A Fair CHARACTER OF THE Presbyterian Reformling's Just and Sober VINDICATION
OF HIS OBSERVATIONS Upon the 30th of January, and 29th of May, In Defense of
the REFORMER RACKED.

BEING An ANSWER to J.G.G.'s New vile RANT, and the Weekly Observator's
invidious and false Reflections on it.

Fiat Justitia, ruat novus Reformator.

London: Printed in the Year 1695.

TO THE READER.
THis Prefatory Occasion to the ensuing Character of the Presbyterian Reformer,
is taken from the Weekly Observator 's Reflections on two Pamphlets:
Observations upon, etc. and my Remarks upon them. Observe. Vol. 7. Numb. 24.
Saturday June 30. 1694. concerning our Intestine Divisions.

For an Author to appear in Print without a Preface, by some fopling Critics
is reckoned as ungenteel and wild, as for Ray the Madman to hair it about Town
without his Cravat on, or the Court-Baux to air in the Park without a Steinkirk
Twisted-post Neckcloth: Just so perhaps for the Complete Attorney not to
preamble in his Dressing Room to his Glass or false Reflector before he flings
into Gray's Inn Walks or expatiates into the Fields, is inconsiderate and
Sloven-like. I am now in the Fashion; thank Mr. Observator: but if we would
submit, and Valet it to his Latitudinarian Nicety and Modish Looseness, should
we not Preface our Recantation of the Church of England's Upbraidings and
Inveighings against the Presbyterians with a peccavimus omnes in our Mouths, or
a confessory or revocatory Rope about our Necks? God-a-mercy Mercurius
Brittanicus for this.

J.G.G. has Vindicated his Observations: and I have here a Counter-Cuffe for
the Vindicator as well as the Observator; but it is Two to One that the Castle
in the Air goes down, and I am worsted in the Engagement. Mighty Antagonists
indeed, Pelion upon Ossa-Blades! And when I come on my Marrow-Bones to either
for Quarter,

Farewell Reader.
A Fair Character of the Presbyterian Reformling's, Just and Sober Vindication
of his Observations upon the Thirtieth of January and Twenty ninth of May, --
in Defense of the Reformer Racked, etc.
THE Reformling would gladly be reputed Just and Sober in his Vindication, and
if the World will take it upon the credit of his Title Page, or read no more of
his Virtues, than what they may do Walking, upon a placarted great Gate, or a
plastered Signpost, he may be so still in a vulgar Eye. Sober! what? Because he
has so outrun the Constable, But, stand in the Name of Justice; can he be Just
too that does so? Well, however he sets a good Face on the matter, and carries
himself Just and Sober in his Frontispiece, and as sure as Caudles are Caudles,
he that will herd among the Sober Party, must look as modest and demure, as a
Whore at a Christening.

Many a good old Sign promises Sobriety and Mortification enough, when there is
nothing but revelling, rant, Hey-go-mad, Murder -- Watch! Watch! within: Some
Men will not keep the peace, because it is the Kings, nor keep the Kings nor
keep the Church, because it is not Theirs, and John of Leyden or Jerome of
Prague never established nor endowed it. But up stalk Mid-night-justice, and
the Raunters no sooner see the Staff and the Lanthorn appear, but they are as
Just and Sober as Peace can make them; every Man is ready with his Vindication
in his Mouth, and nothing falls out but good Neighborhood between the Cup and
the Lip. This might suit J.G.G. for a Tiring-Room, where to put on his Vizards
of Truth, Justice, and Soberness; and be a proper Stage for the Impostor to
masque the face of a lie or reproach, and to act his false qualities on. Here Is
likewise the exact Emblem of our Reformlings smoothing over, and palliating a
quarrelsome business; a serene brow with a Head-ful of Storms, and the Aeolus
speaks fair, breaths a soft and gentle breeze, when he designs a Hurricane the
next blast. His Title forsooth, must needs be a Just and Sober Vindicator; but
to Vindicate the Truth of that, and justify the Usurpation, he might swell his
Fustian into a bigger Volume of Faction, and never make a better Cloak on it,
nor the true Herald ever think him worthier of a Coat of Moderation.

There Is a Comical Story of one Aletheia Gray in the North, Christened with
Truth enough: Her Name had some Divinity in it, though her Nature had none; for
she proved as great a liar as any of the Masculine Sex in the Kingdom, and so
noted, it is believed that she might have carried off the Whet-stone at
Temple-Sowerby in spite of her Baptism. This may be a pretty Sister-Motto for
J.G.G's just falseness and revengefulness, and Aletheia Liar might very well
have weighed the Panniers against his sober Madness in his Vindication.

Sober Gentleman! Ah! What should ale him unless Presbytery intoxicate, for a
Man sometimes grows drunk with his Cordial. Just too! no doubt of it; if he
have Authority, he will act within his Commission, although his stomaching pride
knows no rules of devouring; He is a foolish Cobbler that goes beyond his Last.
But it is an unfortunate thing to be confined or encircled, except it be to keep
the Devil out: His Sphere is not large enough for all Liberty of Conscience,
and an honester Man may grow giddy with the rapt and motion of his own narrow
Orb with Toleration. Thus like a turn-sick Child at running round-play, the
civil Copernican may chance to reel, and make a false step of Ambition over the
Globe, to justle out his Neighboring lights and keep himself still in the
dark, not believing all the while his farther distance from the Sun; The Son of
Righteousness and Peace. He may indeed bid as fair for Heaven, by his gloryed
Justness and Seberness, and Charity, as another for any thing I shall tell him
yet of treading his own Antipodes, to a Heavenly Union; let him make his way
thither as fast as he can: But in the interim, let him be advised to be content
with his own station and lot here; be wise on this side Heaven, not mutinous on
this side of the Water, and then I wish him his Belly full of Milk and Honey
beyond it. In sine therefore of his factious Covetousness, when his adulterate
Astraea has pimped Victoria to his insatiable embraces, and he becomes master
of one World, let not the imperious spirit of our Alexander make him weep and
put his Finger in his greedy Eye for another.

Notwithstanding a Brother full of the Creature may be Sober and Just too; the
Club of Saints have perhaps a Sober Hatcham-Barn Statute, to make their own
Indentures as they go, and Stagger all the Laws in England to keep their own
Potvaliant Legislations out of the Kennel. Such a Brother I have seen lately
Stamping it homewards, and moving, passing Nemine contra dicente, and, as it
were, Engrossing some new Model of Church Government with his Toes, by the same
token that a Bantering wagg said, he wondered whether his Socks were Paper, and
his Shoes Parchment. Excuse; The Parrot had got into ill Company. It Is
excusable in one of the Holy Cloak'd Fraternity, and He Is sober enough to be of
the Party still. Much Truth is in the Bottle; but no more of your Religion in
your Cups, pray.

Ours is a Soberer Gentleman, and is full of the Scripture: He seems such a
sworn Enemy to the WHORE, that I believe he would not Cuckold the POPE for his
Infallibility. Infal. lible! no, he had rather be a mistaken St. John, and have
no more Religion than is in the 43. Chapter of the GOSPEL. Title page. Page 3.
Whether he or the Printer was better read in the Geneva, I determine not in
this Error; But EZEKIEL was like to have lost a Text between them. If this
Scripture had only been misquoted to an Auditory of Dear Brethren and Sisters,
there would have been spitting on Thumbs, and ruffling of Dutch Bibles, to find
out John 43.9. but then the mistake might have been hushed up and muttered for
an inspired piece of his own Illumination, or passed for the Word of God with
the Godly, and he not thought a whit the less a Gospeller or Minor Prophet, for
the miscall. The 43. of Go-look, would have done as well among the Religious, I
would say Infallible Gracelesses, ('it is all one in the Greek, as the Town-talk
has it for sameness) though they had consulted St. Luke for the Divinity. The
Words then, the words, wheresoever they are written. -- Now let them put away
their Whoredom, and the Carcasses of their Kings, far from me, and I will dwell
in the midst of them. How Apocriphal, how uncanonical he renders this Scripture
in his use and application of it! and would make the Prophet speak from his
mouth, call the Dead Kings WHOREMASTERS in their Graves, and lay all the
abominations of the Kingdom of England upon their Monuments. As for King
Charles the First's Carcass, much good may the put away or removal do him; he
has his wish on it already, if the most received and common Fame lies not; and
had he Interpreted This of Windsor-Castle, the Prophecy had been fulfilled long
ago to his purpose: But then he might as well have talked of Christmas-fare,
after Twelfth-day; yet who will not remember his Box for all that. That the
Royal Body was removed, seems to be no News, and what became of it a Courante
need not post from the other World to inform us It Is believed, if the
Presbyterians would be so Ingenuous, they might shorten the Stage, and save the
Labor and Travail of a long tedious Truth.

I will not bring a railing accusation against any of them; But the Archangel
contended for the Body of Moses, and defied the Devil, Jude Ep. verse 9. Let
the report, true or false, hurt or disgrace no Body more then it does him; for
the most dishonorable Interment of him, either in a Vault or Ditch, only gives
Foil and Luster to Massacred CHARLES; and if no misreport, why should we strive
with the Presbyterians for Him, when Heaven has Him no doubt before the
struggle; and will give Him a nobler Resurrection than they did that stole Him
away? He has been worse used, if this story be untrue.
But let Englands Iliads record the story of Homer's, that it was the Honor of
Dead Patroclus, that two Armies fought for his Corpse. The Living are sometimes
not unreasonably alarumed for the Glory of the Dead. A Sovereign so unhumanly
persecuted after Death, deserves a Monument at least, and Montrosses Epitaph.

As great an Additioner as the Reformling would falsely State me to our CHURCH,
Fage 12, 13.
I need add little more to those Truths I published before, to clear the
Glorious Kings of such a Bigot's Defamation and Personal Aspersions, but St.
Hierom's words, Ep. ad Gelant. Adversus Obtrectatorum libidinem pugnat
meritorum magnitudo. They have deserved better rank in the Estimations of all
Loyal Christians and Subjects: For if Subjection were fairly, or even
Parliamentary now canvassed, I doubt whether the Presbyterians would in
courtesy d' Angleterre, or could by their dangerous Principles, be found to be
any to English Monarchy; and our Reformling may chew the Cud twice upon this
before he digests an Ecclesiastical or Civil Obedience, to either Church or
State. He may be the Lurdans Fellow Laborer, that was troubled with an Atrophy
of both, consume em both, says he, for want of being nourished, that is,
glutted, by either; and indeed our Just, Sober Gentleman talks as if he wanted
Preferment too, by his envying me mine, when he does not know but I may be in
Lobs-pound to morrow.

One King was laid out in his Gore with a murdering conclamatum est in
derision, and for a raree show to the pitying Loyalist and dejected Cavilier: A
jolly Fellow indeed Catachrestically blessed himself at the sight, and was asked,
why? says he, I am a Rope-maker. The Second's heels were trod upon by the same
Power, and the like Plot; How far from having his Throat cut, or the
Back-stroke and Fore-stroke of injustice, the Goward in Eighty one at Oxford
can tell: Where such as he impudently avouched, -- They wanted a King, whom
they might trust. It Is true, Non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris; A sense of
that error will never exstimulate them to their Duty; A Word and a Blow with
the Ring is an Old Parliament-Law, and happy were the Man that could wrest the
same Club out of Hercules's Hand; the Reforming Sisyphus, will still be rolling
up the same Stone he must expect to tumble down with.

I would call Religion and Loyalty the two Poles of steering any Government by,
but a castaway, if it were not for the artick and antartick Opposition that is
made of them. But this can break no squares in a similitude; and
Tantive-College run the Presbyterians and Protestant Tribe of Tantivee-College
run to our Established Religion? A Scholar may speak now I hope, and like a
Gentleman. Page 2.
-- Did they not use all the Spades and Mattocks of Seditious contrivances, to
undermine the Foundation of our well established Church Government? Did they not
envy us the support of our Chief Pillars, the Bishops, whom they would first
have made weaker, and then pulled down? would they not have let in many Beasts
of the Forest to our Vineyard, by making a breach in our Fence, in taking out
three stakes from our Hedge of the 39. Articles? Page 60, 61.
Would not they have given encouragement to Divisions, by granting liberty to
Dissent, and by removing of Penalties, have invited many to transgress? Did not
they take up at the second hand, many Old Artifices of innovating a Change; as
crying out against the unreasonableness of Pluralities, the inconveniences of
Non-residence, and affirming the necessity of a Redress of both? And finally,
did they not use all methods of irritating the Vulgar to vilify the Clergy,
because they were the chief opposers of Sedition and perswaders to Allegiance
and Uniformity. And then in opposition to Loyalty; How Arbitrary and
Magisterial were their own proceedings, while they pretended to be doing
nothing else but preventing the Arbitrary Power of another? How many Honest and
Loyal Gentlemen did they force to do the Penance of falling down and
Worshipping them, for speaking. Blasphemy against their Authority, while
Treason against a higher Power past unquestioned? How crosly and resolutely did
they always deny His Majesty's just Demands, though they were to be employed
for the Nations security? And at last, how saucily would they have cried down
the King by debarring him of the privilege of the meanest Subject, making it
unlawful for any one to turn his Creditor, though on never so good security?
This is not the moity of what might be said, but perhaps in this case; (...).
The Vetus Fabula only wanted the Curtains drawing and Parliament Candles
lighting, of being acted on an Oxford Theater; and the Novi Historiones, with
some of the Veteres too perhaps, had played their Parts of the like Tragedy
over again; if they had been so successful, as not to have been hissed off
before they came to Prologue to it. However the Reformling will have King
Charles the Second to be beholden to his Party for his Restoration, and
peaceable enjoyment of his Royalty; and certainly he was, just as the Father
Dotard was beholden to the Son, who flattered him into a Settlement, and then
burned his House about his Ears, for his Daddy to roast his Eggs with. Our Sons
of Faction could love uproars and Bonefires too, but that they hate Rumps, and
it looks too much like Sacrificing to the Genius of Restoration.

At an Election of a Member for the approaching Parliament at Oxon, (The Loyal
Pudsey and Whorewood Candidates) it is pleasantly storied of a brisk Mechanic,
in the Van of a Tumultuous Crowd, who hearing a Graduate exclaiming no
Roundhead, no Roundhead, reparteed him with no Square-head, no Square-head;
when all the University knew they were for no Head at all, or at best not for a
Crowned Rowly-Head.

I am afraid I shall be tedious on the face and complexion of his Pamphlet, but
if length be not the Picture of him, it is his best Character at a Vindication,
or one of his Sixteenthly Beloveds. Now I cannot imagine what he would be at,
have done or prevented, the Pope is not like to be Lord Mayor next Year, nor
King JAMES to be in his Throne again the next Moon. Popery is out of Doors, he
needs but give it an Alms, or send the Cripple to the next Constable; Authority
will take care of it: But it may be he has an extraordinary knack at Reforming;
he may have as good and Religious a God-piece as King Henry the Eighth, and can
Whistle a better Tune too in Divisions, that would make the Rabble Dance a
Commonwealth Morisco.

The Reformer needs but lead up the Figure of three, four, Heptarchy or a
hundred, the Piper's paid: Cut the first Caper, and protest he wishes England
as well as the Duke of Burgundy once did France, when he swore, He loved France
so well, that for one King, he wished she had twenty, and then you are all of a
Litter quoth Lambert. Let me tell you Lylly's Grammar comprehended a great deal
of policy in it is Neutram modo, mas modo vulgus, but it is Aes in presenti that
must carry on the business effectually, to persection, and what not. The Mobb
love variety, and every Body knows what is as good for a Sow as a Pancake, -- A
Fartical Raskal that bid a KING kiss his Posteriors, I conceive and presume,
saving J.G. G's presence, would make an excellent Tool for his Arsie-Farsie
Reformation. At this rate every Wat Tyler, or Jack Straw, with a fair Wind and
auspicious opportunity will be invading and matching Politics with King and
Council; and if the Green-pated Reformer Heads but well, and puts Liberty, and
Property, and the Old State Quibble of Personal and Politic Capacity, into the
Mouth of the Moabites, the Man STUART may be cut off, and the King never the
worse hurt. A Second Oliver may chance to drop out of the Clouds, and then
defiance to the Powers of the Earth, our Sovereign Lord the People are, as
assuredly as the Rebels against King John the Army of God. Any New Coin gains
acceptance with the Lower Mobb from its Stamp of Novelty; and if the upper sort
of Mobb mints it but with a popular App^ause, Vogue, and Reputation, it has
Credit, Justice and Authority enough to abide their Test.

The next thing our good Gentleman does, is as wise as he can make Solomon, not
Solomon him, to call his Adversary a Fool, and the worst of the sort, a
self-conceited Fool: Surely if Robin Wisdom sets not up for an Author and Fools
not the rest of Mankind, the Press cannot blame him for it. But the would-be
Solomon, presently starts a Fool out of the Proverbs before he enters the
Field; no, if he had not been besides the Bush, Page 18.
and had had the good luck to have thrown his UTINAM SAPEREM soon enough in his
tail (as the No vice-hunter carries Salt to catch the Hare with) he had taken
him too, and might have Sounded his Triumph of the Prey at the first View. Many
a one has had the fortune to Course the Hare and catch the Witch. He mistakes
his Fool and his Game: And well remembered, Wise man of Gotham, how the Scot
tuke the Tartar, and the Tartar proved the Conqueror.

I might have dwelt longer upon his Title Page, sufficiently answered him, and
never have gone farther than the Porch: But curiosity prompts me to show his
Guests what better entertainment or welcome they and I must be treated with in
the House. At the Threshold then I shall only premise a gross injury done me,
and soberly good morrow his passionate ELDERSHIPS scandals and misconstructions
of me: For in my Remarks or Reflections, Page 12.
(which I allow him to take in the worst sense) on his Observations, I fully
declared my propo's and design, which he has run Counter to with a full cry,
almost throughout his Vindication, only coldly chopping on it here and there.
The Mungrel-hound often flings off and runs a back-scent; But a worse Nose than
his might have taken the right Game and made a truer chase of it: A false
pursuit never obtained the least Quarry. Having waved the Divinity of his
King-killing, and traducing Pamphlet, let the unbiased Judge, if it is fair
play to be bid keep close to the Text, -- ho! Religion is the Province of our
Learned Clergy; there were eleven Apostles for one Judas; and we have Orthodox
Divines enough to confute his Schismatical Doctrine, though too many follow
their Master, like Peter, at a distance in secular Persecutions; and it is well
if more do not deny him: In all Don Quevedo's Visions Judas was the only Man in
Hell for selling his God; but there was a number for buying of HIM. But I never
intended to meddle with those matters that were too high for me, or handling of
Controversies in Religion, which required an Ordained Pen. I have often thought
of the Story of the silly Ass that carried the Goddess Isis so long to and from
the Temple, that at last he began to take State upon him, and would needs play
the Goddess: So I have gone a long time to the Church of England by Law
Established, and I never yet could call the Preacher God Almighty's Spiritual
Merry Andrew, or the Lecturer Gods afternoon Jester; A Libertine or Atheist
may banter his Soul, and jest with his Salvation: I never thought the Minister
in the Surplice an Owl in an Ivy Bush, as Islington Cook had it in the days of
Oliver's Gospel. And I do not yet see any reason for Schism and Dissension.
Neither am I able to be the tottering Churches Atlas, nor to Sampson it down
with the strength of Conviction and Division. Believe me, Reformling, I am in
the same humor with the modest Lay-Countrey man, who coming up to London did
not aspire to a Mitre, or think to set his Foot at next step of Preferment upon
St. Paul's.

Thus far you see the Front of our Just, Sober and Wise VINDICATOR, yet enter,
and his Inner Rooms are no better Furnished.

At first Salute he begins like a Proclamation, opens his Rhetoric, and
declares as it were for a Kingdom. The Mountain is in labor, and nascitur
Sooterkin. Ridiculous! Page 1.
I not out of any peevish humor -- and the Verb, his great AUXILIARY, have
taken the freedom -- comes trotting in jaded seven or eight lines, I had like
to have said, MILES, behind: His words of Truth and Soberness hang-an-arse too
in the midway to the journeys period, and seem unwilling to come up to his
undefiled Worship, and say, Amen. But he has found out a sore about me, and
has an Hospital for the Wounded on the first floor, if the Patient will not
start, take wing or fly out; as if he were about curing a Butter-fly, which
Domitian had unmercifully run up to the Hilts: nor make a noise, while he
handles and probes the unsoundness; as if he were about to salve the cracked
pericranium of a Wasp in a Honey-pot. Let him resolve to crush the
Cockatrice-Egg of his own hatching, lest in the end it prove a hissing Scrpent
to himself. The Duramater of his own Brain stands in need of the Physician; and
I wish the same Gentleman Surgeon would be sensible of his own Errors, and
so become Achillean to cure the Wounds, which himself has made in our Church
and State.

In the next place are his Combustibles: Room enough for the Fire of Foxes
Tails, which shall do no more harm than in Judges 15. Chapter. I wonder to see
him so much in love with Foxes and Firebrarnds; A Book called so.
our burned Child dreads not the Fire. He would pun a Man to Death, and the
shades of Ghosts almost with Lovalist, Page 22.
LOYOLIST, to derive me from LOYOLA, a few ap's from a Hellish Pedigree: But I
will assure him the POPE is none of my Sovereign Lord, though such as J. G. G.
are Ignatians, (i.e.) Firebrarnds to all the World beside: Rome may well laugh
at the Grinder when she has the Grist: Neither do I think Martial's rule an
axiom for my Pen -- Parcere personis dicere de vitiis. For I look upon the sly
Jesuit and Barge-sainted Fanatic, with my own as well as another Eye, as two
dangerous Philistine Foxes, that carry between their Tails that Brand of
confusion -- The Lawful deposition of Supreme Magistrates. Hill at Cambridge
prayed -- Deposc him, O Lord, who would D^pose us. Assem. Man. p. 14.
If their Faces be contrary, they are coupled by the Tails, and although they
may not tug with the same Oar; Their Faces look one way against White Hall and
Lambeth: it is no great matter whether they Row and are bound for Rome or
Geneva-hey! Here he plays the Doctor upon me again with capouring and vapouring
of the Spleen and low parts, which cause great fumes and disturbances in the
Head: And are the Natural Members then subject to the Higher Powers? Would he
be willing that his Head should ache till he professed this politically? If he
will agree to it; the College surely must make much of him for his new
Invention, and honor him like Harvey for a Circulation: The Government should
call him good Subject, stroke him, and buy him Monumental Ginger-bread, as
Clieveland uses the Rebel Scot. Oh! that he could be clawed into a retraction
of Noll's Arts and Practices, that he would pur and pur while we rub off his
Old Mange! Then we should hear no such scrieking and catter-wauling against our
Church Order. But I am afraid Sir Empirick Presbyter understands not the
Nations Pulse, Vena Basilica.
nor the Basilick-vein to make a Politic Phlebotomy, and will be working upon
the superfluous Humors, till he wastes and consumes the very Vitals. What
signifies this among Friends? The Quack and the Sexton are Cater-Cousins still,
if one can but kill as fast as the other cuts out Oblivion for the Murder. Page
1.14.
Acts of Parliament will perpetuate Divisions, else the Reformling means
nothing by laying that scandal at the Parsons Door for Preaching on the
Anniversaries of Rebellion and Murder, the blessing of Peace and Right; for
nothing and nothing to purpose in every Ninnys Logic is all one; the Saddle on
the right Ass is this; (...) is the English of it; we keep up a Church by Law
against the Presbyterians, and till we line their Purses with her Revenues and
Equipe 'em with Cloaks out of our Vestiary, they are resolved never to Unite or
Mount our Altar, Baptistery or Pulpit, for they cannot ride Triumphantly else,
Page 66.
and we shall never be eased of the burden, din, or eternal Clack of their
dissenting Faction. That our Anniversary Fast and Thanksgiving chiefly
disgusts, continues, or perpetuates their division and Schism, I will believe,
when I see them throw their Carolus a Carolo Money out of their Pockets, and
hold it Superstitition to carry Britania's Picture about them. If the
Reformling can give me one probatum of the Truth of Paracelsus's Doctrine --
That to eat Creatures alive will perpetuate Man's Life: I may probably be
induced to swallow a less absurdity, that our Anniversary Worship wherein in
the Creature (his Dialect) is no otherwise concerned, than as a Heinous Sin was
committed and a providential blessing was bestowed upon HIM, does occasion
immortal hatred and Schism, which he Englishes perpetuate Divisions. Page 37.
I am amazed to hear the Lawfulness of Preaching, Page 42.
the blackest Rebellion down to its Grand-fire, and right re-inthroned, Justice
restored up to the King of Kings, controverted by any but the Imps and Zanies
of Infernal Empire. This is the all of our Worship on the Royal Anniversaries,
and yet dissenting obstinacy says, we may as soon meet upon a needless Point as
this, or center in Union: We neither pray to, for, nor against the Souls
separate of our Kings; God is the Author and sole Object of our Devotions. Page
42.
Truth may as well be said to Lie as rail in our Sermons on the Thirtieth of
January, and Twenty ninth of May, Page 13.
which his contradictious spirit calls Seditious; but he hits himself no small
Fillip there. And in short, there is less mixture of the Creature in our
occasional Worship, than the Presbyterian had in his Comical Grace, wherein he
begged a blessing upon the Turky-pie, for though it be no Christian Fowl, says
he, yet thou have commanded us to pray for all Jews, TURKS, Infidels and
Heretics. As another Graces it in complaisance to his Fare; Souse us and dowse
us in the powdering-tub of Repentance, and make us fit Tripes and Chitterlings
for thy Heavenly Table. Strange! How some Capricio's hugg their singularity in
that Monumental sin of Rebellion, not thinking the Witchcraft will leave them
at the Gallows: The Devil never hugged the Witch upon any other score; and if
the impenitent Rebel slips his Collar, Old Nick's an Ass. My whole drift before
was to rub this Tetter, and the worse it spreads in his Vindication. But hold,
I task my self too far with Religion; and if our Reformling be a Layman as
well as I am, for he is Plato's Servant to my knowledge: He is an impertinent
Beast of reason, and as Coltish to take this Religious Controversy upon him,
as Nero's Brute was in State with the Consulship. Every Wood will not make a
Mercury: A judicious foresight of the Heathens: For had he been touchwood;
since we had a smoking World, the Tobacco Funker would not have stuck to have
lighted his Pipe with a Finger of the God. But every uppish Conventicler can
set up for a Professor of Divinity; and were the Bugbear Epithet REGIUS kicked
out of the Schools, J. G. G were as fit a Man as has sprung from the Loins of
Calvin to domineer a republican Moderator. Sermon at Paul's Cross 25. November.
No wonder then, as the ingenious Henry King observed 1621. If Preaching may
breed surfeits that so many Crudities lie in the stomach of the People; that so
many Fumes and giddy Vapors fly up into the head, to the no small disturbance
of the Churches quiet; that so many hot spirits, like the Canons overcharged,
recoyle against all Discipline, break into diverse Factions, and with the
Splints of those cracked opinions, do more mischief then Deliberation or Justice
can suddenly salve. I speak no new unheard Language. This Community of
Preaching has brought it into such cheap rate and contempt, with many, that,
as if the gift of Tongues were prostitute to Idiots, and Trades; you shall have
a sort of Lay Mechanic Presbyters of both Sexes (Praedicatores and
Praedicantissae) presume too far upon their acquaintance with the Pulpit, that
they will venture upon an exposition, or undertake to manage a long unweildy
Prayer conceived on the sudden, though not so suddenly uttered; nay, they are
so desperate, they will torment a Text, and in their resty Conventicles Teach
as boldly, as if they were as well able to become Journey-men to the Pulpit, as
to their own Trades.

As for Predestination, Election, and Reprobation, they are (...): Page 11, 19.
Good and Gracious words, but no such Mysteries, as our Reformling
misunderstands and misinterprets; and although I do not sport with the
Tremendous and Eternal Decrees of Heaven, yet I can whistle at his Heavenly
inspired Bag-pipes, and look upon such inquisitive record searchers of the
Supreme Judge, but as bold Astrologers, who saucily and presumptuously pretend
to bring intelligence from the Privy Council of Heaven, as if they had picked
the Cabinet of Fate and Providence through the Keyhole of the Stars. The
Dutchman found himself in the wrong Box at last, and swore there was no Butter
there.

You are scarce sooner entered the Glorious Fabric of his contriving Brain,
but whip he goes, as nimble as a Monkey, to the Housetop, and as swift as
exhalations from the Earth, he is rapt and transported with Thunder and
Lightning, many Stories above Bedlam Garrets, into the second Region of the
Air: But the Storm ceases, Page 2.
and down comes he like gentle Snow -- (...) Hom. (...). to Boil Solomon's Pot
with the crackling of Thorns, as if he had stolen 'em from the Man in the Moon.
This is his Vagarie; and I leave my Incerti Laris -- Friend to maunder here and
Cook by himself.

His next Paragraph couples him with the Observator, and I shall answer them in
the leash. As they come in my way, Page 3.1^.
I am for them, armed with reason, not Sword and Pistol: For a Man may as soon
beat Religion, as good Manners into either Head with a Pole-axe; and therefore
I would not have them cry out Murder with such a false hollow! Sure, had our
Reformling been an Antidiluvian, he would have cried out Fire, Fire lustily, in
Noah's Flood. As Castor and Pollux shine by turns, so they must ever expect an
alternate extinction. Take care of your Candles both, else for the glimmerings
of your reason, you may walk Home with the fainter light of a Gloworm. Though
the Pamphlet in Question, be not in any thing worth a reply, and the
Pamphleteer deserves to be answered otherwise then with a Pen; a Pen, Man! what
can be a better argument, except his Cudgel or Kill-zadock, and convincing
Club-law? Here I might eat his words, as he often does mine, and retort, it
were a sufficient Reyonder. But he mercifully leaves me to my Competent Judge,
p. 7. Did not his own hand shake when he wrote, JUDGE? His own guilt might very
well have given him the Palsy. This Sentence he borrows from the Weekly
Observator, and publishes himself a Plagiary in his Postscript: And for all our
Reformling's different Physiognomy of Religions, they are much of the same
Feature: I leave the Devil and the Colliar to parley whether had the blacker
Complexion. Now since he does stand upon the Observator's Legs, Page 73.
for the Support and Authority of his illegal Observations, he shall seem to be
as good a Man as he pleases, but then he must acknowledge himself, to be very
much mistaken in several of his Notions, and especially in Church Ceremonies:
And so he gives up his Cause, and looses his Tub as the Butcher lost his Knife,
which he had all the while between his Teeth.

As never any Beauty or fair Face, gained all Hearts their suffrages or
admiration; nor any ingenuity and plain-dealing a general applause: So there
has seldom been wanting an Apologist to refute the pitiful and paultry
Imputations of the reflector. Page 12.
An Author now a days has no civiler treatment than a Pissing-post; every
little Cur holds up his Leg at him, cocks his Tail, and throws dirt in his
Face. As I should have the stomach of a Night-man to read Tartaretus de more
cacandi; so truly I would as soon choose to be condemned to be a Scavenger for
the Streets of London, and to carry all the Dung out of this little World of
Sin and Sea-Goal, as to examine the foul and filthy absurdities of the
Reformer, or the mercenary Scandals of the Observator, more then I have or
shall do, in short. A Muckender for 'em both to rake their puddles of reproach.

The Reformling wrests, culls, and tears my Book in an incensed Mood for Forty
and more Pages together, as if he had never drawn bit nor breath for it; and he
makes the veriest Tatter de mallion of it, Page 13.
with half words and half sentences, that it would certainly cry for the
Rag-man, but that it had been at the Paper-mill already. He has the bien
turn, I Will say it, at marring of sense, and as excellent a knack of a Laconick
answer, as a Popish Priest in the late times, who, Preaching in a Chapel about
Town, Reported by Bishop --
brought a petit Library of Heretical reformed Authors with him, and told the
Auditory with a brisk look, he must confute them; the first he touched upon
chanced to be John Calvin: This is that grand Enemy to our Church, John Calvin,
says he; his first word is Institutiones, gives him a quick turn-over, his last
word is Iniquitates. His Institutiones are Iniquitates, ye may conclude with
himself, and so he lays him by with confutation enough to his Hearers. So J. G.
G. picks out words, strips them of all antecedent and consequent Sense, and
when he has them naked, he whips them off with a Jerque. Thus Atheism shall be
proved out of Scripture; the Psalmist has it -- There is no God; not
considering what went before, The Fool has said it in his Heart: For who but a
Fool would have said so? He rakes up an Oglio of a few scattered words
Higlede-piglede in my expressions; and then he Mauls, and Slanders, and Rogues
them ad arbitrium; as the Cock-bawd will be bespattering the Carted-whore of
his own making; though of all Men in the World he should not cast the Stone or
Horns at her. As Division is his Talent he improves it upon my sense and words
to his own Note. He shatters the whole Frame of my Discourse to pieces, like
the splinters of the Knight Errant's Lance: But he breaks no Bones, but what
being set by an unprejudiced Hand, will knit more firmly and strong against
him. Page 4.
For my abusive and brutish Language I had his parol that he would not take
advantage of the Law Talionis upon it, but it is so material a Limb of Magna
Charta, that he must now stand upon it as a piece of privilege to quit scores
with me: And the fundamental constitution of Billingsgate is -- You're a Rogue,
and you're a Rogue. This is his Religion, which cannot govern his Morality; and
such an one, is not a Dram better than my Mastiff Dog, so long as you stroke
him and please him, and do not pinch him, he will play with you as finely as
may be, and wag his Tail: He is a very good Moral Mastiff; but if you hurt him,
he will fly in your Face, and tear out your Throat, says Seldom p. 36. Where
Scripture should shackle his hot-spur spirit, he breaks forth pell-mell upon
me; and calls me Fool, and Fool, and Fool, to the end of the Chapter. He would
turn me a grazing to converse with none but Nebuchadnezzar's Society. page 4.
certainly he does not wish me his Metamorphose too, of long Nails for fear of a
Scratch't Face. I am a Lion in his Roaring page 31. that would have all under a
spoiling Paw; yes, when he is my Jackal I shall never want Prey. All along he
insinuates me to be a Papist, a furious Persecutor. page 6. That would promote
the Ruin and Consusion of Kingdoms with Fire and Faggot. This is his Ignis
fatuus: Such wildfire does not burn; and it is all made by the antiperistasis
of his own clod pate, Neroe's Fiddle would have sounded harsh to my Ear in the
combustion of blazing Rome; and I could have wished, when London was of a
Flame, that the Fire had not looked and raged so much like the Final
conflagration; that it had been no greater, no fiercer, than what any Man might
have pissed out. What a pother and calenture were the Brains of that
Hyper-critical Philosopher in, to find out the Materials God first struck Light
with? I pity the nice folly, but I hold, and practice according to my Tenet,
that fire was not made to blow up Parliaments, or to serve either a Popish or
Presbyterian Plot. I should have been content never to have seen Englands
Wonder, a Monument erected upon the ashes of our Metropolis: Oh! that every
Man's Engine could have quenched the Flames; and fewer Tears then were shed
might have put them out! I do not think King Charles II. brought the Goal or
the Incendiary home with him, as he would intimate in his Observations p. 13,
14. Neither do I believe it was for the Sin of Gluttony, though the Fire began
in Pudding-Lane and ended in Pye-Corner: The Heavens have spent much Fire and
Brimstone in Old Story, upon Murder, Rebellion and Faction. He hints at my Dear
Sister Popery again page 18. when I deny the Relation or Affinity; and was
never wedded yet so far to any Religion, but upon good Evidence and true
Conviction I might be Divorced. Jacobitism and Popery are his Darlings, Ibid.
The last time we shak'd Hands with Popery I bid it a Farewell with all my
Heart. Ibidem.
A liar, a Child of the Devil, a false accuser, that is, the Devil's Devil, as
Hugh Peter's was said to Possess Satan, not Satan Hugh Peter's. The Protestant
Cause is perfidiously betrayed by me, page 68. He may Trumpet this with a
Silver Tongue to be neither impious, nor profane, nor scurrilous, nor
perfidious, but I must tell him, his Forehead is of the same Metal with his
Kitchen, if there is any Brass in it, for doing so. A Villain, page 65. an
Arminian, page 66. a Cutthroat, an Executioner, a Hangman, page 15, 34. I
arraign God for his Decree, page 57. Mentiris impudentissime, page 70. and his
own English of it. -- Thou art a most impudent liar, Quid pro quo.
is a pretty concise answer to all that he has scandalously held forth. For
Uniformity-sake we must hang together, page 34. He gives me all the Hangman's
Office, but where is the Gallows? Haman made a Gallows for another, and was
Hanged on it himself. What a Maygame he makes of an Act of Parliawent with his
Uniformitytwang? He little considers surely, how his jest intrenches upon the
old Roundhead Cant, Good Lord, make us of one Accord, Concord, Record, or
Any-Cord, Good Lord, that we may hang all together; and a bold daring Cavalier
said Amen to it. But I would stab him if I could, page 14. I never push home a
Topic with the Rhetoric of the Sword: I write with such Ink as He does, not
with Blood; for Sanguinary Laws I am averse to, yet I do not think or esteem
DRACO the worse Lawgiver for His. Indeed to be called so many Names, would make
a Man scratch where it does not itch, as CHAUCER has it upon another Account:
To see Men live poor to dye rich.
I care not what the Italians say; but I wonder he should travel so far for an
Itch of a Popish Expression, page 16. He Is a great Linguist, I suppose; for he
says Latin is the Language of the Beast, page 23. But it would certainly be
worth his Enquiry, whether Balaam's Ass spoke Latin.

My Language is abusive, unbecoming, immodest, unclean, ridiculous, reviling,
impious, injurious, rubbish, trash, and stuff. -- Well said Textor! So he
hashes it, and makes such a Hotch-potch Sluttery of it, that, like the Greedy
gut who spit in his porridge, he designs it all for himself. Enter Observator.
The Painter that should put a Pen into the Angel's hand would detract from his
Knowledge, and degrade Intuition. But were it no Grotesque, and if Angels
themselves wrote Books, I am apt to think we should not have fewer Mercury's:
and their happiest Notions would hardly escape the Libelling, Censure, and
Burlesque of a braving Observator. How nobly would Grubstreet encounter Heaven
and cry out upon the abusive language of Thunder, and the Nonsense of Flashes
and Lightnings for foul play in the Quarrel! Page 7.
were the pacifick Angels to converse with Presbyterians: for I am so
charitable as not to wish the destroying ones among them; in order to proselite
so many persecuting Saul's of our Church. Were they commissioned to make them
loyal and pious Converts by conforming them to our Monarchy and Liturgy; would
not one believe that the main stress and argument of their Revelation would be
urged from the Novelty, Inhumanity, and Unchristian Cruelty of their
King-killing or Schismatical Principles and Zealous Biggoticism? Which in the
Language of Man, were to call them, the Dissenters, Schismatics, and
Regicides. Where is the Harshness or Impiety of the Dialect then? To call a Man
an Eternal Villain whose Ears bear witness of the Cruelty, if he pleases, or
Justice of the Pillory, and have eternized his Fame, can be no great Abuse, I
hope, or unjust Affront. You cannot take the Sow by the wrong Ear when she has
none left. O Edipodas facito, Telegonosque voces, says Ovid of his Amourettes;
he bids his Tristia call 'em Rogues and Rascals: OEdipus's and Telegonus's,
Murderers.

And may not an artificial height of Passion be allowed in an Orator as well as
the sweet-tongu'd Poet? He Is not the less mild and soft for a
Counterfeit-Anger: for He only sung a feigned Chastisement of his de Art
amandi Adventures, which He yet loved so far, I dare say, as to pride Himself
in Banishment for innocent Wit and Amor. No; this is not allowable: it is
abusive. Why? for what Reason but a Woman's? Because it is. Or an Observator's
IPSE DIXIT? The notable Pansophist has said so. Methinks a little Sense and
less Wit might distinguish the Persons from their Good Old Cause: I can love
the Observator, and hate his Extravagance; What! Not one penny left of five
hundred a year? Have Charity for the Rebel, and abominate the Rebellion; the
Vicious Person and the Vice are distinguishable by an easy Logic, and I think
the Tongue may stab a base Principle through and through the sides of a
Presbyterian, and the patient Person be never the worse hurt. A sort of
humoursome people are laboring with a Ic ne scay que of a singular Distemper
and Ruptures of their own making; well, Corrosives are applied, and the Wound
probed deep in order to a safer Cure: The Patient groans under the tart Remedy;
in comes Sir Empirick, and calls the Physician abusive: A wonderful
Quack-assurance and Judgment indeed! I Will warrant you Presbytery is not to be
handled but with such a comprehensive Wafer-Charity as His: the Wafer is easily
broken with the least dry touch, and then the whole Bond of Christian Love is
cancelled and nullified. If he opinions that Presbytery cannot endure the Test
and Touch of Controversy, he will bring it into the like Suspicion and
Disgrace with the salivated Gentleman's tender Nose, that had got the Noli me
tangere, and could not abide the Jest of a Naso suspendere adunco: who slightly
made use of his Handkerchief, and wiped off the angry Bow spreat of his Face
into his Pocket, because it should be no longer the Subject of a pockify'd
Bantre or Jeer. He that would be cured of the King's Evil, must have the Royal
Touch; some perhaps had rather rest incurable. A Presbyterian can no otherwise
pretend breach of Charity for a Reason why it should not be touched with the
severest Truths, than a Corpse kept under ground seemingly entire, which being
once touched, soon falls to dust and ashes. How strange a Paradox, how
monstrous a Notion does he frame of Charity, Love, and Concord, who would have
the satirical canvassing of Presbyterian Polity and the Invectives of
Controversy to be Transgressions of Gospel-Vertue! I would ask him but this
Question civilly: Does he think Mr. Observator's Head might not be broken
without breach of Charity? the one stand in need of a plaster, and the other
not need the least salvo? With Charity I hold the Affirmative: and I am sure
there is less blood drawn from lashing their Principles and Opinions. What if I
mean no Body or no individual, particularly? There are no broken pates among
Universals: and he knows no Body breaks his windows at Football.

Could my Pen write as deep a style and more legible Characters of Perjury,
Disloyalty, and Rebellion, than the Whip does, on the Backs of such respective
Malefactors at a Carts Arse; I should not think my self the worse Christian for
an Observator's exclaiming, inhumane, uncharitable, abusive Tory: Page 6.
I have nothing to say but Sir William Coventry for the Trimmers; but to call
Churchmen highflown names is Billingsgate all over. I might have advertised
them of a notable Petition of the moderate Divines drawn up by a comical
Witling last Session of Parliament -- That the 30th of January and 29th of May
be discarded out of Partridge's Almanac, as being great Eye-sores to the Godly
Party; but they are resolved for anotherguise Debate. Could the dint of Pen cry
Slash, like the Whip, at every period: Law and Justice would authorize and
justify the Severities of the one with as much tender reason as the Slashes of
the other, and no Law rightly interpreted, is repugnant to that of Humanity: so
that the whole charge and burden of Nonsense and abusive Language thrown at me,
I am afraid, for all the Verbosity and bluff Moderation of an Observator, will
recoil upon him that first discharged the reviling Mouth-Granado.

Perhaps it was a cruel Wish to have the Reformer's Book burned: I can give him
an old Rule for this Animosity; Igne pereat qui fumum vendidit: and pity it
should be obsolete as long as such Authors as he kindle those Flames in their
own Works, which shall consume them; the silly Phaenix will be burning her own
Nest. For any thing I know his Friend Baldwin anticipated my Wish, to make his
Book sailable. Palace-Yard, the Bookseller knows, makes a thing Sell
incomparably. I confess my Expressions were sometimes troubled and storming,
sometimes serene, calm and moderate. Here my Words fall like Hail, there like
softer Snow; and with Mr. Observator's leave and a shallow-brain'd Sciolist's
Favor, I rather judge it a piece of Art than a Fault or abusive Language, to
vary the Idea or Character of my Speech: now to smooth a Period, then to
thunder, according to the quality of the Subject, and my satyrick Design on
notorious Scandals: Scandals and Reproaches of two great, good, and just Kings!
Their Fame is traduced: of our Church! Her Peace is disquieted, and our
Jerusalem rabbled by Sectaries into an Uproar of Dissension. How liberal was
Propertius in bestowing his artful Curses on the Baiae that killed Augustus's
Nephew! And where is the Abuse or Imprudence in taunting those with
impassionated Satyr who killed Caesar himself? Those, whose Principles either
oblige them to apologize for the heinous Fact, or to write it down to eternal
Shades of Oblivion: Those, who could frame a Panegyric for Busyris, a
Vindication for Nero; with varnished Tenants, pleasing Delirium's, Shifts and
Disguises, put such a face on the Matter, as to accuse Innocence, without
guilt, of Calumny and Cruelty, Detraction and Inhumanity: Those lastly, who
would put all England into a doubt, not only to raise Vulgar Men's wonder, but
to win a popular Belief, that what they called Justice was better executed on
their Sovereign, than it had been if omitted. Here I shall take liberty for one
Digression on our Reformling page 28. Neither St -- ns, J. G. G. nor John
A-styles, are over-passionately concerned for King C.'s Death. Not over
passionately; that is, in our Idiom, not passionately enough. They are
Democritus's to day. King Charles the Second's Restoration, suppose we, is to
morrow; then they are Heraclitus's. This is like the Saints Gibbrish of
Grantham. Page 27.
Excess of Joy and Sorrow are equally dangerous: neither would I have Men revel
till their Faces are all on Illuminations on this, nor weep into Funeral Marble
on that occasion. Passions are to be suppressed when they rise against reason:
But the Moralist is not for rooting them out, but moderating them; we must not
take away diversity of Tunes in Music, but reduce 'em to good Order, and so
make up a Harmony, till such as our Reformling, I do not say Pigs, play upon
Church Organs. Page 17.
Another Paradox is advanced, page 59. That those who had been for the
Parliament were the great Instruments in bringing King Charles 1. home again.
It may be so: He that has not so wise and worldling a Foresight as to save his
own Bacon, is the greater Hog of the two. The truth of it is not upon Record,
and their subsequent Actions never verified the Report; for they were always
nibling under-board at Kingly Power afterward, and mouthing under the Rose at
Despotick Prerogative and Penal Laws. His Challenge to disprove what he says of
King Charles 2, page 13, 14. of his Observations, is huffing brave: It is more
Honor to refuse than accept such Provocations; but I durst dispute it upon a
Pillory with him, and he that lost the Prize should pay the Excise of his Ears
or the Poll of his Head. However, he reproaches him; while his Miscarriages as
a Man ought to be obliterated in the Ashes of Oblivion, and raked up in the
Embers of an ardent and mutual Affection for his Memory, as a good and
peaceable and merciful King; for he might put all the Blood, he unlawfully
spilt, in his Eye, and never see Mercy and Indemnity the worse for it. Now
because Scripture bids him not Curse, nor I presume, revile, slander, traduce,
the King in his Thought, he does it in Print, and saves the Letter of the Text:
Because Majesty is sacred, it must be profaned with a private Reign, A Novel
entitled so.
which those of his Cabinet never knew any thing of: where he is falsely
Romanced into the Murder of the Earl of Essex, Incest, and I know not what
Aspersions. Justly then has Fancy given Satyr Teeth, and may they now bite
like a Badger's till they meet: What bad Decoctions of Style must he stomach
with, who in his undigested Rifts would call Sarcasm, the very Purity and
Nettetee of Rhetoric, abusive Language? Nevertheless, says the high and mighty
Observator: The Author of The Reformer Racked has broken all bounds and rules
of Humanity with Mankind; and perhaps never was there in a Pamphlet so much
Nonsense and so much of abusive Language as in this: But what can be expected
from a Man, who in his second Page looks upon Calvinism as an Heresy as
damnable as Socinianism, Arrianism, and Anabaptism? Such a Champion of our
Church deserves, I am sure, to be taken notice of some other way than by an
Observator; especially if it has stolen out with no License from Authority, as
I may reasonably presume it has.

Here the Erroneous and Reviling Philistine is upon me, but the least peble of
an Argument drawn from clear Reason; Truth as naked and unarmed as David may
humble or sink into the Goliah's Forehead and convince him, if he were more
brazen'd than he is. How Magisterially does he pronounce me in a State of War
with Mankind? Let him be assured I am none of Hobbs's Creatures: though I think
Selfpreservation is almost arrived at his pitch and state of it; since I see
most Men now adays possessed with a specious pretended necessity of Defense,
where no Offense is half so much given as unfairly taken: and some are
affrighted with Fantasms, Fears, and Jealousies of their own Windmill or
Quixotian Fancies, standing upon their own Guards never so unjustly. It would
have made his Position good upon me to have proved every Swordsman that carries
Toledo dangling at his side was in such a Duelling Frolic, who never drew it
in Anger or unsheathed for Inhumanity. The Pen was never yet reckoned a Weapon
of War, but by the strained Metaphor of a Paper-fight, or Writing- Combat.
Exit.

Enter Reformling page 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. -- The Reformer Racked was an
unmerciful Title: yes, if I had misconstrued his Principles, or misrepresented
his Vagaries; made him confess or depose Things upon that Titular Rack
different from his Intentions or Persuasion, though he brings himself off, page
26. with the Equivocation of a Not Guilty King Charles 1. Racking is a hard
Word: Suppose I had entitled my Pamphlet, The Reformer Booted and Thummakin'd:
But the good Covenant would na allow that misleard Lownery, na, na, Billy. It
must be a strong Imagination that this Idea can extort a Sob or a Sigh from: A
stout Malefactor may tremble at the Sight or Thought of the Three-legged Tree;
but I never heard of any one that was choked with the Fancy. As for
Reformation, I like nothing so ill in it indeed, as the NAME, and the
Reformers. We know our Upstart Reformling is as singular and prepossessed as he
that would eat no Fish but what was taken out of the Lake of Geneva; that was
the only relishing Fish for the Presbyterian Maw. I do not say Omnia been:
Queen Elizabeth might have reason to reform many Things in the Church, and had
the sole Supreme Authority to do it, howsoever she might be advised. Will he
grant this? Apud omnes Gentes, quaevis administratio solennis erat sacerdotem,
authoritas tamen summa sanciendae, reformandae, vindicandae religionis, semper
erat penes Magistratum. Reges Israelitici and Christiani idem jus sibi
vendicarunt, Davenant: Deter. quaest. 19. Exodus 31.18. And because he falsely
taxes me with Scripture-Ignorance, Page 60.
I shall humor him with another Text, Exodus c. 34.32, 34. Such as J. G. G. are
not to be their own Carvers in a Reformation. But every Cot-Queen, that is
scarce fit to make Kitchin-stuff, will have a finger in the Pie, and then it is
not for my Tooth. Does he remember how long his Predecessors sat toward a new
Religion, and in the interim left none at all. We had had a hopeful World on it,
if the King of Arragon had been to assist God in the making of it; and yet the
blasphemous Architect thought he could have contrived it much better. The
Giants built themselves a very high Fall: and since our Reformling dislikes
Fables, he may love the Moral if he will. The Self-interest and Fat-livings of
our Clergy, as he maligns them, retards a Reformation. Page 11.
O Interest, Interest! I can cry out against Interest as loud as he with his
O's! and tell him that some Worthy Personages have gone through Traytor's Gate
toward Heaven by the barbarous Interest of his Party. He may keep the Opinion
of a Perfection in this Life to his Puritan-self: Page 10.
an Age is not enough for this Accomplishment; but when seven years are run
out, the Fanatics may begin again and finish an Apprenticeship as long as
Life, yet come short of that freedom and perfection they seek. Our Clergy would
be still improving the Reformation: and it is not Interest so much as Schism
that hinders, which has been so often baffled for all his new Challenge, that
it gives ground and runs back to an Accommodation. Some have reformed out of
Interest, and to be ingenuous, whether Interest and a Pique did not set
Luther's Reformation on foot, let Thuanus's History of it be the Umpire. Let
Erasmus jest: Luther might have cracked a Creeper or beat a reforming Parley
upon the Priests Belly with the Pope; but as far as I can impartially judge,
the loss of a little Interest more than a religious Dislike, moved him to
quarrel with Indulgences; as the Man that missed of being the King's Treasurer,
began to rail at his Coin and the Revenues of the Crown. I submit this
Conjecture to the candid Reader of that Relation in the Council of Trent. The
Occasion was the Necessity of Pope Leo the Tenth, who by his Profusion had so
exhausted the Treasure of the Church, that he was constrained to have recourse
to the publishing of Indulgences, to raise Moneys: some of which he had
destined to his own Treasury, and other part to his Allies; and particularly to
his Sister, he gave all the Money that should be raised in Saxony; and she,
that she might make the best profit of the Donation, commits it to one
Aremboldas, a Bishop, to appoint Treasurers for these Indulgences. Now the
Custom was, that whenever these Indulgences were sent into Saxony, they were
to be divulged by the Friars Eremites, (of which Order Luther then was.) But
Aremboldus's Agents thinking with themselves, that the Friars Eremites were not
so well acquainted with the Trade, that if the Business should be lest to them,
they should either be able to give so good an account of their Negotiation,
Annotations upon Dr. Brown his Religio Medici.
or get so much themselves by it as they might do in case the Business were
committed to another Order; they therefore recommend it to (and the Business is
undertaken by) the Dominican Friars, who performed it so ill, that the Scandal
arising both from thence, and from the ill Lives of those that set them on
work, stirred up Luther to write against the Abuses of these Indulgences; which
was all he did at first; but then not long after being provoked by some Sermons
and small Discourses that had been published against what he had written, he
rip; up the Business from the Beginning, and publishes XCV Theses against it at
Wittenberg. Against these Tekel a Dominican writes; then Luther adds an
Explication to his. Eckins and Pierius, Dominicans, thereupon take up the
Controversy against him: and now Luther begins to be hot; and because his
Adversaries could not found the Matter of Indulgences upon other Foundations
than the Pope's Power and Infallibility, that begets a Disputation betwixt them
concerning the Pope's Power, which Luther insists upon as inferior to that of
a General Council; and so by degrees he came on to oppose the Popish Doctrine
of Remission of Sins, Penances, and Purgatory; and by reason of Cardinal
Cajetan's imprudent management of the Conference he had with him, it came to
pass that he rejected the whole Body of Popish Doctrine. So that by this we may
see what was the accidental Occasion wherein, the slender mean, which in my
sense smells something of Interest, whereby; and the abject condition of the
Person by whom, the Work of Reformation of Religion was set on foot. But the
Reformation's a good Reformation, and we have it in the comparative degree. Any
Woman will say her own Eggs are the best in the Market.

Now our Reformling would be at the Altar, Page 49, 50, etc.
to level or take it away for our superstitious Idolatry of bowing to it: and
he might as well go about to pull the Sun out of the Heavens because we bow to
the East. Ad and Versus, in his Grammar, are all one; but when he proves an
external Act of Worship of Jesus Christ performed toward the Altar to be
Superstition, I will give his Worship my Cap, make him a leg, and turn to what
point of the Compasses his Indifferency pleases. Yet our Religion shall stand
unmovable, no more shaken by the breath of Factious Spirits, than the Rays of
the Sun are diverted by the Wind; blow it from Rome or Amsterdam.

What I spoke of in the sour Grape, other Authors, In the Reformer Racked.
I may say, have done in stale Vinegar, without the Imputation of abusive
Language, that ever I heard or read of. The Royal Charter granted unto Kings,
page 125. characterizes the Conception, and Birth, and Education of John
Calvin's Infant Schism with the most salt and tartest Excursions. Never was
there such a Monster as this ruling, and thus constituted Presbytery; the
Father of it Rebellion, the Mother Insurrection. Witness the Fall of the Prince
and Bishop of Geneva to the puny Historian, our Observator: the Midwife,
Sacrilege; the Nurse, Covetousness, Pride and Ambition; the Milk, Schism; the
Coats, Armor; the Rattle, Drums; a bloody Sword, the Coral; Money, (and
Janus-fac'd too perhaps) the Babies it delights to play withal: It grows up to
be a Stripling, and goes to school to a Council of War; its Lesson is on a
Trumpet; its Fescue, a Pistol; its going out of school in rank and file; its
Play-days the days of Battle; and Black-Munday the day of Judgment: It comes of
age, and is married with a solemn League and Covenant; it begets Children like
it self, whose blessing upon them is the power of the sword, and whose
imposition of hands are broken pates; the Monster cries down this truly ancient
Catholic and Apostolic Power which the Bishops exercised, and then tacks it
up again, and use it themselves in a higher nature than ever any Bishops or
Apostles themselves did or durst have done, even to the Excommunication and
Deposement of their Kings, to the delivering of them up to Satan and to
Heads-men, to whom the Apostles taught submission (how faulty soever they were)
and if not obedience, yet submission still to every one of their Ordinances, if
not for their own sakes, yet for the Lord's sake and for Conscience Sake: these
men cry down the same Authority as Popish, whilst they exalt themselves above
all that are called Gods in a higher manner than ever any Pope of Rome ever yet
did. The Observator might observe and remember a certain Pope treated an
Emperor as uncivilly as a Querry, in making him hold his Stirrup till he
mounted his Horse, Frederick I. waited on Pope Adrian 's Stirrup.
walk a foot while he rode: But the Presbyterians dismount our Kings, hold our
Kings in chains, and our Nobles in fetters of Iron, for themselves to ascend
their Thrones. They take from Caesar the things which are Caesar's; not only the
Tribute, but Crown and Life too. Yet our Government was never long a
Bucephalus, to be ridden by such new Masters as they: He always knew his
Alexander from their uneasy Sitting, and they were once fairly thrown out of
the Saddle. As for their old Arts and new Practices, we know they usually play
at Tennis with our Church; either strike it down like a Ball for themselves to
rebound the higher by, or throw it up, as the Beast does its prey, only to
catch it coming down again in his mouth, devour, and sport it to ruin; so some
Parasites may be assured by experience that the most feasible way to bring a
haughty King down, is to make him yet a haughtier Monarch, pride him, stick a
feather in his Cap to take off his CROWN, and so honorably kick him up stairs;
Fiddlers and Drawers are only flung down 'em. The ingeniousest and most
infallible Maxim, Politic or Religious, that has been stated, since
Philosophy, Certainty, and Demonstration came to perfection, was King James's,
in his Basil. Dor. Sublato Episcopo tollitur Rex. And the same Princely Wisdom
that said Monarchy and Presbytery agreed like God and the Devil, might have
called Episcopacy, Michael in the Battle. That our Bishops are Jure divino,
Page 34.
I am convinced from another Gospel than (...), from the Fathers, Councils,
Sanderson's Episcopacy, Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, Morice's Vindication of
Diocesan Episcopacy against Baxter's Church History, and the Learned Lowth's
laborious Subject of Church Power, etc. He must confute them, or he proves
nothing. The World's come to this Gue, you must either trip up another's heels,
or he is your Master. This is the Juggle of Parity, they would have no Body
above them; but we guess who they would have under.

It Is storied, that after " Luther had made a Combustion in Germany about
Religion, he was sent to by the Pope, to be taken off, and offered any
preferment in the Church, that he would make choice of: Luther answered, if he
had offered half as much at first, he would have accepted it; but now he had
gone so far, he could not come back: in truth he had made himself a greater
Thing than they could make him; the German Princes courted him; he was become
the Author of a Sect ever after to be called Lutherans. So have our Preachers
done that are against the Bishops; they have made themselves greater with the
People, than they can be made the other way, and golden Mountains cannot bring
them off now. The Reformling is angry that I do not prove every thing out of
Scripture, page 60. What will become of the Parliament and Westminster Hall
then, if we cannot find them in the Bible? What shall I do for Words to fit
this Man, unless I took the length of his Ear, or the measure of his Mouth, as
the Fellow said that was to make a Speech for my Lord Mayor?

Farther yet the forecited Loyal Author, page 136, 137. may as well exemplify
and justify my Language as obviate an Objection of an Elder-date, which might
now be urged. To recite him then: Oh but the Presbyterians had no hand in it,
they prayed, and preached, and wrote against it, fasted and prayed for a
diversion of all such Intentions: but I pray who took the Scepter out of his
hand, in taking away the Militia, of which it was an Emblem, that should have
defended him; was it not the Presbyterian? Who cast down his Throne by taking
away his negative Voice; was it not the Presbyterian? Who took off his Crown,
the fountain of Honor, from off his Head, by denying Those Honor on whom he
had conferred it without them; was it not the Presbyterian? Who took away his
Supremacy signified by the sacred Unction wherewith he was anointed, in not
allowing him the liberty of his own Conscience in the point of Episcopacy and
Church Government; was it not the Presbyterian? Who would not treat a minute
with their King before they had made him acknowledge himself guilty (as they
say) of all the blood that had been spilt throughout his Dominions; was it not
the Presbyterian? who (notwithstanding all the Concessions on his part that
could be granted, even to the very grating his Princely Conscience when he bid
them ask flesh from off his bones, and he would not deny it them, if it might
have been a benefit unto his people, prayed that he might keep his Conscience
whole, it was the Queen-Regent of all good men's Actions, and he hoped there
were none would force his Queen before him in his House, as Ahasuer us said to
Haman) voted not satisfactory so long, until the Independent Army came from
Edinburgh, and surpised and murdered him; was it not the Presbyterians? He
that said the Presbyterians held him down by the Hair, while the Independants
cut off his Head, said true enough; they murdered him as a King, before ever
they murdered him as a Man; for what may the Independent say to the Presbyter?
If you will take off his Authority, we'll take off his Head: if you will make him
no King, we'll make him no Body: if you will make him a man of Blood, we'll use
him accordingly: therefore at your doors, O Presbyterian Hypocrites! do I lay
his innocent Blood: it is but like the rest of your Actions committed by your
Ancestors to former Princes all along. These primed the pan, and those gave
fire in the very face of Majesty; as some are Designers, and others put in
Execution.

It Is true, we are miserably divided in point of Politics and in point of
Religion; and I wi^h the Church and State had not occasion to use St.
Augustine's Litany -- Libera me a me: and that her true Sons had no need to
pray unto Almighty God that he would save his Church out of the hands of her
Church men, for she now almost lies upon the ground like the Tree that
complained, that she was rent in sunder by Wedges made out of her own Body. But
for Divisions of the first magnitude, we are beholden to the Presbyterians; and
for a lying Observator to level my Desires or Actions at widening the Gap, when
I wish to be a Phineas to stand in it, and compose or repair it with my own
ruins, is as irreconcilable a Contradiction, as that I should breath hot and
cold at once, or carry the very entire Elements of Fire and Water together in
my mouth.

Brotherly Love and Charity are sacred Commands of the Gospel, and some
Libertines practice them, like the Oaths in the Play, as the best broken
Commodities in the Nation: But that we break them in being Zealous for those
little Trifles, as he intimates our Church-Ceremonies or the Authority of our
Church are, I doubt not but 'twould puzzle a solider Head than an Observator's
to prove. Ceremonies may be Trifles, Play things, Scotch Buchanan nicknamed
them so.
Theatrical Fopperies, by the way of Observatoring, and he may villifie our
Church to a sanctified sort of Gaudy Toyshop too, if his Observatorship please:
and from what himself meanly advances, I cannot but take a hint of Ridicule on
the Dissenters for parting with Christian Union at as ignorant, frivolous, and
cheap a rate as a Fondling that parts with his whole Estate for an Apple in the
Fairing-season, and which a Hobby horse trap'd with glittering Tinsel from a
Pedlars shop, or a Rattle, may purchase at any time of his unthinking Infancy.

Our Church stands like the everywhere wounded Man in the Almanac, pointed and
pushed at by more Diabolical and Schismatical Designs, than there are Celestial
Signs in the Heavens: Aries, Scorpio, Taurus, and Leo, are her Enemies, and all
confederate to ravage her: The Planets have their Goodness and Malignancy, and
from Mercury's Conjunction with insulting Mars and Opposition to us, our Church
expects no favorable Aspect or pacifick Influence.

If I have done the Presbyterians a Discourtesie, that is all; and I have done
it without breach of Charity: and let the Observator know, though our Opinions
differ, it is not necessary that our Affections should disagree. As the best of
modern Epistolar Orators has observed, Balsack 's Letters.
The Head and the Heart have their several Motions and Actions distinct: and
moral Virtue can reconcile and unite what the Intellectual might separate. With
Charity I say it to them; Travelers may fall out by the way, and yet set their
Horses up together, and both meet at the same Inn at their Journey's end. The
Pilgrim must meet with Distractions in his Progress: ^unnyan.
I do not mean the Tinker. Notwithstanding there are two principal Things which
might advance our Peace and Unanimity so far, that we might draw nearer every
day, to the great Center of the One Religion; and little else would hinder but
that we might maintain Christian Commerce and Traffic in things lawful. FIRST,
That the Dissenters would leave Preaching up Novelty, and Sedition: not
maintain our Savior's Religion by Insurrection and Rebellion; for this is to
maintain it by means condemned by the same Religion they would maintain. And
SECONDLY, That they would unlearn their Principle of Fighting for the Liberty
and Property of the Subject: The Religious Rebellion's Stalking-Horse, under
whose Belly the King is wounded: since thereby the Subjects do alter the very
property of their Goods and Estates; forfeit, their Great All, their Lives too,
which they would seem to fight for or preserve.

Once more let me tell this Pseudo-Moderator, that much of that Sarcastick Wit
which he miscalls abusive Language, has been written in Tears and Pity for our
Divisions in point of Religion. As Howel neatly complains and languishes in
England's Tears, page 10, 11. But the principal thing that I hear that Reverend
Lady the Church (that Queen of Souls and Key of Heaven) make her moan of, is,
that that seemless Garment of Unity and Love, which our Savior left her for a
Legacy, should be torn and rent into so many Scissures and Sects by those that
would make that Coat which she wore in her infancy, to serve her in her riper
years: I hear her cry out at the monstrous exorbitant Liberty that almost every
capricious Mechanic takes to himself to shape and form what Religion he lists:
for the World is come now to that pass, that the Tailor and Shoemaker may cut
out what Religion they please; the Vintner and Tapster may baoach what Religion
they please; the Druggist and Apothecary may mingle her as they please; the
Haberdasher may put her upon what Block he pleases; the Armourer and Cutler may
furbish her as they please; the Dyer may put what Color, the Painter may put
what Face upon her he pleases; the Weaver may cast her upon what Loom he
please; the Boat-swain and Mariner may bring her to what Dock they please; the
Gardener may lop her as he please; the Blacksmith may forge what Religion he
please, and so every Artizan, according to his Profession and Fancy, may form
her as he please. Methinks I hear that venerable Matron complain further, how
her Pulpits in some places are become Beacons; how in lieu of Lights, her
Churches up and down are full of Firebands; Page 27.
how every Caprice of the Brain is termed Tenderness of Conscience, which well
examined, is nothing but some frantic Fancy, or Frenzy rather of some
shallow-brain'd Sciolist: and whereas others have been used to run mad for
excess of Knowledge, some of my Children grow mad nowadays out of too much
ignorance.

The Mitre never wore the Cleft with more reason of Division than for the
Presbyterian Blows it has received; and i^'s wonderful that the Crown is not
cloven too: we are divided in point of Politics. Some Men are like the mad
Fiddler, I remember, that would run Divisions with a clever Bow by himself; but
he could never endure to play in Consort: these Humourists make bad Music and
harsh Discords in Church and State. Other Minions, when they have got on to the
Battlements of our Church, are not contented on that Pinnacle, but they must
stilt their heights of Ambition over Civil Policy too. These are the
Coryphaeus's, the Brutus and Gassius that march in the Van of Confusion: the
Generalissimo's of Squeak and Disorder; and it is merciful enough to thunder
upon such singular Parasites and Schismatics, whose evil Paradoxes it were no
Cruelty to answer with the Bolt. The keenest Satyr has a charitable point
enough for such Eye-sores of public Weal. I would fain ask the Observator,
whether he likes an Easy Majesty in this dissolute chowsing Age, where KINGS
are slyly gulled and made their Favorites Cullies? whom I can compare to
nothing but Meteors appearing glorious for a time, till by their yielding more
and more to Court-air-Candidates, they fall and vanish to unnatural Earth. Oh
the precarious Grandeur of Princes, which is little more than a Tenure of a
Grandee's Courtesy! What signifies it then for Kings, like the Sun in the
Firmament of Glory, to look biggest with gullifying Sciophantry, when they are
going down, and must never hope to rise again with Crowns on their Heads but in
another World? If every Tub were to stand upon its own bottom, I am confident
there would be work for the Cooper: I see nothing so absolute, that does not
stand in need of mending, and nothing mended, but like botch'd Tinker's Work,
three holes are made for it. The Observator and I agree in one Opinion, that the
Reconciliation of the Williamites and Jacobites is very improbable: and I fancy
it is impossible too for our WEEKLY SOLOMON to moderate their Contentions
successfully with all his Statism, and give the Child to the right Owner. The
Sword must decide that Quarrel. Yet I am apt to believe that his boasted
Humanity would not, like the unnatural WOMAN, have it divided: though the
indifferent Man's moderation perhaps might be willing to go halves or part
stakes with the Winner, play what Game of Religion you please. Will he accept
this Motto for himself -- Regis ad Exemplum componitur Observator? Cannot he
trim as those at the Helm steer? He may bluster and mediate with a Pennyworth
of Weekly Scribble for a PEACE, and Heaven could not send a Welcomer present on
Earth: but to call him a STATESMAN for this, were to Knight a Mandrake, to view
him through a magnifying Perspective, and by that gross Hyperbole to give the
Reputation of an Engineer to a Maker of Mouse-traps. He may see all his
Beauties and Perfections in a true Reflection of Queen Mab's Register's
Looking-Glass; and read his own in CLIEVELAND's Character of a Diurnal-Maker. A
Statesman! by the same reason that Sir Roger L'estrange is no Statesman, no
Observator superlative, none of the best Translator's of the lettered World. A
Statesman! yes, as much as Merry Andrew last Bartholomew-Fair but one, would
needs pretend to be an Admiral, and put to Sea with a Ship called the TOWER,
take the Monument for the Mainmast, and make such a DESCENT, that Neptune
should tremble and drop his Trident, and the Tyrant of France flag him. Have a
care of a Mercurius Britannicus Vapulans: the Punchanello was soundly whipped
for his Jest. A Statesman! a Plagiary rather, that struts in borrowed Plumes,
and makes a great Figure and Show of the Frippery and Brocage of Gazettes and
Foreign Prints: Mercury was always Thieving and Filching. Let him be put in the
Gazette for the amusing Intelligencer, and the deluded Country's Bubble: the
Hawkers and Coffee-House Wholesail Merchant for Politics: and that may make
him talk so much of my Nonsense in the Lump, for he can no more speak it, I
suppose, than some sell, by Retail. This general Nonsense must be much of the
same Line and Lineament with accumulative Treason: Twins of the same
Nonsensical Brain perhaps. Accumulative Treason is a huddle of Nonsense;
Nonsense is Nonsense, as a Block's a Block all the World over: and so both have
the same complex face and feature, wrought up like a Mass of Paste or Puff
before it has received its Christmas-form, or dough-bak'd a Pie with half an
Observator under it. Accumulative Treason, I hope, is to be no Precedent for
taking a man's life away: He may remember, THAT for THIS was no Nonsense, for
it had a capital meaning in it; and a notable Construction could behead a Peer
for a Monosyllable. Nonsense indeed, it may be, is as inconsistent with an
Author's credit, as a Nobleman's Head was thought with his Shoulders, without
any fairer Law or farther Examination. Yea, but he particularizes: In my second
Page I look upon Calvinism as an Heresy as damnable as Socinianism, Arrianism,
and Anabaptism, and so our Reformling has it page 65. and this is peccant
Nonsense with a vengeance. Can the Reader believe the busy Observator ever
read this Pamphlet by his misquotation of the second page for the eleventh? But
a false Report, a false step in the Threshold, is an easy Mistake in a Hearsay
and Say-so Writer; and I esteem him little else than a Hackney or Huckster of
other Men's Notions: Political Inventions are cheap indeed that are cried off at
Two Bunches a penny Ho. I appeal to any Man of Letters, or so much Logic as he
has been born with; Whether there be Nonsense, or even Absurdity, in these
Words: If an Enemy is suffered to come in upon us, he may easily wrestle us
into his mercy, and the melancholy Stander-by may see us thrown at their will
and pleasure into Socinianism, Arrianism, Anabaptism, Calvinism,
Commonwealthism, or any other Heretical-ism, to the utter abolition of our
Communion, or downfall, ruin, and rubbish of the Fundamentals as well as
Ceremonies of our Religion and Devotion. Reformer Racked, J. G. G's Vindication.
page 11. Now let Them both open their Eyes, and see their own blind
Misconstruction: Any other Heretical-ism, has no manner of relation to any of
the foregoing Terms, much less particularly to CALVINISM: the Expression is
aptly and clearly distinguished from them, inasmuch as other-isms points at
Nestorianism, Pelagianism, or such like other Heretical isms; if the Reformling
pleases, Arminianism: and they do not know but I meant peculiarly the late
Masonism. The late Millenarian in Bucking hamshire.
Moreover, if it had a connexed relation to any of the forementioned HERESIES
or Words; how comes it to be Nonsense? For if in any just Sense, CALVINISM may
be called Heretical, I hope it is not Nonsense to call it so: now that Heresy
has a large and a stricter Sense is plain; it may signify an Erroneous Sect,
according to the Etymon of Election or Division, from (...) or (...), whether
Theme they please: so the Philosophers also laudably used it to signify a
Dogma or an Opinion, good or ill: strictly taken, it signifies in the Schools,
an Opinion contrary to sound and fundamental Principles of Religion. Hence the
Theologue's Axioms, Non quilibet Error facit Haereticum: Non omnis Schismaticus
est Hareticus. Wolleb. Th. Christ. page 137. Schismaticus est qui salvo fidei
fundamento a ritu aliquo Ecclesiae petulanter and ambitionis studio discedit:
But he goes on; aut enim erratur (meaning ab Haeretico) in fundamento; ut fit
ab Arrianis and Marcionitis, quorum illi Deitatem, hi vero humanitatem Christi
negant: aut circa fundamentum; qualiter Errant Pontificii docentes
transubstantiationem, qua naturae humanae Christi veritas tollitur: aut praeter
fundamentum, quales Errores a Paulo faeno, ligno, etc. assimilantur, 1 Cor.
3.12. And, in fine, that CALVINISM is Heretical in a larger Acceptance, and in
the stricter sense of Heresy, PRAETER FUNDAMENTUM, I assert. Through the
Labyrinths of Logic is not the easiest way to Heaven, nor overmuch Curiosity
the readiest course to search out Truth by: Nevertheless, if they will have
Recourse to their Ante-Predicaments, and consider that it is only, Aristotle's
Organon.
Analogum per se positum quod praesumitur stare pro famosiore analogato; and
but make out Their Calumny of Nonsense upon my Assertion, by proving, a
Consilio, that there cannot be assigned any reason of an analogical Dependence
or Similitude between CALVINISM and ARRIANISM, etc. Cur conveniant in nomine
Haereseos, I will recant my Error as willingly as he that makes as common a
Trade of Begging Pardons as of Writing pieces of Scandal. What Impertinence is
it for Them to say, I look upon CALVINISM as an Heresy as damnable as
Socinianism, Arrianism, and Anabaptism; when the Distinction and Degrees of
their Wickedness is manifested in the Cadence of the Sentence: where I allot
the Destruction of the Fundamentals of our Religion to Arrianism, Socinianism,
or Anabaptism; and the Abolition or Abrogation of our Lawful Ceremonies, only
to Calvinism or Commonwealthism? So the Physician may prescribe to his Patient
against Pease-Pottage, Livers, Lights, Hasty-Pudding, Wine, Cherries; they are
bad for him in a Fever, and unwholesome Food in a sanebrisk Constitution: yet he
would not have all these disliked with an equal Disgust. But to give Mr.
Observator a more sensible Example of his Misunderstanding: if I mention
ATWOOD, Bellwood, Wellwood, Elwood, or any other ill Wood; yet perhaps I should
never find such a special Stick as he, nor mean to bring the rest into equal
Disgrace of Prodigality and Profuseness of Pen, Tongue, or Estate with Him.

Their great Concern for Unity in Religion, they may imagine will justify them
in branding me with Nonsense and abusive Language: This is pretty Sophistry
with a witness; as Quiblers, when strained, and have little more to say, make
use of a true Proposition to infer and quirk in an Erroneous Conclusion:
Fallacies are difficultly detected, but easily refuted and solved after a
Discovery. Pettifoggers will still be citing Law as quick and voluble as
Mercury, to authorize their Injustice, Barretry, and Vexations. The
Observator's Religion, I surmise, is reformed according to the fundamental
Articles of Scold, of Railery. How should we expect an Harmonicon in Discords;
a Peace or Reconciliation with those Zealots who are so madded with Spirit, and
I know not what of Bigotry of Persuasion, that they are fitter to pick Straws
in Bedlam, than to Preach or Lecture an Union about the Nation? One is for
shoving the heavy ars'd Christian to Heaven, or making high-heel'd shoes for
the Dwarf in Christ. Another wildly harangues, that if we have not better
Success with our Arms against Turkish Lewis, the ensuing Campaign, he will
conclude that God is turned Jacobite: B^verley. Burgess.
But he prayed that he would rather stand Neuter, and have no more to do in our
Camps than the Kings of Sweden and Denmark. A third found King William out in
the Revelations, but not till some time after the Prince of Orange landed at
Torbay: while the poor Revelationer mistook the Fleet-prison for God's Cabinet.
This is their Triumvirate of Frenzy; and the Presbyterians Gullery.

The Reformling, page 36.69. repeats -- Were it better to wrap up our
Gospel-Talents in an idle Napkin of Silence and Oblivion, than to preach and
Evangelize the Jews out of the pale of the Christian Church? Reform. Racked, p.
19. for a piece of uncharitable Monstrosity. Was the Messiah crucified, the
Lord of Eternal Life put to Death? And do not the Jews disbelieve the whole
History? Must they not be told they are no Christians then? That they are of
the wrong side of the Hedge or Pale? Yet if the Unbelievers will come over, we
are willing to lend them a hand, and think it no Trespass. That they would come
in and welcome, is the meaning of my Evangelizing them out. But he handles the
Napkin as if he had got the Glander with a Horse-pox to him, and makes no
better use of it, than the Widow in Don Quevedo, throwing Snot about the
Mourning-Room. He might as well have busied himself about computing how many
Bushels of Phlegm would go to manuring an Acre of Land, as in sniveling at me
and misrepresenting an idle Napkin of Oblivion and Silence: might as well have
said they had washed their hands cleaner than Pilot in a Laver of Repentance,
and that the Jews and Moorish Infidels, whose Religion lies not in their Skins
I confess, were now as fair Christians as any in Europe.

To call Mr. Observator a Bankrupt of Reason as well as Estate, would be but
Fleet-Language; and he may keep his Tongue a prisoner to his Heart there too,
his Pen to his Ink-Bottle, his politic Thoughts to his Head; for he is indebted
more to the News-monger for acceptance and perusal of Mercurius Britannicus,
than ever he will be able to repay with Wit or Policy. But if Observatoring is
his Livelihood, I shall give him free leave to have a fling at me when he
pleases; no, to make me his Jack-a-lent, as many Throws as he will, if he can
make a penny on it. And if I suffer a Shrove-Tuesdays persecution to get him a
Mess of Cock-broth; will not he dye me with Red for a Martyr of my own Folly,
in his Diary?

How Authoritatively he Lords it over the High-Churchmen with Bluster, Rancour,
and Bile! He can find nothing but Priestcraft among them, can hear nothing
from the Pulpit on the Day of King Charles 's Martyrdom, but Invectives,
railing Accusations, and abusive Language, instead of Christian Exhortations to
Repentance, Union, and Charity: and his appealing to all the Sermons that have
been published on that Subject, is notorious; just such another Appeal to prove
HIMSELF mendacious, as SOME BODY brought to prove Himself a Cuckold. He
romances yet a little farther, and calls me a Champion of our Church:
Christendom had but seven: I thank him for the honor of an Eighth Champion,
and return him a SAPIENTUM OCTAVUS for that.

How Magisterial he is with his pennyworth of Licensed Scribble, Page 19.
and the Reformling Pedant with his Lash of Punishment, in dealing with me not
by Argument but Remonstrance, not by their vaunted Moderation, but Menace of
having me made an Example, and our Church purged of me too? And had they the
power of Executing the arbitrary Bylaws of their Sic volo's, Cross and Pile
whether they would make any Bones of Difference, whether I, or the Cause I
satyrically wrote for and still espouse with the same unblunted edge, should
drop and perish. But the Observator's Mercury has not cured my itch of Writing:
it tickles the more; and I shall never solicit them to a Cessation of the
innocent Arms of Pen, Ink, and Paper, let Them rally again as soon as they can
accoutre. They cannot disturb my Reputation and Sedateness, so long as they
cannot plunder or sequestre me of this Humor -- Alte non temo and humili non
Sdegno. The Cynick vied Conquests with the Great: I neither fear the High, nor
disdain the Low. For I esteem it no Disgrace to be censured by those whom I
would account it no Credit or Applause to be favored by: Should an Observator
commend my Travels, I should call my self in question, and task my Thoughts
with a stricter Scrutiny, whether I had not sat all my Life in the
Chimney-Corner, and never got farther out of the Smoke, than the homebred Girl
that was got on to the top of a high Mountain, and cried, Whoo Father, Here Is
another World. A Man should never publish any thing, but only read his own
Composures to his own Ears and make Wall-Lectures of them, if he were afraid of
awaking Envy. When the time of Paper-Kiteing comes about, and highflown
Observators make up most of the giddy Airy thing; I shall not truckle under any
other Wing but Truth's, let him take me up like a Chicken or Gizzard, prey upon
me Hagard-like, and whistle the Insolence of his false Triumph to the Public.
Nevertheless, one Courtesy I must beg of my Adversaries, when the Clumsy
Mercury and the Reformling decypher my Intentions; not to tell a Tale of a Tub,
not to make me intend what they please, not to adapt such foreign Idea's to my
Words and Phrase, not to put such a vast difference between my Text and their
Commentaries, and lastly, not stupidly or maliciously to wrest my Sense, and
put me to the trouble of being my own Interpreter again; for I have only given
Them a fair MARFORIO for their PASQUIN.

FINIS.

