(...) TO THE CREDITORS OF THE BANKERS IN GENERAL, AND Particularly to those
concerned with Sir Robert Vyner, who have not yet Subscribed to his late
Proposals.

By some of his CREDITORS that have already Subscribed them.

LONDON, Printed for S. L. ANNO 1681.

Advice to Sir Robert Vyners Creditors, who have not yet Subscribed his
Proposals -- By those who have done it.
UPON Sir Robert Vyners publishing his proposals to us, for the assigning of
Eighty Pounds of every Hundred Pounds principal Debt on the Excise, and of
paying the remaining Twenty Pounds, and all Interest due till payment thereof,
out of his Estate, now settled on Trustees: We thought it our great concern,
most seriously to consider all things, that might reasonably induce us to a
compliance (with an offer that seemed so fair) and these Reasons chiefly
occurring to our thoughts, did prevail with us to a cheerful, and speedy
Subscription, but considering, also that our own Act will not be sufficient in
this case to help us, except the rest will do so to, we thought it absolutely
necessary to our selves, to lay before you those Reasons, that prevailed with
us, to the end you may also be persuaded to do the same your selves, and no
longer delay it to your own hurt, as well as ours; the time for Signing, being
nigh spent already.

1. In the first place we considered, that the delaying our Subscriptions,
would be a great mischief, by putting further off the raising the Money for us,
by the Trustees, who cannot Act, till they see that the Creditors have
subscribed the proposals, and that those, who have subscribed first, must have
the first payment, or else, no orderly payments, for the ease of the Trustees,
and the Creditors, can be made; and that the neglect of doing it in time, might
frustrate the offered satisfaction, which is too likely to be the fate of this
thing, if not presently prevented.

2. We could find no reason, to expect any better offer whilst Sir Robert Vyner
lives, the first is usually the best, and if he dies before this, he offers, be
in all things finished; we have no confidence of better dealing from others that
shall succeed him, and by his often illness, from very sharp and acute
Diseases, though he be now pretty well recovered, none can reasonably conclude
him likely to be long lived, besides many other Accidents, that the wisest of
men can neither foresee, nor prevent.

3. We considered also, the more generous Acts of those great Numbers, who took
his Assignments on the Excise for their whole Debt, and many of them for the
Interest also; (out of a worthy consideration, no doubt) as many of them have
affirmed, of the great oppression he lay under, not acquired by his own fault,
but by an unresistable hand, and therefore, most kindly, and conscientiously
freed him from it, as much, as in them lay, and except they had so done, it
would have been impossible for Sir Robert to have made us such an Offer, their
Number that took Assignment, being about Seven Hundred, and those that remain,
not much Inferior in Number -- Therefore let not any think that our
subscribing only, will conclude us, and so serve their greedy Designs of
gaining better Terms; for we are promised, and do rely much upon it, that if
you do not come in, and subscribe, we shall be as free as you, and will not
suffer you to have any Advantage whatsoever, but what we have a share of, as is
our due; for our Debts, are as good as yours, and we are as desirous to make
them as good as you can do, by any violent acts, and upon this proviso and
promise, we have subscribed, and do expect, that if those few that have by
commencing suits at Law, gained appearances, will not the next Term forbear
their prosecutions, we shall be put into the same forwardness, and obtain
Judgments as soon as they; and so be on even ground with them.

4. We seriously considered his great losses, by bad debts, besides the loss of
that great Trade he was in, his great charges for nigh Ten Years together,
getting nothing to bear them, paying great Sums of Money for Interest of Money,
to pay Interest to his Creditors, long before he could receive it, where it was
as due to him, as from him to them, also by his unseasonable disposing of all
profitable actions, and many other things too long to repeat, which he affirms,
and we believe amounts unto above Fifty Thousand Pounds, and those that know
his Estate very well, say, that what will remain to him, after this proposal
shall be made good, will be but little, and lies out in such a manner, that if
recovered at all, must be got out of the Fire, for when his business was at the
height, he had such (...) that their Actions will find him work enough to
retrieve as long as he lives, and his Executors after him, whilst his own time
was taken up at Whitehall; the Lord Treasurers, and other places, from home, in
the manage of those great concerns, and also in serving the public Affairs of
his Majesty, and this City: Therefore now he wishes only to have but a small
part of that Estate which he acquired other ways, without a penny of that he
got by banking, and it ought to be considered, that from the good Debts
remaining, as its proposed some part of our Money, must be raised, and that if
you do not join with us in subscribing, they will be in as much danger to be
lost, as the others are already, surely they will not grow better, but worse
every day.

5. And we also considered his unwearied pains, and vast Expenses, (a Sum)
though he will not name (nor is it indeed fit to be mentioned) yet we know in
part, and believe the rest, that it was not a little one, to go through all
Offices, and other things necessary, to attain that valid legal Security from
His Majesty, and passing the Bill in the House of Lords to confirm it, for
which he asks none of us one penny, or the Abatement of one days Interest, in
so many years; paid us at the highest Rate the Law allows, and there is much
truth in it; if we say, we had all of us a very great Advantage till the stop,
by his paying Interest for our Money, which we at at any time (if desired) had,
to serve any better Occasion, so, that really we had full Interest for nothing,
our Money being as ready, as though we had kept it at home in our Chests; which
was so great, and general a benefit for many other Reasons, as the not keeping,
or trusting our Servants, etc. that we now want it, and also do believe when
Sir Robert's Estate is better known, it will not be found considerably
augmented by that Trade; and do confidently aver, that he has paid no less,
then Two Hundred Thousand Pounds for Interest, since the stop for Eight Years
Interest, amounts to more then that Sum, and we believe but few have had less;
although he has not since the stop of the Exchequer received One Hundred and
Ten Thousand Pounds; so, as its evident, he has paid Ninety Thousand Pounds
more then he received for Interest; for a great part of which he paid
Extraordinary Interest, that his Creditors might be supplied, and it is in vain
to say, we did not know Sir Robert lent it to the King, for we knew it as well
as he, and he told it to all that asked him -- And what other way could he, or
any Man living, raise such vast Sums of Interest as he has done, it being
computed by those that know it, that Sr. Robert has paid diverse Hundred
Thousand pounds for ^nterest of Money, and we know that those that pretended
lately to great credit, and able to pay Interest by Merchandising only, are
fallen to a very low ebb, and like to pay little or nothing at last.

6. We also reflected on the low esteem we had of this Debt, for which most of
us would have taken all the principal by Assignments, on the Excise, if we
could have had the Interest paid us, and its well known that the whole Debt,
Principal and Interest, was by diverse persons sold for Forty per Cent., if not
under, within these Three Months past, and this propose of paying Twenty per
Cent.; and all Interest will amount to very near that Sum in Money, besides
the Eighty per Cent. per Assignments, so that the account of this Debt is this,
that from that unlucky stop of the Exchequer, every one will have for his
Interest Money, Sixty per Cent, and of his principal Twenty, which is Eighty in
good money, and Eighty more by Assignments on a good real security which is One
Hundred and Sixty Pounds in all, for every Hundred pound now remaining due,
which cannot be called a bad Debt, and are sure, its that we never expected;
this also convinced us and many of you too, that confess its a fair offer, and
shows an honest intent, yet do not do your part to fix it, whilst you may have
it.

7. The proposal made us is a Real thing, its no Chimera, nor Fiction, but such
an Estate that has present Purchasers enough, and might be turned into good
Money by the next Term, if you will do your part in subscribing speedily, for
this vacation is the most fit time, for the Trustees to agree, and contract for
the Sale of the Lands, and Houses, prepare the Writings, and have nothing left
to do at the Term, but to Seal the Deeds, recieve the Money, and Pay it to the
Creditors, and all before the end of that Term, for although the propose
mentions a Year from the subscription, there will not need half that time to do
it in, and we have no cause to fear Sr. Roberts Real Intention, having actually
settled it already in the Trustees, and his desire of doing it does the more
appear, in parting with his Beloved Swakeleys, together with the rest of his
Lands and Houses, and for the Trustees they are known to all men of business,
to be not only of the most worthy and able Citizens, but such also as are as
fit to be trusted, and are as often trusted, with as great concerns, as any in
London, so without any exception, men that want no such employments, but of
kindness to Sr. Robert and his Creditors, are willing to undergo so great a
trouble, if they find the Creditors consent in it, else not, so that we
concieve nothing can possibly hinder the doing it, and quickly too, if your
needless and unreasonable delays do not do it, standing, shall I shall I, and
inquiring if the rest have done it yet, and others ask if you have done it, and
so time passes, and men dye, as daily experience shows, whilst you delay; as
though you had all a mind to be last in subscribing, though first in recieving,
when your resolving and doing it, is absolutely necessary to your advantage.

We also considered some Objections we met withal, one was that

8. Some of you are entrusted for the Orphans of your dead Friends so are some
of us, and yet do not doubt to Justify our actings therein both to God and
Man, having done it as cordially and carefully for them as if it were our own
concern, and our all, and much better, then if in such a case we should loose
or hazard all, like some over cautious Executors, we have known in a like case,
that have lost the Orphans estate, rather than do a prudent and necessary thing
to save a part of it, and most of those Orphans (at least the poorest of them)
are usually left to the (...) Rich and Charitable Relations, with the Parents
hopes of great kindness (...) them, and thereby the Orphans dependence is such,
that will oblige them (at full age,) easily to confirm what their careful
Trustees have acted for their good, and surely if an Orphan, when of full age,
should be so ungrateful as some fear, the High Court of Chancery will
indempnify him, for doing any prudent act for the good of the Orphan. And to
clear that matter beyond all doubt, the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham,
Lord High Chancellor of England, has made a decree in this very case, since
the last Term, and has thereby enabled a Trustee for Orphans, to subscribe
these proposals made by Sir Robert Vyner, so that now we hope that block is
totally removed, and that we shall never hear that scruple made any more --

9. We did also seriously consider another Objection we met with, that Sir
Robert did not intend to pay the growing Interest, he recieves from the Excise
to the Subscribers, but let it run on, till the Lands were sold, and pay all
that way, in which he has satisfied us fully, having promised to pay it as
usually, and as fast as it comes in, and also that he does not desire to have
up the Creditors old Bonds, before they take Assignments for the Eighty pound,
and new Bonds for the Twenty and all Interest, which is not to be done, till
the Trustees act therein, and if they do not act your Subscriptions hurt you
not, but are void by the proposal it self.

10. We have also considered, the common (and no doubt) ignorant Objection that
his Majesty's grant may be taken away, and made void at his pleasure we are
satisfied to the contrary, by all that has been said by the most Learned of
the Law and not only by what they have said, but more by what they have done
themselves who with the first, took Assignments thereon, and for very great
sums, which no doubt, did also encourage that great number of (about Fifteen
Hundred) Noblemen, and Gentlemen, Citizens, and persons of all ranks; high and
low, to take Assignments on the Excise, which has made it much stronger and
surer, then when it remained in so few hands, as the first lenders were, and if
those (which yet stand out) will join their Interest to it also, though their
particular Debt were but Fifty pounds, or less, we doubt not to say such a
general complication of Interest, will make it formidable enough, to deterr the
boldest of evil Advisers, that may come hereafter, to procure another stop, and
again, act over that wicked project. And all that know any thing, do know this,
that his Majesty has declared his dislike of that former mischievous advice, in
such a manner, that none can with Modesty fear his falling into that Snare
again, that wounded him so much before, and much worse then it did his Subjects.

11. And above all the rest, that main Objection, which is either weakly or
maliciously urged, that this settlement on the Excise, does not bind his
Majesty's Successors, as well as himself, although the Learned Council, do
unanimously agree without dispute, that the Kings of England their Heirs and
Successors, are bound by their acts under the great Seal of England, otherwise
many Families, now considerable and great, would be in a sad condition, many
hundreds holding their lives, (and a multitude of all sorts) their Estates,
upon that Tenure only, and if this Allegation were true, his Majesty might be
in actual possession, of the greatest part of all the Lands in England, and
thereby raise Millions of Money without any other helps, which has been well
demonstrated and proved by that Worthy Lawyer, Thomas Turner Esquire, in a
Sheet published a little before his Death, Entitled Three Seasonable
Considerations, on his Majesty's gracious Letters Pattents etc. ^aper worth any
man's Reading, that desires to know what the Law speaks, in ^^vour of this
grant, and all other grants of the Crown, and has been given out (...) Sir
Robert, at his late Shop to all his Creditors, that came or sent for his
Propo^^ls, and therein it is well observed, that many of those grants upon
suits, have ^een held valid in Law, although they were procured and granted,
without any ^aluable purchase of them, but only by the Kings mere Grace and
Favor, where^^ in Sir Robert's grant, Printed (by his Majesty's command in
Council,) ^^e King declares that he does actually owe, and has recieved of Sir
Robert Vyner, the Sum of Four Hundred and Sixteen Thousand Seven Hundred
Twenty Four pounds, Thirteen shillings, for which he grants to him and his
Assigns a perpetual yearly Interest, at Six Pounds per Centum, amounting to
Twenty five Thousand and Three pounds, Nine shillings and four pence by the
Year, and a Covenant to make such better and firmer grant for the same, as he
shall reasonably desire, if any defect shall be found therein.

12. And farther we observe the great Assurance that the Laws give to those
that are already the Assigns of the Goldsmiths, for several of them, finding
their payments at the Excise of late, worse then formerly, have Arrested, and
brought their Actions at Law, against the Commissioners, and will without
doubt, recover their Money and Charges the next Term. And as His Majesty has
graciously assured all Persons, that they shall enjoy the Laws, and thereby
their Properties, so its manifest, that he intends it, having done nothing to
protect his Commissioners, or defeat the prosecution of the Laws in this case,
and we are informed, that some, or all the Prosecutors have been offered their
Interest money, if they would lose their charges, which they have refused to
do. And it ought not to be forgotten, that when a Bill was past in the House of
Peers, for the securing the payment of this perpetual Interest, it was done,
not only with the consent, but all the furtherance too of His Majesty, who
also recommended it to the Members of the House of Commons, as a thing he
greatly desired, and no doubt, would have been then an Act, had not their
Rising been so near, as it then was; and surely no Parliament will refuse to
join with His Majesty, in so Just, and Charitable a thing, when they find its
not the concern of Ten or Twelve private Men, but the Right of Ten Thousand of
English Men, Widows and Orphans, and that it is indeed the very Blood of many of
them, whose Cry will be heard without all question, and the rest are many of
them, Persons of great Quality, Power and Interest, who will, be able more
easily to help themselves, and the whole concern, to that Right and Justice,
which Parliaments do not use to deny to English Subjects, this we hope will
convince all that are not wilfully blind, that it is a good and legal security
to all that take it: Also the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of His
Majesty's Treasury, have given all persons Assurance, that there is no
intention of a stop, but that the Revenue falling short of late, by several
ways, they are at present forced to pay ^lower than before, but have now
ordered more weekly Money to be paid to those Assigned, and also to the
Goldsmiths, and that very shortly, they will pay it more punctually, which a
few days will satisfy you in, by their being paid another Quarters Interest,
which is a clear Demonstration, that there is no stop intended.

These things being duly considered, what can hinder all Rational Persons from
subscribing presently, and loseing no more Time to their own certain damage,
unless any man having any particular ill Will to Sir Roberts Person, and so
from the Exact Rules of a high Malice) do himself a hurt, that he may hurt him;
(...) we can say nothing, but by all that is said before, and our long
knowledge of (...) ^^haviour to us, and particularly of his care of our
Satisfaction, we cannot adjudge him deserving any ill usage from his Creditors,
but rather to pity and free him, as we have done, in obedience to that most
excellent Command, to do to others, as we would have others do to us, which we
hope will be the Pattern and Rule you also will follow, and therein remain

Your Friends, VV. B. R. T. I. C.


