THE LATE SPEECH and TESTIMONY OF William Gogor, One of the three desperate and
incorrigible Traitors, Executed at the Grass-Mercat in Edinburgh, the eleventh
day of March, 1681. for disowning His Sacred Majesty's Authority; and owning
and adhering to these Bloody and Murdering Principles, contained in that
Execrable Declaration at Sanquhar Cargils Traitorous Covenant, and Sacrilegious
Excommunicating of the KING, by that Arch-Traytor Cargil, and avowing of
themselves to be bound in Conscience, and by their Covenant to MVRTHER the
KING, and all that Serve under Him; being Armed (the time they were
Apprehended) for that purpose.
MEN and Brethren, These are to show you, that I am come here this day to lay
down my Life for owning Christ and his Truths; and in so much as we are
Calumniate and Reproached* by lying upon our Names, and dreadful upbraiding of
us, with saying, That we are not led by the Scriptures, and say, we have taken
other Rules to walk by; I take the Great God to be Witness against all and
every one of them, that I take the Word of God to be my Rule, and I never
designed any thing but honesty, and faithfulness to Christ: and for owning of
Christ and the Scriptures, this day I am murdered; for adhering to the
Born-down-truths, I am Condemned to die; and I also leave my Testimony, and bear
VVitness against all the Apostate Ministers this day, that have taken favor at
the Enemies hands: the only thing they take away my Life for is, because I
disowned all those Bloody Traitors, not to be Magistrates, which the Word of
God casts off, and we are bound in Conscience and Govenant to God, to disown
all such as are Enemies to God, and which they are avowed and open Enemies to
Christ; And they have made void my Word, says the Lord. Say what ye will
Divils, say VVretches, say Enemies, say what ye will, we are owning the Truth
of Christ, and his written Word; and condemn me in my Judgment who will, I
leave my Blood on one and all that says we are not led by the Scriptures: I
leave my Blood upon you again to be a VVitness against you, and a Condemnation
in the great day of Judgment. I have no more to say, I think this may mitigate
all your Rage; and so forth, I leave his Enemies to his Curse, to be punished
into Everlasting Wrath, for now and ever, Amen.

Sic subscribitur, WILL. GOGER.

London, Reprinted for John Smith, in Great Queen Street.


