A DISCOURSE OF Friendship.

By E. G. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. B. for the Author, and are to be sold by Thomas Fabian
at the sign of the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard, a Corner Shop next
Cheap Side, 1676.

To the Honorable The Lady SARAH COOPER.
Madam,
IT may be thought a presumption in me to affix your Name to the ensuing
Leaves; I assure you ( Madam) it was not their merit but you candor that
induced me to make such an attempt, which also created in me a more then
ordinary confidence and belief that you would overlook all those defects
occasioned by the unskilfulness of the Author, with a charitable allowance: you
cannot expect from the ensuing discourse, that excellency and sublimity the
subject requires; it neither suits with my ability nor design, to send into
the world a splendid Piece of Oratory: Truth was what I aimed at, which, though
naked, will never shame its Master; and experience has furnished me with
arguments not wholly contemptible in this regard: and these must take place
before any acquired accommodation, where the advancement of truth is the
ultimate end: there needs no pompous words to usher in this subject: it carries
so much worth and excellency in the nature of it as is enough to commend it
without those trivial accomplishments; if nothing but blandishments should
demonstrate the value and esteem we have for truth and virtue, they would want
their most affectionate advocates; but Madam, as Clouds and darker colors
serve to set off those which are beautiful and glorious, in this sense my poor
endeavors may be of some use to your Ladyship, and as a foil set off and
commend your more curious notions: many persons of learning and Ingenuity have
offered at this subject, but it has been so generally considered by them, that
they have come short of that satisfaction which might justly be expected from
so sollid and useful an undertaking as that of Friendship; neither have I taken
upon me the task and exactness of a Casuist, in curiously anatomizing even the
most hidden and smallest particulars reducible to each head; I have only drawn
out the fairest and plainest lines, leaving the more artificial discoveries to
them of greater parts and learning, who I heartily entreat to lend their
assistance to this great affair; if they would from hence conclude a call, to
draw this blotted copy fair, and thoroughly effect what I would gladly have
done, and wish it were not above my reach, I mean (Madam) a solid satisfaction
in so material and useful a concern as this is, I should think this adventure
no great crime: but I have been too tedious, give me leave to add, that the
Author wishes to your Ladyship in the perfection of it what the work
describes, and am,

Madam, Your most humble and faithful Servant, E. G.

The PREFACE To the READER.
THe Subject I am upon was never more necessary and seasonable then in these
unhappy times wherein we live, where we find men generally so vicious that
virtue is almost extirpate, and not a few become so monstrously brutish, that
no philosophy can sweeten and allay their extreme bitterness, and so flinty
are their tempers, that love, that tender and delicate plant, can have no
rooting among them; but that which is most to be lamented is, that persons of a
softer mould, and pliant, and yieldable enough to love and friendship, are
forestalled by other objects, and so averted, that they do not think it worth
their while to study and acquaint themselves with this great affair: if any
thing I have done could be so successful as to prevail with them to consult the
reason, convenience, and excellency of this great concern, and weigh things in
the balance of right reason; I dare say the balance would incline another way
then it does with them now: I do not fear that any person though never so
envious should upon the first glance of this book take upon him to prejudge it,
but rather expect the Title Page should prove a powerful motive to induce and
incline the Reader to a further search into the nature of that subject, that
has so splendid an aspect: yet I do not expect to pass this Discourse through
a vicious world and various tempers, without some reflections; the vain and
vicious will be apt to quarrel at the confinement they will find to their
unlimitted fancyes and humor; the Critic will say, it is too trivially
managed to please their curiosity, they can neither find elegancy of style,
nor the advantage of History, which they will affirm are usually the most
proper and principal parts of such an undertaking as this is, the subject in
the nature of it is so rich, that it needs no varaish to set it off, the reward
and pleasure which attends it is enough to commend it without complement; and
indeed I designedly omitted quotations, not that I slighted History, but partly
because I intended only to give my own particular notion of Friendship, as also
what I had collected from my own experience and observation; and partly that I
might leave sufficient encouragement to persons of more leisure and ability to
enter upon this subject, and add that part which is not only most material for
illustration and confirmation, but the most delightful part of the whole
concern; I mean in relation to the composure of it, because as the experience
of others is greatly confirming to the subject, so it is no less pleasing to
the Author, who is never better satisfied then when the truths he asserts come
attended with a cloud of witnesses; beside the Author of this present book may
receive no small advantage, because hereby those errors may be corrected which
unavoidably attend so unskilful an Undertaker: But not to detain or carry the
Reader any further from my intended Subject, I shall leave him with with this
assurance that I am his,

In the Service of Truth, E G.

A DISCOURSE OF FRIENDSHIP.
THe subject of the ensuing Discourse is of that excellency and importance,
that it deserves our diligence in the enquiring into the nature of it; it is
the great Mystery of Friendship which contains in it things worthy, weighty and
exceeding necessary both for the pleasure of the sensitive and rational
appetite: men are tired in the chase of satisfaction from one thing to another,
still pursuing those shadows that cannot be brought nearer, and the reason is,
that in the humane nature there is an intense and continual desire of pleasure,
without which life it self has no satisfaction; for life consisting in the
operations of the soul, either the external of the senses, or the internal of
the mind, it is sweetened by those delights that are suitable to them: the
subject I am upon bids fairest for a temporal satisfaction; as having in it
self those excellent accomplishments which are the intermedial steps by which
we climb and get within reach of it: Philosophers in their vast enquiries into
natural things were never so busy wholly to decline this moral concern, and in
the conclusion when they made up their experiments, they never reckoned those
they found in the way of friendshp inferior or less considerable then those
that were bound up in natural causes; for beside the convenience they find in
this relation for the use and improvements of their natural acquirements, they
arrive at more true and solid contentment: men in tracing effects to their
causes, as they find pleasure, so they find labor, and many disappointments,
their knowledge not seldom proving the fruit of anxious enquiries, which
mightily abates their content, and often they take up with little things they
find in their way, while they still remain short of the end they design; but
Friendship, as it has not such cragged and obscure ways, so it has more
certain and direct ends: men do not in this concern like foolish Chemists, who
melt a great part of their estate in vain in expectation of the great Elixir,
such have riches and treasures in notion and fancy, little in possession; but
it is quite contrary here; Friends have least in notion, most in possession;
when they attain this generous state, they find a real enjoyment of what they
thirsted after; we do not value things only for their intrinsic beauty, but
that which raises the value, is the accommodation they have in them to our
satisfaction, that is the more desirable part: now as there is nothing in all
the creation so good as man, so there is nothing so suitable to the nature of
man, as man himself; and that is the reason ingenious men find so much content
among themselves; and this cannot but advance their content exceedingly, the
symmetry and proportion men have in their natures and dispositions is the
greatest content: satisfaction is derived from similitude, if this be wanting,
however things may appear, they are really unpleasant and ungrateful; like a
garment that is too loose, or too straight, however it may please and humor
pride, it will not content the person, because it wants proportion to that part
to which it was assigned. Friends act^ many parts in this relation, and all
tend to profit and the pleasure of each other; sometimes they act high, and
then they advance the pleasure of the mind by communicating knowledge and
experience superior and consonant to the intelligent nature, other times they
act so as to gratify senses, which is both necessary and convenient, if a due
observation and subordination be allowed to the rational faculties, and so
equal satisfaction according to the several objects is obtained: these and many
other inviting properties you will find in this concern, if you please to enter
with me into the nature of it. But some persons are averse to all virtue, and
consequently to this concern, others through inadvertency wave and neglect the
pursuit of it from a supposed incapacity in themselves, or the difficulty that
lies in their way to the obtaining of it; this proceeds either from ignorance
and unacquantance with this concern, or from a careless and unconcerned temper;
the first should rather animate, and quicken then obstruct and impede, because
nothing is more incident to the nature of men, then to prize those things most
that are scarce and rare, those of an easy and cheap descent bege^ contempt:
Friendship is not less considerable, because it is like the sun in its
clearness, which though less approachable is most glorious; others they cannot
admit of any diversion from their secular affairs, so as to study this concern,
they like the notion of it, and will commend it, but it is at a distance,
according to the outward luster not inward beauty, they fancy it, like children
that admire the gladning rays of the sun that shines in their faces, without
the least consideration of the utility and excellency of it; if these would
make a true estimate of this material concern, it would swallow up the vanity
of those inferior things in which men take such complacency, and so elevate
them, that no unworthy or abject end should sway their more noble part, which
is the soul, and so enlarge and sublimate their minds, that nothing repugnant
to its more direct dictates should be allowed: would we take a view of this
concern, we may inform our selves by looking into the superior schools and
Academies, where we see men of all tempers, some masters of their reason,
others mastered by sensuality; amongst the first we find the most perfect
friendship which seems to be made, not so much for pleasure as utility, profit
being first in their eye, that this design may not be looked upon as
speculative only, and so be received with suspicion as things not common to
vulgar capacities are, till some experiment be made of them: I shall endeavor
in a plain and familiar method to submit the argument I am upon to every man's
reason and experience: I shall not refer to remote Instances of this kind,
though I am not ignorant they would amplify and illustrate the concern, but
confine my self to my own Observation and Experience: And because a regular
proceeding herein will be best understood, I shall cast what I have to say into
this Method.

First, show what Friendship is here meant, and the Import of it.

Secondly, The subjects fit for it both for number and qualities.

Thirdly, What qualifications are necessary.

Fourthly, The great ends aimed at in that relation.

Fifthly, The pleasantness to be found in the state of Friendship.

Sixthly, How Friends are to govern themselves in this relation of Friendship.

Seventhly, The Conclusion by way of commendation.

First, What Friendship is here meant comes first to be considered.

There are Four kinds of Friendship, and these all derive from different
causes, and produce different effects.

First, There is a Christian Friendship.

Secondly, A common and universal Friendship.

Thirdly, A relative Friendship.

Fourthly, A morral Friendship.

First, Of the Christian Friendship: I shall not say any thing to this, but
that it is the most excellent, sweet and durable Friendship, and most to be
ambitioned and desired.

Secondly, there is a common Friendship which we have with all the world as our
fellow creatures, and this is more or less according to our interest in them,
or their merit and desert; this is the measure of this Friendship; the rule
that we go by is the benefit and advantage we expect, and the accommodation that
it has in it to our safety and tranquillity, and other such like ends; or from
charity which we are morally disposed to as rational creatures: Friendship take
it how you will, is very desirable; consider it under this consideration as it
is expatiated, or in a moral sense where it is confined, in all respects it is
eminent: this common Friendship is as general an advantage as the sun, for as
the sun influences and enlightens the world, so Friendship preserves a world
for that light and influence: were it not for this binding and regulating
concern, men like beasts would devour one another, every man naturally
ambitioning rule and hating subjection: were it not for this confinement that
has an universal influence upon all persons and transactions, what tyranny
would reign in the Courts of Princes? what rebellion among subjects? by this
binding concern Princes are made almost unlimitable, and subjects most free: it
is the undissembled affection of Princes upon which the freedom and happiness
of the people are firmly planted: Friendship, is that which secures Families,
otherwise all things would be in confusion there; Brethren like Cain would rise
up one against another, and a man's enemies be them of his own house: besides
this, the prejudice would yer go higher, and all men must stand as in Nehemiahs
time, with their weapons in one hand, and work in the other: since the progeny
of Adam is increased to a vast society and numerous issue, all manner of
disasters, as Famine, Pestilence, Deluge, Fire, Wild Beasts, have not been so
destructive of man as man himself, which was occasioned by this want of
Friendship.

Thlrdly, There is a Friendship among Relations, as that between Father and
son, Husband and Wife, and Brethren, these Relations make Friendships, and such
as must not give place to any other; and this proceeds from natural principles,
which obliges to duty and Obligations not to be violated; of which I shall
speak more in another place.

Fourthly, There is a Friendship that is grounded purely upon moral Principles,
and for distinction we call it a moral Friendship: here is no Obligation
preceding, as in that of relation, but every man is left to his free choice
and election, and is governed by prudential and moral swasion; a Father beside
his own inclination is bound to love his son, the law of nature binds him to
it, and a son his Father in like manner; but no man is bound to love any person
with a complacential love, nor can he do it, except such an one that he can
find upon prudent considerations agreeable to his reason and fancy, these are
the most proper and powerful motives to excite the affections: Friendship is
equal in it self to all the world, and has no difference, but is differenced
by accidents, and by the capacities or incapacities of them that receive it;
charity commands us not to be enemies to any, and reason and prudence directs
us to be most friendly to them that are most useful and deserving: if we have
reason to love many, we have much more reason to love some more then others;
and if my affection be according to reason, I must love most where I see most
reason: this moral friendship as it flows from the most generous principles so
it produces the most desirable effects; we may make an estimate of it by its
causes and effects, sor its causes it derives either from a native candor and
generofity of mind, or from a noble and ingenious education, or something
jointly from both* these seem as good originals as any thing merely moral can
proceed from; and hence it is that we find those of great minds and extraction
most obliging; whereas those of abject births and spirits are of a quite
differing nature; ths first are governed by reason which is still the same, and
will act equally and consonant to it self, excluding an arbitrary will; for he
that does things this moment because he will, may the next have as weighty
arguments to do some contrary, and so spend his whole time in unravelling his
spiders webs, still lying under the lash of the superior faculties, which will
be constantly following him with grating reflections, who resist its more
direct admonitions, numerous are the effects that proceed* from this cause: I
shall point at two or three briefly.

First, men are hereby made so like God, that nothing can more assimilate man
to God, love being a supreme attribute of the unchangeable being, and prepares
and enables us to a conformiry, to the Divine Law.

Secondly, Friendship calls home our wandering fancy, that happily may range after
a thousand vanities, which may allure the affections, but can never satissie
them, and contracts them to objects that are solid and excellent: all men
naturally afpire after happiness, but few find it, because they either mistake
the way or the end; some place it in wisdom, some in honor, others in riches,
taking up with something short of the great end; there is more satisfaction to
be had in a faithful serious friend then in all sublunary things; nothing can
reach our content, but that which can rationally engage the affections, and
this cannot be done by riches, humane reason or pleasure: we may add, the most
binding relations and the most powerful obligations that pleasure can invent,
not any of these nor all together can do it, and that because there is not
worth enough in them to attract the heart and affections, nor weight enough in
them to satisfy reason, nor power to lay any restraint upon exorbitant
passions and unlimited fancies, but friendship can do all this: there is love
to attract, nothing so attractive as love it self: it comes always attended
with the lucre of reward and pleasure: and hcreby it insinuates it self and
lays constraints and limitations upon the person insensibly without force or
violence, and so makes an absolute conquest.

Thirdly, Friendship is exemplary virtue, and carries in its front the clearest
conviction of vice: Philosophers were of opinion that no true love could be
amongst any but ingenious men: persons that are vicious cannot build their
wood, hay and stubble upon so solid a foundation as that of friendship, yet
this concern harh such credit with the worst of men, that it has not wanted
advocates among its greatest enemies, which though they have been never so
vicious and industrious to defame virtue and condemn it as men do the light,
because their weak eyes cannot receive the luster of it, yet they judge it most
amicable, and they can bestow praises upon virtuous men, and commend the
radency of that state they employ their utmost power to circumvent and destroy:
they can as well hold a Lion in a twine thread as confine their unruly passions,
and grasp the air as give check to one lust: these are the unhappy subjects of
those skilful Artificers that vitiate men in their persons to corrupt their
principles, and when all hopes of virtue is lost, they will easily be persuaded
into all the infelicity of a contrary state: these are so deeply plunged in
vice, that they are contented that the last should be raised upon the ruin of
the first, and while they catch after the one with impetuous violence, they can
tamely endure the other to be vilifyed and despised: whereas virtuous men can
view them in their hurry and maze, though with pity to them, with satisfaction
to themselves, while they with serenity and a calm mind can regulate their
opinions, and confine a wandering fancy, and reduce things to their just value:
and however this loose age, the dreg of times, may contemn things in themselves
most deserving, magnifying an arbitrary will, and trampling upon all that
oppose it, these look upon their Trophies as miserable that is built upon
virtue and honor; as a clear day befriends us with more distinct prospect of
distant objects, so when there is quietness within, then we can look about us,
and see what excellencys invite the reason and affection: when vain men as a
just reward of their sensuality are clouded; and it is not seldom, that
melancholy, that black passion overspreads the mind like an Egyptian darkness,
admitting no allay, but hurrying men blindefold into their own ruin: Let none
think this a scheme of discourse, since there is nothing more common then to
see men vitiate their principles as well as their duties, and be worse then
their nature inclines them to: many evils are committed against the grain, and
with violence to constitution: if the best sensuality be too trifling to
maintain any proportion with virtue and honor, how far wide must they needs be
that stand in competition with virtue; those that have such degenerate wills as
that they can exchange liberty for licentiousness, have lost their freedom, and
are contracted to low and base objects: I would gladly vindicate virtue, and
make it illustrious, it is my design in this Discourse: there is but one way
for the obtaining that end, and that is by making it as radiant as I can, that
by the splendor of it men's eyes may be drawn off from worse objects; but some
spirits are so dis-ingenious, that the most glorious rewards will not animate
them, like brutes they are not concerned in all the happiness to be found above
in the region of reason, but would relinquish or resign any portion there, so
they may secure and enjoy husks and draught: these prodigally spend their time
and treasure upon such trifles that will reward them with poverty and vexation,
the certain reward and portion of those that are not capable of more generous
resentments; but it is time to take leave of this digression, and come to the
point.

The next thing that comes under our consideration, is, what a Moral Friendship
imports: It imports the closest union, the most generous contract, thc sweetest
communion, the strongest resolutions between persons that study nothing more
then the satisfaction one of another in all things both divine and humane.

I purpose not to speak to every individual part of this Proposition, that
would take up more time then I have designed for this undertaking, and swell
this little Tract to a volume; as also beeause I shall occasionally take them
all in the Discourse that sollows, I shall only at present explain my meaning
in a general way, and so proceed: By Union I mean a union of hearts, which is
most exeellent as to its original and effects; it has a higher cause, and
derives from the most noble spring, and its consequents are proportionate: It
is natural to every production to bear symetry and proportion to that which
produces it; from this heart-union springs the most complacential communion
and fellowship: Friendship is love and society mixed together, which make it
most delightful in this sociable state; men do not only meet with useful
diver^isements, the want of which is the great spring of mischief, but they
find ingenious advertisements consonant to the intelligent nature, together
with an entire affection, which is the ax^s upon which this great concern
turns, seconded with generosity its most constant and grateful attendant; as
also a fixed resolution which makes the wheel, though always turning, never
uncertain: By how much the more free any thing is, by so much the more lasting
and durable fixedness twists all the other requisites; so that they bind more
strongly; and this makes the union so ^ntire, that friends have the same
interest, the same choice, and in a sense they communicate and exchange
properties, and there is but one soul between them: Friendship is a tree laden
with precious fruit, well rooted and never decaying, no warmth is at its root;
it is not like Jonas's gourd that came up in a night, and perished in a night;
Friendship thus fixed is unmovable to all the effects of contrary motives.

Thirdly, the subjects fit for this moral Friendship comes next to be
considered, and we mus^ consider them,

1. As to their Numbers. 2. Their Acquaintance. 3. Their Qualities. 4. Their
Equality.
First, The number of persons; this must be heedfully regarded: Friendship
strictly taken according to our method, excludes all persons above two, more
the Law calls riots, and lov^ calls Rivals and Competitors, which cannot be
allowed in this concern, but with hazard to the foundation, which is built on
union and integrity * besides the expectation of friends are so large and vast,
that nothing but a full and ample possession is accounted any thing: I cannot
divide my affection, and the heart remain entire, the hear^ goes out in them,
and necessarily is divided; and that is so diametrically contrary to the nature
o^ Friendship, that it is like the taking away of the Foundation, which draws
the whole Fabric after it, or such a rent as must of necessity destroy the
most essential props, after which it must inevitably moulder into its first
nothing.

Secondly, persons fit for this concern are no^ strangers, as those are not fit
at all that are strangers and unknown, so they are most fit that are best known
in their natures and dispositions, an^ hereby many inconveniences are avoided;
first disappointments that are always cross but cruel in love: prudence directs
us to treat with persons at a distance before we take them into ou^ bosom,
lest our ignorant occasions, our vexation and trouble in case of
disappointment, our hasty fixing upon some unequal object, as it insnares the
affection and betrays them, so it puts an undervalue upon the judgment: men
that have made an unequal choice how many inconveniences do they draw upon
themselves, sometimes the head is distracted, and this is destructive of their
peace and tranquillity: the head is filled with troublesome notions and
contrivances, how it may handsomely manage a breath in that friendship that can
neither rationally be continued nor credibly broken, that is a grating
conviction that discovers errors in those things to which the heart is nearly
united; how to unite that knot that cannot be loosed without many a piece of
self-denial is not easily learned, because it cannot be done without grief and
trouble: a separation from them we dearly love is very hard, though never so
good reason appears for it, passion being violent, wilful and impetuous,
easily seduced in the first choice, afterward hardly reclaimed: for as nothing
is more easily surprised then the fancy, so nothing will be more hardly
convinced of its error.

Secondly, The lower appetite may be prejudiced by precipitancy, for the
troubles of the mind has a mighty influence upon the body, and they often
torment one the other: the pains of the body proves no small detriment to the
mind; sharp pains in the body so discomposeth the mind, that its made unfit
for its high and noble operations, so that it cannot perform its acts with that
delight and freedom: Philosophers took a great deal of care speedily to cure
all distempers of the body, that no obstruction thereby might impede the
pursuit of knowledge: As the calmness of the mind mightily prepares for every
serious action, so perturbation has a quite contrary effect, and so distracts
the mind that it proves the greatest prejudice imaginable, because we often
lose our reason in that crowd which is the only expedient to prevail with us
against any thing unnecessary or vexatious: This is a Maxim, that nothing
serious can be done in haste; Friendship is a serious thing, and must be well
weighed both in its substance and circumstances; These things are very material
in order to a well-grounded friendship, that there be excellency in the mind,
sweetness and affability in the disposition, and reality in the affection; if
we cannot be satisfied in all these, we can expect to arrive at no better end
then disappointment; now to acquaint our selves with all these, will require no
small diligence and observation, which will employ our most serious thoughts,
and take up a considerable time: if a man be a servant to the meanest thing,
upon which he places an inordinate affection, as indeed he is, then this
should awaken all our powers to contemplate this concern; lest while we aim at
pleasure we carelessly inslave our selves: It is not notion but experience that
fixes content, as nothing can destroy our happiness but the experience of
evil, so nothing can establish our satisfaction but the experience of good:
there is as much deceit in men as there is in stones, men may insinuate
themselves by specious pretenses, yet gross deceivers; It is hard for a man
that is blinded with pride or passion, or any other delusion, to understand
himself; he is not seldom betrayed by himself, much less can he be understood
by another: there are shining men as well as shining stones, otherwise that
proverb had never been, All is not gold that glisters; we know many a stone
has the Diamond cut and color, yet but a counterfeit, and when we think we
have a treasure, it proves but a trifle: many men that through rashness and
inconsideration fix their affection before experience had of the true value of
the object, are plainly cheated, prodigally giving away their hearts without
any assurance of suitable returns; and hence it comes to pass, that we see some
friendship broken and shattered, and in a short time moulder and come to
nothing; the Materials were deceitful; like a house that is slightly built, it
appears strong and fair to the eye, but soon decays; the defect was in the
foundation, which though least seen is most dangerous.

Thirdly, our too early fixing, as it insnareth the affection, so it condemns
the judgment; many will think themselves concerned here, especially the most
vicious, that are curious in nothing but in praying into and searching after
the failings of others; such inquisitions being more natural and gratifying
extravagant humors, who are most ready to censure what they least understand,
and make causless exceptions, which if rightly argued, they cannot answer one
of a thousand. Friendship may be envied, it cannot be condemned, while it
remains pure and entire, yet upon the least failer it is liable to the greatest
reproach and scorn: When Hushai David's friend came to Absalom he was glad to
see him, yet how ready does he upbraid him, saying, Is this thy kindness to thy
friend? Absalom was one of the worst of men, and the greatest traitor, but he
hated treachery notwithstanding: few men so barbarous as to love deceit, hence
that Proverb came, that men love the Treason but hate the Traitor.

The greatest ground of condemnation is drawn from this, especially our
inconsiderateness in the first choice and election, where we ought to have been
most curious and circumspect, and this is aggravated by two ungrateful
circumstances: First, this seems to be a fundamental error, and therefore most
dangerous, and then it is obvious to vulgar inspection and observation; and this
is a grating aggravation, and comes attended with exclamations, and often
enforces a man to dissemble a kindeness to a person he could never do upon any
other account then this, that he might defend his judgment from censure, and
the relation of friendship from scorn and contempt; nothing more contrary to an
ingenious man then to own a kindeness for him that once deceived him,
especially in so material a concern as that of friendship, where he expected the
contrary; yet prudence will not suffer him to deny him publicly: it is in this
case as with him that has bought a Jewel, which he thought most precious, but
was cheated, that man will be ashamed to own the deceit, because thereby his
ignorance is betrayed; and next to being deceived he hates to be upbraided;
reputation is exposed to scandal in this case without remedy, which is equally
dear to him as his life; what can he allege, should he say, I thought my
friend was worthy, amiable and sincerely affectionate, but I was mistaken, what
a contemptible plea is this? as much as if he should say, I was a novice and
knew not how to make a right choice, or I was careless and would not take the
pains; if ignorant, how can he be a complete Judge? by what rule can he assign
errors on another when for ought he knows the fault is his own: nothing will
sooner misleade then ignorance, if negligent worthy to suffer: To prevent this,
be well acquainted with the person before you make this contract, prevention is
better then cure, the more perfect knowledge a man has of his friend, the
greater is his love to his person, if he be worthy; then acquaint your self
with the law of friendship, love has law as well as duty, and indispensable
obligations, which if thrown off make unhappy breaches: It is necessary that
there should be a principle of reason and choice in that person that is
governed by this law; first, to consider the reason that enjoins, Secondly, to
descern the import of the concern; Thirdly, how to determine it self out of
judgment and choice to accept it as worthy in it self, and advantageous to the
receiver: no external force can compel the will to choose any thing but under a
notion of comparative goodness, as the inferior creatures are moved by the
secret force of natural inclination, so rational creatures are wrought upon and
insensibly drawn by moral engagements, as the foresight of rewards or
threatenings annexed invites them: Friendship cannot be without commands; if that
be true, that the dispensing of benefits acquire to the giver a right to
command, and lays on the receiver an obligation to obey, and these rights and
obligations are measured by the nature of the benefit as their just rule: This
is a Maxim, that every rational man readily assents to, no commands so pleasing
as those of love: no duty so easy; because as the commands are easy without
restraint, so they are equal without violence and oppression, which sweetly
obliges to Obedience.

Lastly, That we may be secured in so weighty a matter, and build the material
concern upon firm bases, know this, that not only reason but religion is
necessary as the most transcendant and pregnant argument to engage the will and
affections, those that are learned in the work of righteousness are the most
excellently qualified for this concern: I admit a Friendship may be made between
persons merely moral; where there may be equality there may be amity, but it
cannot be so sure and safe as the Christian Friendship, one being founded in
heaven the other on earth; so that there is as much difference between them as
between heaven and earth, and as their originals are unequal, so their objects
and operations are unequal; reason cannot bear equal pace with religion, though
it may arise high in respect of sense, yet it is very low compared with faith;
I grant, that religion connot make Friendship complete except rational
accomplishments and natural requisites concur; as reason cannot convey grace,
so religion cannot convey reason: many Idiots without question are pious, yet
not in any case capable of Friendship, because there must be reason as well as
religion to regulate things: that religion is not sufficient of it self to make
Friendship, the case of Barnabas and Paul makes undeniable, who through dispute
and difference did that which is against the nature of Friendship, they parted
and probably never met again; we cannot think they were enemies, but certainly
they were less friends; this must be granted, where the restraint in Friendship
begins, there begins the imperfection of it; and without any question the moral
Friendship was broken, only the Christian Friendship remained entire, we must
needs run a mighty hazard in making alliances with persons impious: First, the
devil will design a breach, either by planting in us some dividing principles,
and afterward he will be as industrious to draw out these principles into
dividing practices: sometimes God himself will design a breach, if God intend
either party for himself, enmity will soon grow between them, there being a
certain antipathy between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent: do
not we see God curse the greatest comforts of the carnal men, and blast their
fairest hopes, and nip their promising blossoms? but if there be truth in the
inward parts, and piety bears the sway, the Friendship will be established: and
because the best Frendships may sometimes want pleasure, but never trouble, we
had need be careful that we have an interest in him that can turn our waters of
affliction into the wine of consolation.

I come now to the Fourth thing, namely, the equality that must be in the
persons of friends previous to this concern: and here we shall first examine
the perfections of the mind, and then those inferior though necessary
requisites to complete this equality: the persons must have in them that which
will do these things, satisfy reason in a competent measure, ravish and
attract the affection, and preserve harmony and agreement in all the
transactions that relates to this concern: those that are untainted with
prejudice, and by being so have their judgments clear and unbiassed, consider
seriously the happiness of this concern: Friendship is not guided by humor and
fancy which has much more sway among the vulgar then judgment and reason, and
that makes them so uncertain, they can shuffle passions, and hate next hour,
what just now they adored; but it is a grave and deliberate act of the
understanding and will, whereby we come to a right estimate of things; the
rational faculties, which are the understanding and will, if rightly guided,
are not to be slightly satisfied; outward blandishments will not do it, it must
be something that is really good, as that which is so fubtilly disguised under
an appearance of good, that it cannot be discovered: things being thus
prefented to the will, it closes with them by a free and unconstrained choice,
and the affections are inclined insensibly, virtue being the only ingratiating
quality: for the better directing our inquisition, it will be requisite to
enquire what those qualities are that are universally and indispensibly
necessary, in order to the answering those great ends beforementioned: I
conceive these three things will fully do it. Eirst, worth and excellency in
the mind, that will satisfy reason as to the choice of the object, that it is
not base and abject but valuable: Secondly, courteous and affable conditions
and inclinations, this will engage the affection: Thirdly, such an equality as
will answer in every thing requisite in this material concern, and this will
both create and preserve harmony and agreement in all transactions, and is the
beauty and comeliness of Friendship; when there is an Uniformity observed in
things, how splendidly do they appear? and the more excellent the things are in
themselves, the more lovely they appear in uniformity: Friendship is not only to
raise and inflame the heart with the love of the object in order to a sensual
satisfaction, though that be necessary, because from thence the felicity of the
animal life proceeds, but rather to improve the superior faculties in order to
a rational satisfaction, from whence the pleasure of the mind proceeds; now
our judgment and reason is abundantly satisfied, when we find in the object
of our affections the habits and acts of reason; for as the principles of
reason inhances the value of the person, so the practices benefits others, not
only as an example, though that be much, but as an improvement of our knowledge
and experience.

First, we will consider reason in its superlative degree, as a King upon his
throne, when reason keeps the throne, the will is right, and its impressions
just and equal, so that the inferior faculties are easily drawn to a
subordination to its dictates and admonitions, and the affections are exercised
with proportion to the quality of their objects, and reason is their inviolable
rule, and love the supreme affection that gives being to all the rest, to
hatred it self; for so much we hate any thing as it stands between and impedes
our enjoyment of what we love; the rational faculties has objects that highly
excels those of the sensitive, their capacities are more spacious, and their
union with the object more close and intimate, their perception more clear, and
thereby become the greatest instruments of pleasure to the intelligent nature:
the highest faculties are the understanding and will, to which the desire of
knowledge is most natural, and produces the noblest and sweetest pleasure; and
this according to the perfection and enjoyment of the object, proportionable to
the degrees of excellency there is in any object, so much rational satisfaction
accrues to the mind by the knowledge of it: Natural things greatly affect an
intelligent man in his enquiring into their nature, I mean the works of God and
his providential distributions, yet the excellencies they find there are but
dark and faint resemblances of the infinite and unchangable perfection, the
desire of knowledge both natural and moral is mavelous quick and earnest and
in appearance, most worthy the rational nature, as being exceeding pleasant and
delicious to the soul: the retirements of nature are not without those
excellencies which invite the search of intelligent men, but the mystery of
morallity has much more perfection in the nature of it, to animate and quicken
our enquiries, and that because knowledge is attained here with less labor,
more certainty, and with greater delight and pleasure; and the reason is, we
get some steps nearer the original of all perfection; the Impressions of God
are engraven upon all his works, but so darkly, that many naturally wise men
could hardly find light enough in their natural lamps to discover the true
nature and characters of him: now morallity ascends much nearer, it is a
prospect that makes clearer discoveries, and hereby we ascend so near
perfection, that we may discover much of the nature and excellency of the
unchangeable and glorious being, yet this is but a glimmering light, and a low
perfection comparatively, and will never reach happiness; there is a strong
inclination in men to be happy, this desire is born and bred up with him, and
it is the first and universal principle from whence all moral consequences are
derived: this is the rule of our desire, and the end of our actions: as in
natural things the principle of their production operate according to their
quality, so in moral things the end is as powerful to form the soul for its
operations in order to it, therefore as all desire to be happy, so they apply
themselves to those means that has a tendency to it: men frame happiness
according to their tempers, and the apprehensions of it are proportionable to
the condition of the persons: for happiness is the pleasure that derives from
the harmony and agreement that there is between the object and the appetite,
that we may come to a more perfect knowledge of the supreme being, and so
consequently be more happy then any man, though never so richly accomplished
can be any other way: we must close with religion to this capacity the beams of
divine light are extended; it is not my design so to magnify humane reason as
to neglect that knowledge that is divine, nor is it according to our method
wholly to rest there; the great import of Friendship as was promised was to
study the happiness one of another in all things both divine and humane; it is
true, there is a secret acknowledgment in every man's breast of a superior
power to whom he must give an account, this he has by the light of nature, yet
the clearness of the understanding i^ lost notwithstanding; and that light that
remains is eclipsed; those that are guided by this ligh^ led by sense, fancy,
and passion, they have no^ motives that should raise them to higher things
there is yet a clearer discovery to be made o^ God, and that is the office of
faith, which lift men up above the region of Reason, and so enlarges and
sublimates the mind that it can ge^ very near the infinite perfection; as
reason i^ greatly above sense, so faith is infinitely abov^ reason: if we
consider its original acts and ends faith is not the fruit of nature, no such
flowe^ grows in natures garden: it is the immediate gift of God: none of the
philosophers could attain this in all their enquiries, and the reason was, they
never understood the knowledge of God in Christ, they were not brought to see,
that there were higher degrees of excellency in the objects of faith then in
those of reason, nor could they discern the infallibility of its rule, by which
all actions are measured, if proportionable to the degree of excellency that
there is in the object: our happiness is more or less complete: a Christians
happiness must need be superlative that has God for his object who is beyond
all degrees, and superlative: the satisfaction of reason and that of faith are
not the same thing, there is as much difference as between heaven and earth,
the different ways they take exactly convinces, that there ends are not only
different, but contrary; the rule or law that Christians are directed by is
infallible, and the rule by which all their actions are measured, is the
perfect law of God, not the moral law written in every man's heart before the
fall, the dark impression whereof remains to this day, but I mean the law of
faith which is not subject to any dispute or doubt; we need not go so far about
as heathens which knew God no otherwise but by the dark impressions they found
of him in natural things, but we come to a perfect knowledge of him, by the
Gospel and see him face to face: Christians as they have clearer
manifestations, so they have more noble and excellent means by which they
attain those splendid discoveries, and this most clearly demonstrates the glory
and magnificency of their end: men that look at a temporal felicity they level
at low ends that which engages a Christian in the pursuit of happiness, is no
motive to them, and that is beauty and reward; nothing that is future can be
any attractive to a carnal and sensual man, nor can beauty invite him: The
vitiousness of his eye hinders him from discerning the beauty: the shortness of
his sight is such that he cannot reach things that are future: the most
rational Philosophers that were most diligent to improve in knowledge, received
with delight truths of lower descent and of infinitely less importance but
rejected divine revelation: morality seems to come very near felicity; their
professed design was happiness, yet these because they could not admit a
higher principle then natural reason, utterly disclaimed Gospel Light, and its
more clear revelations; but God who has commanded light to shine out of
darkness, has shined into the heart of a Christian and has given the
knowledge of God in the face of Christ; this is the sun that dazeled the eyes
of Philosophers, but inlightens Christians more and more until the perfect day:
men of the most exquisite natural parts and perfections, though there were no
future state, bold not be happy while they retain those natural insufficiences
that are incident to the best of men that walk by a fallible rule; how
frequently are they ensnared, allurements may be so subtly and artificially
contrived and made, especially when the bait is reward and pleasure, that the
rational and the sensitive appetite are at once betrayed; the two principles of
action are the understanding and will, there is no particular good but may have
the appearance of some evil, or something that is ungrateful annexed to it, for
which reason the will may reject it; so every particular evil may be so
disguised by the false appearance of goodness annexed to it, that the will may
receive it: spacious objects convey themselves through the unwary and unguarded
fences to the fancy, and from that to the understanding, which by neglect not
considering the danger, or fondly believing the goodness of the end, will
overballance the evil of the means, commends it to the will, and that embraces
it, and the senses that should be sentinels to give intelligence faithfully and
discover dangers vigilantly, and make true reports of things to the mind
respectfully as subordinate to the rational faculties, to hinder all
disturbances or disquietness that might assault the mind, they not seldom act
contrary, carelefly taking disguised enemies for friends, othertimes by a false
alarm affright the lower appetite, and cause such confusion that the command of
reason cannot be observed; and this is done either by bringing in some amazing
trouble or insinuating some inviting pleasure or any other distractions of the
mind: thus the senses wound and captivate the mind, so that there is no
trusting to reason, sense, or any thing but says, which can neither deceive
nor be deceived; this prospective gives a true sight of things, whether we
consider God the supreme object of our happiness or the enjoyment of him which
is subordinate: it is true we cannot come to a perfect knowledge of God in this
imperfect state, bu^ we may have our hearts enlarged here to receiv^ that
happiness that is reserved for a more perfect state, and may have happiness in
the seed and principles of it; nothing shall alter our condition there but
degrees, and we shall have a portion answerable to the spaciousness of the
capacity so then we are not to judge of our selves as t^ happiness or misery by
wisdom and humane reason, but by faith that cannot be mis-guided o^
controuled: this measure is not humane reason that may err, but it is grace,
not in our hand but in the hand of omnipotency, where erring an^ warping is
impossible; as says has its illumination from him whose understanding is
infinite, s^ it has its strength from him that is Almighty By this light the
understanding is rectifyed, the will is inclined, so that they cannot be
inveigle^ by inferior objects, and it substitutes such sobriety in the lower
appetite, which keeps ou^ all those intrusions that generally subvert it But I
leave this point, and proceed, and show how knowledge and mental perfection may
rea^ the benefit of others.

Secondly, Men do not love and value person only for their intrinsic worth
though that is valuable and inviting, but for the diffusive quali^^ that is so
natural to true excellency, that it ca^ not be divided, no more then the beams
of t^^ sun can be separated from the body: men thi^^ themselves happy in
nothing but what comes a^tended with reward as well as pleasure, a^^ therefore
prize^ friendship as having in it self most accommodation and proportion
thereunto: Love is the most free and generous Passion sending forth continually
that which is both profitable and greatly delightful, and this is most
obliging: men are valued as all things else are, for their usesulness; we have
a good instance for this in melancholy persons that have as large capacities as
others, and are as industrous to acquire noble endowments as any, and attain as
great perfection, yet being under the tyranny of that black passion, are not
capable of Demonstration, and so they draw themselves under a cloud while they
live, by obscuring their perfections; and when they die, their excellencies
with themselves are buried in everlasting oblivion; they live no use, and die
without glory; whereas others who like the sun have scattered their light,
though short of their excellencies and acquirements, have lived usesully and
dyed honorably. It is not notion but example that imbalms our dust, and
perpetuates renown; men of clear and inturrupted reason cannot content
themselves with themselves, I mean no man can be satisfied from himself, that
is Gods prerogative, and therefore are frequently taking in supplys from
without; and this they could not do with convenience, content, and
satisfaction, had they not the advantage of communication, by which they
transplant their precious flowers, as also convey from their divine springs
those streams that would overflow all banks, if not carefully turned into
convenient channels; neither would their felicity they intend be complete,
could they confine their notions and experiences within the narrow territories
of their own minds: Now that they may discharge themselves of the burdens of
their weighty conceptions, which they may do while they retain the worth of
them, and find out a way for their capatious souls to empty themselves: They
court all opportunities, among which Friendship presents its self as most
suitable and proper, because receptive of all those generous overtures which
are propounded, and so the will and affection are immediately engaged, freely
without any force or violence, to close with Friendship, as the most convenient
scene upon which they may act those serious contrivances that terminate in
virtue and honor: It is in this state and relation men cheerfully pursue
golden designs, and make use of those excellent experiments they have been
long gathering, but by some harsh accident and unhappy incapacity have been hid
and obscured: Now Friendship mainly intending the improvement of reason and
advantage, every way both to the giver, and receiver immediately puts upon that
employment, without which the most curious searches seems but idle things, and
that is communication, whereby men both improve themselves and others; It is
true, habitual excellency beautifies the mind, but it must be extended beyond
that, else the reputation, which is very considerable among virtuous men will
lose much honor; the more general the inffuence, the greater the glory, like
the sun whose glory does not only consist in the body, though that be all
light, and the sountain of light, but also in the spreading beams; they being
of the most general advantage: But to bring this argument yet nearer our
purpose, observe, that wise men in their first attempts, in order to the
demonstrating of their parts, are not hasty, rash and precipitate; they will
friendly discourse their notions before they will scatter them publicly; this
is readily assented to, that the most accomplished men are not secured from
mistakes, which will ofttimes attend unavoidably the most wary undertaker: men
cannot so exactly shape their best thoughts, as that they should appear comely
to all, nor can he promise himself an exemption at all times from
misapprehension, passion or some other accident which may intervene between the
intention and the action, these are incident to every man, and can be no more
divided from the purest constitutions and innocent lives then light from the
sun: Again, considerate men are not so taken with their early conceptions as to
believe them without exceptions or improvement, and none can so freely,
innocently and without noise do it, as a faithful and judicious friend, who
cannot be suspected of envy or partiality on the other side: who more fit to
pay those just acknowledgements then he who will as cheerfully commend any
worthy quality as he would tenderly, prudently and carefully detect the
contrary; that this act of Friendship is a singular advantage, will further
appear upon this enquiry which follows: Examine great Schools and public
communities and Academies, and you will find they are not only intended for
the study of Learning in their several apartments, but also for the benefit of
Communion in a sociable conversation, whereby learning is improved and extended
in order to the public benefit of the whole society: We are not without
multitude of examples of this kind, it is by discourse truth is disputed,
error is expunged; the true measure of the capacity and incapacities of men
lies originally in that rule that the art or science he is about to acquire
prescribes, but the use is more extensive, and so the measure is in every man's
hand that has skill to use it; and hereby a man comes to make a right estimate
of all things, by applying the rule to them, which is done by discoursing with
our selves or others: words are the shaping of the thoughts, and rally them
into order and form: thoughts are best discerned in their dress whether they
are trivial or weighty; naked thoughts sometimes affright us, we dare not look
on them, till by words they are adorned, and so made amiable; othertimes they
seem so aerie that we cannot hold them, they slip from us; but when we have
shaped them we have greater command of them, and can hold them till we have
examined them, and at last we have liberty to keep them or reject them,
according to their desert and merit: a man's first conceptions may be overvalued
or undervalued by accidents, as when melancholy or pride interposeth:
Melancholy will not stay so long upon thoughts, being of a roving temper, or
till they may be scanned, and pride will examine them overly and slightly,
because it thinks it cannot err: We deal uprightly and judiciously when we
examine things so as that we come to a right understanding of the nature of
them, and can give every thing its true value without lessening their luster,
which consists in their nature, uniformity and composition: It was the advice
of a Grandee, eminent for Learning, and of an excellent judgment, that men
should discourse their thoughts and when opportunities were not to be had of
discoursing them otherwise, rather then wholly omit this necessary concern,
they should direct their discourse to a statue; but he that has a faithful
friend need not put himself upon this conclusion: Familiar converse is always
pleasant and often very profitable and seasonable; Two wits are better then
one, is a Proverb not to be slighted: I may see an error in my Friend he may
not see in himself, without being overcurious and this may be so argued, that
he may be convinced, and his reputation secured from reproach and scandal.

Secondly, there must be that in the object we pitch upon for Friendship, that
must ravish the affections, and that seems to be candor and affability in
dispositions and conversation, this is as necessary in order to content and the
pleasure of this concern, as reason is in order to the profit of it: as reason
is necessary, so love and an equal conversation is as necessary, this was that
which first created and still supports it; nothing so indearing as civility and
courtesy; and this keeps up the reputation of Friendship in spite of all that
envy that malicious persons conceive against it: no cloud can eclipse the
radiancy of this concern, when it is clothed with civility and courtesy, this
is the constraining property of kindness, and in this sense objects has a
constraining force, though properly they have none, but derive their efficacy
from the faculties to which they are agreeable: we may understand the
excellency of this temper by comparing it with those that are of morose and
harsh spirits, such has crossness so natural to them, being born and bred up
with them, that they cannot be otherwise: what torment are such persons to
themselves? every the least contradiction so inflames and so strangely
transports them, and that to such amazing passions, that they are not only
ungrateful to others but frightful to themselves; they arrive to such
extravagancies that mischievous effects follow upon them: they are justly
termed mad, else they would not bring upon themselves a greater mischief that
they may do a less; these persons are not fit for any serious undertaking; but
now a calm and affable temper reduces passions, and so fortifies themselves
against them, that they neither disquiet their own minds, nor others patience:
these can pass by the greatest injuries insensibly; how prudently do they
interpret all things in the best sense that are meant in the worst they do see,
as to pity, but are blind as to prejudice: these do not practice curiosity and
a near inspection into the faults of others, and yet will severely enough
detect vice, without grating and unbraiding how amiable is such a disposition,
and most incomparably fit for this great concern? this temper has many
excellent properties; I shall hint at some: It is free, pleasant and
complasant; Love is noble, and admits the beloved into the heart, and gives him
a peculiar interest there, and in all that he has besides, interest is so
great a part of Friendship, that we conclude, no Interest no Friendship: It is
the true measure of Love; as Interest is more or less persect, so is the
affection more or less complete; proportionable to the interest, such is the
Friendship: All those accomplishments we have been discoursing of, are
insignificant to a person without interest, like the Gold in the Indies; only
valuable in themselves, but of little value to others which are at a distance:
It is interest that inhanceth the worth of any thing, propriety is very
indearing and obliging; it puts a beauty upon our enjoyments; how common is it
for men to slight that in the possession of another they admire, when the
property is altered and they can call it their own.

Again, Friendship is pleasant without those perplexities that attend other
relations; as the temper of friends are more equal, so their commerce and
fellowship is more pleasing; equality sweetness society: Friendship is
compounded of love and society: how pleasant are those harmless diversions that
constantly attend those sociable companions? and that which makes it the more
sweet, is the utility and necessiity of it for the repair of the mind, that
may and will be tired in the most beneficial and excellent employments: the
most diligent person cannot be always upon the wing, the lower appetite must
have content as well as the superior; for as the disturbances in the fenses
much prejudice the operations of the mind, so that it cannot act either
profitably or pleasantly for that particular season; so when the mind is too
intent, the senses are prejudiced, and so much sometimes, that they cannot
enjoy those vacancies that prudence and convenience assigns them for the
repairs of the body and lower appetite, which may be so: weary in attending
upon the rational appetite, that pleasure may seem a burden because
unseasonable, and they may prefer a sleepy stupdity before the most grateful
recreation; and the reason seems to be this because sense cannot bear equal
pace with reason, the body with the mind; wise men in their most eager pursuit
of knowledge had evermore a due respect to the body, which if impaired the
mind could not make its returns either so pleasant or beneficial as before:
now it is the great design of friends so to regulate their affairs that a
general content shall be given both to sense and reason* answerable to their
respective capacity: Society as it is necessary upon a moral account, so it is
most natural; God himself preached this doctrine in paradise, it is not good
for man to be alone; Adam was no other way unhappy, Paradise with all its
pleasure could not make up this want, his sociable nature was not to be
contented without it: Adam was as perfect in his primitive state as any
creature could possibly be; look into his understanding and there you will
find perfect light; into his will, and their exact rectitude; his affections
all pure, without any dross, his body full of beauty and comeliness: add
hereunto his constant communion with God who treated him with no other terms
but love and kindeness, yet after all this, the Lord as a further demonstration
of his favor to Adam, he assigns him a companion, the proportionableness of
which is signified in that commendation he gives the woman, when he presents
her to Adam, saying, she was a help-meet for him: all this illustrates the
pleasure of society. If Adam in paradise wanted society that was happy in every
thing else, how pleasant must Friendship be to us that are happy in nothing else
comparatively? what complacency and delight must needs spring from a state so
peculiarly free and pleasant, I might speak much of the delight and
satisfaction to be found in this regard, but that I shall reserve to another
place.

The Fourth and last thing promised by way of preparation to this great concern
is this, that there must be so much equality in the person and capacity of
Friends which will be commensurate and adequate in every thing material,
relating to this rclation and state of Friendship: for the better directing our
inquisition in this great case, a method will be necessary. I would explain my
meaning here with all caution and circumspection, that I might not be
mis-understood, because the intricacy of the whole Discourse lies in this
particular.

First, I do not mean by this equality such an absolute equality as will admit
of no disparity that is almost impossible, and certainly unnecessary: Men
cannot meet in this concern as lines in the eenter, no man can perfectly
understand the heights and depths of his own mind so as to make a certain
estimate of them, and it must needs be without the reach of any other; as the
accidents of life in some inferior things may make a difference as to the
outward state, so the perfections of the mind, though not contrary may be
unequal, and that because one man may and does excel another in particular
things; and this is so far from causing a disgust, that it promises singular
advantage; for as a worthy man is dissatisfied though he has treasured up
great things while they remain obscure, so he is highly contented to part them
between himself and his friend, and no less is he delighted to see his own
worth outvied by his friend: for whatsoever the one possesses the other cannot
want: no matter where the propriety is when the use is in both: the trade that
Friends drive is giving and receiving in order to a mutual satisfaction: beside
were this seeming disparity wanting, friends would miss one of their great
ends: no man is loved for himself: It were well if we could love God at that
rate: there is a vast expectation of profit and pleasure among Friends, and
much of their satisfaction lies in this, exchanging value for value, and hereby
they are both gainers, and this upon a double account. First they add each to
others treasure by some additional excellency, and then to their content,
because its mutual: It is no cause of quarrel that one excels another in worthy
qualities, the one never loses by the others gain; and then there is much more
delight in submitting the reason and wills in the voluntary intercourses and
acts of Friendship, then can be any other way, and that because there is more
love expressed in those acts, and the more of love is in any thing, the more
sweet, gratifying and contenting it is: But to come to particulars.

And here I shall endeavor to show what are those inequalities that are
absolute, and can never be otherwise, and then what inequality that is that may
be dispensed with and taken up when prudence speaks it necessary: That I may
not in stead of explicating intricate this material concern, I shall promise
these Four things wherein this inequality is to be found, and is so interwoven
into the composition and condition of the persons that no prudence can take up.

First, The inequality between a Prince and a slave, a wise man and a fool,
persons of different persuasions in matters of religion, and in the ^ast place,
that inequality that is in some Relations.

First, A Prince cannot without too base a con^iscention and diminution of his
honor take his ^ave into his bosom, this is so great a disparity, that no
prudence can ever take up; this is both ^n unnatural and unreasonable
condescension.

Secondly, There can be no equality between ^ wise man and a fool; if a wise
man cannot make ^rendship with a person that is grossly ignorant, because of the
disparity that there is between them in respect of their reason, as I shall
show anon, much less with him that is so far from great reason, that he has
none at all: fools can never be so equallized as to comport with men of
competent reason, much less with wise men; their natures are made up of
contradiction: there is that madness, wilfulness and folly in the one that
cannot consist with that gravity, wisdom and humility of the other, as one can
never be raised to any congruity with the other, so the other can never be so
depressed and degenerated as to bea^ any proportion with him: no such amity can
stand with so great an inequality: I need not use any further argument for the
confirmation of this assertion; Give me leave to speak a word to the
supposition, which is, that men of high parts and sublimated minds cannot be so
equalized as to be made fit subjects for a Friendship with the ignorant: Men
eminent in virtue, as they cannot in honor associate themselves with them that
are vicious, so they cannot in wisdom make alliance with the ignorant; and this
will be yet more clear, if we consider the distance they stand one to the
other; a man of raised parts can never be so degenerated as to comport himself
with them that are much inferior; difference in person as to the outward state
is much, as appeared in the former instance between a Prince and a slave, but
here it is more, because there is all manner of distance both as to the mind
and outward state: what pleasure can wise men take in sowing barren ground, or
scattering their precious seed in a Common, or at best to sow among thorns,
where the seed will never spring up to any satisfaction: Every secular business
shall be admitted to come in and choke it; that in which wise men are most
excellent, the other regards not; the more a man understands the more he makes
necessary to himself, which those of vicious spirits call madness, and abject
and low spirits call needless curiosity; and instead of putting that worth upon
noble and generous actions they deserve, disparage them by their slights and
reflections; and so put an undervalue upon the person, who the higher they act,
the more prejudicial the least aspersion cast upon them proves to be; as from
these so unreasonable a condescension cannot be desired, so from the other so
great an elevation cannot be expected, that true worth, value and excellency
that should greaten their minds, and enlarge their capacities: For such
alliance is a riddle they can never understand, a jewel they would never be at
the cost to purchase becaufe they can never be brought to think it necessary,
no such enemy to learning as the ignorant, but here comes in an objection; Some
will be ready to say, I exclude all persons from Friendship, but those that are
stars of the first magnitude, and so consequently most men and all women are
exempted: To this I answer, that I am not of that opinion, nor can I see any
ground for it, I have laid down the rules of Friendship in the strictest sense,
as all material points ought to be, not supposing all can reach them; they that
comes nearest do best: this must be allowed, that difference in virtues make a
great difference in Frendships, as some men are more excellently qualified then
others, so their alliances are more esteemable, and fellowships more eminent:
men differ in their extractions, natures and moral acquirements exceeding much;
and then education adds much weight to all the rest, if it be refined by art:
it is true, nothing is more excellent then a natural genius when it is rightly
directed, it is the groundwork and foundation of all ingenuity; but this is
not alike in all, nature is more bountiful to some than others; and therefore
art is intended to make up the defects of nature, and sometimes it is so
successful in that behalf, that a man pollished by it comes to much perfection:
we see boys that have been observed to be weakly accomodated in respect of
natural ability, yet through the help of art, which by much diligence they have
acquired, they have proved wise and useful men, though they could never arrive
to that perfection that men both naturally wise and learned have done; there is
as much difference between them as comparative and superlative.

But to come to the Question, I conceive high parts and titles to be no more of
the Essence of Friendship then gay clothes to be of the essence of a man: A man
eminent in Titles and gloriously arrayed, may appear more splendidly then he
that is clothed in rags, but there is as much of the nature of a man in the
latter as in the former: men not so highly raised in their parts, persons and
Estates as the former may make a moral Friendship, they have the capacity of it,
and why not the significations of it: a competent reason will serve among
equals: Men that look no higher then their particular calling and commerce in
the world, may have reason as to useful hearts as much united, their
conversations as pleasant, their actions as equal as those that stand in a
higher sphere: as reason is not so eminent among these, so they can be happy
without it, because they have not the same occasion ^or it that others have,
these can as dearly love and as faithfully comport themselves, and may ^rove as
fast and unchangeable friends as any other: It is not above the reach of any
that has any ingenuity: some have been apt enough to ^y, that this is a Scheme
of Discourse, a kind ^f Romance; rather what ingenious men wish ^ight be, then
really what is or can be: If reason may be heard in this case, it would
convince ^s, that we cannot be happy without Friendship, ^ough in the confluence
of all enjoyments, es^ecially women that have as much reason to im^rove this
argument as any other: but they ^^e excluded some say for want of mental
accom^^ishment: these would have women appear as ^^ntemptible to themselves as
they have rend^^d them in their invectives: how come women so ^^ort of men in
this regard? this question is not (...) easily answered; compare the personal
ex^^llency of the sexes, particularly the under^^nding and will, these seem all
one, therefore (...) cannot be a natural defect in the one, or per^^tion in the
other that must make this difference: therefore it must be learning and
Education that must add weight to the balance o^ the man's side: who can deny
that women have been eminent for learning, valor and other worthy qualities,
and why they are not generally so is not so much the defect of nature as evil
example, by which they are corrupted, so that the will loses its freedom, and
is contracted to low and base objects, or else this comes to pass from the
severe customs they are forced to submit to by which that freedom and
improvements the should have, is either so restrained or so limited that let
their intrinsic worth be what it will, the never arrive at any eminency: but
those tha^ have stepped over those limitations, and throw^ away those manacles,
have lived usefully an^ died honorably: Many Instances History affor^ to
strengthen the argument, but I forbear, thi^ being occasionably, not
intensionally hinted at* All women can entirely love, they can be faithful and
sociable, and why not fit for friendship* except their husband make them so:
Nothin^ more evident then the hgih displeasure me^ take at the Friendship of
women, especiall^ where their wives are concerned, may be the^ have reason it:
I do not censure them, yet I cannot but conclude, that there can hardly be th^^
moral Friendship among married women, who^^ affection, reason and freedom must
attend upon and be commanded by their husbands, who n^^ seldom make it their
business to cross their wiv^^ though their ends be never so innocent fair; a^^
handsome: I do not say all men are of this u^grateful temper.

Secondly, there is inequality that may be taken up and dispensed with, and
that is when the distance lies in things not material; I instance in riches and
commands: A man may not be so rich as another, this is no inequality, but what
prudence will find arguments enough to take up or dispense with; what is
riches to reason, a noble title to a noble mind; money may elevate abject and
sordid spirits, but a generous man would be so far from valluing himself by it,
that he would trample upon it, if it stood in competition with virtue and
honor; noble minds assend the throne when men of vicious principles and
practices are cast down with shame and scorn; witness Haman, what a stain
remains upon his glory we all know: blind fortune seldom makes a just
estimate of things, she distributes her favors promiscuously, and men scrabble
for them, and the strongest and those that least deserves them gets the
greatest share: they pride themselves in their unmerited gains and Titles, yet
they in their highest elivations are like fools upon a Theater, attended with
reproach and contempt: men take but a low level at greatness that vallue
themselves by such insignificant Titles like a great letter in the Alphabet,
they take up more room and look bigger but signify no more then the least
letter there, like the crackling of thorns under a pot, they make a great
noise, and blast, but after a little while this blaze will extinguish; they are
more ^n noise then in notion, more in show then in substance; but men that
derive their Titles from merit and desert are so splendid, that no envious
cloud, though never so dark can eclipse their luster; it is true, men may
sooner get a noble Title then a noble mind, there are instances enough of this
at hand in this present age, the most unhappy times that virtuous men ever saw,
the golden clue has led many a worthless man into the palace of Princes, who
with the spider carry their poison thither, serving only by their principles to
corrupt, and by their practices to defile the Court: how often have we seen as
little things as the change of a besom comparitively, sweep down those cobwebs;
those to whom fortune has given an unexpected and undeserved grandeur; are of
all others most subject to changes, the interest they first had, presently
grows cold and faint, and languishing: as nothing can purchase the treasure of
a noble mind, so nothing can depresse or extinguish the glory of it: Times
must be beyond all parrellell barbarous wherein such men shall be degraded,
Philosophers that were of raised minds would not part with, nor Exchange one
single virtue for all the gold in both the Indies, they vallued time better
then to expend it upon such trifles: men proportion their care to their value,
these are the persons that are expert in all virtue, and consequently most fit
for this generouss state because they are most acquainted with sublimity, and
their intendment are beyond all Expceptions.

Secondly, Command and duty most be Examined, and there they seem unequal
wherever they are, yet it may sometimes be otherwise: Instances there are many
whose conditions are far wide from servitude, yet they are servants in a proper
sense, and must own an inequality between them and their masters, but this
disparity in the strictest sense is but a subordination in some things, and for
some space of time, or some particular business when the time is expired, and
the business finished, the master and servant are both equal, the Inequallity
did not consist in the essential but in the circumstantial part, not in person
and condition, but in the art and science which when taught and learned, the
Master and servant are both equal; so that there remains no more distinction of
Master and servant; but we will suppose the inequality yet greater, and that
there is absolute power in the Master to command without any restriction and
proportionable obligations on the servant to obey beyond dispute; yet it does
not follow, that these commands and duties are always alike, and that they can
never be dispensed with; it is most true, it is not in the power of the
inferior to lessen his own obedience and duty, or extenuate the superior
authority, yet the superior may abate and lessen his own power, according to
his will and pleasure, and so they come to be more equal, though the one cannot
shrink the other can stretch; a servant cannot upon any just pretense deny his
obedience to his Master, yet his Master when it seems convenient either for
profit or pleasure, or any other way expedient, can abate or lessen his own
property in the servant, without the least injustice, and discharge him from
any or all his obligations; and this seems to be the way of princes, and the
method that they use in raising persons from a low condition to eminency;
sometimes it consists with the sagacity and prudence of a prince as well as his
fancy, to advance men of low extraction but of noble spirits to places of high
trust and honor: some men by the vastness of their natural parts and ability,
are most admirably accomodated for the most honorable and noble services, and
for emergences of state, may be more useful then those much above them by
extraction and titles: these cannot be admitted, though they are qualified for
princely receptions, but by the favor of the prince extended toward them: and
this does not diminish nor impair the dominion of the prince, or lessen the
subjects obligation, but rather advance and magnify them; it brightens the
Princes glory and makes it more illustrious, it strengthens the Favorites
obedience, and makes them more faithful, though not so servile: such
condescentions swallows up much of the distance, so that they are not so
unequal as before; greatness is neither debased nor diminished by goodness; the
sun that glorious and raised body may shine upon a dunghill, yet looses none of
its glory, and though there be noisomness in the dunghill, it can contract none
of the defilement, so princes when they shine upon their Favorites in the beams
of their generosity and benignity, their honor is not in the least impaired
thereby: there is no distance so unequal, but it may be taken up, except that
which is so twisted with the compofition of the persons, that no art can
loosen, and so natural to the relations, that it would be both impious and
impudent to endeavor it: and that is baseness of spirit, that complexive
incongruity to virtue and honor; men of low principles can never level at high
and generous actions, nor bear any symetry with those of contrary tempers and
affections; but if the mind be right, that beginning that was mean may reach a
glorious and magnificent end.

Thirdly, persons of different sexes cannot comport themselves for friendship
according to our method, they must be either men or women, not a man and a
woman, and that because as their natures are contrary, so is their condition,
fancy and business; nor can they rationally design, that equal conversation
without which Friendship is very imperfect, and but a lame attainment; nor can
there be that familiar converse and intimacy necessary to this concern, without
reflections, if not temptations: should I enter into this argument I might
find enough to say, but I judge it neither grateful nor expedient; Let those
that are concerned inform themselves from the inconveniences that daily accrue
upon such adventures; they need go no further then common experience and
observation to fatisfie their curiosity.

The fourth inequality to be avoided, is, that of Religion, if there be a
confluence of all other requisites, and there be no harmony and agreement, here
the Friendship will be short lived: nothing do more unite or divide persons
then Religion, if they agree in principles, religion wonderfully strengthens
the Friendship, and engages their hearts one toward another; and this must
needs be so, for if men agree in things of the greatest consequence, it is
likely they may accord in things less considerable: It is observed that no
differences are so great as those occasioned by religion, and no spirits so
bitter and inexorable as such as are by disputes in Religion exasperated: how
hardly are small dissentings in Religion, though but in one single point,
composed? what difficulty then must there needs be in reducing those to
compliance that differ in substantial points, in the doctrine as well as in the
manner of worship; and if this be not done, the Friendship will be uncertain. I
grant, there may be some circumstantial dissenting among friends, and no great
prejudice thereby, because those may be argued with indifference and
moderation, and a reconciliation is not impossible, but very probable, because
in this case the best reason carries it, but in substantial points the matter
is not so soon done: Matter of Faith seems too sacred to submit to the best
reason while conscience remains unsatisfied, who though misguided and led by
examples and custom that have no foundation in the word of God the most
infallible rule, yet these shall have such influences upon the seduced
conscience, that they will not give place to the most infallible and divine
truths, and having made the first impression will plead their propriety, and
oppose it against the commands of divine justice: there is much arguing in this
case, little yielding and compliance, when men are tainted with corrupt
principles, arguing may beget disgusts and heats, and engage the passions, and
set them all a quarrelling, and wind up the differences to such heights as
will admit of no pacifying arguments: this is plainly proved by common
experience; witness the Church of Rome, and the Reformed Churches; what vast
endeavors has there been for an accommodation, but with no success; the
animosity grows higher, and a reconciliation more impossible, as is evident by
the vast treasures that have been expended, and effusion of blood that has
been spilt, and is still shedding: Look a little nearer, even among our selves,
where the dissentings are not so universal, and we shall find much vexation
and trouble: Is it not observable, that persons that have lived and conversed
together a great while, have at last parted, and no cause visible appearing;
there seems to be a twofold reason for this, First, from the difference in
opinion which prevails so over the passions, that love the master-affection
which for some time has preserved unity, has now changed its property, and by
accident, occasions the greatest quarrel: had men no religion, they would not
be so liable to dissentions, there being no cause for dispute; they were equal
in such a condition, I had almost said equally unhappy, but it may be supposed,
that prudence may do much to compose things, it may keep in the fire a while,
but not long, it will at last break out into a flame: nothing more common then
for men to be great friends, while neuters in religion, but if either come to
be sincerely pious, they fall a quarrelling presently, it is not the religion
that does it, but the contrariety of the one against the Religion of the other;
if a man loves his friend, he cannot see him walking in ways of death and not
reprove him, and that smartly; and this cannot be born what amity can continue:
where there can be no arguing without quarelling, no reproof without retorting;
now friends begin to treat one the other with suspision and absent themselves
from that equal conversation and intimacy which first made the amity and must
still preserve it.

Secondly, the efficacy of piety and religion it self insensibly loosens the
knot of this alliance, because the one cannot bear the convictions and
restraints that will be laid on him by the other, which though not by design,
and intentially, but by example and accidentally, will be very severe and
confining to his extravagant temper: I have read a story of a young gallant,
who had a pious Father, that had given him many admonitions, but he little
minding the counsel and example of his father, became vilely vicious, and when
he intended to drink to excess or be any other way debauched in the room where
the effiges of his dead father hung, he would first draw a curtain before the
picture, saying, he could not be frolic while he saw any thing of his father,
who had so often reproved him; such convictions attended him: I shall only add,
that in all alliances, religion, if sincere, is the surest tie; nothing we
enjoy can be constant and durable without this: this is the fruit of the tree
of life, which if we feed on, will make our comforts not only long lasting,
but our happiness everlasting.

Lastly, the inequality of relations comes to be considered; but before I
proceed, give me leave to take notice of an objection which seems ready to
assault me at my first entrance into this part of the discourse, and that is,
that I have endeavored all along to confine friendship, and limit it to a
moral capacity and so have excluded relations which in truth, are more capable
and receptive of it: there are three relations especially that make this
challenge; Father and Son, Husband and Wife, and Brethren: Pray give me leave
to lead these Objectors into the nature of these relations, and there they
will satisfy themselves of the invalidity of this splendid scruple, which is
more in show then in substance.

To begin with the first, namely, Father and Son, this relation is so far from
equality, that it intends and commands the contrary, it is a composition of
disparity, which is so natural to the relation that it can neither have a being
nor wellbeing without it: Instance, the power and authority of the Father,
which can never be lessened, the fear and duty of the Son, which cannot be
excused: a father is much more bound in this relation then any other superior,
for they may sometimes dispense with their propriety in this regard, without
prejudice to themselves, and with advantage to the inferior, but a parent
cannot abate any of his just authority, but with injury both to himself and his
son; to himself by failing in his duty, which is ever to keep up his power in
all lawful things; to his son, in laying before him a temptation to
disobedience, by his example, while he omits his duty: Indulgence is the inlet
to all other traps and snares: sad Instances we have had of this in our present
Age, where all vices are made almost indifferent, but such as disturb the
tranquillity of the Kingdom: there are many things of the nature of this
relation that cannot consist with a moral Friendship: Instance, the power and
command of the Father, the fear and obedience of the son, these are contrary to
that personal equality, which cannot be exempted from Friendship; it being as
natural to the being and well-being of that concern as inequality is to this of
relations: the properest expressions between Friends is that which a Father and
son never do, as constant, familiar converse, equal conversation, wherein they
always submit their wills and affections each to other: there are many things
in friendship that cannot be admitted where there is a challenge of duty and
command: it is no prejudice to a parent, and the duty I owe him, to pay all
possible endearments to my Friend, because there are many things due to the
one, the other cannot challenge: It is not my design to derogate from any
relation, that just esteem they ought to have: this must be allowed, that this
relation makes great dearness and a most inviolable Friendship, and under such
real obligations, as the laws of God and men has made indispensable, and that
because there are duties that obliged them before any other Friendship could be
made, and have left such impression as must abide, and will never give place to
any other, because of their propriety which is supreme: There are two things
especially I shall point at, wherein this relation differs from a moral
Friendship, and that is, first, in their springs from whence they flow, and
Secondly, in their ends and designs: First, the love and friendship of the
relation is grounded purely upon natural causes, and therefore called natural
affection: there is no need of prudence in this case, no man consults his
reason, whether he shall love his son or not, a natural instinct inclines him
to that, but if his son be rebellious, then he has need of prudence to direct
him how to regulate his affections, so is his indulgence may not prejudice his
son: There are many things binding to persons in ^his relation, as the law of
God; the law of nature, and their love to themselves: parents love their
children because they love themselves ^hey are perpetuated in their children,
posterity ^eing the instruments of a civil immortality; ^ikewise the son cannot
dispute his obedience to ^is father, he being bound with his father by the ^ame
laws, and under more obligations then the ^ather can be. 1. he has his being
from his father, ^y which he is capacitated for all the rest that fol^ow, as his
preservation, education, example, sup^ly, and all these add to the sons
obligations, but ^oral friendship has no law or obligation predis^osing the
persons for friendship, but is grounded upon moral principles, and is animated
by that profit, reward and pleasure that is annexed to the object: Love in this
respect is the effect of an unconstrained choice, and therefore is not subject
to those uncertainties that natural affections are; nothing holds the affection
stronger and longer then a free choice, we experience this; the love of
relations is not much to be trusted in, as the duties so the love of relations
is changeable, and much altered by accidents; instance, parents much abate in
their affections to their children that once they dearly loved, happily
occasioned by some rebellious and unworthy carriage and actions against
commands, persuasions, threatenings and entreaties, which aggravate the crimes
and make them inexcusable: sometimes cross marriages become a great ground of
quarrel, when they are inferior or unequal: Again, when sons put themselves
upon dishonorable designs, and by their extravagances brings a general ruin
upon themselves and families, and grow so desparate, that instead of cherishing
and supporting their parents against the injuries of others, lay violent hands
on them themselves, and imbrew their hands in their blood, or consent with
others, unnaturally designing against them, from whom they have their being:
David had such a son in Absalom, all which so alienates the hearts of parents,
that they cannot give them a favorable aspect without censure, nor a place in
their thoughts, but with reluctancies, and the aggravations which second these
high provocations are so many and heinous, that natural affection sometimes is
thereby quit, and abandoned, and that upon just and solid grounds: Othertimes
pa^ents fail in their duty to their children, and carry it unnaturally toward
them that have deserved ^etter, nothing more notorious, then for men to forsake
the sons of their love, preferring foam Dalilah before them, upon whom they
prodigal^y spend their substance, discouraging and corrupting their children
together, which they do by their inhumane actions and vicious practices, and
this is worthy our consideration, how separation will alienate the affections
of relations, so that there shall not remain in them a powerful inclination,
either to solicit or endeavor the prosperity one of another, but shall prefer
a faithful servant before the relation: this has been so amazing to me, that I
have thought natural affection one of the greatest uncertainties of humane
life, and not to be confided in, because men so strangely degenerate in this
respect; that they make themselves inferior to the brutes.

Secondly, as the original from whence the love of this relation comes is
incongruous to that of Friendship, so their ends are contrary: Friendship
designs nothing more then the pleasure of society, whereby by communicating
each others joys and hopes, afflictions and disappointments, they come to
obtain the proper and most useful effects of Friendship, but parents have no
such expectation, they do not aim at a sociable contentment in their children,
nor children in their parents: how freely do parents and children consent to be
divided, sometimes into the farthest part of the world, one from another; if
their persons, estates, or content may be advanced by it* and are very well
satisfied, to meet once or twice in their whole lives, or to converse together
in a few lines, which are uncertainly ventured, and seldom arrive at the
desired place, and when they come can do no more but tell them they left a
relation alive, but how long he has continued so since is most uncertain: men
account themselves rich in relations, when their propriety is so far removed
that they serve only for contemplation and generation, both which gives but a
general no particular contentment; it is otherwise among friends, they cannot
satisfy themselves in contemplation, fruition is that which compleats their
felicity: Friends are like the turtles, they never associate themselves with
other birds, they never sing and fly abroad for recreation as other birds do,
but they have their peculiar notes for each other, and when the one dies, the
other droops till he dies; so friends, they need none of those vanities that
are remote, they never search after them, the chatting of Friends is to
themselves a most pleasing note; they live in the embraces of each other, and
if one dies how impatiently does the other lament after him until he die also:
So then it is plain by what has appeared in this argument, that this relation
of Father and son has not in it the capacity of a moral Friendship, how then
can it have the signification of it?

The Second Relation to be examined is Husband and Wife, the former relation
was grounded upon natural causes, but this upon justice and reason, pursuant to
a solemn league and Covenant, which cannot be violated, but by the worst
perfidiousness, and as the love of that relation was natural this is conjugal,
and in some respect greater then natural affection, because here are greater
obligations and more binding duties annexed to this relation then to any other,
and that by a twofold law, the law of God, and the law of man. I must expect to
meet with many persons that will think themselves disobliged by this argument,
therefore I must say something to fatisfie them: I must confess, I have less
pleasure in this part of the discourse, then in all the rest; This relation by
a groundless supposition has been deemed the best capacity for Friendship, as
having in it self all that accommodation necessary: Let us consider the persons,
and then the relation, the persons strictly considered, are not fit for this
concern, not only because of the difference in sexes, though that be something,
but upon many other material considerations.

First, There is the greatest inequality possible in the persons, and it is
constituted by the relation it self; persons may be equal before marriage,
they cannot be so afterward: now what makes the change, only the relation,
nothing else could do it; if a King gives his Crown and throne to a slave, it is
no wonder if the slave possesses that throne and Crown, and he be degraded, but
this is not so great a prejudice, as sometimes happens in marriages, for the
slave is but an usurper, and there is no law to confirm him in that undeserved
grandeur but those that make a like adventure in this relation; they do not
onl^ throw away their robes, and become equal i^ subjection to persons of
abject spirits, and conditions, and subservient to such as were slave^ before,
or so inferior that they would have thought it preferment enough to have had
the meanest employ about their persons; and tha^ which aggravates it, is that
this bondage cannon be thrown off, as in the former instance, but i^ is
confirmed by a Law both civil and moral, which cannot be violated: there are
many things of the nature of Friendship, and such as are most eminent, which
cannot stand with this relation; instance they cannot submit their judgments
and wills one to another in all things, this Friendship must do or it cannot be,
and this is expected among Friends which are equal, but not among those that
cannot be so: for a superior to submit his judgment and will to an inferior,
is neither just nor convenient, but for the inferior to submit both to the
superior, is just and necessary: it is true, there is command and duty in
Friendship but those that command, and them that obey are equal, and though they
may sometimes command different things they have not different wills, but this
cannot be, where command and duty is severally in the persons, because where
there is an absolute power to command, there follows a proportionable
obligation to obey as a just due that cannot be excused or omitted: and because
power is not always so regular and just as it ought to be, therefore it is,
that there is such difference and jarring among inferiors and superiors; and
this will ever be so long as men has any thing of pride, or passion, and so
they augment or lessen their authority by these rules, and hereby sometimes the
state of marriage is so imbittered that it becomes harsh and ungrateful, they
will plead the threatening, this desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall
rule over thee, and the laws of men are seldom favorable in this kind, but
imposes more upon it, as we find by the civil law of Nations, which commands
the man proving bankrupt and cast into prison, his wife be sold, if she be
worth it to redeem her husband; and as if the bondage were not severe enough,
the consent of the wife comes in, and twists the cord, and makes it yet
stronger; the woman is obliged by no law, till she binds her self by a
voluntary consent, neither law of God nor man does constrain her to come under
these restrictions, but finding her there lays more obligations upon her.

2ly, let us examine the relation it self (some say) that conveys Friendship, we
will look into the first marriage, that in Paradise, if a perfect Friendship,
can be conveyed by the relation, we shall find there Adam had as much reason
to contract a perfect friendship with Eve as any man ever had, she being made of
the body of Adam in a more peculiar manner then any else ever was, and because
she was the gift of God immediately delivered to Adam as a token of special
favor, and because there was no creature so suitable to him as she was; and
this similitude was some inducement from a natural principle that inclines
every creature to love its like; yet notwithstanding all this, we see that in
Adam that seems contrary to Friendship in many things, especially this, that he
so readily and upbradingly laid tha^ blame upon his wife, a true friend would
have taken upon himself, so that there seems a want of Friendship in paradise,
and this may very well be, paradise was not without its wants, man wanted a
wife for generation, and why not a friend for counsel, advice, and
conversation? had Eve had a faithful friend, who would have encouraged and
strengthened her against the insinuations of the serpent, she might have baffled
his arguments, and repelled his strongest temptations: on the other side, had
Adam been so happy to have had a faithful monitor, in the intermi, when the
temptation lay before him, he would not have so rashly ventured upon the breach
of that primitive and positive command, yet he had a greater advantage then the
woman, in that he might have argued the point with the woman (with less
surprise) then the woman could with the Serpent; he had the advantage of
discourse with her: he might have demanded of her, how she could think to
escape the penalty of so peremptory a law, and by what arguments she was
invited to the breach of so positive a command, and what advantage she
propounded to her self in so bold and criminal an undertaking; such arguing
might have given some check to the temptation; much arguing there was between
the woman and the Serpent: where was Adam then? had there been Friendship Adam
could not have been so long from Eve, being in the same garden with her, till
the Serpent could accomplish so great a work; this seems to be a work of time:
neither is it likely, had there been this amity, that she would have intended,
much less have acted any thing, till she had acquainted Adam with it, with whom
she would have had inclination enough to advise with in such a difficult case,
there being always a communication of affairs between friends: no wonder the
woman was seduced when all the wit and policy of hell was employed to do it:
but Adam without that was betrayed, he hastily ventures without reservation and
exception upon the breach of so positive a command.

Again, if this relation could convey the best Friendship, none in that relation
could miss it, but experience evinces the contrary: we find not seldom their
open enmity; if the relation could convey it, though there was little love
before marriage, there would be no want of it after, but this is clear to
common observation, that where persons have ventured into this relation before,
the affection and fancy has been fixed, the relation has been so far from
engaging the affections and uniting the heart, that it has increased the
enmity, and sometimes to murder and other violent acts; and I might bring many
reasons for this, but I do not love to rake in a kennel.

Again, as repeated fruition is the most binding thing among Friends, in this
relation it is most loosening; I have heard some say, and seriously to, that
repeated fruition is a dull thing, and blunts the edge of the greatest
affection, Friendship in this relation would be arbitrary, and therefore it is
that there are such strong commands obliging persons to the duties of it, as is
evident by the laws of God and man: It is observable, that Friendship is most
tied, and yet most free; there are no laws confining friends, they have no need
of coaction to obedience, love is a law to it self, this shows the natural
unfixedness of the one and the stability of the other: some men were they left
to their liberty as friends are, they would change their wives as often as they
put off their clothes; men are much guided by humor and fancy, small things
deludes the fancy at one time, and things as contemptible will alter it at
another; men hastily catch at a wife, she pleases him well, after a little
while fancy has found out some new object, and then we hear them say, they
cannot fancy the old, the new is better; but Friendship is ever guided by reason
and judgment, and finds more amiableness and loveliness in the object every
day: give me leave to add, that persons in this relation are not capable of
those convenient and necessary acts of kindeness that friends are, Instance in
emergences of state or times of war, a friend may be eminently useful in either,
but what can a wife do, she can have no vote in Council, nor command in war:
The wife of David, though the daughter of Saul, and therefore did not want
interest when he left the Court and betook himself to the wars, signified
little to him, but Jonathan his friend was more useful then then ever; and this
is most considerable, the advantage friendship has beyond relations, for
personal kindeness which comes to pass from hence, because they are united in
heart though not in person in a legal sense as men and their wives are; and
this is no small advantage, hereby they are more useful in times of extremity,
where none will assist and help but them alone; many acts of friendship women
are not capable of, if a husband be arrested, his wife cannot bail him, but his
friend can; if her testimony be never so full and pertinent, it will not be
taken for her husband: I might instance in many other things, but I hasten from
this ungrateful argument.

Lastly, If Friendship were made by this relation, then no man would seek it
elsewhere, but we see those persons who have as much content as the relation
can give ambition, this state of friendship and they make the firmest and
strongest alliances in this regard, and the reason they give is this, that they
would find satisfaction most suitable to their nature and being, and that (say
they) can be no where but among equals, where this only can be found, that the
hearts are united and the persons free to all friendly acts and entercourses,
and this cannot be among relations, where the persons are joined, but too often
the hearts are free: I hope none will mistake and think I have no true value
for this relation, I have really a great respect for this relation, and highly
esteem it where it is in truth rightly managed: They are most happy that meet
with least disappointments every one will conclude; poverty and sickness what a
change do they make, persons in this relation aim at many ends, which if they
miss they are impatient, and that because there does not seem efficacy enough
in the relation to command a submission to any great disappointment: And by how
much the more evils cannot be foreseen, by so much the more intolerable they
be: I shall point at but one end and that is children, if they fail of this
end, as sometimes they do, what an alienation does this make, or rather a
separation: I am loath to say, it is plain enough, but friends can miss their
ends in many things without distraction, crosses does not separate them, but
rather unite them: Jonathan and David were never so united as then when
affliction seized them, then it was that they renewed their covenant and
strengthened their affections one toward another: Thus I have led you through
two relations, the one grounded upon the principles of nature, and therefore
binding, the other upon a promise or covenant no less obliging, and to both
these friendship is due, but not that friendship or love I am treating of;
there is natural affection due to the one and a conjugal love due to the other,
which must be paid with all care and circumspection.

I shall touch a little briefly upon the third relation, and so come to what I
most aim at.

The Third Relation I am to speak to is, that of Brethren; I shall consider the
persons and relation jointly; brethren having in them all that worthiness that
friendship requires, are the fittest subjects for friendship, but they do not
pass into it upon the account of relation, nature passes but little, but as
they are disposed and prepared for it, either by natural qualities or moral
excellencies: We see brothers that live apart, and adopt themselves to Families
remote, they have little love: Friendship is nourished by the same matter by
which it was first made, it was created by communion and fellowship in an equal
conversation, and must live by the same: the Wise man observed, that in a time
of separation friendship was of a small signification: Better (says he) is a
neighbor near then a brother afar off; and he draws his argument from the
incapacity of the one, and the capacity of the other; for all friendly acts and
intercourses, its true friendship may last, when by some accident the persons
are divided, but not in that vigor it did before: it is a languishing
friendship; we may understand this by the similitude of the love of the iron
the loadstone, which arises from a hidden quality, the motion of the iron
toward the loadstone is slow while at a distance, but quick when near, and
when it does but touch it, it cleaves so fast, that unless forced, 'twill never
part, and when it is parted 'twill at the furthest part of the world retain the
virtue of the touch; so Friends while at a distance move slowly, but when
together are so united, that they cannot be separated without great force and
violence, and their separation is like the dividing the heart from the body:
now that there is nothing in the bare relation that can amount to friendship,
will be further evident by our daily experience, which furnishes us with
instances of the great animosities among brethren, and such aversions as cannot
consist with friendship: Look into the family of Adam, and there you see
murder; into the Family of Isaac, you would think you should not miss of
kindeness there, yet instead thereof we find Esau consulting with himself how
he should slay his brother: this is most true, that there may be much indeared
affection between brethren, occasioned by the equalness of their persons and
conversation, they having in them all other requisites, ar^ first to be chosen
as the most fit persons for friendship, the relation being something, and when
both these meet the relation and friendship, they exemplify one the other, and
shine most illustriously; but some may think, I have pursued this subject too
far, I am sure it was with no design to derogate from the just desert due to
any relation, yet I would not have them monopolize our esteem, so as to snuffle
out Friendship, which so truly deserves our value.

I come now to the qualifications which are necessary in order to a well
grounded friendship: all that I have said hitherto is previous to what remains:
I hope none will expect friendship in an artificial dress, attended with elegant
phrases, and words well accented, this being both above my ability, and far
wide of my design, which is a general satisfaction in this material concern,
in the plainest way that I can; gla^ing and gaudy embellishments being trivial
accomplishments where truth is concerned, which shines bright enough without
them.

The First qualification is this, there must be an entire affection and love
among friends, this is the principal hindge upon which this concern turns, this
being a philosophical discourse it will be necessary to touch upon love in
general. Love in the general nature of it is either rational and supreme, or
sensual and subordinate, in the sirst sense love is the most vigorous, potent,
sovereign, affectionate; it sits as Queen Regent in the will, and governs all
the faculties; love is the spring of humane actions, and gives life, being, and
motion to them all; the other affections, as desire, hope, joy, fear, anger,
all these are but the several forms and shapes os love; for as the object of
love is affected with this or that circumstance, so is love proportionably
invested with this or that form; if the object be absent, love goes out to meet
it in desire, if present, it solaceth it self in fruition and delight; if under
danger and hazard, love trembles with fear: if it be impeded or hindered, love
waxes angry and impatient, when there is any possibility of enjoying the
object: love moves nimbly after it if impossible of enjoyment; so that the
object be lost, love clothes it self in mourning habit: there is also a kind
of love in the sensual and animal part, but this is more passionate, that in
the superior part more rational; this is more uncertain, that more fixed; this
more confused, that more regular and uniform.

There is a threefold love,

First Divine, and that is altogether spiritual and highly rational.

Secondly, there is a natural love, and that may be bruitisn as well as
rational.

Thirdly, there is a moral love, and that consists in a mean betwixt both,
evermore the thing beloved gives the denomination to love; if the object be
divine, it is a divine love; if sensual, it is a brutish love; if moral, it is
a moral love.

Love is an affection of union whereby we desire and enjoy perpetual union with
the thing beloved, and there are these two effects that immediately flow from
this union: First, it is transforming and changing by love* we are changed into
a thing more noble or more vile; so that we debase our selves when we love any
unworthy and inferior thing, whatever we love we give a kind of dominion over
us, so that the will loses its dignity when it loves abject things.

Again, Love inlarges and widens the heart, not only for the reception of the
bounty and generosity of the object, but the object it self is that the heart
goes out after when the will is filled with love, it awakens all the powers,
and moves all the faculties toward the object, the understanding meditates and
is enquiring after the excellency of the thing beloved, still musing and
plodding about it; the will is obstinate and will not be charmed of its object;
the thoughts they are still kindling the affections who are in eager pursuit
after the thing beloved, but I shall speak more particularly to this matter,
and explain my meaning in this particularly. My meaning is, that there must be
an entire love not only to the qualities of the mind, though those be most
worthy, but this love must reach the superficies of the body, if that be
ungrateful there cannot be a complacential Friendship; As the interior part
must have Analogy to reason, so the external part must be accommodated to the
fancy: in short, there must not be conceived in the sancy a disgust against the
form and condition of the person, all love begins with the person, if that be
displeasing and ungrateful, nothing will satisfy, there is that in the person
of every man that either obliges or disobligeth the fancy: instance, there may
be some personal defects which are so natural, that they cannot be divided from
the person, and these may be very displeasing; or there may be some cross
dispositions, and they may be so riveted by custom, that they will hardly (if
ever) be cured; Love studies the person in the first place, and it is most
necessary, because as there is a kind of antipathy in some persons to some
creatures, so that they cannot be brought to take any pleasure in them, so many
times we see an antipathy in men against such particular persons; there is no
more reason to be given for the latter then the former, yet the contrariety is
as evident in the one as the other, and this may be occasioned by the mistake
of fancy, rather then any real defect in the object; the eye of fancy may be so
vitiated, that it may not be able to behold the clearness of a splendid object
with complacency and delight, a weak eye cannot look with content upon a clear
air, much less can it behold the sun, there is such a contrariety in them; so
that we often draw a curtain between them as a screen or veil, not that the air
or sun are not both excellent in themselves but the reason why they are not
desirable, is the eye is not receptive of them, because of its own imbecility
and weakness: fancy is often surprised in the first choice and election,
sometimes it is blind, and declines objects most worthy, and pursues those that
are most base and abject, it seldom consults reason, but often betrays it;
spacious objects convey themselves through the fancy to the will; the senses
they inveagle the fancy, and the fancy betrays and captivates the will: Fancy
othertimes is so idle that it will not take the pains to examine things but is
put off with outward gaudiness, it seldom is so circumspect to act by rule,
and that is the reason we are so uncertain in our first elections of persons
and things: Fancy rashly fixes without the consent of reason, to which it
ought to be subservient, rather complying with sense, which makes it stray and
warp from the exact rule; it is very hard to secure the fancy which lies open
to so many temptations; and if it be betrayed and deluded, it is as hard to
reclaim it: I have thought that passage in Samuel worth observation, when he
was sent to anoint David, Eliab the elder brother passed before him, he fancies
him presently, because he was a comely person: we experience this among our
selves, when we come into a room where we see many strange faces, we take an
affection to one more then the rest: Jonathans heart was knit to David, while
he was discoursing with Saul, and he loved him as his own foul: there is no
reason to be given why a man should pitch upon one person with delight without
the least concern for the rest, but this fancy is surprised, and that so
strangely sometimes, that reason cannot prevail to break those fetters the man
is manacled with happily to his great prejudice and utter ruin.

As there are several things that may betray and delude the fancy, so there are
things that displease it, that may be removed as a supercilious gravity, this
is very ungrateful, yet may not be so rivited as never to be taken away, as a
harsh and severe aspect, and the like: but those things that cannot be divided
from the person must (though never so ungrateful in themselves) be kindly
accepted: that which seems deformity to another which stands at a distance to
the object, may appear pleasant to me who am more united, and therefore I may
see comeliness where they fancy nothing but the contrary: this being the
prudence of friendship to reconcile it self to every thing that at the first
view may seem not grateful; if this cannot be done fancy is still uneasy; where
there is a latitude, every faculty will endeavor a satisfaction; fancy bears
so great a sway in all matters of Love and friendship, that it will be humored
and that in the first place, and the rather because it stands nearer then any
other faculty to that object about which it is conversant, it is so
considerable, that nothing can be done without it. So there are many things
very pleasing and acceptable to the fancy, if it be rightly guided, as an
humble demonier, a sweet and amiable conversation: the wiseman observed, that
the countenance of a man rejoices his friend, if I cannot look upon my friend
with delight I cannot love him, looking breeds liking, and proves the inlet to
affection: Jonathan embraced the person of David; very pleasant was Jonathan to
David, his love passed the love of the most passionate woman.

Secondly, as we must love the person of our friend, so we must love his
conditions, we cannot love his person and hate his conditions, this is a
paradox, and altogether impossible: I do not say, but we may and must love the
persons of our enemies, though we must hate and abominate their conditions, if
they be evil; but this is with a love of charity, it cannot be with a
complacential love; what felicity can a virtuous man take in a vicious person,
he may love him so as to pity and pardon, and converse with him at distance,
but never so as to court his society, and place him in his bosom, it may be my
friend is not the most affable courteous and obliging, or the patientest, or
the best humoured man in the world, yet I may love him; one worthy quality is
enough to make friendship, but the more worthy the greater the reason: a friend
must endeavor a reconciliation to the condition of his friend as well as his
person, as far as possible, and throw the mantle of love over those defects
that are either accidental, or such as are not so riveted that they cannot by
contrary examples and friendly arguments be expunged: instance, a passionate
man may see so much sweetness in patience that he may abhor contention, and so
much pleasure in a free and equal conversation, that he may hate reservedness,
and so much grace and beauty in humility, that pride may be cast out as most
contemptible: reason will mightily prevail with ingenious persons in this
regard, and they may easily be convinced of these vanities which cannot consist
with Friendship: love cannot be supported but by that which is substantial, and
this must be allowed, that there are some dispositions that cannot comport
themselves for Friendship: there are dispositions or rather evil qualities that
I could never be reconciled to, and they are especially four, covetousness, and
deep melancholy, pride and envy; I couple them together as those tyrants which
aim at a perfect conquest over the heart, and life, these can never stand with
this relation and state of Friendship, because they are diametrically contrary,
and the only poison that corrupt and destroy it,

First, Covetousness ingrosses the whole heart, and will endure nothing in the
least contradictory. Covetousness so debases the heart, that no noble quality
can inhabit there; it bends and submits all to the metal it so dearly loves
and so highly values, and that is thick clay. Reason, conscience, and affection
are all entangled in this golden web, so that they cannot soar aloft either to
fix upon, or contemplate those things that ennable a man, and makes him act
like himself according to his moral excellencies and immortality of the soul. A
covetous man will lay all things at stake, rather than his money; his
reputation, life, soul, any thing shall go; see this in Gehezi and in Demas,
the one embraced a leprosy, rather than loose a talent; the other forsook God
to embrace this present world. Have we not instances of this before our eyes
every day, when we see men lay their honor in the dust, sacrifice life,
content and every thing to this dumb Idol; that man that loves money more than
himself, or God, must needs love it better than his friend, and therefore above
all persons fit to be excluded.

Secondly, melancholy in the extremity of it comes next to be examined, and
this always accompanies the former; that fills the heart with distracting
cares, vehement desires, which if crossed, presently this is ready, as an
effect of that cause; as appears in wicked Haman; he coveted not only riches
but honor, as most covetous men do; though they never do a generous act to
deserve it; and because he could not obtain it from Mordecai an inconsiderable
person in his esteem, he presently falls into a fit of melancholy, and though
he had more to boast of then most men in respect of his honor, riches, and
favor with the King, yet all this signified nothing, as long as Mordecai stood
in the kings gate, who refused that obeisance to Haman, he so eagerly coveted,
and so impartiently pined after, and hereupon the devil deludes him, and helps
him to hammer out this device in his own shop, (which is melancholy) to hang
Mordecai. This was the anvil Haman had been working at before, when he had
framed an engine to destroy all the Jews. I cannot find any ill quality
excluded from melancholy, as wrath, malice, envy, uncharitableness, mis-trust,
self-love in the highest degree, and where all these are, we may justly
conclude there cannot be friendship: they love nothing but themselves, they
indulge themselves, they admire themselves, as if God had created them for no
other purpose, or to any other end; and so extreme wilful are they, if they
will their own destruction, they will effect it, they are naturally the
greatest cowards in the world, and they cannot be otherwise, except carried out
by some violent motion, as pride, jealousy, covetousness, or malice; etc. they
will lay violent hands upon themselves, and this they call resolution, but it
is the cowardlyest act possible to come upon nature when it is naked, and
destroy it, when by starving or discontent nature is brought low, to lay
violent hands upon it this cannot be valor. I dread nothing more than this
pettish humor and disposition; I could never make friendship with a person who
in all respects I might believe would be as prodigal of my life, should I trust
it with him as of his own. Many Examples we have of this daily, and much blood
has been shed by melancholy, that often harbors such discontents, that
nothing but blood can satisfy, and not seldom the blood of those they have most
reason to preserve; Judas was such a one, who through covetousnes first
betrayed his master, and after through melancholy hanged himself.

Secondly, let us consider the other couple pride and envy. A proud man cannot
be a true friend because he cannot deny himself, in any respect: He wholly aims
at himself in his thoughs, words, and actions; his honor, pleasure, ease is
all he looks after; he is not sollicitous how it fares with others: He will be
a Diotrephes and have the pre-eminence: he cannot give place: himself is his
end, and his will is his rule, by which he squares all his actions* and the Law
he endeavors passionately to bring all others unto subjection to, at least all
those that are under his power and jurisdiction: like Haman he will rather lose
his life, then abate any thing of his pride, is contentious and clamorous and
cannot stand with friendship. Iehu-like he carries on all his designs: he is
well learned in the art of multiplication and addition* but a novice in the
rule of substraction, except from others to himself. Pride is an unbecoming
garment, let it be never so splendid in show, it is but a fools coat: a proud
man is still building up his own reputation with the ruin of others, he thinks
himself always degraded when another is valued; and whatsoever is attributed
unto another, though never so just, he thinks it a wrong done to him: he would
willingly ingrosse all the applause unto himself, though he never appear in any
generous action to deserve it* he cares not who loses, so that he may gain: he
will rather rob God himself, as Herod did, then deny applause: he will blaze
abroad any thing that has but the appearance of good, but will seldom or never
do any praise* worthy act: upon an adress to him, let the complaint be never so
just, and the adresse never so humble, and the object never so deprorable, he
is no way affected, but like Nabal a man cannot speak to him: he covets to be
admired by all, but obliges none: feared he may be, but never loved: this man
may promise fair, but he is so uncertain, you cannot trust him: by all which it
is clear that a proud man cannot be fit for friendship, that requires all the
contrary dispositions, and must possefs them, or cannot be at all.

Secondly, Let us consider a little of Envy. Solomon says, make no friendship
with an angry man, and with the envious thou shall not go: and here (that I may
not be mifunderstood,) we must distinguish of anger. I do not mean by anger
here, the boiling of the blood, which comes from a natural cause, this is like
a flash of lightning, soon come and soon gone: This is found to be the
consequence of the best disposition; but I mean by this anger, that which
arises from an envious heart, that cannot sleep except they have done
mischief. These are like thunderclaps secretly wounding to the very heart, and
bears down all before it. Solomon observed this, who can stand (says he)
before envy. Such have those things in their hearts, and practices that cannot
possibly abide with friendship, but would immediately, like a worm, eat out the
substance of it. This anger or rather revenge rests in the bosom of these
fools: It is not a wayfaring man that continues for a night, but an inhabitant
that is always at home plotting and contriving how to tread down credit,
estate, life, and all, if it stand in its way. An envious man has these
qualities, he is soon disobliged, never reconciled. He can forgive (he will
say) but never forget: he is constant in nothing but vexation: his tongue a
persecutor: his heart like the troubled waters, casting up nothing but mire and
dirt: Such a one was Simei, his revenge to his servant was so great, that he
must follow him with the peril of his own life. You know what Simei was, by his
railing at David: doubtless he was an envious and a malicious man: he that will
prefer his passion before his own life, will hardly value the life of his
friend. The calm temper is the best accommodated for friendship: how much better
is a handful of green herbs, where quietness is, then a stalled ox with
strife. A malicious man cannot be grateful; he is satisfied with nothing: if a
man be good he grudges that; if he be evil he will revile him, though he be
worse abundantly himself: he is like the witches, that put on their eyes when
they went abroad, but when they came home, they put them in their pockets: if
he fancies an undervalue, he will hate a man for that, and he will never be
serious about the cause of that hatred, but pronounce judgment right or wrong
upon the person offending (as he pretends,) he will dispense with all manner of
justice in this case: he will do as Felix did by Paul, may be, promise a
hearing at a more convenient season, but that season shall never come, he
having much more pleasure in aggravating quarrels, then studying peace.

Secondly, The second qualification is sutableness in conversation and
expression. There must be an agreement here, or else no amity, and herein is
most of the sweetness of friendship; can two walk together except they are
agreed? walking signifies all manner of familiar converse, and sociable
delight, and this is very pleasant: I would rather have a friend that could
delight me, than one that could enrich me: there is a vast content in the
conversation of friends, especialally in their communications, recreations, and
negotiations. In conversation we express those endearments and affections that
feed a real friendship; in communicating our joys and griefs, the first is
doubled, the last is divided: with how much satisfaction do friends chat away
sad times, that otherwise would seem tedious, either by disappointments or
actual sufferings; not seldom they discourse themselves out of a pettish
humor, changing distracting thoughts and ungrounded resolutions, for a calm
and serious temper, and this may be done by solid and serious arguments,
wherein there is not only profit but beauty. Solomon says, a word spoken in
season how good is it? It is like apples of gold in pictures of silver; friends
they have much variety of business to communicate, as their fears, and doubts,
perfections, and imperfections; their hopes, and delights, especially their
affections, and covenant of friendship which is often renewed. There must be
this intercourse between friends to avoid suspicion if they will be happy; and
this is exceeding necessary, because fear offers violence to nature, takes away
man's strength, draws a cloud upon all his comforts, and lies like a talent of
lead upon the heart, we are most times more unhappy in what we fear, then in
what we feel: How did Belshazars knees smite one against another, and his very
joints were loosed when the handwriting appeared upon the wall? Is it not many
times so with the best of us, when God writes bitter things against us? a
friend in this extremity of affairs comes like the shepherds with tidings of
great joy, and declares our peace with God, his good will toward us. These are
the heart-cheating arguments, that winds up the heart above those fears, and
like the sun dissipates the clouds, and opens a door of hope: fear overwhelms a
man, casts him into a swouning fit: a gracious and serious friend revives and
restores him to his strength again. Doubts are as inseparable to men in their
most serene temper, as motes from the air in the clearest day, or spots from
the moon in the brightest night; there is much cause of hesitation in men of
the purest and most innocent conversations, they are not without their
entanglements, many a perplexing web they spin; but these may be unravelled by
a judicious friend, who happily may be skilful, as Joseph was to answer those
riddles of providence, and resolve those doubts that at present seems
intricate, and past finding out. Joseph was such a friend to the chief butler:
men are many times reasoned off their doubts, and enforced to throw them away,
because they cannot abide the test and conviction of reason. Jonathan and David
the best friends we ever read of, they spent much time in communicating their
dispondences and trouble. Says David, there is but a step betwixt me and
death: how affectionately did Jonathan resolve this doubt; who alone was the
most likely instrument to secure David: which he did, more then promise, in his
answer to David's scruple, where he says, whatever thy soul desires, I will do
it for thee, and so goes on with pregnant arguments of his faithfulness to
David, whereby he cleared the most puzling doubt of all by expressing his care
and kindness in a matter that concerned David's life: the preserving of which
must loose Jonathan his crown. Jonathan lying under this temptation, no wonder
if David had doubts in such times as these are; friends must renew their
covenants, as they did, and acquiesce in the faithfulness of each other.

Again, friends communicate their Joys and hopes; joy will strengthen nature as
effectually as fear will impair it: he is no friend that will not be more ready
to impart his comforts then his sorrows, which he may do with more freedom and
less caution, and may promise himself a mutual satisfaction, which doubles the
content. There are many things that cheers the heart, but these being according
to the conditions of the person concerned we cannot well define them, but this
in the general observe, that whatever is absolutely necessary, earnestly
expected, justly due, if accomplished is a matter of joy and delight, and
cannot faithfully be concealed; whatever my friend takes pleasure in, I must
not withhold but rather augment, illustrate and amplify it, always annexing a
complacent behavior, as the sit temper for that season, when the heart is
upon the wing of hope and joy, that will raise the social communication of
friends to a high pitch of satisfaction; when the heart is full of pleasure, it
is full of love, and resolution; these being as natural to joy and hope, as
discontent and harshnes is to fear and doubt: a merry heart makes a joyful
countenance: what is more pleasing then a cheerful aspect? hope is to the soul
as the anchor is to the ship: it keeps it steady among the most perplexing
waves: Joy is a passion arising from the apprehension of some good we have in
hand or in hope, relating to our selves or others: did I apprehend any thing in
my self, in the world or in my friend that could be matter of pleasure unto
him, I could be neither kind nor civil to conceal it, nor could any thing be
matter of joy unto me if I could not impart it, at best it would be but a half
joy.

Lastly, love and delight must be imparted also in this equal conversation:
love is the hand within the wheel which turns the whole concern; as the heart
must not be without the habits of an entire affection, so our conversation must
not be without the acts in our daily commerce: Love is workful and watchful:
this passion is very industrious, it is never off from action, nor does it ever
want expression: It shrinks at neither service nor suffering: it is oil to the
wheel of action: It thinks no suffering intolerable so long as it enjoys the
help of a true friend, who will take up the heavyest end of the burden,
putting oil into the wound, and joy into the heart by cheering considerations.
In afflictions (says Job) pity should be showed by a friend. This is the
discriminating time; a friend is known in adversity. If a man can delight in
his friend when under a cloud, when his luster is obscured (this speaks a fast
friend) and administers great delight: we do not much value our entertainment
in a prosperous estate, all will admire the rising sun, but to have an equal
respect when declining this is rare, and can proceed from nothing, but an
unchangable affection, which excellently improves all opportunities and seasons
to express that love and delight which is consonant unto it self: nothing more
sweet then endeared expressions, these leave a tincture upon the heart many
days after. How do we ^owle such expressions in our thoughts as honey under our
tongue. Love is full of contemplation and invention, and therefore cannot be
wanting in expression.

Suitableness in recreation and business in the world is also considerable as
that which compleats the happiness of this concern exceedingly; if friends
differ here, much of their society will be lost. Instance, one man affects
serious recreation, another those that are most sensual; these cannot hold
correspondency one with another long, but must certainly one time or another
hazard a breach, because that their recreations are not only different but
diametrically contrary, and consequently will occasion discontent on both
sides. A serious man though he may bear while he thinks there is some hopes of
reclaiming, yet he cannot always do it because contrary to his reason,
affection and humor, nor can he long suspend his censures; on the other side
pleasure will so prevail with him that loves it that he will defend it, and
contemn reason and religion too, if it stand in opposition to, or in
competition with it, pleasure being very attractive and prevailing, nothing
more.

Let your business as much as possible be the same, at least nor contrary; much
of the sweetness of Friendship stands in living, walking, working together;
there is nothing a man is more impatient of then the absence of his friend: O
how he longs for his communion! as the last sweetens and shortens time, so the
first imbitters it and makes it tedious; the reason is ready, because there is
nothing so harsh as disappointments, especially in those things wherein we
expect the highest satisfaction and pleasure; suitable to men's negotiations
such are their conditions and affections; If a man's business carry him far
away, so that he stands at a great distance to the object, you will soon see
coldness in affection, carelessness and unconcernedeesse will follow
immediately; and as clouds will darken the splendor of Friendship, though it
shined never so bright before, and that because they cannot be capable of those
acts of kindness which beautifies and maintains Friendship: besides they meet
with many diversions and temptations, which like a moth will soon deface the
beauty and glory of this concern.

There must be suitableness in the expression of our love; we must not observe
different methods in the expressing of our affections: there is more in this
then at the first view does appear or we think of: the want of this has
occasioned much difference among Friends, and created many causless suspicions,
when their manner of expressions has been contrary: Instance, some are more
open and free, others more close and reserved; the first cannot believe any
temper so contrary to generosity, can haveany consistency with Friendship; the
latter suspects the former, as altogether appearing in hyperboles, thinking
that they rise to high in their expression to be real and so censure and slight
it, though it be never so ingenious and certain. But when that method is the
same, how confirmed and fixed is the friendship; and this is not hard to be
brought to pass among prudent persons, which though at the first they seem
very different, yet they will soon agree: if they argue the case, and yield on
both sides to that which comes nearest the rules of a perfect friendship in
that latitude in which it ought to be considered, I think this would be one of
the first things I would study, were I to contract a well grounded friendship.
I never affected hyperboles in friendship; though some say in love they are
most comely; because by the same reason I may not believe some, I may question
all that is expressed by them. A true expression is most pleasing and
insinuating: some truths may be more valued than others; not that there is any
defect in truth, but there may be in them that receives it. We value all
truths, but especially those we best understand, and is of greatest use unto
us. Some truths may be so high that we cannot reach them: others may be so
contrary to some tempers that they will not believe them, and hereby truth
passes under a notion of falsehood, men are hardly brought to believe that in
others which they cannot find in themselves; never insisting upon their own
incapacity for it, because that were a secret reproof, and a close reflection,
and therefore are more prone to conclude things impossible they cannot
possess, then prize or value them in another. Neither would I be too low in my
expressions; this were coming as short as the other was shooting beyond the
mark; because high affections are always accompanied with proportionable
expressions. Nor could any thing mean be accepted; where there are such vast
expectations, as in friendship; but prudence may so regulate this affair, that
neither demonstration nor expression, confirmation nor affection shall be
wanting; as also bend all things to the perfect rule, so as there shall appear
so much equality as shall reach and continue a real satisfaction and a right
understanding of all things that at first seemed to render this sameness in
expression impossible or at least uneasy.

Lastly, above all disparity be careful of this, that there be some proportion
in your estates; covet not a person much richer than your self to make a friend
of: you may run into more inconveniences then you are aware of in this respect;
sutableness here is as considerable as in any of the former: I would not aim at
an advantage here, because as I would not have a friend that could not do me
courtesies, so I would not have too great a dependence upon him: it is a more
blessed thing to give, than to receive. I would rather take a friend that
should share with me, then one that should think my affection a purchase he
made by his money. If you fancy a friend that is rich, or rather for his
riches, sit down first and consider the charge; this may cost you more than it
is worth: we must be very discreet in this case, men cannot long love
chargeable things: such persons may expect too much distance, obligation, and
service to stand with this relation: you must wisely weigh all circumstances,
and not depend too much, if you intend to be happy: Money will beat down the
price of friendship and contend for superiority; and will think it very hard to
be denied when the least reason of challenge appears, we know, it is too base
to be compared with friendship, yet it would be honored because it has a
splendidaspect, it carries its value in its face, and like an usurper
endeavors to submit to slavery and contempt, that which is infinitely more
valuable; true it is a virtuous man may be outwardly mean and contemptible, yet
has a mind more glorious than the gold that perishes. I cannot but smile
when I see persons valued for their money, and they take very kindly, that
which would be a vexation to me, which is, to see my servant honored above my
self. How contemptible would many be, (though they make a great noise in the
world, and are clothed in gorgeous apparel) if their golden servant were gone,
that they are adored for: such a man would be despised though he be now like
Dives, as Lazarus upon the dunghill, there is no real worth in gold, all is but
fancy: there is more worth in a piece of bread, or in a draught of water then
in all the silver and gold in both the Indies; Heathens could see this.

We read of the Medes that they did not care for silver, and for gold they had
no delight in it; It is hardly to be creditted how wise men do adore this dumb
Idol, and value themselves by it, stripping themselves of robes and clothing
themselves with rags, I mean when they debase their reason which is the crop
and glory of man in his moral capacity, and cloathe themselves with thick clay,
I could never honor nor esteem a worthless man, though I saw him tumble in
gold, no more than I could value a puppet because he had glittering attire. I
cannot admire persons, as they admire themselves if their greatest excellency
be riches, and are only happy that they have what their money can procure,
making a hundred things necessary to themselves, men of real worth could live
and be happy without. I will never make a friendship with one that must
maintain me: it is ten to one if ever I should be brought to set so high a
value upon an estate, as those whose property it is would expect, if all the
gold and silver in the world were put into one scale and a virtuous man in the
other, the latter would mightily overballance. I will bless God for plenty, but
abundance I would be afraid of; and evermore remember what we are taught in our
Litany to pray, which is, in time of our wealth, good Lord deliver us. If money
were as little valued as virtue, and a greater price put upon goodness, we
might yet live to see some happy days. There is nothing more contemptible than
those that look no higher then money; they cannot be honest, they will make
shipwreck of a good conscience to get it, nor are they desirable, because so
low in their ends and aims, that they do not think it worth their while to
drive any other trade, but their profit: they will not be rational for fear
they should not be rich; they cannot look off from their wealth, nor study any
other mystery: These persons will never be at the charge of friendship: all your
endeavor there will be like water spilt upon the ground, that can never be
gathered up again, no suitable returns can be expected.

The third qualification, is self-denial: this is most necessary in friendship:
friends must not be wilful; there may be seasons when they cannot deserve that
name, if they cannot deny themselves. Jonathan denied himself eminently for
David, they were both obliging, but Jonathan exceeded, because though he knew
David would prove a supplanter, yet he consulted how to preserve him, hazarding
the loss of his crown and kingdom. A man will in some respects do more for his
friend than himself, in a way of self-denial: many men would be reduced to
great straights, rather than court some persons for themselves, yet can
cheerfully do it for their friend, I could deny my self estate, habitation,
relations, any thing for my friend, but reputation and conscience; to sacrifice
the first were to lie under a crime unpardonable aniong men: the violating of
the last a sin inexcusable before God: both which would make me too base for
this concern; no person fit to be trusted with friendship, that can prodigally
part with those things so precious, that nothing can repair, or expiate.

The fourth qualification: there must be freeness and openness of heart;
freedom and friendship is inseparable; and can no more be divided then the cause
from the effect; Reservedness cannot be admitted: It is too late to lock the
cabinet when the Jewel is gone: where I can give my heart, I can reserve
nothing: true love allows neither reservation nor exception, all is free; their
intercourse is without violence. How insinuating is affection! how easily it
winds it self into the heart? If I cannot live in the heart of my friend, he is
no friend to me. And if he be an open-hearted man he is open-handed: he that
has access to my heart, has a key to my cabinet, or else no freedom, and
consequently no real friendship. A generous man can as freely give as receive,
he hates covetousness: If there can be no friendship without exchange of hearts,
surely then the heart comprehends all things else inferior, and speaks a full
possession of all things that are near and dear to a man. There is a
reciprocation of affairs between friends: all things are common: there is but
one common stock between them it is true, the property may be in one, but the
use must be in both: there is nothing so low as money among friends in their
esteem and value: and if they can part with every thing else, they will never
grudge that; nor can any prudence restrain a man who has voluntarily put his
friend into possession, and bound himself to maintain it, and can no way be
disobliged but by the worst perfidiousness possible; there is no contending for
propriety in this state: if my estate snall not serve my friend, I will never
give him that name.

The fifth qualification is Wisdom: a* man of understanding is of an excellent
spirit; wisdom makes the face of man to shine upon his friend with
heart-gladning rays. Solomon is said in respect of his wisdom that he was as
an angel of God. And indeed nothing makes a man in his moral estate more divine
than wisdom. A man cannot be happy except his friend has competent wisdom. I
grant that there are differences in men: some are not so capable as others:
proportionable to the wisdom of our friend, so is our wealth in him; that is
the greatest treasure because most excellent and useful: there are many
intricacies a man winds himself into; sometimes by impudence, othertimes by
ignorance; the clue is in the heart and hand of a judicious friend, that may
bring him out: If my friend be wise, I can confide in him in the worst of
times: many plain-hearted men have been undone for want of this: how often do we
hear them complaining? all this evil is come upon me, because I had no serious,
wise, and faithsul friend to advise me in this or the other affair, but now it
is too late, I am ruined: If Ioabs wisdom had not interposed, David had been
undone in that case concerning Absolon. A wise man can see an evil before it
comes, and extenuate it when it is come. A prudent man foresees the evil, and
hides himself and his friend both; they will be together. It was no small
advantage to Pharaoh that Joseph foresaw the evil of famine coming upon the
land of Egypt, when it came how easy it was made by the wisdom of Joseph, the
story will inform us. There are many things to be done before we come to an
undoing necessity: a wise man foresees that, and does that now by way of
prevention that an imprudent man would wish he had done, when the extremity is
upon him. Wisdom is most desirable in this regard, because there is no great
want, where it is rightly improved: it is the ladder by which men climb up to
honor, and is useful in all conditions; in prosperity a wise man will remember
that he is in slippery places, and therefore will look well to his steps; in
adversity, that he has many temptations, and therefore must be serious and
considerate. Let a wise man be cast into never so much mire, and trampled upon,
he sparkles like a diamond still; nothing can deprive him of his worth and
excellency. True it is, that wise men are not always rich, nor rich men are not
always wise, yet the former may and shall have the preheminency, riches and
greatness being both subordinate to wisdom: the poor wise man delivered the
city, when the king could not do it by his honor, wealth, and strength: Have
we matters of high trust? none more fit to commit them to, then a wise man: In
troubles he will support, in straights he will direct, in most perplexing
business and puzling doubts he will advise when to be active, when to sit
still; none fit for sriendship but these: many there are that are faithful and
affectionate, and would be very active, if they knew how, or in what method,
but for want of wisdom; They conclude all their good desires in a few empty
wishes, which may satisfy themselves, but never serve their friends: but wife
men are most useful, therefore much to be ambitioned: this is an indifpensable
quali^y for friendship which must be endeavored with all possible care.

The Sixth qualification is faithfulness: this is the cabinet that contains
our most precious jewel, I mean the secrets of the heart): secrecy in a friend
is the most precious part of friendship, and that because there is assigned to
that part the highest trust imaginable; a defect here cannot be without the
greatest treachery conceivable; because it makes a perfect divorce, and strikes
against the very nature and essence of friendship; Solomon observed that a
faithful man conceales the matter. There are many things between friends; that
are in no case fit to be revealed, nor cannot be done but with the greatest
treachery, because thereby a man betrays the highest trust, which nothing can
make a crime more unpardonable. The intercourses between friends, cannot be
revealed without detriment, because expressions of kindness (though innocent)
may by an unfaithful repetition, prove prejudicial and slanderous. There are
these things especially in a faithful man, that challenges our respect and
value, and renders him exceeding precious, First, he is true, you may trust
him: he does not wear like Jezabel, a painted outside; or like the gallants of
our times, that has the most endeared expressions in their mouths, their
voice is the voice of Jacob, but their hands the hands of Esau. And this is
very much to be admired, especially in persons of ingenuity, because men
naturally love truth, and value things according to truth, Instance, a picture
if it be never so curiously drawn, shall obtain no reputation, if it do not
resemble the person it represents. No wonder there is no more love in the
world, men cannot trust one another, Joab-like they cry, my brother, and smite
deadly. Is not a faithful friend to be valued in such times as these; when
there is a lie in the right hand of those that in complement pretend the
greatest reallity, if I cannot believe a man, I cannot trust him, nor treat him
without suspicion, nor value him; nothing more destructive to friendship, than
falsehood; nothing more obliging than faithfulness.

As a faithful man is true, so he is honest and just: he is a covenant-keeping
man, as well as a covenant-making man; and this is considerable, because in all
friendships there must be covenants: you see that between David and Jonathan
the pattern of friendship: the covenant of God was between them: it is called
the covenant of God by way of eminency: for every thing in Scripture that has
the name of God annexed to it, as the city of God, or the mountain of God, or
the temple of God, this speaks the eminency of those things. The covenant
between friends is not a trivial thing, but weighty, and seriously to be
heeded: we ought not to break promise with an enemy, God has severely fallen
upon covenant breakers, and good men have been very conscientious in making
good their covenants, as we may see in the case of the Gibeonites, Josh. 9. 15.
Joshua knew that they were deceivers, and that they had sinisterly brought him
into league with them, yet the league being made Joshua could be no way
discharged by any manner of prudence, piety or policy. Many men make^
covenants, but few keeps them. Covenants are very binding to men of honest and
just principles (...) bind the conscience, as well as the reputation, a prudent
man will not be brought into covenant, when he foresees a breach unavoidable;
because as a man cannot be wise, rashly to promise, so he cannot be just, if he
does not exactly keep (...) There is nothing next to holiness more valuable
than justice, next to believe and be saved that golden rule takes place, do as
you would be done unto. A man that is faithful cannot be bribed by profit, nor
biassed by pleasure to prejudice hi^ friend, he cannot be uncertain, you may
know where to find him: he is not a friend to day, and an enemy to morrow; as
he never fixed without deliberation, so he can never alter without great
provocation. The place where our treasure lies must be certain, or else the
treasure cannot be safe: none can pick this lock. A faithful man will not only
hate unfaithfulness in himself, but he will endeavor to make others faithful,
with whom his friend is concerned: the concernments, as well as the person of
his friend so considerable to him; in all disputable matters he will make the
case his own; he will never see his friend condemned where he ought to be
justified: in all actions that concern him his help and assistance is never
wanting: he will not say, am I my brothers keeper? but will be a wing to cover:
a succor in the most uncomfortable times: a faithful witness for him, and will
have a due respect unto all his concerns.

The Seventh qualification is humility: This is like oil that makes the wheels
of friendship go more smoothly: how amiable is humility? It not only sweetens
the conversation of friends, but graces and adorns them more than honor;
before honor is humility, says the wise man; humility is acceptable both to
God and man; God ascribes wisdom unto it, with the lowly is wisdom, and man
gives him greatest reverence and respect; an humble man is a self-denying man;
he can heighten his friend and undervalue himself, he contentedly will
decrease, that his friend may increase: how willingly will he throw of that
applause from himself, he would court for his friend. Humility is a garment
that becomes the greatest prince in the world: An humble man studies not so
much his perfection, as his imperfections: he contentedly passes under a cloud
without any noise, and thinks himself most happy when least observed: can
retreat when there is no reason for it, but his humility: h^ readily and freely
submits rather than make a quarrel whoever does the injury: he is always on the
yielding side; I do not mean a base submission by this compliance, as a
transferring that crime, which is properly another to my self: this is the
picking of a thorn out of another man's foot, and putting it into my own.
Religion bids me submit where there is cause, and reason tells me it is
baseness and pusillanimity to do it where there is none. I ever abhorred an
unworthy detraction and submission, as being against my reason and conscience:
it appearing unto me as high a piece of hypocrisy to condemn my self, where I
am sure I am innocent, as it would be pride to justify my self where I know I
am guilty; besides, hereby I put my self into a necessity to beg that pardon
from another, which otherwise he would have seen reason enough to have desired
of me: such complements as these I could never fancy, nor rationally approve,
because I never saw any other effect proceeding from that cause, but shame and
scorn, for men though never so criminal would gladly be thought innocent, yet
they will not not be at charge to deserve it: nor will men willingly consult
reason against themselves; they will go thus far, and judge by the rule of
contraries, if you are guilty, I must be innocent, How irrational is it, for a
man to brand himself to please another, thereby making himself liable to those
reflections that may one time or another prove more prejudicial to his peace
and credit, than any present advantage he could propound unto himself, in so
base a piece of self-denial: I never thought submission the best way of
reconciling quarrels among equals, but rather the most effectual way to augment
and heighten them. I would yield very far before I would make a quarrel with
them I love, but if there could be no prevention of a just quarrel, I would not
submit; because if I submit, thereby I make my accuser my judge in his own
case, and must stand to his mercy, and though he might reprieve and not condemn
me at present, yet still I lie under the lash of his judgment, whenever he
pleases to impose it; the fear of which would make me a perpetual slave, and
still confirm his jurisdiction over me, which I can never wrest out of his
hand, (having voluntarily invested him with it) without hazarding a greater
quarrel then before; and that because by this act I put an undervalue upon him,
and think him not worthy of that place I had first invested him with by my own
voluntary act; which he will now hardly part with, because compliance and
submission is so grateful to most persons, that they having once obtained it,
they will contend hard for it, rather than make a surrender. The most advisable
thing in this case, is, to forget the quarrel, and time will wear off that
animosity, and convince that the interest of friends is to make peace, rather
then improve quarrels, and to be always studying that method that may effect
this to a mutual content and the least prejudice. But I return from this
digression. In short, humility has these things to commend it: an humble man
will easily admit of all manner of adresses; he is not lordly and stately, nor
does he stand at so great a distance, as a proud man does: this is very
insinuating and captivates the heart, by this means Absolon stole the hearts of
the men of Israel again; an humble man cheerfully receives all complaints, and
seriously studies all manner of satisfaction to the complainants, and willingly
complyes to all just and handsome things.

The eighth qualification is resolution; Neither time, place, nor person can
make a true friend unfixed: time that wears every thing else, will rather
beautify, strengthen, and augment, then impair friendship, because every day
heaps up new endearments, by which it is made more complete and confirmed.
There is a tie upon friends that is like the marriage-knot, nothing but death
can dissolve; and indeed they have need to be resolved, else they will never
stand and fall together, which they must do, if they are real: courage in a
friend is most necessary, especially in time of imminent danger: a friend will
not cowardly loose the life or reputation of his friend: he will hazard two in
this case, rather than loose one. Jonathan was a resolved man, neither honor,
life, or any thing could make him unfaithful to David: every man is at his
liberty before the friendship is made, but not afterward; therefore must be
resolved, There is no wisdom in first resolving and then making inquiries: we
must consider the charge of friendship before we begin and be satisfied in
this, which is a great truth, that though friendship be most desirable, yet it
is not without trouble; no estate nor person without exception in this lower
land; you will find disappointments entailed upon the best of persons and
things, which should quicken our diligence and care, and heighten our
resolutions; friends must not be like bowls, that every small rub will put off
their bias: they must expect many apples of strife to be thrown between them
by the devil and men of dividing principles: both envying the beauty and
comeliness of that state; friendship always attracts the eye: we see many
gazing upon it, but not the heart, because few understand it. They that have a
near inspection into the excellency of this state have a high value for it, not
so much for its outward beauty, as inward excellency: and these greatly esteem
a true and faithful friend though they have not always opportunity to obtain
it, others are utterly incapable of ever obtaining it, and they hate the
persons in whom they see a capacity for it, merely for their friendship; like
the fallen angels that kept not their first estate, and therefore hates all
those, that are not plunged with them in the same unhappy estate. I have seen
persons greatly respected while they carried it at a distance each to other,
but afterward when they have been observed to unite in their affections, have
been hated, vilified, scorned, and scandalized; such is the enmity there is in
some persons to this relation: and this may procecd from one of these causes.

First, Satan seems to be concerned in this matter: knowing that the
improvement of reason and virtue mightily prepares the heart for grace, the
young man in the Gospel in respect of his morality was a great proficient, he
is said by the best testimony to be not far from the kingdom of God. Men in
friendship much improve, because they are always studying things grateful,
comely, and acceptable, and in this united capacity, are not liable to those
various temptations that men of contrary tempers are ensnared by, Satan
perceiving this, studies all possible means to imbitter this state, and as an
effectual means to reach that end, he sets profane men at enmity against those
innocent persons; and these are not only enemies to the pleasure and profit of
friendship, but are at enmity with the persons, and this proceeds from their
ignorance as well as satan's malice; they understand nothing of what they
censure and revile, fondly conceiving, that every attainment they h^^e no part
nor interest in, not worth the having; never considering their own incapacity
for it, who are so turbulent in their humors, cross in their qualities, that
they can never arrive at so much composednes, as will comport with this temper:
nor is it altogether ignorance, but envy also will be concerned, which delights
in nothing more than to spot this innocent garment. I would never esteem that
friend that were not resolved never to decline me upon any account whatsoever.
This was a great amplification of Jonathans love unto David, his resolution
never to desert him, rather running the hazard of his fathers displeasure, the
loss of his crown and kingdom, and which is more his precious life, then deal
falsely in this covenant. I would take my friend, as a man takes his wife, for
better for worse, and resolve with Ruth, whither thou go I will go; where
thou lodgest I will lodge, thy people shall be my people, thy God shall be my
God, where thou dyest, I will dye, and there will I be buried: resolution is
the note and character of a true friendship, and lowdly speaks it neither
tottering nor unsound. If Jonathan could have been corrupted in his love to
David by any temptations, there was enough to do it; if threatenings,
accusations, or entreaties could have prevailed, it would have been done, as
the history will inform us: but Jonathan could not fear the one, nor credit the
other against his friend; nor is it every little slip in friendship it self
would do it: it must be some capital crime that can ma(...) separation; True it
is that a man is not always grateful to himself, and therefore cannot be so to
any other, at all times, sometimes friendship comes gloriously arrayed,
othertimes is clothed in rags; shall a man decline his friend, because he does
not appear always so splendid as at other times, and say he is no friend? this
is as irrational, as to say a man is no man, because he has not on his best
clothes: there are many accidents that may render a man less pleasing and
acceptable at one time than another: the various tempers of body and mind does
make a great change: these must be considered and allowed: little things will
not stick with a resolved friend.

The ninth qualification is compassion and tenness of heart: this is the
cordial of friendship, and the hand that binds up the breaches in the heart,
that which repairs the defects of nature and puts life into a dying person,
this is that oil that sweetly runs into the wounds of a perplexed heart and
heals it, that hand that wipes tears from the eye, and takes the burden from
the heart: it was not the smallest part of Jobs misery, that he had not
compassionate friends in his afflictions: In affliction (says he) pity should
be showed by a friend, but miserable comforters are you all. If there can be
pleasure in affliction this is it, that I have a concerned friend: every
compassionate friend is a man of bowels; he is afflicted in all that his friend
is afflicted, and will as freely share with him in his sorrows, as in his
comforts; this is matter of great lamentation in affliction that we have none
to pity us, the consideration of that doubles the misery and adds weight to
the burden, but this cannot be the case of him that has a true friend: upon a
sick bed who makes the bed so easy, as a compassionate friend? no society so
pleasant and diverting as he: in pain who is so merciful? in penury who is so
bountiful? many will pass by in straights, as the priest and the Levite did by
the poor traveller; but a friend will, like the good Samaritan, give oil for
his wounds, and wine for his heart, he will put his soul in his souls stead,
and do for him what he would desire for himself, were the present case his own.
Here the golden rule shines brightly, do you as you would be done unto. This
was the season Jonathan made use of to express his bounty and compassion unto
David. There is nothing more obliging in friendship than compassion: a
fellowfeeling and sympathy in our friend is very grateful, when like the two
twins History speaks of, these sociable companions laugh and weep together;
these are like the strings of a viol, touch one and the other trembles. As
their sufferings are mutual so are their satisfactions. A man is not seldom
more concerned for his friend then for himself. I have experienced this, who
have sometimes born afflictions with so much the more paence and satisfaction,
because it passed by my friend, and kindly took me: the reason is ready,
because a great cross upon the body is more easily born, than that which is
smaller upon the mind. It is with the mind as with the body, those distempers
that touch the vitals are more dangerous* than them that are accompanied with
more exquisite pains in the body; so heart afflictions are most vexations: when
my friend is under any affliction, my mind is troubled, and I feel that pain
in my heart for him, that perhaps he feels far enough from his. I have been
more amazed and affrighted at the sufferings of my friends, than I could have
been at the apprehension of my own death, and would willingly have purchased
life to them, by loosing my own.

As compassion is free, so it is pleasant: how cheerfully will a compassionate
man look upon his friend in distress? not that he is not sorry for his
affliction, but to show how pleased he is to help and assist him: God loves a
cheerful giver, so does man. The aspect of a man in giving and receiving does
very often discover the heart of the giver; for men can hardly, handsomely
dissemble it here: when favors come^* from persons only moved by credit and
relation, and not from love, how slowly do they come, the chariot-wheels do
move heavily then, but when they come from a compassionate friend, they fly and
come insensibly, nor is this all; compassion goes farther, to acts of clemency
also: that is a true friend, who can heartily forgive, and pass by
infirmities, without reflection: he will not make a quarrel upon every slight
occasion, he is more prove to pity then to reprove, he does not study
exceptions but compliance: he will ever make the best interpretation possible:
and look over the mistakes of his friend with allowance, and where he finds a
blot he will draw it fair again: he will treat him with all civility and
tenderness, reprove kindly and seasonably, excluding all manner of harshness,
clothing himself with all humility, gravity, and civility: and upon the
discovery of any error, if it be not very criminal, he will say as Eli did of
his sons, this is not a good report I hear of you, friend. Wisdom as well as
tenderness is also necessary in this case: the well management of a reproof is
a very nice point, few understands it, and as few are acceptable and
successeful in this regard. Amiableness in the countenance, sweetness in the
expression are the best expedients, and seems to be the most effectual means,
to convince without leaving the least scar on the reputation, or disquietness
in the mind: few persons love a reprover, yet Solomon observed, that men of
wisdom do, reprove a wise man and he will love thee.

The tenth qualification, there must be complacency and delight as well as
profit in a friend, a man takes more pleasure in his friend, than in all the
world beside: all other things are to him at a distance, and we know things
remote give no great delight; the more united, the more pleasure: the sun under
a cloud is not so desirable, because it stands at a greater distance to the
visive faculty, as when it shines clearly without any interposition. Solomon
observed, that it was a pleasant thing for the eye to behold the sun, in its
rays, when nothing intervened between the faculty and the object: here are two
things especially to be considered in friendship in order to a complete delight
and complacency; that is, proportion and propriety: These seems to be the basis
upon which that fabric stands: proportion not only prepares for it, but
greatly supports it; and propriety conveys the pleasure and sweetness of
friendship to the respective persons, by multiplying endearments, and such
expressions which immediately proceed from a well-grounded affection: how
pleasant is a Romance tha^ does but feign friendship? and is not friendly comerce
and communion that is real more considerable? can a picture though never so
well drawn give the content the person can that it ^epresents? we find they
oftener draw fears from our eyes then convey pleasure to the heart, because
they oftentimes tell us, that our dearest ^riends are either lost, or at so
great a distance, that we find more reason to despair then hope, and this
fills our hearts with sighs and cares: pro^riety in a friend is the surest tie,
and the grea^est obligation: certainly there is a superlative ^atisfaction
there, which appears not more in ^he communion than in the heartbreaking
^houghts and languishing desires in case of ab^ence: and this is most evident
by our longing and ^ighing after that person we have happily fixed ^oo much
upon, ever to be contented without the ^eal possession and constant enjoyment
of; yet so unhappy because of some cruel accident intervening, that we cannot
enjoy the object; that there ^s a transcendent content and pleasure in the
re^ation and state of friendship, we cannot want arguments enough to prove,
especially this, because we find there, that which in the highest m^asure will
gratify both the rational and sensitive appetite: and this is done when by
arguing and useful discourses doubts are removed, and fears ^ly away; how
gladly do we welcome that person that can inform us of those things that are
the causes or consequences of our joys and griefs; reason will command
reverence, and comes with that power and efficacy as is irresistible; passions
may be reproved, but reason must be honored; to which persons that are not
wholly brutish will easily consent because of the nature of it which is sublime
and excellent, and yet easy and necessary: there we find such depths that the
Elephant may swim, such sholes that the lamb may wade; no greater pleasure to
the senses (which must be satisfied as well as reason) then the delight of
friendship, which is elivated by the pleasantness of the person and the
certainty of the interest that he has in that person: David says of Jonathan,
that his love passed the love of women: propriety and interest raises the
affections and compleats the felicity of this concern: the words of a friend
drops like an honeycomb, much more is a solid reason accepted, which is like
music to the ear, light to the eye, and a cordial to the heart; strips the
person from his fears, and clothes him with serenity and peace; I can never
fully speak the excellency of this concern: give me leave to call in the
testimony of those that have fully enjoyed it at one time, but unhappily lost
it at another: these can more pathetically speak the excellency of that state;
we never come seriously to prize things till after we have lost them; and in
our mourning habit we are most talkative about the pretiousness of that we can
never recall: that which aggravates any loss, is the speciality that is upon
it: an only son or an only friend, this is that which imbitters the cross;
David sadly resented the death of Jonathan, it was a loss as cruel as death,
David's complaint for Absolon is the complaint of frinds when providence makes a
final separation, would to God I had died for thee, my friend, my friend: may
we not go higher, and with truth affirm, it is like the rending of the soul from
the body, it is that one stroke which cuts the nerves and sinews of all our
comforts, pleasure and delight: the complacense of friendship is beyond the
expression of the best reason; therefore I cannot aim at a perfect discovery: I
have given you my twilight apprehensions of it; I proceed to the fourth thing
which is the great end aimed at in the relation and state friendship.

First, the advantage and utility of friendship is first in our eye, as I could
never fancy any man whose person was ungrateful, so I could not love one whose
parts are not desirable: I can love my friend for any worthy quality, and the
more worthy the more he has of my affections: persons may without censure
expect profit as well as pleasure in those things they dearly love, and this is
neither mercinary nor unreasonable, but most commensurate and equivalent to the
greatest end of friendship; their ends in that concern are the same that his
was spoken of in the parable, that sold all to purchase the field in which the
pearl was. It was not the sield but the treasure he aimed at; so a man does not
love any person barely for himself, but as the cabinet that contains the Jewel
he values, he does not love the Jewel because of the cabinet, but the cabinet
with the respect to the Jewel: we rationally prize things, when we value them
according to their usefulness: we prize water, the sun, and bread, because
these are so necessary, that we cannot live without them; friendship in some
respect is as necessary; as our nature cannot subsist without strengthening and
nourishment, no more as we are sociable can we be happy without society: David
was fully satisfied in Jonathan, not more for the pleasure he had in his
embraces, as the benefit and profit of his counsel, advice, and directions, as
also his example, which might prove as great an advantage to David, if not
greater than any of the rest: without question that faithfulness and humility
of Jonathan was as exemplary to David, as his assistance, and friendship was
desirable. A true and faithful friend is one of the richest talents God
entrusteth us with: a rich man takes much delight to contemplate his money that
lies in such or such a place, it is his only treasure, and where the treasure
is there the heart will be, a man's friend is his treasure, and as Solomon
observed, money answers all things, that is to say, that money can reach, with
as great truth we may say that an ingenious man answers all things that are
necessary to a sociable happiness.

Secondly, Society is one of the greatest ends of friendship, that alliance was
first contrived to promote sociable happiness; man is a sociable creature, and
there is nothing more equal and consonant to his being and nature then
society, because hereby he is most capable of doing and receiving good in that
method and manner which is most suitable to his reason and nature, as also his
inclination which is generous and not mercenary, he does not wholly aim at
himself; but that which amplifies the enjoyment is, that it is mutual, and can
reach the content both of the subject and the object: an ingenious man would
not have a friend that cannot benefit him, because then he could not be useful,
nor will he so spend and confine his affection, if he sees a worthy person till
he knows his reward, or receives earnest by something extraordinary: a true
friend does not study how to enrich himself by his friends bounty, but how to
better himself by his virtues, or else by generous acts and obligations: he is
evermore making suitable returns, nothing more contrary to virtuous persons
then to level at low ends; most ends are too low for love that noble affection,
yet we cannot err here, if our scope and aim be at religious principles and
rational accomplishments, the last makes us happy as men, the first as
Christians.

Thirdly, a mutual satisfaction is aimed at in this relation of Friendship, and
that beyond what can possibly be obtained any where else: what relation is
there that will so far comply as a true friend? there is none bound to study my
humors but by my friend, who must do it, or he can never deport himself for
this relation: there are many paradoxes in friendship, but it is to them that
are strangers to the nature of this concern, the mysteries of friendship are
very deep, and cannot be fathomed by persons that are wholly strangers and
unacquainted with this concern: the sociable delight and mutual satisfaction
between friends, though it be very well understood amongst themselves, is very
intricate to those at a distance, the conformity of friends are speaking and
acting alike, and submitting the reason and will each to other: these are the
hidden parts of friendship, and not visible to every eye, the sameness and
similitude that is between them is not apprehended by others, yet brings vast
contentment to the persons concerned, and exceedingly strengthens and confirms
the alliance: we love those that are like our relations, much more those that
are like our selves; how pleasantly can a father look upon his image in his
son? and the more suitableness appears in their dispositions, the more rooted
and grounded is their affection; we plainly see, there can be no friendship
between persons of contrary tempers, but rather antipathies, that which we call
prudence is not known among them; for if a man hates a person, he dislikes all
things that are about him; so if he loves a person he approves of all things
that concern him: when the will of friends are melted, and like lead run into
the same mold, then this conformity and the mutual satisfaction of both persons
is attained: contrary tempers are like contrary creatures, still at variance:
Pride and humility, patience and passion, folly and ingenuity, pie^y and carnal
policy, these can never consi^t together; con^rarieties neither agree in whole
nor in part; In short, this conformity is not only excellen^ ^^t self, but also
in its concomitants, and they ^re resolution and contentedness with every
thing, especially that which cannot be divided but with a fundamental
destruction: To be satisfied with the comfort of friendship without submission
to the crosses, is a foundation-errour, and will occasion a breach irreparable;
in our humane state, natural defects that cannot be cured: these therefore must
not be reflected on in a way of discontent; to reprove or impose an
impossibility is alike irrational; it is most unreasonable to dispute
impossibilities, and unkind to make grating reflections, because they still
turn to scorn and scandal, if they be public, and to discontent and trouble,
though they be never so private: I can look upon the natural defects of my
friends with more pleasure then the perfections of another, because they are
parts of what I dearly love, and so much of himself that they cannot possibly
be divided, otherwise I would sooner take part of them my self then dislike
them in him: In the first choice I had my freedom, and might have declined the
whole if I could not be reconciled to every part, but now I cannot make
exceptions but at this hazard, the loss of my friend, or at the least a
persuasion in him that I cannot love him so entirely as I ought, and the
relation justly challenges: Beauty is not much in friendship, a sociable and
amicable disposition is much more necessary, if this be wanting, it is not like
some natural defects in the body that art can mend, nothing can supply; all the
art of reason and religion together cannot do it; we see this in angry Jonas,
whom God could not please, he thought he did well to be angry with God himself.
I have sometimes taken much pleasure in contemplating the satisfaction I have
observed among friends, how studious they have been to please each other? how
ready to serve? how impatient of any interruption to their social delights? how
unsatisfied if they could not in all respects reach a mutual content? If to
have the greatest contrivance, how to promote our interest in the world in
respect of credit, estate, or life, be a satisfaction, friendship is that. If
the greatest love, the highest value, the sweetest embraces, the most constant
and pleasing communion, care, love, goodness, faithfulness, bounty, ready
service be desirable, then friendship is most incomparable. How easy suffering,
how pleasant service, and how inconsiderable do life appear, where mutual
satisfafaction is in view; where a man would otherwise indulge himself and sit
down and consider the expense of a chargeable and painful undertaking before he
will venture upon it; it is very observable where mutual satisfaction is aimed
at, especially in great enterprises and high undertakings, let the conclusion
be never so good, if death or any cruel accident have divided the friends, the
contents is not half what it would have been, had it been mutual: the end aimed
at was the satisfaction of both, which being ardently desired, but really lost,
is constantly lamented, and instead of a gainful possession there remains
nothing but a melancholy diversion; this constantly torments the mind, which
if unquiet will imbitter the sweetest enjoyments, David could not receive the
news of victory with any satisfaction, because Absolon was slain, who probably
he intended rather to reduce then destroy: promising himself a mutual benefit
by that victory, how eager are friends to promote the pleasure one of another?
they remove all impediments and study all expedients to that effect. He is no
friend that has not experienced this, that upon any offense g^ven as
occasioned by him he finds as much trouble in his own heart, as can possibly
possess the heart of his friend: grief and anger presently employed; the first
that any occasion should be given, or taken to discompose his friend; the last,
that he should do any thing to procure it together with thoughts and cares how
this breach may be made up again; It is probable every method will not do it. I
would bear with any thing rather than consent to a quarrel with a person I
dearly loved, but if offenses were causelessly taken, I would think it more
prudence to dispute it than submit. If I submit I am not only beholding for a
pardon, but confess the crime, and become my own judge to condemn my self. I
have observed, let the submission be never so ingenious, if the fault be
thought great, it will prove but the skinning over the wound, and upon a more
muture consideration seem but a small satisfaction. If credit and reputation
are concerned in the quarrels and unavoidably sow the seed of suspicion in the
heart; to prevent this, deliberation seems most advisable, in which time the
present passion and animosity may wear of, and reason may be heard on both
sides, and they may be inclined, rather to lose something of their own right,
then appear exact or punctual, the law of friendship absolutely forbidding all
such exactness. I would make any interpretation serve, rather than endanger a
fundamental difference, because I never yet could be convinced by the
observations that I yet could make, that a fundamental breach could be
repaired. I mean by this, that which strikes against the nature and essence of
friendship. Instance, as the revealing of a secret, a treacherous blow,
revilings, by which my reputation may be impaired for ever: if such as these
occasion a breach, it is like that of a venice glass that can never piece
again; art may mend it, but nothing can cement and repair it: there may be
reasonings pro and con, and the best argument may carry it for the present, but
there cannot be a difference occasioned by any wilful disobligation in any case
allowed it being a crime unpardonable, and that which I would never ask
forgiveness of; nor could I be satisfied in any friendship I foresaw any thing
could intervene destructive to it. I could never love one, I thought, I could
possibly be induced to hate: such a thought would prove a grief, that would
drown my comfort, and fill my heart with those doubts that never could admit of
satisfaction. I come now to the fifth thing premised, viz. the pleasure and
delight the ways and friendship is strewed with. Here are many flagrant
flowers, we shall gather them as we go.

The first fragrant flower is this; a man has something secure in the most
uncertain times, and that is no small advantage: you know fortune is very
uncertain; the wheel is up to day and down to morrow, and what more common,
than to see men valued or undervalued according to their present state, in
relation to outward things? all admire those that are uppermost, trampling upon
every thing beneath them, looking more at the outward varnish, then the inward
luster; painted scpulchres make a gaudy show, yet have no real pleasure in
them, because though they are fair to the eye, they are filled with nothing but
rottenness and corruption. Most persons look at the superficial part of a man,
wholly judging according to sense without the least appeal to reason, which
ought to be first satisfied in every doubtful case, else we may be biased, and
being in the dark mistake things to our prejudice. I have read a story of a
traveller, that came to a painter in a kind of disguise, and desired to be
employed, being of the same profession, and though a great artist very meanly
accoutred, the painter received him, and treated him according to the meanness
of his present capacity; bread and cheese was his fare, which this artist
thought a diet too course for his fine art; he presently paints his mean food
most exquisitely, and goes his way, leaving his new master to lament his
ignorance and prejudice in loosing so gainful a fervant, which was aggravated
by the circumstances that attended it; the master returning missed his servant,
but found his breakfast (as he supposed,) and though he were an artist, he
ingeniously confessed, that the representation seemed as real to his senses, as
the true food did to his reason. The hidden parts of friendship are not visible
to all the world, persons in the relation does not like money carry their value
in their faces, yet they are not without true worth, a man can prize his friend
in rags as well as in robes. Jonathan would rather strip himself for David than
despise him, for want of robes he did not abate his affection to David though
he was thrown out of all his honor and splendor he had in Saul's court, and
was hunted up and down as a pattridge upon the mountains; in prosperity a man
will be present with his friend, and consult him how to manage that estate with
humility and general content; times of prosperity requires the help of a friend
as much as adversity. The rich has many friends, few frue friends. It is much
harder to manage a great estate, than that which is meaner. Men of great
estates have commonly greater hearts, and that is the reason they have no more
content; in the midst of their sufficiencies, they are in straights: they have
many flatterers, few real friends, as Rehoboam had: many that are at their
table, that eat their bread, insinuate into their secrets, and yet lift up
their heel against them. David's table was not without these, many a good
natured man is ruined for want of a faithful friend; we find that while
Iehojada lived, Ioas did well, he was a faithful friend, but when he died, Ioas
was soon ruined and undone.

A faithful man is sure in all times, and upon all occasions. Many accidents
may rob a man of his estate, nothing but death can take away his friend. A man
can suffer the loss of all carthly comforts, and not think himself quite
undone, so long as he has his friend, which may prove strength in weakness,
pleasure in perplexity, treasure in poverty, a sympathizer with him in all
conditions, and will be with him in all places, nothing but death shall be able
to make a final separation; he will stick at nothing; ingenuity is noble and
generous; neither prison nor penury shall frighten him: these are the seasons
which he rather courts than fears, because he can here best evidence his
immutability.

Secondly, the second flower we shall gather in this way of friendship, is a
support in the most dreadful afflictions; in prosperity help is near, in
adversity it stands at a distance: the rich have many friends, but the poor is
hated of his neighbor: how seasonable is support in time of extremity; at such
a time we value kindness at a high rate, that being the proper season for it,
because we try our friends then whether they will assist, when others will not
or cannot: there are no seasons so proper and convenient for this purpose as
times of great straits and extremites, when may be the condition of a man must
not be known by his dearest relations, nor can be but at a hazard of his life
or credit: such was David's case, when he fled from Saul; and such is many a
man's case: instance, in time of great losses and other calamities, yet a friend
must acquaint himself with these puzling affairs, else he cannot discharge the
duty and obligation he lies under: he is bound not to desert his friend, and
resolves with Peter concerning his master; though all forsake, he will never
forsake him. I would be more diligent to enquire after the necessities of my
friend, than after any other thing that concern him, not that I love trouble
and sorrow, but I love my friend, and cannot decline that which is inseparable
from him; and if I cannot enjoy him no where else, but in the furnace of
affliction, I should not think that too hot, a prison would be sweeter to me
were he present than a palace without him, because I accept sufferings more
heartily with him then pleasure without him, and this is no paradox, If the
serenity of the mind be beyond the ease of the body, and reason more to be
indulged then sense: it is true prudence may facilitate troubles if the heart be
calm, but nothing can do it if that be unquiet; the heart knows his own
bitterness, no person else can, except a friend, because hearts are united in
friendship, and there is a sympathy; I will study all methods to support and
supply my friend, and when I could do it no longer, I would voluntarily suffer
with him rather than forsake him: love that warm affection maks adversity easy,
at least not so intolerable.

The third flower we gather in the way of friendship, is a counselor in doubts.
Many scruples does assail and perplex the heart of a man which in credit and
conscience he dares not reveal to strangers. This has proved the ruin of many
a man, and has betrayed them into many sad temptations, as murder, rapine,
and all manner of cruelty, not only against their nearest relations, but
against their dearest life's, occasioned either through melancholy, inprudence,
rashness, etc. these might have been prevented by a judicious friend, by whom
they might have been awed, conselled, and prevailed with to avoid those ways
and methods that lead to such extremities, and by whom their scruples might
have received a ready and satisfactory resolution, whose tenderness would have
invited him to use all persuasive and pacifying arguments. I have seen direful
effects my self arising from such causes, how happy had some been of my near
acquaintance, had they had a faithful friend to have divided their cares, and
untye those knots, melancholy was daily tying to their destruction: how easily
might those webs that seemed intricate to them spun by the policy of Satan, and
cruel melancholy (that irrational and black companion) have been unravelled,
before they could have attained those dreadful ends that have been the
consequences of them, you know that a man suddenly unravels that which has
been the work of time: a few well stated arguments has and may through the
blessing of God beat down the batteries, that the devil makes against the
precious life of man, as mental discontents are most dangerous: so secrecy in
this regard is most pernicious, because the greatest policy the devil has, is
to keep this fire within a man's heart: there he kindles a spark which soon
blazes to destruction, especially when melancholy blows the spark; the more
secret fire is, the more dangerous; a spark may easily be put out before it
comes to a flame, but after it may be impossible: no bodily affliction like
heart-trouble, yet these are not to be slighted. Job and Lazarus, and many men
under distracting pains, as the gout and ^^one, and other violent distempers,
has found friends very necessary, when by a gentle hand their wounds dressed,
their bodies supported, when by humouring and content they receive that
pleasure, that is not only useful, but exceedingly necessary in such
extremities.

The fourth fragrant flower we find in friendship is a companion in solitary and
sad times, society being never more pleasing then in solitariness. I do not
mean by solitariness, that retiredness appointed for special duty, and serious
contemplation; but such as is the consequence of some cruel confinement,
whereby we are denied those innocent recreations and harmless diversions, which
would repair nature, that is often tired in conflicting with those distractions
and cares that constantly attend such a prison-state, were the heart always
upon the wing and fit for divine contemplation, a cave that dark habitation
might be as Goshen, a land of light: otherwise it is hard to improve
solitariness to any advantage: as I would with much content enjoy my thoughts,
and discourse with my self sometimes, so I would as gladly at other times speak
my joys, and sad apprehensions of things to my friend, by which I shall double
the first, and may diminish the last; besides I shall have this advantage, if I
speak my thoughts I shall see what they are by their dress, whether trivial or
weighty. I cannot always improve my reason alone, or be so taken with my own
conceptions and apprehension of things as to believe them without exception or
passible, unless confirmed by those who are more judicious, or at least more
indifferent, then I can be in matters that so nearly concern me, arguments
debated between two or more seems to be more clear, because they have a greater
testimony, than when there is not that advantage: a single testimony will not
be accepted in civil things: men can hardly persuade singly in a matter of
importance: we see our lawyers and doctors though never so learned are hardly
creditted except they refer to Authors: nor are we without a divine testimony
in this case, as the Scriptures, which declare^ that in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every thing shall be established; the great conceit that some
men have had of their private notions, which may be, have so tickled and
pleased them that they have sat down highly satisfied with the validity of
them, has been that which has proved their greatest prejudice, and often
proved a delusion, that pride has flattered them into making that appear great
to themselves that looks throw a multiplying-glass which doubles the species,
when indeed if it be rightly considered by an impartial reason and looked upon
by a single eye will appear little, and if rightly argued and discoursed by a
second person, who can impartially weigh both substance and circumstance, will
merit rather shame and conviction, than reputation and satisfaction. I cannot
refresh my self with any lawful recreation without a companion, which will
sweeten my melancholy walks and shorten the long nights; my meat will not
relish well* nor my sleep refresh and compose me without a sociable companion:
my walks will bewearisome, my work will be tedious, my time will be long, my
opportunity of doing and receiving good very short: I can neither manage my
general nor particular calling with profit and advantage: I fancy I shall live
without being desired, and dye without being lamented.

The fifth flower is a supply in the most uncharitable times: this must come in
as a principal part of friendship, which is ever generous and free: a man will
deny himself sooner than his friend, and think it the best policy, because his
content is more than his money, which he can never enjoy, while he sees his
friend in want, how speedily will help come? our Savior observed this, (says
he) if a man come at midnight to his friend, he will arise in all have to give
him what he needs. Men are not at liberty to give, or not to give: So soon as
the friendship is made, we presently come under an obligation, and may as well
deny all other acts of friendship, as that, I would be ashamed to own that
friend, that should not share in my estate, or enjoy any thing in plenty while
he is in penury, he that can keep his money, can keep his heart, and therefore
not fit to be confided in. I have sometimes thought the love of money has been
the cause why there is so little friendship amongst men: many have bid fair for
friendship but could never obtain it, because the cares of the world, and the
deceitfulness of riches have so encumbered the heart, that no place could be
found for such an intertainment. If your friend be right, there is no doubt of
any thing within his power, he will rob himself rather than decline you, and
will without dispute make his estate if you need it more yours than his own.

The sixth flower in this way is, the protection and safety we have in a true
friend: he will venture with us and for us; you need not want a protector if
the strength of your friend can do it: he will accompany you in danger, and
bring you out of it, if possible, though he lose his life in the service; he
will preserve your credit and think no act so honorable as to lose his life
for a generous friend. Many instances we have of this in history: a coward is
too base for friendship: I would not lead my friend unto danger, nor would I
impose any trust in him that should leave me there: If any thing can separate
friends, they bare only the name, never knew the nature of friendship: it is a
mystery still, such knowledge is too excellent for them, they cannot attain it:
It is heroic and noble to prefer the life of my friend before my own, though I
am as good as he; and hereby I show my humility as well as friendship, and so
add excellency to the action, because humility and charity puts a value upon
things, that otherwise would be equal: we are bound to dye in some sense for
all Christians, and therefore more obliged to do so for a Christian friend, who
is to us in this state of imperfection, the most perfect enjoyment, and that
which supposes and includes all things else that may render us happy.

The seventh and last flower this way of friendship is strowed with, (to name no
more because I hasten) is this: we have a friend, that will be with us in life,
and for us when we are dead. This is a flower of the greatest fragrancy, you
need not discompose your mind about your children, what shall become of them
when you are gone, in respect of care and provision, since you have left half
your self behind: with how much satisfaction does a man or woman die, beyond
others, that has a faithful friend, their cares are not about their children,
they have left them in a safe hand, they neither fear cheats nor wrongs or any
unkindness that can be avoided by the inspection, care, and prudence of a
faithful friend. David had a respect to the son of Jonathan and set him at his
own table. Duration is that which heightens the value of any thing, things of
short continuance are not much desirable; though they are sometimes pleasant,
they are not so profitable: would you leave a precious Jewel to posteriry when
you are gone, make sure of a true friend? would you live when you are dead?
would you have a name that should never be blotted out? would you have your
ends accomplished concerning your near and dear relations? a true friend is
most likely to effect these ends, who will extend your virtues, bury all your
imperfections, and ingrave that praise and honor upon your tomb, that shall
not be rased for ever. posterity are considerable, children lie near the hearts
of parents; yet notwithstanding these, nor any thing else to an ingenious man
is so precious next to his soul, as reputation whereby he blossoms in the
dust, and is had in everlasting remembrance. we come now to the sixth thing
promised; namely, how to govern our selves in the state of friendship in order
to the preserving of it: and we must wisely ponder such things as these, and
sincerely practice them, as those that are most grateful.

First, set a value upon your friend above any earthly thing: you must love him
as you love your self: think him worthy of the best affections, and he must
have it without reservation, or exception: think no service too hard, no
sufferings too much: make him equal to your self in your care and thought: let
nothing in the world stand in opposition to him, or in competition with him,
there are 4. things that raises our value and esteem; intrinsecal worth:
usefulness: propriety: and a real affection: he must be worthy, else not
capable of friendship, (as has been already showed:) we have seen the
qualifications, which speaks him eminently useful: this worth being attended
with benefit, our propriety in all which makes him incomparably also
desirable, and if real affection be added, that will challenge our highest
esteem and value.

Secondly, be not harsh in your reproofs: no friend is so perfect but may need
it: but do it tenderly in the spirit of meekness. Says David, if the righteous
reprove me, it shall be baulm that shall not break my head: he does not say, it
shall not break my heart, by a sunlike thaw, but it shall not break my brain
(was his meaning,) by distracting and perplexing thoughts, and It is more
proper for reproof to break the heart then the head: that heing the genuine end
aimed at among friends: but here we must be wise: discretion is very necessary
in a matter so difficult as the well regulating of reproof, there are several
methods of reproof, and you must seriously study which of them will suit the
present occasion, in this lies the excellency of a wise reprover: sometimes
words and arguments will do best, and are most expedient: and these seem most
proper for men of patience and reason, who will attend and weigh things, in the
balance of a rectified judgment. Solomon speaks of these when he says,
Reprove a wise man and he will love thee. A wise man loves the reproof when it
is well managed and seasonably applied. Sometimes a look is sufficient to
reprove, our Savior did but look upon Peter, and this work was done. Sometimes
the contrary example will do much. Lastly to reprove in the person of another,
seems the most successeful way of reproving, because by this without any noise;
or ungrateful reflection, you will seriously and severely enough reprove. Thus
David was reproved by Nathan the prophet: by this means a man is brought
secretly to condemn himself, and save you the labor; never cast any disgrace
upon reputation, that is a tender thing, a man would take it as kindly you
should touch his life as his credit: then be sure what you tax him with be
true: never go upon fancy and suppositions, this will speak you rash, and it
will grieve your friend extremely to be causelessly impeached by you who is
bound by all manner of obligation to make the most favorable construction:
charity as well as friendship enjoins you, never to make an evil interpretation,
where you can possibly make a good one: whenever you are tempted to make
exceptions, suspect your self, may be you take offense where none is given:
look into your heart, and see that you are free from pride and passion, pride
will raise a storm in the serenest temper, passion will cast a mist upon the
clearest understanding; besides you prejudice your self if you are not
deliberate and careful, how abashed is a man when he has reproved rashly? with
how much shame is he forced to detract and submit, and instead of a Judge, as
he was in the seat of reproof, now becomes a suppliant, where he is not always
succesful, may be the injury was so great that bare submission would not do it;
there must be satisfaction: the first is shameful, the last chargable; and
this, because the offense may be aggravated by circumstances which will admit
of no repair, these might easily have been prevented at the first by a solid
and religious deliberation: in all things sudden and unexpected we should
fuspend judgment till reason be fully satisfied: we every day experience this,
that what we madly resolve with Jonas, we soberly repent with Esau.

Thirdly, whatever you apprehend ungrateful in your friend, never reprove at a
distance, or by proxy, much prejudice may be conveyed this way, I mean by these
messages or written quarrels. These are very dangerous and shake the foundation
of friendship: Instance,

First, hereby you impeach your friend, and article against him, and that you
cannot do without disobliging words, which if by any accident made public,
they may admit of diverse interpretations; which interpretations will be
according to the fancies of those persons into whose hands they may
unfortunately come, and from hence may arise this prejudice; the hazard or loss
of a reputation; you will afterward but in vain sadly lament: many shoot here
in just, but kill in earnest: Reputation is not to be dallied with, because if
it be once lost, it is like yesterday, that will never come again.

Again, you can hardly avoid the revealing of some secret, passion is a mere
blab, and so inconsiderate that it will never make any reflections backward nor
forward, as to think, what reason have I for it? or what prejudice may come by
it? the disclosing of a secret is always disobliging, and not to be excused,
though it be accidentally, not intentionally done. That is a thing that may not
be left to hazard: it is like the defiling of the marriage bed, and of all
crimes in friendship the most unpardonable, because besides much other
prejudice, it blots and defaces your evidences and assurance of the affection
of your friend; whom you have so justly incensed, that much time may pass over
before a right understanding will be fixed between you again, if ever: I saw a
friendship broken by this, that it never peeced again. Nor is it without this
inconvenience always attending it, that I do not only speak unadvisedly at the
present, but leave it upon record, and that may be against me for ever,
writings being for duration, as well as for ratification, and by this adventure
we not seldom seal a prejudice and witness together against our selves, that
may rise up in judgment whenever the keeper pleases, and may possibly prove a
Lion that may devour all our hope and comfort, when we least suspect it.

As I would not write quarrels, so I would not send them by the wisest person I
ever yet saw, I fancy I never met with any person prudent enough to make up
differences between dear and intimate friends; my reasons are these.

First, friends cannot be more friends one to another then to themselves,
therefore they decline judgment in their own case, and address themselves to a
third person, not to be condemned, but to be vindicated, which they both
expect: nor can this third person be a competent judge, because he can never be
rightly informed if there be any secrecy in the case, because all friends lie
under this restriction, they cannot reveal a secret that would widen the
breach, and make it so much the more impossible ever to be mended, and would
prove like the stopping of blood in the nose, by wounding the heart.

I argue thus, this third person must be such a person, as must have the
command of both, otherwise he will be overborn, and then he must act as a
mediator or a Judge; if as a mediator he must entreat both, can command
neither, and then will very hardly reconcile them; they expecting one from the
other, what he requires from both, that is compliance and submission: If he act
as a judge, he must acquit or condemn, he cannot acquit both; there must be a
fault somewhere, otherwise there could be no quarrel, nor can be condemn both
with any kind of prudence, for then he leaves them, as he found them,
dissatisfied still, if not about their guilt (for possibly they may be
convinced they were both in a fault) yet about the measure they may dispute;
one will say he is not so much guilty as the other: now unless this last which
is the guilt can be determined and ascertained, nothing is done, and this
cannot be done but by a definitive sentence upon one of the two, which will be
so far from making peace, that it will promote and ascertain the quarrel,
because before whateverjudgment passed between them upon either was but judging
in their own case, and might be contemned by either without any further breach,
but now being condemned by a person mutually chosen, the judgment must stand
against that person convicted, and so the quarrel must rest groundedly on that
side, which will hardly be submitted to by the other, so then the result will
be this, the quarrel that was only between two before, is now between three.
Solomon says, he that meddles with contention, takes a bear by the foot; and
may get a snap for his pains, but this is sure he shall never pass without a
blot. It is most true, that as differences among friends ought with all
prudence to be concealed, so if once they come to be public, they can hardly
remain friends. I would with much more content in this case make a new
friendship than repair the old, this being more chargeable and hazardous, that
being more easy and certain.

Fourthly, Do not readily accuse your friend, nor hearken to them that does it:
the least countenance in this case as it will encourage an enemy, so you your
self may be ensnared: with the well advised is wisdom: if you argue wisely you
will never accuse rashly, see that there be good ground for an accusation
before you receive it, least you fail of your evidence, and retreat with shame
and loss: nor must you give an ear to others in this matter because this may
convey prejudice into your heart insensibly, and make so deep an impression,
which though never so false, and ungrounded will never afterward give place to
the greatest truth, having taken the first possession, nor be clearly rased by
the best policy, it may disappear sometimes, but like an apparition at other
times it will appear again, and possibly prove a constant vaxation either to
the fancy as to a man's felf, or by reflections from others. It seems more
prudence to stop the ear against an accusation, then study the most compendious
defense; because a man is as likely to be corrupted as the accuser is to be
convinced, especially if the last can more wittily manage the scandal, then the
first can the truth, varnishes will set off much, and men thtough carelessness
sometimes consent to what they could not rationally believe, if they would take
the pains to consult reason; I think I would set my head and my heart at work
rather than by any consent of mine, give satisfaction to persons at enmity with
friendship, or with my friend, as to hearken, much less give the least credit
to their impeachments: I should be very unwilling so much to promote my own
disquiet; who can have little peace if such an Achan lay in my bosom, which
might secretly cut the knot of friendship, or raise such a storm, that could not
easily be allayed.

Fifthly, do not in all companies commend your friend above an ordinary pitch:
this may prove his greatest prejudice: he that rises early in the morning to
commend his friend, the wise man says, it shall be counted to him as a curse:
We have a remarkable instance of this in Saul, the women answered ane another
as they played, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten
thousands, and Saul was very wroth, and this saying displeased him, and Saul
eyed or envied David from that day forward. Hereby you draw many envious
persons nearly to inspect every of his actions, and in case of the least flaw
appearing either in life or birth, improve them to his disadvantage: rather
contemplate and imitate his perfections then discourse them, lest you meet with
subtle men who are resolved in opposition to you (though may be no way
prejudiced against him you plead for at the present) who will be as
industrious to fix a scandal as you are to attribute real worth, and they may
happily find more arguments for that aspertion, though false, then you can for
the truth, especially if you undertake the defense of what you cannot
unquestionably maintain, and so as your argument falls, the credit of your
friend looses, besides you are apt to mistrust and hesitate about that you
cannot say more for, then another can say against, and so instead of bringing
your friend into reputation with others, he may loose his credit worth you; not
because he deserves it, but because you were not rightly informed and prepared
to undertake such disputes: Let your friends good works commend him in the
gates: all his praiseworthy qualities must be private, or public, or both: if
private, not always fit to be proclaimed, they being never so good, are liable
to censure by them that like spiders suck poison where others find honey: the
excellency of friendship may be so interpreted that much prejudice may
accidentally ensue thereby: some men are prone to censure, what they cannot
understand, others willingly shut their eyes, because they cannot look upon
that without prejudice in another, which makes them so much more splendid than
themselves: It is with them, as with the weak eye which cannot behold the sun
in its body, not that there is any defect in the object but the defect is in
the visive faculty which should receive the same.

Again, if they be public, they need no pleader, they will plead for
themselves, and force a reputation from those that are not wholly barbarous, or
(that which is worse) prepossessed with ungrounded prejudice. I never saw high
commendations, but they were seconded with exceptions, the arguing of which
have created many a quarrel, and set the end aimed at, at a greater distance.

Sixthly, if you have been free and generous to your friend, never upbraid him
with it: this is most base and disingenious, and that which a noble spirit
would blush to think of: nothing is more disobliging than this, and speaks a
man of a lower spirit: hereby he does not only undervalue his friend, but he
discharges him of an obligation he greatly lay under before, and puts himself
out of any expectation of a compensation, let his civilities be what they will;
I could never think my self obliged where upbraided, that being a rate too dear
for any courtesy: and in this case I may more justly expect satisfaction, than
give it: I would never bestow my bounty except I saw reason for it; and having
given I should think nothing more unreasonable then to repine. Never look after
gratuities when you have sent them away, nor call them again by repentance, for
nothing will return but a great damage, a just prejudice, and a spot no time
nor endeavor will be able to wipe out.

Seventhly, never carry your self so that your friend may fear you, this
contrary passion will alter the state of that relation, love being changed unto
fear will frighten and amaze where it should induce and incline. This is most
opposite to love and speaks it imperfect, otherwise it would cast out all
manner of slavish fear. I could never love heartily, where I could fear really:
where love is turned into fear, equity changed into power, society into
obedience, there can never be a perfect friendship: here is too much care for
kindness, inequality for amity, obedience for love, and speaks my friend more a
master than a fociable companion. Certainly I could never comply here without
flattery and vexation, there being a flavery in fear too base for friendship.

Eighthly, never detract from the credit of your friend, but still acknowledge
his just deserts; as it is flattery to raise his value beyond his just merits,
so it is injustice to diminish his real worth, never believe his praiseworthy
qualities your disparagement; if you do, you are not only unjust but envious. I
would rejoice as much in the commendation of my friend as my own, beeause I can
with freedom express my satisfaction in the applause of my friend, and augment
it; when I should think it more discreet and civil by a blushing silence to
receive the same for my self: I do oftener contemplate the goodness of my friend
then his errors, because I love pleasure, and fear perplexity: I hate to be
like the ungrateful raven, that flies nimbly over many pleasant things, and
pitches with delight on a carcass. I would rather convince my friend by a
contrary example and behavior than be too officious in searching into his
defects, that may be he is as far from justifying, as I am from commending, and
he needs no reproof being too ready to condemn himself, and yet at present
cannot assume the title of conqueror; we cannot think we contract alliance with
angels: in our best frendships mnny a slip must be winkt at, and a friend may
challenge so much as this, viz. that we should use all possible means to keep
up the credit of him, to whom we are so nearly related: nor can we be kind or
just, if we do not improve all to his advantage in this regard.

Ninthly, never manage any dispute with passion, this will entangle the web of
friendship, destroy the peace, and turn your harmony unto jangling: disputes are
separating things, Paul and Barnabas lived friendly together, till dispute
parted them, pride very often is at the bottom of disputes, and will contend
for victory, and men will venture very hard for it: witness those sad
dissentions in the Church of God at this day. I would rather consult my books,
and learned authors, or rational strangers, or any indifferent person then with
my friend about matters of difficulty, because I would not run the venture of
contention; friends may deliberately argue, and convince one another, and this
may augment their profit, and experience, but they must not proceed to a
dispute, wherein there is a forcible opposition made on both sides; it will be
more prudence to leave it to them that are better able to manage it, or to a
more eonvenient season. I have observed that those that have seemed
unperswadable while the dispute continued, afterward upon a more mature
consideration by the same arguments have been convinced; and was not this
silent and peaceable victory better than that which might have ended in a
quarrel, men are not willing to submit their reason, where they think they
shall pass under any slight or undervalue, yet upon mature consideration and
solid contemplation afterward, it appearing necessary reason will force them
to submit, which they are willing to do when it may be done silently and
without noise.

Tenthly, be not curiously inquisitive after any thing you find an averseness
in your friend to reveal, and do not believe it a breach of friendship, if upon
such an attempt he denies you: it may be your humor and present capacity
cannot bear it, or the season is not fit for it; or should he gratify your
curiosity, he may be cruel in what you call kindness, confide so much in your
friend, as to believe that he will conceal nothing from you, that will do you
good to know, and what he does in this particular is from prudence not
perverseness. Instance in this one particular; I have committed a fault and have
perhaps engaged my reason and conscience against me, and is not that enough,
but I must engage my friend against me also. I ambition nothing more, (next to
my interest in God and eternal concernments) then the good opinion of my
friend, and shall I not preserve it by all means possible? I will never betray
my self to his censure: I had rather pass under his approbation, than
condemnation: the first will confirm the friendship, the last will loosen it: I
never thought it civil to press my friend beyond a voluntary complianee, nor
passionately to scrue a secret out of him: this were to betray my trust and rob
his cabinet because he has trusted his key with me, which he did not do to
hazard his own interest, but to secure mine. It is true a friend must be
trusted with secrets, yet it does not follow that he must be entrusted with all
se^rets. Instance, there are many things that I can neither in prudence, nor
conscience reveal, that may be against the trust imposed in me, which though
from an enemy, I must be faithful, and no obligation possible can releaf me:
this may be what I cannot disclose without betraying my self into those
inconveniences, that nothing in friendship can repair, Sampson had a secret the
disclosing of which proved his ruin. No man but has something that is most
proper for himself to know and no other: and I should think it the greatest
bondage to be restrained here imaginable, my friend is not my confessor, nor a
competent Judge in every case, he is a traitor and no friend, that would induce
me (as Dalila did Sampson) to betray my self in any thing sorbidden by
conscience and prudence. These things must be left to the wisdom of your
friend, who is not worthy of that relation, if he cannot manage this affair
without prejudice to himself or his friend. Nor could I with reason conclude
that man could keep my secrets that could not keep his own, or be faithful to
me that betrayed himself.

Eleventhly, never indent nor impose on your friend after the friendship is
made; that were to make propositions after the truce is concluded, which is
very irregular, you had your liberty in your first choice: you might have made
what exceptions you pleased: and if inequallity had appeared have deserted him
without censure or prejudice, but now it is too late: by such an endeavor you
extremely disoblige your friend, because you presuppose him unfit for that
relation without manacles and bolts, and this speaks, him a prisoner, where he
ought to have the greatest freedom; and plainly delares you selfish, wholly
aiming at your own satisfaction, little regarding that of your fr^end; besides
you expose your judgment to censure by fixing, before you were in all points
thoroughly resolved, in all things relating to this great concernment. Likewise
you make your self a judge of the qualifications proper for friendship,
excluding your friend as being a novice in this point. Lastly you plainly tell
him, he is obliged, and you are not: he stands upon his good behavior, and you
at your liberty: thus you article with him: by all which you declare, you are
unfixed till he answers all those articles, and that he must stand and fall by
your judgment. I love liberty as well as any person, yet would expect no more
here than I would give: I would never ask of my friend what was slavish or
unhandsom, or prejudicial to him, or any thing that may speak me mercenary or
uncivil; nor would I grant it if he desired it of me, I may conceal my errors,
but never commend them, nor communicate them, they do not deserve an interest
in a virtuous person that does so.

Twelfthly, Never contend for superority, since friendship has made you equal;
It is more prudence to shrink than stretch here; such quarrels that arise about
place and superiority, are mechanic and base, and they that least deserves it
mostly contends for it. I would abate in this case rather than contend, yet
should I be no loser, for what I lost one way I should gain another (if
humility be better then pride;) I would not grudge my place, where I could give
my heart, nor fear any censure, because thereby I do not give away my right, or
make him more deferving that takes it, but I lay this obligation upon my friend
that I can deny my self any thing, him nothing.

Thirteenthly, In all differences between your friend and others endeavor to
be absent (if possible,) if you cannot, be sure you be silent: by intermedling
there you can do no good: if you speak for him you will be thought to be
partial, if you be never so just; if you speak against him you can neither be
friendly nor civil: and these two inconveniences will necessarily follow
thereupon, the strengthening your friends enemy against him, and weakening your
interest in your friend, beside his disappointment is so much the greater
having this aggravation entailed upon it, that whereas your friend had but one
to contend with before, (and that enemy, which he did not care were he
satisfied or not) he has now a friend also to persuade, lest he should by any
means espouse the quarrel: it being not seldom the endeavor of an enemy so to
widen the difference as they may take in our best friends: I do not wonder that
I see wise men sometimes to seek to find arguments to plead their innocence,
when such cross accidents as these fall out, in which men are surprised. It is
probable a man may be provided with arguments enough for his adversary; but
these may be too harsh and impertinent for his friend, which he desires to
treat with more moderation than the other may deserve, but now he is at a
loss; for while he is making good his atgument with the one, he loses it with
the other, because he may be urged to passion by his enemy, but bound to
patience with his friend; and while he exercises patience to him, passion
out-runs him in his adversary, which may very well be because he has two parts
to act, the adversary but one; he has not only passion to contend with against
his enemy, but moderation to exercise toward his friend, therefore cannot keep
equal pace with his adversary; so his task is doubled. This is the reason men
are argued many times of their right: passion is quicker-witted than patience
in all hasty matters, and will not stay till patience can deliberately deliver
it self: passion is more ready with accusations, than patience can be with
vindications, there being much more of the use of reason in the last than in
the first. Commonly men are general in their aspersions, which when they come
to be divided and answered to particularly, requires much reason in order to
the right arguing of them. I would never trust that man that should join in a
quarrel, or be a voluntary evidence against his friend, this were a crime that
could not be palliated by any pretense whatsoever. There are but two things I
ever saw offered by way of defense in this case, neither of which can excuse
it: It may be (you will say) your friend contended with his superior, and did
not observe his distance, and you thought that you should have been no less
uncivil if you had not at least showed your dissent by way of reproof, I never
saw such civility seasonable or grateful to either; for the first he thinks he
deserves it, and therefore will own it not courtesy, the other will believe it
a breach of friendship, which ought to be considered before complements: this
seems to be allowable only in parents, who sometimes in quarrels among their
children, may condemn the most innocent either out of complement to a father
who may be honored for his title, or by way of reproof to affrighten him from
contention where he may be overmatched to his damage; there is no such
obligation in friendship, parents walk in a path of unsearchable liberty in
this regard, and may dispense with the rules of exact justice, there being none
capabl^ of questioning them, because of their power and propriety which is
supreme; but friends are under restrictions and tied up to laws that are
indispensable; But (may be) you will say in the second place, your friend did
not state the case right, and therefore you could not understand his
innocence: if so, you had the least reason to censure him: if your friend had
not been ready with his arguments, you had the more reason to help him, or at
least have been silent till you could have been better informed: you know
prejudice is a dangerous drugg, and like a pill easily swallowed, but like
poison hardly purged out by the best arguments; nor will he that has done the
injury stay to cure a wound he has designinglie made, but like a coward
secretly strikes a treacherous blow, and runs away, being afraid to contend
where he is sure to be vanquished: I could never take him to be my friend that
could easily be brought to condemn me.

To avoid this and many inconveniences more, Never ambition to be with your
friend in all companyes, nor dive into his transactions with all persons without
his consent: this is to impose upon him, and entrench upon his freedom, which
cannot be acceptable: men will not willingly be abridged of their liberty; nor
can it be always civil either with respect to your friend or those he converses
with: no man but has something he in prudence ought to manage himself alone,
without the presence of the dearest friend. I would as much desire to discourse
my business with a stranger alone sometimes, as at other times to enjoy my own
thoughts without any interruption: and it is as necessary: it is possible the
persons with whom I converse sometimes, cannot have that freedom to discourse
matters of weight before a stranger, who though he be never so ingenious,
cannot be fit to be trusted with their affairs, without just suspicion and
exception. I never thought it any breach of friendship to forbid the frequent
opening of my letters by my best friend, believing it reasonable to preserve
that privilege to my self; I never remember I ever made a quarrel with any
friend about that, but certainly I have often signified my displeasure at it. I
conceive by the same rule, that all truths are not to be spoken at all times:
so letters may not be broken at all times, beeause hereby I am not only liable
to prejudice my self, but all those that entrust me; and I must deal faithfully
with every man as well as with my friend. It is possible I may be trusted with
those affairs for some person that will think it as much against his interest
as his inclination, to have them revealed to any, but what he had designed and
prepared. My friend though he be bound to me, is not bound to all that converse
with me, neither is he constrained by any manner of tie to fancy all that I
fancy, or to make a quarrel with every person I cannot like; I confess I would
not give that ground for suspicion to hold an intercourse by letters or
otherwise, without his knowledge and approbation; yet in businesses that more
particularly concern my self, if they must be known (especially in those
things, wherein there may be scruples,) I would willingly be the relater my
self; and this may be necessary sometimes because business may be uncertainlie
understood, or by the unfaithfulnefs of the relater so falsely represented,
that it may admit of such interpretations as might much prejudice credit, and
question conscience; not because there is any other reason for it, but the
ignorance or malice of the informer. I have known little petty discontents in
letters, not handsomelie worded, made matmer of contempt and scandal, whereas
if the person had been present that understood the meaning of it, he might have
given such solid satisfaction, that might have answered all the cavils and
exceptions with much ease, and obtained a certain vindication. I would never
impose upon my friend, but would willingly absent my self at any time (if I saw
it necessary) but most especially in such seasons as these are; Instance when
he is to converse with his near relations privatelie: there are many reasons to
be given why a dear friend and nearest relations should not always be pleasant
one to another. The persons concerned may through Jealousy be ungrateful, and
a friend can hardly carry it so, as to give equal content in that case, or at
least would not willingly be at that trouble; neither would I desire to be
present when weighty businesses that did no way concern me, were transacting
between my friend and strangers: above all, I would withdraw my self, when I
saw him seriously inclined about matters of eternal concernment, and I would
give him all the help possible there; and hereby I should wonderfully express
my real and entire affection, also my own advantage would incline me to
encourage him rather than divert him; being sure of this, that his advantage
will be my gain, because he would certainly interest me in his prayers, and I
should partake of the benefits of his contemplations, and this may sometimes be
so seasonable, that I would not be without it for all the world. I have seen
private contemplations and meditations, through the blessing of God so
improved, as to prove more effectual for the resolving of some puzling scruples
coming from a particular Christian, than the advice of several Divines; and
this comes to pass, because experimental knowledge has more credit, than that
which is doctrinal: the one may floate in the head, the other sinks into the
heart; and makes the face of a man to shine, like Moses conspicuously in his
friendly conversation.

Fourteenthly, give sound and serious advice to your friend without obliging
him to obedience, leave him to his libetty, why should not his judgment be as
good as yours? draw your argument as fair as you can, it is no harm to arm at
success, but do not contend for it, nor be angry, if your counsel be
neglected; advise (...) empire: this is not the way to be honored with victory
to make your self a judge, If you give advice and exact obedience, you rather
act like an ambitious man, than a kind and ingenious friend. Counsel is most
taking, when propounded with humility and indifferency. I can persuade my
friend to any thing, when I can command him to nothing: arguments they are
sometimes like food, that in the first taste cannot be rellished, but afterward
is very delicious and pleasant to the pallat; or like some spirits, that are
very unpleasant to the palate, but of great benefit after concoction to the
stomach. I would leave my counsel as my books to be well scanned before I would
expect either a compliance to the one, or an approbation to the other: and at
last would not think the worse of my friend if he liked neither.

Fifteenthly, Never harbor any suspicion of your friend; be well advised here:
you cannot act more displeasing than in entertaining causeless suspicion,
because hereby you may wrong him, and impeach him when he is most innocent: and
what is more thornie and wounding then causeless suspicion, it creates
jealousy and mistrust of that person who intends most unfeignedly; I would
never make friendship where I could not confide without suspicion; because if I
cannot be confident of his sincerity, I cannot believe nor trust him, nor count
him honest, nor pay him that civility that friendship requires, If you have any
temptation to this, argue it gravely and solidly: may be the defect is in the
eye, not in the object: when we consider the various accidents of every day,
in which no man is constantly pleased or displeased with the same things, we
may suspect our selves. Melancholy is very suspicious, and in that dark state
we stumble at every straw: and because my own distemper has cast stumbling
blocks in my way, shall I suspect my friend of treachery, and unfaithfulness,
or want of real affection, etc. and say, because I cannot always discern his
sincerity, (when happily I am blinded with prejudice, passion, or discontent,
surely there is no such thing:) O this were most unreasonable: we may as well
say, that half of the oar is broken, because out of our sight and in the
water: and a blind man may as truly conclude, there is no sun in the heavens,
because he cannot see it: or we may dispute against the being of the sun,
because it is under a cloud, or in an eclipse.

Sixteenthly, Never think a new friend better than an old; many things are most
valuable for their age: friendship is one of these; an old friend like old wine
is much better then new; It gathers spirits, as it expends days: without
question friendship grows more vigorous and active by the delightful
intercourse, and those endearments it feeds upon. Friendship is not so perfect
in its infancy, as in its riper years: it augments as those worthy qualities it
first pitched upon improves, and are more splendid: the hidden parts of
friendship are not seen all at once, nor can be: they discover themselves
according to the accidents and times they are most welcome and necessary in: a
friend acts many parts which require time and order: if you esteem your friend
worthy, he will appear much better by trial, and experience, whereby you will
be satisfied of his habitual worthiness; he was new, you have kept him till he
is old: say not now the new is better. I could never fancy any earthly thing in
hope equal much less beyond that in hand; or expect happiness in the change of
what I was in a good measure satisfied in before; that proverb is not
contemptible, seldom comes a better. I could never neglect and despise any whom
I once thought worthy of my affection: nor think it prudence to part wirh my
cabinet, in which my chief treasure lies, because the varnish is worn off, and
it is not so handsome as when it was new, I mean my secrets, which are my most
precious jewels. One friend according to this measure is enough for my whole
life, if death does not separate, nothing else shall by my occasion or consent.
I cannot change but at a great uncertainty, for if I could not find reason to
continue the old friendship, I should find less to make another. It must be some
error in the first that induces me to make a second, and that must be what I
did not at first discover, and therefore cannot be certain, I shall not find
the same defect in another; because men act* as their age and temper of body
inclines them, and that may be very different at one time, to what it is at
another. We cannot expect that pleasure in age, we found in youth, nor that
content in sickness we found in health; all these things must be considered and
allowed: If you have found a faithful friend, you have found a treasure, and
admit he may not be in all points what you would have him to be, he is too good
to part with, and most likely your gain in the change will never recompense
your loss, nor can you ever rationally think to gain credit with a new friend,
when you have lost it with the old, he may flatter you, but he will never trust
you: he may humor you, but can never honor you, nor heartily close with you,
having great grounds for suspicion, and fear of a heart breaking separation.

Seventeenthly, Be free and generous: A gift (says the wise man) fasteneth
friendship: give bountifully and receive thankfully, the smallest kindness:
think nothing too good or too great for your friend: nor esteem that a
recompense fit for kindness received, except you can equal or exceed it; better
still lie under an obligation than make a half satisfaction: nothing short is
accounted any thing in this case: it may undervalue the gift, but never gratify
the giver. I sometimes take a small gift kindly from my friend, because it
makes me no great debtor, and speaks his love as truly as a greater, yet I
would not give meanly, were I obliged and able to do better; and it is no crime
in me to endeavor to outdo my friend in noble and generous actions: this seems
a paradox because we cannot understand how we speak properly when we speak of
giving or receiving among friends, where hearts are united and consequently
they can have no divided interest, but all things are common; except we mean by
it the signification of the thing which is more then the thing it self, as a
real and sincere affection: I would not value any courtefie or civility that
did not bring more of affection than profit: I can easily compensate the last
and discharge my self, but must lie under an eternal obligation for the other.

Eighteenthly, Never dissemble with your friend, but deal plainly with him,
especially when he referrs himself to you: do not call bitter sweet, and sweet
bitter: this is the worse way of ingratiating your self, and by this means you
may prove a traitor to him if you can keep off evil, do it with all possible
care and endeavor, but when you see it will come unavoidably, rather prepare
him for it, than keep it from him: nothing more cruel than disappointment;
which no man oftener finds then he that is flattered into a belief of what is
really impossible. It is as great a wrong to a man, to heap upon him unmeritted
commendations, as to detract from his just deserts. I would not be the first
that would impeach my friend, nor the last that would undeceive him, is I saw
him inclinable to overvalue himself.

Nineteenthly, Let your speech and communication be religious, solid and civil,
it is Paul's advice, that we be courteous; there is much in this to promote
content: words may be healing, and they may be wounding. Solomon observed, that
they are like honey. David observes, they are like arrows, that shoots fwistly,
secretly, and deadly, says he, they shoot arrows against me, even bitter
words: in order hereunto, shun all unfaithful repetitions. I mean by this, such
as for matter represents things absolutely contrary to the meaning of them that
speak. It is usual with us to wrest words according to our own fancies: good
meanings may be often so ill-worded, that they may prove matter of reproach*
and scorn; especially because often seconded by smart and cruel reflections:
acceptable words are very pleasant; such as these Paul refers to, when he says,
let your words be seasoned with salt, administering grace to the hearers: such
words as these leave a kind of titillation and pleasure upon the heart, which
sweetness absence, and reconciles all cross accidents that are present whereas
on the other side contrariwise evil words leave a disrellish upon the heart,
and extremely imbitters and aggravates such accidents: Evil words are the
ground of all quarrels; it is exceeding necessary, as well as pleasing, that
there be a habit of good words among friends, because the tongue is not seldom
like an unruly and unfaithful servant, that very often runs without the consent
of his master, and is not seldom prompted by passion; we think it a sufficient
excuse, when the injury is done, to say, I was rash, and spoke what I did not
believe or think; This is breaking my head and giving a plaster, and very
seldom signifyes any thing in reference to a reconciliation: besides passion
does not study privacy, and if a scandalous word reaches the ear of a third
person, it may prove like a gangrene, that will admit of no cure, and surely
provides work for the Devil and his imps, who would rejoice in such an
opportunity, that they might aggravate things to a final separation. Solomon
gives us a hint of this, and says, a talebearer separates chief friends; and
St. James tells us, such a tongue is set on fire of hell: therefore we had need
have the more care, and conclude all our disputes with this exhortation of S.
Paul, Let all bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, evil speaking, be put away
from you, and be kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Again, never pass sentence against
your friend, or willingly be judge in any case that concerns him, especially if
the matter be hidden and intricate, or if you find in your heart the least
partiality; otherwise you wrong your self and your friend; both your self in
indulging a passion, your friend in condemning the truth, or at least injuring
of it; which must needs suffer where partiality is concerned. If you must judge
because your friend will have it so, let him not lose his end, who expects from
you justice mixed with clemency and charity, and be as willing to clear as to
condemn, if no cause very criminal appears.

Lastly, banish all things that may alienate your heart from your friend*
Entertain him kindly, let him have a seat in your heart: think of him with
delight; love his company: bear with him, though he appear sometimes not so
amiable; commend him when he does well; excuse him when he is in fault: cast
the mantel of love upon his infirmities: win him rather by love then fear:
study his humor: think it not beneath you to comply, though little reason
induces you to it at that instance: contemplate all his virtues and imitate
them: decline his errors, and by a contrary example convinee him: live
together: love and rejoice together: comunicate your virtues, improve your
society to a mutual advantage: he only is fit for friendship that can do all
those offices for which friendship is excellent; treat your friend handsomely and
nobly, multiply those endearments upon him that shall make him your own
inseparably; improve society by frequent commerce; nothing in this relation
more endearing than repeated fruition; and in this respect friendship surpasses
all other relations because it is without disgust: study what friends you would
have upon the exactest election, and be that, example is much: friendship is not
for contemplation and show, but for material comfort and mutual satisfaction,
and is advantageous to the spiritual as well as rational parts, when religion
and reason go hand in hand the friendship is most illustrious because singularly
advanced hereby. I come now to the Last thing promised, viz. the conclusion by
way of commendation; here see the illustration and confirmation of the
happiness, honor, and excellency of the capacity and state of friendship.

In order hereunto give me leave to set before you the best and highest example
possibly in heaven or earth: the man Christ Jesus, who may if we consult reason
and Scripture be verily concluded to contract a friendship with John the
Evangelist. We do not find that our* Lord took any delight in sensual
pleasures upon earth: yet it is more than probable, he had pleasure in this
rational recreation of a moral friendship: which may easily reach our belief if
we examine his own books, the holy Scriptures that testifie^^ of him, if the
cause may be concluded by the effect, the thing by its properties, then it will
not be hard to prove, that there was a moral friendship between Christ and
John, and that which seems to strengthen the argument may be this: if
friendship be the improvement of the rational part, as it has been already
proved; then it must necessarily be in our savior, who improved both naturals
and spirituals to the highest perfections imaginable; nor is this any paradox,
that Christ should improve in his naturals; for it is undeniable, he was a
child and in minority before he came to riper years: and it cannot be thought
that our Savior had as much perfection in his reason when he was wrapped in
his swaddling hands in the Inn, as he had when he was thirty years of age,
teaching in the temple; without question he improved in his reason as he
multiplied years, and had a more imperfect use of his reason in his youth than
after he came to be a grown man: nor can it be absurd to believe our Savior
having so sweet a nature was not without some sociable pleasure, as a diversion
for the repair of his humane nature, which was often afflicted, vexed and
grieved: and that his humane nature needed repairs, may be concluded by his
eating, drinking, and sleeping, John. 4. 6. it is said, Jesus being wearied,
sat down upon the well: othertimes he withdrew from the multitude, and conveyed
himself from them, when they pressed upon him: and no diverfion so innocent,
and had so little temptation, as this of friendship. There are these seven
arguments following, that seems to prove this, and they are all eminent
properties of a moral friendship.

First, the denomination given to John; that he was the disciple whom Jesus
loved: we find John among the disciples rarely known by any other name, and
this plainly discovers the love that our Savior had to the person of John in a
moral sense, and this is most evident, because it came within the observation
of the rest of the disciples; for had it been Christ's love to the soul of John
that was intended by that appellation, that had been inward and spiritual, and
could not have been understood by them; and we do not find our Savior by any
declaration demonstrate any such thing; so that nothing can rationally be
concluded here, but that the disciples did gather this love of Christ to John
from some outward and visible cause, as his friendly discourse and behavior
toward John, as also the intimacy that was observed between them; as lying in
his bosom and constant communion, and his indulgence; all which we shall
consider more particularly in the following arguments.

Secondly, the familiar converse between our Lord and John is another
property, and eminently declares friendship: John is said to lie in the bosom
of Christ, and this seems to import much intimacy, and much affection: we
dearly love them we take into our bosoms; yet this is but an outward
expression, and therefore may be a moral friendship, and the rather because
these embraces are the proper acts of a moral friendship* Now as the former
denomination did express our Saviors transcendent kindness to John beyond
the other disciples, so this does no less speak the intimacy, that was between
them beyond what was enjoyed by the rest of the disciples. It is probable Peter
lay as near the heart of Christ as John in a spiritual sense, and many
believers since; if we could not conclude our Saviors love to us but by such
expressions, we must be shut up under despair; nor could the disciples
themselves, have been without just cause of despondency, doubtless that which
did satisfy their spirits was, they looked upon it only as an outward
expression of his love to John, as also the delight he had in his person,
happily for some obliging quality our Savior saw in him, more than in the
rest; and this made them rather incline to honor, than envy John who
unquestionably was exceeding honorable and happy in this relation of
friendship, wherein he stood toward our Savior: And this may be the better
credited if we consider that it is not usual with men to be unsatisfied with
one another touching their elections of friendship, nor think themselves
disobliged that they are passed by and others pitched upon; because they allow
a freedom to every man in that case according as his fancy and affection leads
him.

The third Argument is drawn from the interest John seemed to have in our
Savior above the rest of his Disciples, as appears in that case of Judas, John
13. 26. and when our Savior signified that one should betray him, they were
all amazed, saying, is it I? is it I? Mark. 14. 19. and none presumed to ask
our Savior a resolution in this doubtful case: such was the distance between
our Lord and them; but this distance was not between John and him* for the
Disciples no sooner applied themselves to John to move our Savior in the case,
but the question was immediately answered: nor do we find that John used the
least ceremony in his addresses to our Lord, but with as much freedom as
possible asked the question of our Savior; who readily answered, with as much
satisfaction; and this is a notable property of friendship; because this act
carries in it the greatest intimacy and propriety, both which must needs make
up a full and perfect friendship, including every thing that can make that
capacity happy.

Fourthly, It is very probable, John had more of the secrets of Christ than the
rest; and this is no small property of friendship; the communion that passed
between our Savior and Moses and Elias in the Mount, was a secret many of the
disciples knew nothing of, yet it was not peculiar to John; for Peter and James
was there also: Mark. 9. 2. by which it appears Christ had peculiar favors
which he contributed as he pleased, and I verily conceive that person who was
most especially beloved, was not without peculiar discoveries, at least of
those things which concerned his person: it is probable John knew more of our
Saviors prudential proceedings, and moral transactions then the rest did. I
conclude it from hence, because though the rest of the disciples were ignorant
of this treachery of Judas, it is very like John was not; if so, he would not
have needed an incitement to be resolved who should betray our Savior, having
the advantage of lying so near him as in his bosom; we may probably conjecture
he would have readily asked that question, and we may as rationally conceive,
that our Savior had not only discovered this sad and perplexing providence
publicly to all his disciples, but privately to John the beloved disciple* and
there is the more credit to be given to this supposition, because we know that
there can be no friendship where there is not a communication of affairs; and we
find our Savior did often discourse of his death to all his disciples, and
therefore most likely to John the beloved disciple and friend of Christ:
friends delighting as much sometimes to discourse their afflictions; as other
times to discourse their affections* it appears by what has been already
observed, that our Savior had a friend, so I conceive we may without prejudice
conclude, he did not d^ny the use and benefit of him, as to social
satisfaction, service, content, and pleasure; yet notwithstanding from all
this, or any thing else, we connot conclude John had more knowledge in spiritual
things than the other disciples, who (we know) were ignorant of many truths and
some fundamentals; for they dreamed of an earthly kingdom, that our Savior
should have here on earth: and it was after his resurrection before they were
informed of many things touching him; and then our Savior sent his spirit that
taught them all things: It is probable John was no more instructed; than the
rest before, because if any of the disciples had understood those things, it is
likely none would have been ignorant; for we see they were willing to inform
each other by the discourses that passed between them at the sepulcher, and in
their travail to Emaus about our Saviors death and resurrection; nor do we
ever find that the disciples did ever address themselves to John to be
informed of any of Christ's miracles, or any hidden and divine thing; yet we
know they often hesitated about such things, and reasoned among themselves
concerning them, so that the conjecture is pretty clear, that the outward acts
of Christ's prudential negotiations upon earth, as his traveling and healing
and other outward acts may be better known to John the beloved disciple than
any of the rest,

Fifthly, another argument of our Saviors affection to John may be drawn from
his iudulgence to John. We never read that he rebuked John, as he did Peter by
any particular reflection. Christ severely checks Peter and calls him devil,
get thee behind me satan; No doubt but John was subject to mistakes, as well as
Peter; for we find that John was as drowsy as the rest when Christ was in his
passion, where it might have been expected he should have been most watchful
above any of the rest of the disciples; yet we do not find that our Savior
takes any notice of this so as to reprove John more than the rest, and it is
probable Christ may use more tenderness, because of the relation, though his
want of watchfulness in such extremity of affairs, seems a great fault in John.
A friend never inclines to grieve the heart of him he dearly loves, because the
greater kindness the more wounding is any thing that looks like the contrary;
our Savior was tender toward John, who happily could not have born a reproof
without much heart breaking trouble, because of his transcendent affection to
his Lord. No person more considerate than our Lord, who was compassion it self;
the man Christ Jesus was a man of bowels, as we perceive by his lamenting over
Jerusalem, Luk 19. 42, 48. yet we find that our Savior was more compassionate
to some, than others, according as his affections was set. The Jews observed he
wept for Lazarus, when he was dead, and why so? because he loved him, as
appears by that passage in John 11. 3. Lord, him whom thou love is sick, and
we see by that passage of the young man in the Gospel, that our Savior could
love a man for any worthy quality, or moral aceommodation; the text says, he
looked upon him and loved him; not that he saw his own image upon his heart,
(for this he had not, as is evident, because he parted with our Savior) but
saw reason in his witty answers, which pleased our Savior, so that he gave him
an outward commendation suitable to his superficial acquirements.

Sixthly, the constant communion between our Savior and John is another
argument to prove the friendship. John was very rarely separated from our Lord
before his death and after his riseing again while he was upon the earth. Peter
took notice that this disciple was following Christ after his ariseing from the
dead, and seems to be much concerned about him, how he should be disposed of,
being to leave his dear Lord; and thereupon makes this question to our Lord:
Lord, what shall this man do? as is he had said, our loss is great, but his
much greater, as indeed it was; John 21. 22. our Saviors answer, seems to
check Peter's curiosity: If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? The methods of kindness between Christ and John was not fit to be
enquired into; as is evident by our Saviors more than tacit rebuke to Peter.
It is most probable that John saw our Savior before any of the rest aster his
resurrection, because he came with him, when our Lord appeared to them, for
Peter takes special notice, John 21. 20. that he saw that disciple following
our Savior; by which it is evident he was not among them* and it is
observable, that John is seldom called by the disciples or known by any other
denomination but these, viz. the other disciple; or, the disciple whom Jesus
loved. I conceive the disciples might so srequently give him those titles,
either as titles of honor to signify the relation in which he stood to our
Lord; or because it pleased our Savior, that his affections to John should be
observed, and taken notice of; probably that a suitable respect might be given
unto him, as the friend of Christ: for our Savior was not ashamed to own this
relation, but publicly upon the cross signified it to men and angels, as will
appear further in the seventh and last particular* but I submit to better
judgments in this matter; and only give my notion of it, and what seems most
rational to me: but this is evident: our Savior and John had much communion,
they were still together in his transfiguration, conversation, and
communication: he never left our Savior while on earth: you shall find him in
the garden, and in the highpriests hall, where Peter denied him in the one and
deserted him in the other: he was with him at the cross and at the sepulcher*
and no wonder that our Savior delighted in the society of that person he would
take into his bosom; and John was so improved by this communion with his Lord,
that he speaks and writes nothing but love, and this will appear a great
confirmation of the friendship, if we compare it with the frendships between
ingenious men. Obferve and you shall find that when friendship is in reality, it
mightily sweetens the nature of those persons, so that they cannot endure
harshness and crossness, but endeavor all things with all persons by love. Men
in their communication and conversation are as much as they are with whom they
converse. There are no arguments more pregnant to prove the dear and near
communion and union between our Lord and John, than the strains of love that
runs through all his writings, by which we may judge of the intercourse between
our Lord and him; and what manner of expressions they were that passed between
them in their particular acts of friendship.

Seventhly and lastly, the last argument may be drawn srom our Saviors last
act of friendship toward John, and were sufficient, had there been no more to
prove this friendship, viz. his recommending his mother to John, when he was
upon the cross. John 19. 26. 27. and breathing out his last breath expressed
in this last passage; woman, behold thy son: and he said to the disciple whom
he loved, Beheld thy mother, and from that hour that disciple took her to his
own home* you, see here the union that was between our Savior and John; they
were brothers; though the relation of brothers precisely considered do not make
friends, yet the relation of friends always makes brothers; our Savior by this
charge to John did imply thus much; that though his mother had lost him, she
had a son still, that was obliged to take a special care of her upon a double
account, partly in obedience to his dear master, who had laid that command upon
him; but most especially by that tie of friendship, that was upon him: so he
takes his last farewell of John and his mother together, expressing his natural
affection toward the one, his friendship toward the other: There is no greater
evidence of friendship than this, the confidence dying persons have in their
living friends, and the trust they impose in them, as to their dear and near
relations: and how secret soever friends may carry it in their lives, yet at
their death they declare to all the world, who they take to be their most
faithful friends, when they commit their dearest relations to their charge, and
bestow their last breath upon them by a trembling farewell: we do not read that
our Savior spoke one word more after he had taken his solemn farewell of his
mother and John but this; I thirst: and It is finished: Thus you see the
friendship between our Savior and John cleared. I shall draw to a conclusion of
this whole discourse, only give me leave to add these few words, which I hope
will not be impertinent.

If friendship be the improvement of reason, the happiness of a sociable state,
the pleasure of our Lord, then it is great pity this relation and state of
friendship is no more in credit in the world than it is, especially among
ingenious persons, who seem to mistake this great case, or think it too hard a
task to accomplish.

First, believe that it is attainable, this is the first step toward it; and
that it is not a study too mean for the greatest prince in the world; and which
is more, he can hardly be happy without it, if he considers the directions he
may have in his weighty affairs by the wisdom; the safety he he may promise
himself in the faithfulness, the wonderful pleasure and delightful diversion he
may enjoy in the society and integrity of a suitable friend; I cannot believe
but all persons serious and judicious must need ambition this capacity, yet
they do not all attain it, being possibly crossed by accidents unfriendly and
unreasonable, in their endeavors after it, the ways of virtue being strewed
with thorns: well, if the way be not so grateful and easy, as that which is
sensual, yet the end will be glory. Let this qui^ken your endeavors to that
end which will crown your action; and when you have obtained perfection here,
you will set to your seal, that this is true; that you have found an experiment
that can sweten you sorrows, divide your griefs, augment your comforts, gratify
your affections, improve your religion and reason, and that capacity whereby
you may live the life of angels, still contemplating things that are excellent
while on earth, and when you are dead, your name shall be as a precious
ointment powered forth sweet and pleasant to all posterity; like Abel, who being
dead, yet speaks.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 7. line 3. for are read is. p. 8. l. 33. for some r. something. p. 10.
l. 14. for has r. have. p. 13. l. 17. for axes r. axis. ibid. l. 31. for
warmth, r. warm. p. 20. l. 17. for the r. this. p. 22. l. 29. for as, r. or, p.
26. l. 12. for led r. are led. p. 30. l. 23. for and r. too. p. 31. l. 18. for
live r. live to. p. 46. l. 26. for reason it r. reason for it. p. 48. l. 32.
dele their. p. 51. l. 2. for impudent r. imprudent. p. 51. l. 14. for is r.
are. p. 65. l. 17. for that r. this. ibid. l. 28. dele and. p. 69. l. 20. r.
the iron to. p. 89. l. 18. for that r. their. p. 98. l. 9. for that r. who. p.
115. l. 4. for so spend r. suspend. ibid. l. 14. dele yet. ibid. l. 33. for or
r. are. p. 120. l. 25. for and r. of. p. 126. l. 2. add are. p. 131 l. 24.
dele also. p. 71. l. 10. for affectionate r. affection.


