INFORMATION FOR MY LORD AND LADY NAIRN, DAVID FALCONER OF NEWTOUN AND MICHAEL
BALFOUR OF FORRET Against the EARL of ARGYL.

Printed in the Year, 1690.

INFORMATION FOR MY LORD AND LADY NAIRN, DAVID FALCONER OF NEWTOUN, AND MICHAEL
BALFOUR OF FORRET. AGAINST THE EARL OF ARGYLE.
THERE is a Petition presented by the Earl of Argyl to the high Court of
Parliament founding upon several Acts of Parliament, and upon the common Law,
and Law of Nations, whereby it is alleged that Judges pronuncing unjust
Sentences are punishable, and subsuming that the deceast Earl of Argyl was
unjustly Forfeited, and desiring that the Heirs and Representatives of the Lord
Nairn, Sir David Falconer of Newtoun, and Sir David Balfour of Forret, three of
the Criminal Judges who pronunced the Sentence of Forfeiture, may be liable to
this Earl of Argyl, for the Damage sustained by that unjust Sentence,
amounting to 6000^ Pound Sterling.

This is a Claim, such as was never offered before any Judicatory within this
Kingdom, and is the more extraordinary, that it is presented after the decease
of all these Judges who lived and died in Honor and Credit, and the Reputation
of Integrity; And it is very hard that any Stain or B^ot should be laid upon
their Memory, in Relation to their Deportment and opinion in a Process, which
they themselves could only have cleared, their Heirs being altogether Strangers
to it.

Albeit there be several Laws and Acts of Parliament, whereby Judges are
Punishable for doing Wrong, or Unhonesty, or for refusing to do Justice: Yet
that has been a Point so tender, that there cannot be any precedent Instanced,
wherein a Judge has been pursued upon that Ground, so that really these Acts
may be reckoned amongst Old and Obsolet Laws, neither does it appear by any of
them, that it was designed to give a Party an Interest to pursue for Damnages
by unjust Sentences; but that a Party might Complain to the King and his
Council; and that a Judge being found guilty might be punishable in his Person
and Goods, but without any Benefit to the Party, except his Charges in the
Complaint, the fine to be imposed upon the Judge being Penal, which with all
others of the like Nature does belong to the Fisk.

The Earl of Argyl who offers the Complaint, does found the same upon the
Claim of Right, and Restitution of the Forfeiture, which may be a good ground
for Possessing or Affecting his Fathers Estate, but it were of very Dangerous
Consequence, that the Restitution of a Forfeiture by Act of Parliament, should
make the Judges obnoxious who pronunced the Sentence; this is not the first
Restitution in Parliament by way of Justice, our Records are full of the like,
but none who were ever so restored, did pretend in this or any bygone Age, that
the Judges who pronunced Sentence should be Culpable; and if it were sustained
in this Case, there is a prospect of Restoring several Hundreds of late
Forfeitures, what then should become of the Judges who pronunced these? Or who
would undertake to serve as Judges under any Government, if all posterior
Reductions or Impungning of their Sentence should make their Estates liable to
Damnages, and what is now Acclaimed in the Case of Criminal Judges, were much
more Competent against Judges in Civil Matters; All the Laws Cited having a
special Relation to Civil Processes, and therefore our Predecessors in making
of these Laws having foreseen the Dangerous Consequences of allowing Civil
Actions to Parties, who either really were, or apprehended themselves to be
Injured. They did not place any right interest or Benefit to the private
Parties prejudged, but only that they might be Informers, or complain to the
King and His Council, and obtain the Judge to be punished at the Kings
Pleasure, either in his Person, Fame or Goods: Yet so as no share did fall to
the Party Complainer by that Process, and if it were not so, how miserably
would all the Fences and Securities of our Properties be unhinged. for after
such a precedent, there would remain nothing, but to run throw the records of
Council, Session and Justice Court, and under the Notion of Damages, by the
Sentences of these Judicatories, the Estates of all the Judges thereof; whose
Sentences were afterward Reduced or Rescinded might be wholly exhausted and
carried away; neither could the Members of Parliament acting in a Judicative
Capacity be secured from the Consequences of such a Preparative.

It were unnecessar and unfit to debate any thing, in relation to the
Procedure, against the deceast Earl of Argyl, whom the Parliament has
Restored; But what ever Action or Complaint is competent to him, the like will
be competent to all who shall be Restored by way of Justice; For albeit there
may not appear the like clear and evident Grounds for their Restitution, yet
being Restored by way of Justice, their Forfeitures must be acknowledged to
have been unjust; And no Party will be admitted to plead any point that might
feem to support the Justice of the sentence of Forfeitures; And it were
impossible to fix and settle a clear Rule or Limit, which of the Rescinded
Sentences were more or less unjust; And in what case the Judge should be liable
or Free after such a Restitution, especially where Restitution is by a public
Act of Parliament, without Process or Citation of Parties, which is equal in
the Earls case, And all others who shall be restored that way; For albeit the
Heirs of the Judges be no^ called, yet there being once a Restitution, without
calling of Parties, all Defense is now precluded in Relation to the Process,
which in deference to the Act of Parliament, must be presumed, and plead as
absolutely Unjust in the same Terms, as it is expressed in the Restitution.

These general Grounds being premised, It is Answered for the Defenders, 1 mo:
That albeit the Earl did actually Represent his Father as Heir and Executor, to
whom he is only Appearand Heir by h^^ Restitution, and thereby has no
sufficient Active Tittle to pursue* And that the Defender did Represent these
Judges upon the passive Tittles which they deny; Yet the doom of Forefeiture
can be no Probation, that these three Judges, or any single one of them did
give their Vote or Opinion, for sustaining the Relevancie; But only that the
Relevancy was sustained by the Plurality, which does not prove that the
Plurality was made up by the particular Vote or Votes of a^^ One or More of
these three Judges, which might have been by the Opinion of others, and can at
most but conclude one of the three* And it cannot be distinguished or known,
which of the three was the person; And it is a known Principle, That Actore non
probante absol^tur reus, Neither can any Probation of their Accession be
sustained unless it were proven under their own hands, or by their own a^
knowledgment, That they were Consenting or Concurring in sustai^ing the
Relevancie; Because, albeit Witness could be received f^^ proving of that
point, which is denied; There is none living wh^ can bear Testimony in that
Matter, except two Judges with them (...) the same Court And the Question
being, who were the Judges guilty None of them can be sustained to liberate
themselves by loading others; And for this cause, in the Trial by an Assize of
Error, upon the 63: Act 8: Par: Ja: 3: It is provided, That the Assize shall be
called and inquiry made at them, if they did all agree, whereby no particular
Assysour could be singled out from the rest, much less a g^^^ fixed upon any
Defunct, who was not to answer for himself.

2 do. Our Munieipal Laws for punishment of Unjust or Neglig^^ Judges, are all
in Relation to the Civil Administration of Jus^^ betwixt Party and Party, and
not one of them does relate to the Justices, in Criminal Mattets, and on the
contrare it is evident, that by our Law, no Judges or Assysours, passing upon a
Criminal Process, can undergo any punishment if they Condemn, but only in case
they acquit the Pannell, and therefore there is an Assyse of Error provided by
the said 63 Act, 8. Parl. Ja. 3. In case the Inquest contrare to manifest
knowledge, do acquit the Panel, but no punishment on the other hand; And the
reason is, because the Sympathy of Humane Nature, is thought sufficient to
restrain both Judges and Jurors from Condemning the Innocent, and this
presumption has so satisfied and filled the minds of the Lawgivers, that there
is no Statute providing any Remedy, or Punishment against the Judge in that
case,

3tio. In so far as the Petition is founded upon the Acts of Parliament of this
Kingdom, there does not arise any Inrerest or Damnage to a Party prejudged by
the Sentence of any Judicator how unjust soever, but the sum of all the Acts
of Parliament Lybelled in relation to the Judges, amounts to this, That Unjust
and Negligent Judges may be punished by the King and his Council in their
Persons, Goods or Fame, according to the quality of their Offense at the King's
Pleasure, and where ever a Party is in general appointed to be punished, any
Fine or Pecunial punishment that can be imposed by that Law, does fall to the
Fisk, unless the Law appoint a particular Application in whole or in part to
the Person prejudged; so that whatever were chargeable upon the Judges at the
Instance of the King's Majesty, there is no Action competent at the Instance of
any Party for a private Interest, or at most only for the Charges in Accusing
and Prosecuting the Judge, and for instructing this defense without repeating
the several Acts of Parliament founded on, the same are desired to be
considered as they are Stated in the Bill, without the Commentaries that are
affixed upon them expressly Contrare, and Inconsistent therewith; And it is not
pretended that any of these Acts, do expressly found an Interest to the Party,
but after a full Relation of the Acts, there is subjoyned a Commentary on them
in these words; Which no doubt does farther import the Parties damage: A rare
Assertion and well founded! that beside the Penalties expressed in the Act, there
is no doubt a farther Penalty imported thereby; and there is (...) more to make
out this Position, then a bare Assertion, it is not u^ged from any former
Practice or Precedent, for the like was never p^^tended: It is not aledged that
in other Laws, of this, or any other N^tion, where there is a special Penalty
expressed, or an Arbitrary punishment at the Pleasure of the Judge or Sovereign;
that beside the Special or Arbitrary punishment expressed, there shall be a
separate d^stinct Penalty competent; so that this Position, upon which the
weight of the whole Acts of Parliament cited, is founded, being wi^^out the
least shadow of Law, Reason, or Precedent, the conclusion upon it must fall in
Consequence; And the Defenders do upon good Ground conclude, that seeing these
Acts do not contain a^^ Clause or Provision in Favors of the Party Injured,
That No Do^^ they do not import any such Interest in Favors of the Party, an^
their Assertion is confirmed by the Acquiesence of all, who in this (...) any
former Age have been Injured or Prejudged by the Sentence (...) any Judicator,
who have never pretended to such a Redress; and t^^ Defenders Assertion is also
confirmed by the Example of all Pe^^ Laws, which do never import any farther
Penalty then what is speci^^ly expressed: And without question, the Earl's Claim
is merely Pe^^ against the Heirs of the Judges, who are no ways enriched by his
l^^^ or any Consequence of that Sentence.

4to. Albeit these Laws might infer a Punishment against (...) Judges, yet the
same being merae poenae, and falling to the Fisk, m^^^ be freely discharged by
the King, which was done in this case, in (...) far as the Sentence and Process
of Forfeiture, was approven by (...) Act of Parliament, 1685: and by the 31:
Act of that Parliame^^* All the Judges of the Nation, Civil or Criminal, were
indemni^^^ and secured anent their Actings in his Majesty's Service, and tha^
(...) fully, as if every particular Crime and Misdemannour were specia^^^
expressed in a Remission, under the Great Seal, Requiring all Jud^^^ to
interpret the said Indemnity in the most Ample and Favoura^^^ Sense: Which Act
does fully secure the Judges as to any Claim, t^^^ can arise either to the
Fisk, or even to a private Party, by any Cri^^ or Misdemannour Committed or
Ommitted in their Office; A^^ no Rescision of the Forfeiture can found any
Action against the Judges who are as amply exonered, As if they had been
pursued, and undergone the severest penalty of the Law.

5to. In so far as the Lybel is founded upon the Common Law, it does appear
that the Earl has laid very little weight upon it, seeing there is no special
Citation adduced from that Law, for inferring the Conclusion; And indeed there
was no reason to Rely upon it; For, 1: Albeit by our Customs great Recourse be
had therteo, where, we have no positive Law of our own; yet in this and all
other cases, where we have special Statutes, we are to be Regulate thereby, and
whether the Penalties therein expressed, be more or less then what is contained
in the Civil Law, it is of no importance; so that if by these Special Penal
Laws of this Nation, mentioned in the Bill, the Representatives of the Judges
be not liable, they cannot be subjected to any Punishment by the provision of
the Civil Law. 2. It is true that several Texts in the Civil Law do subject an
unjust Judge to severe penalties, which do distinguish two cases, either the
same is pronounced per imprudentiam, in which case the Judge is not simply
liable in estimationem litis, for the full damage and interest. Sed in quantum
Religioni judicantis visum fuerit l: ult: ff. de extraord: coquit: Inst: de
oblig: quae quas: ex delict. in prin:
: Or otherwise, the unjust Sentence was pronounced by fraud and corruption, in
which case, the Judge was punished in the full damage and interest and infamy:
But by that Law, Fraud was never presumed l: 6: C: de dolo: l: 13: 1: ff: de
pro: l: 51: ff: prosocio.
, So that however palpably unjust the sentence did appear, yet the presumption
was for the Judge, that it was per imprudentiam aut imperitiam, unless there
were a positive probation, that there was Corruption; And the Law was so
favorable to the Judge, that it did allow him to purge himself of the
suspicion of corruption by his own Oath Nov: 124: cap: 2.
. And did further most severely punish the party, who did slander the Judge,
and subjected him to the punishment, to which the Judge should have been
liable, so that the presumption does still ly for the Judge, that any Error
that was committed by him, was merely per imprudentiam, and the punishment
thereof was Arbitrary. But all Writers upon the Title, de poenis ^al^
Judicantium, do agree that the practice generally of all Nations have recede
from that severity expressed in the Law. Perezius de poem: Jud: n: 5: Christene.
u: vol: 4: Decis: 95: n: 4: Argentre ad consuetud Britan. Art: 33: ^: 4: ^:
Groenweg: de Leg. Abrog: ad Ti^: Inst: de ob: ex quas: del.


It is therefore a very injurious Censor and Reflection, That these Judges did
maliciously cooperate with Popish Designs, in condemning the innocent, seeing
all of them lived and dyed without the least suspicion of declyning from the
Protestant Religion, in which they were Educate; and it is the common Interest
of Mankind, to interpret the Actions of other Men in the most favorable and
benign Sense they can bear: Every Person who weighs Humane Frailty, And
considers himself likewise subject to INFIRMITIES, ought to construct all
doubtful Actions in the best sense, and never to presume Malice or Fraud; no
Man desires his own Actions to be so constructed, Et quod tibi f^^^^ non vis,
alteri ne feceris.

3tio. The Civil Law did restrict all penal Actions, and did allo^ the same
only to be pursued against the person guilty; but there was no Action competent
against his Heirs, except in two cases, where either the Action had been
pursued against the Defunct, and proceeded the length of Litiscontestation,
whereby it was no more considered as a Penal Action, but as a Civil Debt, ex
quasi contractis, or otherwise, in case the Heretage were enriched by the
Defuncts Crime* And in that case, there was only Action granted, in so far as
the Heir was enriched, in quantum ad haeredem pervenit ut turpe lucrum
extorque^^^. But in all other cases, ( perduellion, and the Action called in
Law condictio Furtiva, only excepted) mortalitate extinguitur crimen; This is a
point so clear, That it is beyond all Debate, being plainly expressed by
innumerable Texts in the Civil Law, so fully, that there does not ari^^ any
Contraversie in that point amongst Writers or Practitioners L: un: C: ex del:
def: l: 5. ff: de Calum. l: 19: ff: quod moetus causa l: Inde neratius 23: hanc
actionem ff: ad l: aquil: l: haec actio 13: ff de serve: Corrup. l. l: 9: 1: ff
quod falls: tut: l: 3: pen: ff si (...) falls: mod: l: 1: de Priv: del: l: 2:
ult: ff vibon: rapt: l: inhonorariis 35: de obl: and Act pupil^^^^ Ill: 1: de
Reg: Jur: ult: just. de obl: quae quasi ex del: Inst: de perpet: and temp: Act
1.
.

If then this Action be acknowledged to be a penal Action, it is c^^ly
personal, and it cannot with any shadow of Reason be contr^verted, that the
same is penal against the Judges, or their Heirs because the foundation of the
process is the punishment of an alleged Fact and Deed of the Judges, whereby
they nor their Heirs a^^ no ways enriched; And there are many Actions which are
not pen^^ upon the part of the Pursuer, who claims nothing but damage and
interest, Quod a patrimonio suo abest; And yet they are reckoned penal, because
in so far as concerns the Defender they are such, his Fortune not being
enriched by the Pursuers Damage; And therefore most of all the Texts, which
mention penal Actions to be personal, the Examples and species facti, contained
in these Laws are inch, as are only for Damage and Interest upon the part of
the Pursuer, but Penal upon the part of the Defender, as will be evident to any
who shall consider the Laws. And the general Rule of Lawyers in this matter,
is, That Quoties actio factum punit and in dolum concepta est, and is pursued
against him who is not enriched by the Fraud: d. l: 9: ^: ff quod falls. tut.
The Action is Penal, and not competent against Heirs, albeit upon the Pursuers
part, it may seem rei persecutoria for Damage and Interest *. And albeit the
Law cannot enumerate every case, to apply the general rule to it; Yet it is
particularly decided I: 16: ff: de Judiciis; That the Heir of a Judge cannot be
pursued, Julianus autem in haeredem Judicis, qui litem suam fecit, actionem
competere putat, quae sententia vera non est, and a multis notata. And what
shadow of pretense can remain to pursue the Heir of a Judge, who is secured by
innumerable Texts, upon that general ground, that no Penal Actio^ is competent
against Heirs; And by a particular express Law, the Heir of a Judge is
comprehended, and has the benefit of the other Laws, which liberate the Heirs
of all Delinquents.

4to. As by the Civil Law, the Heir of no Delinquent could be pursued; The like
holds in our practice, and by our Statutes, and for verifying of this
Alledgeance, let all the Crimes which are punishable by our Law be considered,
and see if any one of these can be instanced which may found an Action against
the Heir of the Delinquent* except in quantum pervenit, conform to the Civil
Law; Or let the Earl condescend upon any Action of the like Nature, that was
ever sustained or acclaimed: And why is it, that our Law does require a special
Statute to make Treason punishable, after the death of the Traitor, by an
Action against his Heirs? But because that was a speciality, wherein that Crime
was differenced from all others, and all Processess of Treason against the
Heirs of Defuncts, are expressly founded upon the said Act of Parliament, which
renders it beyond D^^bate, that all other Crimes are extinguished by Death. And
therefore, although Murder and Manslaughter be amongst the most odious of all
Crimes, and whereby frequently great damages arise to the Heirs, yet there was
never any action for Assythment, or any other effect sustained, or intented
against the Heirs of the Murder^^^

The Earl appears to have foreseen the inevitable force of this De^fence, and
for obviating thereof, he does in his Bill, insist upon two Acts of Parliament,
viz: 49: Act Parl: 11: Ja: 6: and 69: Act 6: P^^^^ Ja: 5: By the first cited of
these, it is provided, That whoever maliciously accuses another of Treason, if
the Party accused be acquit, the Accuser incurrs the pain of Treason; which in
all Reason (as is alleged) ought to take place against these who maliciously
conde^^ the innocent; and thereby would pretend, that the Judges were lyabl^ to
be punished as Traitors. And by the other Act of King James the Fifth, it is
provided, That process of Treason may be pursued against the Heirs of the
Traitor; but the Earl of his mere bounty, does restrict the effect thereof to
Restitution.

To these pretenses it is Answered, that it was a rare streach of Invention, to
find out an Argument from these Laws against the Judge or their Heirs, to make
them liable according to the desire of the Petition, and to which the Earl was
driven by the view of the Obvious and Unanswerable Defenses above written,
especially, That all crimes are extinguishe dby death; therefore it was
necessary that this Crime should be Screwed up to the pitch of Treason, that
the Heirs might become liable, and in effect Forfeited by a greater Streach
then the forme^

It is then to be considered by what Reason this pretense can be supported,
which must necessarly bear the weight of the whole Claim^^ And Imo. it is
uncontraverted that Penal Statutes are not to be be extended de Casu in Casum
L: 42: ff: de poen: l: 19: ff: de lib: and posthum: haered: instit.
, and tho the Law affix a great Penalty to (...) small Crime, it is to be
inflicted, licet durum fit, quia ita Lex scripsit. B^^ to pretend from thence
that every Crime as Heighnous of its o^^ Nature, or having any Resemblance to
that which is expressed, shou^^ be punished by the same severity, is such a
Notion, as never formerly entered into the Head of any Lawyer; this were indeed
to rende^^ every Man uncertain in his Life or Estate, and to make our Penal
Laws altogether Arbitrary at the Apprehension of every Judge, according to his
Opinion and Estimation of the Crimes Lybelled. 2do. There can hardly be two
Crimes, having less of Parity or Resemblance one to another, then that of a
Malicious Accuser with an unjust Judge: What Parallel can be imagined betwixt
these two? A Malicious Accuser is a Person who Offlciously, and Unnecessarly
obtrudes himself to Prosecute a Person for his Life and fortune; a Judge is
bound by the Necessity of his Office to give a Sentence, which tho it may be
found Unjust; yet it is presumed to be per Impertiam, out Imprudentiam, and not
by his Malice, Fraud or Corruption, as is above mentioned: And that which is
mainly considered in that Statute, is the Officiousness of the Accuser of an
Innocent Person, and therefore tho His Majesty's Advocate should prosecute a
party with Rigor, it is not understood Malice, because he is in his Duty or
Office, so the Judge deciding, is in his Office, but the Fault is a Miscariage:
Which in all Law is esteemed to be an Error in his judgment; For by the Novel
Constitutions, a Judge was only bound by his Oath de Fideli, to swear that he
should decide secuudum, quod illi visum fuerit justius and melius, and its from
that Reason that the Custom of all Nations have exeemed Judges from any
Process, upon their Sentences; except in the case of Fraud, or Corruption;
Arth: Hodie C: de Judiciis.

3tio. Let it now be supposed that the imaginary Parallel betwixt the Judge and
Officious Accuser, could subsist, which is impossible, yet that could found no
Action against the Heir of the Judge, upon King James the Fifths Act, for that
Act does only mention the case of Lase-Majesty; And does provide that processes
of Treason might be pursued against Heirs, conform to the Common Law, so that
it must be considered, what was provided by the Common Law, as to putsutes of
Treason, against the Heirs of the Traitor: It is true that both the Civil Law,
and Ours, do recede from the general Rule, That all crimes are extinguished by
Death; In the special case of Laese Majesty, but neither of these do Authorize
processes to be pursued against the Heir upon Statutory Treason, as is clear by
the last Law, ff^^^d legem Juliam majestatis. Is qui in reatu decedit integri
status deced (...) Extinguitur enim crimen mortalitate, nisi forte quis
majestatis reus fuit, hoc crimine, nisi a successeribus purgetur, haereditas
Fisco vindicatur, non quisquis legis Juliae majestatis reus est, in eadem
condition est, s^ perduellionis reus est, hostili animo adversus rempublicam
vel principem a^^ tus caeterum si quis ex alia cousa legis Juliae majestatis
reus sit, more mine liberatur. By which it Appears plainly, that every Treas^
not competent to be pursued against the Heir of the Traitor; that which is
specially called Laese-Majesty, or Perduellion, against King or Commonwealth;
But all other kinds of Treason, su^^ the Statute against False Accusers, are
extinguished by Death.

4to. But even suppose also, that as the Crime lybelled were Tre^^ so the
pursut were Competent against the Heirs, what Interest arise to the Earl of
Argyl by this means, the King's Majesty (...) indeed pursue a Forfeiture, and
Gift it to the Earl; but such n^^^ Processess are not so much in Vogue, but by
what pretense th^^ should by a seeming Condescendence Restrict the Claim of
P^^ture to Damage and Interest, passes all understanding, for if Tr^^^ be
Incurred, the Action arises not to the Earl, nor can Dama^^ pursued by him upon
that Ground, that the Heirs are liable as (...) Case of Treason, and after all
the Earls pretended Bounty i^ stricting the Lybel, is wholly unprofitable to
the Heirs, the I ^^ges Acclaimed being far beyond the Value of the Defunct^^
whole Estates.

It is therefore Humbly and Confidently expected from the Wisdom a^^stice of
the High Court of Parliament; That no Counten^^ Encouragement will be given to
the streached pretenses in the Claim, which are destitute of all Foundation in
Law Civil ^^nicipal, and without Example; And which carry along more ^^ning
Consequences to the Fame and Reputation of Judges who^^ Honor and Credit, to
the Estates of their Innocent Heirs, and Lives and Fortunes of such as are
Alive, then ever was pointed any former Case, in this, or any other Nation,
under the Sun.


