CRUELTY Unvailed; OR, The State of the Case of several Persons, Committed
Close-Prisoners to the Gate House, Westminster; Diligently Collected
(piecemeal) from good Information: together with some Queries annexed.
Tendered to the Consideration of the Learned in the Law, for their Advice
there-upon.
By Peter Goodman, a Visitor of Prisoners, and a Wel-wisher to Justice, and the
Peace and Happiness of these Kingdoms.
I. THat the said Persons being in a quiet and peaceable manner endeavoring in
their respective qualities, to provide Bread for themselves and Families; and
being not excluded from the Common Rights and Benefits of their Native Country;
nor having by any Act of Theirs forfeited the same; Yet were seized on by
Messengers, with Warrants from the Chief Secretaries of State, to bring them
before the King and Council: But instead thereof, they were, by other Warrants,
signed by the said Secretaries, carried away to the Gatehouse, and there kept
close Prisoners, without any Hearing, Examination, or Accusation, that they
have heard of; Where the Exorbitant Fees, and other Extraordinary Charges of
that Prison, together with the severity of their Jaylors, does not only impare
their Health, but does also consume and eat them up daily, and deprive their
Wives and Children of the benefit of that little which was left them.

II. In this Condition, several of their Wives and other Relations, with much
Solicitation, Attendance, and Charge, procured Orders from the Council to see
them, and to supply their Necessities: which Orders the Jaylors will sometimes
obey, at other times refuse, with scurrilous language to their Relations; and
also Contempt of the said Orders; saying to some of them, They may keep them,
and wipe their Breeches with them. Some of them, so denied by the Jaylors, have
out of the Streets Called to their Friends at their Windows, to know their
Wants; for which they were Imprisoned, until they would pay what the Jaylors
were pleased to exact. Some of the said Prisoners being sick, have been denied
a Physician, without Order from the Council, which is not readily obtained; and
in the mean time have denied them the company of their Wives, who had Orders to
visit them; and yet the Jaylors have neglected to bring them Food, and other
Necessaries in convenient times, suitable to their weak Condition; and
sometimes when Necessaries have been sent for from abroad, they have taken them
away, and disposed of them as they pleased; being unwilling any thing should be
brought to them, which they have no profit out of.

III. And whereas some of the said Prisoners have Suits depending in Law, and
other Occasions, wherein all they have is concerned; Yet are not permitted to
speak with their Counsel, Attorney, or others, with whom their Business lies:
by which several of them are like to be wholly Ruined.

IV. Pen, Ink and Paper is denied them, Except it be to write for Money for
their Jaylors, in their sight; who exact of them Ten shillings a week for a Bed
in some Rooms; and Seven shillings in other Rooms; and double the sum, where
two Prisoners lie in one Bed; besides Five shillings for a Pair of Sheets for
each Man at Entrance: Also Twenty shillings of Every one for turning the Key;
and Five shillings for the Under-Keeper: demanding also Five pound a man to be
Excused the wearing of Irons; which some have been forced to pay, or wear them.
What Drink they have, must be had of them, at Twopence a Winchester Pint,
whether strong or small: Besides the Messengers Fees, which are very great;
Their daily Charge; The Damage they receive by the neglect of their Callings;
Their great Poverty; The Necessities of their Families, many of them being very
large.

All which considered, with what more might be said, makes their Condition
Exceeding Miserable. And that which adds to their further Misery, is, That no
time is prefixed (that is known to them) for a Hearing or Determining their
Cause, although often by them desired, to the end that their Innocence might
appear; And in order thereunto, very much means has been used by their
Relations, which hitherto has proved ineffectual: And that no lawful
Endeavors, to avoid the utter Ruin of them and their Families might be left
unattempted, It Is queried as follows; 1. What the Law means by
Close-Imprisonment?and for what Crimes, and by what Authority men ought to be
so committed? and how long without being called to any Trial? some having been
there imprisoned about the space of a year. 2. Whether Prisoners committed as
aforesaid, ought not to be maintained at the Kings Charge? 3. Whether by Law,
Iaylors may chain up and use such Prisoners so as is expressed in the State of
their Case above-written? if not, 4. What Remedy is there by Law for such
Prisoners committed and used as aforesaid (by their Iaylors) to right
themselves?


FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.


