A LETTER to Dr. W. Pain.
SIR,
HAving understood from one of your late suspended Brethren, that you have been
apt to complain of their Silence, and to call for their Reasons, their Reasons;
and why did they not publish their Reasons? promising, that if they would send
you them by the Penny Post, you would take care to answer them. I have hence
taken occasion to give you this present trouble; not that I will undertake to
relate all their Reasons, Unlawfulness of Stretching forth the Hand agt.
Princes, in 2 Sermon. by William Pain Rector of St. Mary Wh. Chapel. Land. --
83. Ep. Ded. p. 3.
nor any of them to the advantage they would themselves, if they were to go
about it, but only to attempt some kind of Apology for them, whereby to let you
see in short, that they are not without Reason for what they do. And because I
would give both you and my self as little Trouble as I can, I will choose for
the most part to deduce my Arguments from such Principles as I know you are so
well satisfied in already, that they will not need any farther proof.

1. First therefore I conceive one Reason of their Noncompliance in the matter
of the present Oath, might be because they would not be like a kind of
Weather-glasses, by having their Obedience to Governors higher or lower,
according to the Temperature and Variation of outward Affairs; this being a
likely means to render all their ministerial Endeavors useless and
ineffectual, as likewise to become a very great Scandal and Disturbance to such
as have known their former Doctrine and manner of Life, and to bring a Reproach
upon that excellent Religion they profess. And perhaps they may be the more
cautious in this respect, because they have been told, that Treason has stood
so long in this Nation, that it has run to seed, and scattered its Principles,
Ep. Ded. p. 4. Id. p. 2.
that will not fail to nourish and make it grow again. And again, that Treason
is a Disease, which though it be not like the Sweating Sickness of old, a
Malady peculiar to Englishmen, yet the Plenty and Luxury of our Country may
perhaps make us more subject to (...) than others: For they may probably
conclude from hence, that it would be an unpardonable Crime in those who are to
be Guides to others, to give any kind of encouragement to so growing and
heinous a Sin, which yet they have too much reason to fear a Conformity in the
present Case would be.

2. Because though Popery is a Religion most corrupt and dangerous to the Souls
of Men, and therefore to be opposed by all lawful ways, by every honest Man; 1
st. Sermon. p. 9.
yet to resist, and rebel against our Governors (and by consequence to oblige
our selves to adhere, and aslist any that may have done worse by them) for fear
of it, nay, for the thing itself, should God in his Judgment bring it upon us,
is what the Gospel forbids upon pain of Damnation, and what the first
Christians never did against Paganism, and yet they were as hearty Enemies to
that, as we can be against Popery.

3. I might add, that if Resistance, then also an Oath of Allegiance to any but
the proper Sovereign, 1 st. Sermon. p. 9.
is most contrary to the Constitution of our Government, to the fundamental
Establishment of it, the many public Acts and Declarations that are made
concerning it, (such as 5 Eliz. c. 1. and 1 Jac. 1. c. 1. and others,) and the
many Oaths by which we are restrained against it, which these dissatisfied
Persons once thought themselves bound to take, and now think themselves bound
to keep them, and cannot unloose them as Sampson did Withs.

4. Because none amongst us could possibly have a power of excluding the
rightful King from his Government, so long as there is any truth in that
Doctrine which we have been taught not many Years since, namely, that we have
not such a Government as the Lacedaemonians under their Kings and Ephori, 1 st.
Sermon. p. 10.
or as in some other places, where the true Sovereignty is not as it is here in
the Prince; our Case being such, that no Englishman, who knows the
Constitutions of our Kingdom, can be any more ignorant who has the Sovereign
Power, (and by consequence who is by our Constitution unaccountable and
irresistible,) than a Servant can be ignorant who is the Master of the House
where he lives.

5. Becuuse they may think taking the Oath would be a kind of owning the
Peoples Power to pull down and set up Princes; and this they might justly fear
would be of very mischievous consequence to the Nation, since Resistance only,
which is far less than a perpetual Exclusion, is said to have so ill an effect,
p. 11.
that though it is possible that some Inconveniences may happen sometimes to
Mankind, by their Governors abusing their Power and Authority, and using it to
serve their own Wills and Pleasures, rather than the public Good; yet there is
much less Mischief likely to b^fall Mankind from thence, than there would if
they should be allowed to disobey and resist as they thought fit.

6. Besides, They may very well be conceived to think, that if a Prince might
be resisted, or (which is the same thing) violently kept out of his Dominions,
2d. Sermon. p. 22.
it ought to be in one of these four Cases, the Case of Religion, the Case of
Regal Rights, the Case of natural Defense, and the otherwise remediless Case,
by the Encroachment of Princes. But as to these they have been taught, and
profess themselves verily to believe,

1. That they may show their Zeal and Love to Religion a better way, p. 23.
than by thus resisting and fighting, and I may add, that by adhering to and
abetting those that do resist and fight against their proper Sovereign for it;
for that is to do what our Religion expressly forbids, and which can no way
consist with that Love we should have for it; that there is another and much
better way to demonstrate the highest Affection for Religion, and that is by
suffering for it, and enduring all manner of evils rather than forsake it; and
that this is a likelier Method to prove and propagate it, and to transmit it
down to Posterity, both with safety and Credit.

2. That our Law has made an express Declaration, that it is not lawful to
resist upon any account whatsoever, p. 25.
and that as long as the power of the Sword is wholly in the King by the Law of
God and Man, 2d. Sermon. p. 26.
none may draw it without Authority derived from him; and that therefore we
should be like the Primitive Christians, who suffered themselves to be
punished, adversus formam, adversus naturam judicandi, contra ipsas quoque
leges.

3. That Self-defense is at most permission, no Law of Nature; p. 27.
and that positive Constitutions may limit and restrain natural Right in that
or any other Case; and withal, that though the Law of Nature allows to resist
private Violence in ones own defense; yet it does not to resist the public
Magistrate, for that would be destructive of public Good, and injurious to the
Peace and Welfare of Mankind, which the other is not.

4. And lastly, they have been taught, p. 28.
that they must never expect to find a remedy against all possible
Inconveniences in this World, but shall be always subject to some public as
well as private Evils; that the Projectours of the late Times would have the
Prince accountable to the People, but never was more mischief done, than by
that Traitorous device; Id. p. 30.
that there must be unaccountable Sovereignty somewhere; that a legal
Constitution, such as our own, is a great security to us; that things would not
stand long bent by an illegal Force, p. 31.
but would by degrees unloosen themselves, and would come right again in a
little time; and, which is much more considerable than all this, that God's
Providence and Government of the World is the best security in this and all
other Evils we are subject to; that Princes are God's immediate Officers and
Lieutenants, and he will take particular Inspection over them, that they abuse
not his People committed to their charge; that to him alone they are
accountable, and therefore he who has exempted them from the cognizance of
others, will take the matter into his own hands; that satis est quod Deum
expectant Ultorem; that a Tyrant's Subjects have not half so much reason to
fear his Power, as he has to be afraid of God's; p. 32.
that the great Patron of Justice will set Bounds to the Power and Injustice of
Princes, and, as far as is necessary for the good of the World, and for his
wise Designs, so far shall they go, and no farther.

These things have been publicly taught, and they are so plain and convincing,
that diverse you see are not able to withstand their Force, howsoever others
may. And as we have been not long since taught thus, both from the Pulpit and
the Press, so if we a little consult our standing Laws, and the nature of our
Constitution, and the late Opinion of all our beneficed Divines, we shall
easily see all these agreeing hereto. For,

1. There is a Statute of 1 Jac. 1. that very expressly declares the Right to
the Monarchy to have lineally descended to the Prince, and by proximity of
Blood, and that hereupon he was recognized and submitted to by the whole
Nation, and not upon any Choice or Election of the People. There is another of
the same King, that enjoins the Oath of Allegiance to him, as the true and ard
rightful King, and (which deserves well to be considered) makes it Treason to
go about to persuade one to take the Oath to any else. 3 Jac. 1. c. 4. And so
long as Men's Allegiance is thus due to the rightful King, you would be very
kind, if you would show those who are dissatisfied, that they may transfer to
any other without Sin.

2. That neither the Peers of this land, nor the Commons, nor both together in
Parliament or out of Parliament; nor the People collictively, nor
Representatively, nor any other persons whatsoever, have any coercive power
over the persons of the Kings of this Realm is as plainly declared as words can
do it. 12 Car. 2. c. 30. with other Acts to the same purpose. And Bracton you
know tells us, that if the people be at any time oppressed by their King, they
are to use only the primitive Arms of prayers and Tears. His words are these:
Si autem ab eo petatur -- locus erit, supplicationi, quod factum Suum corrigat,
and emendet, quod quidem si non fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad Poenam and. And
not only your self, but all other Benificed Divines were so well persuaded of
this, that it is very well known, you have all in a solemn manner professed,
that it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against
the King, or any commissioned by him; which it is to be hoped you did in the
sincerity of your hearts, and what strong Reasons any of you may have met with
since to alter their Judgments, I cannot tell.

Again lastly, It is possible that some at least of those whose defense I have
here undertaken may be dissatisfied concerning the power that enjoins these
Oaths For they may think perhaps that by our Constitution a Convention has no
power at all in Law and therefore may not be of power enough to alter the
Succession, and so may question whether this be a Lawful King; or suppose they
could get over this stumbling block, there is yet another very considerable
doubt arises in Relation to the house of Commons whether they had any Authority
to Act as sn house of Parliament in imposing these Oaths. And this is not a
needless scruple if we consider that, 1. Our Law owns no Parliaments, but what
are called by the Kings Writs. 2. Nor does it know any member of the Lower
house, but who are chosen for a Parliament. 3 Nor does it give a Right to any
to Act in the house, til they have taken the Test. 4. And if any one enter and
take their place there before they have taken the Oath of Supremacy, their
place is void and they are not at liberty to take it afterward, but new
Election is to be made. 5. Eliz. c. 1. 5. And lastly, The former Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy have been so imposed by diverse Statutes, and are so
expressly required of all Members of Parliament, that none could possibly have a
Power of Substituting others in their stead, till they had taken those, and had
swore, if not that they believed King Jamos, yet at least that they believed
King William to be rightful King of this Land.


Wherefore upon these several Accounts, its possible some may think, (for I
will ^^t undertake to speak positively of other Men's private Sentiments,) it is
possible, Isay, that some may think these new Oaths not to be enjoined by a
competent Authority, and that supposing they had believed the matter of them to
be lawful, (which I am pretty well satisfied they do not,) yet-they could not
think they ought to take them as now imposed.

Here. Sir. I have presented you with some of those Reasons, which our
dissatisfie'd Cl^rgy may have to offer for themselves. And now that I have
given you this trouble, I must take the boldness to add another to it, and that
is to entreat that you will be so kind, as not to shift off the matter to a
Conquest, which is neither owned by King nor People, nor to a vacancy by a
voluntary Desertion, which is a falsity in matter of Fact, and no way
reconcilable to the Kings Design of sending to the Convention in order to
return, and his appearing since in Arms to recover his Right, and which, had it
been true, could never have amounted to a Resignation, unless it had been
apparently without a design of returning again to his Government, which this
could not be said to be; but that you will return a serious Answer, and such as
you will not be ashamed of at the last, whereby you will oblige,

Sir, Your Humble Servant.


