FRIENDSHIP.

To the truly honorable Mrs A.O.
MADAM,
YOu have all the Right in the world to this Trifle; for 'twas first penned by
your Commands, and is now by them made thus more legible: whose Name then
should it wear but yours, whose only Patronage is enough to protect it, could
any thing that is yours want Protection?

Nothing but your Will to have it so could have made me come so near the
Press as to make use of an iron pen: for I am certainly assured it cannot bear
a public scrutiny; nor is there any thing here fitted to the Pallat of the
Times, or that will relish a severe Reader.

My Comfort is it has past your Approbation, which is all it asked, and has
received no advantage from the Press, but security from the errors of
Transcribers, (if any could be found so vain:) and this I had some Reason to be
solicitous of, having given it so many blemishes and imperfections, that
nothing but one entire Blot could cure.

The few Copies I suffered to wear this character, and none of those Voeniall,
secures me from all but merciful eyes; and if it were possible for me to hear
it commended, would secure me from vain glory too.

I remember my Lord of Cherbery having sent diverse copies of a Book he printed
to several eminent persons beyond Sea, and receiving thence as many
gratulatory Complements, was told by our excellent Seldom, if He would know
what people thought of his Book, He should suffer it to ly on the Stall, and be
sold by the Stationer for eighteen pence or two shillings apiece. Indeed every
Book an Author gives is a Bribe, and the Receivers Testimony made thereby
rather his Civility then his Judgment.

It Is an old observation, that those Philosophers who wrote the most severe
Tractates in contempt of glory, still prefixed their names to those Pieces, as
loath to lose the glory of being such Contemners. You, who are the severest
Self-denyer in the world, have taught me another lesson, and this very
Dedication may serve for a Testimony of that virtue in you, and that desire of
it in me. For upon what other score can you bear with so trivial, and (to you
at least) so useless a Piece? Or upon what other account could I wrap my Name
in a Disguise, and decline the public Honor of being known so devotedly yours?

How beneficial any thing in these following lines may prove to others I
cannot prophecy; to you I am sure it is very unnecessary, who have already
outdone, and outlived all that has been, or can be said of Friendship.

When I have said that, I need not mention your other Virtues: for in my Notion
of Friendship they are included. I dare not so much as name them here, least
you should think me (though You would be the only Person of that opinion) a
Flatterer, which I hate as much (if possible) as I do Hell, or love Heaven and
the Way thither, which is an Endearment and Union with Lucasia, and the being
constantly and eternally

March 30. 1654. Your most devoted, faithful Palaemon.

D. Noble Lucasia-Orinda.
It Is not without much regret as well as disadvantage to my self, that I disobey
any of your Commands. But you ought not therefore to quarrel at my
Disobedience: for when you require things impossible, as ingenious Discourses
from Men that have it not about them; you may be so merciful as to allow your
self mistaken in the merits of the Person whose obedience you exact, and do him
so much right as to acknowledge and preserve the Empire you still have, by
distinguishing between Impotency and Infidelity.

The assurance I have that you will not easily confound these two, had begot
some hope in me that my silence on a subject you are so absolutely Mistress
of, Friendship, should have a very candid Interpretation: but since you thunder
out Excommunications against it, and in the only Names I reverence to such a
height as takes off all color and thoughts of dispute, Lucasia and Orinda; I
am resolved to give you a Testimony of my Obsequiousness, though in it I must
also of my Inability, which you might much more to my advantage perhaps, have
concluded by my saying nothing.

How to begin I know not; and if I find it as difficult to end, I may possibly
swell this into a bulk incongruous for a letter, and I am sure aforehand it
will neither have Method nor Solidity enough to deserve the appellation of a
Treatise, or Discourse.

Some order I would willingly observe, without any confinement to strict
Philosophical Definitions of, and inquiries into it, or Historical Deductions
of its Origination, Rise, and Growth, enumerated in several Examples, whereof
we have little left besides the Names.

But however he that were happy enough in his Proficiency in so blessed a
Mystery as Friendship, as to pen all it deserved with all the accuratenesse
desirable, might (as far as I yet understand) comprehend all under these
three heads, The Nature of it, The Causes of it, and the Benefit and Use of it.
And these three I shall touch at.

First, by the Nature of it I do not mean the Natural Causes of it, for that
were to confound the first member of my Division with the second. But by Nature
here I mean Quality or Condition. And perhaps it is not preposterous to see
first what kind of thing this Friendship is, before we ask whence it comes; for
hereby those who are not satisfied with the value and quality of it, may spare
further questions concerning it as useless and impertinent.

Some have been so prodigal in their Encomiums and descriptions of Love, that
they have not been content to keep the other Passions at a just distance and
subjection, but have quite swallowed them up: and by making the objects of
every Passion lovely in the eyes of that Passion whereby they are pursued, have
taken away the proper name of that Passion and anabaptised it Love. And thus
the Extremes of a Passion which hardly avoid being vicious where the Passion it
self is virtuous, must carry the plausible inscription of Love, though Love it
self be thereby brought into Detestation. Ambition is hence styled the Love of
Honor, Covetousness the Love of Money. But it is not the name of Love can
excuse, much less transform Vice into Virtue; for Love it self is like the
Planet Mercury, which has no influence properly its own, but follows the
predomination of those other Planets with whom he is in Conjunction, and so is
good with the good, bad with the bad: and just so is Love, vicious or virtuous
according to its objects.

But reserving to every Passion its due Name, and to Love its just Superiority,
I shall believe I have done that and Friendship Right together, when I have
said, Love is the Crown and Perfection of all our Passions, Friendship of our
Love. I bate not the highest pitch of Love, our Love to God, for Friendship
crowns that too: which I shall not take much pains to prove, if Abraham's love
of God and Gods of him be allowed of as high a degree as any others mentioned
in Scripture; (and surely it is no prodigality to give so much to the Father of
the faithful.) It Is more then once that Abraham is styled in Scripture the
Friend of God. 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Isa. 41.8. James 2.23.
And we find one of the highest and constituent qualities and effects of
Friendship expressed clearly by God in the preambulatory chapter to Sodoms
destruction, to wit, Communication of secrets and counsels; Shall I (says God)
hide from Abraham the thing I am about to do? What follows we know, a positive
Declaration of the doom of Sodom, and a concession of all those Conditions and
Qualifications for the reversing the Decree and preservation of the place,
Abraham could think fit to desire.

But to come out of the clouds, and descend to the proper stage of Friendship,
(and if you believe Guzman, the only true Friend) the Earth: I do not think
the love of any Relation has that Candor, Vigor, Complacency, and eminent
Perfection, which is in the love of Friends. And the reason hereof (to my
present apprehension) is, That in all other Relations, whether Natural or
Politic, our love is a Duty imposed; in this a Duty too, but freely chosen at
first, and made so by our selves. Now regularly, what ever we are bound to by a
Law, we look on as an incroachment upon and abridgement of our freedom, and be
the thing never so good we are obliged to, it alters not our conception of, and
quarrel to the Obligation; and hence we qualify our Obedience as much as we
can, and think we have shaken off a yoke and piece of servitude, when we have
found out a way to slacken our dependence on those Relations: In this case we
are all like Princes, who take it very unkindly to have their Counselors and
Confidents appointed them by their Father; and therefore, as they usually do at
their Fathers death, we count it the first part of our Royalty to advance some
new Favorite, and the stranger the better we think, because it gives the
clearer testimony of our Absoluteness.

Notwithstanding all which, it is a great happiness, and rather to be wished
then found, that the Relations of Blood (especially the most capable ones)
might twine and grow up into those of Friendship; that where Nature has made
some Ties, we may add others, and so twist a Cord into a strength not easily
broken. But to effect this there must be an Alliance or correspondence of Souls
and Humors, as well as blood, and where they may be found, there is not any
consanguinity in an equal degree (as between Brothers and Sisters) which ought
to hinder the stricter union of Friendship. And though Diversity and (may be)
Contrariety of Humor hinder so happy a progression; yet this must not unravel
the affection Nature knits 'twixt those of such affinity. There is a vast
difference betwixt admission of one into my dearest thoughts, and exclusion of
him from all: and before we have done with all the requisites toward making a
Friend, we shall certainly find it highly necessary He be not without natural
affection.

It is hardly worth the while to enquire why it is so rare to find a Friendship
contracted 'twixt Relatives. But the wonder, if it be one, is taken off, if we
consider that their Souls are of as different makes as if their Persons had no
Relation. For either the Father does not beget the Soul of the Child; or if he
does, since no man differs more from another then the same man at several
times does from himself, the next child may be of as contrary a frame of
spirit, as if he had been the issue of a stranger.

Now in Relations which have not that equality, as Father and Son, and the
like, or Politic Relations, as King and Subject, the inequality and aw created
thence quite destroys possibility of Friendship; and this incapacity of the
greatest happiness here, is the sharpest Thorn in a Kings Crown. Some one King
may be there is of so extraordinary a Genius, as by unvailing much of his
Majesty, and descending to appear in an address and converse more familiar and
obliging, may arrive at the felicity of Friendship: but I must not name him,
lest Historians explode the Narration (as fabulous) and Politicians Him.

And it is so certain that Superiority, whether Natural or acquired, forbids
Friendship, that every place will give you examples of stricter Unions 'twixt
younger Brothers one with another, then any of them with the elder; especially
if the elder Brother has a kind of adopted Paternity over the younger, and
they depend wholly upon him.

If any Love may stand in competition with that of Friends, it is the
Conjugall; and that, if any where, where the Marriage was purely the choice and
congruity of the Persons united, without the Byasse of other Interests which
usually bear a great sway in that Union.

Now even here, unless the Love proceed to a Friendship, it is short of what
it might come to, and of that Passion which the very Persons have toward
others, if so be they are really and indeed Friends to any. There be many can
adore one as a Mistress, affect her for a Wife, and yet believe her not so
proper for all the Relations of Friendship; More that while she is a Mistress
believe her fit for all those offices, and find themselves afterward deceived.

But to bring Marriage and Friendship into Competition, allowing only to
Marriage the legal and ordinary Union, I think it will be past dispute where
the Transcendency lies, if we admit the most unquestionable Gradation that can
be any where desired. Take it as it lies in Deuteronomy, the 13. chapter, and
about the 6. or 7. verse: where God commanding enticers to Idolatry how near
soever to be put to death, thus reckons them up; If thy brother the Son of thy
Mother, or thy own Son, or Daughter, if the Wife of thy bosom, nay if thy
Friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee to Idolatry, etc. thou shall
not spare them. Higher then a Friend we cannot go. There be those would
sacrifice their other Relations for the preservation of this; but he that can
be persuaded not to spare this, needs little weaning from the rest. It is not
possible for me to go higher in evincing the excellency of Friendship in
relation to all other Loves. Let us look a little nearer and more narrowly into
its Nature and Qualities.

One I have already mentioned, its being Communicative: and this keeps
Friendship in perpetual Motion and Action, and so makes it more resplendent.
By this a private person is happier then his Prince, all his Actions and
Counsels being subjected to a more ingenuous and free debate, and the result
given more impartially, according to true Interest, not affections, and what is
worse, parasiticall cockering of the humor.

Then Friendship has an Uniting quality, it makes two as it were One, but so
as the Communication is hereby increased: for who can doubt disclosing what
troubles or perplexes him to one so much himself? it is but appealing from my
distempered self, to my self composed; all the difference is for my advantage:
and when my Pallat is down or my sight vitiated by some ill-acquired Tincture,
I have the advantage left of a Taste and Sight uncorrupted, which restores me to
as perfect a Judgment as if I were in my own Nature infallible.

Thirdly, Friendship is Secret: its communicativenesse extends no further then
its Relation. And this is the very Prop and Support of all the comforts it is
capable of imparting by virtue of its other Qualities. It Is the Harbor in
which the weather-beaten friend is safe after all storms. One cannot readily
instance a greater incapacity of Friendship, then a Spongy Nature; one ready to
suck in what secrets you please, but as ready to give them up to the first hand
that calls for them. The Boy in Plutarch that having no where to hide a live
Fox he had stole, but next his skin, and being pursued for the crime, chose
rather to have his Bowels gnawed out by it, then confess the Theft, should
teach us a greater constancy of Nature.

He that betrays the Secrets of his friend entrusted to him is doubly guilty,
and by adding Fraud to his Violence, and breach of the greatest trust to his
Robbery, has withal done execution upon himself too, and lives branded and
infamous to that degree, that the Gallows, which his Desperation of so much
Mercy may in time make him find way to, shall be thought a Pardon.

Lastly, Friendship is virtuous; for indeed nothing that is not so is or can be
lasting. Nor can one long retain a good opinion of Persons otherwise habited.
It delights in nothing more then preserving those in the paths of virtue whose
inclinations hearken to the worse. And that very consideration has restrained
many from courses which, but for the interest and preservation of their
Friendship, they would have embraced to their Ruin.

I deny not but there may be some kind of Union betwixt Persons of a Complexion
very different from virtuous: but that is a Combination, not a Friendship; and
though the Covenant be never so Solemn, will be like an Almanac out of Date,
as soon as the precious Ends for which it was contracted are accomplished.

When I have said Friendship is virtuous, I have given it its proper Title, but
too comprehensive to be instanced in particularly in the several Exercises of
its virtue. And much of that Nature will fall under consideration in descending
to speak of the Benefit and Use of Friendship, somewhat, in inquiring into the
Causes of it, which I now am come to.

The Causes of Friendship are either such as respect our desire of Friendship
in general, or more particularly our contracting it with this or that Person
rather then another; which may as properly be called the Occasions of our
Friendship. The first are Universally Natural, our common Nature and
Principles of Humanity necessarily put us upon the acquisition of Friends.
There is an innate desire in every man from the Principles of
Self-preservation, to make his party as strong and considerable as he can, by
engaging some other to the protection of that Self which is so dear to him.

Again, Man being naturally a Sociable Creature, and a common outward formal
Converse being very empty and unsatisfactory to a communicative Spirit,
especially as the world commonly goes, when People watch like Wolves to make a
Prey one of another; the Soul boils and grows impatient, till it find somewhat
where it may more freely and safely dilate it self, and that cannot be any
where but in the Bosom of a Friend. The inhabitants of the Air and Deserts,
Birds and wild Beasts are far more innocent Auditors of our Complaints or
Discourses, then Man, unless Friendship has civilized him. And since our
Passions must either have vent or they will burst us, it is not only necessary
to seek the only proper relief, a Friend, but very advisable till we find one,
to put Demosthenes practice for the cure of his stammering afoot again, and
like him Harangue it to the Woods.

In a word, the miserable uncomfortable Solitude of being without a Friend, the
incapacity of advising our selves or taking discreet Counsels, since He who
teaches himself has always a fool to his Master, the unrelievablenesse of
our bad condition, the unpleasantnesse of our best for want of a congratulating
partner, are powerful incentives of this Desire of Friendship in all Men.

But then particular Friendships, and with one rather then another, are the
results of particular Natures and Fancies; sometimes, which are guided by a
prevalent Humor to consort with the Disposition they choose; and other times
perhaps are contracted not by particularity of choice, preferring the person
chosen to all others, but by some accidental occasional circumstance offering
that Person to an endearment, which our Natural Desire and indeed Necessity
of Friendship makes us eagerly embrace.

What the Common Occasions or Causes of contracting Friendships are, may be
useful for our inquiry, especially if we desire to preserve any of our
concerns from too hasty and unadvised contracts of that kind. This Caution is
indeed as necessary and as much to the advantage of those committed to our
Care, as the very supervising their Marriages: A Cross and misfortune in the
Election of a Friend as fatal as of a Wife. Therefore though Friendship it
self be virtuous, yet all Persons of all ages and Tempers are no fit disposers
of themselves; no more then in Marriage, which is virtuous and honorable, but
yet does not preserve all those such who enter into it.

The Constitutions of Men are various: some of a serene, free, transparent,
open Genius from their Cradles, of a soft tender affectionate Nature, and if
they follow the guidance of their own thoughts before they come to a Maturity
of Judgment, are easily ensnared by those of a more subtle and naturally
dissembling temper, and so may by such as study only their ownadvantage, by a
few fair words and lefthanded kindnesses, in the days of their Credulity, be
betrayed into an endearment, from which they expect the Name of Friend, when
more truly that of Stalking-horse fits better the use they are put to.

The Common Occasions of beginning Friendships with particular Persons, are
either a long acquaintance, begun especially in the Age of greatest tenderness
and fondness, but least judgment; or when we come to understanding, a sense
of Gratitude where we are obliged highly upon slender or no merit; at least not
particularly applied to the person obliging. The Natural and Congeniall Return
of Love is Love, it will not be bartered for any thing else, nor admit any
other thing in Exchange for it: and though it brings all things with it, as he
that gives himself will surely deny nothing; yet it brings it self, which is
better then all, and without which all the rest is nothing.

Now whosoever desires to grow into a Friendship with a particular Person, whom
his own observation (as far as a stranger can observe) and a general Fame
has recommended to his thoughts, will quickly be ingenious enough to find
ways of expressing the Esteem He has, and Endearment He desires: and if the
Resentment be answerable to Expectation, which it will be if there be any of
that Common Ingenuity which a truly noble and friendly Nature is always
furnished with, here is a fair foundation laid whereon to build a firm and
lasting Friendship.

But because no Person credits Fame enough to take up Friendship on Trust from
her, though he may receive thence great praevious inclinations, and such as may
go very far in blinding his Judgment when he has greatest Use of it; we may
consider that the first ordinary designation of the Person we affect, (where we
have not been prepossessed with a Traditionall Merit in him) is from the Eyes;
and it is the Eye too that where we have trusted much to Report, gives the first
Testimony of our assent to its Veracity.

Every Motion, Passion, Affection, and Alteration of the Soul, is indeed first
perceptible in the Eye, the motions whereof are much nimbler then of any other
part; and I have known Blushes visible in the Eyes of those whose Blood has
come much slower into their Face, and only time enough to testify that they
were not deceived who read their Blushes in their Eyes before.

Nor is the Eye merely Declaratory of our choice, but isntrumental in it too.
All men believe (or by their practice seem to believe) that from the Aspect,
Countenance, Meine, Air, or Spiritous Resultance (arising from the Composure
of the Face) call it which you please, a shrewd Judgment is to be made of the
Nature and Conditions: And the Principles of this Philosophy are probably
clear, if the Rules to reduce them into Practice were so. But however, we all
allow our selves so well skilled in this Physiognomy, that we venture to
descant to our selves upon the Conditions of a whole Company, though merely
Strangers to us, and shall prefer some and condemn others, right or wrong,
because Our (may be deceiving) Sight has imprinted Characters in us to their
favor or prejudice.

Two, though never so estranged to us, can hardly contend either in Fight or
Play, but that we shall be factious in our wishes and fancies for the one
rather then the other: and amidst a throng of such we never saw before, our Eye
will fix on and mark out some one or other, as a more desirable Object of
Friendship then all there besides.

When we have gone thus far, we cannot be so much wanting to our own
satisfaction as not to experiment by innocent arts and applications whether we
are deceived in our Judgment of that Person: and if we are, the comfort is the
Error is not fatal; for no Reflections of unkindnesse, or rather estrangement
from one for whom we have only harbored an extraordinary good opinion,
without a progress to mutual endearments, will proceed to Heart-breakings and
dyings for Love.

The first experimental applications in order to this discovery are,
Observation of the Inclinations of such person, and practical compliances with
them as much as is possible, particular addresses of the Eyc and Discourse to
that person, unsatisfactorinesse in other company where that may be had, and a
greedy catching at Opportunities of doing Civilities of such a Nature as flow
not from Principles of mere Civility; all which if received as meant, will not
be long without very sensible Returns, such as our selves could wish.

But if the Eye be tinctured with selfishnesse, and these common Organs of
Election vitiated and indisposed by some such ill predominant humor, if either
an extraordinary Morosity of Nature, want of Natural affection, Pride, and
Self-conceitednesse, or in a word any vicious and contrariant Habit to the
Piety and Innocence of Friendship, makes our sight perfectly useless to the
Settlement of our Judgment concerning the aptitude of any one to the Relation
we are speaking of, it is a very impertinent labor to design other Rules for
his guidance, since till those impediments be removed and his Eyesight
cleared, he is incapable of being a Friend.

Now since Nature as well as Manners has some contradictions to Friendship,
and those not so easily removeable neither, (for, by the way, though all men do
naturally appetite Friendship, they are not capable of the perfection of it,
and yet to satisfy their natural necessities of it, they must have somewhat
like, or instead of it) we have the more Reason to proceed leisurely and with
deliberation our selves in a thing of so great concernment as the choosing a
Friend, and retard the Election of those of a more tender age (within our
verge) who are not yet arrived at Discretion to make Judgment of their own
Nature, much less of another.

And though we could possibly afford them some help in deciphering the Nature
of their Compeeres, that being as legible, to a considering and
that-wayintelligent Person, in a small Print, even Childhood, as a fairer
Letter: Yet their Manners depending commonly upon imbibed Principles, and
always upon Custom and Practice (whereby now and then they are swayed against
their Principles) it cannot be safe to enter into so strict an Union, which
invovles them in the same courses, till they have given Evidences of a life
seasoned with so much Religion and Morality together as will not in probability
miscarry.

It Is true, our Younger years are not capable of the Seriousness and
Solidities of Friendship; but notwithstanding that they are very apt for the
contracting Habitual Inclinations to the constant companions of our Converse,
and those not so easily eradicated afterward, when there appears just cause to
wish they never had footing or Plantation.

Some are so severe, they will not allow the Bonds of Friendship to be entered
into before those of Matrimony: for this being the Critical change (or if you
will, beginning) of our life, and the Espousall of new Interests, perhaps they
may be such as are prejudicial to, or inconsistent with our former
friendships; which will beget a strange and bitter conflict in the Soul,
wherein which Side soever gets the better, the Man is miserable and
unfortunate, and has no cause to triumph for the Victory. For indeed in Civil
wars of old, the Romans never allowed the Conqueror to ride in Triumph.
Therefore the severity is very safe and useful, especially if exercised by one
over himself: for so long he is free and happy, while his Passions are in his
own Subjection and Awe, and no bodies else.

But then He who is arrived at this Empire over himself, is not so easily
engaged in Marriage opposite to and destructive of his Friendship, and has
Prudence enough to reconcile those seeming or (if real) ill-grounded
Oppositions. For it is the Disease and Corruption of our Natures that animates
these contrary Interests, and seeks to give Feuds a greater duration then
Amities. And yet we find this disease very catching.

For very seldom do we find Friendlinesse descend in a Blood. The next
generations and descents may, for the freshness of the Example, and Speech of
People, keep in reasonable good Intelligence; but at the second or third
descent they look upon themselves like Cosin-Germans so many times removed: and
as they by a popular error believe themselves incapable of Intermarriage,
which in a nearer Degree they hold lawful; so these are, or at least commonly
act in relation to the continuance of the old, or contracting of new
Friendships.

Nay, what is more unpardonable then all this, you shall sometimes see the
surviving Friend wholly unconcerned in the Relations of him deceased, at least
too-too-forgetfull of the precious Relics of his Friend. But where that
happens, it shows clearly, if either of them did love really, who loved best; a
Controversy (and the only one) irreconcilable 'twixt the Persons themselves
while alive.

And would we had no Examples of this kind in our own observation. But the
saddest one I ever met in return of the Noblest and dearest Friendship, was
that of David toward Mephibosheth. A Pick-thank malicious Informer, upon no
color of truth, accuses him to David: He, without further examination, gives
this informer Ziba his Estate; and afterward, though convinced of the
Innocence of Mephibosheth, would notwithstanding only restore him half his
Estate. Have I not said it (says David) Thou and Ziba divide the land? Yea
(says Mephibosheth) Let him take it all, seeing my Lord the King is returned
in peace. Surely Jonathans son deserved better usage from David, if but for
Jonathans sake: and I am persuaded, if the Scales had been turned, Jonathan
would not have used a son of David's so: and therefore I shall never question
which of them two loved best; no more then I shall who wept most at their last
parting, save that the Scripture is positive in this, that David exceeded, and
Reason evinces that Jonathan did so in the clearness of his Friendship.

On the other side, if we once conceive our selves injured, and thereupon
entertain high Animosities, we will take special care to entail them, and most
commonly do it with that advantage, that our Posterity will preserve this more
precious part of their Inheritance to go in Succession, though they leave
nothing else of their estate; as if like Mordecay's, an affront (and that
possibly of our own making or interpretation) were irreparable without the
extinguishment not of the Person alone whence the Fire first kindled, but the
very Eradication of his Name and Race: So much apter are we through the
Depravation of Nature and Morality, rather to revenge ill turns, then
acknowledge good ones.

Eminent examples of these hereditary Feuds there be in all Nations, especially
Foreign; but so few of real and solid friendship, that it will be the less
wonder to find Persons that have spent many years in Travel, and amongst such
as live rather by Rules of Policy then Honesty, (though that be the best) and
such are the major part, seldom (if ever) contract more then superficial and
formal Friendships: unless it be with some continued partner of his Travels,
whom the Circumstances of mutual kindnesses and uniting dangers, have firmly
endeared and knit together; or except it was entered into before his flying
abroad, and kept alive there by a continued correspondence.

The two usual Residences of those who do not so much ride abroad, as inhabit,
are France and Italy: in one of which the reigning Humor is Levity, in the
other Jealousy; either of which possessing a Soul makes it inhabitable by a
clear and sublime Friendship.

Now some Fathers are so over-politick, that though they know this, or rather,
because they know this, commend those they design for the Support of their
Name to be Principled there, and are very glad to see them suck in and hug dark
and pernicious Axioms of Dissimulation, and sacrificing all to Interest. They
please themselves strangely to find their hopeful Posterity count a
Good-natured Man and a Fool the same thing under various expresssion; to say of
Friendship as of Plain-dealing, that it is a Jewel, but who uses it shall die
a Beggar. A number there are of Maxims to this effect, which whether borrowed
from Machiavil or Ignatius is not much material: but let not Friendship hear
the worse for these clamours, especially since the same Persons, and upon the
same slender account say the self-same things of Religion.

But as no body ever spoke against Religion but they that had none, and
therefore endeavor to confute it by Votes rather then Arguments; so it is of
Friendship too. But while men speak against what they understand not, the
greatest Nonplus they can put their Auditors to is, to resolve whether these
Detractours have more Ignorance or Impudence.

A good wit that had leisure enough, might without Force extend the Parallel
'twixt Religion and Friendship very far. Certainly there is a very near
resemblance betwixt them: They grow and thrive best in the same soil: They have
the same Enemies; the same weeds choke them.

We make a just account that all Vice is destructive of Friendship, for the
Progression of Vice is infinite, and the Multiplication like that of Hydra's
heads, or the Covetous man's desires, they have no bound nor Damm; and therefore
if we could allow some one Vice compatible with this sacred Amity, yet ere long
that Vice would have got company, that Devil seven more, and they worse then
himself: For even the Devil loves not to be alone; and therefore the old Adage
which says the Solitary Man that loves to be alone is either a God or a Devil,
is not to be literally strained, for it was never meant farther then to show
such Persons are extraordinary, either good, or bad. And so by this Catenation
of Vices, some one link of the chain would be found confessedly too heavy for
Friendship to bear.

I do not say a Friend must not sin, much less cannot; that were to confess
there could be no Friendship here on Earth, for I am sure there cannot be any
Condition of man exempt from sin. But there is a vast difference 'twixt a Sin
and a Vice, at least I would be understood so now. Every going less then our
Duty is a Sin: but by Vice I intend some chosen approved darling Habit of doing
wickedly, which we indulge to our selves. And this, let it be of what kind you
please, quite incapacitates the soul for Friendship, because it has seated
this Vice in a higher Place and a dearer affection, then it reserves for the
Friend; and consequently on a necessity of parting with one of the two, would
shake hands with the Friend and retain the Vice.

'Twere extremely tedious to run over all the Vices, and show how they were
particularly exclusory of Friendship, since their Priority in our affection (if
there were no other) is evidence enough. But let us cast our eyes upon two or
three of them that have the mildest Names, and either for their Customariness
in most places, or Connaturalnesse with many Tempers, seem to claim a little
more connivence or Indulgence; and when we have found these upon Trial to have
no Right at all to Friendship, we conclude safely against all others which have
only the same or (it may be) more weak Title.

I will instance in Lust or Wantonness, Drunkenness, and Covetousness; which
their favorers call A Trick of youth, Good-fellowship, and Thrift.

For the first; Did not the satisfying of Curious his Lust cost him the lives of
his dearest and Sacramentally-combined Partners, while his prostitute Fulvia
sucks from him the deep Secret of Catilines conspiracy? And after so solemn a
Consignation of Secrecy 'twixt the Conspiratours, can we believe he that would
expose them, would if they had been the most dear Friends have been more
continent? Nay did not Sampson betray that Secret to Dalilah (after he had
reason enough to guess for what end she was so inquisitive) that cost him his
life? and can we imagine, He that could not continue his own friend, should
have conquered and withstood the same Temptations for the Preservation of
another? And to leave examples, has not the Apocrypha, (Canonical enough in
this particular) given us a large Muster-Roll of the Forces of Women?

For Drunkenness (give it as good words as they please) is it not a confessed
betrayer of Secrets, and consequently of Friendship? Did not Alexander in his
drink stab one of most esteem with him? Drunkenness does the same thing every
day, it kills the Friend though not the Man, destroys the relation though not
the Person: in a word, an habitual drunkard though he was once my Friend,
cannot be so when he is drunk, because he is no longer himself.

Thirdly, the Covetous man that makes money his God, will Sacrifice his dearest
friend Religiously to it. Tell him he has dealt dishonourably with his Friend,
Hang honor (says he) Give me twelve pence. Tell him he has basely sold his
Friend, he will reply, I got five hundred pound by it, and would I could sell
all the friends I have at that Rate. These pithy Sentences are too true and
Modern. But what Fruits of Friendshipp can be expected from the Root of all
Evil?

That Religion then and Friendship have the same Enemies I take for granted,
from the past instances and genuine Consequences of them; and so have they the
same Friends and Interests; They are like Hippocrates Twins, they live and die
together. I need not stretch the Parallel any farther; This is more then
enough to justify Friendship against the loudest Calumny, and take off part of
the wonder (if it be one) to find so loud clamouring against that and Religion.

But to give a clear account why the best things are used so ill, we are to
consider, That the greatest part of the World are Strangers to Piety (not to
say Enemies) and consequently to Friendship. He that is an underminer of the
Foundation must of necessity ruin the Superstructure. Now Religion is the best
Groundwork and Foundation imaginable, whereupon to build a dear and most firm
Friendship: for how is it possible He should not be admirable in the love and
endearing of his friends, who has learned of a Master that has taught him to
love his enemies?

But this is not all: It Is not the Open enemies of Friendship and Religion that
have brought them into Question and Contempt, but the pretended Professors,
through whose sides they are wounded. It has been the ill Logic of many ages,
and we have had sad Examples of it in this Nation, to transfer the Crimes of
Persons upon the function, place, office, and calling; from hence it is that
all the Accusations against Bishops and Kings are urged to the abolition of
Episcopacy and Monarchy. Now though this be a very irrational way of argument,
yet when made use of against Friendship and Religion it is far more absurd:
For those men upon whose account Episcopacy and Monarchy are condemned, are
really Bishops and Kings; but they through whose default Friendship and
Religion are calumniated, are neither Religious nor Friends, but only
Hypocritical Pretenders.

At the beginning of our Combustions here, when the main Argument of all
companies was the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of raising Arms against the
King, I happened to be in company where a Grecian Patriarch of Constantinople
urged severely (as being moved with indignation at the example of Subjects
taking Arms against their King) the Apology of Bishop Jewel for the Church of
England, wherein in the Name of the Church he teaches other Doctrine, which
notwithstanding this Forreigner could by no means be persuaded to credit as a
received professed Protestant Doctrine, against such a Cloud of witnesses as
were in Arms against it. The only answer a Protestant Divine gave him was,
Those you talk of in Arms are none of our Church, we disclaim them. Truly the
self-same answer we may justly give concerning them whose Scandalous Courses
bespatter things so Sacred as Religion and Friendship.

It Is high time, as I take it, to put an end now to this tedious -- what shall
I call it? I have scribled much more then I promised, intended, or thought
possible for me. You are too ingenious to object my promise of treating of the
Benefits and Uses of Friendship, as an obliging argument for my protraction of
this, which must have more then tired you ere now: for you cannot but have
collected all I can hint on that account, from what is already past your view.
I would not willingly come to repetition of them, since it must of necessity be
irksome to you, whose own observation has collected more particulars of that
kind then I have or can express. But yet upon the same score all this might
have been spared. For you want no knowledge of what Friendship is, nor any
allurements to it. If I were to recapitulate all the Motives proper for
persuasion of those who yet understand not what this Friendship is, I should be
Voluminous. But yet since the Design it self of courting men into a good
opinion of Friendship is in it self so Noble, and people have so awkward
Imaginations of it, that all the art of the most powerful Pen is little enough
to win their attention, and reconcile them to their own true Interest, for
Friendship is so, when it is rightly understood; I will offer somewhat as a
Motive to our embracing it: which shall not be any painting or artificial
Dress, but its own Native Beauty and Luster; which will appear best in the
inquiry into its Use and Benefit, that being the touchstone which makes it
pass for current or not.

The Benefits, Advantages, and Comforts that flow from Friendship are as many,
nay more then flow from Life it self. Life is a burden to many for want of a
Friend; but a Friend was never, never can be a Burden to any, and who thinks
otherwise never knew what Friendship was.

I had almost said a Man never lives, truly lives, till he has a Friend; and
if I had, those who are Friends would believe me, so improved a way of living
is that of Friendship; those who are not will, when they come to be so happy.

Friendship does the same thing to the whole Man that the Rational Soul does
to the imperfect Embryo: as that adds a higher and more sublime life to what
had only Vegetation and Sense before, so does this to that.

There is not any Condition of our life that either does not receive, or at
least is not capable of receiving a vast Support and Comfort from Friendship.
The saddest condition imaginable, when thy Patience as well as Strength fails
thee, and thy Grief carries a weight with it able to sink thee to the Center of
the Earth, and crush thee to Nothing, may be supported by the assistant Arm of
a Friend. And the best Condition thou can fancy to thy self here, unless
thou have friends, falls and dies and perishes in a moment. For thy Gladness,
like the Shunamites oil, increases still and never stops, while thou have a
Vessel, a Friend, to pour it into. And is not this more then enough to
recommend Friendship to us, to find it capable of abating our Grief, and
increasing our Joy?

Nor does the common Objection against Friends, of disparity of Condition,
invalidate this Benefit of Friendship: For that wealth and imaginary Honor
wherein so many pride themselves, are transitory, and may perish; a Friend
cannot, and therefore is far the more considerable Treasury: Nay the very
wealth and honor it self is hardly preserved without a Friend. Now he that
after that Pomp which made him deem all Persons below his Friendship, shall
fall into a Condition of Poverty as eminent in its kind as his former
Splendor, and the more pointed at for that Splendor; has nothing left in Art
or Nature to make his Condition tolerable, and becomes insufferably Ridiculous.
Even his being humbled will ten to one be without either the pleasure or
rewards of Humility; for it is rare if it prove so to such Spirits, so much
difference is there 'twixt being humble and humbled, Humility and Humiliation.

I remember Aesop tells us of an Ass, that being overburthen'd with his
Masters Carriage, desired a Horse, his fellow servants and led leer by him, to
ease him by bearing a Part: but the Horse was too proud, and so refused. What
follows? The Ass dies under the Oppression, and so the whole load devolves to
the Horses back. The Fable moralizes it self. Many prepare heavy and
insupportable burdens for themselves by being Brutish, unsociable, and
uncommunicative.

I but (says my politic Objectour) is this your Rhetoric and art of
persuasion toward Friendship, to make men carry Burdens? This is not to make
us Friends, but Porters. I answer, it is far otherwise: For had the Horse
been the Asses friend, he had proved his own too, and by parting the load made
it none; For Burdens, like Rivers, divided loose their Name.

Friendship is very far from being oppressive in any of its Offices; for that
cannot be a Burden which is neither thought so nor felt so: and were it
possible for me to receive one from my Friend, his Caution to preserve me from
it would make my own needless. I have known very ingenious arts practiced by
Friends in conferring (on one part) and declining (on the other) Civilities,
which the receiving hand has imagined oppressive to the giving: But that is
rare. Yet where a Friendship does grow so boundless that it shall be thought
to want limits, those limits must be of thy Friends setting, not thy own.

I could (to save my self more pains) very contentedly believe I have by this
time (taking what is scattered in the former Pages into consideration, together
with this last supply) given considerations enough to render Friendship
desirable, without the addition of any more. But one more will necessarily
fall into our Examination, by a short inquiry into what may fit us for
Friendship, as friendship is fit for us (unless the fault be ours) and that is
Religion, the having or wanting whereof is the main Hinge upon which our
Friendship is turned.

All Souls are Equal; and unless they have taken up ill and contrary
Principles either from ill Education, or an unlucky Temper and composition of
their respective Bodies, whose Temperament they follow, so would our
Dispositions be too all Equal and very like. But let the Assimilation hold in
as many particulars as you can fancy, if they differ in Piety (not in degrees,
but the whole) there is a dissimilitude irreconcilable by Friendship.

I am told in Architecture that Lime and Timber are so unsociable, that the
Beams of that House which are laid in Mortar will be by it corroded and burnt
up, to the destruction of the Fabric, and the worse this mortar is tempered
the sooner. Now a Man without Piety and Religion is this untemper'd Mortar, and
will certainly eat out the heart of that Friendship you thought firmly built
upon him.

If you desire therefore to have a Friend, learn first to be Religious. It Is
not any fantastical imaginary Greatness and disproportion of Condition can
make the inferior Person useless as a Friend: You have heard of the Lion in
the Fable that was delivered from the Net and Death by the little Mouse; and no
man differs so much from another; or if you can think they may, yet you have
heard of a Poor Woman, who by her wisdom delivered a great City from as
great a danger. It Is only the want of Religion, which makes either us
incapable of others Friendships, or them of ours: For this flatuous tumorous
humor which makes us too big to be grasped by a Friend, and all other
contrariant tempers to Friendship will be mortified by Religion.

I must not go on here, lest I send a Homily instead of a Letter. All I shall
add is this; Let us all labor to get this necessary Foundation, Cement, and
All of Religion, and then we are not only Excuseable if we want Friends, but
have this Comfort and Suppletory and Cordial left us, when those whom we chose
for friends have through their own Vanity and Impiety forsaken us, that God is,
and while we be Religious, will be our Friend.

To that Almighty Friend, I recommend you, who have a Soul so exactly built up
for an Eternal and Glorious Friendship, that I cannot want any of the
happinesses I have described here, and wish you (though the wish be needless)
eternally Partaker of, while I have the honor and advantage of being

October. 30. 1653. Your Friend (all Epithetes are needless and go less)
PALAEMON.


