A FATHERS Advice to his SON AT THE University: Wherein is hinted some general
Directions, which may be usefully read by Persons of any Age or Sex.

Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent
Majesty's, Anno 1693.

And are to be sold at their Shop, and at Mrs. Ogstoun's Shop in the Parliament
Closs.

To the Reader.
THese two following Letters, written by a Gentleman to his Son at the
University, came to my hand, without any other notice whose they were, then
that they were the sincere desires of a country Gentleman, to the Heir of his
Family at the University; and by some Circumstances of their conveyance to me,
I had ground to believe the Gentleman was of the West; I was desired to read
them, and I must confess, the more I read, I was ever the better satisfied.

You have not here any thing of gaudy language, nay, nor that gayety and quaint
neatness of expression, that is so much the study of the men of this Age, who
love to appear abroad in the World. And therefore you may be sure, the Author
had not the publishing of them in his view, they being dressed up by him, as
the private paternal Advices of a Father to his Son.

Nor will you find here any thing as to the Subject of what is writ but what
you have very well discoursed of by many who make it their design, to treat of
the Education of youth; But if you do seriously consider the sincerity of the
Author, you will find in all his words a weighty Ingenuity, that will bear home
deeper Convictions, of the solidity and moment of the Advices given; than if
they were set off with more delicate words, they come from a country Gentleman,
by whom solid Truth, in a plain Dress, and Religion in a simple primitive Garb,
is more valued, than with a pompous ceremonious Attire.

It has rendered these Letters more dear to me, that therein I find a
wonderful contexture, of the deepest impression of Religion, and an honorable
concern, for all the points of true Gallantry; with what care and solicitude
does he press home, the serious minding of soul concerns, and of an Eternity
that does approach us all, as if that were the only thing to be minded by us,
yet with such vigorous endeavors of preparing for, and the managing the
affairs of a present life, as if his Son were always to live.

How truly noble is it, to see a Gentleman alse warmly concerned to entail the
Grace of God to his Posterity, as he is to leave it the opulency of a Fortune,
and honor of a Family. If the Author had been a Minister of the Gospel, what is
writ, had passed as an ordinary effect of faithfulness, and diligence in his
Employ: but being from a Gentleman, living it seems upon his private Fortune at
home, the Words are to be the more regarded, and the person more esteemed. A
Minister preaches the Gospel, from the Precepts and Promises in the Word of
God; this Gentleman, with a suitable regard to the Word, and the preached
Gospel, does evidence the reality and life of Religion, by his own experience
and practice, and therefore presses it on his Son.

That calmness in his temper, when he treats of matters of Religion, and of the
Government of the Church, is worthy of all imitation, and gives an irrefragable
demonstration, that there may be a Presbyterian, and that in the West of
Scotland, that has a suitable esteem of worthy men, of differing Persuasions;
and who are more concerned about the life and kernel of Religion, then either
the husks or shells, though they be the Safe-guards and Ornaments of the same;
and though this Gentleman lived in a Country, and manifests a Persuasion; that
without all question, he was a sharer in the Sufferings, that were for so long
a time, wrapped about these of his Country, and persuasion; yet the whole of his
Letters, are far from public resentment, or revenge.

I reckon it no small Glory, that as that part of the Kingdom, in a special
manner, had it for their lot (and submitted to it cheerfully, even those of the
best quality) to suffer for the Interests of Religion, and were eminent for
faithfulness therein: so now when God is pleased, by a mavelous cast of His
own Right Hand, to give a merciful change of Providence; That there are found
in that Country, Gentlemen of Note, as vigorously to act and do in their
Stations, to adorn Religion by their Practices, and commend it by their
Precepts, and endeavor to transmit the same to posterity: and it is to me a
very encouraging Token, for good to this Church and Kingdom, that as God is
pleased to raise up Instruments in the Church, and to grant access to his most
faithful Servants, to preach the Gospel, so he is spiriting and stirring up
some of other qualities, and employs, to press home serious seeking of God,
and manly Religion.

If persons of all ranks, were suitably concerned in their souls state, and
taken up with the study of a personal Reformation, and were imitating this
worthy Gentleman in such serious advices, and laying such ties on their
Posterity, to give themselves unto God, as you see he does, the Reformation of
a Church and Nation, would have greater advance, and would be a more cheerful
work to the Governors of Church and State, then many a time they find it.

I nothing doubt, when with a serious eye you have perused these Sheets, and
how much massy reason and religion you find, you will allow of my recommending
the perusal thereof to all, and in a special manner to the Youth at
Universities: the Advices here contained, though not at first designed for you,
are very suitable to you, and calculat for your station and age, and it may be
my recommendation will go the further with you, that you only know that I am,

Your sincere wellwisher, and humble Servant.

The Printer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THe writer of these Sheets, having it seems, partly for his more easy
comprehending thereof, and partly (as is said in the Letter here printed) of
its being done, without any exactness upon several pieces of Paper, as the
Subject occurred, written the sauce in Paragraphs: in the printing they are
numbered, with some intention of adding an Index, for the more ready finding the
virtues exhorted to, or the vices dehorted: but the Paragraphs being so short,
and the Book of that bulk, as the whole may be so easily perused, it is not
done; and the Writer, his not attending the Press. and want of exactness in the
written Copy, has occasioned Errors in the printing, there being in some places
words wanting, and in others, words that ought to be delet, sometimes one word
for another, or Letters wanting, or added, which makes what ought to be the
Plural Number, the Singular, or the Singular the Plurar, and the Pointing in
many places, as may occasion its not being rightly read, yet the mistakes being
obvious to the judicious, shall spare the trouble of giving any particular
account the Errat^: and I expect, that not only the Epistle recommending the
reading these Sheets, but thy own perusal will satisfy that thy time in
reading, and the (...) of this small ^^^k shall not be thrown away; and now
whilst they are printing there is come to my hand six Letters, from a Gentleman
to his Neighbor, which albeit the Author of either the Advice, or Letters, be
unknown to me, yet I apprehend both to be done by one hand; and since the
Subject can give offense to none, and the consideration thereof, may be useful
to stir up Gentlemen and others, to Correspondence of that nature, and may
(besides the diversion in reading thereof) be helpful for direction in some
Occurrences: I presume their adding to the bulk of this little Book will not be
grudged at. I have some Information, there are more of this kind written; if
they come to my hand before the impression be finished, and be such as these
are, they shall be added, and I have confidence my doing thereof, will not be
resented.

Sir,
MY yielding to your Inclination, to have what I wrote as advice to my Son
published, might justly be repute censurable, and an Action not only
conceitedly foolish, but impudent; yea, it might be thought strange, that any
of my Capacity and Literature, should allow, any thing written by themselves,
be designed for public perusal. What I did therein to my Son, was not from any
sense of his wanting in many books which may be easily had, better and more
pertinent Directions tending to his temporal and eternal Well-being, then it
was possible for me to give him; but having at sometimes, as the Actions of
others and my own have given me occasion, observed what I thought to be Duty or
reprehendible therein, I did consider thereupon, and thought my particular
directing thereof to him, might be to his Advantage, not because of any
Excellency therein, but that it being from his Father, and written to himself,
he might be induced to the more serious and profitable perusal thereof: for I
have often observed, that in hearing the Word preached, or having other public
Means of Instruction, every one is apt to hear or read of Duties pressed, as if
they were the concernment of their Neighbor, and not their own; which has made
me much prize Ministers diligence, in visiting Families and Catechizing; what
being at these occasions spoken to poor people, they do usual more seriously
attend thereunto; it is like, you ca^ not upon perusing it again, but see how
unreasonable and unnecessary your desire is, and be sensibl^ that its
uncorrectness would make you asham^^ to own an Interest therein; nor do I know
a^^ thing could be an Argument for printing there^ except that the Advices
therein, having (as^ shall acknowledge) some Endeavors to perswa^^ to, at lest
some Duties does come from one, u^^ fitted many ways for doing thereof; for
some times what of this nature is pertinently pressed (...) any judicious and
learned Minister of the Gospe^^ or any else otherwise of known Parts is hear^^
but cursorly; whereas something of the san^^ Nature, coming from one not
expected, it m^^ occasion a particular Reflection, and thereby o^^ lige the
Hearers to apply it to themselves: I ha^^ since I had your desire read it over
agai^^ but with little intention of bettering it, not the I am insensible of
its need to be corrected, for think I have never at any time read it over, any
part thereof, but I saw in it Incohesion, wa^ of Grammar, and much
Uncorrectness; and ^^ving upon pieces of Paper (at several times as t^^ Subject
has occurred) written it to be of so^^ use to my Children, the Directions
therein a^^ not Methodically set down, and being without consideration of what
I had already done, as t^^ Matter thereof has occurred to me, not without
Repetitions, and will make obvious to any jud^^cious Reader, the foolish
Arrogance of preten^^ing any thing so written for public reading, a^^
sometimes my Pen beyond what was compete^^^ to me, or, it may be, what might be
much use^^ to my Children, has run out upon some Subject, and in Taxing of
some Professions: but a^ the full and overflowing sense of their Practice led
me to it, so it yet makes me wish, that these in a Capacity to do it, would not
only hold forth, but by suitable Means prevent Practices so much prejudicial to
Society. I do confess that the smallest of books (when done with seriousness)
pressing Duty are most useful, for seldom are books of any Bulk read over, and
I could wish, some fitted for that Work, would do something in such Terms as
might engage to the reading thereof; not that there is want of abundance of
books of that nature, but the Novelty and Succinctness of what might be
pressed, would be helpful to induce to a serious perusal. There is indeed great
need of suitable Directions against our selfish sinful Inclinations, for it is
obvious, that self is the Devil's great Engine to destroy Soul and Body: yea
Covetousness, and almost every other Vice, proceeds from that Root: and as the
Devil and Corruption within us, makes every vicious Habit to have some
appearance, either of its being necessar, or of the Virtue that is most
opposite thereto; so the Covetous, are apt to construct their Actions only to
be frugal: it is true, being careless of what Providence trysts us with, or
Lavish, or Exorbitant in using thereof, is not only against the Command of God,
but is often accompanied with an otherwise sinful and vicious Life; yet are the
Covetous as grossly Faulty, and the Holy Spirit of God in the Scriptures, does
plainly declare his Abhorrence thereof: I could wish some Pen, fitted for that
Work, would direct Mankind particularly and succinctly, to understand the true
middle betwixt these Extrems, and let them see that as unconcerned and prodigal
spending is very unallowable, so is anxious caring for things of this World and
the love thereof, as much so; for the Generality does satisfy themselves in
this, that if they seek after but what is their own, and that by no unlawful
worldly Means, (which is a length the most part comes not to) they apprehend
not the inconveuiency of doing it with too much intentness, not that any can be
too careful in their lawful Calling, if it encroach not upon their other Duties
but where either the having or losing of Money, or any worldly Goods, does
further influence us, then the procuring, our valuing them not so much for
their own worth, as that they come from God to be used at his Direction, it is
surely unallowable; and when they are lost, we are not to grieve for the want
thereof, but to search our ways, and to acknowledge our sins, as the true cause
of every cross Dispensation that befalls us: and neither to rejoice in the
having of temporal Goods, but as they are the marks of his love, nor to be
concerned at the loss or want thereof, but in so far as it proceeds from his
Displeasure, because of Sin; yea, sometimes is want more behoveful to sinful
man, then a full enjoyment; and surely God will make good that Promise, of
turning all his Dispensations for the best, to them that love and fear him. It
is to be wished, that if some little Piece were published, some short
Directions to every state of Mankind, Nobility, Gentry, and Commons, for none
living upon Earth, but are to do what may be said to be their Calling, and the
Greatest of Mortals will at the Great Day of Account see their Misery, in not
living up to it; neither are they, nor these of the most mean and low
Condition, exempted from Duty toward God, themselves, their Neighbor, their
Relations, and their Servants. I tell you it is beyond my Capacity, to hold
forth the same as may be convincing; it is true, to willing Learners, they
depending humbly upon God for Direction, their Duty will be very obvious, and
their Adventage of doing thereof is not only great to all Eternity, but even
whilst in the World, the serene Peace of Conscience and entire depending upon
God, and expectation of being blessed eternally by Him, is incomparably
valuable, beyond all that wretched men can propose to themselves, by following
the Dictats of their corrupt and wicked Inclinations; indeed almost all Mankind
may be said to live without the sense of God's Being, and that they are
undoubtedly to receive from Him, either the Sentence of their being forgiven
and accepted of, in, and for Christ's sake, or that of being rendered miserable
with the Devils to all Eternity: for generally does Ignorance abound, and we
are not aware, that without Knowledge, at least i^ some competent Measure, we
are not able to serve God, and where there is some measure of Knowledge,
Corruption does so far prevail. (...) there are ^ew that lives up to it, and
all precessing themselves to be Christians, may be considered as these that are
either openly profane, and however with their mouth they profess, yet in their
practice they deny their belief of God; or such as says they do, and seems to
believe and rely upon God for Mercy, or such as from a true sense and feeling
of their sin, flies with all their heart to God in Jesus Christ, as the only
Sanctuary for Sinners: of the last of which, there is surely the least number;
the difficulty of truly coming to Christ, being greater then the most do
conceive, for in doing thereof, a Sinner must first have a heart-real sense and
feeling of its lost Condition, and being fully satisfied and convinced of its
own unworthiness and inability to any good in all humility, and entirely to
throw it self in the Arms of the merciful Savior of Sinners, whose Blood is
only able to purge from Guilt: and this every Sinner may be fully convinced of,
that it can never seek or come to Christ acceptably, but as it sees it self
lost and undone, beyond all possibility of help without Him: and albeit our
utmost endeavor to perform religious and moral Duties, must not be omitted,
yet must there be a full Conviction, that as it is possible for us to perform
them, they avail nothing in our Access to God. I remember to have read one
saying, when thou come to Christ in Faith, thou must leave behind thee thy
own Righteousness, and bring nothing but thy Sin. O! that is hard, leave behind
all thy Holiness, Sanctification, Duties, Humblings, etc. And bring nothing but
thy Wants and Miseries, else Christ is not fit for thee, nor thou for Christ.
Christ must be a pure Redeemer and Mediator, or Christ and thou will never
agree: and the same Person, when pressing to a true and cordial Believing in
Christ, says to Believing, there must go a clear conviction of Sin, and of the
Merits of the Blood of Christ, and of Christ's willingness to Save; upon this
consideration, only that thou art a Sinner. I seem herein to express to you, my
sense of the need of something directing Mankind, by some short Rules to their
Duty toward God, their Neighbor, and themselves; and has said, that the
novelty and succinctness of it, might induce to a perusal thereof, in which you
may justly tax me of Imprudence, for as the word Novelty is improper to such a
Subject, so you may allege there is already much written, that directs to
Duties, of which I am sensible; but they being either enlarged upon, or done in
other Writings, whereby the brevity that is taking to the most of Readers, is
wanting, and for what I have seen in little Rooks containing Matters of this
kind, there is either apparent indifference, in directing to religious Duties,
or at least the want of life and zeal in principally endeavoring God's glory,
as if living so as might gain worldly Repute, were most to be desired. But I
hear of other Pieces which are not come to my hand, particularly one done by an
English Marquess, and another said to be Argyls; and if in these, or in some
others already printed, which I have not seen, that Want be not made up; I
think there Wants not Reason to induce Persons qualified; yet to give some
brief Directions therement, for surely the most of Mankind does generally by
their Converse declare, that the Laws of God are not the Rule of their Walk,
which is much to be lamented; for if frail man could guard against Corruption,
and live according to the Rules in the Gospel, an Society so constitute, would
be to all Degrees of Persons desirable, almost beyond humane Comprehension.
But having exceeded Bounds in this Letter to you, I shall only add, that I do
sincerely wish, there may be pressed in some short Directions what may be
useful, and that God by his Holy Spirit accompany the same, and the Endeavors
of Godly men in books already written, that in this Age, and in these Lands may
be fulfilled that Prophesy, Is. 11.8, 9. And the sucking child shall play on
the hole of the Asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the
cockatriceden: And They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea.

I am, Sir, Your etc.

A Fathers Advice to his Son.
Son, However unfit I am for the Discharge of the Duties incumbent to a Parent,
yet have I upon my Heart a sense of the Obligation I ly under, to endeavor
with all my Strength your welfare in this World, but especially to all
Eternity, which has made me resolve in these following Lines, to send you some
Advice and Directions in order to it,
BEing now past your Childish years, you are to know, that your end of living,
is undoubtedly the Glory of God your Maker, and Redeemer, and you are called to
missimploy no part of your time, but to live in every thing, as minding you are
ever in God's sight and presence. Your Duty holden forth in his blessed Word,
especially in the New Testament, by our Lord, and his Apostles, is beyond
exception, the most rational and convenient, even for the well-being of
Society, and good of Mankind in the World, and far preferable to the best of
Rules and Laws that ever were given by any man, or Society of men. I shall
forbear writing of many things which might occur to me, and does entreat your
whole Conversation may evidence the belief of your Being, to appear before the
Tribunal of God in Judgment, and shall recommend your being careful of some few
things in your Walk. First, toward God. Secondly, Toward your self, and
Thirdly, Toward our Neighbors. You are in all you do, to respect the Glory of
God, there being no action of your life, but it truly ought to be done to that
end. We are with all carefulness to avoid every thing sinful, and to go about
even the most indifferent of our Concerns, in obedience to his Command, Love to
him being the Motive, and his Glory the Aim of all we do; wherefore make
Conscience of seeking of God, strength enabling you to every Duty. I shall not,
nor am I fitted to enlarge upon what might be said to what is Duty, and shall
recomend your reading practical Pieces of Divinity; but above all, be in a
constant and humble dependence upon God for his Grace, enabling you to serve
him, and seek for Christ's sake a broken heart, and strength against every
Corruption: Cry with earnestness, that you never be left to the power of your
wicked self, and beware of seeing any Merit in what ever is possible for you to
do, for only in Christ is your acceptance with God.

Son, whilst I am writing what occurs to me of your duty Godward, I am
sensible it may be truly said to be duty toward your self, the Salvation of
your Soul (not of Merit, but Free Grace) being what is annexed thereto.

1. Have your heart filled with faith in God and his Son Christ Jesus, and love
to him, and the fear of his holy Name, seek not to satisfy your shallow
Reason, in divine things; but as the Apostle requires, 2 Cor: 10.5. Casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought unto the obedience
of Christ. For to give your Assent, merely upon a sensible or rational
Demonstration, is no divine faith, and truly to believe in a divine sense, is
to assent to a preposition, upon the credit of the Revelation, though we cannot
make it out by our Reason. And this is to have our thoughts brought into
Captivity, unto the Obedience of Christ; for man's reason being corrupted by
Adam's fall, it objects against several divine Propositions, Saying, how can
one be three? and three one? How could the divine and humane Nature unite in
one Person? How can the Dead rise? These and what else are above ^^r Reason,
and contained in the blessed Word of God, are to be believed, because asserted
therein, and at all times our hearts ought to be filled with Love to God, and
his Son our Savior and Redeemer, whom we are to love with all our Soul, with
all our Mind, and with all our strength, for whatever in Creatures may be a
Motive to love as Goodness, Power, Kindness, Veracity etc. Are in our blessed
God in an unspeakable superlative degree; He is of infinite goodness and
excellency, and there is nothing good in the world, but what has received all
its Goodness from him, and he is wonderfully Kind and Merciful to Souls and
Bodies of poor Sinners; Having, when miserable Man had lost himself, by sinning
against his Command, offered that wonderful way of satisfying Divine Justice,
by sending his Son to the world, who took upon him the nature of frail Man, and
suffered that shameful death of the Cross, and all to stand betwixt Sinners
and Justice. And are not our Bodies supplied with all good things we enjoy
through his care and providence?

2. Make Conscience of living as in the sight of Him, the only living and true
God, before whose Tribunal you must appear, to give an Account of your Actions.
Be diligent, having Faith with Knowledge, and attention of Mind, in reading the
Scriptures, and seek of God, and depend upon him for his Holy Spirit enabling
you to that and every Duty. I have from my experience observed, that being up
late at night, and lying a Bed in the morning, are a hinderance of the Duties
required of us; for not only has God appointed the Night for rest and sleep,
and the Day for Exercise, but you will find the advantage of making use of the
Morning for your private Devotion, and that so early as you may have convenient
and uninterrupted time for the performance thereof, before either Business or
Company may have the occasion of tempting you to a Diversion. You will find
David's practice in the 5th. Psalm. and 3 v. In the morning O Lord, will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

3. The end of your living being Gods Glory, your last thought at night, and
first in the morning ought to be of God. Think with seriousness of your own
misery through your Original and Actual Sin, and of the unexpressible Goodness
and Mercy of God in Jesus Christ to you and every lost Sinner, that shall have
grace to lay hold on him, in and by Christ. And when you arise, endeavor by
meditation to bring your heart to such a Frame, as may fit you for drawing near
to God; who albeit he be merciful, yet is the great and only God altogether
unaccessible to sinners not coming to him, in and through Christ. And surely an
Ignorant, Wandering, Unbelieving and hardened Heart has no ground to expect
Access to God in Christ our Lord. You would stir up your self, not only to
Prayer in the morning, but to reading some part of the Scriptures; and I do
advise you, when first you do retire your self, after you have endeavored by
some suitable Mediation, to bring up your heart to an awful Sense of the
presence of God, to whom you are about to dare to speak, that you fall down
upon your Knees, and lifting up your heart to God, in some few and suitable
words, seek to him with earnestness for Grace, enabling you to read his Word
aright, and suitably to put up your desires in prayer, and whenever you do
pray, always express your thankfulness, and magnify the Name of God, for his
Mercy to lost Sinners in Jesus Christ; then read a portion of Scripture, as you
find convenient to stint your self to: I think it would not be amiss, you did
every morning read a Psalm or two, and an Chapter of the new or old Testaments,
as you have read through the Psalms, you would begin again and think it not too
much, if you should read them a thousand times, and for the old and new
Testament, there is no part of either ought to be omitted; but especially you
would read the new Testament and the Prophets, and for the histocal part of the
Bible, I think it not so necessary, that you do so often read it. After your
reading, endeavor to enlarge your self in Confession and Prayer to God, and
lift up your heart not only in a general acknowledgment of his mercies, but in
particularly acknowledging him for the mercies you are ever meeting with. In
your Petitions, pray for all, especially these you have interest in, and such
as are in Authority, yea, omit not your very Enemies, and forget not to be
earnest with God in behalf of his Church and People. And certainly you cannot
better at some times conclude your wandering and sinful Prayers, then in the
words of that unconceivable excelling Prayer of our blessed Lord and Savior,
Our Father, etc.

You would endeavor duly to perform the duties of Prayer, Reading, and
Meditation at the times set a part by you, and not to omit them, unless some
special Reason occur obleiging you to alter, in which case you would redeem the
lost occasion by a new opportunity, albeit I be not against the length of
Prayers, when fitness of frame and occasion enables you to enlarge therein, yet
I incline you should for ordinar be frequent, albeit succinct in that Duty, and
besides the ordinar times for your Divotion, Evening and Morning; you would not
only throughout the day be frequent in ejaculatory Petitions to God, but as
occasion offers of any privacy, you would upon your Knees, with thankfulness of
heart, humbly put up your desires to God, for strength against your Corruption,
and a supply of your Souls wants, which upon little Recollection, you will
always find to be many.

4. When you eat or drink, neglect not that Christian Practice, of seeking a
Blessing before your doing thereof, and giving of Thanks after your partaking
of what God in great merey has bestowed upon you; it may truly be said to be a
Christian Practice, being as you may be satisfied from the Evangelists, the
Custom of our blessed Savior. But as ye are called to avoid Formalitie in
Christian Duties, so ye would especial-beware of it in this, the Corruption of
our wretched Hearts prevailing but too much to our being formal in the Duties
we more frequently g^ about, it is to be feared, that the Motives to this Duty,
with the most part is allanerly Custom, or to shun some kind of public
Reproach, that attends the neglect thereof: And alas! too seldom are our hearts
intent upon what we are doing therein, I desire ye may seriously mind, that it
is not Words but the Heart that God requires, and whether by your self alone,
or as the mouth of others that with you does partake of what he in Mercy gives,
be serious in expressing succinctly desires suitable to the occasion, and
especially, if you do it with, and for others. I am satisfied of its being very
suitable for Persons qualified at some occasions, to enlarge in that Duty; but
I think it would be done with discretion, for unless some singular Circumstance
require it, or that the Speaker be satisfied of an inclination in these that
join with him, to go along heartily in the Petitions put up to God not directly
tending to the craving of a Blessing to, or giving Thanks for the present
Mercy: He would beware of doing what the unsuitable frame in others, and very
likely in himself, may be but a Snare to the Company. Indeed we are not only in
all our Approaches to God, to forbear the doing thereof, so as may evidence
Formality, and want of Attention to the Duty we go about, but even in the most
single Petition we put up, it were fitting we did so express, a sense of our
own unworthiness, and Gods infinite Goodness, for which at all times we should
praise him, yet our Experience from a small Observation, may satisfy that
tediousness therein, reaches not to bring the hearts of these that should join
in it, to a serious doing thereof.

5. With your Petitions in Prayer and at other occasions, either in word or
thought, magnify the Name of God for his Mercies, they are unexpressibly Great
in all that occurrs to us: but oh the Greatness of the Love of God! in sending
His Son to satisfy Divine Justice for wretched miserable rebellious Man: Forget
not at all times the Praising of God, by word and in thought; Our most Blessed
Lord in that excelling Pattern of Prayer, does begin and conclude with the
Father's Praise, and surely the duty of Praise, is of all that is required by
God of Man; what does most immediately tend to His giory, what we are else
called to do or seek of Him, has the immediate tendency to our own or our
Neighbor's Well; but our conscientious hearty praising of God of all Duties,
does most directly glorify Him, and it is the beginning here, what shall be the
delightful and ever continuing work, of such as shall in and through Christ at
the Great Day of His appearance, be accepted of Him to all Eternity. I have
told you of my unfitness, to direct you particularly in your duty Godward, and
I pray God for Christ's sake give you knowledge in Duty, and sanctify your
heart, let the World have nothing of the room of Christ therein, for it is
unspeakably vain and wicked: Solomon does uncontravertedly hold forth the
vexatious Vanities incident to the life of Man, and it is certainly evident,
there is nothing truly desirable, but an Interest in Christ, and that they are
only happy, whose God is the Lord: and not only is the Evidence of an Interest
in Christ desirable, but it is attainable, as is plain from the Mouth of our
Blessed Lord, who says what all the enemies to the use of Marks or Evidences,
can lay no exception against. Mat. 6.21. For where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also. And I recommend to your serious perusal, Mr. Gu^hrie's
Trial of a Saving Interest, which will direct you therein, and the Means for
attaining to it.

6. Let your whole walk throughout the day be as I have hinted to you, have
upon your heart the awful sense of Gods presence wherever you are, or whatever
you do, or think; I deny not, but the World may, and must be minded by you, but
still in its place, secondarly and subordinatly: for what is the World to your
Soul? What is Bread, or Clothes, or Money, or a house or Lands, to an
everlasting Kingdom? Let the Lord have the whole ordering of you, make no
Purchase, but where God who is present allows of the Bargain: and go about no
Business concerning which you cannot say, I am herein trading for God: That is,
your doing either what immediately tends to his Glory, or your serving Him in
your Station and Calling, as he has appointed; by the 15 Psalm you will see
what is acceptable to God.

7. Meditation is a Duty in which there is much delight, to such as seriously
practice it, and it is what will truly tend to the bringing your heart to, and
keeping it in a tender frame; yea the advantages thereof are so great, as may
stir up to the redeeming time for the exercise thereof, even from what may
lawfully be allowed to our worldly Concerns, or bodily Refreshment; and how
much more then ought we when we are alone, guard against our minds going out
after foolish and vain fancies, if not what is grossly sinful in the sight of
God? Surely if we had an awful sense of his omnipresence and omniscience, we
would dare to be thinking upon what is unallowable in his sight; and if we had
a sense of our miserable condition through sin, our hearts would ever be ready
to take hold of all occasions of serious thinking, how we should evite the
Curse and Wrath of God to all eternity, which unavoidably will be the Portion
of hardened sinners, not coming to God in and through Christ. David in Ps. 4.4.
Requires we stand in aw, and sin not: and that we commune with our hearts upon
our beds, whereby you may be satisfied, it has been the practice of the Godly
seriously to meditate at all times. The subject Matter for your meditation is
obvious, and will easily occur, as the Debt we ow to the Justice of God for
sin: the certainty of Death, and after that of Judgment, the misery of such as
shall be Doomed to Hell with the Devils, and so for ever separate from the
Presence of God: His incomprchensible Mercy to lost sinners in Jesus Christ,
and the Fullness of the unspeakable Joys that is secured, to such as heartily
and humbly lays hold thereof; yea innumerable are the Subjects of that
exercise, that will with ease offer themselves; and I advise for your Direction
and encouragement to that Duty, that you read the last Part of Mr. Baxter's
Saints rest, which does fully Treat thereof.

8. Every Evening set some short time apart, and state your self as before
God's Tribunal, take a back-look upon your Actions of that day, and what you
have done toward God or your Neighbor amiss, acknowledge it with contrition
and brokenness of heart, and seek of God Grace, enabling you to a due
Reparation, either by a sorrowful, even public acknowledgment thereof, in so
far as they are sins against our good God, providing the same may tend to the
Edification of His Church and People, or by repairing the prejudice of any hurt
done to your Neighbor, in so far as it is possible within your power: and in
your Evening Prayer, acknowledge the goodness of God throughout all the days of
your time, and in particular acknowledge Him for the Mercies of that day, and
enlarge your self in Prayer as in the Morning.

9. As you are called to own a Profession of Godliness, so you are to avow the
public performance of Duty, wherever Providence shall tryst your Being; yet
for the most part, you would endeavor its Being, as retired and as private as
possible, at least beware that to be seen or heard of men, or any self end, be
not a Motive to your doing thereof; I remember to have heard of a woman meeting
with godly Mr. Fox upon the Street, and after some discourse, she pulling out
her Bible told him she was going to hear a Sermon, upon which he said to her,
if you will be advised by me go home, but said she, when shall I then go to
Church? To whom he answered, when you tell no body of it.

10. Beware of Hypocricie, and be assured God will not be dissembled with, he
has in many places of Scripture, ranked Hypocrites with the worst of sinners;
you will find Mat. 23.13. they are amongst the number of such, against whom our
Lord denounces a Woe; and in Chap. 14.51. the misery of their condition is held
forth, in the Sentence of the unjust Servant, where, as an aggravation of his
punishment, it is said, his portion shall be with the hypocrites: where there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Do not you appear to be what you are
not, and let the design of being thought religious, or the making use of a
Profession to cloak your carnal and worldly ends, be far from you. I
acknowledge to be morally honest, is not to be religious: but mind, that
without endeavoring to be so in all your Actions, there is no Religion. And it
is the height of folly, for any to think that their being of a Persuasion with
those that are the most godly, or their own practicing, even with much
appearing sincerity, the Duties of Religion, where there is not Moral Honesty,
does so much as truly entitle them to the name of Christians: it is true, every
man is subject to Failings, and an entire doing of what is required of us, is
not within the power of sinful man; but as truly are our Failings in Moral
Duties, either where they are customary and habitual, or not repented of, and
endeavored against difect indications of the want of Religion: and that our
Lord notwithstanding the Name and Profession of such, will disown them in their
greatest extremity: and you may see the Prophet Micah holding forth, that the
outward performing of what was legally required of the Jews, was not the
principal part of their Duty, and says in Chap. 6.7, 8. Will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I
give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my
soul? He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? And
God by the Prophet Jeremiah Chap. 4.24. says, Let him that glories, glory in
this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord which exercise
loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth: for in these things
I delight, says the Lord. Yea our Lord himself in that most excellent Sermon
upon the Mount, has said, Mat. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will of my
Father which is in heaven.

11. Mind what you are engaged to in your being Baptized, and live up to that
solemn engagement: you are to fight out your Warfare under the Banner of Christ
our Lord, and renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; seek of God for
Jesus sake, that He may give you knowlegde, and enable you to see and live up
to the solemn Ties you are under, through your baptismal Covenant, and as ye
will answer to our good God at the day of your Appearance before his Tribunal:
be not among the number of such, as never thinks of Baptism being otherwise
useful, then as a Ceremony for their having a Name.

12. I expect that you will be able, as the Apostle requires, to give an Answer
to every man that asks you a Reason of the Hope or Belief that is in you,
with Meekness and Fear; Forbe^^ Debates and Disputings upon Controversies in
Religion, what plainly holds forth the duty of Christians, in their whole life,
is uncontraverted^ clear from the Scriptures, and all Debates (...) religious
matters, that have not the alone prospect of bettering and advancing of
Knowledge are certainly not allowable: And as your heart^ all times ought to be
over-filled with true love (...) God, and such as bears his Image; so
especially be respective to the Ministers of the Gospel, being Ambassadors for
Christ, and Administrator of the Ordinances appointed by him in the Ne^^
Testament, as the Apostle enjoins, 1 These. 5.1^^ I beseech you brethren, mark
them which labor amongst you, and are over you in the Lord, and adminish you,
and esteem them very highly in Love, for the works sake; And let not the
infirmities of any (...) them, procure in your heart any disrespect to th^^
holy Calling: But mind what the same Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.7. That we have
this Treasure in earth en Vessels, that the exeellency of the power may be
(...) God, and not of us.

13. As you are to have a Pity and Love eve^ toward such, as altogether wants
Religion, (...) worships God not truly, as he has appointed (...) his Word, so
ye would altogether avoid the least of Animosity with such as with Charity
(...) may judge differs only anent Church Government or any thing else not
inconsistent with the salvation of their Souls, not doubting but ye will sin^
at the day of Judgment that the many Niceitie^ which a great part do, but too
much concern themselves in, are the effects of want of Charit and a gospel
Frame, and disposition of heart.

14. The wickedness of our hearts, is such as does altogether unfit for the
doing of Duty. Have we any prosperity in the enjoyment of health, or any thing
desirable in the world, we are seldom or never in a frame for rightly
acknowledging God for his Mercies, and improving them to the end of our having
thereof; And if Providence tryst our being crossed in what is delightful to us,
how ready are we to dejection of mind, and what does unfit for Duty, let every
Dispensation of God to you-ward, lead you to the consideration of failings in
your bypast life, and stir you up to a suitable walk under what you are trysted
with. Endeavor an equality of Temper in all your ways, if Dispensations any
ways prosperous be your Lot, consider you have them from God, and humbly
acknowledge his Mercy in what ever you meet with, and if what is more cross
befall you, repine not thereat, but mind that the worst of Conditions is above
your desert. Seek of him with earnestness, that you may truly learn his holy
Will in all his Dispensations, and in Prosperity or Adversity, let all your
care be, to know what ye are called to as Duty; and to endeavor with diligence
the doing thereof, even in things relating to this life, then with cheerful
Submission leave the event of all your concerns to God who is wonderful in
goodness, to such as fear and trust in him.

15. When the Lords day is come, remember to keep it holy, as God has expressly
appointed in his 4th. Command: And in order thereto, prepare your Heart for the
Duties thereof, before it approach; for however a great many in this Age, may
contravert the Morality of that Precept, for the due observation of the Sabbath
yet may you be satisfied with what is fully held forth by (I may say) all the
most serious and godly of Divines, that it is from the Practice no^ only of the
Primitive Church, being the mospure of Christians, but even of the Appostles,
wh^ were immediately inspired of God, and whose Example we are bound to follow.
And as the due Observance of the Sabbath under the Law was enjoined under the
certification of gre^^ wrath from God, as in Nehemiah 13. cap. v. 17. and 18.
What evil is this that ye do, and propha^^ the Sabbath, did not your Fathers
thus? and did (...) our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this C^ty?
yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profanity the Sabbath. So the Promises
to the doing there of were great, as in Isa. 56.2. Blessed is the m^^ that does
this, and the son of man that lays hold^^ it, that keeps the Sabbath from
polluting it. A^^ 58.13 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, and
from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, a^^ call the Sabbath of the Lord a
delight, the holy of the Lord honorable, and shall honor him, not finding
thi^^ own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words; then sha^^ thou delight thy
self in the Lord, and I will cause th^^ to ride upon the high places of the
earth, and feed the with the heretage of Jacob thy father, for the mou^^ of the
Lord has spoken it. Yea not only from History, the judgments of God upon
Sabbath Breakers are manifest, but such as are of small Experience, may
evidently perceive the dreadful consequences thereof, in the confession of
almost all Malefactors that comes to public Execution. It is tr^^ such as are
pleased to have no respect to the d^ Observation of the Sabbath, and to object
again^ the obligation upon Christians for keeping it holy, does answer to that,
of its being so generally confessed by dying Penitents, that the same flows but
from their Education, and its being inculcat in them, to be so sinful: but what
answer will such, I may say, profane Wretches, give to this so palpable
Evidence of God's displeasure, with the profanation of that Day; that He in his
overruling Providence, often permits notorious Breakers of the Sabbath, to fall
in such sins, as even brings them to open and shameful Punishment, in this
World? And albeit the ways of God's Providence, are not to be fathomed, and
gross Sinners of every kind, does in things relating to this life, Die, without
any appearing Marks of God's displeasure, which may fully satisfy all rational
Persons, that there is a Judgment to come: so the temporal Calamities,
sometimes trysting Sinners in this World, are an Earnest of what shall be
Dispensed at that dreadful Day to such; and it may plainly appear to you, that
the Cavilling against the Obligations, for keeping Holy the Sabbath of our
Lord, is of the Devil; being, that only such as want tenderness of Conscience,
and Love not to live in any thing according to the Rules of the Gospel, do thus
declare themselves: whereas, Persons whose hearts are Godward, however their
Frailty may hinder the due performance of their Duty, are ever ready to
acknowledge their Obligation to the observation of that Day, to be kept, a
Sabbath Holy to the Lord. Yea, Sir Matthew Hale late L. Chief Justice of
England, whose Memory is Savoury to all good men that knew or heard of him, in
his Directions to his Children for keeping the Lords Day, does press it upon
them for several Reasons, and in one whereof he says, because I have found by
long and sound Experience; that the due observance of that Day, and of the
Duties of it, have been of singular comfort and advantage to me, and I doubt
not but it will prove so to you; God Almighty is the Lord of our time, and
lends it to us; and as it is but just we should consecrate this part of that
time to Him, so I have found by a strict and diligent Observation, that the due
Observation of the Duties of this Day, has ever had joined to it, a Blessing
upon the rest of my time; and the Week that has been so begun, has been
blessed and prosperous to me: and on the other side, when I have been negligent
of the Duties of the Day, the rest of the Week has been unsuccessful and
unhappy to my own secular Employment; so that I could easily make a^ estimat of
my success, in my own secular Employment the Week following, by the manner of
my passing this Day; and this I do not write lightly and Inconsideratly, but
upon a long and sound Observation and Experience. These being the words of that
Great Man, are much to be considered, he not only being of great Integrity, but
uncontrovertedly o^ a sound Judgment and great Knowledge, almost in every thing.

15. In the Evening of the day preceding you would be more then ordinarily
earnest with God, that He may by his Grace, fit you for (...) suitable going
about the Duties of the ensuin^ Sabbath. And when it is come, consider, that as
God did appoint in the Old Testament, the Sacrifice to be doubled on that Day,
so he require^ of us Christians, that we should therein double our Duties, of
Prayer, Praise, and Meditation^ and as at all times, you are bound to remember
the Church and People of God in your Prayers; so especially in a Sabbath, pray
with earnestness, that our Lord's Kingdom may be advanced throughout the world,
and that the Offers of Grace in his Gospel, may be the Portion of the Land you
live in. Pray that God for Christ's sake, may send forth Ambassadors fitted for
that Work, and that he bless the Word and Ordinances where you are, to be
present in the discharge of the Duties of a Sabbath.

16. Rise early that Morning, and mind you are to spend the whole day in God's
service. When you repair to the place of Public Worship, do it so, as you be
there before any part of it begin; and come not from the same, whilst it be
fully ended: and in the time of Worship, have your heart intent upon the
Duties, it is the heart especially that God requires: and not only ought we to
have presence of mind in hearing the Word preached, but especially in Prayer,
and Praise; for it is an intolerable contempt of God, who searches the heart,
and knows the most secret of our Thoughts, to draw near to Him in Worship,
and to have our hearts going out after any other Object whatsoever. Yea, it is
a direct Saying practically, that we are brutish Fools, and wretched Atheists,
in worshipping of God as knowing our Thoughts, and doing it in that manner, as
evidences manifest contempt, and directly draws down His Vengeance upon us.

17. If the Sacrament of Baptism be administered where you are present, you
would not only with all your heart concur, in the Petitions up to God before
and after the Administration, but hearken to your own Duty, in what is held
forth by the Minister, and let such Occasions, stir you up to new Resolutions,
to live up to your own Baptismal Engagements. Mind that the whole Sabbath, is
to be a Mercat-day for your Soul; and by dealing in the Duties thereof, gain
strength against the Corruptions of the ensuing part of your time.

18. When occasion offers of your Communicating, you are to consider, that it
is not indifferent to you, to come or not to come to the Table of the Lord; but
that you are obliged to be serious, in examining your self: as to your
Knowledge, and your being otherwise fitted to partake of that Sacrament,
Instituted by our Savior: First, in the remembrance of His Sufferings, which
were only able to expiate the Guilt, of lost undone Sinners. And next, to be a
Seal of Sinners, Covenanting with God in Jesus Christ. And 3dly, to be a Mean
of Communion with our merciful Lord, that suffered for our Sins. It is plain, 1
Cor. 11.26. That the great end of the Sacrament is, to hold forth to the Church
the Lords Death and Suffering, whilst he come again to Judgment: And by the
27, 28, and 29. Verses, you see the absolute necessity for the worthy
participating thereof. You must search your heart, and find out all your
iniquity, and hate it, not only as it procures Gods Curse in this life, and to
all Eternity; but especially as it is contrare to the Commandments, and holy
Nature of our God: and as a needy Wretch, having examined your heart, and found
out your Wants, you are (in coming to the Table of the Lord) to bring with you
some Faith, some Love, and some hope, etc. Your Errand being for more; and cry
with earnestness, that you may be amongst the number of such, of whom the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
Power. At such Occasions, make conscience of mourning for every Sin, and with
all your heart magnify Gods Mercy, in his Dispensations to you: and seek with
earnestness of heart, Grace, enabling you to that, and every duty: and beg of
God for Christ's sake, that he give a heart, in a truly fitted frame. So as in
the Sacrament, you may (by the eye of Faith) behold our lovely Lord and Savior
crucified, and His Blood shed, to expiate the Guilt of vile sinful Wretches;
and in particular, to stand betwixt your self a vile sinful Wretch, and the
Vengeance of God due to you in Justice. Seek with all earnestness from God, a
heart filled with love, to Christ our Lovely Savior, who so loved loft undone
Sinners, as He took upon him the nature of frail man, and to satisfy Divine
Justice, (which could not be otherways satisfied) for the sins of all that
would truly come to Him, and by Faith rely upon Him, He suffered the shameful
Death of the Cross, it Representation whereof, is this Sacrament, Institute by
our Lord himself before His suffering. And before, and at the time of your
drawing near to the Table of the Lord, have your heart filled with suitable
Meditations, and ejaculatory Petitions to God, as saying within your self, O my
Soul can thou behold Justifying Blood, and not love Him that shed it for
thee? Canist thou behold Precious, Quickening, softening Bloods and not love
Him that gave it to quicken and soften thy heart, and to Redeem the from Sin,
from Hell, and everlasting Wrath? O my God and Savior, enable me to say, if my
love were better, it should be thine: but such as it is, thou shall have it;
make it greater, and make it better, and I firmly resolve in thy Strength, it
shall ever be set upon thee.

19. Whatever may be the Station that God shall call you to, make Conscience of
doing therein, what is required of you. Evite idleness as the Bane of
well-being, in this side of time, or to Eternity. Your acting diligently in
your Station, is commended from 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, 11, 12. For even when we were
with you, this we commanded you, that if any man would not work, neither should
he eat, etc. In many places of Holy Scriptures, is diligence in our Calling not
only commended, but required: and the temporal inconveniences following
idleness, are manifest from Prove. 19.15. Sloathfulness casts into a deep
sleep, and an idle soul shall suffer hunger.

20. Such a competency of Riches, and other temporal Blessings, as is
consistent with a comfortable Being in this World, is desirable, and what you
may not only by lawful Means in your worldly Station, endeavor to acquire, but
you are allowed, yea required with submission, to seek them of God; only in
this, and whatever else you do, make your principal end, His Glory. Do not
exceed to satisfy your carnal and worldly Appetites, either in your Prayers
for, or your Endeavors after temporal Enjoyments. Let the Prayer of Agur the
Servant of God, be your Rule; Prove. 30.8, 9. Remove far from me vanity and
lies: give me neither Poverty nor Riches: feed me with Fo^d convenient for me,
lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? Or, lest I be poor and
steal, and take the Name of my God in vain. And what it pleases God to bless
you with, you would mind your Ties to the Gracious Giver, and endeavor with
all your strength, so to use it with relation to your self, and others, as may
evidence your thankfulness; and if it shall please our Wise and infinitely Good
God to refuse your desires, and render your Endeavors without success, seek of
Him, that His Dispensations to you may be sanctified, and beware of repining;
for the frailty of foolish man under any cross Dispensation befalling him,
makes him but unwillingly examine, why the Lord contendeth; and sinking under
his trouble, does not readily fly to Him, in and through Christ Jesus, by
fervent and earnest Prayer, but is rather poring upon his Calamities, and
aggravating them, to the raising in his heart thoughts inconsistent with Faith,
and true Love to the Glorious and Merciful God, which upon serious Reflection,
will appear the most unreasonable of Practices, for every man upon due
consideration, will see what befalls him, to be God's dealing with him in
wonderful Mercy, and far from what in Justice his Iniquity calls for. And man's
being tempted to lament his troubles, in comparison of others, and to aggravat
them from Circumstances, too readily occurring to him under any affliction,
will upon little examination, evidence the height of folly; for by a true
comparison betwixt the Circumstances of the Afflicted, and these of such as He
judges more desirable, if they were alike apparent to Him, it is more then
probable, he would have no desire to exchange; and undoubtedly such as are most
pressed under worldly Calamities, has manifold Mercies to be thankful for, and
it will be their own default, if such of God's Dispensations as are even
burdensome to corrupt carnal man, tend not, it is like to their temporal, but
surely their spiritual advantage, sometimes because He loves, he chastises;
indeed miserable man from his blindness, cannot rightly see into the Causes of
God's dealing with him, yet however blinded with Ignorance he may be, and
surrounded with all imaginable difficulties, it it is obviously apparent, that
he has infinite reason to magnify God's Mercy, in not only allowing, but
inviting the most miserable of Wretches, to draw near to Him as their God and
Portion, in and through Christ Jesus the merciful Savior of Sinners. And I do
advise your being earnest in seeking after Grace, enabling to true contentment
with your Condition; for being content with what God in His Providence is
pleased to tryst you with, as it is your duty toward Him, so it is what
contributes most to your worldly satisfaction; yea it is uncontravertedly
apparent, that it is not our attaining to what in the World we propose, as the
Means of reaching satisfaction, that answers our expectation, be it Riches,
Honor, Pleasures, or whatever else. And as it can be truly said, that true
Happiness consists only in an Interest in Christ, so one of the great
Consequents of that Happiness, is the quiet and peaceable acquiescing with a
contented mind, in whatever is our worldly Lot. I remember to have heard one
asked the Question, if he were to have one wish granted, what would it be? To
which it was answered, an Interest in Christ Jesus: nay but says the Inquirer,
that I grant is beyond all exception the only answer to my Question, but I
desire to know what you could wish, as most conducive to your worldly
satisfaction? To which he again answered, a contented mind, with whatever in
Providence is dispensed to me, which is indeed beyond what it is not possible
for man to wish; for as the ultimat end of all the desires, the toil and labor
of man, is his reaching contentment: so it is apparent, the attaining what he
desires, toils and labors for, reaches not the end, and man's endeavor to do
with diligence what he is called to do, and resting contented with what
Providence dispenses to him, is truly most to be desired, in things relating
to our temporal Being, and is attainable, if we would but put in exercise the
little Reason we have; for discontent and anxiety, avails nothing to the
bettering of our Condition, and does certainly more fret and torment, Solomon
in Prove. 19.3. tells you, The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his
heart fretteth against the Lord. Yea man's wickedness and stupidity is manifest,
in repining against what is done by our Creator, and Disposer of what concerns
us, for every thing, be it great or mean, is ordered by Him; as in Psalm. 113.5,
6. Who is like the Lord our God, who dwells on high? Who humbles himself to
behold ^he things that are in Heaven, and in the Earth? And so particular are
the Providence of God in relation to mankind, as our Blessed Lord has said,
Mat. 10.29, 30. Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing, and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your Father, but the very hairs of your head are
all numbered. And it may be said, the great and only Mean of attaining true
Contentment, is a free and absolute Resignation of our Wills, to the Will of
God, who is not only able, but willing to do for the best, to such as trust and
love him: as the Apostle tells you, Romans 8, 28. And we know that all things
work together for good, to them that love God, etc. Let us make sure the full
resignation of our Wills to Him, and Contentment will undoubtedly follow the
doing thereof: yea consider, that all Endeavors after true Contentment, will
be of no effect, until we have entirely resigned our selves, and molded our
affections into that frame, as whatever be His Dispensations to usward, we can
cordially say with old Ely, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what
seems good unto him.

21 Hate and eschew Pride, which is rightly termed the Devils sin, for it was
the cause of the Fall of that Creature, from a most excellent ^tation: and if
we could seriously and unbyasedly look upon it, we would see great cause to
abhor it, It is not only without reason, but against reason, for any proud
person by their being so, are so far from conciliating respect, or any thing
else desirable, as it does directly procure to them disrespect, and does in
every thing prejudge them; for the Proud have this misfortune, to displease
every body but themselves. It is impossible a vain man should love to be
blamed; and a man when he hates reproof, ought not to be accounted a
reasonable Creature: and Pride is unspeakably disadvantagious, by its being
hateful to God: as in Prove. 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, and
arrogance, etc. And the sad effects thereof, are foretold Prove. 16.18. Pride
goes before destruction: and a haughty Spirit before a fall. And the
punishments threatened therefore, are apparent; Prove. 15.25. The Lord will
destroy the house of the proud, etc. Psalm. 119.25. Thou have rebuked the proud
which are cursed: and in Prove. 16.5. The Lord declares his abhorrence thereof,
and the undoubted certainty of its punishment, Every one that is proud in
heart, is an abomination to the Lord: though hand join in hand, he shall not go
unpunished. And Psalm. 101.5. him that has an high look, and a proud heart,
will not I suffer.

22. As the extreme folly of Pride is apparent, from many places of Scripture;
so are the advantages of being truly humble, as in Psalm. 9.12. He forgeteth not
the cry of the humble, and in Prove. 29.23. A man's pride shall bring him low:
but honor shall uphold the humble in spirit. And in Isa. 57.15. For thus says
the high and lofty One, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place,
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, etc. And as pride in
heart, does altogether incapacitate a person from drawing near to God in Duty,
so Humility has the promise of being heard and accepted of, as in Psalm. 10.17.
Lord thou have heard the desire of the humle, thou will prepare their heart,
thou will cause thine ear to hear.

23. Be sober and moderate in your Apparel, for excess therein, is most
unbecoming a man, and inconsistent with reason; forbear following of Fashions,
or appearing singular in being too much opposite to them, a decent comeliness
therein, answerable to your Station, is desirable; for it is obvious, that
Clothes can add no worth to the Owners thereof, and it is intolerable Vanity,
their valuing of themselves thereupon.

24. Anger is almost always the effect of Pride, and as you respect Soul or
Body, strive against it; surely it is at no time advantageous, and the folly
thereof (when the Cloud it procures is taken off our Reason) is obvious to any,
that has the use of Reason; we ought truly to be angry at nothing, but sin:
for Anger is fitly called Madness, and Fury and Bruitishness arise from it. I
think you need only behold the Actions of any person inflamed with Anger, to
satisfy you of the truth of all, that Tongue or Pen can express against it, you
may from Scripture be fully satisfied of its being exceeding sinful, you will
find it dehorted, and the folly thereof held forth; Eccles. 7.9. Be not hasty
in spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of fools. And Psalm. 37.8.
Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thy self in any ways to do evil.
How often are we angry when there is no cause, and when our Corruption may be
stirred up to that Passion? We are told Prove. 19.11. The discretion of a man
deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over a transgression, And in
Prove. 14.17. He that is soon angry deals foolishly: and in verse. 29. He that
is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but he that is hasty of spirit
exalts folly.

25. Endeavor in all your Conversation, such a meek and peaceable deportment,
as becomes a Christian; which will even from these that are much otherwise
disposed, procure you an advantageous Testimony, and the advantage to your self
will be so great, as is hardly expressible; for as Pride and Anger clouds
Reason, and discomposeth from proceeding rationally, either in thinking or
doing, so meekness of Temper, leaves you at full liberty to use all your.
Reason, and will even procure compassion from others, if your Ignorance or
Corruption should bring you under any inconvenience, and the benefit thereof
is clearly holden forth from Scripture, where it has the promise of temporal
Blessings, as in Psalm. 37.11. But the meek shall inherit the earth: and shall
delight themselves in the abundance of peace. Yea, it has the promise of
Eternal Life, Psalm. 149.4. For the Lord takes pleasure in his people: he will
beautify the meek with salvation. And in Mat. 11.29. We have the blessed
Example of our Lovely Savior, where he says, learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

26. Beware of Envy, as what has nothing in it, but what is to be hated; for
as it is hurtful, and intolerable burdensome, even to those who entertain it,
so it is altogether inconsistent with Society, and the Rules of Christianity.
Yea, the envious person does directly wage War with God, and repines at all his
Dispensations, to the advantage of others: and certainly these persons must be
miserable, whose Sorrows arise from the satisfaction of the Public, and whose
happiness proceeds from the misery of those of their Acquaintance.
Covetousness, is an Evil against all reason, and is to be hated, because of the
sordid baseness that attends it; how bruitishly foolish are the ways of the
Covetous? And they being the delight of the Wicked, God hates them, as the
Psalmist does well express, in Psalm. 10.3. For the wicked boasts of his
hearts desire, and blesses the covetous, whom the Lord abhors. Yea, the
Holy Ghost holds it forth to be Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. For this ye know, that no
covetous man who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ,
and of God. And in verse. 3. he urges it, may not so much as be named among
Christians. Yet would you make conscience of living frugally, and whatever
Station you are in, and Profession you follow, let Virtue and Industry be your
Guides, and not Pleasure and Idleness. Undertake nothing without your Sphere,
or above your Capacity; and let all your Ends, and the means whereby you intend
to come to them, be just and honest, in the sight of God and man. Be content
with the Station and Condition of life, that God has called you to; seek not
great things for your self, and quarrel not with Providence: albeit the Event
of your lawful Endeavors, should not answer your expectation, for our God
does, and certainly will make, every thing turn to the advantage of such, as
fear and love him.

SON,
I Have no desire to enlarge much in writing to you, and has in these few Lines
I have last written, minted at saying, what might be the Subject Matter of a
large Discourse; and I require, you may at suitable Occasions, make the ground
of your Meditation, to be the Obligation you ly under, to Frugality, and
Honesty; to diligence in your Station and Profession, and a contented and
submissive frame of heart, under all the Dispensations of God, to you-ward.

27. Evidence in all your Behavior, a heart-hatred to Intemperance in Meat or
Drink; for as being given to a luxurious Desire, of eating much, or of things
pleasing to the Appetite, is hateful, even to persons that upon a moral
Principle, only values their Honor; much more is it to be hated, by such as
profess to be Christians; yea, the Misery attending it, even in this World, is
apparent, from Prove. 23.21. For the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to
Poverty: and the Apostle in Phil. 3.19. describing the Enemies of the Cross of
Christ, holds them forth to be such, Whose end is destruction, and whose god is
their Belly.

28. Drinking to Excess, may be said to be the Mother, of almost all Vices; for
as there is in every humane Creature, when born, a natural propensity to Evil;
so, were it not the common Influences of the Grace of God, even to all Mankind,
enlightening their Reason, in so far, as may let them see the Iniquity, in
breaking of the the most of His Commands, and were not also restrained, from
the apprehension of temporal Punishment, frail wretched man, would always be
committing every wickedness within his power. Ought we not then to fear, lest
we should provoke God to give us up to our selves, which is the worst of Evils,
when by intemperate drinking, we not only cloud, but destroy our Reason, which
as it is given us principally, to distinguish us from Bruits, and enable us to
glorify our Creator, even so, that we may thereby see the filthiness of Vice,
and fear the punishments justly due to it. History does plainly make appear its
being hateful, even to Heathens; and the many and dreadful Judgments, that has
befallen miserable Wretches, given over to that wickedness, and the Holy Spirit
of God, holds forth the folly and misery of that Sin, as in Pro. 20.16. Wine is
a Mocker, strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not
wise. And the great misery attending it, is apparent from Prove. 23.29, 30. And
as being abominable to Almighty God, it is put into the Catalogue of grievous
sins, that secludes from the heavenly Kingdom, 1 Cor. 6.10. nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, etc: shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

29. What I have said before this, of Idleness, and now of Intemperance, brings
me to dissuade your being guilty of the beastly, and to be hated sin of
Uncleanness, whereof they may be truly said to be Parents. It is indeed most
hateful, and to be abominate, and I entreat you may be earnest with God, that
He for Christ's sake, by His Grace, may prevent the very beginnings of, and
inclinations to that silthy sin, for in every sin, and especially this,
wherever Satan prevails, but to a beginning, or tendency thereto, it is
impossible, without the special Grace of God, of His great Mercy bestowed. to
prevent the being given over, to the practice of that wickedness, which is
almost irrecoverable: as in Pro. 2.19. None that go unto her, return again,
neither take they hold of the paths of life. Ye would not only forbear any
Action, or corrupt Communication that tends thereto; but in your very heart
entertain no thought that has any prospect to that Sin: for albeit ye should
forbear the grosser Acts of Uncleanness, yet if you do with any delight
entertain such sinful Thoughts and Fancies: It is to be feared, your
forbearance flows not from a principle of the fear of God, or love to Him; and
that your lodging such filthy Suggestions, will bring you under great danger of
being guilty of the gross Acts of Uncleanness, which are utterly destructive to
Man, even in relation to his temporal Being; Curses following that Sin, being
plain from Scripture, Prove. 6.26. For by the means of a whorish woman, a man is
brought to a piece of bread, and the Adulteress will hunt for the precious
life; yea Wrath and eternal Judgment is frequenly denunced against it, as in
the 13. Heb. 4. But whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. The Body is
called the Temple of the Living God, and the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 3 17.
peremptorly threatens destruction to the Defilers thereof. If any man defile
the Temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy, which
Temple ye are. And it does eternally exclude from the presence of God, Ephesians.
5.5. For this ye know, that no whoremoonger nor unclean Person shall enter into
the kingdom of God. And how great will the stupidity and beastliness of Sinners
appear even to themselves, in that day of their standing before the Tribunal of
God Almighty, when they shall find from their being guilty of that beastly Sin,
that they are for ever secluded from his presence and kingdom.

30. Swearing and Profaning the blessed Name of God, is an evil, directly
contrair a positive Command, and it is being of the Devil is obvious, I entreat
you guard against all tendency thereto, for God does often give over to
themselves, such as are usual Swearers and Profaners of His Name, and leaves
them to fall into that to be lamented State of constant Swearing, where they
have no Temptation, nor the least pretense to any Advantage thereby. Remember
the Account you must make at the great day of your appearance before God's
Tribunal, and if they shall not escape who have spoken idly and vainly; how
terrible shall their Judgment be, who profane and abuse the Name of the most
holy God? Accustom your self to a most awful Dread of His Name, and never
pronounce the same in word, or have it even in the thought of your heart, but
with due Reverence; for he has expressly said, He will not bold them guiltless
that takes his Name in vain.

31. Lying, is by every one known to be so inconsistent with Honor, or any
thing desirable; As I think, few Arguments may serve to diswade your being
guilty thereof. It Is Effects among such as ye converse with, will be not to be
believed when ye speak truth, and Experience shows, that any person being
found to ly, they are with difficulty after that believed, but considered as
void of Credit, and very worthless. As you respect your Honor and Reputation,
but above all your Souls eternal Interest and Well-being; accustom your self
to Truth, in every circumstance of your Speech and Actions: for as Lying is so
obviously hateful to every person, but pretending to Honor and Honesty, so it
is abominable to God. Prove. 12.22. Lying lips are abomination to the Lord, and
a Lie being in the mouth of any Person, does prognosticate the Devils being in
the heart; for lying, may properly be said to be his Language, he being the
father of Lies. And ye find in the 22. Rev: 15. such to be debarred from the
new Jerusalem, as loves and makes a lie.

32. As you are to abominat that dishonorable Vice of Lying, so ye would
forbear what has any likelihood to, or appearance thereof; Beware of reporting
Stories, having any thing of incredulity in them: since you may thereby soon
procure to your self, such a Stain of dishonor, as even your after-life,
albeit of great prudence and veracity, will with difficulty delet. I hope my
confidence in your being nothing inclined to this Vice, shall not deceive me,
and I give you this Caution, lest by unnecessar reporting of Truths, which has
any appearance of impossibility, you begin to weaken your Credit, for I think
any at least, whilst they are entering upon the World, and whilst their
Solidity and Veracity be nottour, should be cautious they do not in Discourse,
or otherwise what may have a tendency to weaken their Reputation.

33. Being talkative, and a love to Discourse much, has many inconveniences
attending it, and however some persons truly of Worth may be inclined thereto,
yet has it ever to me most usually proclaimed their folly. Whilst ye are in
company of any Superior, it will be Wisdom to speak but when required, unless
it be with modesty in few and apposite Words, to evidence some desire, or seek
to be resolved of some Question; and in all Companies whatsoever, shun the
taking upon you of much Discourse, as what is not only Nauseating, but often in
the abundance thereof, is something said, which the Speaker, or such as is
concerned in him, would heartily wish, were not said. And Solomon in the 10.
Prove. 19. Holds forth to you, that in the multitude of Words, there wants
not sin, but he that refraineth his Lips, is wise. And the 17.28. Even a fool
when he holds his peace, is counted wise: and he that shuts his lips, is
esteemed a a man of understanding.

34. I have told you, ye are to evite Idleness, and so live as to be useful in
your Station, and that you may continue the more fitted for so doing;
Recreation both to Body and Mind is necessary, but your Care must be, that it
be allowable both in Quality and Quantity. Let it be what is suitable to
persons in your Station, and by not exceeding in the use thereof, free your
self from that too epidemick Fault of making Recreation, as if it were your
Calling. Surely, it is most irrational, that men should so little value
precious time, as the most of their Thoughts should be, how they shall cheat
themselves of what they would find to be Irrecoverable; and for which to have
it redeemed from the Wickedness and Folly of our vain way of living, would
willingly be given, all within the power of wretched Man. Forbear such
Recreations as may be sinful or offensive: I shall not determine anent the
lawfulness of Games, wherein there is Lottorie, knowing that some good Men have
allowed thereof; but many are of the Opinion of their being unlawful, and since
you may have suitable Diversions, without using such, it is surely safest to
forbear. And it is evident, that the playing at Cards, and Dice, (from which I
absolutely dissuade you) is obviously accompanied, with such sinful
Inconveniences, as the advantage of the Recreation of your whole life, will be
dearly bought by any part thereof: I shall not say, but it is possible, to use
that Diversion with moderation, yet seldom are Youth enabled so to do; and to
me, it is not the least Argument against that, and some other Games, there
being not much allowable, that there is not only upon the most of persons using
them, a kind of bewitching Inclination, to the frequent doing thereof; but
often are these given up to their immoderate use, so far deserted of God, as
they are otherways in their conversation, Offensive. Yea, I may say, there are
not many that uses them, without what is very sinful; for if they be not, as
the most are tempted to Swear and Curse; do they not at the best, in the
practice of that Exercise, evidence such an intent, and serious diversion of
mind, as is inconsistent with Recreation, and disables from Duty.

35. As you would not do what is offensive to all good Men, and above all,
sinful in the sight of God; frequent not wicked and sinful Company, let not
their complacency, or any other inducement from their Converse, overcome you;
for the Frailty of man, is most likely to prevail, under the temptation of evil
Company. I entreat, your ordinar converse be with such, as may rather further,
than hinder you in the ways of Godliness: and endeavor, to frequent such
Company, as you would desire to be found with at the day of Death, or your
appearance before God's Tribunal. You find by Psalm. 119.63. That David was a
Companion of all them that did fear God, and did keep His Precepts. And Solomon
in Prove. 28.7. Tells, that who so keeps the Law, is a wise Son; but he that
is a Companion of riotous Men, shameth his Father. I acknowledge, whilst men
are in the World, it may be said to be impossible to be altogether out of the
Company of the Profane; but let it be evident from your whole Conversation,
that your delight is not in any such Fellowship; for undoubtedly a young man's
frequenting evil Company, is an Evident, and undeniable Demonstration, of his
beginning to be such, as the Company he keeps, if he be not already come their
height.

36. Having in what I have written, minted at, directing you in some things,
that has relation to your self, in the discharge of your Duty Godward, and in
the beginning thereof, urged your making conscience of Prayer. Yet, such is the
unvaluable Gift of God, in allowing Sinners to come to Him, as I shall, before
I say any thing to you, that concerns your Duty to your Neighbor, again
entreat your Diligence in drawing near to him, which you must do in Faith,
under a sense of your very many Wants, your great Unworthiness, and
apprehending and taking up God, as able to help, dreadful in his Justice, yet
wonderful in Mercy, and accessible to lost Sinners in Jesus Christ: and as we
are called in whatever we do, to consider aright the motive to, and the manner
of our doing Duty; so I desire it may be your care, to prevent your Guilt in
either of these. Your motives to Duty, would be allowable in His sight; who not
only allows of, but requires our concernment in our selves and others, which
may lawfully in a great Degree, stir us up to come to Him. But let your great
Endeavor be, that your heart may be filled with love, to the only Living and
True God, who is wonderful in Mercy, and make love to Him, the great Motive to
whatever you go about: let the manner of your doing thereof, evidence your
sense, of God's knowing the most secret of the thoughts of your heart. It is
much to be lamented, that the Duty of Prayer is so generally neglected; but
alas! How great is the guilt of such, as but seemingly goes about the
performance thereof, in not coming aright, as in the Presence of God? It is the
heart that God sees and requires, and how wicked are its wanderings at all
times, especially in that Duty, as you expect to be owned of God, in Christ
Jesus, the day of your Appearance before His Tribunal? Strive against this
Wickedness, and as an useful Help, through the Blessing of God, after you have
been about the Duty by your self, or joining with others; meditate upon your
particular Failings, in the motives to, and manner of your Performance; and
hold them up to God, as being hateful to you, and with a full desire, seek, He
may strengthen you against such, in all time coming: and this without any
seeming affectation, yea without being noticed, even by these in company with
you, you may do by serious Meditation, whatever be you Diversion in worldly
Concerns; and if you do it with earnestness. you may with confidence, expect
the weakening of the Corruptions of your evil heart: and as your subordinate
ends in Duty, may be His blessing you, even in this Side of time, but
especially to all Eternity; so let your great end in this, and whatever else
you do, be His Glory.

37. My heart does much serve me in repeating my Desires, that ye prize the
Goodness of God, in allowing wretched mankind, to put up their Desires to Him
in Prayer, for His Mercy therein is Incomprehensible; yet I incline to Caution
you, that your coming to Him in that Duty, may not be your Snare; for as there
is but too many, that does slight the doing thereof, so there are not wanting
such, who are not only hypocritical, or selfish in their Ends therein; but
there are, who mistakes the Means for the End, and think their praying, may and
will atone for Immoralities in their Conversation, and are ready too much, to
consider the performance of that Duty, as the carnal Jews did, sacrificing
under the Law. We ought indeed with joy, to consider, that our Blessed Lord,
was once offered a Sacrifice, to satisfy for Sin: and that we are not only
allowed, but enjoined, to apply our selves by Prayer, to our Merciful God, that
in Him we may be accepted. But as I have said to you, that without being
morally honest, all your Endeavors to religious Duties, will be but lost
labor: so where one of your Ends in praying, is not for Grace, enabling you so
to live, you want not Reason to regrate your doing of it: for as the First and
Great Command is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind; so the Second is. Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. And no way can a Christian more adorn the Gospel of our
Blessed Lord, then by such a Conversation toward all men, as the Apostle
enjoins, Romans 13.14. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in Ri^ting and
Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying: but
put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof. And as hating what the same Apostle dehorts, 2 Cor.
12.20. Debates, Envyings, Wraths, Strifes, Backbitings, Whisperings, Swellings,
Tumults: and let us mind that it is our Duty, what he says, 2 Timothy 2.19. And
let every one that names the Name of Christ, depart from Iniquity.

38. You know the sum of the whole Commands is, to love the Lord your God with
all your Soul, etc. and to love your Neighbor as your self. A due
Consideration of this great Precept, and making use of that short Rule, of
doing as we would be dealt by, and that in every thing that may relate to our
Neighbor, might be instead of Advice to you upon that head.

39. Be tender of his Goods and Good Name, as of your own, in so far as ye have
access to interess your self therein, and hate in your self or others,
detracting or speaking to the prejudice of any, for Charity toward your
Neighbor, and being charitable, in order to the Relief of his wants, are
Duties, then which there are none more clearly and positively held forth in
Scripture. We are called to judge charitably of every thing our Neighbor does
or says, and ever to put the best Construction upon the same, that it will
suner; The Apostle in the 3. to the Col. 14. Exhorts thereto, and presses
that above things, ye may put on Charity, which is the Bond of Peace: The said
3 to the Col: and 12. to the Romans Ye often would read, they containing many
excellent Precepts. And a charitable relieving of your Neighbor in his wants,
is as fully enjoined, and as great Promises annexed thereto, as almost any
other Duties in the Scriptures. It is true, as we are required to give
liberally, so we are to do it with discretion; and not only to give what is our
own alanerly, but even what in our Stations, our Circumstances being
considered, we may spare; but what we do therein, we are to do it with a
liberal and cheerful heart. You shall know, that there are no sort of Duties
which God has more expressly commanded, than that of Bounty and Mercy toward
our Brethren; whence evidently the high value thereof in God's Esteem, may be
inferred: in the Old Testament, it is said Deuteronomy. 15.7. Thou shall not harden
thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother: and in Verse. 11. Thou
shall open thine hand wide unto thy Brother, unto thy Poor, and unto thy Needy,
in the Land. And when Daniel would prescribe to King Nebuchadnezzar the best
way of Amendment, and the surest Means of averting God's Judgments, impendent
on him; he says to him, Dan. 4.27. Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be
acceptable unto thee, break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine Iniquities
by showing mercy to the Poor: this he pitched upon, as chiefly grateful to God,
and clearly testifying Repentance. Yea, we not only have a positive Command
from God, for being charitable; but we have in Prove. 19.17. His express
Obligation for its repayment, He that has pity upon the Poor, lends unto the
Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him again, Men are rationally
satisfied, when their Stook is entrusted in the hands of an apparent sufficient
Creditor; and certainly, the only true Wisdom, and reasonable improving of what
is within our Power, must be in the disposal thereof; so, as that we have our
God, who is infinite in Power, and all his other Attributes to be our
Play Master: and as there are in very many Parts of the Scriptures, holden
forth, the great advantages of this Duty; so also, there are therein
correspondently, grievous Punishments denounced against the Transgressors
thereof: as in Jam. 2.13. He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that shows
no Mercy; and Job 20.18, 19. That which he labors for, he shall restore, and
shall not swallow it down; according to his Substance, shall the Restitution
be: and he shall not rejoice therein, because he has oppressed and forsaken
the Poor. You see here, this Judgment is denounced; not only because he has
unjustly oppressed, but because he has uncharitably forsaken the Poor. And as
your Charity must be with a full heart, extended to all in Want; so especially
to such, who can be judged to have an Interest in our Blessed Lord: for in the
Gospel it is plain, the value our Savior puts upon this Duty, by telling us in
Mat. 25.35. That the Blessed of His Father, would be such, as gave Him meat
when he was hungry, and drink when thirsty, etc. And that on the contrare,
these doing otherwise, would be found to be the Cursed of God, on the left
hand: and He plainly declares what is done to his Poor ones, to be as done to
Himself. But mind in this, or whatever duty ye go about; that Applause from
men, or any other self-end, have no weight with you, and that all that is
possible for you to perform, is unexpressibly short of meriting in the sight of
God.

40. Endeavor with discretion, and as you have access, without an officious
and undiscreet obtruding your self, to make your neighbor perceive the Error
of his Conduct, and if your Knowledge and Opportunity enable you to the doing
any thing for the good of his Soul lay hold upon the occasion with all
cheerfulness.

41. Beware of Oppression, yea of the least of Injustice to your Neighbor, in
his Goods or otherways, especially the Poor, or such as may be unable to defend
themselves, for the grievousness of that Sin, is manifestly held forth in
Scripture, and many are the Precepts expressly discharging it. The Prophet
Zechar: 7: 10. Requires, that the Widow, the Fatherless, the Stranger, and the
Poor, be not oppressed; and that none imagine evil against his Brother in his
heart. And the Prophet Malach. denunceth Judgments, and declares God will be a
swift Witness against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and false
Swearers, and against these that oppress the Hireling in his Wages, the Widow
and the Fatherless, and that turn aside the Stranger from his Right, and fear
not me, says the Lord of Hosts. Yea, our blessed and everliving God, does so
far take the poor under his protection, as he says, Prove. 14.31. He that
oppresses the Poor, reproacheth his Maker; but he that honors him, bath
mercy on the poor. And he is said in the 23 Prove. 11. To be their mighty
Reede^^ner, and that he will plead their Cause with their Oppressors.

42. I have confidence, I need nothing diswade your stealing, or taking
unjustly what is not your own, and shall only tell you, that you be careful,
that the Right to what you have, be suel^, as not only secures from a civil
Inconveniency, but so as ye may be found in the sight of God to have a just
Title thereto; of which ye would be very circumspect, for every person is too
ready in in any debatable Matter, to determine to his own Advantage. Yea, if
you shall find any thing that is lost, your retaining, and not restoring it to
the Owners, if possible they can come to your knowledge, does directly break
the eighth Command; and where the Owner cannot be found, you are to consider
the Poor the Proprietar thereof, and dispose of it, or it is Avail, to such as
truly are in want.

43. I have hinted something to you of the inconveniency of Detraction, it is a
Crime, albeit amongst the Basest, yet very ordinary with many persons, and it
is palpably observable, that the most of People does evidence a delight in
telling and devu^ging the Faults of others, which directly speaks their being
in so far of the Devil, and not of God; for Satan endeavors, and delights in
the death of Sinners: But our blessed Lord has said, that he takes no pleasure
therein: do not you from any finistruous design, enquire into the Actings of
your Neighbor, and thereby evite what is but too ord^^ar, that custom of
enquiring us News, or for diversion at idle Hours, what is the Carriage of
(...) Neighbors, in their private Concerns; I am sensible, it may be in some
persons their Duty so to do, but then the end therein is sincerely Gods Glory
in their Neighbors welfare; and such will be far from receiving a Report to
the prejudice of any with the least of Satisfaction, or at all to divulge it,
but as a necessar Mean to reach the end, for which they enquire after it. It is
indeed a wonderful and irrefragable Evidence of the entire Corruption and
Depravation of the Nature of Mankind, that we should delight in evil, without
any imaginable prospect of Satisfaction or Advantage to our selves, or others,
whereof this Practice is an instance: And it is but too frequent, for without
much noticing, it may be observed in almost all Companies, that the Faults and
Infirmities of others, are oftener, and with greater pleasure discoursed upon,
than any thing tending to their Advantage. It is true, almost all Mankind, has
more of what is Foolish and Sinful in their Carriage, than what can be spoken
of to their Commendation. Yet I tell you, it is your Duty in discretion, as a
Neighbor, and above all, as a Christian in the sight of God, to refrain from
the speaking to the prejudice of any; and where you cannot with truth, speak to
their Advantage, let your silence evidence, that you have a sense of its being
Duty, neither to enquire into, or speak of the Failings of others unless called
thereto by your Station, and therein sincerly designing God's Glory in your
Neighbors well-being.

44. As I do entreat ye may foresee the great (...) in bringing your self under
Debt, (...) any of Ingenuitie, there can be no greater worldly Trouble;
especially, where they are not able to ^^tifie the just desires of these to
whom they are indue. So if Providence shall tryst your being engaged, let it be
your greatest worldly Satisfaction, to discharge your self thereof, and freely
to give when it is required, even to every person you are indue to; but
especially to such as cannot subsist with the want thereof. I beseech you, let
not the Hire of the Servant or Labourer be in your hand, when they need it; for
severe is the Curse pronounced against the Withholders thereof; and consider no
kind of Goods to be the Propriety of your self or Children, as coming from you,
so long as you are Debtor to any person, and that all you have, in the first
place, is to be disposed of for their payment.

45. Be very cautious anent your engaging your self Surety for any, it being
amongst the greatest of Snares, that concerns your worldly being. You have
Solomon, who had the greatest knowledge dissuading it, (I say Cautious) because
I cannot but acknowledge the case may ex^^^t, wherein your friends wel-being
may absolutely require it, for he is a miserable Creature, that acts in his
Concerns, as if he were only born for himself, and that is not concerned in the
Well-being of his Neighbor, but especially of his Friend; yet would it be
necessity that makes (...) do it, and so do therein, as may be con^^^^nt with
the Substance of your self and Family in your Station: And I advise you rather
to be helpful to him, in giving the use of what you are able to spare of your
own, for the Inconveniency of Surt^eship, and its lying over unpayed, has
often proven very hurtful to these engaged in it,

46. Where you are Creditor to any Person, it is your Duty with diligence, to
concern your self in your being satisfied; but if they be in Want, and willing
to Pay, beware of exacting too rigorously; for the true use of Law on that
Head, is, but to compel such, who uses not the utmost of their Endeavor, to
pay what they are endue: and I advise you rather to Clemency, albeit it should
be your loss, than too severe exacting upon Persons in Want; lest you be found
to have wanted the Bowels of Compassion, and Mercy toward your Neighbor, when
you appear before the Tribunal of our God, before whom there is no standing,
but as he is infinitely merciful to sinful Creatures, in Christ Jesus.

47. As detraction, or reporting falsely any thing to your Neighbors prejudice,
is utterly unallowable; so Flattery is a Crime, most unbecoming a man: it is an
aggravation of Lying, which is amongst the basest of Crimes, and its Iniquity
is held forth, Prove. 26.28. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by
it, and a flattering mouth works ruin. The exercise of Reason, would prevent
our flattering, or being flattered: a Reproof being truly more Savoury than
Flattery; as in Prove. 28.23. He that rebukes afterward shall find more
favor, than he that flattereth with the tongue.

48. Civility, and Complacency, are the Bonds and Ligaments of Society; and
whosoever is void of these, are but troublesome to all they converse with. Let
it be your care so to behave as your Company may be acceptable; yet let your
Complacence have Reason for its Rule; and beware of every thing that is sinful
and unbecoming your Station.

49. Be cheerfully affectionat to your Relations and Friends, and with freedom,
allow them such a part of your Heart, your Time, and your Means, as is
consistent with your other Duties; for surely there is (at least to my
Apprehension) no earthly satisfaction, to that of an Affectionat Correspondence
with, and Converse of Friends.

50. As you are to be sincerly affectionat to all your Friends and Neighbors,
and to prize a cordial and intimat Correspondence with them, so let no cross
Dispensation befalling them, allienat and estrange you therefrom. For
Friendship only entertained in prosperity, is not solidly founded, neither upon
Christian nor Moral Principles. Yet so general and great is the Corruption of
Mankind, and every one so ready to decline from Duty, as it is almost the
practice of all, not only to undervalue such a Correspondence with the Mean and
Low in the World, albeit otherwise, having what may in some measure induce
thereunto, but even to forbear, and let fall that intimacy of Correspondence
they have had with such, upon whom Providence seems to frown; and albeit some,
and it may be said but a few, from their natural Affection and Kindness to
their friends, and from Conscience, moving not altogether to desert them in
their need, may not be wanting in many things when required: Yet is it evident,
any familiarity retained, is not with that freedom and willingness of heart as
formerly. Be ye careful, that such with whom ye enter into Friendship, be from
their Humor and christian Conversation desirable, and when engaged, do not
desert the same, so long as your Friend changes not; and let nothing but either
Desertion on his part, or his being guilty of what is inconsistent with a
Christian and Friendly Correspondence, diminish any part of your Respect and
Familiarity. And where you are engaged by any Benefit, be not forgetful
thereof; evidence by your carriage, that you remember it with thankfulness, and
abhor your being guilty of Ingratitude; for it is truly said, Si ingratum
dixeris, omnia dixeris.

51. In Society, innocent Jesting is not unallowable, but beware of giving
Offense thereby; for the exercise of little Reason may satisfy you, that the
advantage from the wittiest of Jests, is too dear bought; the price being
Offense given to the most inconsiderable of Persons: and seldom does ordinary
Jesters, miss the giving as much Offense in a little time, as the Jests of
their whole life are worth, to themselves, or others.

52. Make not the Miseries, the Infirmities or Deformity of others, the Ground
and Matter of your Jests: and of all kind of Jesting, beware of doing it with
things Sacred: It is too much the practice of many, to use in their ordinary,
if not sinful converse, Texts of Scripture without any seriousness, only for
Diversion to themselves, or the Company they converse with; which is surely the
height of Wickedness, and an avouched declaring, they believe not the
Scriptures to be dictated by the Holy Spirit of our most Blessed God, who will
surely recompense the Iniquity of such.

53. If your Occasions shall sometimes tryst your being in Company not
desirable, guard against your being concerned in any Debate or Quarrel; for
the usual Effects of such Contentions, are most lamentable. And for what is
most unreasonably called Honor, and pretends to oblige to accept of a
Challenge to Fight, it is so entire a Device of the Devil, and inconsistent
with Religion, as I am sure, none that has the use of Reason, but sees that
Practice to be foolishly Mad, and Abominable; for nothing that has either
Honor or Virtue, but it is fully agreeable to the Rules of Religion: and this
Practice is so absolutely a Device of the Devil, as it truly has in it
nothing, either honorable or virtuous; and is altogether inconsistent with the
serious belief of a Judgment to come, where the Immortal Soul will receive the
final and incontravertible Sentence, of etetnal Salvation, or Damnation. The
Devil, that Enemy to Soul and body is undenyably the Author of this Wickedness,
it striking directly at the destruction of both: and surely, there is nothing
honorable to which a man dares not seek of God a Blessing, and any man's
offering to pray to God, before his entering upon that Action, is most
unreasonable, and an extremely Arrogant, Wicked, and sinful seeking of God, to
bless him, in doing what is palpably held forth in Scripture, to be against His
express and positive Command.

54. So much as is within your power, endeavor the living peaceably with all
Men; forbear if possible, all Lawsuits with your Neighbors; for it is surely
your Interest, to forgo some considerable part of what is your own, rather than
seek your Redress by that Mean: and if you can persuade your Party, if
Providence shall tryst your having of any, to refer what Difference there may
be betwixt you, to equal, knowing, and honest Arbitrators, chosen by your
selves; you may have a Sentence it is like, better, and with much less trouble,
and vexation, than can be had; the Difference being insisted upon, before
ordinar Judges.

55. As you are to forbear prejudging, or offending of your Neighbor; so if
you be prejudged or offended by him, entertain no resentment of the Injury,
that may be inconsistent with an entire forgiving thereof; Remember, our
blessed Lord, Mat. 18.22. In answer to that Question; How often shall a Man
forgive his Brother? Enjoins it not only seven times, but seventie times seven.
And in Prove. 20.22. We are required not to recompense evil, but to wait upon
the Lord, and he shall save us; Yea, truly there is no access to God in Duty,
where there is not in the heart, an absolute forgiving of Injuries received.
You find in Mat 5.24. The Israelites were to leave their Gift at the Altar, and
go and be reconciled to their Brother, and then to offer; and surely, if our
hearts entertain any Rancor or Prejudice toward our Neighbor We do in
pronuncing the words of that excellent Prayer of our Lord, directly desire our
ever lasting Destruction. The Petition in plain, and express words, being not
only to be forgiven as we do forgive; but in Mat. 6. where He i^ teaching His
Disciples that Prayer, in the very Verses following, He adds, But if ye forgive
not men their Trespasses, neither will he forgive you your Trespasses.

56. If your Neighbors or others, by speaking or acting, prejudge you in your
Person, your Relations, your Goods, or good Name, let the Effect thereof be,
your retiring your self to your own heart, and your examining your Ways in the
sight of God: if you find, that you have deserved such usage, fly to God by
hearty Repentance, and acknowledge even your Obligation to the Instrument,
albeit your Good has not been by him intended: and if after a strict search,
you shall not see, that you in that measure, deserved what you have met with;
yet look not to the Rod that strikes, but the Hand that orders every thing
well, in His wise Providence: and believe, that no Dispensation comes without
its errand, nor can we meet with any thing so grievous to us, but what we merit
at Gods Hand: and humble your self in His Presence, that He, for Christ our
Lord's sake, may sanctify every Dispensation to you-ward, and thereby bring you
to a greater nearness to Him.

57. If it please God you live in this foolish and vain World, whilst it be
your Duty, to enter into a married State; remember your doing thereof, is the
Action, that does not only greatly concern your Well-being in the World, but
is, what may further or hinder your eternal Happiness. Therefore, that your
choice of a fit Person may be conducive to these Ends, be in the first place,
earnest in your Prayers to God, that he direct you therein: Parentage, Beauty,
and a competency of Means are desirable, and what you may very lawfully with
Moderation, concern your self about; but either, yea all of them together, are,
what yields no real satisfaction: Beauty is a Blessing, and I think the Choice
of every man, should at least, have so much thereof, as satisfies him; but it
will evidence the height of Folly, to propose it as a chief Ground of
satisfaction; for Sickness a few Years, or a thousand Accidents, may not only
impair, but destroy it. And albeit it were possible, it could continue in the
greatest Perfection desirable yet is it certainly amongst what gives just
Ground to cry out, that all is Vanity: and the wisest of Men, and of greatest
Experience, even in that Particular, has said Prove. 31.30. Favor (...)
deceitful, and Beauty is vain: but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be
praised. Let it b^ your great care, she have the fear of God i^ her heart. It
is true, it is hard to determine where that is, and I can give you no Rules
directing to any certainty thereof; but it is mo^^ desirable, she be of honest
and religious Parentage, and that she be of good Report, and fre^ of such
Carriage and Deportment, as speaks fort her want of the Fear of God, such as
any tendency to immodesty in her Speech, or Actions, Ga^ding, and being much
Abroad, Idleness, (...) frequenting idle Company, or any thing else notoriously
vicious; for albeit a Woman not gu^ty of these Crimes, may prove an
uncomfortable Match to a Man: Certainly such as are guilty without the special
Grace of God restraining, wi^^ prove so. Endeavor as what will much te^^ to
your quietness in that State; that she be (...) a meek and affectionate Temper,
and Disposit^ on; for as it is a quality unexpressibly desirable, in either
Man or Women, so it is most necessar to the Peace and Wel-being of Parties
under that relation.

58. As ye would not enter rashly into a married State, so being in it,
consider the Charge ye thereby come under, which is, indeed great, and requires
the discharge of Duty, toward your Children, your Servants, as you are
severally concerned in them, and of Family Duties toward them, and all within
your Family in general. I entreat the great end ye propose to your self in
Marriage may be, the having such a Wife as will encourage you in the ways of
Godliness, and make it your great work so to live with her, as your only Strife
may be who shall excel therein. Remember she is one flesh with you, and is the
nearest of Relations, as in Ephesians. 5.31. A man shall leave his Father and his
Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Yea, the
same Apostle has told you, in the 28. verse. of that Chapter, Men ought to love
their Wives as their own Bodies; he that loves his Wife, loves himself.
Fornication is expressly discharged in Scripture, and Adultery is a dreadful
Aggravation of the Crime, let not the thought of your Heart go after any other
Woman. But as in Prove. 5.18. Rejoice with the wife of thy youth. and in Mal.
2.15. Command that none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth; Be
tenderly affectionate to her, and express it at all occasions: But I my self,
could never like of that Affection that is held forth by a Man's giving of Gift
to his Wife, whilst they live together, what is convenient for her in her
Station, being absolutely her Propriety; and I consider a man's giving any
thing to his Wife, except with a prospect of it is being useful to her after his
Death, (at which time, the Law allows her only what she has thereby a right to)
to be as if with his one hand, he should give it to the other; for Man and Wife
whilst they live, ought to have no distinct propriety in Goods, and your care
of her ought in every thing to be, as it should be in relation to your self. As
I have said to you, one great end of your entering into that state of Life,
ought to be, your being encouraged in your Duty Godward, in order thereto,
watch over one another, and with Meekness and Affection hold forth to others
your Failings whatever they be. Accustom your self to the patient bearing of
one another Infirmities. Be often in Prayer together, and at such times, and
apart, let it be your earnest request to God, that He, for Christ's sake would
enable you, to the mutual Duties required.

59. If ye be blessed with Children, receive them from God as Blessings, and
solemnly return, and devote them again to his Service. When they are to be
Baptized, as you are to engage to their Education in God's fear; so let these
times be Opportunities of your renewing your own baptismal Engagements, and
with a willing Heart give up to God your self, your Children, and what ever is
yours: As a Parent, you are expressly bound to provide for your Children in this
World, but especially to all Eternity; your care is to commence from the time
of their being in the Womb, and what is suitable for them in your Station, is
to be provided for them in all tenderness and affection; yet let not your
indulgent Care, destroy Soul ^or Body. Be careful of the means of their
convenient Subsistence, but beware of what is hurtful to the Child, or tending
to Vanity, and being sinful in the sight of God: Often does Parents indulgence
in pampering Children, as directly destroy their Bodies, as if they did out
their Throats. Wherefore I advise their Diet to be of such common Food, as is
suitable to persons in your Station, and never press their eating, but give
moderatly when their Appetite requires; for sure I am, the death of Thousands
of Children is hastened and procured by Unseasonable, Intemperate and
Unwholesome Feeding, where one for the Thousand suffers death by Want and Hunger.

60. Endeavor their Knowledge in Learning, as what will more fit them for any
Condition of Life, they may be called to: Be sure they be acquaint with doing,
what may keep them from Idleness, and make them useful Members of the Society
they live in.

61. The usual Employments for Male-children, besides what is Mechanics, are
the profession of Law, Physic and Merchandise: You would in some measure from
their own Inclination, let them make choice of their manner of Living, and
endeavor to hold forth to them, the many Snares that attends them whilst in
the World; and particularly most incident to persons, in the Employment they
are to follow. For that of Law, I believe since the world was, it has been much
abused, and I think never more against knowledge and light than in their late
Ages; I shall be far from thinking, but there are persons of great Honor, and
integrity of that Profession, but uncontravertedly the generality of these in
it are very corrupt. I shall say nothing of Judges, but what is too apparent,
that they do, at least many of them, beyond what Law allows, take upon them the
disposal of peoples Propriety, and by the event makes it appear, they do it to
the hight of Injustice; and for Advocats and persons of an Inferior Rank
depending upon Judicatories: The generality of them are not only corrupt, but
truly to the hight of Excess therein, for the most tender and conscientious of
that Employment (some few excepted) does little scruple to endeavor the
promoting of an injust Action: I must confess, there are to my knowledge,
persons of great Honor in that station, and it may be said, that severals are
of that Ingenuity, as to signify to their Client, that they ought not ^o
insist, and that they should in Justice lose their pretenses: But too seldom
does it happen, that these in that Profession does absolutely refuse to concur
with their Client in the Injustice; and if they do not for their own gain, with
the greatest part stir up, and further their Client to what is unjust; yet if
they be desired, and liberally rewarded, do they not endeavor at the Bar, and
otherways, so to inveagle the Judge in comprehending any Intricacies in that
Action, as to oblige him to pronounce a Sentence, which they are fully
satisfied, is as unjust, as they are satisfied, that the Sun is in the
Firmament. And as it is surely to be cordially wished, that Judges and other in
a Capacity, would by suitable Rules and other Methods, provide against the
continuance of that Iniquity; so the only desirable way of reaching that end,
is the Liedges having such a Sense of the Inconveniences from contending at
Law, and that both to Soul and Body, as may make them, by having a Christian
and desirable Concord, in all their dealing, withhold what enables that
Society, to acquire a great part of the Substance of the Kingdom.

62. For that of Physic, you would be very cautious in determining your
Children to that Profession, for next to the Ministry, there is no other to
which a suitable knowledge is so necessar, for in other Employments, a man by
his want of Knowledge and Care, does for the most part only prejudge himself,
but an unqualified Professor of Physic, or Pharmacy, does irrecoverably
prejudge his Patient; and it is to be feared, that Ignorance and Insobriety,
which is most inconsistent with that Employment, does but too much abound.

63. Merchandise has many Snares attending it, the Devil and our corrupt Hearts
combining together, where there is mulciplicity of Business, thereby to destroy
our Souls; and I do truly apprehend there is no little guilt in the common and
uncondemned way of dealing in that Employment, and that both by Vender and
Buyer, in their disingenious Asking, and offering what they are conscious to
themselves, is not the worth of that they deal for. And I know no Argument for
it, but its being (as it is but too truly) customary: But so are many things
very grossly sinful. And whereas it may be objected, the impossibility of
dealing in any Trade, without following these customary Methods; the objecting
is a direct saying, they believe not in God, and his Providence: And that he
has said, Prove. 10.9. He that walks uprightly, walks surely. I can for my
self truly say, I have been ashamed to offer persons who I was otherways bound
to value as ingenuous, less than what they asked, being satisfied that the
asking more than the worth, is direct Lying, and that my offering less than was
asked, was indirectly saying you Ly. It is true, the Buyer and Vender may
differ, in point of Judgment, and after communing may come to alter their
Opinions; but it is certain, most usually dealing of that kind proceeds from a
covetous desire of overreaching their Neighbor; and it is much to be wished,
and were most desirable, that Buying and Selling were reduced to this; that
the Merchant who is supposed to know the value of his Goods, would neither ask,
nor take more than the true worth, albeit a Fool or Child were enquiring after
them; and that the Buyer, if meeting with an ignorant and foolish Merchant,
should to his knowledge, neither offer, nor give less than the true avail,
without respect to the Price asked, and evite that sin of taking the advantage
of such as sells within the worth, either through folly, or through Strait and
Poverty; the first whereof is indeed sinful, but the last of taking advantage
of any, under the necessity of selling their Goods, is direct Robbery of the
worst kind, being off the Poor, who are specially under Gods protection.

64. It has been, and is too much the Custom, for Parents, in designing their
Children to the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ our Lord, merely to consider
it as a Trade or Employment, and with respect allanerly to their worldly
maintenance, which is the most sinful and foolish way of disposing of them. I
am indeed most sensible, there is no Station more honorable and desirable than
that, when conscienciously discharged; and if it shall please God to bless you
with Sons fitted for that work, and who you are satisfied has a Call to engage
therein, consider it to be your Credit to further the same. Yet I entreat you
rather than design that for their maintenance, breed them to the meanest of
Employments; I do not mean by a Call, any inward thing immediately from God, he
has thought fit in the times of the Gospel since the Appostles days, not to do
so with men, but be fully satisfied of their being in some competent measure
qualified for that great Charge, and that they themselves in their hearts do
truly intend therein the glory of God; and not only satisfy your self
thereanent, but advise therein with religious and judicious Friends, and such
Ministers as does themselves endeavor in faithfulness, to discharge that so
great and excellent Station. Whosoever enters therein, would have much of
Humility: Pride and Conceitedness, being almost inconsistent with Grace;
Learning, Prudence, and strength of Reason, is most desirable, and some good
degree thereof, is altogether necessar; but surely Humility, and serious
depending upon God for strength in the discharge of that great Work, is
absolutely required. I could my self much rather be subject to the Ministry of
one truly humble and serious, than of one being otherways, and of the greatest
of Parts and Learning. Indeed where they are together, they are an excelling
Ornament, and much to be desired; but this Age from their Corruption, does so
little intend God's glory in designing persons for that Work, as the Converse
of too many therein does sometimes speak their want of respect to moral
Virtues, and very often Conceit joined with want of Parts and Learning, and
what else does very much unfit them for the discharge of the Duties in that
Station.

65. Be careful that your Daughters be accustomed to the doing of what is
Virtuous; so soon as they come to any Years of Discretion, let them be bred to
what is suitable to your Station, and see to it, that their time be not wasted,
in that Breeding that tends not to Virtue, whereof, there are but too many
Instances in almost Persons of every Quality. It is not my design, to
condescend too particularly in any part of my Advice to you, expecting, your
own Discretion and Experience, will supply that Want: yet can I not forbear to
say something of Dancing, upon which, to have it taught to their Children,
Parents does so wastefully employ so much of Young-ones time. I shall not be
peremptor, in determining against those that moderatly use it; you will find
from History, it has been practiced by Great Men, who lived moral and virtuous
Lives; yea, from Scripture, we find it to have been the practice of the Godly,
even in their worshipping God, to express their rejoicing and thankfulness of
heart, in that Behavior; as in 2 Samuel 6.14. David danced before the Lord with
all his might; and when God in Jer. 31.13. is by His Prophet promising to His
People, that He will bless them, says, Then shall the Virgin rejoice in the
Dance, etc. Yet, as it is now used, it is but little allowable: I know it is
generally pretended to be, only for procuring to Young-ones a suitable
Carriage, in the behavior of their Bodies; but beware the immoderate use
thereof, bring them not to such a Behavior, as that they thereby, come under
the Curse pronounced, Isa. 3.16. Moreover, the Lord says, because the
daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks, and wanton
eyes, walking, and mincing is they go, therefore will he smite them with a
Scab, etc. And albeit my Experience be inconsiderable, yet can I positively
say, that I have observed the Consequences, of wasting of time in Learning,
that so empty, foolish, and not truly termed Qualification, to be fatal to the
Credit, and otherways the well-being of those, who so much practice it. If
their Health permit, let them not lie in the Morning: and as their first Work
ought to be their performing the Duties required of them as Christians; so
throughout the day, let them evite Idleness, it being the nursery of Sin. A
cheerful and free manner of Conversation, is desirable in every person; yet is
it altogether fitting, that Young-women have joined with it, a modest
Reservedness, for too much freedom in converse amongst Young Men, and
Young-women, is often attended with stains to their Reputation, which they
would, by a modest and gracious Conversation, greatly endeavor to acquire, and
retain: and especially they would beware of any thing, tending to too much
freedom, with such as are not of their own Degree, and Quality. And as a modest
reservedness in their Behavior, even in all their Converse, is becoming their
Sex; so a decent and becoming Gravity, is desirable in their Attire. It were
indeed an unallowable Morosity, not to grant, that Young-women ought to have a
neatness, answerable to their Quality; for it is truly decent, to behold it in
young ones of that Sex; but endeavor, that the doing of it, have too much,
neither of their heart, nor their time: and as all our Actions ought to have
an^ honest end; so ye would often mind them, that what they do therein, be
neither to satisfy their own Pride, nor to stir up unsuitable Affections in
others. But ye would consider, that your Children being educate in God's Fear,
is the only way to bring them to a true sense of their Duty toward God and
Man; you are therefore by your Example and Precept, to persuade them to a
Christian Walk; we have God's positive Command for this, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And the^
words which I command thee this day, shall be (...) thine heart. And thou shall
teach them unto the Children, etc. And in cap. 32.46. He says, S^^ your hearts
unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which you shall command
your Children to observe to do. Let your Deportment toward them be such, as may
procure them to fear, respect, and love you: and so soon as they com^ to the
Years of any Understanding, mind you Engagements at their being Baptized: and
in discharge thereof, hold forth to them, the Obligation you did then come
under, and take the^ solemnly and expressly Bound, to the performance of their
Part: and as their Capacities w^^ admit, instruct them so far as you can, in
every part of their Duty Godward: curb in them, every tendency to evil; such
as Lying, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and what else, their Corruption derived
from you, makes them prone to commit: and as you are whilst they do well, to be
familiarly affection at toward them, so far as is consistent with the
reverential Aw, they ought to have of you; even so, as you respect their
Well-being here, or to Eternity, forbear not Reproof, and Chastisement, when
their Carriage calls for it. A Parent would justly be contemned, that should
suffer his Child to die for Hunger, whilst he were able by any thing within his
power to prevent it; and unexpressibly more is that Parent to be abominate, who
does not by suitable and fatherly Correction, and all Instruction within his
power, prevent his Child's not only dying, but suffering the extremity of
Torments to all Eternity. Forbear Chastising whilst you are in Passion, and
much more ought you to beware of doing it, only to satisfy Passion, but have
ye the glory of God in your Child's well-doing as your Aim.

66. If it shall please God, you live with your Children, whilst they be
marriageable, and Occasions offer, for their entering into that state of Life,
I entreat you let it be done with a prospect to their eternal wel-being. I have
my self observed, what I consider much to be lamented, that persons whom I
judge truly serious in the ways of God, are too usually, but little tender of
their matching their Children, suitable, and with respect to their eternal
Salvation; how seldom does it happen, that a Youth albeit profane, if he have
Riches, and what the World foolishly considers, Credit, and Honor, is refused
any Young-woman in marriage; surely, there can be no Action less consistent
with Reason, then Parents so disposing of their Children, and they will at that
Great Day, of God's judging Sinners, then perceive, it had been their Interest,
rather to have matched them with the meanest Mechanic, of honest
Qualifications, and a Christian Walk. Endeavor in your Childrens being settled
in Marriage, that it be with such, as may be Helps and Inducements to their
Duty Godward: and above all things, and in the first place, be satisfied in
that, so far as is within your power.

67. As your Children are not of themselves to enter into that State, against,
or without your consent; so as a Parent, you are to be reasonable in your
Grounds, for refusing it: and in their Marriage, it is your Duty, to advise,
direct, and hinder, if you see it necessar; but altogether forbear pressing
them to marry, where their own Inclinations does not freely go along.

68. When they are to go out of your Family, and enter themselves into any
other condition of Life; endeavor by good Advice, to fit and direct them, for
what is to be their Duty: and above all things, press their depending upon God
for strength, without which, it is impossible for them to do well. If they
shall go from you to their own, or any other Family; by Marriage, instruct them
in the Duties suitable to their Station. If Sons, exhort them to what I have
hinted, in this my Advice to you, and enlarge therein, as you will find
sufficient Ground so to do. And if Daughters, be assisting to them in your
Directions for their Carriage, in what is required of them, under that Relation.

69. Their end and manner of entering to it, would be with an entire respect to
the Glory of God: and when in it, their Charge is indeed great, whatever is the
Husbands duty, she, at least in his absence, is to supply his place, and her
fidelity, care, and sincere love and affection to her Husband, is to appear in
all her Actions; she would, by her not gading abroad, and a modest, quiet, and
discreet Carriage, whilst at home, evidence her firm Resolution, to the
discharge of her Duty. Solomon in Prove. 7.11, 12. Tells you, the Carriage of a
Naughty Woman, She is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house. Now
is she without, now in the streets, etc. And in Tit. 2.4, 5. The Apostle
presses Women may be sober, love their Husbands, love their Children. And that
they be Discreet, keepers at home, Good, obedient to their own Husbands, etc.
And as there is Business, that does more properly belong to a Husband; so there
is, that the Wife is almost only concerned (...) such, as the Care and
Oversight, of almost all within Doors, and particularly, of the Education, and
Up-bringing of Children, whilst young, when they come to the World. It is
apparent, that Nature, by giving to Mothers Breasts, and Milk fitted for their
Nourishment, has intended their discharging that Duty. I am indeed sensible,
that sometimes the want of ability, or necessary Diversion in other Affairs,
and other Accidents occurring, may hinder: in which Cases, it is Duty to
forbear; but it is much to be feared, that too many, without just Ground, puts
off the nursing of their Children, to their great Inconvenience. It might be
Argued, that the nature of that Nourishment, may influence the Humor and
Temper of the Child; and it is uncontravertedly true, that it is a real Cause,
for a more firm Bond of Affection, betwixt Children and Parents: and surely, it
is very pleasant, to see Mothers, of whatever Quality, when there is fitness
and ability for that Duty, discharging it. And when Children comes to any Years
of Discretion, the Wife is Jointly concerned with the Husband, in their
Instruction.

70. What servants you need, and are fitting for you in your Station, make
choice of them; having in the first place, a respect to God's being served by
them, in your Family, and what ever be the qualifications and fitness of any
servant, for any worldly Concern, if they be notoriously wicked, or you be
satisfied, that they will not concur to worship God in your Family, let no
worldly Consideration, procure your entertaining them. I shall not say that you
admit of none, but such as are Gracious; but be sure they be such, as are not
known to be wicked; and when they come into your Society, let it be your care,
that they know their Duty Godward, and practice it. As their Master, you are
not only to provide for their suitable Maintenance, and to give them what is
the Condition of their serving you; but you have a Charge of their Souls, which
if neglected, and not repented of, you will answer at the day of your appearing
before God's Tribunal. Your first and great care must be, that they serve God:
and if they so do, they will be faithful in their service to you. It is very
desiderable, that the generality of Masters, are so little concerned, in the
Souls of their servants; and that they should be so ready, to reprehend their
omission of Duty in their worldly Concerns, and so neglective of putting them
to their Duty toward God: and rebaking their slighting, of what is required of
them in their service. Endeavor what in you lies by Admonition, and otherways,
that your servants live, as suitable Members in a Christian Family: and if you
cannot procure them so to do, disiniss them so soon as you can, out of yours.
David in Psalm. 101. Promises to God, what shall be his Carriage; I will walk
within my house with a perfect heart. I will set no wicked thing before mine
eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave unto me,
etc. And in verse. 7. He says, He that works deceit, shall not dwell within
my house: he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. Endeavor, that
every one in your Family, may with quietness, go about what they are called to
in their Station, and prevent Contention, and all Clamor and Noise; for every
ones acting in their several Concerns without Noise, and with Discretion, is
most desirable; Noise and too many words, having always Confusion attending
thereupon: and where there is much of the Tongue in Husband or Wife, or any
within the Family, it is easy to conjecture, that there is in such persons, no
great fitness for Action. Let your Carriage toward your servants be such, as
may oblige them to a due Respect to you, and to the keeping of that distance,
which becomes them in their Station; yet forbear all churlish and passionat
behavior toward them, as the Apostle enjoins Ephesians. 6.9. forbearing threatening;
knowing that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there respect of persons
with him. When they do amiss in any thing, reprove them not to satisfy
Passion, but so reprove and exhort, as it may reach the end, their amendment:
be not your self, an evil Example to them; let your own Actions rebuke them,
and be assured, that no reproof will have weight, where the Reprover is guilty
of the Fault reproved. And when you find a faithful servant, respect him as a
Friend; for it is but just to allow it to him. And Solomon Prove. 17.2. Tells
you, that such shall have Rule over a Son that causes shame: and shall have
part of the Inheritance among the Brethren.

71. Your care must be, that God may be served by all within your Family apart,
and jointly at convenient Seasons; be as careful that your Servants do by
themselves discharge their duty Godward, Evening and Morning, as you are, that
they do what ye require in your Affairs; and if this ye do with a sincere and
only design of God's glory, you may with confidence expect the greater Success
in your own concerns. Forget not the worshipping of God in Prayer, and Praise
jointly with all your Family, and do it at such times as your Family may be
most conveniently got together, at least pray with them twice a day, and at the
most convenient time, read some part of the Scripture, and sing to his Praise:
I know many does use it at Evening before Supper, because after that time,
Drousiness and unfitness after Meat disables from the performance of the Duty;
but I advise the time ye pitch upon, may be when every one within the Family
has liberty of being present, and so may join in the Worship; for I have often
considered it unsuitable for some few in a Family, to begin or proceed in
Worship, when others in that Family were acting in their Business, and has
thought it more decent, when the meanest within the Family could attend, albeit
it should be after their Affairs for that day were ended. And as your times for
Family Worship ought to be such, as all may give Attendance; so let your
continuance in it, be as all may get their hearts brought up with you in the
Duty, and make not the length of your Prayers, or any other part of
Family Worship a Snare to these that should join with you. Be often exhorting
all within your Family to their Duty, and let them not consider, that the
having of the Assemblies Catechism in their memory, as only Childrens work,
that little Piece contains the Sum and Principles of Religion, and I think, is
to be prized equally to any thing else written, not dictated by the Spirit of
God. When ye conveen your Family to Worship, (at some times at least) in some
short and suitable Exhortation, press that their hearts may go out after God in
the Duty, it being to be feared, that all of us are too ready to draw near with
our Bodies, when we would be ashamed the frame of our hearts were laid open to
our Neighbors, then which there can be no Action more stupid, Brutish and
Atheistical; for if we foolishly apprehend that God (who is surely the Hearer
of Prayer) does not hear us, and know our Heart, why do we offer to draw near
to Him? And if we do consider Him as the Hearer of Prayer, and Searcher of
Hearts; how daring is our Boldness and Wickedness to do it so unsuitably? I
entreat ye may duly discharge that Duty of worshipping God with your Family;
for ye find the Prophet Jeremiah 10.25. Ranking Families that call not upon
God, with the Heathen that are ignorant of him, and he prays, saying, Pour out
thy fury upon the heathen, that know thee not, and upon the Families that call
not upon thy Name. And it has always been the practice of the Godly; as you
find Joshua 24.15. peremptorlie saying, But as for me and my House, we will
serve the Lord; And you have Almighty God, in the 18 Genesis 19. giving it as the
Reason of his singular respect to Abraham. For I know him, that he will command
his Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord, etc.

72. As at times, your Family may be increased by the repair of Friends and
others, let that be no ground for your neglecting the public worshipping of God
therein; and let your Modest, Humble, Discreet and serious way of performing
it, incite to their joining with you; so far as is convenient for you, be
Hospital, and let Strangers of whatsoever quality, that may need the
accommodation of your house, and what you can afford, have it with freedom; so
as may be consistent with your duty to these within your family, and with
cheerfulness entertain your Relations and Friends; for Religion does truly
allow of a free and hospitable Converse, and such a competent use of every good
thing as is convenient for every person in their Station. And from the goodness
of God, every thing being made for the use of man; man's using it moderatly, is
not only allowable, but required: Yet I entreat you beware, that as an
Expression of your kindness, ye do not in any measure persuade your Friend to
insobrietie, for there is indeed no grain of real Kindness or Affection in
tempting your friend to be as a Beast, if not worse than such.

73. You may after this apprehend, I should have imparted to you my Opinion
anent the Government of the Church, and the Nature of your Alledgeance to the
Civil Magistrate; but these Heads being not to be handled, but where there is
suitable ability and discretion for doing thereof, is Argument enough for my
not doing of it; I have already written more than I intended, and my attempting
any thing of this kind, would engage me far beyond my design: Nor do I consider
my self fitted, becomingly upon evident Grounds to hold forth, wherein
Presbytery is the Government most warranted from the Word of God, and nearest
to that in the first ages of the Church, albeit I be satisfied of its being so,
and sees no ground from Scripture allowing what is assumed by Bishops, that
Title being therein given to such as were Overseers of their Flock, and not of
their Brethren in the Ministry, for their pretending to so great preferment
and power in Jurisdiction to a negative Voice, and the power of sole
Ordination, with other of their pretenses, are without all Warrant from the
same: and from which Office to the reproach of Religion, and being an inlet to
Error and Wickedness, has plainly proceeded the Pretentions and Corruptions of
the Church of Rome; for albeit, the maintaining of the Popes Infallibility,
Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, and the almost innumerable
other Fopperies of that Persuasion, be but the Consequents of the Corruptions
of that Church; yet has the Papacy, first and naturally had its Rise from
Episcopacie; nor can I see, why there is not as much Reason, for there being a
Supreme Bishop over the whole Catholic Church, as there is, for there being an
Archbishop over a National. I remember where before I was requiring of your
love to your Brethren, even differing in the Essentials of Religion, but
especially such, as differs only anent Church Government: I have said it to be
too much the practice of many, to trouble themselves with Niceties, which Word,
may seem to infer in me, great indifference in the contraverted Points, betwixt
Presbytery and Episcopacy; but I did only therein mean, the later Practices and
Principles of such, as but too eagerly pretend, to be the more refined part of
Professors; yet shall I say, I do believe there are of the Episcopal
Persuasion, such as are among the best of Men; and that since Episcopacy was
brought into the Church, there has been some Bishops in all Ages; and in some
Ages many, who were truly Pious and Worthy: but to my Apprehension, what in
this Kingdom may satisfy such as are not able, duly to weigh the
Controversies betwixt these Persuasions, is the palpable decay, and almost
utter-failing of Christian-walk and Conversation, under Episcopacy. I do not
consider my self able to defend Presbytery in all its Principles; and much less
can I say, that all Presbyterian Ministers, or Professors, are in their
Profession and Practice, what is desirable; yet is the advantage palpable upon
that side, for Prophanity has been, I may say, (at least in this Kingdom) the
Concomitant of the other; yea to such a Degree, that Swearing, and doing of
almost every kind of Wickedness, were the infallible Marks of Respect, to that
Government. This may seem to you, a severe and uncharitable Censure, but it was
too palpable; for in their rigorous and unchristian Persecution of their
Brethren, of the other Persuasion, it was undeniably evident, that the doing of
what evidenced Prophanity, was the ready way for their deliverance. As I am
satisfied there may be good Men of both Persuasions; so I can say, I do from my
heart wish, that their only Strife may be, who shall love one another most, and
live nearest to the (...) of the Gospel of our Blessed Lord. And for
Alledgiance to the Civil Magistrate, the nature of it has been, at least in
their late times, so much canvassed, and the differing Notions thereof, so much
defended, as puts it beyond my reach, to say any thing satisfyingly to you
thereanent. Whatever my own Inclination has been to Loyalty, yet could I never
come up to that height, as to think, that the Supreme Government in any person,
or Family, was intended only as an honor or advantage to them; but that its
principal end was, the good of the Society they were to Govern: and that it is
possible, the Case may exist, wherein it may be the duty of Subjects so to act,
as the end may not be inverted and destroyed. It is above my reach, to set
bounds to, and limite how far the Alledgeance of Subjects ties them to
Obedience; but I am fully satisfied, it were the interest of Subjects, to
consider their Ties therein very great. There are in many places of Scripture,
plain and positive Precepts requiring it: And surely a Subjects giving Passive
Obedience, even when he thinks himself, or may be truly wronged, is what he
will have most Peace in, upon serious Reflection; and when the great day of
accompting for our Actions comes, it is more than probable, Challenges will be
for refusing, and not giving at least Passive Obedience to the Civil
Magistrate: And it may with some confidence be affirmed, that many for
Rebellion and Disobedience may be rejected, but few or none for being Passive,
will be refused Mercy.

Son,
I have hinted to you some Directions in this I have written, and after this,
when years brings you to greater knowledge, it may with some reason appear to
you, that I have omitted many things necessar, and has not suitablie urged and
enlarged upon what I have hinted at, and that I have written some things which
are not necessar under your present Circumstances, and which may fall out never
to be useful to you; to which I shall say, that albeit my Capacity did allow
or yet is it not my design, either to write upon every thing that might have
occurred, or to enlarge upon what I have hinted at; But having from experience
observed in some things what is obviously apparent in the Actions of Men; I
have given you brierly my Opinion thereanent, and for what I have said, in
relation to a State of Life, from which you are yet at a distance. If it shall
so fall out, that my Advice to you therein, be not necessar, you have but
little lost Labor in reading of it, and as by the course of Nature, I ought to
die before you; So I entreat you whilst you live, as any thing occurrs in your
being in the World, that has any relation to what I have herein mentioned.
Consider what I have said to you upon it, I do not intend ye should think it
any ways full or Perfect; my Capacity not allowing me to pretend to any
fitness for doing thereof, and having but in some things given you my Opinion;
but if from your heart ye seek after God, and depend upon him for Direction, He
will for Jesus sake give Knowledge, and what else will be necessar for you. And
I entreat ye may consider this, as the Advice of an affectionate Father, that
with his Heart and Soul wishes your eternal Welfare. You are now at a distance
from me, and in a Society that makes me the more solicitous anent you, for
often does Youth at Colleges, instead of acquiring Learning, and any thing
desirable, procure to themselves an habit of vicious Living, and this
sometimes happens to such, as may be judged in probability, would without the
temptation, be free thereof: I entreat you beware of keeping such Company, as
may be a Snare to you, and seriously ply your Book, which is the end of your
being in the place. Be careful, not only in giving a dutiful obedience to your
Regent, and the other Masters of the University; but also of paying that due
Reverence and Respect, that is owing to their several Places: be observant of
their Orders, not from fear, but for Conscience sake; and attend duly to the
Diets appointed for your Class; let your Converse where you lodge, evidence
your Discretion and Respect, not only to the Head of the Family, but to your
Comrads, and all within it: and be sure you be not absent from Family-exercise,
nor from your Chamber at late, or unseasonable hours. Mind my Directions to
you, anent the Sabbath; and beware of spending any part thereof, in idle
Converse; forbear in that day, your being in the Streets, except when you go
and come from the Church: and attend the Diets of your Class, before and after
Sermon but above all, make Conscience of seeking with earnestness of heart,
that our God, for Jesu^^ sake, may keep you from all evil; let it be you great
Work, to grow in greater nearness to God for surely the World is Vanity, and
every thin we so much pursue after, will appear to us, whe^^ Death is at our
door, as the height of Vanity and most contemptible. Think often of th^^
certainty of Death, and that to the healthiest (...) Youth, it may come in a
Moment; mind, th^^ also, certainly after Death, will come Judgment where even
the most secret of our sinful thought shall be laid open before the Tribunal of
a Ju^^^ God, and a most dreadful and horrible Sentence, pronounced against all
such, as shall (...) be found in Christ, our Blessed Lord, who (...) only able
to stand betwixt Sinners, and the Stroke due to them in Justice.

It is most lamentable, that the Generality, even of such as profess to be
Christians, are either truly Atheistical, and among the number of such Fools,
as in Psalm. 14.1. Says in their heart, there is not a God. Or they vainly
pretend an Interest, where they have no Title: the Apostle in Heb. 12.14.
Having expressly said, that without Holiness, it is impossible to see the face
of God. It is true, all that possibly wretched man can perform, does little
deserve to be called Holiness; but our hearty endeavor after Duties, a serious
continued sense of our Failings, our hearts mourning because thereof, and our
humble coming to, and relying upon Christ our Savior in Faith for Mercy, is
graciously accepted of, by our infinitely Good and Merciful God. Ye would
consider, how our corrupt hearts agreeing with the general Practice and Belief,
of almost all owning themselves to be Christians, seeks to persuade us to an
Indifferency and Unconcern'dness in our Souls well-being, and would make us
believe, that the punctual performing of Duty as Christians, is but an
over-doing, if not Hypocrisy: and every Person is ready to befool themselves,
with a groundless Confidence that they will be saved, where they are little
concerned in the Salvation of their Souls, or the means of attaining to it:
wherefore, think ye often with seriousness upon what is said Mat. 7.13. Enter
ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Because strait
is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life; and few there be
that find it. This ^aying ought to be much in your mind, for stirring you up to
Duty, lest you be found to be amongst the great number, that goes in the
Broad-way to everlasting and dreadful Damnation; for in any worldly Concern, if
to a Society of Persons were offered, that a few number of them, upon doing of
some Duty required, should undoubtedly have Riches and worldly Honor; every
one, without Arguments inducing them to it, would be earnest, in doing what
might include them in that Number: and what unspeakable Degrees are poor
^inners more concerned, to endeavor with all their Power, the giving Obedience
to the Gracious Commands of our God, that we may enter in at the Strait Gate,
leading into that everlasting Blessed Life. I have already something signified
to you; the excellency of Humility, it is truly most desirable, and without
which, a Sinner has not any Ground to expect access to God; for as Pride in
ordinar Converse, and in worldly Affairs, is hateful; so in what relates to our
Duty as Christians, any tincture of Conceit and Pride, is utterly to be
abominat, as being a principal Engine of the Devil, for the destruction of the
Souls of Mankind: and that Excelling Grace of true Humility, is the great
Ornament of a Christian, as Pride is the undoubted Mar^ of corrupt Natures
prevailing; yea, so great (...) the excellency of Humility, as it may be sai^
without Hyperbole, that our infinitely Merciful God, will not, yea (such is His
free Mercy cannot refuse the Acceptance, of a sincerely humbled Sinner: it is
indeed much to be prized and most advantageous, and it necessarly must be,
where there is a true sense of our miserable Condition. I do again entreat your
being frequent and serious in your Prayers to God, from whom every thing must
come to you: and let every one of your Thoughts and Actions, speak forth your
being truly humble in the sight of God and Man. The Apostle Peter in Cap. 5.
verse. 15. of his First Epistle, desires ye may be cleathed with Humility: for
God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble. Let all your Actions
flow from a true Principal of love to God, and sincerely designing His Glory.
Often is Duty gone about, when the motive to the doing thereof is sinful. Self,
which is our very great Enemy, for it wickedly leads and forces us, to every
evil Thought and Action; therefore strive with all your might, that no selfish
sinful Inclination prevail over you, and that the Principle moving you, may be
truly love to God, and the end of whatever you do or think, His Glory. It is
true, we may have subordinat Ends consisting with our Duty; but let what tends
directly and immediately to the Glory of God, have the first and great Room in
your heart, and when you repeat the Lords Prayer, let your heart go out more
earnestly, in desiring that His Name may be Hallowed, His will be done in
Earth, as it is in Heaven, and His Kingdom come: then you desire He may give
you your daily Bread, and forgive you your sins, etc. This may seem hard to be
required, that we desire any thing more earnestly than the Salvation of our
Souls; but if our Love be in any degree, as it ought, we will surly see it to
be our Duty, which being performed, our Salvation is secured to us, in, and for
Christ's sake; and there can be no surer Mark of our Hearts being right with
God, than our truly finding, that really above all things whatsoever, we
longingly desire, that God's Name may be hallowed, his Kingdom come, and his
Will be done. The saying of that holy Man. Quench Hell, and burn Heaven, yet
will I love and fear my God, did hold forth the most desirable frame of his
heart, and that it did flow from a right and excellent Principle; Herein he
acted merely from a principle of Love to God, without the immediate prospect of
his eternal or temporal Advantage; there is indeed nothing more certain, than
that either Salvation or utter Destruction, will in end be the irretrivable
Doom of all Mankind; and that we are called with our power, to endeavor the
avoiding of that Sentence: and the goodness of God, is unexpressibly great, in
promising his Spirit, enabling us to Duty, in living up to his Precepts, which
even in relation to our temporal Being, are so advantageous, as it is obvious,
that if there were neither Heaven nor Hell, the ways of true Wisdom have in
themselves an excellency and desireableness, a thousand degrees beyond what is
possible to find, in giving way to our wicked Inclinations, and living as may
be pleasing to corrupt and depraved Nature. Be you entreated by me, not to make
the Practice of such as only own themselves to be Christians your Rule. Mind
what is said, Prove. 23.17, 18. Let not thy heart envy Sinners: but be thou in
the fear of the Lord all the day long. For surely there is an end, and thine
Expectation shall not be ^ut off. Let all your thoughts and Actions be, a^
minding you are in the presence of a dreadfully just, albeit merciful God; and
endeavor with all your Strength, that your heart may be filled with knowledge
of Christ, faith in, and love to him; and be diligent in using the means of
Grace, which in providence you are trysted with. I have hinted at some things
of your Duty, and you have the benefit of the Word preached, public Prayer,
and Praise, and the administration of the Sacraments, which I pray God in his
mercy may continue to this Land; you have also the benefit of many Pieces of
practical Divinity, written by serious and Godly Men such as Flavel's
Writings, the two Allens, Joseph and Richard, and many others, the serious
reading of which, with Prayer for a Blessing upon your doing thereof, will be
Strength to your Soul, and at the hour of Death, unexpressibly more savourie
than the Consideration of having done what is generally the Practice of the
world; I desire ye may write over a Double of this, and keep the Principal
carefully by you, for I have no exact Copy thereof: And that you at sometimes
read what I have written to you, and whilst you are at the College, stint your
self to the reading thereof (excepting what is Advice relating to a married
state) once in the Week: Let me know with your first Conveniencie, if Joseph
Allen's Allarum to unconverted Sinners, be to be had in any Stationers Shop
where you are, and if it be not, I will endeavor the sending it to you within
a short time: Make conscience of reading it seriously and diligently, and when
fitness of Frame in your heart enables you, engage your self to God, in the
terms set down by that seriously holy Man: But see to it, that your whole heart
go out after God in the Duty. The Sin of an unfitted Frame of heart, in what
ever we do, is great in Gods sight, but in so solemn Approaching to him, the
doing of it unsuitably, is a great Aggravation thereof. I think it not amiss,
that sometime ye put in write to be kept by you, what may evidence your Frame
at such occasions; if you have a suitable sense of Sin, or your heart go out
after God in Faith for Mercy; or if in the expectation of particular Mercies,
or the Receipt thereof, you engage your self to any particular Duty, or in the
general, more solemnly to serve God: I think ye would put down in Writ; your
Engagements to God, and what may evidence your Frame of Heart at these
occasions: I have my self considered with satisfaction even some few Petitions,
which may heart has gone out after God in the desire of, and which at the time
I have set down in Write, not so much with a design, more fully to imprint on
my Memory, the Expressions of my Desires (albeit my Memory be very frail) as
to have the satisfaction of knowing by my reading them, that at such times, my
heart did in some measure, go out with earnestness in these desires; and that
my Remembrance of the Endeavors (albeit frail and faint) I have had to bring
my Heart to that Frame, might afterward shame me from any Sluggishness of
Temper, or any proness to gratisle my many Corruptions, so as may be
inconsistent with what God at the time enabled me to attain to. Make Conscience
always your Friend, it is Gods witness within you; beware of doing what may
harden or kill it: depend upon God, that it may be in you according to
knowledge, and so walk in every thing, as it may witness for you in the day of
your greatest need. I do entreat your whole Life and Conversation, may be
humble and serious in the sight of God; have always upon your Heart, a Sense of
your unexpressibly great misery, which will stir you up to the performance of
Duty, in which you must ever be most intent and serious: And besides your daily
Performance, set at times some Hours, and at some times one day apart for your
wrestling with God, that He for Christ's sake may subdue Corruption in you, and
give knowledge in every Duty, and Grace to perform it; and I hope our good God
in his mercy, will so far discover to you the filthiness of Sin, and how
Desirable, Lovely, and Advantageous it is to serve him: That times so set
apart, will be your delight, for your direction in such Duties, you have many
means, as Scudders daily walk, and the Works of many other serious and godly
Divines, both of this and the English Nation; and that God may enable you to
the sanctified use of every mean of Grace, and bless the same to his glory, in
your eternal Wel-being, is, and (my God enabling me) shall be whilst I live the
Prayer of

Your affectionat Father.
January 8. 1691.
SON,
WHat I have written to you in their few Sheets, I entreat you do not neglect
the perusal thereof, as I have desired; it is far from my intention, to do what
may agravat guilt in you; but if you consider not seriously what I have written
with a full resolution, and endeavor to put the same in practice, however
imperfect it may be, yet it will witness against you in the day of your
appearance before Gods Tribunal; But I hope our good God will by his Grace
enable you so to live, as the most desirable and only Savior of Sinners, in
that day will be found to be your Portion; you know I have sometimes
endeavored to hold forth to you, your Engagements in Baptism, and you may
remember what partciularly you engaged your self to in Write, under your hand
that day, I did with your dear and most tenderly affectionat Mother, whose
Rememberance ought ever whilst you live, to be savourie to you: I say, when we
did jointly endeavor in Prayer, cordially to devote you to God, and lest ye
may not have kept by you, the Double of what by writ you have engaged your self
to, I send you the words thereof underwritten.

^. A. B. having it represented to me by my Parents, the Engagements I am under
by my being baptized; That I shall renounce the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, and live Godly, and Righteously, and soberly: do here declare, I believe
in one God, the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost; and does devote my self to him
my Creator, and reconciled Father in Jesus Christ, who is Blood signified by the
Water in my Baptism, can only cleanse me from Sin; And I promise in his
Strength, (He for Christ's sake enabling me) to live up to my Engagements in
Baptism, to strive against all sinful inclinations in me, a wicked and corrupt
Creature; and to hate every Sin, not only because it procures a temporal Curse,
and the ruin of my Soul to Eternity: but especially, because it is hateful to,
and contrair the holy Nature and Precepts of my blessed God. And I do hereby
expressly promise (He by his Grace strengthening me) to live in obedience to His
holy Will, revealed in the Scriptures, and explained in the Confession of Fath,
and Catechism, presently professed in this Church; and I humbly beg, O my most
merciful God! for Christ's sake, that thou would enable me to the performance
of what I have hereby engaged to, and to every Duty required of me in my
Station; and that I may ever have thy Grace in my heart, and for my Portion
here, and to all Eternity, an Interest in Christ, thy Son, my Blessed,
Glorious, and lovely Lord and Savior.

A. B.
November 28. 1689.
MInd that you have thus engaged your self, and I entreat, you may not by your
being forgetful thereof, and not living up there to, draw down a Curse upon
you. You would at least every Sabbath, set some short time apart for thinking
upon your Baptismal Engagements and read over the Double of what you have
subscribed: and in a humble sense of your Sin an^ Unworthiness, upon your
Knees, seek by Prayer with earnestness of heart, that God for Jes^ Sake, may
enable you to every Duty. I am se^sible, I have written to you more in some
thing then is at this time necessar: and that I have not in what is more
necessar, suitably press your Dut, under your present Circumstance which makes
me again require your remembri^ my desire to you, in forbearing bad Company
Neglect not private Prayer, and know, that you unreverent going about that
Duty, with a wa^^ dering, faithless, loveless heart, and the was of a due
consideration of what a wretched Sinn^^ you are, and what God is, whose
Presence yo^ dare to approach, will but aggravat your Guil^^ in stead of
procuring to you a Blessing. And also desire you, mind your being moderate
(...) the time you allow for your Recreations; (...) them be so harmless, as
may be vindicable in (...) sight of God and Man: and you would your se^^ not
only forbear altogether the going to drink Taverns, or Alehouses; but even
forbear (...) Company of such, as does it; for often is the Practice an Inlet
to, and the beginning of avitice and debauched Life: yea, shun all appearance
of Evil, for the bent of the Inclination in fr^^ Man, is ready, where there is
the least of yie^^ing to hurry us forward to every Wickedness, and whatever may
be the desirableness of the humor of any Comerade, or complacency in his
Converse, if there be in his fellowship, any thing inducing to the slghting of
the due attendance upon your Book, but especially to the doing of what is
sinful, and so dishonorable to God: I do strictly enjoin your forbearing all
familiarity with such. I have written to you more then I intended, and shall
now end, again entreating you may unbyasedly enquire, in what may be your Duty,
in all your Concerns, and therein debar Self, which is almost undecernable in
its workings to our ruin, and may be truly said to be the Devils Bait, for the
destruction of Soul and Body: and that ye so live, as in your whole
Conversation you evidence the due apprehension you have, of the certainty of
Death; the uncertainty of the time thereof, and that you have an Immortal Soul
that will be miserable to all Eternity, unless you so walk, as Christ may be
your Portion: and in your so doing, you have even whilst in the World, the
advantage of the Crowd therein, that pursues so eagerly, after what is truly
and undeniably Vanity; for your heartily and humbly endeavoring after what is
Duty in the sight of God, and your being content with what He in His Providence
is pleased to tryst you with, and your using it to the end of His giving
thereof, is what the World reaches not, as is apparent to those, that has but
the use of little Reason; for almost every man, be he Great or Mean in the
World, is grasping at what when obtained, proves but a Shadow, and yields
nothing of what he proposed, as the end of his having it. Ask the Ambitious man
why he covets Honor, and the Covetous Riches, the Voluptuous and Carnal, their
Pleasures suitable to their Desires, and Appetites? And all will be answered,
that they may have Contentment, and their Minds satisfied in having and using,
according as they project to themselves, what they so eagerly seek after: and
how Notour and uncontraverted a Truth is it, that when their Projects are
attained, they are not nearer, but surther from Contentment and Satisfaction of
mind, then before their seeking after them; I pray God in Christ, may be your
Portion.

I am, etc.

SON,
YOu may believe what I have written to you, to be larger then was intended;
yet I have this day before its coming to your hand, received the Lord Capels
Apothegms, or Contemplations, and am so satisfied with concise Sayings of that
Kind, that I recommend your reading them and the like, as very conducive to the
improving of, and rectifying the Judgment: their Brevity, Independance one upon
another, the Quaintness and Pertinency of Expression, being not only Taking to
Readers, but to Persons not intent upon reading, and but of ordinar
Comprehension, and Memory, more easily comprehended, and some of them with
some others written by other persons (which I desire ye may imprint in your
Memory) I have herein set down, that as you read what I have written in their
Sheets, they may be the more obvious to you.

1. Nothing can hurt us but Sin; and that shall not hurt us, if we can repent
of it; and nothing can do us good, but the Love and Favor of God in Jesus
Christ; and that we shall have, if we humbly and in sincerity seek it.

2. So much Sin, so much Sorrow; so much Holiness, so much Happiness.

3. Make thy Sin thy greatest Sorrow, so shall Sorrow never hurt thee; make
Jesus Christ thy greatest Joy, so shall thou never want Joy.

4. It may be learned by experience, that seriousness is the greatest Wisdom,
Temperance the best; hysick, a good Conscience the best Estate, and the time
will certainly come, that Men and Women will repent of all their life, but that
part they spend in Communion with God, and doing good.

5. There is an odious Spirit in many, who are better pleased to detect a
Fault, than commend a Virtue.

6. Such a man is to be honored and imitated, that will rather suffer Injury
than do it.

7. Wise and happy is that Man, that will not be drawn to commit, either an
undecent or dishonest Act for Love, Hatered, or Gain.

8. A wise Man, will not speak the Truth at all times; nor an honest Man speak
an Untruth at any time.

9. A wise Parent, more patiently suffers the death of his Children, than their
wicked and debauched Actions.

10. Moderation in Diet, Sleep and Exercise, are especial means to prolong, and
make healthful our days.

11. It is worth the Observation, to hear the laboring man sing at his Plough,
and the Rich man fret in his Palace; this shows, it is the Mind, not Riches
that makes us happy.

I thought to have sent you some more of these, but the Paper of this sheet
being ended, I shall delay it whilst after this I write to you.

SON,
I Have Reason, as minding I am in the presence of my good God, to acknowledge
the great Corruption and Pravitie of my nature, and unfitness for performing of
any Duty required of me, yet have I ground to bless his Name, that there is in
my heart, any earnestness of desire, that he may be glorified in the Salvation
of Sinners: I do seek of him in Christ Jesus, that he may bless you, so as your
Lot in the World may be comfortable, not in having great Riches, which does but
too often nourish Corruption, and destroy Souls, but in your having such
competent means of Subsistence, and that without perplexed involving your self
in worldy concerns, as may enable you to live with a comfortable Tranquillity
of mind in the Station that he shall call you to live in; but above all, the
earnest desire of my Soul in your behalf is, that Christ may be your Portion,
and that in Him, and through his Strength, you may so live in this World, as
that when death comes, you may immediately beholding his Glory, live with him
to all eternity. I have in the Sheets I wrote for your use, given you such
Directions as did occur to me, and minded you of your Engagments to serve God,
which I entreat may be your great work: indeed the generallitie, even of such
as own themselves to be Christians, does directly in all their Walk, speak
forth their misbelief of the manifest Truths contained in God's Word; but go
not you in the broad way with the Multitude, for it undoubtedly tends to
Destruction: Our God in the Scriptures, has plainly held forth the Duty of Man;
and if we could come cordially to resolve to close with him, in the Terms
offered therein, we would see the Conditions of our Salvation, in and by
Christ, to be neither unintelligible, nor unpracticable. In order to your so
doing, I desire your Diligence in improving the Means ye are trysted with; I
entreat you rejoice in your enjoyment of Sabbaths, and so live on these days,
as may evidence your heart being filled with the fear of, and love to our great
God, who set apart the seventh Day for his Service; when you approach him in
the public Ordinances, have your heart intent upon the Duties ye go about,
especially Prayer, and Praise; indeed wandering of heart, whilst we pretend to
hear the Word preached, is grossly sinful in the sight of God, but in prayer or
Praise, our hearts going out after any other Object, is a direct contemning of
Him, and a dreadful Mean for drawing down his everlasting Wrath and Curse: I
advise you to follow my Directions, anent your meditating upon what you have
heard, so soon as ye can have occasion after Sermon, and write the same in so
far as your Memory will serve you, and that what ye write of that kind may be
useful for your own reading at other times; and that I may be satisfied of your
diligence herein when I see you: I desire you buy for your self, a Quair or
half Quair Book, bound in a long Octavo, and write thereupon, not in time of
Sermon, but after the ending thereof, the day of the Month, the Preacher's
Name, the Text; and whatever you are able to remember of the Sermon, write it
so, as it may be distinctly read: be diligent and attentive in hearing, mind
the Doctrines raised, and and forget not the Uses and Application thereof,
endeavor with all your might to see your Sins, whereby your Condition is for
ever lost, and undone without Christ, and with humility of heart, depend upon
God, that he may direct and strengthen you to every Duty. I have been sometimes
much inclined to wonder at the Actions of almost all Men, in their whole
Converse and dealing, that does constantly sin in Thought, Word, and Actions,
and very often without any reasonable Prospect of the least, even shadow of
temporal Advantage; But this is the Effect of our dreadful Fall in our first
Parents, which Fall, did so much destroy the Original Purity of Mankind, and
fill him with an unresistable Inclination to every Evil, that the wonder is,
that all of us are not always committing the worst of Evils, which that we do
not, is of Gods great Mercy. I obtest, that the consideration of your miserable
State through Sin, and of God's wonderful Condescension in offering Mercy, in
and through Christ, may stir you up to a Christian-walk, which I humbly for
Christ's sake, beg of God you may with all your strength endeavor. I have
reason to fear, that my corrupt wretched heart, may not in my Directions to
you, have had the sole prospect of His Glory, in your eternal Well-being, and
the vain Imaginations thereof, in what I do, may justly provoke to His keeping
back His Blessing upon my Endeavors, to your doing of Duty; which I pray my
good God in His Mercy may avert, and I earnestly entreat, you may so walk, as
you be not an Offense to the professing the Name of Christ; for my Endeavors
in relation to you, howbeit faint and frail, will tend to your advantage, if
you seriously mind them, and seek of God strength, enabling you to live up to
Duty in your Station: and if this you do not, my heart is afraid you will
thereby provoke God, to leave you to your self, and they will witness against
you, to your eternal undoing. I did in the end of the last Sheets I wrote to
you, send you the Double of some Apothegms and short Sayings; but want of time,
and the Paper I wrote upon having failed, I have herein sent you some that I
have found written by several Persons: and albeit you may consider, that your
having them to read being printed, might have spared my Labor; yet being what
of Sayings of that kind, I judged fittest to be under your consideration, I
have been at the pains of writing them, and of contracting some of them, and of
altering others thereof, which makes me expect you will so peruse them, as to
imprint the same upon your Memory.

12. It is a never failing Rule of decerning a man to be in the state of Grace,
when he finds every thing that befalls him, draws him nearer to God.

13. We may safely expect God in His ways of Mercy, when we are in His ways of
Obedience.

14. We do truly honor God, when we see nothing for us, but rather all things
contrary to what we look for, than to shut our eyes to all inferior things, and
to look altogether to His Allsufficiency.

15. In what we are called to, we ought to do our own Work, and depend upon God
for Success, Diligence in what is required of us, and trust in Him, is only our
Duty. Let us then with cheerfulness perform our part, and our Merciful God will
beyond all doubting, in His own due time, make the Event our advantage and
comfort.

16. It is folly, to think that we should have Physic and Health, both at
once; God's time is the best time, resolve therefore your waiting upon it:
after a weary Week comes a Sabbath, and after Fight, comes Victory.

17. It is an evidence of true trust, when we can wait God's time, and not make
haste.

18. A man can be in no Condition, wherein God cannot Supply; if Comforts be
wanting, He can Creat them, not only out of nothing, but even make Afflictions
the cause of Comfort

19. The only way to have our Will, is to bring it to God's Will. No Sin but is
easier kept out, then cast out.

20. What we are afraid to do before Men, we should be afraid to think before
God.

21. The humble and thankful acknowledgement of the Goodness of God, in His
several Dispensations, is advantageous; for such as retain the memory of
Mercies, seldom loses the sight of them.

22. He that cannot abound without Pride, is unable to suffer Want without too
much dejection.

23. The frequent meditating upon the certainty of Death, will stir up so to
live, as the horror thereof, will be found swallowed up in the Death and
Sufferings, of our Blessed Savior.

24. If you would have God hear your Prayers, do you hear the Requests of the
Needy.

25. He that carelessly regards the misfortunes of other Men, ought not to think
it strange, if others look upon his Misfortunes without Compassion.

26. Prosperity makes others know what we are, and Adversity makes us know who
are our true Friends.

27. If you do not easily bear with the failings of others, ye will render your
own failings unsufferable.

28. He that will not know his Friends in his Prosperity, deserves to meet with
none in his Misery.

29. He that boasts of his good Qualities, loses the merit of them by his
Pride; and he that hides them, adds to their Esteem by his Modesty.

30. Temperance and Exercise, are the best means of Health.

31. An able Cook, is as much to be feared in time of Health, as an ignorant
Physician in time of Sickness.

32. Flatter not thy self in thy Faith to God; if thou want Charity for thy
Neighbor, and think not thou have Charity for thy Neighbor; if thou want
Faith to God, where they are not both together, they are both wanting, and both
are dead if once divided.

33. If thou hope to please all, thy Hopes are vain; if thou fears to displease
some, thy fears are idle, the way to please thy self, is not to displease the
best, and the way to displease the best, is to please the most; if thou can
fashion thy self to please all, thou shall displease Him that is all in all.

34. If thou have any Business of Consequence in agitation, let thy care be
reasonable, and seasonable, continual standing Bent, weakens the Bow, too
hasty drawing breaks it; put off thy Cares with thy Clothes, so shall thy Rest
strengthen thy Labor, and so shall thy Labor sweeten thy Rest.

35. If thou desire not to be too poor, desire not to be too Rich, he is Rich
not that possesses much, but he that covets no more; and he is not poor that
enjoys little, but he that wants too much, the contented Mind wants nothing,
which it has not, the covetous mind wants not only not what it has not, but
likewise what it has.

36. If thou desire that unestimable grace of saving Faith, detest that
insatiable Vice of damnable Covetousness: It is impossible a heart, (though
never so double) should lodge both: Faith possesses thee of what thou have not;
Covetousness disposesses thee of what thou have: thou can not serve God,
unless Mammon serve thee.

37. If any hard Affliction has surprised thee, cast one Eye upon the hand
that sent it, and the other upon the Sin that brought it; if thou thankfully
receive the Message, he that sent it will discharge the Messenger.

38. Trust not the Promise of a common Swearer, for he that dars sin against
his God, for neither Profit nor Pleasure, will trespass against thee for his
own Advantage.

39. So use Prosperity, as Adversity may not abuse thee, if in the one Security
admits no fears, in the other, Despair will afford no hopes; he that in
Prosperity can foretell a Danger, can in Adversity foresee Deliverance.

40. If thy Faith has no doubts, thou have just cause to doubt thy Faith, and
if thy doubts have no hope, thou have just reason to fear Despair; when
therefore thy Doubts shall exercise thy Faith, keep thy Hopes firm to qualify
thy Doubts, so shall thy Faith be secured from Doubts, so shall thy Doubts be
preserved from Despair.

41. If thou stand guilty of Oppression, or wrongfully possessed of another
Right, see thou make Restitution before thou give an Alms, if otherways, what
are thou but a Thief, and make God thy Receiver.

42: When thou prayest for spiritual Graces, let thy Prayer be absolute; when
for temporal Blessings, add a Clause of God's pleasure in both, with Faith and
Humiliation, so shall thou undoubtedly receive what thou desire, or more, or
better; never Prayer rightly made, was made unheard, or heard ungranted.

43. Not to give to the Poor, is to take from him, not to feed the hungry if
thou have it, is the outmost of thy power to kill him, that therefore thou
may avoid both Sacrilege and Murder, be charitable.

44. So often as thou rememberest thy sin, without grief, so often thou
repeatest these sins for not grieving.

45. In thy Apparel avoid Singularity, Profuseness and Gaudiness, be not too
early in the Fashon, nor too late, Decency is the half way between Affectation
and Neglect; the Body is the Shell of the Soul, Apparel is the Husk of that
Shell, and the Husk often tells you what the Kernel is.

46. Be not Censorious, for thou know not whom thou judge; it is a more
dextrous Error to speak well of an evil man, than evil of a good man, and
safer for thy Judgment to be misted by simple Charity, then uncharitable
Wisdom, he may tax others with Privilege, that has not in himself what others
may tax.

47. If thou can desire any thing not to be repented of, thou art in a fair
way to Happiness if thou have attained it, thou art at thy ways end He is not
happy, who has all (if it were possible) that he desires, but that desires
nothing but what is good.

48. Has any wronged thee, be bravely revenged, slight it, and the work is
begun; for give it, and it is finished; he is below himself that is not above an
injury.

49. Deride not him, whom the looser Worl^ calls Puritan, lest thou offend a
little one, (...) he be a Hypocrite, God that knows him, will r^ward him: if
zealous, God that loves him, w^^^ revenge him: if he be good, he is good to God
Glory: if he be evil, let him be evil at his o^^ Charges: He that judges, shall
be judged.

50. As thou desire the love of God and Man, beware of Pride; it is a Tumor
in thy Mind, that breaks and poisons all thy Actions: is is a Worm in thy
Treasure, which eats and ruins thy Estate, it loves no man, is beloved of no
man; it is the friend of the Flatterer, the mother of Envy, the Nurse of Fury,
the Bawd of Luxury, the Sin of Devils, and the Devil in Mankind: it hates
Superiors, it scorns Inferiors, it owns no Equals, in short, till thou hate it,
God hates thee.

51. Beware of Drunkenness, lest all good Men beware of thee; where Drunkenness
reigns, there Reason is an Exul, Virtue a Stranger, and God an Enemy.

52. Take no pleasure in the folly of an Idiot, nor in the frenzy of a
Lunatic, nor in the extravagancies of a Drunkard, make them the Object of the
Pity, not of thy Pastime; when thou beholdest them, behold how thou art
beholding; to Him that suffered thee not to be like them, there is no
difference between thee and them but God's favor.

53. Use Law and Physic, only for necessity; they that use them otherways,
abuse themselves into weak Bodies, and light Purses; they are good Remedies,
bad Business, and worse Recreations.

54. In every relative Action, change Conditions with thy Brother; then ask thy
Conscience, what thou would have done; to the being truly resolved, exchange
again, and do thou the like to him, and thy Charity shall seldom or never err:
it is injustice, to do what without Impatience thou can not (...).

55. Things temporal, are sweeter in the expectation; Things (...), are sweeter
in the fruition; the first shames thy Hope, the second crowns it: it is a vain
Journey, whose end affords less pleasure then the way.

56. If thy words be Luxuriant, confine them lest they confine the; he that
thinks he can never speak enough, may easily speak too much^ a full Tongue and
an empty Brain, are seldom parted.

57. Of all Vices, take heed of Drunkenness: other Vices make their own way,
this make way for all Vices; he that is a Drunkard, is qualified for every evil.

58. Let the words of a Virgin, though in^ good Cause, and to as good purpose,
be neithe^ violent, many, nor first, nor last: it is less sham^^ For a Virgin,
to be lost in a blushing silence, the^^ to be found in a bold Eloquence.

59. If thou have but little, make it not le^^ by murmuring: if thou have
enough, make (...) not too much by unthankfulness; he that is n^^ thankfully
contented, with the least favor (...) has received; has made himself
incapable of the least favor he can receive.

60. Do thou want things necessar, grumb^^ not; perchance it was a necessar
thing th^^ should want them, endeavor lawfully to supp^^ it: if God bless
not thy Endeavor, Bless h^^ that knows what is fittest for thee, thou (...)
God's Patient, prescribe not the Physician.

61. Look upon thy Affliction, as thou usest^ do upon thy Physician; both imply
a Disea^^ and both are applied for a Cure, that of the (...) (...): if they
work, they promise (...), if not, they threaten Death: he (...) that (...) not
afflicted, but he that find^ happiness by his Affliction.

62. Many times when we are in heavy Affliction, and ^^sperate of all outward
Means, our Fa^^^ is more strong then afterward; when Go^^^^th mercifully
delivered, yea so far does the Devil prevail upon the heart of wretched man,
wi^^^st in any pleasing Prosperity, that in the day of his Accounts, it will
(at least often) be found, that his Troubles have been his greatest Mercies.

63. It is good to suffer twice, before one complain once; for those that often
though justly complain, come with disadvantage, especially i^ it be to a Party,
who from the too common Infirmit^ incident to Mankind, is ready to determine
persons under strait^^ing Circumstances, to be ^^^lish, if not worse, as they
are ready to overprize the Actions of the worldly prosperous.

64. He that desires but what he may, may have that he desires; therefore he
that is sparing in his desires, may have P^enty, even in a moderate ^state.

FINIS.
Dear THEOPHILUS,
YOu may remember, that in our discoursing together, some Weeks since, we
considered that Love was the great Duty required of Man, and the Apostle having
said 1 John 4.7. Let us love one another, for love is of God: yea, our Blessed
Lord in the Evangelist Joh. 13.35. Declares, that By this shall all men know,
such to be his Disciples, as have love one to another. And having said in Mat.
22.37, 38. That the First and Great Commandment, was to love the Lord our God,
with all our heart and with all our soul. And the second was like unto this,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Let us therefore resolve in the
strength of our God, to take up and retain, such an affectionat and innocent
Correspondence, as shall evidence our Endeavoring, to have the lively Marks of
being the Disciples of our most Blessed Savior; which that we may do
effectually, we must cast from us Pride, as what is destructive to our
Christian Converse. As I am writing the word Pride, my Pen runs in adding as
further, to be thrown away, Anger, Self-conceit, Revenge, or what else may take
up in our hearts the room, that love to our God and our Neighbor ought to
have; but if we could so take up the folly and sin of being Proud, as to bring
our selves to hate and forsake the same; we would in eviting that great
Wickedness, which has drawn down the everlasting Sentence of Gods Wrath, even
upon Angels, easily master these Evils I have mentioned, and many others, which
are the proper Brood and develish Issue thereof; which Evils, being in the
Strength of God weakened in us, we must further strive for Humility, and
meekness of Spirit; and these being acquired, the Virtues opposite to the
mentioned Vices, will (through the Blessing of God) with great easiness, become
habitual unto us; yea so great are the advantages of true Humility, and
meekness of Spirit, as even the worst of Men, are from some small Beam or Ray
of primitive Purity, yet left in Fallen man, forced to acknowledge the worth
thereof, and value the person enriched with these unvaluable Blessings.

D. Theophil. as their can be no earthly Blessing, preferable to this christian
and affectionat Converse amongst Friends and Neighbors, we would make it our
care, to prevent every thing that may occasion the least Breach thereof; the
Devil is ever ready to ruin the Peace of Mankind, here, and to all Eternity;
and is always feeding Fuel to our Lusts, thereby to render us miserable in Soul
and Body, and for disturbing a Neighbourly and Christian Correspondence;
besides Pride, and what is naturally consequential to it, makes our worldly
Interests, to open a Gap for division amongst Neighbors; this flows from
Covetousness, which is an Evil much reprehended in Scripture, yea Branded by
our Blessed Lord, with the Name Idolatry. It is true, it is the Duty of every
man, to concern himself in managing and retaining, what is justly his own
Propriety; yet for keeping fast that Chain of a Christian and Neighbourly
Converse, it may be his Duty in some measure, to recede therefrom: and if
Interest shall at any time bring Nei^hbours to differ, so as neither may
consider it Duty to yield; surely their is a Rule for Determining, which may be
obvious to an ^^^^terested Person: of such, a Choice would be made, to whom the
Difference in great Affection would be submitted, and his Determination with
much love amongst all Parties acquiesced in: and if Pride and Self were thus
set aside amongst Neighbors, and they giving hearty obedience to the Apostle,
his Advice to us Philip. 2, 3. Let nothing be done through strife, or envying,
(...) i^ lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better t^en themselves. The
satisfaction that would flow therefrom, would be incomprehensible: and only the
envy of Devils and wicked Men, and a Neighbourly Concord being resolved upon,
it would come next under our Consideration how the same, besides the
satisfaction arising from it, may be improven to our temporal and eternal
Advantage, in all things that may concern either of us, if we would firmly
practice that Rule, of doing as we would be dealt with: it is so easily laid to
all we are called to do, and so comprehensive, as may spare our Pains, in
laying down any other Rules as to our temporal Interests; but our eternal
Welfare, being of greatest Moment unto us, in this especially, we would
endeavor our being helpful to each other. I am satisfied, if under the
Apprehension of approaching Death, it were possible to lay before us, all our
Actions, Speeches and Thoughts, that scarcely one of a thousand of either, we
would repeat; and could not but palpably see our Failings, either in matter or
manner; the consideration whereof, should make every one cautious how the time,
that Neighbors and others makes use of, in conversing together, is employed.
it were a severity, having no allowance from Scripture, to say that all
neighbourly and friendly Converse, should only be about our Souls and things
Heavenly; for our Lord by Himself and His Apostles, does plainly require our
Concernment in our particular Callings: and surely, a recreative Diversion is
necessar, to both Body and Mind; yet is it to be regrated, that such as profess
to be Christians, should in their so often meeting together, so seldom speak of
God, and things heavenly. Our great God, his Command to the Israelites was,
that they should speak of his Precepts given by Moses, whilst they walked by
the Way: and albeit the indiscreet Zeal of some people in their meeting
together, for Prayer and spiritual Conference, may give offense, yea may be
hurtful to themselves, when their Ends are not serious in the sight of God, or
when there is want of Prudence, for regulating Meetings of that kind; yet
surely, it were delightsomly advantageous in Christians meeting together, that
they, at least sometimes by suitable Discourse, relating to their Souls
Condition, would raise up in themselves a Warmness of Affection, toward their
God in Jesus Christ, and a heart-hatred to Sin, that only can separate betwixt
Him and them; and which would be a Mean, for putting and keeping their hearts
in that Frame, as He by His Spirit, would Dwell in them; yea it were desirable,
that at sometimes, when fitness of Frame and Occasion offers, that they did
upon their Knees, jointly put up their Petitions to God, and humbly acknowledge
His unexpressible Goodness, for the particular Mercies they are ever meeting
with, and never to be forgetful of the wonderful Mercy of God, in His offering
to wretched and miserable Man, Salvation in and through Christ. But lest my
insisting further should make this exceed the Bounds of a Letter, I shall only
add that I am in sincerity.

December. 22. 1691. Your truly affectionat Neighbor and Servant. Theocritus.

Mi THEOPHILE.
IF I could bring up my heart to meditat with any seriousness. upon the
manifest Vanities of all that is almost the constant Practice of frail Man: I
am sensible, I could not better at some occasions, employ my time, but such are
the distractions thereof, and it is Irregularities in all it is motions; as I may
truly say with the Prophet, Jeremiah. 17.9. It is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked, who can know it? My dear Theophilus, I have this night
considered, that, as ground for our Meditation occurs, either from providential
Dispensations, or what is the constant practice of Mankind, in their most usual
dealing and converse, it may be behovefull our marking the same, and as
Conveniencie allows, that we in Conference or by Writ, at sometimes so express
our imaginations thereof, as may be through the blessing of God, a mean to
bring us to an affectionate endeavoring, to perform what as Christians we are
called to, and a heart hatered to the innumerable Evils, the Devil, the World,
and the Fesh, drags us daily to commit. We need be at little pains, in finding
out subject for Meditation, and that from all that is the practice of both, the
Great and Mean in the world, at this time, what we heard the other day from
that worthy Minister, M. G. M. anent the frailty of Man, and his being by the
Prophet Isai. excellently likened to Grass, and his goodliness to the flower of
the field, may very usefully be taken under our consideration: And since this
morning, some spare time invits me, I shall employ this little Paper and Ink,
in telling you that all men, and I my self in particular, does in so little
minding our approaching Death, not only speaks out full^, but the hight of
Stupidity; yea, the Actions of almost all men and Women, does proclaim their
being Atheists: For however, every one is ready to say, they believe in God,
and hopes to be saved, in and through the Merits of Christ^ yet does almost
every thing we do, say, or think, manifestly declare, we have no sixed Belief,
that there is a Judgment to come. O^ the unexpressible Madness that is in poor
Man, who does with so much eagerness, pursue after empty Vanities, and utterly
to slight the great End of his being in the World: Yea, I may say, that all
sublunary Enjoyments are Vanities, to Degrees beyond expression; and that the
truth of this saying, is beyond contradiction pa^pably obvious, even to mean
Capa^^^^^, whilst they are in the true (...) Reason, for if we (...) our Eyes
upon Me^ of all Ranks and Qualities, is it not apparent, that there is in every
one a Toyling and Endeavoring after what they propose, as the Mean for
reaching their Satisfaction, which Mean, when attained, proves always such as
reached not the end, and often it is as casting Oil into Fire, whereby the Hear
and Violence thereof is more increased; and truly, there is nothing in all that
occurs to Man, but the due Consieration thereof, will not only stir us up to
live as mu^^ing, we must certainly die, but will satifie that we endeavoring
with all our Strength, to live up to the Rules in the Gospel, there is into
doing, not only a serene Peace and Satisfaction, which is unknown to the most
of Men, but thereby the Terror and Sting of death is ^one away, in and through
Christ our blessed Savior; ^^ would take much time, even to (...) at the
particulars in all our dealing and Con^^^^ that we are called to manage, as
having a prospe^^ of our approaching death. And I shall only mind you of that
common Adagie, H^^^age, qu^^ cras mori^urus agas. I remember the desirable
Author of the Winter Evening Conference, taxes this saying, as if thereby
Christians were to do nothing but what they would do, being to die the Morrow;
but I conceive the meaning of it is, not as to the Matter but Man^^^ of
performing what ever we do, which is to be so done, as if we were to die the
Morrow: And surely, if we were at all times under the due apprehension of
approaching D^^^th of the uncertainty of the time thereof, and the ^^tainty of
a Judgment to come, where we shall appear before a Tribunal, whose Jud^ albeit
wonderful in mercy, yet is a God of J^stice, unacessible to sinners not coming
to Hi^^ in and through Christ our Lord. it would of (...) self (God blessing
the same) be sufficient (...) deter from all Injustice toward God, our
Neighbor, or our selves; let us therefore stir up (...) Hearts to an awful
sense of God's Omnipresen^ and Omniscience, and of the certainty of Death and
of our Being, to account for all our gu^^ before a just and omnipotent God,
that there by we may be induced to endeavor in all h^mility a suitable
Christian Conversation, a^ wherein we come short, with all our Heart, at all
our Strength, to fly to Christ who is the (...) lone Refuge of sinners, which
that we may serously and cheerfully perform, is the Pray^ of

Your affectionate Neighbor (...) Servant THEOCRITVS.
Jan. 8. 1692.
D. THEOPHILUS.
IN my last, I expressed some sense I had of it being our interest to advantage
our selves by Meditation upon what does hourly occ^^ from the Actions of men:
And indeed but seriously othink upon what is the common Practic^ of all without
Exception, not only offers ground for Meditation, but for Wonder; for if we
could divest our selves of our own corrupt Inclinations, and habitual Bias to
do as the world generally does: we would in looking upon Mankind, as they live
in the world, clearly see how extravagantly ridiculous the Actions of almost
all men are; Consider Rulers, and these that ought to be ruled, of all Degrees
and Qualities and not one of a thousand will be found to act with a true
Design, of living up to his Calling, and therein serving God in his Station,
for surely, as God the Creator of all things, made every Creature for some
rational use in the world, so Man particularly is to be serviceable to his
Creator, in the Station which in Providence he is called to live in. Sometimes
when I am alone, I fancy an overflowing fullness of Matter for meditation of
this kind, yet having this morning taken my Pen in hand, resolving to express
something thereof; I find the shortness of my Reason bounds my Fancy, and
hinders my giving you any rational Account of my thoughts herein; but since
what I do, is to meet with no critical Censure, and that it may offer ground
for being bettered from your Meditation: I shall give you a view of my thoughts
of the actions of persons of several Stations. I am sensible, it is not the
part of every one to enquire into the Actions, or meddle with what is the Duty
of Rulers, yet so strange and wonderful are the late Providence in relation to
them, as such as are least concerned in enquiring into the Actions of supreme
Magistrates, cannot forbear the having of what is past under Consideration; I
can truly for my self say, I not only had in some competent Degree, that due
respect for Magistracy, which I think is necessar for all Subjects, and made me
consider it our Interest, at least in our particula^ concerns to suffer to
Degrees of extremity, rather than by our Resentments to trouble the Peace of a
society; but I had also that Veneration for the persons of our late Kings, as
indu^ed me to an affectionat and serious wishing, that they might by their
Government, gain that tr^^ Honor of being serviceable to God in their
St^tions: It were an improper Task for me (...) canvass the late Kevolutions,
and approve, (...) censure what has been lately acted in their Kingdoms; I am
satisfied, that as all required (...) Man, is primarly intended to the Glory of
o^ great Creator, so the ends of Magistracy, a^ next to that, the good and
advantage of the S^ciety they are to govern: And as I shall (...) vindicat
Actions, that in too palpable appearan^^ had not only the prospect of greatly
prejudgi^ Subjects in their Propriety; but especially over-tnrning the
Religion happily established their Lands, so I have considered with regre^ the
troubles of CHARLES the first; and do truly lament the Condition of King JAME
who abstracting from his being Popish, mig^ have been fortunat in his
Government, and (...) Affections of his Subjects: I may say, it is has to
understand the ways of God, from the pr^vidential Dispensations, that he in
great justic^ does carve out to misirable and frail man: 'O Savior himself
tells us, it was not the great^^ of sinners, upon which the Tower of Siloam fe^
and in the bypast Ages, yea, in this present ag^ there has been, and are
Princes that Reigns (...) as declares, they only live to serve their Lu^^ to
the great Damage of these they govern, a^^ so far as is within their power, to
the dishonor of the Almighty God; yet he in his wise providence, for his own
ends, which the shallow Reason of man is not able to comprehend, does suffer
wickedness of that kind: Surely all in their Kingdoms, ought to admire and prize
the goodness of God, in his dealing therewith, and to be humbly serious in
begging of him, that all that has occurred, may be followed with his Blessing.
I am not much inclined to determine my self, in approving or disalowing Actions
from the event, yet when so singular a Providence as has occurred amongst us,
is so circumstantiat, I think in persons of our Station, it is Duty not too
nicely to canvass the same. And it may be said, there are not any in their three
Kingdoms, who are not from their interest biased, or otherwise from their
Lusts and Passions induced to Partiality, but they are satisfied, our present
King has been sent as a Mercy to their Lands; and that he may continue so to us,
if our sins do not obstruct. It is the duty of Subjects to pray for their
Governors, and that supreme Magistrates may have Servants and Counselors, that
will be instrumental and exemplary, in the persuading all in their Lands, to
their living up to Moralduties, and to the having the fear of God in their
hearts, and rightly to worship him; for Princes are much to be pitied, and
surely their condition of Life, is not to be envyed by the meanest of Men, for
as their Cares and Anxieties are extreme; so their Temptations to do what draws
down the Curse of God upon mankind, are often greater than frail man is able to
resist. And how often is the Condition of Princes much to be lamented, from the
insufficiency and wickedness of their Servants and Counselors? for not only
has Princes their own Frailty to wrestle with, but are not almost all their
Servants and Favorites their Bane and Plague, who for their own ends, counsel
and persuade to an arbitrary way of Governing; and surely their Kingdoms has
their thirty years past, experienced the sad Inconveniences, much arising from
evil Counselors, who not only did destroy the interest of our Princes, in the
affections of their Subjects, by screwing up what they unreasonably owned to be
the Princes Prorogative, but by acting directly to the Destruction of the Souls
of Subjects, without even the leaft shadow or prospect of Gain, Honor, or
Security to the Prince or themselves, of which their Circuits were a deplorable
Instance, it being manifest as the Sun at Noontide, that they acted, as if
their Commission had been from Hell to the Destruction of Souls, for granting
the public Oaths they tendered, might have been taken, yet it must be
uncontravertedly granted to be the Magistrates Duty, to refuse the tendering
even of an lawful Oath, where they are satisfied, the Party does not take the
same in Knowledge and Conscience. And alas! how much to be lamented is the
remembrance of the horrid cruelty to the Souls of men, that was so strenuusly
practiced in the proceedings of some late Circuits; for not only were public
Oaths pressed upon poor People against their Light, and they forced to the
taking thereof, when it was beyond all Contradiction known to the Imposers,
that it was done manifestly against their Knowledge and Conscience; but general
Lybels of Reset and Converse with Rebels, and all other Crimes they could
almost mention, were rai^ed against thousands, and the same made probable by
their Oaths; where Oh! to be lamented, the extreme severities of the
Government, made almost every one so to purge themselves upon Oath, as I hope
it shall be their Mercy to repent for it, that they may evite the Sentence of a
more dreadful Judge, who is Irreconcilable to such as does not by Repentance
come to him, in and through Christ: Indeed the severities in prosecuting many
of this Kingdom in their temporal concerns; from dissenting from the
Church Government established by Law, have been very hard, but not comparable
to the prejudice multitudes did suffer from that hellish Contrivance, in
forcing people so far as possibly the Persecutors could, to Per^ury; and I have
often thought it had been the Interest of some parts of this Kingdom, to have
prevented some Circuits, which have molested them with the loss of the greatest
part of their worldly goods: And this I say, not from the consideration of
temporal loss, albeit it was not inconsiderable, but from the inconvenience to
the Souls of people that followed from the Temptations they were under through
such Severities. I can, I think in a great measure, free my self from
particular prejudice to the person of any, and that my resentment from any small
trouble I did meet with at the time, does not act me to revengeful Desires; yet
truly I cannot but often wish, that our Governors would see it their Duty, so
to censure such who have been most instrumental in these lamentable Practices,
as may evidence their hatred to what is so offensive to God, and m^ be to the
terror of such as after this shall from such wicked Principles be inclined to
follo^ Methods of that kind; and I do wish from (...) heart, that our King
would see it to be his great est Honor, in governing so as God may be mo^
honored; and that he may be sensible of the Vanity and Folly there is in the
actings of a^ most all the Potentats that are, or has been (...) the world; for
surely the greatest of Conquerers, or such as have most reached their Project
for enabling them to live, having their own Wills only for their Rule, have
found the sam^ when attained, not at all to answer their Expectation; and
Princes that have been most instrumental in enacting good Laws, and putting the
same to due Execution, besides the advantage to their eternal Interest, which
is most to be valued, they have ever had greatest Honor whilst alive, and
their Memories Savourie and Honorable to Posterity. D. Theophil, I am sensible,
I have not only herein by the Bulk in too much writting offended, but that I
have extravaged, and in stead of prosecuting the Design of bettering our
selves, by representing what is, or ought to be the subject of our Meditation.
I have run out upon an account of Actions, without having due Reflection upon
the same; and that I have meddled in what is above my Station and Capacity, but
as it will not suffer, so I expect no severe Criticizing, and I send you it,
that by your modest Censure, and your further Meditation hereupon, ye may be
beneficial to

Your Neighbor, and Servant, THEOCRITVS.
Feb. 16. 1692.
D. THEOPHIL.
I Remember I proposed that in Conference, and sometime by Writing, we might
communicate our Thoughts, of what is usually occurring to us: in my last I
troubled you, with too much writing, and meddled in a Subject beyond my Sphere,
which may be little useful to the End intended; yet this Morning, I incline to
impart to you my Thoughts of the Vanity there is in the Actions and
Conversation, of the most of our Nobility and Gentry. Our Blessed Lord in Luke
12.48. Holds forth that to whomsoever much is given, of them much shall be
required. Which will greatly increase the Charge, upon persons of that Quality;
their Advantages from their Education, their Wealth and their Time, are
Talents; an account whereof, will undoubtedly be required of them: and it is to
be lamented, that the most Part are so little aware of what is to be laid to
their Charge; for almost all persons of that Rank and Quality, live, as if the
end of their being in the World, were only to satisfy their Lusts and Passions,
and they consider it a great Streach toward Sobriety, if they live, as if
Idleness were their Calling; which is the hight of Ingratitude, and far from a
due acknowledgment of the Bounty of the Creator, who has dispensed so liberally
toward them. All the Creatures in the Universe, do wonderfully concur, for
accomplishing the End of their Creation: only wretched and wicked man, in
almost all his Walk, is Retrograde to what is required of him: and to consider
how, at least f^^ the most part, the Great and Rich Men among^^ us, employ
their time; notwithstanding the many Advantages they have of serving God, is
most lamentable; they little mind, they are not (...) much Possessors of, as
Stewards to what God has bestowed upon them, and where they us^ them not as he
has appointed, that they man expect the Sentence truly due to the Unjust
Indeed our Reason satisfies us, of the necessity (...) the differing Stations
among men: and our God by his Word, makes plain His allowance thereof; but the
many Advantages bestowed by the Almighty, upon Great and Rich Men, will be
found at the Day of Accounting, to be but misimployed, if either lavishly
expended for pampering their Lusts and Pride, or covetously retained, under
pretense of maintaining their Grandieur, and providing for their Families. Sure
a great end of Gods giving Riches, is, that the Possessors may Discharge that
often-repeated Command, for man's being charitable to his poor Brother; but it
is little to be learned from the practice of the most Part, that this Duty of
Charity, is so often and pressingly urged in the Scriptures, and great is the
necessity of holding forth the Charge, given by the Apostle in 1 Timothy 6.17, 18,
19. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate: Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. It
were indeed desirable, to see our Nobility and Gentry, improving the Advantages
they are trysted with, that God may be glorified, and the Occasions for doing
good that Great Men have, through their Authority amongst Friends, Followers
and Servants, ought to be much improven to that End; for it is but too much
observable, that their Example prevails greatly, to influence to all
Wickedness: and it were very pleasing, to see Nobility and Gentry, in all
religious and moral Conversation, Examplary to others: and how truly honorable
were it for them, not only by Example, but Precept, to stir up others to
religious Duties: I know the most of Great Men, would be ready to entertain a
desire of this kind, with scorn, as being below and unsuitable to their
Station; but in this, their foolish Pride is Extreme; for our Great God, in
Comparison of whom, the greatest of Mortals are as Grashopers, yea as nothing.
Having required this Duty of all, without Exception: it were the hight of their
Honor, yea their invaluable Advantage, to improve their Authority, their
Riches, their Reputation, and whatever they enjoy, to His Glory; and where it
is not so done, the little hand-breadth of their time being spent, they will be
sensible of the having lost, what to their incomprehensible Sorrow, they will
then find to be irrecoverable. It is beyond Contradiction certain, that the
Mind of man is not satisfiable, by any earthly Enjoyment; yet Riches and Honor
with God's Blessing, are desirable; but how often do they prove a Snare to the
Possessors thereof? The consideration whereof, should stir up to a suitable
improvement, of whatever they enjoy: and they may be assured, that either the
due improvement, will accress to their Advantage, when solemnly Appearing
before the Tribunal of God: or the Abuse thereof, will then to their Shame and
Confusion, aggrava^^ their Guilt. Indeed the Frailty of every one disables from
resisting Temptation: and Great and Rich Men are much to be pitied, because o^
the many Snares, that are unevitably incident to their way of Living; yet it is
most practicable for Great-ones to live so, as they may be the Comfort of their
Friends and Followers, serviceable to their Generation, an Honor to the Nation
they live in, (and what is most desirable) true Lovers of God, and Promoters of
Godliness; which last, if they would conscienciously endeavor and set aside
Pride in their worldly Converse, the other Advantages would be, the natural and
desirable Consequents of their so doing. I have said to you, that with many of
our Nobility and Gentry, the yondmost attainment toward Virtue, is their
Living, as if to do nothing were their Calling, and what has been appointed,
or allowed of by God, to recreat the Body and Mind of man, in order to his
greater fitness for the Discharge of what is required (...) him, as Duty in his
Station, is immoderatly used by them, as if it were the only end of their
Living in the World. I think it were unjust to refuse, not only the lawfulness
of Recreation, but that even greater Degrees thereof, is allowable to persons
according to their Quality, and Circumstances in the World: and I am not of the
Opinion of such, as maintains, that all enmity betwixt Creatures, is the Effect
of Sin; for I think our infinitely Wise God, has Created these Creatures used
in the Recreation of man, that they might be made use of to that End; yet is it
evident, His Displeasure with Excess therein, by suffering in His Wife
Providence their so doing, to become their great Snare, obvious to the most
unconcerned Considerers; for how lamentable is it, to hear the unallowable
Passions, yea the dreadful profaning the Name of the most Blessed God, that is
almost the constant practice of such, as gives up their Minds with too great
intentness to Recreation, and is it not astonishing to hear one otherways,
sober in his Conversation, upon the least disappointment of the Flight of a
Hawk, or Hounding of a Dog, so to carry, as if there were not a God in Heaven?
surely if it were the practice of such persons before their sleeping, seriously
to Examine, what they have done throughout the day; the bitter remembrance of
their unchristian Behavior, would cool their Inclinations to such Recreation.
D. Theophil. let it be our work to endeavor the bettering our selves, from the
consideration of what does hourly occur to us, and I wish our Prayers to God,
in behalf of one another, may be, that in His Strength we so live, as we may
with Confidence, Own the Name of Christians, and Christ our Lord may be our
Portion, Heir, and to all Eternity. I am

March 21. 1692. Your affectionat Neighbor and Servant, Theocritus.

D. THEOPHIL.
IN a Line some Weeks since, I promised you some part of my Thoughts, anent the
Action^ of Persons of several Stations: and since that time, I have (albeit to
small purpose) written something, relating to what is, and ought to b^ the
practice of Great Men: it is indeed but superficially done, for there is so
much reprehendible, in the Actions of all Men, and man^ Corruption calls for so
many Arguments (...) persuade to Duty, as the Bounds of a Letter are too small
to Treat thereof; but the narrow Bounds of my Capacity, does more hinder m^
doing it any thing effectually; yet as I then sai^ to you, that it may be
subject for your Meditation, I shall this Morning, signify my thought of
persons of an inferior Rank; Mechanics an^ Lobourers of Land, albeit they are
wanting i^ what may Qualify them, to put in practice Mache^ilian-Policy; yet
do they daily in their ordinar Converse and Dealing, practice what (...) very
little suitable to the Rules of Christianity. And so great and many are the
subtilties of persons in these Stations, as plainly says, the Generality
thereof are running with violence, (...) Way that leads to eternal Destruction;
for (...) you consider their way in Dealing, does it (...) manifestly speak
forth, their unbelief of a D^^ty, and that the only and Almighty God, do^^ in
His providential Dispensations, order and dispose of wretched Mankind, in all
His Concern^^ and how evident is it, that the most part of persons in that
Station, does live, not at all bounded by Conscience, or what even the World
calls Honor: and that it is only shame, and the fear of Worldly punishment,
hinders their being altogether unsociable, it being a Truth not to be
contraverted; that were it not fear of temporal punishment, there would be no
peaceable Correspondence amongst Mankind, which is an Evil greatly to be
regrated; and it is against all Reason: For how brutishly foolish is it to dare
the doing of any thing unallowable, for fear of Man and temporal Punishment;
yet without control to sin against our great God, to whom there is no access
for sinners, but in and through Christ; and before whose Tribunal, all men must
undoubtedly stand: and there receive either the sentence of eternal Salvation,
or of eternal Damnation. It were much to be wished, that Men and Women of all
Ranks, would so live, as the thoughts of approaching Death and Judgment might
not be their terror. And surely the Station of men in low degree, does not
hinder, but contribute to their so doing. I have often thought, that a Country
Man's way o^ living, where he has for his convenient Subsistence, and is Master
of what is necessar for his being in that Station; is desirable beyond the
most pompous and splendid Living of the great est of Men. And it is beyond all
Controversy, that thousands of Land-labourers, leads lives preferable in true
and solid Contentment to their Landlords, who lives but too often idly upon a
great part of the Fruits of their Labors: And if they could be persuaded to
the practice of Godliness, in the discharge of Duties required of them in their
Stations; they would see much reason to magnify the Mercy of God, who in his
providence has so disposed of them: And it were the Interest of every one, to
rest contentedly satisfied with their worldly Station, and that without
Anxiety, they acted in what ever they are called to: Yea, I think it may be
warrantably said, that none ought to aim at a higher Station in this world than
they are in; for many have at their dying hour, wished never to have had Riches
and worldly Honor, which have Snares almost unresistable in frail Man. And I
think, never any wise Man, at least when dying and at the brink of Eternity,
but they did absolutely see the Vanity in such Enjoyments where the Possessors
has not rightly used then as Stewards for our great Lord and Master. (...) I am
unfit to handle, what may be held forth as the Duty of any; I pray God may
bless thi^ Land, with the means of Grace to every Ran^ and Degree of persons,
and continue them there in for the good of Souls, to His Glory; yet (...) may
say, that albeit persons in that Station, have neither much time, nor fitness
for reading (...) Books, that every Family, besides Bibles to every one, would
be furnished with some Book^ most suited to their Capacities. The Assemblies
Catechisms, are truly to my apprehension beyond expression desirable; and some
of the plainest Explanations thereof are useful: As surely the meanest of
Families, that would from Conscience resolve to employ some part of the^ little
Money, for acquiring some Books, Exhorting and Directing to the practice of
Duty would not be the poorer thereof, nor any whi^^ thereby disabled, for
expending in their temporal concerns. There are many Pieces of practical
Divinity, some whereof may be had at easy Rates; and I do seriously wish, that
each Family, besides some few of other necessar Books, would purchase to
themselves Baxters poor Man's Family-Book, and Flavel's Husbandry
Spiritualized. And I am fully assured, if they would apart, and in their
Families together employ the time at Evenings, and other convenient Seasons,
which their worldly business may dispense with, in serious perusal thereof: And
if they did in Humility, and with hearts desire, seek the blessing of God upon
their Endeavors, their Advantage and true Comfort in so doing, will be beyond
what can be well expressed. D. Theophil. if Men and Women of whatsoever Degree
or Quality, had the serious Belief of a Judgment to come, it would be easy to
persuade to Duty, and which time surely approaches, and will come to the
grievous Conviction of Sinners: For however man's Corruption may lead him to
Atheism, yet not only does the concurring Consent of all Nations, speak forth a
Deity, but that there is a particular Providence in relation to Mankind, and
all worldly Concerns is beyond all contradiction, and which Providence are
ordered by our Only and Almighty God. My being unqualified, and the narrow
Bounds of this Letter, hinders my making plain from Reason, that the owning of
a Providence, is the owning of God; and that our God is the only living and
true God: Yea, such a God, to whom it is vastly unsuitable, even in the
thoughts of Man, to compareall Heathenish Vanities, or pretended Deities
whatsoever. How man^ things occurring to Man, may satisfy him of the
certainty of a Judgment to come. I have m^ self been satisfied in the
certainty of a day for Gods Judging of Men, from the consideration (...) the
great Wickedness of the grossly Profane. And that the Omniscient and Omnipotent
God however He in his wise ordering of all things for his own Reasons
unfathomable by frail Man suffers for a time so far as wretched man can d^ even
to the contempt of his glorious Power, wi^ doubtless require an account of all
Actions. (...) say, I have in being present among such lew^^ Compancy, (which
alas! has not been at th^^ time, nor since my hearts grief from a rig^^
Principle) had the full satisfaction of the certainty of God's punishing
Sinners. Let it be o^^ Work, to bring our Hearts to such a stav^^ Frame, as we
may fully see, that God ove^^ rules the Actions of Men; and that he will (...)
His due time vindicate his Justice, where wret^^ed Mankind has not a Claim to
Mercy, in a^^ through Christ: And let us so live, as know^^ that all sublunary
Enjoyments are of no wor^^ without God's blessing; and that frail Man (...)
propose no solid Satisfaction in the enjoyment any thing under the Sun,
excepting in th^^ having their Hearts toward God, their seek^^ with
earnestness of Him, for Christ's sake Gra^^ and their fully endeavoring toward
God a^^ Man; so to live, as the Savior of Sinners (...) be their Portion. I
have my self much rea^^ to lument the great wickedness of my corr^^ Heart; yet
blessed be God, I can, and does least sometimes say, with Reverend Elavil,
(...) of his occasional Meditations, printed with his Husbandry spiritualized:
For my own part, I wish I may so order my Conversation in the world, that when
I am dead, I may live in the affections of the best; and live a honorable
Testimony in the Conscience of the worst; and whilst I live, I may oppress
none, do good to (...) say when dying, as good Ambrose did; I am neither
ashamed to live, nor arrayed to die, or as he says in another of the same
Meditations: Die I must, but I wish I may lay up that good Treasure before I
go. Mat. 6.20. ^arry with me a good Conscience when I go. 2 Timothy 4.6. ^. And
leave behind me a good Example when I a^^ gone, and then let death^^m^, and
(...) but least I should exceed in what may be but too justly considered,
little worth your Consideration, I shall conclude, assuring you, I continue

D. Theophil. Your Theocritus.

Dear THEOPHIL.
AS I am this Morning taking my Pe^, to express to you what has been some part
of my thoughts, since my last writing, I am not without an sense, that even the
time I employ in doing thereof, may be very truly reckoned amongst what is
spent in my insignificant Actions, which alas! does not only with what I
otherways sinfully and vainly do, and think, take take up a part, but almost
the whole of my Life yet if I could by Writ, make plain my Notion of what does
often occur to me; I am satisfied I employ much of my time worse than I would
in so doing. Mi. Theophil, I can from my Experience speak of the Distractions
of a wretche^ Heart, in poor frail miserable Man: And (...) think what may be
said thereof, might not only exceed the bounds of this Letter, but truly would
offer Matter for more than either my Time (...) Capacity can comprehend; yea
the wickedne^^ in the heart of Man, is not fathomable, and the consideration
thereof, holds forth the Strength of that Argument; for the Scriptures being
from men, influenced by the Spirit of God, that they speak so elegantly, what
carnal Reason could never reach, and particularly in expressing the
deceitfulness of Man's Heart, as in the Genesis 6.5. Genesis 8.21. and the 17. Jerem.
9^ Saying, that it is evil, yea, only evil, and containually evil; and that the
Imaginations a^^ so from the youth of Man; and that it is decei^ful above all
things, and desperately wicked who can know it? The due pondering whereof,
should induce to the serious and entire Dependence upon our God, that He for
Christ^ sake, may guard us against every wicked Inclination, and direct and
strengthen to Duty^ which Dependence, is absolutely necessar to fra^^ miserable
Man: And it would be our work intently, to ply the means for bringing up our
Hearts to, and keeping them in that Duty. Our having the benefit of the
Scriptures, is an unvaluable Mercy, but we are little earnest, that God by his
Spirit may enable us aright to read them; which if we would in humility, and
with Hearts desire, endeavor our Happiness and Advantage therefrom, were
beyond what I can express; and as it is our Duty to depend upon God for
Strength and Direction in reading his Word; so we are to do it, not only with
what seriousness and presence of mind we can; but also for our better
understanding thereof, to make use of for our assistance what helps we are
trysted with; I remember, we have sometimes whilst together, been speaking of
the Notes lately printed with the Bible; and a beit some parts thereof, give
but too much ground to such, whose Hearts delight not in that blessed Book to
Cavil, yet as our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount, is, what cannot be too often
read, so I have with satisfaction read the Notes thereupon; ^ea, the whole
Notes upon the Evangelists, which appears according to my Capacity, to have
been done by one who deservedly may have the respect due to a worthy and solid
Divine. These Notes upon the first three Evangelists, which in appearance are
the works of one Man, has many things desirable; I remember what he has upon
the Prayer of the Cananitish woman to our Savior, is worth our Consideration;
and indeed that Prayer gives both Direction and Encouragment to a sinner
sensible of it is Sin, in drawing near to God; and what the Anonator says
thereupon, would be imprinted on our Hearts, he therein tells us three things
are remarkable in her Answer, besides her Faith, so eminently expressed. First,
her Humility, she owneth her self a Dog. 2ly. Her Modesty, she beggeth no more
than a Crumb. 3ly. Her Fervency and Importunity after three Repulses. By this
w^ know our Duty in Prayer, to go to God humbly to implore Him modestly, and to
be instant (...) Prayer, going on in our Duty, though we have no^ such an
Answer as we desire: These things conjoined with Faith, make an acceptable
Prayer. Having begun to write upon Man's Misery^ from his wretched Heart; I am
satisfied, that without straining, their might be much said thereupon; and I
wish by communing or by Writ^ we could stir up our selves to the consideration
thereof, and to the use of means enabling us in God, Strength to subdue the
same; it at all times and all occasions, is ready to go out after what is
unallowable in the sight of God. And even in our approaches to him in Duty,
which does dreadfully speaks forth the power of Corruption within us, and at
times when we are alone, which we ought much to improve in suitable Meditation.
Alas! how ready are our wretched Hearts torove after vain and unallowable
Imaginations. My dear Theophile, we are to consider, that whilst our Sin be our
Burden, we have no ground to expect freedom from the power thereof: I pray God
may strengthen us duly to examine all our ways, which if we seriously do, our
Failings will be palpably obvious; and that he enable us under a due sense
thereof, from our hearts, to acknowledge the same, and with earnestness to seek
for Christ's sake, that we in every thing live, as minding we are in the
presence of God, to whom the thoughts of the heart are naked and open; and
before whose Tribunal, we must stand and give an Account therefore. I am truly
at this present, so full of what I think, lays open to me the vanity of all
earthly things; as if my Capacity did allow of my expressing to you
rationality, what I conceive thereof; it would give palpable ground to believe
the folly, yea, the madness there is in almost all the actions, and ways of
every man. And surely I can say, that only in doing what tends to our eternal
Well-being, is Man reasonable. It Is true, it is our Duty in our Stations to go
about what we are called to, in relation to our worldly Being; but where even
what is so done, has not it is principal aim to the glory of God, and the
salvation of our Souls, in and for Christ's sake, it will at the time of death,
or when we come to the true use of Reason, appear to be what the remembrance
thereof will be better unto us. I pray God for Jesus sake, may do away our
sinful and wretched Hearts; and that He by his Grace, fit us for such suitable
Meditation, as may by his Blessing, be a mean enabling us so to live, as Christ
may be our Portion. I am

March 28. 1692. D. Th. Your Neighbor and Servant, THEOCRITUS.

Postscript.
I Have in my last Letter to you, insinuat, that it might be warrantably said,
that none ought to aim at an higher Station in the World than they are in,
wherein I may appear Taxable for as there is a necessity of differing Stations
for the being and governing of Societies; (...) there must be Changes by Death,
or otherway^ of Persons in those Stations: and it cannot be denied to be the
Duty of every one, to endeavor a fitness for being serviceable in their
Generation, in whatever Station Providence shall ca^ them to; yea I do
acknowledge, there may be Endeavors after Qualifications, with some Prospect
to Advancement; but surely the principal End in so doing, ought only to be
God's Glory in the God of the Society: and I yet say, how ever there may be an
Obligation upon person qualified, not to decline their being useful it whatever
Station they are called to, that undoubtedly their own quiet and particular,
lies in their neither seeking after, nor having worldly Honor and Advancement;
for there is no little Truth in that old Saying, Rare fumant felicibus Arae.
And as excellent Flavel says, that as it is the misery of the Poor to be
neglected of Men, (...) it is the misery of the Rich to neglect God: and who
can be poorer then he that has the World, and its Honors, and loves them? And
who Richer, then he that enjoys but little of them, and lives above them? And I
think it may be truly enough said, that not any Change to an higher Station,
but alanerly their being serviceable to God, in what is advantageous to the
Society they live in, ought to be the Aim of whatever they do, having tendency
thereto.


