GREAT AND PRECIOUS PROMISES; OR, Some Sermons concerning the Promises, and the
right application thereof: Whereunto are added some other concerning the
usefulness of Faith in advancing Sanctification.

As also, three more concerning the Faith of Assurance.

By Mr. ANDREW GRAY, late Minister of the Gospel in Glasgow.

All being revised since his death by some friends.

The third Impression carefully corrected and amended.

2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of God. Edinburgh, Printed by a (...) Stationers, Anno Dom. (...)

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
ALthough (upon some considerations) these following Sermons have been kept
back till now, and have waited the vacan^y of the Press from other things: yet
was it at first intended the connection of the purposes so requiring) ^at they
should have come forth as soon as some ^her of this precious Author, which we
did ^^merly publish: And therefore, in the Pre^^^ce which we then prefixed, we
did relate to ^^th, and gave the Reader such advertise^^nts as we conceived
necessary, concerning ^e one as well as the other: So that we have ^^hing to do
at present, but to put this little ^^^ece into thy hands, commending it to thy
se^us thoughts, and the Lords blessing upon ^n. Neither shall we use many words
(...) purpose; Only, we find some help (...) ^o thee, in three most weighty and
(...) ^^ts of Christian Religion. 1. (...) lively exercise of faith, thou may
apply t^^ great and precious Promises. 2. How by fai^^ thou may advance the
work of Sanctification And, 3. How thy faith may grow up unto ass^rance: Of all
which we may truly say, that (...) thing can more seasonably take up the
thought nor bring more advantage to the souls of t^ Lords people in these times.

O how neces^ary is it in such troublsome day^ to learn, how through Faith and
Patience, w^^ may inherit the P^omises: and now wh^ our strong corruption has
(in a manner nece^tate the wise Physician to mix unto us so bit^ a cup, and
give so strong a potion, in what fainting and swouning condition must we be, by
the two immutable things, in which i^ impossible for God to lie, we receive not
a^ the strong consolation.

Again, when profanity and ungodlin^^^ has so abounded in these Nations, t^
from the top of the head, to the sole of (...) foot, there is no soundness,
but wound and bruises, and putrefying sores: A^ when the corruptions of the
Time like the s^ of Zerviah, are grown too strong, even the David's who are
amongst us; What sho^ we study with more earnestness, then to (...) ^^^rifie
our hearts by faith, and by have these promises, to cleanse our selves (...)
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, ^^fecting holiness in the fear of the
Lo^^ 3. When the Lord has remo^ed us so far f^ peace, that the souls of many
have even for prosperity, and the multiplied changes revolutions in our days,
has so clearly demonstrate the instability of all sublunary glory, and so
convincingly taught us, that this is not our rest; Undoubtedly, it is time to
look for ^ city that has foundations, and to give all diligence to make our
calling and election ^ure. The subject then is useful.

As to the manner of handling it: It is true, much accuracy and neatness, is
not to be expected in any work of this nature, being only the hasty gleanings
of a Church Writer; And as to liveliness and power, though it be as easy to
draw a picture with the heat and motion of a living man, as to Write or Print,
^hese lively motions of the Spirit which do often accompany the Lords
Messengers in Preaching, and in an eminent measure were also let out upon this
blessed Author, yet we suppose thou will find, the matter most seriously and
feellingly spoken unto, as from a heart which believed, and therefore spoke:
Yea, both conceptions and expressions savouring much of an exercised spirit,
not only much taken up in communion with God within it self, but even thirsting
also, and panting for the salvation of others; nay (in some measure) traveling
in birth, till Christ might be formed in them. Oh, that more of this holy zeal
and fervency, might accompany this great measure of light and knowledge in the
mysteries of the Gospe^ that the Lord has graciously bestowed both (...)
Pastors and People in this generation, the once again we might see, (as in the
days of John Biptist) the Kingdom of Heaven suffering violence, and the
violent taking by force. And that the blessed Spirit by same gracious
operations, may so warm (...) enlarge thy soul in the use of this and all ot^^
means for thy eternal Salvation, is, and sh^^ he the sincere desires of

Thy servants for Christ's sake, Robert Traill. John Stirling.


Great and precious Promises.
SERMON I.
2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.
MAy we not truly say, that if ever the Christians who live in those days
shall be advanced to stand within the holy place, and shall inherit everlasting
life, all these are ^ow before his Throne may lay aside their ^arps and give us
leave to sing? Will it not ^e a mystery, suppose ye, unto heavenly ^noch that
spent so much of his time in com^union and fellowship with God, w^^ ^e shall
behold such Christians within (...) ^^erlasting rest, that have spent so (...)
their time in corresponding with (...) it not be a mystery unto believing
Abraham when he shall behold such misbelievers, su^ disputers of the promises
of God, advan^^ to reign with Christ? Will it not be a ^^stery unto wrestling
Jacob, when he sh^^ behold these Christians once crowned w^^ immortal glory,
that did so little know w^^ it was as Princes to wrestle with God, (...) they
did prevail: Will it not be a wond^ to patient Job, when he shall behold su^^
impatient Christians as we have been, en^^ing into that blessed place of
repose? W^ it not be a mystery unto holy David, wh^ he shall behold such
unmortified Christi^^ entering within that City, into which (...) unclean thing
does enter? Will it not b^ mystery unto tender Josiah, to behold s^ Christians
as we are, that have our hea^ dying as a stone within us, entering i^ Heaven?
Will it not be a mystery unto (...) right Nathaniel, to behold such
hypoc^^call Christians as the most part of us are, ^^tering within the holy
place, and to (...) those that have been clothed with hypo^sie and guile, now
c^oathed with the r^^ of immortal Glory? And will it not (...) mystery unto
self denied Paul, when shall behold so proud and selfish Christian enter into
Heaven? Give me leave to this, go where we will, we shall be m^ less and
singular; for if we shall go (...) eternity of pain, we shall be the gr^^ (...)
unto the infinite justice of God (...) of mercies we have received: (...) (...)
enter into eternity of joy, we^^ ^e the greatest debtors unto the (...) grace
of Christ, in regard of mercy we (...) ^bused. There shall be none in heav^^
(...) ^o us, and if we shall go to hell, there shall ^e few there that may be
compared unto us. And let me but add thus further before I ^ome to the words,
go where we will, we shall be out of doubt with our condition: Within a short
time a real Christian shall be exalted above the reach of his misbelieving,
(...) hypocrite shall be depressed below the ^each of his faith, and one that
is grossly in nature, he shall be abased beyond the reach of his presumption: A
Christian ere long shall misbelieve no more; a hypocrite ere ^ong shall believe
no more; and one that is grossly in nature shall ere long presume no more: there
is no misbelief in heaven, and (...) here is no faith nor presumption of well
^eing in hell. But to come to that which we intend to speak to, we told you
when first we began our discourse upon that precious and exalting grace of
Faith under a ^wofold notion and consideration. First, As it is justifying:
And, secondly, as it is sanctifying. For the first, we resolved to speak to it
in a twofold consideration. First, As it closes with Christ simply as the
ob^ect upon which it rests, and of this we have spoken from that place, 1 John 1.3, 23 Secondly, As it closes with Christ, as held^ ^orth in the
Promises. And now being (...) speak of it in this consideration, we (...) made
choice of this place, in which (...) ^^ings concerning the Promises, (...) 2.
In a Christians believing of spiritual p^^mises, there is often some sense and
rea^^ that helps him to the exercise of Fai^^ at least, they press not the
contrary; b^ to believe a temporal Promise, when a Ch^^stian is redacted unto a
strait, and that (...) can see no outgate present, sense and reason stands upon
the top of his Faith, a^ presses him to despair: As for instance when a
Christian is living upon the top of mountain, and knows not where to s^ at
night, to believe that there is a prom^^ upon which he may rest, that he shall
(...) want his food; but if that the Lord had ^^vice for him he will provide:
Here, (...) has not only reason to dispute against, b^ the strong pinching
sense of hunger, bo^^ crying out, How can bread be given in (...) wilderness?
3 The tentations that assa^ a Christian to misbelieve upon temporal pr^mises,
they are more subtle and more co^ natural to a Christian, then his rentatio^
that assault him in resting upon spiritu^^ promises: When a Christian is in
straits (...) the world, the tentations that hinder (...) exercise of Faith,
they are more consona^ to flesh and blood; we are ready to ye^ to misbelief
then, because we think it is ^^tional, and speaks the truth. 4 A Ch^^stian is
often so affrighted by his daily ^^ings, or some particular more gross o^
breakings in his life, that howbeit he (...) (through grace) be helped to
belive (...) the Lord shall make out these prom^ which concern his eternal
salvation, an^ ^o him good in the latter end: yet may he be sadly perplexed and
distrestfull in making ^use of any particular temporary promise, for drawing
forth any comfort or encouragement therefrom, as to his present exigont:
because he knows, that although the Lord does forgive his peoples iniquities,
yet may he take vengeance on their inventions, Psalm. 99.8. and therefore may
punish his present failing with the like calamities as he has lone others. 5.
There is also much of a ^atural and carnal self love to a present life,
^emaining in the best, that we are many times worse to satisfy in our
securities for the things of this life, then of that which is to ^ome, and can
more easily trust the Lord or our souls, then for our bodies; so that though
his naked word will sometimes satis^e us for the one, yet it will not for the
^ther. And the last ground of it may be a ^hristians unacquaintednesse with
that lo^ (...) exercising Faith upon temporal promises, ^ere being many who
think not that there (...) use for Faith, except for Salvation and ^e things
above, which makes his Faith ^^on these more difficult then upon pro^^ses that
are spiritual: And this may ap^ar most clearly, in that we find men more ^sily
bear their spiritual wants (even a ^^ristian that is most exercised) then they
^^r their temporal want; and more cor^^ption and impatience does arise from
tem^^al want, then from spiritual want.

2. Consider, That all a Christians du^^ (...) turned over into promises; there
is (...) a duty that is required of a Christian, bu^ is converted into a
Promise. Is not Faith duty, 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandm^^^ that ye should
believe? And is not that t^^ ned over in a promise, Jer. 3.19. Thou sh^^ call
me thy Father? The word importe^ not only an act of necessity, but of violen^
thou shall do it: And in the thirteenth (...) Zechary, at the close, Thou shall
call me (...) Father, and so in Ezekiel. 11.19. Is not m^tification a Christians
duty, Colos. 3.5. M^tifie therefore your members; and it is turn over in a
promise, Jer. 32.28. and Ez^ 36.25, 29. where he promises, that (...) will
purge away all their uncleanness; a^ it is clear from Micah 7.19. I will sub^
(said he) all thine iniquities, it is not sa^ thou must subdue them, but, I
will do it, (...) not also the knowledge of God a comm^ded duty? and yet it is
turned over in a p^^mise in the Covenant of Grace; They sh^^ know me from the
highest to the lowest, nei^^ shall there be need any more that one sh^^ say,
know the Lord, for they shall be all ta^ of me. Is not the commandment of
(...) your duty, as is clear from Eccles. 12. (...) and yet that is likewise
turned over in a ^^^mise; I will put my fear in their in^^ parts, that they
shall not depart away from. So tenderness is a Christians duty, and that is
turned over in a promise, I will away their heart of stone, and give them a
(...) of flesh. And that I may say no more of (...) but to these four places,
and ther^ (...) see almost all duties turned over in mises: there is Jer. 31.
Jer. 32. Ezekiel. 11. and Ezekiel. 36. ye will see all the duties of ^^e Covenant
converted into promises. But ^ay not some say, what advantage is there ^f this?
much certainly, every way: That ^he duties are turned over into promises; it
^ay give a Christian hope, that he shall once ^erform these duties: Will ye not
once ^e tender? Yes certainly, because your ten^ernesse lies within a promise;
Will ye not ^nce be much in the exercise of fear? No ^oubt ye will, and the
ground of it is this, because your fear lies within a promise, and ^o of the
rest. And, 2. there is this advanage of it, that all the duties required of a
Christian are turned over in promises because by this means, a Christian may go
to God when he cannot perform such a duty, and desire him to fulfill his word,
and accomplish ^is promise; and so may make use not only of ^he Omnipotency of
God, but of the faithfulness of God also.

There is this third Consideration that we would propose, that there are some
things ^f a Christian within a promise, that he does not believe to be within
it, especially these ^hree: First, the challenges of a Christian ^re within a
promise, when ye are convinced, that is the accomplishment of a promise ^his is
clear from Isai. 30.21. where convictions and challenges are turned over into
promise; When thou art turning unto the righ^^ ^and or to the left, thine ears
shall hear, (...) voice behind thee, crying, this is the way, (...) in it: And
it may be clear, that our co^ctions are the accomplishment of prom^^^ because
it is a work of the Comforter well to convince, Joh. 16.9. as it is him to make
one rejoice: and if a Christ could believe that his challenges were
accomplishment of a promise, he might brace his challenges, he might see the
fa^^^fulnesse of God in his challenges, and might see much love in his
challenges. (...) Christians cross is within a promise, so t^ when a Christian
meets with such affliction he may sit down and cry out, this is the
complishment of a promise, and this is ch^^ from Psalm. 89.31, 32. wherein in
the m^ of the promises of the Covenant of Gra^^ that promise of visiting their
iniquities w^rods, is put in the bosom of them: (...) from Psalm. 119.77. In
faithfulness have (...) afflicted me, Why does David say in fa^^ fullness? It
was this, because his cross (...) the accomplishment of a promise: and may be
clear also from that word, Heb. 12. Forget not the exhortation, (speaking of
cross) the word is, Forget not the cons^tion that speaks unto you: As if the
h^ Ghost did say, crosses do yield much co^lation, as in verse. 11. They yield
the peace fruits of righteousness: And if this were lieved, that our crosses
were the accomp^ment of the promises, it would help a ^^stian unto much humble
submission, (...) there would not be murmuring under the if once we did believe
that they were accomplishment of a promise: Yea, the (...) advantage further,
that if we did be^^ ^^at our crosses were the accomplishment ^f a promise, we
would be much in advanc^^g holiness under our cross. There is no^ing that
obstructeth the sweet fruits of ^^ghteousnesse under a cross so much as
im^tiency: and I would say this to commend ^e cross, a Christian never moves
so ^^iftly to heaven, as when he is under a san^^ified cross; a cross when it
is sanctified, ^ill prove a Christians motion to Heaven, ^ore then ten
enjoyments, for our enjoyments ordinarily do retard our way as much (...)
further it. And there is this, Thirdly, ^^at is within the promises, even your
daily ^^od, and the hairs of your head, the hairs (...) a Christians head are
numbered, and with^^^ the Covenant. So that ye may see what (...) high respect
Christ has put upon Christi^^s, that is clear from that word, Psalm. 111.^ 8.
He has given meat unto them that fear ^im, He will ever be mindful of His
Cove^nt.

Our fourth consideration shall be, to point at a little these grounds upon
which Christ ^^th delay his accomplishment of the pro^ises; It is certain that
a Christian is often^^es put to this, Does his promise fail for ^ermore? and
cries out, Why art thou be^^me unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail; ^^d
the grounds of this delay are these:

Christ knows that a Christian can often ^^tter improve the delay of the
accomplish^ent of the promise, then he can improve ^e accomplishment it self:
we might find ^is in our experience (it being for the most part) easier for a
Christian to bea^ crosses, then to bear his enjoyments. I the David never had
so sweet a time as the when he was pursued as a partridge by son Absolon; then
grace did breath so most sweetly in his actions: but let ^^vid be under
prosperity, and then we he falls in the sin of Adultery. (...) therefore
never repine when ye are u^ a cross; for certainly, if we had spirit
understanding, we would not judge i^ great a hazard to be under a cross, as u^
prosperity, since we have greater stro^ to bear the one, then to endure the o^
2. The slothfulness of a Christian to w^ the promises are made, this makes the
^^mises to be delayed in their performance was clear in the people of Israel;
the forty years in a wilderness, before promise of entering into Canaan is
ac^plished; It was a promise that could (...) been accomplished in a few days,
an^ because of their sin, it was not accompl^ for forty years, as ye may see
from word in Numb. 14.33, 34. 3. The ac^plishment of the promises is delayed,
Faith may be more put in exercise; (...) clear from that remarkable word, Psalm.
19. Until the time that his word came; is, until the word of the Lord was a^
^^^^^hed; The word of the Lord tried him; (...), it was the matter of his
exercise, an^ cise especially unto Faith; for inde^much for a Christian to
believe upon a (...) when it is delayed in its accomplish ^e fourth ground of
delay is, that the excise of prayer may be more; and it is cer^n, that the best
improvement of delays to be much in prayer; the promises they (...) occasion
prayer, as is clear from Exodus 4. (...), They believed, and bowed down their
^ds and worshipped; and from 2 Samuel 7. (...) where the great promises being
made to ^vid, he cries out, Therefore have I found my heart to pray this
prayer unto God, and it clear from Psalm. 119.49. Perform the word to thy
servant upon which thou have caused (...) to hope. It is bad improvement of
delays ^hen we turn impatient; and it is a bad im^ovement of delays, when we
quite our ^nfidence. Know that promises are accomished after delays, and they
have a lust^ ^on them that may compence all the delay.

There is this other ground of the delays accomplishment of the promises, even
at the thing that is promised may be more ^eet to a Christian when it comes:
this clear from that word of Solomon, Prove. ^.12. Hope deferred makes the
heart sick, ^t when the desire does come, it is as a tree (...) life: O but a
mercy that comes to a Christian through a promise, it is sweet; ^a, a drink of
cold water taken up as the ac^^mplishment of a promise, is more sweet ^en a
feast of fat things full of marrow, and ^^ine on the lies well refined; to take
up your ^ead and your drink as the accomplishment ^f your promises, it would
make them re^^shfull to you. 6. The Lord delays his ^romises, that a Christian
may be more in the exercise of dependency, and may (...) ways kept about the
throne. A C^^ an goes to God from a threefold pri^^ he goes to God from a
principle of (...) from a principle of necessity, and fr^^ principle of love:
but would you (...) that which puts the Christian often (...) God? it is a
principle of necessity: an^ lieve it, that if necessity did not drive a (...)
stiun unto the foot of the Throne, we w^^ seldom go from a principle of love,
or (...) a principle of faith. And there is this ground of the delay of the
accomplishm^^ the promises, that the glory of the wisd^ of God may appear, and
the glory of his p^ in the accomplishment of the pro^ When the promise is long
beneath gro^ then the wisdom and power of God (...) more appear in the
accomplishment of (...) promise. And from this I would only (...) to Christians
that are under that exer^ compleaning of the want of the perform^ of the
promises, these few things: 1. (...) lieve that the promise shall once be ac^
plished, that though the vision tarry, yet a^^ it shall speak. 2. Believe, that
every h^ delay of the accomplishment of the (...) mise has a sweet design of
love: the^ not one moment of delay, but it is for^ advantage of a Christian, as
is clear from (...) word, Romans 8.28. And, 3. that pro^ that comes after long
delays, it has (...) three sweet and soul-refreshing attend^ 1. It is
performed most seasonably, a (...) ^tian if he will observe, he will see in^
^sedom shining in timeing the accomplish^^nt of the promise to such a
particular ^y: a Christian will be constrained to cry ^^t, if the promise had
been fulfilled before, ^ere had not been such art of wisdom ^pearing in the
performance of it. 2. Th^^ ^e promise when it is accomplished, w^^^ ^gage a
Christian more in the exercise of ^ve, than four promises accomplished at a
^ort and smaller time: there is nothing ^at will so inflame the soul with love,
as to ^^ve a promise accomplished after delays. and, 3. the promises
accomplished after ^layes, have much sense waiting upon the ^rformance thereof:
I think hardly a ^hristian ever met with the accomplishment ^f a promise after
long delay, but his soul (...) as made as a watered garden, and as springs
(...) water whose waters fail not; this promise ^ileth and comes to a
Christian perfumed ^ith love.

Now we shall shut up our discourse at ^is time, and shall only speak to these
fix ^fects of a Christians faith in believing the ^omises. 1. That our faith is
impatient, ^e cannot stay upon the promise if it be de^yed: Hence ye will see,
that in Scripture ^ten patience is annexed to faith; which ^eaketh this, That
it is impossible for a ^hristian to believe as he ought, that want^h the
exercise of patience. See Heb. 6.12. ^e ye followers of them, who through faith
and ^tience inherit the promise: And that word (...) the Revelation, This is
the faith and pa^^ence of the Saints. 2. Our faith in closing with the
Promises, it is most unconstant (...) Christian when first a promise is born in
(...) on his spirit, he will then believe the p^mise and join with it; but
after six or ven days go about, he will change (...) Faith: this is remarkably
clear from E^^ 4.31. compared with Exodus 6.9. W^ first the promise comes to
the people of ^rael, that they shall go out of Egypt, it is (...) of them in
the fourth Chapter at the cl^^ They believed the promise, and worshipp^ But
look to them in Exodus 6.9. and ther^ will see them not believing, because of
(...) ternesse and anxiety of heart: And I (...) tell you the grounds why our
Faith is (...) constant. 1. Sometimes the reading o^ promise to a Christian
will be as his sa^ meat; sometimes when a Christian will (...) one time in the
Covenant, it will be (...) fumed with love, and his soul will be tr^ ported
with joy after it, and at another (...) when he shall read that promise again,
it (...) be tastelesse as the white of an egg, and as sorrowful meat. 2. That
we are not m^ in studying the exercise of the things (...) are promised, which
certainly would (...) short many of our debates. There is (...) third defect of
our Faith, That we are (...) diligent, a diligent faith we call this, (...)
after a Christian has believed, he would much in the exercise of prayer, for
the complishment of the promise, he wou^^ much in the exercise of meditation,
to (...) that promise sweet and lively to him. (...) a fourth defect is this,
We build our (...) ^ore upon Dispensations then upon the Word: when
dispensations say that which ^e promise says, then we will believe: but ^hen
dispensation speaks the contrary ^nguage unto the promise, then we will re^ct
our confidence and hope. I will tell ^ou two great mysteries of believing, It
is ^ard for a Christian to believe when the ^ommentary seems to destroy the
Text, ^at is, When the Commentary seems to ^clare, that the promise shall
never be ac^^mplished. In sum it is this, It is hard to ^^lieve when
dispensation will say, the Word (...) the Lord will fail, and when promises ^ds
you believe. 2. It is hard for a Chri^^an to take impossibilities in the one
hand, ^d the word of promise in the other, and (...), O precious Christ
reconcile these two ^^gether, that impossibilities do not destroy ^e promise,
but that the promise may be complished notwithstanding of this.

We have this defect of faith amongst us, ^at we build our faith more upon
sense, ^en upon the word of promise; when a ^ristian is in a good frame, he
will believe, ^t when Christ hides his face, he will then ^e over his hope.
And lastly, there is this, ^at our faith upon the promises is general, (...)
believe the truth of the promises, but (...) study notto make a particular
applicati^^ of them. I shall not stand long to make (...) use of what we have
spoken: Only I ^^uld have the Christians of this age, and ^se that are here, to
go home with this ^viction, the damnable neglect of believing of the promises.
A Christian negle^ these three duties of Religion most, (...) glecteth the duty
of self-examining, the^ of believing the promises, and that nobl^ exalting duty
of meditation: these thre^ ties a Christian does so constantly neglect almost
he is above the reach of convic^ that he does neglect them.

But I would say a word unto these are destitute of the Faith of the promise
are strangers unto these blessed things are recorded within the Covenant: A^ is
only this; doubtless ye must b^ your senses, if ye will not believe his W^ It
is a question indeed, Which of al^ senses shall be most satisfied in heaven,
^ther that of seeing, when we shall beh^^ King in his beauty, and see him as he
is (...) that of hearing, when we shall hear these lodious Halelujahs of that
innumerable pany, which are about the Throne, wi^ any jarring amongst them all,
or the smelling, when we shall find the swee^ sum of his garments, which are
per^^ with all the powders of the merchant; o^ of touching, when we find Mary's
in^ on taken off, Touch me not, and be ad^ to embrace him who is now ascended
(...) Father; Or, that of tasting, when w^ drink of these rivers of
Consolation, th^^ never run dry. This, I say, is indeed (...) stion; But give
me leave to tell (...) atheists and enemies of God: It is (...) question, Which
of all the five sens^ ^epr^^ate shall be tormented in He^ that would ye answer
to it now? Whether ^hink ye the sense of sight, when ye shall be^^ old that
darkness of wrath, the devil and ^is angels, and your fellow prisoners in that
^ungeon? Or whether shall your sense of ^earing be most tormented in hell, when
ye ^all hear those screighings and howlings ^^at shall eternally ascend up
before God, ^y the souls that are in prison? O but the ^eatest enemy would have
compassion upon is enemy, to hear their cries: Or, whether ^ill ye say the
sense of tasting shall be most ^rmented, when ye shall drink of these ri^ers of
brimstone? Or, will the sense of ^uching, when ye shall be eternally scorch^^
with these flames of eternal indignation* ^r the sense of smelling, when ye
shall eter^^lly be, as it were, suffocated with the ^oke of that sulphurious
furnace that shall ever be quenched? O think you if Cain^ ^ould come from hell
and preach that do^rine, that we should not persecute the ^^nts, would we
listen unto him? If A^^^lon should come from hell, and should ^each against the
evil of ambition, would ye ^ten unto him? And if Achitophel should ^se from the
dead and preach that doctrine ^^to you, Let not the wise man glory in his
^isdome, would we stop our ears? Or if ^udas would come from hell and preach to
^u the evil of hypocrifie, in betraying the ^n of man with a kiss, would we
belie^ ^m? Or if Dives that is recorded in (...) ^spel should come from hell,
and (...) ^at Text to preach upon, Jam. 5.1. (...) ye rich men and houl, and
weep for your (...) ries that shall come upon you. And if D^^ would come and
second him with that w^ love not the world, nor the things (...) are in the
world. I fear ye would cry (...) we will embrace that doctrine at an^ time. We
desire not to insist much (...) these, but O to believe, that there is an (...)
nity of pain, and that there is an eternity (...). I will give you a
description of ^^heist, and let him think upon it, it is e^ to convince
hundreds of you, that ye (...) the fear of God, then that ye want the (...) and
love of God. Oh, an imaginary f^^ and a conceit of love, will ye ever (...)
these two Idols. I confess, once ye (...) have a faith that no man shall ever
rob (...) of, and that is, the faith of that truth, (...) when once ye enter
into eternity of (...) there is no redemption out of that pl^ Awake, awake, for
behold the Judge com^ and he shall render vengeance unto t^ that know him not.
To his blessed (...) most precious Name we desire to (...) praise.

SERMON II.
^ Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.
THough Justice and Judgment be the habitation of His Throne, yet mercy and
truth do go before it as two di^ne Ushers to convey us home unto God. ^ere are
these two things that we would ^^ve Christians principally to study. 1. That
(...) would be much in the study of these ^rongs and injuries that ye have done
to ^rist: And, 2. that ye would be much (...) the study of these infinite acts
of precious ^ndescendency that Christ has manifested ^wards you, that the one
may provoke you ^to sorrow and humility, and the other ^y provoke you unto a
sweet astonishment ^d admiration. And I would ask you this, (...) Christ should
present that challenge unto (...), which Absolon presented unto Hushai, (...)
this thy kindness unto thy friend? O be^^ed, what could you answer, when you
^re thus reproved? I think if Christ had ^t forgetfulness for that blessed
end, to ^^get the wrongs and injuries of his own, I know not unto what use
Christ should (...) forgetfulness, for he knows not wh^ is to forget our
good works, but he ha^ blessed art of forgetting our wrongs; tho^ we may say
upon the contrary, that we h^ a cursed art of forgetting them our sel^ There
are these three things that Christ (...) does forget; they forget much Christ,
(...) is the great author of the promises, so (...) may charge them with this,
Why have ^^^gotten me? 2. They forget their (...) ^^es, and these divine
receipts of love (...) Christ has given unto them. 3. They (...) get even
their iniquities, yea sometimes (...) forget them before Christ does forget t^^
and pass an act of pardon upon the^ shall not stand long to plead with you
your undervaluings of that blessed and (...) Plant of renown; I think if there
were more to evidence that low esteem that have of Christ, but only this, that
we so much in sleighting the promises, it (...) more than sufficient: but
besides, is t^ not this to testify how much you u^^ value that holy and just
one; that ye (...) more to have an outward conformity (...) him, than to have
an inward. We may (...) the Christians of this time Nephtali; (...) are as a
hind let loose, and they give go^ words, but we do not give Christ (...)
practices: And is there not this also (...) testifies our undervaluings of
Christ (...) we slight so much, secret and retired respondence and communion
with hi^ suppose there are some that are he^e, (...) ^nsciences bears them
record, they do ^t exercise themselves unto godliness, and shall only say that
word, that Gideon spoke (...) another case, If God be with us, how (...) all
this come upon us? such a spirit of ^o^^ality, such a spirit of laziness, such
a ^irit of hardness, and such a spirit of un^rvaluing of Christ? I suppose,
that if ^ere were a Chronicle written of all the ^es of the Saints that have
been since Adams ^yes, and the Christians of this time should ^ad over that
Chronicle, when they should ^gin and read the life of Adam, they might ^t this
to the close of it, my life is not ^^e his, and when they should read the life
(...) Abel, they might put this to the close of it, ^y life is not like his;
and when they should ^ad the life of Enoch, they might put this (...) the close
of it, my life is not like his: O! (...) which of the Saints can we go: and if
ye ^ould call, is there any that would answer ^u, your life is like mine.

But to come to the words, we told you the last occasion that we spoke upon
them, ^at there were these things concerning the ^omises holden forth in them.
1. The rise (...) the promises is holden forth in these words, ^hereby, or as
we cleared the words may be ^us rendered, by whom, which relates un^^ Jesus
Christ.

The second thing concerning the promises, ^lden forth in the verse is, the
property of ^e promise, and they are these four. 1. That ^e promises are free,
holden forth in that ^rd, Whereby are given unto us; all the promises of the
everlasting Covenant are (...) and not debt. There is that second pro^ ^y of
the promises, that they are unchable, holden forth in that word, Given, gifts
and calling of God being without retance. And the third property of the (...)
mises was, That they were exceeding gr^. And the fourth, That they were exce^^
precious.

The third thing concerning the prom^holden forth in the words, is the advan^^
that flows to a Christian by the pro^ that by them they might be made partake
the divine nature.

And the last thing concerning them (...) that time when the promises were
espe^^^y accomplished, it was then, when we escaped the pollutions of the world
th^^ lust.

Now, as for the first thing, to wit, fountain, original and rise of the prom^
which is Jesus Christ, By whom; In spe^ unto this, we shall speak a little unto
(...) two. 1. In what respects Christ ma^^ said to be the fountain and original
of promises; and we conceive he may be to be so, First, Because he purchased
promises unto us by his own pre^ blood. There is not a promise in all
everlasting Covenant, but it is the pri^^ the blood of the Son of God; this is
cl^ Ephesians. 2.12, 13. where speaking of the tiles, that they were strangers unto
the venant of promise: he sets down (...) 13. verse, the way by which they
(...) brought near unto the Covenant, and had ^ight unto it, it was through the
blood of hit rosse: and it is clear in Ephesians. 3.6. that the ^romises of the
Gospel were given unto us in ^im, that is, through the purchase of him, and his
merits: and 1 Pet. 1.19. where ^e are said to be bought by his blood: for the
^romise of Redemption, was the price of ^oud. Secondly, Christ may be said to
be ^e fountain of the Promises, in this respect, ^at he is the Person unto whom
the pro^ises of the Covenant are first made, and ^rough him are made over unto
us; this is ^ear in Gal. 3.16. the promises were given ^^to Abraham, not unto
many seeds, but as to one, that is Christ; and it is clear from Tim. 1.9. where
the promises of Grace ^^d Salvation are said to be given unto us in (...)
before the world was made: It is true, ^t the promises are not given to Christ,
^nsidered only as the Son of God, (for so (...) had no other relation to us
then the Fa^^er of the holy Ghost) but yet they are, ^^st, made to him as the
Mediator and head (...) his Church, and as that blessed Days man, (...) King
of Saints, and the Great Lord ^^per of all the Rights of the young heirs Glory;
And we all receive of his fullness, (...) grace for grace. Thirdly, There is
this ^pect, in which Christ may be said to be (...) fountain of the promises,
that he it is whom we have a right unto all the proses; this is clear, 1 Cor. 3
12, 13. where^^se two are conjoined, ye are Christ's, and ^n all things are
yours: If once a soul close with Christ in the Covenant of p^mise, there is not
one promise in Scriptu^^ but he may write this superscription ab^^ it, This is
mine, this is mine. Fourth^ Christ may be said to be the fountain of (...)
promises, in regard that he is the Person (...) applies the promises, and
makes u^ rest upon them, and to believe them, (...) David did acknowledge,
Psalm. 119.49. (...) member thy word unto thy servant, upon w^ thou have caused
me to hope: as if David s^^^ I had never believed a promise, except (...)
hadest caused me, and it is clear, Ephesians. 2^ where faith is called the gift of
God, (...) faith to believe the promises, it is the r^ donation and gift of
Christ. Fifthly, may be said to be the fountain of the (...) mises, in that he
qualifieth us for the ac^^plishment of them. Christ gives us stre^^ to obey
the condition that is annexed to promise, and Christ he infuseth habi^^ grace
in us, by which we may be helpe^ exercise faith upon the promises: so grant all
the Scripture were promises, if Christ did not help us, we would never lieve a
promise, and there would never a mise be accomplished unto us. Six^ The last
respect in which Christ may b^ to be the fountain of the promises, is, (...)
all the promises of the everlasting Cove^ they have their accomplishment
through^ according to that word, 2 Cor. 1.20. A promises of God are in him yea,
and i^ Amen; so that ye are to bless Christ, ^^ly for the giving of the
promises, but (...) accomplishment of them also.

That which secondly we shall speak to ^^om this, that Christ is the fountain
of the ^romises, shall be to press upon Christians ^^ese three excellent and
soul-concerning ^^ties. The first, That they would not have light account of
the promises, since they are ^^olets and streams that flow from that ^^essed
Ocean: O but if a Christian did be^^eve that the promise that he has for his
^^ily bread, it was bought with the blood (...) the second Person of the
blessed Trinity, ^ould he not have an high account of that ^^omise? And let me
tell you, it is impos^^le for the promises to be in high account ^ith you, till
once ye reduce them unto their ^^e, and to their fountain: but once know at all
the promises are sweet streams of we that have run through the heart of
pre^^^us Christ, and from thence they have ^wed unto you, and then when this is
be^^^ved, how shall ye sit down and comfort ^^ur selves in the promises, and
rejoice ex^^^dingly in them.

The second duty that we press upon you ^^^m this, is, That since Christ is
the foun^^^^^n and original of the Promises, be much (...) the application of
the Promises. And ^^^e I shall speak a little upon these three ^^ings. 1. A
little unto the evidences and ^^ks of those that have a right to apply (...)
promises; and shall only name unto you ^^^se few. The first is, to be a person
under, ^^victions of sensible need and necessity of (...) a promise; have ye
convictions of (...) ^ecessity; Then from that ye may (...) have a right to the
promises, and are not (...) glad tidings? I know there are some are under such
convictions of their sin, they think it boldness to apply the prom^. But I
would say this unto you, that i^ were under sensible convictions of your
^nesse, ye would give a world for an ha^^ a promise whereby to hang: believe
it, exercise of misbelief is never at its hei^^ ^ill we would be content to dig
through^ earth to get a promise, and till we (...) at that, that our souls
would pursue a them from the one end of the world to other: And for the grounds
of this a^^tion, that sensible necessity gives a righ^ the promises, if ye
will look to these g^ promises of the everlasting Covenant, they not given to
that Christian that is det a need, Isa. 55.1, 2. and Matthew. (...) where the
great promise of the Gosp^^ given out, and the invitation of (...) Christ, is
unto these that are weary and ^Iaden. Christ would account it an exce^
courtesy, that ye would not dispute, believe, and that ye would look upon y^
necessities as his call to believe the prom^ 2. A person that has a high
account o^ Promises, he has a right to apply the^ mises: Let once your soul
close with (...) by Faith and Love, and then you may (...) holdnesse close with
the Promises. (...) sesse, if we were more in believing the ^ises, we would
have a higher and (...) (...) of the Promiser: Would (...) the reason that
Christ is not acco^^ matchless, it is because of this, our necessi^ties of the
promises is not always within our sight, and our exercising of Faith upon the
promises is not our daily work. 3. This looks like a right to the promise;
that which is born in upon a Christians spirit when he is near God in prayer,
and is under most sensible exercise under his own infirmities, he has readily
a right to apply tha^ promise: As for instance, when a Christian is debating
himself out of Christ, which is but an unpleasant exercise; to meet with a
promise born in upon their spirit, that gives them some ground of hope, that
they may apply and rest upon Christ: of when a Christian is fainting under
affliction and is like to give over; to meet with (...) word of promise born in
upon his spirit (...) that does uphold him in the day of his trial he may
probably conclude he has a right t^ believe that promise. 4. There is that
ev^^dence, persons that have an high account (...) the promises, they have a
right to apply (...) promises, it is an excellent and most conce^^ ning work
for a Christian to believe the excellency of the promises, when he cannot have
the actual application of the Promise^ For when once a Christian comes to this
(...) that the great things of the everlasting Covenant are matchless in his
eyes; then tha^ is the valey of Achor, and a door of hope that ere long Christ
will apply the^ 5. When a Christian has great delight (...) ^he promises, when
they are sweet (...) ^aste, and are the refreshing and rejoy (...) his heart,
that is an undeniable sign that (...) has a right to make use of such promises
(...) Were your souls never refreshed by reading of the boundless Covenant of
love, an^ the sweet promises that are in it? I would have Christians marking
these promises tha^ have upholden them in their straits, I would have them
marking the promises that ha^^ been lievely to their souls, and say, The once
was my goodly meat, and made me (...) rejoice in the house of my affliction;
and (...) would have a Christian marking the time (...) the accomplishment of
the Promises, (...) which he will see infinite wisdom shining (...) ordering
the accomplishment of the pr^ nises to such a time. And I would have (...)
Christian marking the frame of his own spirit, when the promises are
accomplished (as ye will find often in Scripture) and (...) ^ll this, ye should
find such a reviving an^ profitable delight in the promises, the ^ould give a
very full evidence of your righ unto them. 6. Lastly, when a Christi^^ under
straits can receive consolation from (...) ^ther thing, but all prove
Physicians of (...) ^^lue and miserable comforters: when (...) Christian is
convinced, there is no joy (...) ^e had under such a cross but in the faith^^
^e promises, that is an evidence that the person has a right to the promises.
(...) would only say this, O beloved in the Lo^^ ^not this your guilt, your
undervaluing ^^e promises, and your little exercise ^ith? I would pose you with
this, w^^ ^^st studied ye to apply any promise of (...) Covenant of Grace? When
last did ye ex^ercise faith upon any of them? Shall I tell you what is the
practice of the most part of us, we study perhaps to apply one promise, but for
the rest of the promises we lay them aside, and do totally neglect them: we
study to apply the promises of salvation, and of having redemption through
Christ, but for the promises of Sactification, for the promises to help us to
perform duties, for the promises to support us under the cross, for the
promises to comfort us in our way to heaven, for promises in reference to all
ordinary things, we are not much in application of these. O but if a Christian
were believing the promises, he might sit down even while he is here and sing
one of the songs of Zion, though yet but in a strange land.

The second thing that I shall speak to upon the application of the promise,
shall be to propose unto you some rules that ye would mare use of in the
application of them, and shall name unto you these.

Frst, Study these four things, one is the faith^ninesse and truth of the
promises, that such thing is the saying of him that is the faithful witness,
and Amen: This was the^ practie of Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. the way how^ he was ought
to make application of the promise was, 1. by laying down that conclusion this
is a faithful saying; and Ren. 22. frot the beginning to the 6. verse, whose
there ^n great promises made, and much spoken t^ the commendation of heaven,
this is subjoyned in the 6. verse, These are (...) faithful and true sayings
of God: As if Jo^ had said, all that I have spoken concerni^^ heaven, will be
to no purpose, except ye believe the truth of the promises; and this w^ the
practice of David, 2 Samuel 7.28. T^ words are truth, O Lord, he subjoyneth the
unto the actual application of the promise 2. Study the sweetness and
excellency (...) the promises, this was the practice of Pa^^ 1 Timothy 1.15. This
is a faithful saying, (...) then he subjoyneth, and worthy of all acctation:
And this was the practice of David Psalm. 119.72. I have esteemed the laws of
(...) mouth better then thousands of gold and sil^^ O such an opinion, to
esteem the promi^^ better then thousands of gold! It is he^^ rodox amongst the
most part of you, th^^ prefer the world before the promises of (...) Covenant:
and it was his practice, verse. 10 and ver. 162. I rejoice at thy word as one
the finds great spoil: he had a higher acco^^ of the promises, then to divide
the spo^ ^^^er war. 3. Let the Christian study (...) necessity that he has of
the promise, the there is no way of winning above that necesity but the closing
with the promise, a^^ saying hold upon it. 4. Lastly, A Christ in would study
the suitablnesse that is in (...) promise to answer their necessities that they
be under need, there is aprecio^ way of remedy manifested unto them (...) ^hese.

The second rule that we would prescr^^ (...) the application of the promises,
is, T^^ ye do not expect sensible comforts immediately after ye have believed
the promise, a Christian may apply the promises, and yet want the joy and
sweetness that is in them: This is clear, Psalm. 119.25. My soul cleaves unto
the dust. There he is under much unxiety and much sorrow; and yet he is a
believer of the promises in the mean time, ^s the words following does clear,
Quicken one according to thy word, he lays claim to the promise, and this is
clear in the 81 verse. of that Psalm, My soul does faint within me; There is
much exercise of sorrow, and yet he is a believer in the promise, But I hope in
^hy word: A Christian after he has believed the promise, he would put a blank
in Christ's hand concerning the sweetness of the promises to be made out in its
own time. What ^s sense? Is it the precious indulgence of Christ that he gives
to his own. I would press this upon you, prophecy nothing before your
believing of the promise; but, having believed, ye may surely prophecy that
the promise shall be accomplished in its own time, and the word that he has
spoken shall certainly come to pass: but as for sense, is for quickening, as
for comforting, as for receiving, ye must put a blank in the hand of Christ to
dispense these things to you as he sees fit.

The third rule in the application of the promises, is, That ye do not build
your faith upon this, that the promises shall be acco^^^ plished, because
probability and reason (...) to say the thing: I would say this (...)
Christian, that ye may oftentimes suspect (...) promise is not near to be
accomplishe^ when reason says, Behold the word of the L^^ comes, and that of
times the Lord is nea^^ when we begin to pass a conclusion, (...) Word is not
at hand, and the time of the (...) complishment of the promise is not nea^
Certainly many times before Christ accomplish the promises, he will learn us to
be ^^ing above sense and reason, and he will h^ reason to submit to faith, and
he will ha^ probabilities to contradict the accompli^ment of the promise; and
when probab^ties are furthest away, that is His time (...) work: this is clear
in these two signal d^verances of the people of Israel from Eg^ and Babylon,
Exodus 3.4, 5. and Ezech. 37* the beginning. And therefore as a Christ would not
quite his grip of the promises, (...) cause dispensations seem to contradict
(...) accomplishment of the promise, and so^ time cries out, Why art thou
become unto as a liar, and waters that fail? So on (...) other hand, ye are to
build your faith up^ the promises, and not upon dispensation even when
favorable; seeing that we kno^ the way that Christ takes many times
accomplish the promises, is by contra^ means to our apprehension; His paths
(...) in the whilewind, and his footsteps are (...) known. And may we not cry
out, Who (...) take up the ways of God, whose ways more subtle than the way of
an eagle in the (...) the way of a serpent upon the rock, or the (...) of a
ship upon the sea, etc.

The fourth rule that we would prescribe into you in the application of the
promises, (...), That ye would close absolutely with the promises, I mean,
without limiting the only ^ne. There is a limited closing with the promise,
which is the frequent exercise of ^ur hearts; we will close with the promise,
^ur with this restraint laid upon Christ, that whenever we begin to believe
the promises, all things might go as we desire: and this is the great occasion
that we do so ^equently reject our confidence, and do re^se our hope when God
does not answer ^ur peremptory expectations.

Fifthly, We give you this rule, that ye ^ould eye Christ much in the
application of ^e promises. There is a threefold sight of christ that a
Christian should have when he ^pplyeth the promises, a Christian should ^ave a
sight of the boundless and conde^ending love of Christ, that so he may be
^onstrained to hope, and may be constrained (...) love. 2. A Christian should
eye the ^ithfulnesse and unchangeablenesse of Christ, that what his blessed
lips have spoken, he ^ill also do, and what he has said, he will ^ikewise
bring to pass. And, 3. in the ap^lication of promises, he must eye the
om^ipotency of Christ, that what he has said, ^e is able to bring to pass.
And O when shall we have occasion to sing that song, What has God wrought for
us, which was the ^ong that Balaam sung who yet was but (...) ^rofane wretch.

6. There is this rule that we would prescribe unto you in the application of
the promises, that a Christian after he has applied them, he would be much in
the exercise of Prayer for the accomplishment of these promises; this was the
practice of David, 2 Samuel 7.27. When God in passing many precious promises;
David does subjoyn that word, Therefore have I found in my heart to pray this
prayer: And we see in Ezekiel. 36.37. all alongs that Chapter, God is passing most
excellent promises; and yet in verse. 37. this is subjoyned, For all these
things, I will be enquired of the house of Israel: And in Jer. 29.10, and 12.
where the time is coming, when God would accomplish his good word (as he
speaks) that is subjoyned in verse. 12. Then shall ye call upon me, and seek
after me: And Daniel 9.2, 3. when Daniel knew that the promise was near the
time of its accomplishment, then he set himself by prayer and supplication to
seek the face of God. I would say these three words unto a Christian; The
smallest mercy that a Christian meets with, if he can call it Samuel, that
is, The son of prayer, and if ye can call it Isaac, that is, The child of
promise, he may then, and does ordinarily receive much consolation in that
mercy. O but a mercy flowing to a Christian through a promise, if it were but a
drink of cold water, and a piece of brown bread, it will be more excellent
cheer, then all the dain^^es of the Kings of the earth. O but to eat and drink,
taking these things as the accomplishment of the promises, this would make us
eat our bread with singlnesse of heart, and much cheerfulness. And there is
this, secondly, I would say unto you, When a promise is accomplished, and a
Christian is not much in the exercise of Prayer in the accomplishment of it,
one to a hundred if he lose not the sanctified use of the accomplishment of
that promise. Ah, know ye not that a promise when it is accomplished, may be a
curse to a Christian. That word is most terrible, Mal. 2.2. I will curse your
blessings. And the last word that I would say to this, is, That a Christian who
believes the promises, notwithstanding that dispensations seem to contradict
it, that promise shall be made most refreshful unto his spirit, when it is
accomplished. O but a Christian that never had much jealousy, nor much
staggering about the accomplishment of the promise, when it comes, it will be
most refreshful unto him: And believe it, there is not one hours entertainment
of jealousy about the accomplishment of the promise, but it will impare the
sweetness of the promise when it is accomplished, except so far, that the
transcendant and free love of Christ is seen in the accomplishment of them,
notwithstanding of our misbelief.

The last rule that I shall offer a Christian in his application of the
promises, when ye meet with objections that ye cannot answer, but they do
silence you; I will tell you wha^ ye should do with them, misken these
obstructions and lay them by. This was the practice of believing Abraham, Romans
4.9. He considered not his own body being weak, an^ the deadness of Sarahs
womb. The weal^nesse of his own body, and the deadness o^ Sarahs womb were so
strong objections (...) the way of the accomplishment of the pr^mises, that he
could not answer them; an^ the way he takes to refute them was, H^ did not
consider them; as it were, he forg^^ those objections, and went about his duty.

The third thing that we shall speak to, (...) relation to the application of
the promis^^ shall be somewhat for helping a Christian the is standing at too
great a distance, to get the promises applied.

First, A Christian would be much in t^^ study of these experiences of the
faithfulne^^ of God, and what others have met with When ye begin to apply a
promise, ye man be helped in the Faith of applying promise by beholding these
great records of the faithfulness of God that are extant. This w^^ the way the
Angel took with Mary, Luke (...) 36. where helping her to believe that pr^mise,
that of her should be born the Messia^^ this is the way that he strengthened
he^^ Thy cousin Elizabeth is now with child, (...) has gone six months, even
she that was call^ barren. And I shall only name these (...) places in
Scripture which may help you ^^ceedingly, and strengthen you to believe (...)
promises upon this account. There is that word in Exodus 12.41. and 51. It is a
most remarkable saying, At the end of the four hundred and thirty years, on
that same very day, (there was not one day misled after the time that was set
was accomplished) In that same very day they came out, and this is marked in
ver. 51. again: And there is that word 1 King. 8.56. where Solomon, when he is
singing most sweetly to God, he takes an observation of this, Lo (says he)
there has not failed one word that God has spoken to you by his servant Moses.

Secondly, Ye would be much in the consideration of your own experiences, that
you have in the accomplishment of promises formerly. This was David's way that
he took to strengthen himself to believe the promise, He that has delivered me
from the rage of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me from
this uncircumcised Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.35. and 37 46. And this was the
practice of the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. God has delivered me from that
cruel lion: And from thence he subjoyneth, And the Lord will deliver me from
every evil work: And this was his practice, 2 Cor. 1.10. where these three are
sweetly knit together, God has delivered me, he does deliver me, and he shall
deliver me. There is not one experience of this kind, but it preaches that
unto you: O believe the promise, and do not call in question his faithfulness.

Thirdly, There is that help; that (...) study much the excellency of the
promise^ that is the most noble and excellent way (...) move you to apply the
promises, accordin^ to that word, Psalm. 119.111. I have ma^^ thy testimonies my
heritage for ever, and the ground of it is that, Because they are the r^joycing
of my heart. The sweetness of the promises would engage our heart to app^^
them.

And there is that fourth help, A Christ an would study the omnipotency of God
that so he may be helped to believe a^^ apply the promise: This is clear in
Zee^ 12.1. where God going to pass many excellent promises, he ushers in that
discour^ with high and majestic descriptions of h^ power, in that he
streatcheth forth the heaven and lays the foundation of the earth, a^^
forms the spirit of man within him. An this was the practice of Abraham, Romans
4.2^ the way how he came to believe the promise He counted him able that had
made it, that (...) might perform it.

Fifthly, For your help in applying (...) the promises, Study much the unchange
ablnesse of Christ, and his faithfulness, kno^ that he is the same, yesterday,
and to day and for ever. This was the way that Sar^ came to the faith of the
promises, Heb. (...) 11. She believed, and the ground of it (...) that she
judged him faithful that had ^^^nised. There is not one act of misbe^^ that a
Christian falls into, but it sai^^ that God is not faithful, and that he is
not true.

Now the last duty that we would press from this point, that Christ is the
fountain of the promises, is, that we may have an high esteem of the Promiser;
even of Jesus Christ, in whom they are yea, and Amen. And I shall close all at
this time with this, are there not many here, that have no respect unto him who
is that faithful witness, and the Amen; who has promised us himself, and all
things: and if ye will not take with the challenge, let your hearts but answer
these two or three things. 1. Has not the loss of things in the world
affected your heart more, then ever absence from Christ did? Has it not? And
can such a soul say, I have an high account of the Promiser? Is it possible,
that these that will mourn more under the absence of their Idols than for the
want of him, that they can have ^n high account of Jesus Christ? I am persuaded
of this, there are some Merchants, that the loss of their goods at the Sea,
has diverted them from their nights rest, and yet absence from Christ never
did divert them from their sleep one hour. O when did love to find out Jesus
Christ, and to enjoy his fellowship, make you rise up in the filent watches of
the night, and to pursue after Him. 2. Have not your souls delighted more on
the enjoyment of the things of a world, than ever they did in the enjoyment of
Christ? Is not this true, that the increase of wine and oil, and of silver and
gold, has affected your hearts more with joy than (...) Christ did? And have
you a high es^^ of the Promiser? 3. Are you taking (...) light to entertain
fellowship and comm^^ on with the Promiser; Is this true? W^ went you to your
prayers, but ye wear^ere ye went away? And have ye a h^^ account of the
Promiser? Is not that (...) language of your hearts; O when shall (...) Sabbath
be over? and when shall the new (...) be gone that I may pursue after my Idols?
would pose you with this, if there were eye to take notice of you, would you
(...) flight secret prayer, would you not sli^^ Family Prayer? We love not to
serve ^^sus Christ. I know there are atheists he^ that would love to go to
heaven with^^ Faith, Love, Prayer and Repentance, the would love to go to
heaven by a way t^^ never one went before them. And now shall say but this one
word to you that (...) the heirs of the promise, and have the ble^^ expectation
of heaven, what ever the wo^^ do, esteem ye highly of him: O remem^^ and
comfort your selves in the thoughts (...) the blessed day which Christ (after
he ha^^ past the sentence of condemnation upon (...) wicked) shall go in upon
the head of (...) Troops of the first born, he shall walk before us through the
Ports of the New (...) rusalem, having Crowns of Immortal G^^ upon his head,
and then shall follow (...) Him His Angels, and then shall follow (...) Him the
blessed company of the first (...) every one having the Harps of God in (...)
^and, and they shall be singing as they enter (...) through the Ports of the
City, Hallelujah unto him that was devd, and is alive, and now lives for
evermore. O to believe that day when first we shall all enter in through the
streets of the New Jerusalem, when we shall be clothed in white robes, having
Crowns upon our head! O such a day, if it were believed, might it make us often
shake our glass, and streach out our necks, (as the word is, Romans 8.19.) till
once we saw that blessed day were approaching to us! There is no wearying in
heaven, the promises are now accomplished unto them, and they are inheriting
the promises; When shall that word be accomplished, or when shall we have
occasion to say it? Mark 1.37. Behold all men seek after thee; the word that
these Disciples spoke to Christ: O study to love him, study to believe on him,
for be persuaded he is upon his way. And I shall say no more but this, that as
all the promises that are within the bounds of this everlasting Covenant, they
are yea, and Amen, in an embraced Christ, and laid hold on by faith; so I say,
all the curses that are in Deuteronomy. 26.27, 28. and all the curses that are within
the volumn of the Book of this Covenant, they shall be yea and Amen in a
despised Christ, and not laid hold upon by faith.

SERMON III.
2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given un^^ us exceeding great and precious pr^mises,
that by these you might (...) partakers of the divine nature having escaped the
corruption the is in the world through lust.
SOmetimes the soul of a Christian dot^ move in the paths of God, and in the
ways toward Zion as the chariots (...) Aminadab, when they are under the sou^
enliving and quickening influences of heaven and sometimes the soul of a
Christian dot^ move in those blessed paths as Pharaohs ch^riots, they drive
most heavily, when there (...) a cloud between the precious face of Chri^ and
them: and we conceive that sound an^ spiritual exercise of Faith upon the
Promises, would make a Christians motion more swift toward heaven. We grant
Chri^ has three different ways of guiding so^ and daughters to Glory: there
are some the Christ carries to heaven in a chariot pa^^ with love, that all
alongs their life they (...) living within sight of that promised (...) and are
taken up with the refreshing (...) tastes of the heavenly joys; such a one
(...) Henoch, who spent his days in walking (...) God: there are some that
Christ guid^^^ heaven in a chariot that is drawn with speck^ed horses; they
have mixed dispensations of forrow and joy attending them in their walk, they
have a winter and a summer, they have a night and a day, and such a one was
Job. 3. There are some that Christ carries to Heaven in a fiery chariot, that
all alongs their life they are under distracting terrors of the most High, and
are living perpetually to their own apprehensions upon the borders of hell, and
such a one was Heman, whom Christ thus did guide to heaven: however, if we
shall go there, we need not much dispute the way how we came, for he does all
things well. And upon the other part, Satan has three different ways of
guiding souls unto everlasting torment; there are some that Satan carries to
hell in a chariot of delusions, making them believe that they are still going
to heaven; and such are the hypocrites in Sion: and I shall say; I think that
chariot was never so filled as it is in those days. O fear that anxious
disappointment that many of you (it is like) will meet with? An hypocrite he
has strong hopes, he has strong idols, and he has strong delusions, these
are his three attendants. And there are some that Satan carries to hell in a
chariot of profanity and ignorance of God, whose judgment goes before hand,
and they are known that they are going there. And there are some that Satan
carries to hell in a chariot of civility, whose Religion stands in thi^,
^^^cerning the letter of the Law to be blamele^^ And certainly, believing of
the promis^ and studying to exercise faith upon them, that which might prevent
many of the damnable soul destroying and murder^ delusions that are within some
of our brea^^ There are three things in Scripture that a^ called precious:
Christ he is called precion^ 1 Pet. 2.7. Faith is called precious, 2 P^^ 1.1 To
you that are partakers of the li^precious faith with us, and the Promises the
are called precious, in the words that (...) have read, and Faith, (as it were)
ha^ two blessed eyes, by one of these it beho^eth Christ, and by another of
these it (...) holds the promises, and fixes it self upon them. O Christians
and expectants of he^ven, would ye know what is the rise of (...) the sad
things that have befallen you in the^ days? It is this in short, ye believe
not the promises. O Christians, what is the reas^ that ye carry not your
crosses with patien^ it is, because ye believe not the promises (...) which
your soul must be upholden in the day of your affliction. O Christian, wh^ is
the rise of your little mortification? (...) it not because ye believe not the
promise^ for by them ye should be made partakers (...) the divine nature. O
Christian, what is the ground that ye pray so little, and that y^^ pray with so
little success? It is, beca^^ ye believe not the promises. A Christ when he
goes to pray, he should take th^^ two things along; 1. The sensible ^^victions
of his necessities: And, 2, (...) precious promises that is given to (...)
^^hat necessity, the one would provoke fer^ency, and the other Faith. Are there
not some here that knows not what it is to ^ray upon a promise, and that
makes you ^ray to so little purpose. O Christian, what (...) the reason of
your so much sorrow, and ^f your little spiritual comfort? It is, that ^ve
believe not the promises: It is no won^er that your names be called Marah,
because ye exercise not faith upon the pre^ious promises of God. I think
without wronging you or any that are here; I doubt much if ever Christians had
such hearts as the most part of us have; O what a heart is that, that can
neither pray nor praise? both we alike mysteries unto them: What a heart is
that, O Christian, that can neither believe promises, believe threatenings, nor
obey commands? What a heart is that, that can neither sorrow for sin, nor
rejoice in God? and what a heart is that, that can neither love Christ when he
is present, nor can they long for Christ when he is absent? and what a heart is
that, O Christian, that can neither love heaven, nor can fear hell? and is
there not such hearts with us, even with us that are here this day?

At the last occasion that we spoke upon these words, we spoke a little to the
first thing in them, which was the rise and original of the promises, holden
forth in that word, Whereby, or by whom. The second thing in the words, was the
properties of the promises; and we told you that there were these four holden
forth in the words. The first property of the promises is, t^ they are free,
which is imported in (...) word, are given; all the promises of (...)
everlasting Covenant being the precious (...) free gifts of God. Hence you will
see t^ often times the tenor of the Covenant of Graruns upon that strain, I will
give you, as clear, Jer. 32.39. I will give you one hea^ and Ezekiel. 36.26. I
will give you a new hea^ and Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give you; It is t^ strain of
the language of the Covenant (...) Grace, to give.

Now in speaking upon this first proper^^ of the promises, to wit, their
freedom, shall speak a little unto these two, the fir^ thing shall be to point
out unto you the w^ how a Christian may win to the distinct u^ taking of the
freedom of the promises, a^^ then I shall from thence press some duties.

And in short, as to the first, we concei^^ that a Christian may win unto the
distin^ uptaking of the freedom of the promises, by these Considerations. 1.
Let a Christ^^ cast his eye upon the sweet rise, and spring or fountain of the
promises, and there y^ will see their freedom shining most clea^^ for what is
the fountain of the promises. Is it not the boundless and everlasting lov^ of
Christ: this is clear, Deuteronomy. 7.7. when God giving a reason of all the great
thi^ that he had performed for them, he sett^^ down the rise of it, Because I
loved you, sa^ he: and again the ground of this is, (...) I have loved you,
there being no reason love, but love: and it is clear, 2 Samuel (...) where David
having received many precious promises, he sets down the rise of all these
in that verse, For the words sake, says he, and according to thine own heart,
have thou done all these things to make them known to thy servant. And it is
clear, Ezekiel. 17.8. where God calls the time of entering into Covenant with
them, a time of love; that love it was eminently shyning in that day when God
did condescend to Covenant with them: And hence ye see in Scripture, that the
promises they are called by the name of mercy, Micah 7.20. To perform the mercy
to Abraham, which is the Promises, and they are so called, because mercy and
boundless love is the sole fountain and spring of all these promises.
Secondly, Consider the persons who have right to make use of the promises? Must
not the promises be free when the proclamation is upon these terms, Rev.
22.17. Whosoever will, let him come, there is nothing to give you a right to
the promises, but only a willingness to embrace them, if ye will, ye may take
them. And, thirdly, ye may read the freedom of the promises in this, that any
condition which is annexed to the promise: Christ gives to the Believer
strength to perform that condition: It is known that Faith is the condition of
the promises, and it is certain Christ gives (...) Believer that condition as
well as he give the him the promise, Philip. 1.29. To you it is given to
believe, and Ephesians. 2.8. It is the gift of God: It is impossible for a Christian
(...) perform the condition, except Christ who^ is surety for him did perform
it. Fourthl^ Ye may read the freedom of the promises, ye consider the time when
the promises a^^ accomplished, it is often at such a time, wh^ the Christian
has been, and is under no ^^ry spiritual frame. Hence ye will see (...) Ezekiel.
16.60.61. that when the promis^ are accomplished, then God requires conf^sion
and blushing of face, because of their fo^mer ways: and Ezekiel. 36.31. when the
pro^mises are accomplished, then that is the tim^ when the Lord calls them to
rememb^^ their own evil ways, and their doings that were not good; yea he will
have them and all the^ world to know, it is not for their sakes th^^ he does
this; therefore he commands them to be ashamed and confounded for their own
ways, or the posture they were in when he accomplished his promise: And if
there were no other thing to speak the freedom of the promises, but the
trysting of the accomplishment of them with such a frame, it were more then
sufficient: But besides this, see David's practice, 2 Samuel 7.8. he reads the
freedom of the promises from his own imperfections, What am I (says he) and
what is my fathers house, that thou should have brought me hitherto? And
even in the same Text, there is an Emphasis in that word, to us, Whereby are
given to us, as if the^ Apostle did say, to prove that the promis^^ are gifts:
I can bring no other argument so strong as this, They are given to us. Fifthly.
Ye may read the freedom of the Promises, (...) ye will consider and take up the
infinite ful^nesse and all sufficiency of the Promiser, that there is nothing
without himself that can persuade him to give such promises. Hence ye will see,
Genesis 17.1. when he is making the Covenant with Abraham, he puts it still in
the Frontispiece of the Covenant, I am God all-sufficient, as it were, to put
off all thoughts of merit that Abraham might have, and that Abraham might be
persuaded of this, that there was not any imaginable perfection in himself,
that could be the ground and rise of such promises. And there is that, lastly,
from which ye may read the freedom of the promises, if ye consider the
greatness of these promises: if they were of a lower nature, then were it less
to be wondered, if merit should come in to plead for it self: But when a
Christian shall compare himself, and the greatness of the promises together,
he cannot but then sing that blessed song, These are the gifts and donations of
God, and what am I, and what is my fathers house that thou have brought me
hitherto,

Now the second thing that we purposed to speak to, is, to press some duties
upon you from this, that the promises are free, and we shall lay before you
these three. The first, That since the promises of God are free, then as you
would not destroy your own souls, be much in making use and application of the
Promises: Are not the promises your life? Did not all the Saints that went to
heaven before us go to heaven, living upon the promises? There was not a step
of Abraham's life, but he walked with a promise in it; there was not an
afflicti^ that Abraham met with, but he took co^^ fort to himself from the
promises; and shall remove these two mistakes that are ^^cident to Christians
in the application of t^ promises, even from this ground, that the are free.

The first is this, There are some Christ^ans that will not apply the promises,
because they are under the convictions of their ow^ infirmities, and of their
own baseness: (...) that when we press you to believe the pro^mises, ye
reject this counsel, because ye^ consult with your own infirmities. This was
the practice of David, Psalm. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted
and were delivered: but he durst not trust i^ the 6. verse, But I am a worm,
and not a man, I am a reproach among the people. And it is that same divinity
that is in these days, when we press you to believe the promises, because of
the great cloud of witnesses that have gone before you, that believed the
promises. O say ye, if I were like David, and Abraham, I would believe the
promises; but truly David said that same, that lived before you, if I were
like my fathers, I would believe the promises, but I am not like my fathers.
And therefore I would say to you these two words. 1. Are ye inferior (...)
short unto David in holiness, or necessities? We do not question but all of
you will answer, we are not inferior to David in necessities, but in
holiness; Then sa^ we, if ye be not inferior to David in necesity, then make
use of the promises: for as we cleared the last day, necessity gives a right
in making use of the promises. 2, I would say, I am certainly persuaded, that
sensible necessity would cut short many of our formal debates, in closing with
the promises, necessities (as ye use to speak) has no Law, and necessity has
no manners. Let me say that to you who will not close with the promises, that
if ye were under sensible necessity, if Christ should forbid you to close with
such a promise, ye would close with it though he forbid you, as the woman of
Canaan did, there is nothing but sensible necessity will overcome it: necessity
never disputes its right, for it goes over the belly of such a dispute, it
presently makes use of that that its need calls for.

Secondly, There is that other mistake amongst Christians in believing the
promises, that they want the qualifications annexed to the promises, and
therefore they dare not believe the Promise, especially that promise of dosing
with Christ, they think they are not under such a deep measure of humiliation,
of sorrow for sin, nor under such lively apprehensions of the excellency of
Christ. And I shall say but these six things unto these that will not close
with Christ, because they want qualifications, or at least, have not these
qualifications after such a way. First, Let me tell thee (O Christian that thus
disputes,) go between the first steps of a Christians way to heaven and the
last, and see if ye can behold a grave upon which this is, written, Behold here
lies a man or a w^man that came to Christ to embrace him, an^ he would not
receive them; Did ye eve^ behold such a grave as this? And why the do ye so
much dispute? Will ye take a tria^ of Christ whether he will refuse you if y^
come, and if he shall refuse you, sure I am he will do that which he never did
to any before you. The second thing I would say to such, that the want of such
degrees of such things, ought not to be a ground of your no^ closing with
Christ; for if ye had these qualifications that ye require, ye would maintain
that same dispute that ye do now; for when we desire you to close with Christ,
y^ answer, that your sorrow is not come to such a height as it ought, nor is
you humiliation come to such a height, as ye pitch for your self to come to. O
Christian, if ye come to ten times more, and yet ten times more, ye would have
that same dispute the^ which ye have now: and the ground of it is this, the
more that a Christian have real sorrow, he will oftentimes be the more i^ the
apprehension that he has not sorrow* Thirdly, If ye want the qualifications
that are required in these that should close with Christ in the Covenant of
promise, then come to Christ to get these qualifications. I would only ask at
you, think ye to spin sorrow for sin out of your own hearts; Think ye to spin
humiliation for sin out of these wretched breasts of yours, ye must come to
Christ ^or sorrow, as well as ye come to Christ for ^^^e. Fourthly, All the
qualifications that are annexed unto that promise of closing with Christ, and
coming to him, they point out rather the qualification of them that will come,
then the qualification of these that ought to come: Ye read such a command as
that, Come unto me all ye that are wearied and heavy laden. O say ye, I am not
weary, and I am not under the burden of sin, therefore I cannot come. I will
tell you what is the meaning of that command; Christ inviteth these who have
the greatest unwillingnesse, to come and get willingness: But withal, it
shows this, none will come to get rest from Christ, but these that are first
weary; and that this is the Lords method of working, first, to make weary, and
then to ease; but no such matter in his Word, That first, we must have a
weariness of our own making, or else he will not receive us: now but when ye
come, ye will be weary, and he will receive you. Fifthly, Let me say to you who
thus disputes, make your want of qualifications the very ground of your closing
with Christ. I shall but in three places let you see this strange arguing of
Faith in closing with the promises: There is that, Psalm. 40.11, 12. Let thy
truth continually preserve me, that is, let thy promises be accomplished and
made lively unto me, which are ^^y preservation: and would ye know the ground
and reason that he annexeth unto ^his; For says he, Innumerable evils
encom^assed me about they have taken such hold of ^e, that I am not able to
look up. He makes his very want of qualifications, the ground of his closing
with the promise, and seeking the accomplishment of it. And there is th^^
second expression which is most wonderful^ Psalm. 25.11. David prays for the
acco^plishment of that promise, Pardon my si^ upon that same very account,
Because it (...) great. And I shall give you a third place i^ which the arguing
of Faith is most myster^ous, Exodus 33. compared with Exodus 34.9. In the first
place, God demeth the accomplishment of that promise, of going (...) amongst
that people: And the ground (...) gives of it, is, Because, says he, ye are
(...) stiff necked people. And chap. 34 verse o^ when Moses is praying for the
accomplishment of that promise, That God would (...) amongst them; he takes
that same very a^gument out of the mouth of God; Go (...) amongst us; For,
says he, we are a sti^^ necked people: God said he would not go up because
they were a stiff necked people, a^^ Moses desires him to go up because of
th^^ And there is this, lastly, that we would sa^ to you, that so much dispute;
If ye would have these qualifications that ye want, y^ would study to close
with Christ by Faith Would ye have sorrow for sin? then believ^ Would ye have
high thoughts of Christ? the believe: Would ye have humiliation? the believe;
for believing is a mother grace un^^ all these.

The second duty that we would press (...) on you from this consideration that
the pr^mises are free, is, That when the promis^ are given to you, and are
accomplished, ye would study to be denied to any merit in your selves, which ye
may suppose to be the rise of the giving or accomplishment of the promises.
There is nothing that a Christian receives, but it is a fruit of infinite love,
there is not a conviction that trysteth a Christian, but it is the fruit of
infinite love; there is not one real sigh for sin, but it is the fruit of
infinite love; there is not one blink of the precious countenance of Christ, but
it is a fruit of infinite love; there is not the least degree of hatred against
sin, but it is the fruit of infinite love; there is not the least promise that
is accomplished unto you, but it is the fruit of infinite love: so that upon all
our recepts from God, there is reason to sing that song, Not unto us, not unto
us, but unto thee does belong the glory: And therefore, I would press this
upon you, O Christians, reduce all your mercies unto the fountain, and there
sit down and pen songs of everlasting praise to him. Will ye but take a view of
this, there is not one bite of bread that ye eat, that is within a promise, but
it is a mercy that has come running to you through the bowels and tender heart
of Christ: his heart is the fountain of all our mercies, and they sweetly
stream out of that precious fountain; so that if ye had no other thing to
commend your mercy from, but that it is a gift of the heart of Christ, ye may
take it in your arms upon this account, and solace your selves with it.

The last duty that we would press upon you from this consideration, that the
promises are free, is this; Ye would be studying to close with Jesus Christ
that is promised and freely holden out to you in the Gospel: O sinner of eighty
years old, O sinner of sixty years old, O atheists of forty year^ old, and O
sinner of twenty years old and downward! I do here invite you, as the
Ambassador of Jesus Christ, to embrace Christ freely offered in the promise;
yea, I do invite you by all the virtues of that noble Plant of renown; by that
everlasting love that dwelt in his precious heart, by all the sufferings and
wounds that he received, by his eternal glory, and by all the blessings and
joys of heaven, and by that love that ye owe unto your precious and immortal
souls, that ye would come and embrace him freely offered to you in the Gospel.
And for the further pressing of this, and for clearing of the way of your
closing with him, I shall first propose some Gospel mysteries, and sweetly
agreeing contradictions, (if so we may speak) held forth in Scripture. 1. Come
and buy Christ, and yet buy him without money; that is, come and receive
Christ, and ye shall have as unquestionable a right to him as if ye had bought
him, that is to but without money; ye have nothing to commend you to Christ but
necessities, and necessities bids you go, and Christ bidde^ you come, why
then will ye sit this call 2. What a Gospel-mysterie is that, Ye a^^ to buy
Christ, and Christ is above price, the^^ is nothing that we can give to buy
that pe^^ of greatest price, and yet we must buy him; then the meaning is,
come, and buy Christ by faith, and by forsaking of your idols, this is all the
price that he does require for himself; and so he requires nothing of you but
what he himself does give, or what is both your duty and advantage to forsake
and which is no gain for him to receive: Christ is not enriched by your hearts,
and by giving of your consent to him. 3. This is a Gospel mystery, that we are
to buy without money and without price, and yet to buy with a price, according
to that word, Prove. 17.17. there is a price put in the hand of fools, to buy
wisdom, and what is the meaning of that, to buy with price, and buy without
price? It is in short this, though Christ be offered to you in the Gospel
freely, ye must not sit down, but be active in closing with him; What is the
price that Christ requires of you? even this, that ye would forsake your soul
destroving idols, and that ye would forsake your former evil ways, and take
hold of the present opportunity for embracing him. And O! cursed shall the
heart be that will not embrace Christ; O but to have him one hour in our arms,
it were well worth ten thousand Eternities of the enjoyment of all things that
are here below; ye would never open your arms again to another lover, if once
ye had him between your breasts. O but a sight of him that now is the eternal
ravishment of all that are above, would transport your hearts with joy, with
delight, and admiration; above all expression. Fourthly, There (...) this
Gospel mystery by which we would press you to embrace Christ; A Christian must
buy Christ, and yet he must have him freely Is there not an inconsistence, do
you suppose, between buying and having freely* But I would say this to clear
it, Christ is bot^ the seller, he is the wares, and he is the buyer; Christ he
presents himself unto your hearts, and he desires to sell himself and he
persuades and freely enableth yo^ to buy him: I will tell you what Christ
does, He stands without our hearts, and within our hearts, he stands
without and knocks by the Word, and he stands within and opens by his
Spirit; Christ he both commands, and he obeys, both within doors, and
without doors, and all this h^^ does freely.

The second thing I shall say to persuade your hearts to take Christ freely
promised and offered unto you, shall be this; Will you consider that there is
willingness in the heart of Christ to take you. I shall give unto you these
six things that speaks out Christ his willingness to receive you. First,
Does he not command you to come and receive him? and if ye could multiply
objection^ throughout eternity, why ye should no^ close with Christ, ye may cut
them all asu^der with this knife, This is his Command^ment: And does he not
command you, M^ 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor: A^^ Isa. 55.1. Ho,
every one that thirsts, co^^ to the water. Secondly, He does regr^^ and
deeply resent it that ye will not come. I think Christ never weeped so
bitterly, as that day when he weeped over Jerusalem, that they would not
embrace him, Luke 19.41. If thou, even thou, at least, in this thy day, had
known these things that belong unto thy peace: And Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come
to me that ye may have life. O what think ye can be the rise of this, that
Christ should sorrow because ye will not give up your hearts to him; does he
increase his gain when ye give him your hearts? No certainly, but he cannot
endure that madness in you, that ye should forsake your only gain. Thirdly,
Would you do Christ a joyful turn, and make his heart glad? Embrace him: This
is clear, Luke 15.5. that when he finds the sheep that is going astray, He
returns rejoicing. Fourthly, I say no more unto you, would you make all the
Persons of the blessed Trinity to rejoice, would ye make all the Angels of
heaven to sing, would ye make all the Saints that are round about the Throne to
exult for joy; then give your hearts up to Christ, and close with him in the
Covenant of promise; according to that word, Song 6. last verse. Return, return
O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look upon thee. Four times that
command is repeated, return, and the great argument with which he backeth it,
is, That all the Persons of the Trinity may rejoice, That we may look upon
thee. Fourthly, Consider but how he has condescended to give himself at a very
low rate: What will ye give for Christ? O sinners, what will ye gi^^ for him?
Would ye give the world (...) Christ? I will tell you what ye will (...) Christ
for, ye will get him for a very loo^ Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, O all ye ends
the earth: And think ye not that is a matc^lesse mercy, that the thirty three
years ^^ferings of Christ, all the pains and cortu^^ of his heart, his being
under the unsuppo^ able wrath of an offended God, the fruit (...) all that
should be yours for a look. Will (...) deny that to Christ, Oh, do ye ever thi^
to find a more down coming market? Ye^ fifthly, does not this speak an
admirable w^ lingnesse to have you, he is to give you thi^ look. It is
impossible for these cursed ey^ of ours, ever to give precious Christ a loo^
and therefore he has promised to give the to us, that we may give to him,
Zech. 1.10. They shall look to me, that very look y^ are to get from Christ,
and ye see it is with the compass of a promise. Lastly, That spe^ keth Christ's
willingness to receive and (...) you, that he does not take the first refus^ O
Christians that are now in Christ, if Ch^ had taken an hundred refusals from
you, (...) should never have been in heaven, but (...) waits for an answer,
and does not take at our first word: according to that wo^^ Song. 5.2. I am
wet, says he, with the d^ of the morning, and my locks with (...) the night:
He was long knock^^ (...) heart, and stayed a long time there pac^ (...)
suffering all the injuries he could mere (...) And I would only pose you, think
ye (...) if one of the richest of you were suiting a very poor woman, and she
refused you so many times, would your proud hearts submit to take her? And yet
how oftentimes has the precious heart of Christ submitted to many effronts,
and refusals that we have given him. I think if it were possible, Christians
would wink when first they behold Christ upon the day of their espousals: For I
suppose their will be a great dispute between shame and love, desire and
confusion; shame will make you to close your eyes, because ye have oftentimes
undervalued that Prince, and yet love dow not let you close them; desire will
put you to look, though reflecting upon your former ways, will make you blush
and be ashamed.

Thirdly, To persuade you to receive Christ in the offer of his free promises,
I shall but say these three words and close. 1. Look to these excellent gifts
that Christ brings with him, he brings Justification with him, and is not
that an excellent gift? He brings Sanctification with him, and is not that an
excellent gift? He brings joy of the holy Ghost with him, and is not that ^n
excellent gift? He brings the love of God with him, and is not that an
excellent gift? He brings patience under sufferings with him, and is not that
an excellent gift? But why should I name what he brings? He brings himself
and all things, and what ^ould ye have more? O but for one saving ^^^k of his
face, it would make your hearts ^y down your enimity that you have maintained
so long. 2. O Christian, that ye (...) close with Christ, do but remember the
ha^ pinesse that ye will have in embracing him I told you not long since, and
now I put yo^ in mind again: There is a sixfold crown which shall be put upon
your head; Would yo^ have long life, then come to Christ, and y^ shall have a
crown of eternal life: Would (...) have glory? then come to Christ and ye sha^
have a crown of glory: Would ye have knowledge of the mysteries of God? then
com^ to Christ, and he shall crown you with knowledge. Would you have an
eternal felici^ and ^^n-interrupted happiness, then com^ to Christ, and ye
shall have an immor^ crown: Would you have holiness and sa^ctification, then
come to Christ, and ye shall have a crown of righteousness; yea, he shall put
a royal crown upon your head, a crown of pure Gold; and then that word shall be
accomplished to the full, Zech. 9.16. The^ shall they be as the stones of a
crown lifted (...) and as an ensign upon the land. O what a d^ think ye will it
be, when Christ shall ho^ your crowns upon his hand, and shall p^ them upon
those heads never to be remov^ again, here we are often put to sigh o^ that
lamentation, The crown is fallen from (...) heads, woe unto us for we have
sinned, (...) there shall be no more sin to make our cro^ to totter. 2. I must
tell you, The fourfold sure of apparel that ye (...) clothed with ere long: ye
are now c^ed with heaviness, but then ye shall be ^^ed with the garments of
praise; And (...) ^er know such a robe as that? Is it not a ^ore excellent robe
then the robes of Kings and Emperors in the earth, to be clothed with
praises? Many of them are and shall be for ever clothed with infamy and shame.
2. Ye shall be clothed with change of raiment, and shall be brought unto the
King in ^ayment of needle work. O poor Less and poor Lade that sits upon
the dung hill, that knows not what it is to have change of apparel, ye shall
have it in that day, when Christ shall solemnize the Marriage with you, ye
shall misken your self. O Christian, if ye knew your self never so well, ye
will be forced to cry out, O! is this I? Is this I that am now made perfect
through his comeliness. 3. Ye shall be clothed with the garments of immortal
glory, ye that have your foundation in the dust, and dwell in the houses of
clay, ye shall then be clothed with these excellent robes of immortality, and
clothed upon with your house from heaven. And lastly, ye shall be clothed
with the garment of the spotless righteousness of Christ. O such a majestic
walk as ye will have, when ye shall have a scepter in one hand, and a palm in
the other, these robes put upon your back, and these crowns upon your heads,
and then shall be walking through these streets that are paved with Gold. 3. I
shall give you this word to think upon, That there are five things that shall
be your exercise in heaven. 1. Ye shall be constantly taken up in wondering: If
it be not presumption for us to think a little; What is the exercise of Christ
and the Saints that are above, we ^^ceive it is this, Christ is wondering at
(...) beauty, and they are wondering at his ^^ty, Christ is looking upon them,
and (...) upon him; and is it not true, that if (...) be now ravished with one
of our eyes, (...) 4. ver. 9. much more shall he be rav^ when both our eyes
shall be given to (...) and shall eternally behold him, withou^ing a whoring
after other lovers. 2. shall be continually in the exercise of p^ joy and light
shall be flowing in, and ad^tion and praise shall be flowing out etern^ ye
shall then sweetly warble upon (...) Harps of God, and shall cry, Hallelujah
(...) him that sits upon the Throne, there (...) be no discord there; there
is a sweet (...) beautiful harmony amongst all these spir^^ all and heavenly
Musicians. O but to (...) them, it were a heaven, though we had (...) that
blessed lot as to sing with them. 3. shall be continually taken up in the exe^^
of love: Faith is your predominant (...) while ye are here, but Love shall be
y^ predominant grace when ye are there. (...) is it not a mystery to take up
these (...) emanations of love and of delight, tha^ pass between Christ and
you? ye shall (...) folding Christ, and Christ shall be info^ you. 4. Ye shall be
continually beholding (...) I think it is hardly possible for the wife (...)
member her husband in heaven, thou^ loved him as her own heart, they will (...)
taken up in beholding him that fitteth (...) Throne, they will think it too low
an (...) to be taken up with looking upon another in these relations: all will
will be ravished beholding him, and one another in him, and for him. O the
blessed exercise of these that are now entered within that City, and within
these Gates, whose name is (...). 5. Ye shall be continually taken up in
beholding, ye shall be always knowing, and yet never able to comprehend the
endless mysteries and perfections of Jesus Christ. O such a study! Is it not
pleasant always to be studying Christ? and will not these things persuade you.

And now but a word more to these that will not have this free offer: If ye
will not embrace Christ and take him, let me tell you, I would not be in the
stead of that person for ten thousand worlds, if ye will not embrace Christ and
take him for your portion the stones of the wall of this house will b^ witness
against you, and they shall have (...) tongue to speak against you, that ye
have been invited to take him, and would not (...) ere long that day is
approaching, and dra^ing near, when the Atheists and refusers (...) Christ they
shall change their faith, they shall change their love, they shall change their
fea^ and they shall change their joy, and the shall change their mind, ye shall
change you faith ye that are refusers of Christ; for (...) know there are many
that thinks they have closed with Christ, who never did close with him; that
faith shall flee away, and ye sha^^ believe the contrary: ye shall change (...)
love, or at least, your opinion of your (...) ye think ye love Christ, but ye
do (...) brace him; I will tell you what will be y^^ exercise, and I can tell
you nothing so terrib^ Christ shall eternally hate you, and ye she eternally
hate Christ, there shall be a mut^ hatred betwixt you two for evermore. (...)
that dreadful we^^ Zech. 11.8. it shall the be accomplished to the uttermost,
My s^ loathed them, and their soul also abhorred (...). And ye shall change
your fear, for now thou ye fear not God, nor reverence man, yet the the horror
of God shall make you shake a leaf, and ye shall change your light and yo^
judgment. Ye do now undervalue Chri^ and thinks him of nothing worth; when
Chri^ is presented unto you, there is no beauty (...) ye should desire him:
But, O think on the day when Christ shall sit down in the clou^ and ye shall
see his beautiful face, every (...) of which shall be able to captivate your
hea^ if they were then capable to be ravished w^ the sight: O what will be your
thought (...) him? And if the blessings of a crucified Sa^ our come not upon
you, then the eternal, (...) unsupportable vengeance of Christ shall li^ upon
your heads that would not condesc^ to take him: ye shall be cursed in your
(...) ye shall be cursed in your death, and ye (...) be cursed after death;
What say ye to (...) Are ye content to take him? ye might b^ the day that ever
ye were born, if ye co^ once come to close with Christ. Now him that has the
keys of the house of (...) vid, that can open your hearts to give (...) entry,
we desire to give praise.

SERMON IV.
^ Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.
THere are three most glorious and excellent gifts that God has bestowed upon
man, there is that comprehensive gift of heaven, Jesus Christ, who is so
called, Joh. 4.10. and sure such a gift as that, ought in some sense to blind
our eyes, and make us look upon all things that are below him, as nothing. The
second royal Gift that the Lord has given, is the precious promises of the
everlasting Covenant, which are given to us through him: A Christian that is
united unto him by the blood of Faith, he may write this above the head of
every promise of the everlasting Covenant, this is mine, and this is mine. His
third precious gift, is the gift of Faith, which is that grace that makes use
of the former two: and we conceive, that our little making use of these three
excellent gifts, is the great occasion and cause why these four most sad and
lamentable evils have befallen us. 1. The evil of a silent conscience, that
though we be profound to commit iniquity, and do love a reward under every
green tree, yet our consciences does not speak nor reprove us; and if at any
time they do speak; yet there are some that are so possessed with a dumb and
deaf spirit, they can neither hear what God does speak, nor can they hear their
conscience. 2. The evil of a silent rod, we know not the voice of our rod, and
who is he that has appointed it; God does not now open our ears to discipline,
nor seal up our instruction. 3. There is that evil of silent mercies, the
mercies that we receive of God, we understand not the language of them: are not
our mercies Barbarians unto us, speaking to us in an unknown tongue? and yet we
may say, there is not a rod nor a mercy a Christian meets with, but it has a
voice, if we did understand it. And lastly, there is that evil which has
befallen us, and alas, this is the capestone of all, a silent God, who does not
hearken unto the voice of our cries, but turns about the face of his Throne,
covering himself with a cloud in his anger, so that our prayers cannot pass
through. Alas, may not each Christian of this time cry out, Call me no more
Naomi, but call me Mara, because the Lord has dealt bitterly with me. In
short, I think there are these two things that may be our lamentation upon the
high places of Israel. First, That we live without sight of God; And secondly,
that we live without sight of our selves, and all this, because (...) live
without a sight of these precious Gif^ Christ and his Promises.

But now to the words; We told you, the in them there were these four things
holden forth concerning the promises. 1. The original and fountain of the
promises, in that word, Whereby, or by whom: 2. The properties of the promises
which we told you, were these four. The first was, that the promises were free,
holden forth in that word, they are Given; all the promises of the everlasting
Covenant being the noble gifts of God. The second (of which we are to speak at
this time) is this, that the promises of the Covenant they are unchangeable,
which is imported also in that word, they are given, the gifts of God being
indeed without repentance; And as to this: 1. We shall prove the truth of the
point: and for this end, consider that place, Numb. 23.19. which was a part of
Balaams song, Has he not spoken it, and will he not also do it? Has he said
it, and shall it not also come to pass? and Psalm. 89.34. I will not break my
Covenant, nor alter the word that has gone out of my mouth: and the point is
clear also, from the name that the promises gets in Scripture, are they not
called the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.3. and are they not sometimes in
Scripture called Truth, as we may see from Micah 7.20. Thirdly, The nature of
the Covenant proveeth it, in that it is called an everlasting Covenant, and
sometimes a Covenant of Salt, because that Covenant is above the reach of
alteration or putrefaction; And fourthly, It may be likewise shown from the
constant experience that the Saints have had of the unchangeablnesse of the
promises. The Joshua takes notice of, Chap. 23.24. when (...) when he was a
dying, There has not failed (says he) one thing of all these good thing (...)
that God has spoken; and he is so confidence of this, that he is forced to
repeat that wor^ over again in that verse: and he takes notice of it, Josh.
21.45. where he has that same expression again, There has not failed (says
he) one thing of all the good things that God has spoken: and this Solomon he
took notice of, 1 King. 8.56. There has not failed one thing that God has
spoken unto us by Moses; and indeed, there is near six thousand years
experience that preaches this truth, the promises are unchangeable, so that we
may now say, The word of the Lord is tried as silver is purified in a furnace
of earth hot seven times: If there had been any falsehood in the precious
promises of the everlasting Covenant, six thousand years trial should have
brought it to light; but does not every one of the cloud of witnesses that have
gone before us, leave this testimony upon record, Faithful is be that has
promised, who will also do it, his promise is with the night and with the day,
it cannot be altered, the ordinances of heaven continue to this day, much less
can this Covenant of love be broken or altered, only w^ would have you taking
this Caution by the way, that there are some conditional promises that God
passes unto his people which in the depths of his spotless wisdom he does not
accomplish unto these who ^^ver fulfill the condition; such was that promise
that he gave to the Israelites in the land of Egypt of their possessing the
land of Canaan, who yet died in the wilderness: And hence is that strange
word, Numb. 13.34. Ye shall know my breach of promise says the Lord, which is
a word spoken after the manner of men, not importing any change of purpose in
God, but only showing that because they did not believe, and so fulfill the
condition of the promise, therefore it was not to be fulfilled personally to
them.

The second thing that we shall speak to upon this, that the promises are
unchangeable, shall be to propose these six golden pillars and excellent
foundations, upon which the unchangeablenesse of the promises is built. And the
first of them is the omnipotency of God, that there is nothing that he has
promised, but he is able to effectuate and to bring to pass: Therefore, 2 Cor.
6.18. when God had been passing many excellent promises, he strengthens their
faith with this, Thus says the Lord God Almighty: and no doubt, where the word
of this King is, there is power, and who can say unto him, what do thou: O
misbeliever of the precious promises of the Covenant, be ashamed to cast up
your eyes to heaven above, or to the earth beneath; we think the Stars, the
Sun, the Moon, and all the works of God; they may speak that to you, do not
misbelieve God, but trust in him, That is wonderful in counsel, and excellent
in working. The second is, the wisdom and infinite counsel of God, he has not
only complete ability to accomplish the promise that he has given, but he has
the depths and treasures of knowledge, by which he has contrived the way of
the accomplishment of such a promise: Hence is that word, 2 Samuel 23.5. that the
Covenant is well ordered, which speaks out the wisdom of God and then that
word is subjoyned, the Covenant is sure, yea, the Covenant of Grace is such a
thing, that there is so much of the art of heaven, so much of infinite wisdom
shining in it, that it is called the counsel of God, Heb. 6.17. That ye might
know the immutability of his counsel. The third golden pillar, is, the infinite
love of God, that though there be nothing in us that can put him to accomplish
the promises, yet he will take an argument from his own love, to make out such
a promise to us; there is sometimes (if not always) nothing in us, but that
which may speak forth delays of the accomplishment of the promises; but when
God can bring no argument from us, he can bring an argument from his own love,
as Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. where giving a reason of the accomplishment of many promises,
and of his love to them, I loved you, says he, because I loved you; there
being no reason that can be given for love, but love. The fourth is, The
unchangeablnesse of the Promiser, that he is the same, yesterday, and to day,
and for ever, and without all alteration and shadow of change: Hence ye may
see, Exodus 3.14. when God is repeating many preciou^ Promises unto Moses, He
(as it were (...) strengthens Moses faith with this, I am, says he, that I
am, which we conceive to point forth the unchangeablnesse of God, that what he
has said, he will certainly accomplish in its own time, and though the vision
do tarry, yet at last it shall speak. The fifth is, The faithfulness of God,
and that he is one that cannot lie, but certainly will make out what he has
spoken. Love, it makes the promises, the faithfulness and power of God
accomplisheth the promises, and the infinite wisdom of God chooses the most fit
time for the performing of them. Hence it is said, Psalm. 119.89, 90. Thy word O
Lord, is for ever settled in heaven, and the ground of it is in the following
verse; For thy faithfulness is unto all generations: Hence you may see, that
oftentimes when God is making promises to his own, he puts to that word, I
that speak in righteousness, Isa. 45.19. and Isa. 63.1. O! must not the
promises be unchangeable that are made by the Father who is the God of Truth?
Must not the promises be unchangeable that are received and merited by the Son,
that is Truth it self, and the faithful Witness, and Amen? Must not the
promises be unchangeable that are applied by the holy Ghost, that is the Spirit
of Truth? And must not the promises be unchangeable that are made known unto us
by the Gospel, that is the word of Truth? Was there ever any who could leave
that upon record of God, that he was unfaithful in the accomplishment of his
promises. O what a clear sight of the faithfulness of God shall a Christian
get, when he shall be standing upon the our most line between Time and
Eternity, then he will see God faithful in accomplishing all his promises unto
him from first to last. The last golden pillar, is, The justice of God, His
justice, it now puts him to accomplish his promises, mercy and
righteousness have now kissed each other: Hence is that word, 1 John 1.9. He
is just and faithful to forgive: So that now the accomplishment of the
promises, it is not only an act of love, but it is an act of justice also: We
confess indeed, love and mercy makes the promises, but justice and truth also
puts God to the accomplishment of them: Hence is that word, Micah 7.20. To
perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham: Why is it mercy to
Abraham, and it is truth to Jacob? It is in short this, because mercy made the
promises to Abraham, but truth did accomplish the promises to Jacob.

The third thing that we shall speak to from this, That the promises are
unchangeable, shall be, to press these six duties upon you from this point.

O Christians and Expectants of Heaven, who have Christ in you, the hope of
Glory, rejoice and be exceeding glad that the promises are unchangeable. 1.
This is a duty that is pressed from that ground, Heb. 6.18. That by two
immutable things we might have strong consolation: There is exceeding much joy
that may come to a Christian from this that the promises shall be accomplished
i^ their own time. We conceive that the word unchangeable, it is engraven upon
the head of many a Christians mercies. Is not unchangeable written above the
head of our promises? Is not unchangeable written upon the head of our
blessedness? Is not unchangeable written above the head of our enjoyment of
God? That day is coming when we shall have unchangeable love, unchangeable
enjoyment of God, and all things unchangeable: And we conceive, that if these
two were believed, the truth of the promises, and the unchangeablenesse of the
promises, a Christian might walk through this valey of tears with joy, and
comfort himself in hope.

The second duty we would press, is this, that ye would surcease and give over
your disputings and carnal reasonings about the accomplishment of the promises,
since the promises of God are unchangeable, ought not we with this to silence
misbelief, and all that blind humane reason can say: This is pressed, Heb.
6.16. An oath for confirmation, it is an end of all strife. Gods confirming of
his Covenant by an oath, it ought to cut short the disputings of misbelief; And
here give me leave to point out a little these grounds upon which it is that
Christians does so much dispute the accomplishment of promises: and to let you
see how all these grounds may be answered from these six pillars that were
given of their unchangeablnesse.

The first is, When dispensations seems to coutradict the truth of the
Promises, the promise it speaks one thing, and dispensations seem to speak
another: and this is the occasion that oftentimes Christians cry out, Does his
promise fail for evermore. This is clear from the practice of David, 1 Samuel
27.1. when dispensations were upon the top of the accomplishment, and truth of
the promises, then misbelief it arises as a Champion mighty to war, and cries
out, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul: And we conceive, that
dispensations contradicting the truth of the promises, was the occasion of his
speaking that word, Psalm. 116.11. I said in my haste, all men are liars. And I
would only say to you that dispute the truth of the promises upon this account,
that dispensations contradicts them: Do but consider this: God in his way is
not like unto you: Would ye know the time when the promises are nearest their
accomplishment, it is then when we can least see that they are to be
accomplished, the promises are never nearer their performance, then when we
think that they are furthest off from it: And therefore let the faith of the
omnipotency of God, uphold your spirit under such a debate, then let
dispensations speak what they will, ye may answer all with this, There is
nothing too hard for him, there is nothing too hard for the Lord. I grant this
may try the strength of the strongest faith, yea, we find it has made the
best to stagger when they had no probabilities to tell them that the promise
shall be accomplished: this was the ground of Sarahs misbelief, Genesis 18.12.
that when she heard she should bear a son in her old age, she laughed within
her self, and did, as it were, mock at such a promise: and this was the ground
of Moses his misbelief, Numb. 11.21, 22. he did not see a probability that such
a multitude should be fed with flesh, and therefore he did call in question the
truth of that promise: this was the ground of the misbelief of that Lord that
is made mention, 2 King. 7.2. and this was the ground of Zecharies misbelief,
Luke 1.20. But I would only say to you that do so much consult with probability
in the exercise of your faith, these two things. 1. There is nothing too hard
for God, this was the very argument that God took to convince Sarah in the 14.
verse. of that 18. Chapter, Is there any thing too hard for God? And, 2. Faith
is never in its native and spiritual exercise, till once probabilities
contradict the truth of the promise, then faith it is put upon the stage, and
then faith does act; but as long as faith and probabilities think one thing,
then the day of the trial of the strength of faith is not yet come.

The second ground upon which Christians dispute the accomplishment of the
promises, Is their much disputing of their interest in God? Sometimes a
Christian will believe a promise, and before the accomplishment of the promise
come, their hope will be darkened, their interest in Christ will be obscured,
and then they do quite their faith in adhering to the truth of that promise.
These two are joined together, want of the faith of our interest, and want of
faith of the accomplishment of the promise, as it is clear from that word,
Psalm. 77.8. Is his mercy clean gone. There is disputing of his interest, and
presently this is subjoyned, Does his promise fail for evermore. Except a
Christian ca^ read his name in the ancient records of heaven, and can seal this
conclusion, I am my beloveds, and my beloved he is mine, it will be a hard and
a difficult task for him, if not impossible to believe the promises.

The fourth ground of a Christians disputing the truth of the promises, is,
their mistaking the way how the promises are to be accomplished, There are some
that suppose that when ever they close with a promise by faith, there is no
more but to enter to the possession of such a promise; but do not mistake it,
between your believing the promise and the accomplishment of it, there may be
sad and dark days interveening, according to that word in Mark. 10.30. where
Christ passing great promises to his Disciples, He, as it were does add, do
not mistake me that ye shall have these promises without trouble and
affliction, Ye shall receive (says he) an hundred fold in this life with
persecutions. A Christian when he believes the promises, he must resolve to
have a winter before the spring time come, wherein the promise shall bud and
flourish.

The fifth ground of a Christians disputing ^^e truth of the promises, is, when
the promises are long in their accomplishing. A Christian when first he meets
with a promise, he will cry forth, O I believe, but when time is taken for the
accomplishment of it, then his faith begins to faint, and his hope begins
to languish and give over; yea, sometimes Christians they fall in this fault,
when they believe a promise, they fix a day for the accomplishment of it, which
if God do not keep, but go over; then they immediately cry forth, What is my
strength that I should wait, and what is my confidence that I should prolong my
days. This is clear in the practice of Abraham, where the promise of having a
numerous seed being given to him, Genesis 2.12. the long time before that promise
was accomplished in part to him, was the occasion of his misbelief, that he
vented, Genesis 15.3. O Lord, what will thou give me, since I go childelesse: But
ye must know, that before the vision shall speak, there is an appointed time
that ye must wait, according to 1 Pet. 5.9, 10. After ye have suffered a while,
then the promises shall be accomplished, and ye shall be made perfect.

The sixth ground upon which Christians call in question the accomplishment of
the promises, is, The consideration of the greatness of the thing that is
promised, when they compare it with their own worth and deserving, then they
begin to dispute, O shall such a thing be, shall unworthy I, shall finful I,
shall self-destroying I, shall I that am less then the least of his mercies,
receive the accomplishment of such a mercy? This we may suppose was one ground
of Abraham's misbelief, Genesis 17.18. when he cried forth at that same time, when
the Lord was giving him the excellent promise of an Isaac, O that Ishmael might
live: He thought an Isaac such an excellent mercy, that he could not without
presumption, expect the accomplishment of that promise. And, Zach. 8.6. this
was the ground of their misbelief which God does sweetly obviate, If it be
wonderful in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it
also be wonderful in mine.

The last ground upon which Christians dispute the accomplishment of the
promises, is, When in the time between their believing and the accomplishment
of the promise, they fall into some gross iniquity, this makes them
exceedingly debate, whether the promise shall be accomplished unto them, for
since they have transgressed the Covenant of God, and have broken their
purposes and resolutions, they cannot suppose God will abide faithful to them,
and once accomplish his promises unto them, and the only way how to answer this
dispute, is, to look to the faithfulness of God, and use that word, 2 Timothy
2.13. Though we believe not, yet God does abide faithful, he cannot deny
himself.

And now to shut up this second duty tha^ ^^e press from the unchangeablnesse
of the ^omises: I shall only say these two word^ ^o you, 1. Assure your selves
of this, that these accomplishments of promises that come not through the
lively exercise of Faith, does loose much of their sweetness, much of their
luster, and much of their advantage: Sometimes a promise will be accomplished
unto a Christian, when he has not been much in the constant lively exercise of
Faith in believing such a promise; but then the disadvantage that attends
such a one, are not easily expressed: How often may he cry out, The Lord was in
this place, and I was not aware: How little of God does he see in it, how short
is he in praises and rendering to the Lord according to the good he has
receeived? How negligent in improving or keeping the mercy, and how loath to
lay it out for God, when he says, The Lord has need of it: and many things
more of this kind which may press us to be steadfast in believing. And, 2. O
dispute less, and believe more, what profit shall ye have of your disputings;
and if ye would produce all your strong arguments why ye should not believe the
promises, ye may drown them in this immense depth, God is unchangeable. Let me
say but this further, There are three most remarkable changes in a Christian,
in his making use of the promises: First, Sometimes he will believe the
promises and make application of them, and ere many hours go about, he will
misbelieve that promise which presently he believed. Will not sometime a
Christian in the morning cry out, I am my beloveds, and my beloved he is mine
and ere twelve hours come, they will change their note and cry out, My hope and
my strength is perished from the Lord: Sometimes a Christian in the morning
will cry out, My mountain stands strong, I shall never be moved, and ere many
hours go about, he will change his note, and cry out, Thou have hid thy face
from me, and I was troubled. Secondly, Sometimes a promise will be to a
Christian sweeter then the honey and the honey comb: Sometimes a Christian
would die and live upon the promise: Sometimes the believing of a promise will
be to a Christian as the valey of Achor for a door of hope, that will make him
to sing, and yet ere many days go about, he may come to that same very
promise, and it will prove tastelesse to him as the white of an ^gge; so that
he may cry out, O that it were with me, as in months past, and in the ancient
times: And O where is the sweetness that I found in such a promise? O it is
gone, it is gone, and I am left desolate. Thirdly, Sometimes when a Christian
will be believing such (...) promise, and resting upon it, he will (through
(...) Spirit of the Lord) see much light and ^^earnesse in that promise, he
will take up the deep things of God that shines therein; and at another time
he may come to that (...) promise, and it may be dark to him, so, that his
light has evanished: and sometimes the joy of a Christian in the promise will
be one then his light that he had in it may main with him. A Christian may come
to (...) promise, and find his ancient light, yet not his ancient joy, nor his
ancient delight. Therefore if ye would have the promises always sweet unto
you, pray over them, pray that God might breath upon such a promise, and make
it lively to you.

The third thing that we would press upon you from the unchangeablenesse of
the promises, is that which by proportion ye may gather even from this, that
the threatenings of God are unchangeable; these two are conjoined: yea, Joshua
seems to infer the unchangeablenesse of the threatenings from the
unchangeablenesse of the promises, Chap. 23.14. compared with verse 15. and
these two are conjoined, Zech. 8.14, 15. That as I thought to punish you, and
it has come to pass, so I have thought to build you up, and it shall come to
pass. And I would from this desire you to stand in awe, lest you come under
the lash of the unchangeable threatenings of God; for know, that as God is
unchangeable in the promises, and there is not one word in all the everlasting
Covenant that shall not be accomplished; so likewise know, there is not a curse
in all the Book of the Covenant, but it shall be accomplished in its time: And
know this likewise, that the day is coming when that sad word that i^ in Hos.
7.12. shall be accomplished, I will chastise them as their Congregation has
heard. And O ye that live in this place, if all the threatenings that your
Congregations has heard, shall be accomplished in their time ye may take up
the last words of Balaam^^ song, alas, Who shall live when God shall (...)
these things: And therefore since the th^^nings of God are nuchangeable, as
also promises, life and death is set before yo^ and either ye shall be the
object of the (...) changeable threatenings of God, or ye (...) be the object of
the unchangeable promi^^ of God: And therefore I would from the charge you,
that as you would not be he^^ full to the destruction of your own immor^^
souls, you would not undervalue the threa^nings that ye hear in your
Congregations since there is a declaration past, that the threatenings in your
Congregations shall b^ accomplished.

Now there is that fourth duty that (...) would press upon you from this, that
(...) promises are unchangeable, have an unchan^able love to the Promiser; let
this comm^^ the Promiser, let this constrain your hearts delight in the
Promiser. O what a blessed (...) pensation of love is this, that an
unchangeable God should make unchangeable promises (...) to changeable
creatures. If the promises the Covenant of Grace were as changeable their
nature as we are changeable, there sh^^ not one of us go to heaven: but know,
i^ the blessed design of love, and it has be^^ ^^^ssed practice of the infinite
wisdom of G^ (...) when he has to do with changeable (...) ^^ires, he will
give them unchangeable (...). And I would once invite you (...) that you would
come near and embrace unchangeable Promiser: I shall speak (...) five words
that may persuade you. (...) Christ is easily to be gotten if ye will him, ye
will get Christ if ye will but hear; yea, for one listening of your ear to his
voice ye shall get him: according to that word, Isa. 55.3. Hear, And what of
that, and your soul shall live; Is not this to get Christ at an easy rate: and
as we spoke before, ye will get Christ for a look, and is not that an easy
rate, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me all ye ends of the earth and be saved: Have ye a
desire to take Christ, ye shall get him for that desire; according to that
word, Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that thirsts let him come, and he that wills
let him come: Will ye but consent to take him, ye shall have him, and what can
you have at a lower rate the^ this: Shall never your cursed hands take the pen
and put to your name to the blessed contract of Marriage? Shall never these
cursed hearts of ours cry forth, Even so I take him, and do promise to live to
him, and to die to him. O strange, will ye not do it, upon what terms would the
world have Christ, is it possible to have him without a consent to take him? Oh
if ye would but open to him, he would condescend to come in unto you, and to
sup with you, and ye with him; do ye but stir to open, Christ has the keys in
his own hand, and he would help you to open. O what if Christ the precious Gift
of Heaven, the eternal admiration of Angels, that Branch of Righteousness
shall be despised, being offered upon so easy terms; then cursed eternally
shall be that person that thus undervalueth Christ, it had been better for him
that he had never been born: Cursed shall ye be in your birth, and in you
(...), and in your death, all the curses of the Persons of the Trinity will
light upon you yea, believe it: O wife that has a believing husband, in the
day that the great sentence of eternal excommunication from the presence of the
Lord, shall be past against th^^ undervaluers of Christ, a believing husband
will say amen to that sentence, even to his wife that did thus undervalue that
Noble Plant of renown: and the wife upon the other part will say with hearty
consent, amen, to that sentence against the unbelieving husband, and the father
to the son, and the son to the father.

Now there is this fifth duty that w^^ would press upon you from this, That
th^^ promises are unchangeable, that ye would be persuaded to make the promises
your portion and your inheritance; What can ye wa^^ that will choice the
promises for your por^on? I know, our cursed eyes does not love to make
invisible promises, and that invisible crown, and an invisible God our portion,
(...) look to walk by sight, not by faith. But o^^ if you knew once what it
were but to clai^^ a relation to Christ! Did ye once know wh^^ it were to have
but Christ a moment betwe^ your breasts, ye would cry forth, O! (...) would not
love him who is the King of Saint* who would not be content to quite all thing
that they might get Christ that noble pe^ of price.

And there is this last duty that we wo^^ press upon you from this, That the
^^mises are unchangeable; read a lecture from this, O Christian, even your
misbelief; God has confirmed his everlasting Covenant with an oath, with the
Blood of his Son, by the two great broad Seals of heaven, the Sacrament of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper; And what does all these confirmations speak but
our dreadful misbelief, and that we know not what it is to be resting on a
naked word of promise. I shall say no more, but desire that ye would consider
and take notice of these three. First, Ye have been solemnly and often invited
by the Ambassadors of Christ to close with him, and to take him for your
Husband and your Lord, and will you consider presently, that all the Angels in
heaven, and all that are about the Throne, and the three most glorious most
blessed Persons of the Trinity, that they are witnesses, and shall be to your
dissent. And are there not many here whose hearts could never be brought up to
give a hearty consent to close with Christ that is the great Promiser, and who
has laid all the bonds that heaven or earth could contrive to gain sinners
hearts unto himself: O precious Christ, what could he do to persuade us to love
him which he has not done; and yet that may be your name, which is in Ephesians.
2.2. Children of disobedience, Or as the word is, Children of Imperswasion, we
cannot be persuaded. Secondly, I fear if Christ Himself would come from heaven
and invite you, and say, here am I, in brace me, there are some here who would
close not only their eyes, but their ears, (...) would close their eyes lest
the beauty* Christ should allure them, they wou^^ close their cursed ears lest
they should gained and captivate by the sweet encha^^ing voice of that blessed
Charmer, when (...) should charm so wisely. And, lastly, w^^ thou tell me, O
Christian and expectant (...) heaven, what a day shall it be when all the
unchangeable promises of God shall be (...) complished? What a day shall it be
wh^^ that promise shall be accomplished. Ye shall see him as he is? What a day
shall it b^ when that promise shall be accomplished, Ye shall be made like unto
him? What a day shall it be when that promise shall be accomplished, ye shall
know as ye are known? O are ye not longing for the day of the full
accomplishment of the precious promises (...) God, when ye shall sit down and
comfort your selves in the eternal and unspeakable fruition of them? O let us
long and wa^^ till the day shall be when that voice shall (...) heard in
heaven, That the mystery of God i^ finished, till the day when that voice
shall be heard in heaven, Behold, the Bridegro^^ comes, go ye out to meet him:
Oh how us willing are we to leave a world. And ho^^ gladly would we take up our
rest on the side of Jordan. I think if this were the night that that blessed
voice were to (...) heard in heaven, Behold, the Bridegroom comes, go ye out
to meet him; some, if (...) many of the Christians (that are so indeed in this
time would cry forth, Oh spare little that we may recover strength, before we
go hence and shall be no more. Are ye not longing to bring the King over
Jordan, and to bring him home to your self, and to have your heart brought home
to him? O blessed, blessed are these that are above; Is not the voice of these
that shout for victory heard amongst them? Is not the voice of these that sing
for joy heard among them? Job does not now any more complain, Why do thou
make me to possess the iniquities of my youth, and sets a print upon my
heels? David does now no more complain, Why does thy promise fail for evermore,
but rather does sweetly sing, How is thy promise fulfilled for evermore? Heman
does now no more complain, While I suffer thy terrors I am distracted, but
rather cries out, While I feel thy comforts I am ravished. The voice of
mourning is now sweetly gone away, and the voice of Hallelujah and of eternal
praising of him that sits upon the Throne is now heard in the place of it: O
such a day that shall never admit of a following night. Now to him that is upon
his way, that will come, and shall come, and shall not tarry, we desire to give
praise.

SERMON V.
2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust.
THere are three cardinal and excellent Graces that are exercised and taken up
with the precious promises, there is the excellent grace of Faith, that
believes the truth and the goodness of the promise; there is the precious
grace of Hope, that with patience waits for the accomplishment of the
promise, and does stay until the vision speak: and that noble grace of Love,
that loves the thing that is promised; and takes exceeding much delight in
the Promiser. If we may be allowed to speak so, we think these strange
revolutions and times we live in, are another Eclesiastes, which does fully
preach forth the vanity and emptiness of all things that are below God: And we
do indeed conceive, that it is the great design of God in the dark^ing of our
pleasant things, and in making every gourd to wither, under the shadow (...)
which we use to repose our self, and in fa^^ ^^ifling all the gods of the
earth, to bring hi^^ own to delight themselves in this visible Treasure, the
pomises of the everlasting Covenant, and in him who is the substance of them;
and that since all things else are declared to be vanity, we might choice
these, as our own portion for ever.

At the last occasion that we spoke upon these words, we were speaking unto the
properties of the promises; and we told you that there were four of them holden
forth. 1. The freedom of the promises. 2. The unchangeablenesse of the
promises, of which two we have spoken unto you; and now there remains other two
to be spoken to, to wit, that the promises are exceeding great, and that they
are exceeding precious, a sweet and excellent, though a rare conjunction,
greatness and goodness here kissing one another, preciousnesse and highness
linked together by the bond of Union: And we shall speak unto these two
properties to ^^ther, and shall clear a little this thing (...) what respects
the promises of the Cove^^^^ may be called exceeding great and precious; And we
conceive in short, they may be called so in these eight respects. First, They
are exceeding great, in respect of the great price that was laid down to
purchase them, there not being a promise of the everlasting Covenant above the
head of which this may not be engraven in great letters, Here is the price and
purchase of blood: And no doubt this ought highly to commend the promis^^ that
they are bought at so infinite a race. Must they not be great and precious
things that so wise a Merchant did lay down so infinite a treasure for the
purchasing of them. 2. They may be called exceeding great and precious, in
respect of those great and precious things that are promised in them. Is not
godliness a great thing, and this is within the bosom of a promise; Is not
heaven and eternal enjoyment of God a great and precious thing? and yet this
lies within the bosom of a promise? Is not the knowing of God as he is, our
perfect conformity with God, our victory over Idols, great and excellent
things; and yet all these are treasured up in the promises. 3. They may be
called exceeding great and precious, in respect of the great advantage that
redounds to a Christian through the enjoyment of them: the promises of the
everlasting Covenant (if so we may speak) are the Pensils that draws the
draughts and lineaments of the Image of Christ upon the soul, it is the
promises of the everlasting Covenant by which we are changed from glory to
glory, as it were by the Spirit of the Lord, and as Peter does here speak, the
promises are such things whereby we are made partakers of the divine nature. 4.
They may be called exceeding precious, in respect of that neat relation that
they have unto Jesus Christ; What are all the promises of the Covenant of
Grace? Are they not streams and rivolets that flow from Jesus Christ; Christ is
the fountain out of which all these promises do spring; and can this fountain
that is sweet in it self send forth any bitter waters? must they not ^e
precious things that have such a noble descent? as to be streams of love
flowing out from the Father to the Son, and from Him unto us, as the pouring
out of the ointment upon the head of Aaron which ran down the beard unto the
skirts of his garments. 5. They may be called exceeding precious promises, in
respect they, or rather Christ in them are the object of precious faith: What
is the meat upon which faith does feed? is it not upon the promises of the
Covenant, and Christ the kernill of them: What are these things that faith
takes so much delight in, and is supported by? Is it not the promises of the
Covenant: 6. They may be called exceeding precious, in that they are the things
that guides and leads us to precious Christ. There is not a promise within
the Book of the Covenant, but, as it were, it cries forth with a loud voice, O
come to Christ, The promises are indeed the star that leads us unto the house
where Christ does ly, and there is no access unto Jesus Christ but by a
promise, Christ is to be found there, for he dwells within the bounds of the
everlasting Covenant, and there he will tryst with his people, and be found of
them. And, 7. They may be called exceeding precious, in respect that the Saints
have found such sweetness, and such unspeakable delight in these promises. Did
not David find a great sweetness in the promises when he cried forth, The word
of thy mouth are better unto me, then thousands of gold and silver? Did he not
find much sweetness in the promises, when he was constrained to cry out, Thy
Law is sweeter (...) to me, then the honey and the honey comb? D^vid in a
manner was put to a nonplus, to fin^ out any suitable similitude and
significant resemblance, to point out the sweetness of the promises: though we
may see the Christians of this time in a spiritual fever, they have lost their
spiritual taste, so that they may say, if we may allude unto that word, 2 Samuel
19.25. I am this day fourscore years old, and cannot discern between good and
evil, can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink. They know not what it
is to be overcome with the sweetness that is to be found in these excellent
streams of divine consolation. Lastly, The promises may be called exceeding
precious, in that the Saints have a high and matchless account of them: Hence
that word here rendered Precious, may likewise be rendered Honorable, which
speaks forth that there is nothing that has so much of the esteem of a
Christian as the promises. Would ye put wisdom, or riches, or honor, or what
ye will in the balance with the promises, they would cry forth, what should I
profit to gain all these, if I lose the promises. We shall say no more of this,
but that the promises are indeed that Aple, the eating of which would make us
in some respect, (and in humility be it spoken) as God knowing good and evil:
The promises are these things that does elevate the soul unto a divine
conformity with God. And oh that this might be the fruit of them the promises
are as cords let down to soul^ sinking in the myrie clay, and in the horrible
pit, do but lay hold upon them, and ye shall undoubtedly be drawn up, and he
shall set your feet upon the rock, and order all your goings.

Now we come to speak of the third thing in the words; which is the advantage
and unspeakable gain that flows to a Christian through the promises, holden
forth in these words, That by them ye might be made partakers of the divine
nature; which words does not hold forth that there is any substantial chance of
our natures unto the essence of God; but only it holds forth this, that the
soul that is taken up in believing of the promises, they arise unto a likeness
and conformity to him in Holiness, Wisdom and Righteousness. And as to
these advantages that come to a Christian through the promises: 1. We must lay
this for a ground, that the fruit of all comes to him through believing the
promises, and in making application of them.

And the first is, That they do exceedingly help and promove that excellent and
necessary work of mortification: This is clear from the words of the Text; As
likewise from 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us clearse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of the Lord. And the influence that the promises have upon
Sanctification, may be shown unto you in these three. First, They lay upon a
Christian a divine bond and obligation to study holiness, that since Christ
has signified and testifi^^ His respects unto us, in so ample and lar^^ a way
as to give us such precious promise^ we ought to endeavor to study holiness
which is that great reward of love that h^ seeks from us for all things that
he has bestowed, and we receive, and this is the meaning of that, 2 Corinthians.
7.1. Secondly, The strength and furniture of a Christian for fulfilling and
accomplishing of the work of Sanctification, lies within the promises: Are not
the promises of God unto a Christian, as Samsons locks, in which their great
strength does ly; and if once they cut themselves off from the promises through
misbelief, their strength does decay, and they become as other men. Where must
the Christian go to for strength? Is it not to the promise: Is it not the name
of the Lord; yea, this is the strength of a Christian unto which he must resort
continually. And, thirdly, the promises of God they hold forth that unspeakable
reward that attends that Christian that shall study holiness. There are
several promises of the everlasting Covenant that cries forth to the
Christian, to him that overcomes will this promise be accomplished, to him
that overcomes shall this truth be fulfilled, and this does exceedingly
provoke a Christian to wrestle with all his discouragements he meets within
the way, he burieth all his anxieties within the circle of his immortal Crown,
which he hops for, and sees in the promise, and his hope makes him dispense
with his wants, his expectation makes him overcome his fears, and his looked
for joy makes him to dispense with his sorrows.

The second advantage, is, That the faith of the promises do help a Christian
to a spiritual and heavenly performance of the duty of prayer, and withal,
mak^th him delight in the performance of it: This is clear from 2 Samuel 7.27.
where David believing the promises, it is subjoyned, He found in his heart to
pray that prayer unto God; and if any will look unto the words of that prayer,
they will see them running in a heavenly and spiritual strain, speaking him one
much acquainted with God, and under most high and majestic apprehensions of
his Glory, as is clear also, Psalm. 119 147. I prevented the dawning of the
morning and cried; and as if David had said, would you know what made me thus
fervent and diligent in prayer, it was that, I hoped in his word; and hence it
is, that he has so many prayers in that Psalm, all were occasioned through the
faith of the promises: As for instance, when he cried forth, Quicken me
according to thy word, be merciful unto me according to thy word. And we
conceive, the faith of the promises helps a Christian in his prayer to these
four Divine ingredients of that duty. 1. It makes him pray with faith: when
once he builds his prayer upon the promises, then he venteth his prayer with
much confidence of hope, according to that word, Psalm. 65.3. where ye may see a
man believing, and praying when he is believing, and expressing his confidence
m^^ strangely in these words. As for our tran^gressions thou shall purge them
away; It (...) not said thou will purge them away, or we desire that thou
should purge them away, but thou shall, which speaks forth both the
confidence of Faith, and the boldness of Faith: A Christian that believes the
promises, he can take the promise in his hand and present it unto God, and say
fulfill this promise since thou will not deny thy name, but art faithful. 2.
It makes a Christian pray with much humility, for when he does understand that
there is nothing that he has but it is the fruit, and accomplishment of a
promise, he does not boast as those that have received, but walks humbly
under his enjoyments: this is clear, Genesis 32.10. where we may see Jacob
speaking to God with much humility, and in the ninth verse, he is speaking to
God with much Faith. And 3. It makes a Christian pray with much love: Would
you know the great ground that we are so remiss in the exercise of love in
prayer, it is, because we build not our prayers upon the promise. And, 4. It
helps a Christian to pray with much fervency; When was it that David cried to
God? Was it not when he was believing the promise that past to him of old, we
would not plead with God with such remissness if we did believe the promises
that are within the Covenant.

The third advantage is, That the faith of the promises does sometimes uphold a
Christian under his spiritual disertions and tentations. Is it not certain,
that sometimes he has been ready to draw that conclusion, I am cast out of his
sight, and shall no more behold him in the land of the living? when a promise
has been born in upon his spirit, has supported him and made him to change
his song, and to invert his conclusion. This is clear from Psalm. 94.18. when I
said, my foot slippeth, there is the conclusion of misbelief and despair, yet
thy mercy, O Lord, did hold me up, there is the gate at which faith does bring
in consolation, not from by gone experiences only; but certainly from that
which he found in some precious promises that was born in upon his spirit: Many
excellent cords of love has Christ let down unto a soul, when they have been
going down into the depths, and the weeds have been wrapped upon their heads: It
is clear likewise from Psalm. 119.81. My soul faints for thy salvation: as if
David had said, I am in hazard to give over my hope and to break my confidence:
And would ye know what was it that supported me under such an estate, I hoped
in thy word; Has not this oftentimes been the song of a Christian in their
darkest night, In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts do
delight my soul: Faith will see a morning approaching in the time of the
greatest trouble; and no doubt that promise that upholdeth a Christian in their
doubting and most misbelieving condition, the lively impressions of that
promise will remain a long time with him; and when first it is born in upon
their spirits, they will see no small love shining forth in carving out such a
promise to suit with such a providence as they are (it may be) meeting with for
the time.

The fourth advantage in believing the promise, is, that thereby we have an
excellent help to patience and divine submission under our saddest outward
afflictions: this is clear from Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living; and from
Psalm. 119, 49, 50. where David telling his exercise in the 49. I hope, says
he, in thy word, Immediately he subjoyneth; This is my comfort in mine
affliction, as if he had said, if I had not had the promises to be my
comforters, I had sit alone and kept silence, and should have remained without
comfort in the day of my adversity, and verse 92. Unless thy law had been my
delight, I should have perished in my afflictions; and we conceive in short,
the influence which faith upon the promises has upon the patient bearing of
the cross, may be shown to you in these two particulars; First, Faith it is an
excellent Prophet, that always prophesies unto us good things: Would ye
enquire at Faith at your midnight of affliction, what is its opinion of God and
of your own estate; Faith would sw^etly re^olve you thus, Wait on God for I
shall yet praise him for the health of his ^ounterance. Faith knows nor what
it is to have wrong ^o^structions of God; and therefore it is the noble
interpreter of a Christians cross: If sense, reason, and misbelief interpret
your cross, they will make you cry out unto God, Why art thou become unto me
as an enemy, or as a liar and waters that fail? but if Faith that noble
Interpreter do interpret your crosses, it will make you cry out, I know the
thoughts of his heart, that they are thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give
me an expected end. Faith lets a Christian see a blessed outgate and issue
of all the sad dispensations that he meets with. Faith, that is its divinity,
I sow in tears, but I shall reap in joy, weeping may be at evening, says
Faith, but joy shall come in the morning. Secondly, It affords unto a
Christian such soul-refreshing consolation in the midst of their afflictions,
that in a manner they forget their sorrows, as waters that pass away; this
David does divinely assert in Psalm. 119.50. This is my comfort in mine
affliction: The faith of the promises are indeed that tree which if they be
cast into our waters of Marah, they will make them immediately become sweet.

The fifth advantage is, that the faith of the promises does help a Christian
to a greater distance with the world, and to live as a pilgrim, as is clear
from Heb. 11.13. where these two are sweetly linked together, their embracing
of the promises by Faith, and confessing that they were strangers and pilgrims
here on earth. And we shall show the influence that faith has upon this, in
these three. 1. It makes a Christian see the end of all perfection here, and
that there is nothing within this Glob of the World that is not vanity and
vexation of spirit: Faith is that prospect through which a Christian has most
clear discoveries of the vanity of all things, and this does exceedingly help
him to live as a pilgrim. 2. It lets a Christian see the endless
perfections of heaven, and brings it within sight of that Immense and
everlasting hope, and this makes him to live as a pilgrim, and to declare
plainly that he seeks a Country. And, 3. It does exceedingly help him
forward in that blessed work of weaning of affections from all things that are
here; would you know where a Believers heart is? It is in Heaven; would you
know where his thoughts are? They are in Heaven; Would ye know where his
conversation is? It is in Heaven; Would ye know where his hope is? It is in
Heaven, his treasure is in heaven, and therefore his heart and his conversation
is there, And Christ in him is the hope of glory: and indeed, more faith of the
promises would constrain us all to subscribe that Confession of Faith that is
in Heb. 11.13.

The sixth advantage that attends the believing of the promises, is, That it
is the mother of much spiritual joy and divine consolation, and makes a
Christian to be much in the exercise of praise: this is clear from Psalm. 71.14.
But I will hope continually, and then immediately is subjoyned, And will yet
praise him more and more; As likewise from Romans 15.13. and from 1 Pet. 1.8. If
a man would have his way to heaven made pleasant, and while they are sitting by
the livers of Babel, would be admitted to sing one of the songs of Zion, then
ought they to believe the promises, and to choose them as their heritage for
ever: and then he may sing in hope, and praise in expectation, though he have
but little in hand for the present: indeed when he looks to his possession,
there will not be so much matter of rejoicing, but when he looks upon his
hopes and his expectations, he may be constrained to cry sorth, Awake up O my
glory, I my self will awake early.

The seventh advantage is, That the faith of the promises is a notable mean to
attain unto spiritual life: This is clear from Isai. 38.16. By these things,
says Hezekiah, do men live, (speaking of the promises) and in all these things
is the life of my spirit. As likewise from Psalm. 119.50. Thy word, says David,
has quickened me. O what spiritual and divine life does attend that Christian
that is much in the exercise of Faith upon the promises: And what is the great
occasion that our hearts are oftentimes dying within us like a stone, and we
are like unto those that are free among the dead? Is it not because we do not
make use of the promises.

Eighthly, there is that advantage, that faith of the promises, it makes a
Christian have an esteem of the thing that is promised: What is the reason that
we write this above the head of the great things of the everlasting Covenant,
this is a Zoar, a little one? Is it not because we do not believe; great things
sometimes to us have no beauty, and there is no comeliness that appears in
them why they should be desired: but if we had so much faith as a grain of
mustard seed, we would cry forth, How excellent are these things that are
purchased to the Saints, and how eternally are they made up that have a right
but to one line of the everlasting Covenant, That is well ordered in all things
and sure.

And, ninthly, The faith of the promises is the door at which the
accomplishment of the promises does enter in: according to that word, Luke
1.45. Blessed are they that believe, for there shall be a performance of these
things that are spoken of the Lord unto them. If we were more in waiting for
the accomplishment of his promises, the vision should speak, and should not
tarry: And no doubt, a mercy coming to us as the fruit and performance of a
promise, will make it an exceedingly refreshful thing; When a Christian gets
leave to sing that song which is in Isa. 25.9. Lo, this is our God, we have
waited for him, and he will come and save us: And when a mercy is the fruit and
accomplishment of the promise, there is a beautiful luster and dye upon that
mercy, Which no art could set on, but only the finger of the love of God. The
smallest mercy then becomes a matchless mystery of love, and the most
matchless mysteries of love without the exercise of Faith, they become as
things that are contemptible in our eyes, and we do not value nor praise them.
Faith makes our thoughts to ascend, and misbelief makes our thoughts to
descend, in relation to the mercies of heaven.

Lastly, Besides all these advantages, We have these two mentioned in the Text:
1. That by them we are partakers of the Divine Nature, and are brought up unto
that blessed conformity with God, which we had lost in the fall. 2. That by
them we escape the corruptions in the world through lust: Lintend not
particularly to open up the nature of these things at this time, because I am
only to speak of the exercise of Faith in the promises. But O what excellent
mercies are these, to get on the beauty of the Image of God, and to get off
these ugly defilements which were the image of Satan upon our souls. O how
should this commend the promises unto us, that by faith in them, we do all
behold with open face as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, and are changed
into the same from glory to glory, as it were by the Spirit of the Lord.

Now that which, secondly, we shall speak to, shall be the advantages that
results to a Christian from a spiritual observation of the Lords accomplishing
his promises; for here ye see in the Text, the Apostle makes an observation of
these excellent things that are the fruit of these precious promises when they
are accomplished. And the first advantage is, That it stampeth the soul of a
Believer with most divine impressions of love: This is clear, Isa. 38.15. where
Hezekiah cries out, What shall I say, he has spoken it, and himself has done
it, being as it were, astonished and overcome with the apprehensions of the
condescenden^y of God. He is put to a non plus, and to what shall (...) say,
Psalm. 41.8, 9. As we have heard (says David) so have we seen in the City of
the Lord of hosts, That is according to his promise, we have had suitable
performance (...) and he subjoyneth, verse 9. that which wa^ both their
exercise and their advantage, We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God,
in the midst of thy Temple; as it were, the observation of the performance of
the promise, made their thoughts wholly to be taken up with the love of God:
and no doubt, ther^ is more love in performing one promise, the^ eternity were
sufficient to make a commeatary upon. It is one wonder of condescendency, that
God should obliege and bind himself to us by promises: and another depth^ of
wonderful love, that he should perform these bonds, and answer his words with
performance.

The second advantage is, That the observing of accomplishment of promises does
bring in to the soul new discoveries of God^ this is clear, Exodus 6.3. where
God thu^ speaks to Moses: I was known (says he) unto Abraham, and unto
Isaac, and unto Jacob by the name of the Almighty, but by the nam^ of Jehovah
was I not known unto them, the is, by the Name of giving an accomplis^ment unto
my promises, that Name was n^ discovered unto them, but should be man known
unto their posterity, in the day whe^^ his promises should pass unto
performances. And hence it is also, that when the Lord is speaking of the
accomplishment of great promises, he does so often in the Scripture subjoyn
that word, Ye shall know that I am Jehovah, or the Lord, Isa. 49.23, 52. and
60.16. And indeed we do daily find it so; for, is not every accomplishment of a
promise, a new discovery of the wisdom of God, that shines in the suitable
tyming of the accomplishment of a promise: Is not every accomplishment of a
promise a new discovery of the faithfulness of God, that he will not alter
that which has gone out of his mouth? And is not every performance of the
promise a new discovery of the love of God, that he desires to magnify his
mercies above all his work, and a new discovery of the power and Omnipotency of
God, that can bring forth the performance of his promise, notwithstanding of
all things that are in the way, yea, make things that are not to be, and
brings to naught things that are.

The third advantage is, That is helps a Christian to have high
apprehensions, and majestic uptakings of God: This is clear, 1 Timothy 1.15.
compared with verse. 17. where Paul closing with that promise, That Christ came
in the world to save sinners, and beholding in the accomplishment of it, in
himself, (...) heart (as it were) is elevated within ^^th, and he cries forth,
Now unto the King ^ernal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, ^e honor and
glory for ever and ever, Amen. There is an Enphasis in that word, Now, if Paul
had said, I could never praise and (...) toll him till now, and I am so much
bound Christ that I will not delay this exercise o^ moment, now I will bless
him, and it is cl^ from Mic. 7.18. where the accomplishme^^ of the promises
that are there, made t^^ Church cry out, Who is like unto thee, he (...) came
matchless unto them through the p^formance of the promises. And so we conce^^
that these who are much in spiritual obser^tion of the performance of the
promises, the will see precious draughts of the Majesty God engraven upon them;
so that they (...) be constrained to cry out, that he above mighty, that his
Name is Jehovah, and in (...) is everlasting strength, upon which we ough^ to
rely in our greatest straits.

The fourth advantage is, The observi^ of the accomplishment of the promises,
w^ help a Christian when he is redacted u^^ new straits, to be much in the
exercise of fa^^ upon God; his former experience will p^duce hope in his soul;
for there is not ^^discovery of the faithfulness of God, but ha^^ a voice, and
cries out, O believe him wh^^ able to give a clear being unto his word: T^^ is
clear from Psalm. 56 at the close. Thou (...) delivered my soul from death,
says David, then he subioyneth, Will thou not delive^ feet from falling: that
is, I am certainly (...) swaded, thou will likewise perform that w^ unto me.
And from Psalm. 37.2, 3. he giv^ that tittle unto God, verse. 2. that he
perso^meth all things for him, and then he does s^joyn, He shall send from
heaven and save me: and (by the way) the soul that can give God that tittle and
style, That he performs all things for them, that soul must of necessity be
in a choice and excellent state: And the point is likewise clear from 2 Cor.
1.10. where Paul says, God has delivered me, and he does deliver me; and from
hence he draws that conclusion of Faith, And he will yet deliver me. We
confess sometimes our former experiences of the faithfulness of God, they do
not support our faith when we are redacted unto new difficulties, which is
either occasioned through the greatness of the strait that we are now put to,
(in our apprehensions) above that which we were put to before; so that though
God did deliver us when we were running with footmen, yet we have no faith to
believe that he shall deliver us when we are about to contend with horses: or
else it is, through the unfaithfulness of our walk, in not answering the
precious dispensations of Christ, in accomplishment of his promises, for this
makes us that we cannot with boldness make use of his Word when we are
brought into a new strait, a guilty conscience is the mother of misbelief.

The fifth advantage is. That the accomplishment of the promises does occasion
much spiritual joy and rejoicing unto his own. We told you, the giving of the
promises occasioneth joy, and when the promises travelleth in birth and
brings forth, that occasioneth much more spiritual joy: this is clear from
Psalm. 28.7. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and
I was help. And he draws this excellent conclusi^^ from it, Therefore my
heart greatly rejoycet^ and with my soul will I praise him. And (...) conceive,
that sometimes, that God tryste^^ the accomplishment of the promises wi^^ some
precious manifestation of himself to the soul, which makes them to rejoice
with j^ unspeakable, and full of glory; but howeve^ this is the matter of a
spiritual song, The mercy and truth have met together, and right^ ousnesse and
peace are kissing one another: Is not a pleasant matter of a song to beho^^
love making promises, and to behold faithfulness accomplishing them?

And the last advantage is, That the obs^vation of the accomplishment of
promise^ does strengthen a Christians faith in his inn^ rest in God; so that
now many disputings a^ silenced, and many questions now are out (...) the way,
this is clear Psalm. 31.21, 22. Dav^ confesses his quarrelling before, but wh^^
once the Lord had showed his mavelous lovin^ kindness in a strong city, then
all his quarr^ was against himself, because he had quarrelle and did say in his
have, I am cut off from bef^ thine eyes.

And now we shall only speak a little (...) to some duties that we would press
upon you, from that which we have spok^. And the first duty is, That Christians
wo^^ be much in waiting for the accomplishme^^ of the promises, and standing
upon the watch tower until the vision shall spea^^ And we shall only give you
these to enfor^^ it. 1. It is commanded that you should so do: this is clear
from Psalm. 27. at the close, where David presses that duty very much, Wait on
the Lord, says he, and if that be not enough, he will repeat that command in
that same verse; Wait I say on the Lord: and no doubt the doubling of it
speaks not only advantage that is in it, but our difficulty to obey it, and
the great necessity that we have to go about it: and that same word is repeated
by David, Psalm. 31.24. Be of good courage, which is that same, to wait upon the
Lord. 2. These that wait patiently for the accomplishment of the promises, God
will strengthen them to wait: this is clear from Psalm. 27. at the close, Wait
on the Lord, and when we are Hagar like, casting away the child of hope, he
will open our eyes, and give us resreshment, by which we may be supported under
our disquietment, and he shall strengthen thine heart: And there is this, 3.
There shall be a speedy accomplishment of the promises: it is not long before
all the mercies that eves the Lord has promised, and thou have believed, shall
be told down to you, as it were, in one sum, principal and interest: as is
clear from Hab. 2.3. where he positively asserteth, That the vision will come,
and will not tarry. There is indeed a pleasant seeming contradiction in that
verse, he had said before, that the vision would tarry, and yet here he says.
The vision will not tarry, but will surely come: in which ye may see the
divinity both of sense and faith, and that noble contradiction that is between
their asse^^ons. Sense asserting that the promise do^^ tarry too long, and
Faith crying out, it w^^ surely come, it will not tarry; which (...) set down,
2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not sl^^ concerning his promise. 4. Promises th^^ come
unto us through the most strong (...) lively exercise of Faith, and that are
e^^pected and longed for by us before the come, they are most relishing and
sweet, an^ these mercies come unto us with a bindi^^ tie of love: this is
somewhat pointed (...) in Isa. 25.9. where the Church cries forth Lo, this is
our God, we have waited for him we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation
their waiting and expecting of the promis^ to be accomplished in its time is
there the fountain of their song and of their spiritual joy. I think sometimes
a Christian is lik^ that misbelieving Lord, 2 King. 7.2. th^^ though they meet
with the accomplishment of a promise, yet they do not taste of th^^ sweetness
that is in it, because they did no^^ believe the Word of the Lord.

The second duty that we would press^ from what we have spoken, is, That
Christians would close with the promises for their everlasting inheritance,
since the promise of the Covenant are exceeding great, and exceeding precious,
and the advantage that lies in them is unspeakable. O! should no^ these things
proclaim aloud unto us, Close with the promises as your portion for ever. I
think, one that has a right to the promise^ and has entered himself here unto
the va^^ inheritance; he may sometimes rejoice in that threefold mystery of the
Gospel, that to a natural man can hardly appear other then a contradiction. 1.
He may sometimes, I have nothing, and yet I possess all things; for when he
looks unto his being in the world, he is as poor Lazarus, having no place
whereon to lay his head; but when he casts his eye unto his spiritual
inheritance, then he beholds his treasures, and is constrained to cry out, I
possess all things. 2. Sometimes he may cry forth, I am rich, and yet I am
exceeding poor; he may be rich in hopes and yet poor in his possessions. There
is much of a Christians treasure that lies in hope; hope is that thing that
will make the Christian sweetly quite all other in comparison of that: that is
the motto of the Christian, spero meliora which he holds up in his flag, even
in the greatest storm, and at length he finds it true, that hope makes not
ashamed. 3. Sometime the Christian will cry forth, I am always sorrowing, and
yet always rejoicing: when he casts his eye upon himself, he will sit down
and water his couch with tears, but when with the other eye he reflecteth upon
Jesus Christ, He will rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory; a
Christian can both weep and rejoice at one time, and again he can rejoice and
weep: No doubt, the reflecting upon the immense hope, and that everlasting
Crown, will make a Christian rejoice under all his disquietments and anxieties
in the world, he can look to the back of time, and behold a glorious
inheritance. A Christi^ has the eye of an eagle that can behold (...) discern
things afar of.

The third duty that we would press upon you, is, To long for the day when all
the pr^mises of the Covenant of Grace shall receiv^ their complete
accomplishment, and when (...) shall be entered into the everlasting fruitio^
of all these things wherein your blessedness^ lies. There is a threefold come
that Chri^ speaks to the soul that is united unto hi^^ all which they sweetly
obey. There is that first come, which is in Matthew. 11.28. Com^ unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy loaden^ And there is that second come, Isa. 26. Com^
my people, enter into the chambers, which is (...) entertain that excellent
correspondency with him in troublesome times: And there is th^^ third
matchless come, when Christ shall say^ to his own in the day of their standing
before the tribunal, Come, O blessed of my Father* Shall we say it, that if we
had faith as a grai^ of mustard seed, we would cry forth, Why i^ his chariot so
long in coming; and did we relish^^ or made a high account of the matchless
promises of the boundless Covenant, we would cry forth, O that our time would
flee away as the ships of desire. I shall say no more but this, Christ is gone
up with a shout unto heaven, and shall come again with the sound of a trumpet,
sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises unto our God, sing praises.

The last thing that we would press upon you, is, That ye would mark the time
of the accomplishment of the promises. And as (...) this, I shall say but
these: 1. That ordinarily the time of the accomplishment of the promises, is
the time when sense, reason, and probability does most contradict them: this is
clear, Ezekiel. 37. in the fulfilling of the promises that were past to Judah in
their captivity, was it not when they were as a valley of dead bones, and their
hopes were in a manner cut off for their part, from the 11. verse. of that
chapter, compared with the 12. And, 2. that the time of the accomplishment of
the promises, ordinarily is a praying time: this is also clear from Dan. 9.2,
3. and from Jer. 29.12. compared with the 11. verse. and the 10. thus says the
Lord, the time when he will visit them, and perform his good word to them, in
causing them to return, it shall be a time when they shall call upon me, and
shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto them. And, 3. the time of
the accomplishment of his promises, it is a time when our thoughts of the
promises are high and large, when once we begin to value our mercies, this is a
sign that our mercy is near and it is bringing forth: However, it is our duty
to wait on Him who can give a being unto his Word, and sweetly perform his
promises. We ought not to limit infinite wisdom, nor to say unto him that is
infinite in strength, How can such a thing be? but answer all objections of
misbelief with this, God has spoken it, and he will also do it, and drown all
our objections of misbelief in that glotious and mysterious Name of His, I am
that I am. To Him be praise.

SERMON VI.
Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, an^ to turn them from darkness to ligh^ and
from the power of Satan un^^ God, that they may receive for givenesse of sins,
and inheritan^ among them which are sanctified (...) faith that is in me.
WHen first we did begin our (...) course upon the precious (...) excellent
grace of Faith; (...) told you that we intended (...) speak of it under a
twofold notion and consideration. First, As it lays hold up^ Christ for
Justification; and of this we h^^ spoken to you at some length, as ye h^^
heard. Secondly, As it closes with Ch^^ for Sanctification; and of this we are
(...) speak at this time; and have chosen th^^ words to speak of it, which are
a part (...) that excellent Oration and Discourse th^^ Paul had before Agrippa
in his own defen^^ In which Oration and Discourse of his, (...) may be hold
these four things eminently ^^^ing: 1. That Godliness and good man^^ are not
inconsistent, nor contrary one to (...) there: Therefore ye will see in the
secon^ third verses of this Chapter, Paul acti^ part of a Courtly Orator: and
belie^^ there is more good manners to be learned by being seven days in the
School of Christ, then by being seven years in all the Courts of France. This,
secondly, that innocent Policy that he made use of in the deliverance of this
Oration, which likewise does appear in the second and third verse of this
Chapter, where he endeavors to insinuate and ingratiate himself in the favors
of the person before whom he had stood; I confess, piety is the best policy
that is taken up in intertaining piety, howbeit true policy may move in one orb
and sphere with piety, and the one is not contrary to the other in some case:
3. This shines in that discourse, even the spiritual boldness Paul had in
giving an excellent confession of his faith, and the declaring him to be God,
even Jesus Christ in whom he did believe; Christ witnessed a glorious
confession before Pontius Pilat for him, and he would witness a glorious
confession before Agrippa for Christ, that since Christ had not denied him in
that notable day, he would not now deny precious Christ in this day: and this
is from the beginning and all alongs* Lastly, This shines in the words that
Paul does set forth, the matchless freedom and unspeakable riches of Christ,
not only toward himself in that he did cast the lot of everlasting love toward
him; but likewise toward the Gentiles to whom he was sent as a Preacher, and
that he did gloriously condescend to visit the dark places of the earth, and to
have the morning star, and the day spring from on high arising on the
habitations of cruelty. And in this verse which we have read, you (...) behold
these five glorious ends of the pre^^ing of this everlasting Gospel, for
at^^ing of which, Ministers are made instments under God. The first is, to open
(...) eyes of the blind, which in short is even the to give those that are
ignorant of God, (...) spiritual knowledge of the deep mysteries the Father,
and of the Son: So that from this, ye may see that the Gospel has a ki^^ of
omnipotency in producing effects abo^^ the power of nature. The second, we ma^^
see in these words, to remove them from dar^nesse to light: Which imports
these two^ 1. The removing of persons from an estate of excellent joy. 2. The
removing of persons from an estate of iniquity, unto an est^^ of holiness,
darkness in Scripture pointing out sin, and light in Scripture pointing out
holiness. 3. The bringing us from under the power of Satan unto God, the
making a blessed exchange of captivity and bondage, that these who were under
the captivity of Satan, may be under the captivity of Love, that those who were
under the bondage of sin, may be under the sweet obedience of Christ, whose
yoke is easy, and whose burden is light, Marth. 11.30.4. That persons may
receive the remission of sins, and the for givenesse of their iniquity; This is
the gre^^ voice of the Gospel, come to a crucifi^^ Christ, come to a pardoning
Christ, com^^ to a glorified Christ, Christ has the pardo^^ of iniquity in his
one hand, and riches (...) himself in the other, and these are the gre^^
motives by which he studieth to perswa^e us to come. And the last is in the
close of the verse, that persons may receive foregivenesse of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me, that is,
that they may have a share of that glorious mansion, of that excellent Kingdom
that Christ has purchased, and has gone before to prepare. And withal, in
this verse as the words are set down, ye may see the excellent and orderly
method that the Gospel keeps in conquering souls, and you may see these
excellent allurements, these persuasive arguments that Christ holds forth to
conquer you, as it were, Christ comes not unto us clothed with the robes of
Majesty, but clothed with the robes of Love and advantage, knowing that in this
posture he shall most gain upon our hearts.

Now in speaking unto that last end of the preaching the Gospel, we shall only
according to our present purpose, take notice of this one thing from it, (not
intending to prosecute it as it is an end of the Gospel) but as a property of
Faith, and it is that. Faith in Jesus Christ has a noble and excellent
influence upon the growth of Sanctification, and the attaining of holiness,
they are sanctified says he, through faith in me. We shall no^ stand long to
clear this unto you, it is evident from Act. 15.9. where the Apost^ tells us
of purifying their hearts by faith And likewise, 1 Timothy 1.5. where a pur^ heart
and faith unfeigned, they are join and linked together: As likewise, 1 Jo^
3.3. Every man that has this hope in him, (...) purifieth himself. All the
Graces of the G^^spel they are linked together by a golden (...) unseparable
chain, so that he that obtaine^ one, he shall obtain all; yea, more, all the
graces of the Gospel, they have a mutual in^fluence upon one another growth,
so tha^ we may compare them unto Hypocrates twi^^ of whom it was reported, that
they di^ laugh and weep together, and they did grow together: even so when one
grace does rejoice, the rest does rejoice with it, and when one grace does
mourn, the rest does also mourn with it, and when one grace does grow, the rest
of the graces of the spirit they do likewise grow apace.

There are only three particulars that we shall insist a little upon: First, We
shall show you how faith has influence upon the attaining of Sanctification,
and this we make clear unto you in these respects.

1. In that it discovers to the soul that matchless excellency, that
transcendent beauty, and that surpassing comeliness that is in Christ, which
sight does exceedingly persuade the soul to draw that conclusion, What have I
to do any more with idols? A glorious sight of Christ, and acquaintance with
him, makes us lose our acquaintance with our idols, and when once we are
united unto Christ by faith, we break that union we had with them. And indeed,
the want of the knowledge of that excellent comeliness that ^s in Christ, and
of love to him, is the great occasion that the poorest dieries and idols in the
world takes up your hearts: did ye but once see him who is that glorious Son
of righteousness, ye would be forced to put in your Amen unto that excellent
confession of Faith, Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity and
vexation of spirit.

2. In that it is the grace that discovers unto a Christian the spotless
holiness of Christ, Faith does not only discover the beauty of Christ, but
likewise his holiness, and this does make the soul fall in love with that
excellent thing Sanctification. It is recorded amongst the first steps to sin
and misery, that we desired to be as Gods, knowing good and evil; but certainly
it is among the first steps to life and happiness, when the soul desires to
be holy as he is holy: And I suppose, this is the great ground that ye are not
much endeavoring a blessed conformity to God, and to be partakers of the
blessed Image of Christ, ye know not the beauty of holiness.

3. aith lays hold upon Jesus Christ, and draws strength and virtue from
him for the conquering of lusts, and in raising us up into a blessed conformity
unto himself: when the Christian is weak; Faith is that noble corre^pondent
between that emptiness that is in us, and the fullness that is in Christ. Faith
is that noble correspondent between that weakness that is in us, and that
e^erlasting strength that is in him: Therefore there are two noble and
excellent counsels of Faith: First, It counsels us not to lean to our own
strength: And, secondly, to have our recourse unto him whose Name is Jehovah
that everlasting strength; An^^ doubt, if we were more taken up in imp^^ing
Christ by faith, that prophecy should accomplished, I will make the feeble one
David, and David as the Angel of God: (...) when a Christiian is most diffident
in him^^ then God should prove himself to be Almi^^ty, and All-sufficient.

And, 4. Faiths influence may be clea^^ in this, that it lays hold upon the
p^^mises, and does believe them: and believ^ing of the promise brings forth
that no^^^ birth, conformity to God, according to the word upon which we were
speaking, 2 P^^ 1.4. by believing the promises, (that is the advantage of it)
We are by them made part^kers of the divine nature.

5. Faith also believes the threatenings that are past in Scripture against
sin, and the believing them has an undoubted and strong influence upon the
attaining and growth of Sanctification; Faith strengthens a Christian against
the committing of iniquity with these two words: that word, Romans 6.20. O soul
(says faith) commit not iniquity, for the wages of sin is death: and that
word, Rev. 21. last, There shall in no way enter into that City, any thing that
is unclean, or that commits iniquity. And be persuaded of it that the faith
of the threatenings and of the promises that are in Scripture, would be as a
threefold cord not easily broken, to restra^^ you from the acting of iniquity:
And shall I sell you briefly the ground why these curs^ hearts of ours does
commit iniquity wi^^ so little fear, and with so much delight, it is even this,
because we believe not the threatenings of God, which shall be accomplished in
their own season: for is it possible that if ye believed that word, Rev. 21.
last. That nothing shall enter into the New Jerusalem that defiles or works
abominations; or that makes a lie; that ye durst for a world adventure upon
the committing of iniquity as ye do. And I shall only say to such that do
undervalue the threatenings of God, the day is coming when they shall be
constrained to cry out. He has spoken it, and he has done it, and faithful
is he, there is not one jot nor title in the Word of the Lord that shall fall to
the ground: And believe it, God will be faithful in the accomplishment of his
threatenings, as he is faithful in the accomplishment of his promises.

6. Faith discovers unto a Christian the noble excellencies, and those
spiritual dignities that are in that everlasting estate that is provided for
the Saints in light; Faith (as it were) carries up the soul to the top of
Pisgah, off which it is admitted to behold the promised land, and truly the
seeing of these noble things that are provided for the Saints, cannot but make
them study holiness, since they know that there is an impossibility for one to
attain to that estate without holiness, because he had said it, Without
holiness no man shall see God. O then if once ye saw heaven, ye would be
constrained to walk in that path of Sanctification, since it is the glorious
way by which ye must walk in through the gates of that blessed City. Bu^ ye
know not the excellency that is there, i^ is a fancy and notion unto you: and
that (...) the ground that ye do not study to conform, your selves unto that
blessed image of God. And I would only ask you this one question. Is it
possible that such a delusion as this can overtake you, as to think, that ye
who never studied holiness on earth, shall yet enter in to heavens gates. I
know there are some that say in their hearts, I shall have peace though I walk
in the imaginations of my own heart: and many more, that suppose that they
might fight and overcome, that they may quite the estate of nature, and be
complete in the estate of grace all in one day. But why will ye deceive your
selves, Can a nation be born in one day; Or is there but one step between hell
and heaven? O remember, though nothing be impossible with God, yet there was
but one thief saved upon the cross.

7. Faith has influence upon the attaining of holiness in this respect, That
it believes the exceeding great advantages that are promised unto the person
that studieth holiness: Faith believes that word, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for they shall see God: Paith it lays hold upon the truth of
the excellent sayings, and makes the Christian endeavor to attain unto a
likeness and conformity with him, that so he may be admitted to behold his
face for all eternity, and to be made like unto him.

8. Faith discovers unto Christians the sinfulness of sin, this is never
done till once they be in the lively exercise of the grace of Faith. And I will
give you these three grounds why faith completely discovers the sinfulness
of sin. 1. Faith lets us see the Person against whom we commit this sin, and
that does exceedingly aggrege sin; for, when the Christian is admitted to
behold God, and to see that matchless excellency that is in him; then (says
he) what a beast was I to offend such a glorious Majesty as He? What a fool was
I to kick against the pricks; or to enter in the lists with such an infinite
God? 2. Faith lets a Christian see these excellent obligations of love that
Christ has imposed upon us; Faith lets us see the ancient and everlasting
love of Christ; Faith is that grace that lets us see his sufferings; Faith
lets us see all that he has done for us, and this makes the Christian to
cry out, Do I thus requite the Lord, O foolish one and unwise. And no doubt, if
a Christian were more taken up in the study of this duty, he would be less in
contracting debt, and were you but seriously taken up in the study of these two
great Registers. 1. The Register in which all the infinite acts of love are
recorded. And, 2. That Register in which all your acts of offending precious
Christ are written, ye would be astonished and ashamed to see so much forgiven
you; and durst not sin any more; there ye would see infinite ^ency desiring to
rejoice over judgment, and ^here ye would see the spotless riches of that
transcendent grace that is in Christ. 3. Faith lets a Christian see the
disadv^ tages of sin, and what woeful effects does (...) low upon it, and this
does exceedingly ho^ forth the sinfulness of sin.

The second thing that we shall speak concerning Faiths influence in the
attain^^ Sanctification, shall be to enquire a little (...) to these things
that hinder even Believ^ from attaining this blessed effect of the Faith; for
some Christians there are that some respects are taken up in the exercise*
Faith, making use of Christ for Sanctification and yet their making use of
Christ by Faith does not weaken the strength of their ido^ (at least) to their
apprehensions, neither (...) raise them up to a conformity with God; (...) that
they are constrained sometimes to cry o^^ I shall once fall by the hand of one
of mine (...) quities, and when they fight and does (...) overcome, they are at
last constrained to (...) There is no hope.

The first ground of such a dispensation* That a Christian is not constant in
his acti^^ of Faith, he will be strong in says to (...) and when the morrow
comes, he will fa^^ in that exercise, and this does exceeding interrupt the
noble victory of Faith: (...) when faith has gotten its advantages, (...) lose
them through security and neglige^^ that is a command that should be continu^
obeyed, Trust in the Lord at all times: and doubt, if a Christian were more
taken (...) the constant actings of Faith, he should (...) times sing that
song, I trusted in God, (...) was helped.

Secondly, The most part of Christians, they are not strong and vigorous in
actings of their Faith, their Faith is exceedingly weak, and so they cannot
bring forth these noble fruits and effects of Faith. If we were trusting in God
with all our hearts, then that promise, Psalm. 37.5. should be accomplished to
us, Trust in the Lord, and he shall bring it to pass. Thirdly, There is a
strong heart conjunction and soul-union between us and our idols: we are joined
to our idols, and therefore we cannot be easily devorced; yea, when we are in
the heat of the war against them, there is a procuratour within that cries, O
spare this little one, or this profitable or pleasant one, and this is
ordinarily our practice, to spare the choicest of our lusts; so that our Agags
may cry forth, The bitterness of death is past. But I confess, if that union
were once dissolved, we should then be heard with greatest earnestness to cry
forth, O blessed be the Lord that teaches my hands to fight. Fourthly,
Sometimes a Christian lays too much weight upon the actings of Faith, and
does not employ Faith, but as an instrument to which Christ must bestow
strength to conquer. Sometimes we think that faith has the virtue of
overcoming in its own hand, but remember, Faith is but an empty thing without
Christ: as ye may see, Act. 15.9. where the purifying their hearts by faith is
ascribed to the holy Ghost: so that the activity of faith is from him, and not
in it self. Fifthly, A Christian does not hate sin with a perfect hatred, even
in the time of hi^ warfare with his lusts, and with these strong idols that are
within him, but there is a secret heart inclination to that very idol which he
does oppose: So that oftentimes there is that twofold contradiction in a
Christian; Sometimes his light will cry, mortify such an idol, and yet his
heart will cry, O spare such an idol; yea more, sometime his heart will cry,
mortify such an idol, and yet his heart will cry, O spare such an idol: That
is to say, there will be one part of our affection crying one thing, and
another part of it will cry another thing. O! but there is a remarkable command
for the perfect hatred of sin, Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil. The word is
in the Original, hate evil, as ye would do hell, that is, have perfect hatred
to sin, O to hate iniquity as much as hell: and join that word, Ephesians. 5.11.
Reprove the unfruitful works of darkness; or as the word may be rendered, Make
out by unanswerable arguments to your tentations, that you cannor embrace the
unfruitful works of darkness, convince your tentations that ye cannot do it:
As we suppose, it was a noble arguing of Joseph when he was tempted, How shall
I do this? he put the tentation (as it were) to it: O tentation give me on^
ground why I should commit such an iniquity. And certainly, if we were thus
reasoning with our tentations, they should fl^^ before us: But the truth is, we
imbrac^ the desire of our tentation upon implic^^ faith. It is a sad regrate;
and yet I may u^ter it, O if men would but deal with God as they do by Satan,
we never dispute the promise of Satan, and never examine these allurements he
sets forth, and yet we consiantly dispute with God upon every thing.
Sixthly, A Christian promoveth not in the growth of Sanctification, though in
some measure exercising faith, because he has not such a heart to holiness.
If we did discover more that excellent beauty, that is, in being clothed with
that glorious robe of the righteousness of Christ, and in having the sweet
draughts of the Image of Christ engraven upon our hearts, we would have more
victory over our lusts: There is a command for a perfect love to that which is
good, and holiness in that same place, Romans 12.9. and cleave (says he) to
that which is good; or, as the word may be rendered, Be married and glewed to
that which is good, let there be an unspeakable and indissolvable knot of union
between you and that which is good: And certainly, if once we believed that
report which is given of holiness, we would endeavor more to be clothed with
it: but that is the great ground why we advance not in holiness, we know not
the advantage nor dignity, to be made like God. O will ye think on it, What a
thing is it for you who are the dust of his feet, to be made conform to him?
Seventhly, A Christian is no^ much in the exercise of other duties that should
go along with faith, suspect that faith for presumption, that can act, and be
maintained without Prayer, certainly prayer i^ keeps in the life of Faith:
Prayer, (...) that grace that must act mutually with fai^ in accomplishing that
blessed work of San^^fication, and if we prayed more, and believ^ more, then we
should have more to spe^^ concerning the victory over our lusts. Wh^ was it, O
Christian and expectant of heave that ye was constrained to put up an Eben^zer,
and cry forth, Hitherto has the Lo^^ helped me? When was it, O Christian an^
expectant of heaven, that ye was put to cr^ forth, God has arisen, and mine
enemies ar^ scattered before my face? I will tell yo^ what is your practice, ye
make such a cov^nant with your idols as Nahash did with the men of Jabesh
Gilead, 1 Samuel 11.2, 3. yo^ lusts desire to make you pluck out you right eyes,
and there is nothing your lus^ will command you, but almost ye will obey, but
would you send out prayers as a messe^ger to tell the King of such a tyranny,
y^ should know better what it is to bevictorious. There is such a Covenant
between the graces of the Spirit, especially between faith and Prayer (if so we
may allude) as was made between Joah and Abishai, 2 Samuel 10.11. one grace, as it
were, says to another, If I be weak, Come over and help me, and if ye be weak,
I will come and help you. When one grace is like to fall in battle, then
another grace comes and helps it; when faith i^ like to die, then prayer and
experience come (...) in and sweetly helps faith; when love i^ ^^ginning to
die, and wax cold in the fight ^^en faith comes in and puts life in love,
and when patience is like to fall and be overcome, then faith comes in and
speaks that word to patience, Wait on God, for I shall yet praise him for the
health of his countenance. Oftentimes our patience and our sense they join
together, for when sense speaks good things, patience is in life, but when
once sense preaches hard things, it is like to die, and Faith must then
maintain and uphold it.

The third thing that we shall speak as to faiths influence upon
Sanctification, shall be to draw these four conclusions from (...) point.

The first is, That ye may know from this, ^he rise and original of your little
success ^ver corruption: There are many that are ^roubled with this question;
O! what is ^he ground that I get not victory over any lusts, and they propose
that question ^o Christ that once the Disciples proposed ^o him, Why was it
that I could not cast out ^^ch a devil? And I can give no other an^ver nor
Christ gave to them, it is, because (...) have not faith; For if ye had faith
as a ^ain of mustard seed, ye might say unto our idols, depart from us, and
they should ^bey you, and there should not be a moun^in in the way between you
and heaven, but (...) ye had faith, it should be rolled away and ^ecome a
plain. And the ground why many ^^e groaning under the captivity of their ^ols,
is, That they are not much in the ex^cise of faith; sometimes ye enter in the
^^s with your lusts in your own strength, then ye are carried captives, and if
ye (...) ter in the lists having some faith, yet ye (...) tain not the war, if
faith get but one stro^^

I will tell you six things which if (...) overcome, it keeps the fields, and
mak^ the Christian sing a song of triumph, eve^ (...) fore a complete victory.

First, Faith helps a Christian to o^ come that idol of impatience and
discont^^ some never met with a discouragement, (...) they cry out, This evil
is of the Lord, (...) should I wait any longer, they are soon pu^ (...) the end
of their patience: Now faith (...) overcome such an idol, and I will tell (...)
three excellent things that faith perform (...) to the soul under impatience,
or when (...) in hazard of it. 1. Faith tells the C^^^stian there is an end,
and their expectation (...) not be cut off; Faith tells that there (...)
morning as well as night, and this keep (...) the soul from being overcome with
dis^^^ragement, when they are brought to (...) midnight of trouble; Faith can
tell (...) hour of the night it is, and how near the (...) proaching of the
morning, when day (...) break and all their clouds flee away. 2. (...) helps
the Christian to see there is much Christ to make up any loss or disadvan^
that they have; if ye loss your son, or y^ choicest contentment in the world,
Faith (...) say such a word as Elkana said to (...) 1 Samuel 1.8. Is not Christ
better to the^ ten sons? The choicest contentments (...) lose, (that is faiths
divinity) Christ (...) an hundred of them: and so this (...) ^oul be ashamed of
their impatiency, and to give over their fretting at the excellent and wise
dispensations of God. 3. Faith lets a Christian see, that there is not a
dispensation that he meets with, but it has these two excellent ends, it
has our advantage as one end, and the glory of the Lord as another end: and
there is not a dispensation that a Christian meets with, but these are the
glorious ends proposed in it. And therefore I would only give you this advice,
evermore when ye meet with a dark dispensation, let faith interpret it, for it
is only the best interpreter of dark dispensations; for if ye meet with sense,
this is its interpretation, he is not chastening me in love, but punishing me
with the wound of an enemy, but faith will prophecy good things to you in the
darkest night.

The second next great idol that faith will bring low, is that idol of
covetousness and desire to the things of the world. I think that word, Eccles.
3.11. was never so much accomplished as it is in those days, and amongst you,
He has set the world in your hearts, that is the idol that dwells and
lodges within you: yea, the world it has your first thoughts in the morning,
and your last thoughts at night; yea more, it has your thoughts when ye are at
Prayer, and when ye are at Preaching; yea, it has such a dominion over you,
that it gives you, as it were, a new Bible, and in all the ten Commands
scrapeth out the Name of God, and sets down the world. And whereas God
says, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, the world says, Thou shall have
no (...) Gods but me, etc. But faith will bring (...) idol low, and soon let
you see the vanity (...) emptiness of it; yea, faith would let (...) see a
more noble object, and withal, disco^^ unto you how short your time is, and h^
few hours ye have to spend in following (...) ter lies: And I am persuaded of
this, t^^^ if ye could win to shake hands with (...) death every day, and say,
thou at last shall (...) my prince, and shall be the king to whom (...) shall
be a subject, and if ye believed that t^^ day of Eternity were approaching, it
wo^ be a mean to mortify these pursuits a^^^^ the world: And I shall say, he
is a ble^ Christian that can maintain always su^^ thoughts of the world, as he
shall have w^^ he is standing upon the outmost line betwe^^ Time and Eternity.
I shall say it, and (...) lieve it, O worldling, and O thou that (...) the Moon
upon thy head, and in thy hea^ the day shall once come, that thou (...) preach
as much of the vanity of the wor^ as those that undervalued it never so much.

The third great idol that faith will bri^^^ low, is that idol of self-love and
self-in^^gence, that which is the great mother of (...) other Idols. I think,
if there were no m^^^ to be said against that idol of self-love a^^
self-indulgence, that which is in 2 Timothy 3.^. were sufficient, that amongst all
the g^^^ idols of the latter times, this is put in (...) first place, They
shall belovers of themsel^^^ we cannot take pains for Christ, we ca^ go about
the exercise of any duty, bec^^^ (...) ido ^f (...) forbids us. I will tell
you its counsel and great advice it gives you, O person, pity thy self, that
same counsel Peter gave his Master, it bids you pity your self: But if we
could rightly interpret that language, it would be this, destroy your self, for
self indulgence, and self love is that which will ruin you. O what blessed
seize of God; what blessed fruitions of Jesus Christ, what advancement in
mortification, what conformity to God has that idol of self indulgence
obstructed, and only not utterly ruined, even in the best? I think, if once ye
could set your foot upon that idol, the rest should fall apace; that is the
general of all the forces of your lusts, and it is as Saul, the head higher
then the rest of all your idols within you.

The fourth idol that faith will subdue, is self righteousness, this is a
great thing we maintain, we will never renounce our own righteousness and
submit to the righteousness of Christ: and the great ground of it is, That
there is this principle within us all, we love to go to heaven through a
Covenant of Works, and we never desire to be much obliged to any other, we
cannot submit our selves to the righteousness of Christ.

The fifth great idol that faith can subdue, is that of pleasure, the world,
and the contentments of it: Pleasure is the great idol that many worship and
adore, there are some that love the gain of the world, and there are others
that love the pleasures of the world; but faith has a noble influence upon the
(...) faith discovers to a soul more (...) pleasures, more sweet delights nor
(...) found under the Sun; Faith makes a (...) stian lose his state unto all
things tha^ here below; Faith is that grace that ma^^ us grow blind, and not
much to behold (...) passing vanities, those transient delights (...) present
evil world.

Our second conclusion is this, Th^^ Faith helps Sanctification, so
Sanctific^^^on helps Faith. I will tell you three (...) advantages Faith has
by the growth an^ ercise of Sanctification. 1. It is a nobl^ dence of faith,
and makes a Christian (...) persuaded that he is settled upon the (...) and
that his interest in God is made sure, (...) ctification is that which will
help a Ch^^^^ an daily to read his interest in God: T^^ clear from Jam. 2.18. I
will show the (...) faith by my works, where this is clearly (...) den forth,
That a Christian much in the (...) of Sanctification, he can upon all times an
extract of his Faith, and, as it were, (...) cover it and show it to the world.
2. S^^^^^fication makes faith perfect, accordin^ that remarkable word, Jam.
2.22. A^ works was faith made perfect. There is a (...) perfection that
redoundeth to faith th^^ the exercise of the work of Sanctifica^^^^ for not
only is it thereby made manifes^ receives such a shining luster and sp^^^^ as
that sometimes the eves of carnal m^^^ even dazzled to behold a Believer, but i^
receives strength and power: Faith (...) (...) the nature of there things that
spend them^^^ves in bringing forth, but on the contrary (...) faith bring forth
a hundred children (I mean works of holiness) in one day, it grows stronger:
and this is further clear, 2 Pet. 1.8. For if these things be in you, and
abound, ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful. And from that other word,
Jam. 2. where it is said, That faith without works is dead, being alone: If
faith be alone, it wants its spiritual life and vigor; but if ye were much in
the exercise of the work of Sanctification, ye would, no doubt, attain to a
noble and lively acting of that grace of Faith. And, lastly, if a Christian be
much in this work of Sanctification, there will be a comfortable exercise of
faith, Sometimes Faith is exercised with much anxiety, and sometimes with much
doubting, but faith and a pure conscience joined together, they make an
excellent feast, and makes a Christian rejoice with joy unspeakable and full
of glory.

Thirdly, We may draw this conclusion, If faith have influence upon the work of
Sanctification, and helps the producing of a noble conformity to God, then I
say, there are many that their faith is a delusion, and their hope shall be cut
off as a spiders web. There are some that have faith, that have not
Sanctification, nor knows not what it is, and shall not that faith
unquestionably perish as a dream, and evanish as the vision of the night? and
therefore if ye would testify the reality of your faith, then study more the
work of Sanctification. I shall but from Joh. 8.14, 15. give you these eight
properties of (...) pocrites faith and hope, which may (...) you try and
examine your self. 1. (...) hope and their faith is but an act of (...) yea,
there is not such an act of foolish^ under heaven, as a hypocrites hope; (...)
cause it is but a castle in the air, and writing to himself a charter on the
sa^^ so that word ye have rendered, whose (...) shall be cut off; is in the
Original, whose (...) shall be cut off; showing this, that they b^ without a
foundation, and so their faith (...) be most unsure and uncertain. 2. (...)
thing they hope for shall at last loath the^ O hypocrites, ye hope for
enjoyment Christ, but be persuaded of it, Christ s^^ eternally loath you, and
ye shall eternal loath Ohrist: that is clear in that same w^^^ Whose hope shall
be cut off, or as the w^ may be read, Whose hope shall loath the^ the thing he
hoped for shall loath him, (...) Christ shall say, Depart, I know you (...) 3.
And though ye have now much des^^^ and pleasure in the actings of your presu^
tuous hope, yet at the last, ye shall loath (...) hope: The word will carry
that, not (...) the thing ye hoped for shall loath you, (...) ye likewise shall
loath your hope. The (...) is coming, that ye shall cry forth, curse^ the day
that ever I believed that I sho^ get heaven. 3. It shall at last be the (...)
ter of his vexation, from that word, w^^ hope shall be cut off; or as the word
ma^^ rendered, whose hope shall vex him. O (...) the hypocrites shall meet with
that anx^^^ (...) dreadful disappointment one day, they ^^all then put their
hand on their head, being (...) shamed because of their confidence. 4. He (...)
studieth by all means to keep his hope, though it be but false, therefore have
ye that word in the 15. verse, he holds it fast, or as the word is, he
keeps it with hand and arm, with all his strength he keeps his hope: so
that if Christ would come from heaven and say, man, thou art a hypocrite, and
thy hope shall be cut off, they would say, I will keep my hope Sir, and
maintain it, and that is an evidence your hope is not built upon the
foundation; I love never a faith that in this side of time is unchangeable, and
never knows what it is to have ups nor downs. 5. It is built always upon a
wrong foundation, which is imported in that word, He shall lean upon his house,
which we suppose may interpret thus, he shall lean upon his worldly enjoyments,
or upon these spiritual like enjoyments he met with. The hope of a hypocrite is
never built upon Christ, and so unquestionably that hope shall be cut off and
evanish. 6. Let hypocrites hold fast their hope with both their arms, I will
say these three words to them: First, If all the Ministers should preach to
you, and desire you to quite your hope, and ye will not, yet both your hope and
you shall be separate: as it is in that word, Your hope shall depart from you,
and ye shall quite ^it. Secondly, Your hope will bring you to death, and no
further: according to that word, Joh. 18.14. Whose hope shall bring them to the
King of terrors: Will it bri^^^ no further say you, O no, The King (...) rors
shall separate you and your hope. The The day is coming when the foundati^^ it
shall be discovered, and there shall (...) be a delusion but it shall be
unfolded. (...) day is approaching when Christ shall (...) how you got your
faith, and how you (...) tained it. 7. The hypocrites hope (...) poor building,
it is as a spiders web; (...) I conceive (without being critic) is (...) The
hope of hypocrites they spin it o^^ their own bowels, they have it not (...)
Christ, but as ye see a spider spin o^^^^ its own bowels, so do they out of
the selves, it is no better stuff then their (...) rotten righteousness,
Christ ^ever b^ those unto a lively hope. Let me be^^^ you therefore, that by
all means ye wo^ study to make fure your interest in God, (...) to build your
faith on him, whose nam^ that munition of rocks; For believe it, I (...) say it
with much persuasion, I know the are many that shall once meet (if God (...)
vent it not) with a dreadful disappo^ meant: And therefore as ye would not in^^
that eternal hazard that is attending (...) that presumptuously take hold of a
h^^ before Christ take hold of them, study (...) search your hope what it is: I
desire no^ raze any foundation of their hope the laid by the hand of Christ,
but would d^^ and charge you to raze the foundation that hope which ye have
laid from the ginning by your own hands, and he (...) (...). I would press
these three things upon you. First, O ye that are strangers to Christ, and that
know not what it is to im^race the offers of the everlasting Gospel, ^^ey that
excellent counsel, 2 Chronicles. 3.8. ^ive Christ your hand; for that word which
(...) have rendered, Yield your self to the Lord, (...) is in the Original,
Give your hand to God; which is in short, Marry him, and be content ^o contract
your self to him; for believe it, the day is coming, that either that contract
between you and Christ, shall be eternally confirmed, or that contract between
the de^il and you, shall be eternally ratified. And, I suppose, there is so
much spoken to the commendation of that noble Plant of re^own, that ye may take
Christ (if so we ^ay speak) blindly, ye may close your eyes and take him, for
he shall never disappoint your hope; for let you think of him to ^eternity, he
shall always be above your ^houghts. Secondly, I would earnestly desire you
once to search and try, what was ^he first rise of your faith in Jesus Christ:
I ^m persuaded of it, there are many that ^ake up their faith at their foot,
they never ^avelled in pain, and yet faith is brought forth. Is not this a
mystery? shall it be said, before they traveled, they brought forth: (...) do
nor question but there may be less and greater pangs of the new birth, but
this is most certain, there is always some either ^esser troubles or greater,
till that child be ^rought forth: and yet I may condemn these that stay too
long in the place of the breaking forth of children, Christ will never (...)
you when ye do really come, because have not been so many years and days in^
son to the Law. Thirdly, Let me d^ you to go and ask, is there a grave betw^
you and heaven, in all that way thro^^ which the Saints have traveled, upon
w^^^ this is written, here lies a man that sin^ly sought life from Christ, and
he de^^ him. I think without encroaching (...) much upon the searching forth of
the (...) ercise of the Saints in heaven, I think (...) may suppose, there may
be in heaven so^ Queries and Interrogations: Christ shall (...) O beloved, Did
ye want any thing here bel^^ when ye was sent forth to travel in (...) world?
and ye shall be constrained to (...) swer, No: Christ shall ask that question
you, Did I not all things well? and (...) shall be constrained to answer, Yes:
Ch^ shall propose that question, Are ye not w^ rewarded for all your pains? and
you (...) be constrained to answer, Yes: O but (...) take him, he is the
blessed and most excell^ One in heaven and in earth, it is the best ^^gain ever
ye made: O ye Merchants (...) have made many excellent bargains to y^ own
apprehension, will ye come and (...) one excellent bargain yet, that will m^
you eternally up: And what is that? C^ and buy Christ and take him for nothing,
(...) is not your ordinary bargaining: the^ few comes to you, and bids you
bu^ cellent things without money; but con^ the Gospel, and ye shall get Christ
wi^ money; ^^niggards that are loath to spend your money in the world, will ye
(...) to Christ and believe on him, take him freely: O say ye, if I could get
three things of Christ, (...) would come. 1. I would have much gold and silver;
I say, come to Christ, and ye shall get much gold and silver: Is that true? it
is abundantly true: See Job 22.25, 26. where pressing that exhortation,
Acquaint thy felf with God, and using many arguments, he says, Thou shall lay
up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks. Is not that
gold enough? yea, ye shall have silver likewise, Thou shall have plenty of
silver. In the 26. verse, ye shall not only have gold and silver, but shall
have plenty of it, and shall have the most excellent and refined gold. But O
say ve, will that promise be literally accomplished to me if I come to Christ:
I would only say these three things to thee: 1. Come to Christ, and if gold and
silver be for thy advantage, thou shall have it literally accomplished. 2. I
say, ye shall have as much contentment in Jesus Christ, as if ye had this house
full of gold. 3. I will say this to thee, Christ shall be thy gold and thy
silver: according to that word in the 26. verse, which is most remarkable; yea,
the Almighty shall be thy defense; or as it is in the Original, shall be thy
gold, speaking of the promise of gold before. Secondly, Ye say, I would have
this, that what I purpose might be accomplished: I say, come to Christ and ye
shall have that likewise, Job 22.28. Thou shall decree a thing, and it shall be
established unto thee; which I conceive, does not only take in these spiri^^all
decrees; but likewise these that rel^^ temporal enjoyments. But there is a
(...) thing I would have (say ye) and I w^^come to Christ, and it is, that I
might (...) all the desires of my heart: I say, O (...) and O woman, come to
Christ, and thou (...) have what thou desire: This is clear (...) Psalm. 37.4.
Delight thy self in God, an^ shall give thee the desires of thy heart: (...)
can ye have man but it is there? Would have any thing of Christ? He puts
blank in your hand, and says that (...) which he said to Solomon, Ask; What
(...) ye have, and I shall give you, Christ, (...) were, puts his name to
the foot of a cle^^^ sheet of paper, and he desires you to (...) what ye would
have, And is not this an ^^cellent bargan? O niggard, what would (...) have
which ye will not get in Christ? (...) be persuaded, that ye that refuse and
(...) not take him, the eternal curse of all th^^ in heaven will return upon
thy head, (...) eternal curse of all the expectants (...) heaven and heirs of
life will return upon (...) head of that person that will not take Christ And
cursed, cursed shall that person be (...) will not take Christ, and one day all
(...) Congregation in heaven and earth shall (...) Amen.

SERMON VII.
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith? prove your own
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates?
ASsurance is a precious gift which many that live in these days do
undervalue, and trod under foot; do not the Christians of these times go
halting between two opinions, being neither positive that they are received
into the adoption of children, nor positive that they are yet in a state of
alienation, and enemies in their minds by wicked works; yea, and (that which
is worse) there are many among as that walk with much contentment under their
uncertainty. I think it is a fault to be condemned in many, they pursue more to
sa^fie their sense for the present, nor to have a solid well grounded
assurance for time to ^ome: I could wish that all the debates and ^estions of
these days, that take up so much of our time, and so much of our spirits from
better things, were happily drowned in these four excellent questions, which
without contro^ersie are of greatest concernment for all to ^ave resolved. 1.
Where shall I rest all night when the long shaddows of the everlasting evening
shall be streached out upon me, (...) whither or not has Christ gone before
(...) take up a place for me in his Fathers ho^ 2. It is a soul-concerning
question, Mas^ what shall I do to inherit eternal life? to (...) asking at him
that can sweetly resolve y^ And 3. not to rest there, but to be cr^ forth in
the morning, What shall I do to^ saved, and to be crying out in the even^^ Lord
what will thou have me to do. 4. I^ sweet to be asking seriously, Saw ye (...)
whom my soul loves: There is much of o^ time spent in asking news from Court,
(...) from abroad, concerning the revolution^ States and Kingdoms: But I
suppose, (...) were better to ask, What news from heav^ concerning thy self,
and what news fr^^ within, and news of thy Bridegrooms con^^ing? for these are
great Courts, I mean (...) Court of heaven, and the Court of con^^ence, the
affairs of which, a Christian shou^ endeavor much to know. 5. It is (...) soul
concerning question, that a Christian should be much in proposing to himself.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all (...) benefits. It is certain, we
must say, that o^ faith and assurance, and all our other merc^ are from him,
and yet alar, we are neglig^ in praises, we may with Tamar rent our g^ ments of
diverse colors, even the garment^ the Kings daughters, because of spirit^
whoredom against God, and our ingratit^ to him.

Now having spoken unto you at so (...) a length of that precious and fundamen^
grace of Faith, we have thought fit to shut up all in speaking a little upon
these words we now have read, concerning the evidence and assurance of Faith.
The Apostle in this Chapter is vindicating his Ministry and Apostleship, from
the contempt that was cast upon it, he proves he was a Minister of the New
Testament, called and sent of God, by the blessing and success he had among
them, in that he had not plowed nor thressed in vain; and they being so much in
censuring his way, and seeking an account of his Ministry: In these words, he
does (as it were) draw them off by a holy diversion unto another business, as
if he had said to them, O Corinthians, I will divert you from the exercise of
judging me, and will lead you into an exercise that is more divine and
profitable; be much in judging and examining your selves: and indeed, it is a
truth worth our observation, that if we were more in judging of our selves, we
would be less in judging others: but alas, there are some of us, we are so
much abroad, that we cannot be much at home.

In the words, there is these six things considerable. First, That there is
such a thing attainable by a Christian while he is here, as a distinct
persuasion and assurance that he is in the Faith, and has an interest in
Christ: by being in the faith; here is not to be understood, a being in the
doctrine of Faith only, but it is to be understood of principally, being indeed
and really united to Christ by Faith. Secondly, That the seeking after
assurance, is a necessary command^ duty, for ye see here the words very
impe^^tive, Examine your selves, prove your selve^ Thirdly, That there are many
mistakes a^ delusions among people, concerning the noble and excellent thing,
Assurance, the^ being many that keep fast a hope which Chri^ shall once
discountenance and sweep awa^ like a spiders web, and this is imported (...)
these words, Examine your selves, or as the word may be rendered, Take an
acurate an^ an experimental search of your selves, tr^ your selves, or prove
your selves: it is a wor^ that is borrowed from the Gold smiths fineing and
trying Gold. And so his putting of the Corinthians to so acurate a search of
themselves, says this clearly to us, there are many mistakes concerning this
thing many do pass a decree in their own favors before Christ has passed
his approbation of them. Fourthly, Take notice of this from the words, that
there is much and exceeding much advantage, by trying and searching whether we
be in the faith or no; this is imported in his doubling the exhortation.
Fifthly, That one most excellent and spiritual way of attaining assurance,
whether we be in the faith or no, is self examination, and putting our self to
the trial, as if he had said would ye have a distinct persuasion that y^ are in
Christ, then be much in the exercis^ of self examination. For the rest of the
words of the verse, we intend not (...) handle.

As to the first, That there is such a thi^ attainable: I shall only propose
these reasons unto you to make it evident. 1. It is known in Scripture, that
the Saints of old have in ordinary way attained to distinct persuasion of their
interest in Christ, Song. 2. verse. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his, and
Romans 8.38. I am persuaded (says the Apostle) that neither death nor life, etc.
shall be able to separate me from the love of God in Christ. And 2 Cor. 5. ver.
1. For we know, if this our earthly tabernacle were dissolved, we have a house
with God not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2. It is the great scope
of many Scriptures, to show how Christians may attain to assurance. 1 Job.
1.13. These things I write unto you, that ye may know what ye have eternal
life. The great end and design of John, writing in these Epistles, is, to make
a soul acquaint with Christ, and to make them to accept of him, and to give
them a distinct assurance that Christ has accepted them. 3. There are many
commands in Scripture for Christians to be serious in scarching after
assurance, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore brethren, give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure. It is the blessed end of Gods oath in the
everlasting Covenant, that a Christian might get assurance. What was the ground
and great end that God confirmed his Covenant with an oath, was it not, Heb.
6.18. That by two immutable things, wherein it was impossible for God to lie,
ye might have strong consolation. 5. If assurance of our interest in Christ
were not attainable, then th^se precious graces of joy and love could not be
well exercised: i^ Christian were evermore in the dark conce^ning his interest
in Christ, he could not giv^ obedience to that exhortation, Rejoice eve^ more,
again, I say, rejoice. 6. The Scripture has set down these means by which
(...) Christian may win to assurance: as is clea^ 1 John 3.18, 19. 2 Pet. 4.5.
compared wit^ verse. 10. where the Apostle Peter pressing the Doctrine of making
our calling and election sure, he sets down these excellent mea^ by which
they may win to it, and doubtless the marks and evidents that are registrate i^
the Scripture of a gracious state, do assur^ us, that assurance is attainable.
7. What ar^ the ends of the Sacraments, but that our assurance may be
confirmed, and that our faith may be strengthened, the two Sacraments are the
two great Seals of heaven that are put to the Charter of the Covenant.

Now as to the application, and the more full improvement of this first point,
I shall only offer these considerations. 1. I would have it taken notice of,
that though grace and assurance be two lovers, yet there is (...) such band of
union between them, that the one cannot consist without the other: (...)
Christian may have the real grace of God (...) and yet walk in darkness and
have no light (...) a Christian may be going to heaven, and ye^ that word
oftentimes in his mouth, I am (...) off from thy sight; yea, are there not eve^
some who have had assurance, and somtim^ a day have been admitted to draw that
conclusion, I am my beloveds, and his desire, (...) toward me, who are now
under darkness concerning their interest, and in much bitterness of spirit,
do sometimes cry out, My hope and my strength is perished from the Lord. But
therefore let me say this one word, both to weak ones who never had assurance,
and deserted ones who have lost it; when ye miss assurance, beware of drawing
such negative conclusions concerning your graces, but when ye sit in darkness
and see no light, Trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay your selves upon your
God; that is when ye cannot reach the faith of assurance, be much in
maintaining of adherence, remember Jobs divinity, Though thou should kill me,
yet will I trust in thee, and consider that sweet word, He will keep them in
perfect peace, whose hearts are stayed on him.

My second consideration is, That since assurance is attainable, ye would (...)
find out and remove these things that (...) hinder you from attaining unto it.
And that we may help you in this, we conceive, that the obstructions of a
Christians assurance, are especially in these two, 1. Our mistaking of the
Lords dealing toward us. And, 2. Our untender and unsuitable dealing toward
him.

Of the first sort we shall lay before you these five. The first is, want of
favorable terms of prayer; this often makes a Christian to debate his
interest, and call in question his evidence, Lam. 3.8. compared with verse 18.
I cry and shout, but he shuts out my prayers: and this is the conclusion of
that dispensation, verse 18. My hope and my strength is perished from the Lord:
and this especially occasioned when the Christian most serious and servent in
prayer, and the he meereth not with a return, this makes them exceedingly
debate their interest. A^^ I confess, it is a sad dispensation to m^^ with a
silent Christ in prayer; but yet the needs not make a Believer question all,
a^^ debate the reality of his interest in God since the dearest of all the
children of the Kingdom have been so dealt with, even (...) David, Psalm. 22.
Cried night and day without silence, and is not heard, but cries out, Why art
thou so far from helping, and from the word of my roaring; yea, that passage
may relate t^ him who was the root and offspring of David, for even he was so
dealt with, and had not presently a sensible return, when he ha^ prayed thrice,
that the cup might pass from him.

Secondly, The want of sensible enlargement and liberty in prayer, that he
never got to his knees, but his heart begins to die like a stone within him,
then he cries forth that word, 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty, and sur^ if I had the Spirit of the Lord, I would ha^^
liberty in the exercise of prayer, and tha^ this is a rise of the disputing of
our intere^^ is clear from Psalm. 77.4. compared with (...) 7.9 says David, I
am sore troubled that (...) cannot speak, I have no liberty in prayer, (...)
never go to God in prayer, but (as it we^^ my tongue sticks to the roof of my
mou^^ he from hence draws that conclusion, (...) God forgotten to be
gracious, and has (...) wrath shut up his tender mercies for ever: I confess,
this also is a sad dispensation to meet with an absent and veiled Christ in
prayer: so that we can never go to seek God in secret, but we may write this
upon our prayers, He is gone, he is gone, especially when we have lost that
liberty that formerly we have had: and therefore is David's perplexity much
hightened, ver. 5, 6. from his remembering his song in the night, and his
calling to mind the years of ancient times: yet we may remember how soon David
wrote his tetractions, as to that sad conclusion, I said, this is my infirmity,
ver. 10. and so should we do when upon every straiting in prayer, we begin to
question all the Lords kindness toward us.

A third obstruction of assurance, is a Christians wrestling with his
corruptions painfully and seriously, and yet not meeting with any sensible
victory over them, but upon the contrary, their corruptions seem to be
stronger, and they themselves seem to be weaker, and then it is, they
strengthen their misbelief, by that word, 1 John 3.3. Every man that has this
hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure: And indeed, this is a knot
that is not easily loosed, but when he sees his idols and corruptions
prevailing over him, he will cry out, I am gone and there is no help in Israel
concerning this thing, and yet this also is a word in haste, Paul has
registrate himself a standing witness, even after he was a chosen vessel, Romans
7. How strangely a child of God may be (...) down with a body of death even
under most serious wrestlings against it: And the fore if thou seriously
maintain the comba^ though thou do not sensibly prevail, thou h^ no reason upon
that ground to weaken t^ assurance.

Fourthly, When a Christian is put to mo^^ then ordinary outward affliction,
when G^ does dispense sadly unto them in outward things, they then begin to
call in question the interest, and dispute their assurance, this clear, by
comparing Lament. 3. verse. 18. wi^^ the preceding words, where speaking of the
sad dispensations they meet with, he drawn that conclusion in verse. 18. My
hope and (...) strength is perished from the Lord, and Jon. 2.2^ where he
draws that conclusion from suc^ a promise, I am now cast out of thy sight,
the devil he takes Eliphaz divinity and present it to a Christian; Call now if
there be any (...) answer thee, and to which of the Saints wilt the go; as if
he had said, did thou ever know^ Christian afflicted so as thou art afflicted,
(...) so he would have Job to quite his integrity. But yet we know all these
blessed ones for (...) their afflictions, were dear unto the Lord, (...) had
their interest secure in him, yea, as m^ as he loves, he does rebuke and
chasten, and it bastards and not sons on whom he will not (...) stow a rod, and
therefore we ought not (...) quarrel our interest because of afflictions.

And lastly, The rise of a Christians (...) couragement, and that which
hindered their assurance, is, when their former ex^rience of the manifestations
of God does (...) relish to them, and when the promises (...) which they have
built become tastelesse unto them as the white of an egg, and when they meet
not with God in Ordinances, but these become lifelesse, when these three rise
to gether upon them, their case becomes very perplexed oftentimes: and this
also seemed to have been David's case, Psalm. 77. When he remembered his song in
the night, and the days of old, and yet had no sweetness in them, then he
breaks forth into these bitter complaints which are there expressed: but yet
as we said before, this was his infirmity, and there is no reason for a
Christian to question his interest upon such an account; because the Ordinances
are not at all times alike lively even to the best, and the Lord is not always
present, but though sometimes the candle of the Lord does shine upon his head,
yet at other times he is necessitate to cry out, O that it were with me as in
months past.

The second sort of obstructions of a Christians assurance, I mean such as flow
from our untender dealing toward God are,

First, A guilty conscience; that is a remarkable word, 1 Timothy 3.9. Holding the
mystery of faith in a pure conscience; It tells us, that this excellent grace
Faith cannot bide but in a cleanly lodging, even in a pure conscience, and when
a Christian sets about to believe he will know how a guilty conscience will
flee in his face, and cry out, O adventure not to believe, dare thou believe;
the guiltiness of a Christians conscience makes him often to cry out. Touch not
the mountain lest thou be thrust through: And I tell you three disadvantages of
a guilty ^^^science. 1. It obstructeth a Christians ^^^nesse in making
applications to Christ; (...) heart says close, and his necessity says (...)
but his guilty conscience cries out, O (...) aback and do not close. 2. A
guilty con^^^ence oftentimes it hinders the discove^^^ of Christ to the soul,
and does so affright (...) terrify, yea, it will so sting and bite us, (...)
when he reveals himself, we cannot take ^^tice, when he would lay on a
plaster, our so^^ will tear it off, and refuse to be comfort 3. It does
exceedingly obstruct our go^^ about duty. O but our soul moves slowly the paths
of God when we are under (...) power of a guilty conscience.

The second obstruction is, That we (...) not much in the exercise of
tenderness. (...) but if a Christian were tender, and if in ev^^^ step of his
life he desired to set Christ be^^^ his eyes, he would easily win to much
assura^^^ according to that word, Isa. 64.5. Thou m^^est him that rejoycest and
works righteousne^^ and these that remember thee in thy wa^* Would ye know
the assured Christian, (...) the tender Christian; the Christian that (...) not
crucify convictions, the Christian (...) breaks not resolutions, the
Christian (...) does not fit calls and opportunities to pra^^^ the Christian
that says not of any sin it^^ (...) little one; or the Christian that
searches (...) waves, watches always, examineth alway^^ and is always
casting out sin, that is the ^^sured Christian.

The third obstruction is, The want of (...) exercise of the grace of fear, we
are not much under this disposition, to fear the Lord and this goodness: this
is clear from that word, Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will show to them his Covenant. I think there are these two
great evidences that much of the power of Godliness is gone from some of our
hearts: we fear God no more, nor if we were his companion. And we fear our
selves no more nor if we had not a deceitful heart within us, we neither fear
God nor our selves, and that speaks that much of the life of Religion is lost
amongst us.

The fifth thing that does much astruct our assurance, is, much worldly
mindedness, and to eager pursuit after the things of a present life: That is
remarkable, 2 Cor. 4. ver. last, compared with 2 Cor. 5.1. We look not unto the
things that are seen, that is, we are not much taken up with the things of a
present world, which the men of the world seek and delight themselves in: and
it is subjoy^ed, For we know, if this our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a house not made with hands; so we see assurance and
mortification to the world, are much ^nit together. Would ye know where to find
our hearts, the most part of us are conversing with idols of the world; Would
^e know where to find our hearts, they are among the vanities of the world. O
how true (...) that word, Psalm. 39. Man walks in a vain ^^ew: What is man in
all his actings, but (...) one walking in a long gallery that is set about with
pictures, g^^ting on these (...) and saluting them all, as if they were (...)
Kings and Queens, and great persons (...) could do him good; and so our pursui^
^^ter the world, is nothing else but a dead ^^dow pursuing after dead shaddows,
a man^^ is but a short living shadow pursuing ^^vanity and nothing, and thus
he fools (...) his time, forgetting to make sure the one (...) necessary.

Fifthly, Want of distinct apprehen^^^ of these three, the infinite love of
Christ, (...) infinite power of Christ, and the infinite w^^dome of Christ; there
is not an objection Christians that ye have from the multi^^ of your sins, but
it may be drowned in (...) nit love; there is not an objection that have
concerning the strength of your (...) but it may be drowned in that immense
(...) of the infinite power of Christ; there (...) an objection ye have from
your wants, or (...) your evil nature, but ye may drown it (...) infinite
wisdom and goodness of Christ there can be nothing against your assur^ but
may be sweetly answered also from (...) rightly applied, taken up and rested
(...) the soul. The last thing which hinder (...) assurance, is, the smainesse
of the meas^^ grace that we have attained; for when (...) is small, it is hard
to be discerned, and (...) fore, if we would have assurance, lea^ to ly still
and dispute, but to rise up (...) increase our stock, and then you shall (...)
ye are rich, Grow in Grace and the know of God, and by this ye shall know if ye
(...) know the Lord.

The third consideration is, that assurance (...) not bestowed at all times,
but there are ^ome special times and seasons when God gives a Christian a
broad sight of his interest, ^ad I shall but name these.

The first is, when he is first converted, and Christ and he joins hands
together, even then sometimes the best robe is put on upon the prodigal son,
and the fatted calf is killed, and a ring is put upon his hand, and shoes upon
his feet, Act. 9.17. Paul meets with assurance immediately after his
conversion, 1 John 2.12.14. I write unto you little children, because ye have
known the Father; and before that, in the 12. verse. I write unto you little
children, because your sins are forgiven you; so that when a Christian is
brought into Christ, he will (as it were) lead them to the Registers of heaven,
and say, friend come and see, here is your name written from eternity: But do
not mistake me, I do not say, this is always so, but these whom Christ
converreth through the thunderings of the Law, these most frequently meet with
intimation of the pardon of their sins and peace of God, even at their first
acquaintance. I know there are some Christians, that if ye ask at them when
they were begotten to a lively hope, they would say that word that the blind
man once said, One thing I know, I was once blind, and now I see, but for the
time and the day, I know not when it was.

The second time is, when they are wrestling with God like Princes in Prayer,
and watching unto that exercise, Dan. 9.23. compared with the preceding verse,
h^ much and serious in prayer, does meet that word from heaven, O man greatly
^^ved, or as the word is, O man of desires, (...) Act. 10.2, 3, 4. when
Cornelius is (...) exercise of watching and prayer, he (...) a vision, and
gets intimation of his (...) with God; and Jacob when he was ^^ling with
Christ, Genesis 32. he has that (...) money given him, Thou have as a prince ^^led
with God and prevailed.

The third time is, when a Christian is ^^sing through the gates of death, and
is (...) the borders of Eternity: I desire not (...) mistaken in this neither;
I know some ^^stians are led to heaven through a dark tr^ so as they never see
a blink of the co^^nance of Christ, until the day come (...) they get him in
their arms eternally w^^ his Fathers house; Some Christians (...) they go
through the gates of death, they (...) be disputing of this question, Where am
^^ing, but this is certain, that sometimes, (...) oftentimes Christ will
dispense a broad (...) of a Christians interest unto him at the (...) death, 2 Samuel 25.5. When was it that (...) sands in the very jaws of death, God (...)
made with me an everlasting Covenant, (...) not when death was shaking hands
with (...) and 2 Timothy 4.8. When was it that Paul (...) that song, I have fought
the good fight of (...) I have finished my course, henceforth is la^^ for me a
crown of righteousness, was i^ even then when he was ready to depart (...)
(...) offered up? And when was it when old ^^^eon did sing that blessed song,
Luke 2.29. Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen
thy salvation, was it not within a step of death, as it were, he went to heaven
with Christ in his arms, or rather in his heart he carried Christ with him, and
found Christ before him, and so death to Sime^n was a change of his place, and
not a change of his company.

The fourth time is, when he is to be put to some hard and difficult duty:
Before Abraham be put to forsake his native land, and become a stranger and a
wanderer, he meets with sweet intimation of his (...), Genesis 12.2. I will make
of thee a great nation, and verse. 7. The Lord appeared unto Abraham, and before
Jeremiah be sent a Preacher to a rebellious people he will have that word
spoken unto him, I know thee before thou wast brought forth.

The fifth time is, when a Christian has done some singular act of obedience,
when Abraham had obeyed the Lord, and was content to offer up his Isaac^ he
meets (...) sight of his interest and Covenant renew (...) to him with an
oath, Genesis 22.16. By my (...) I have sworn, because th^^ have done (...) and
have not withholden thy son, even thy only son, blessing, I will bless thee,
and multiplying. I will multiply thee as the stars of heaven.

The sixth time is, when a Christian is (...) meet with hard trials,
difficulties and afflictions in the world, then they usually meet with
assurance, and so Gen 28.14, 15, 16. before Jacob go to serve Laban, he meets
(...) intimation of his peace with God.

The seventh time is, when a Christian under sad persecution and affliction,
then the Lord give a word from heaven to co^^ him and assure him of his
fatherly love mercy: When was it that Christ left that (...) Legacy to his
Disciples, Joh. 14. ver. 27. peace I leave with you, my peace I give you, it
not when he himself was to leave the^ troublesome and sorrowful days, in a
(...) secuting world.

The eighth time is at some solemn O^nances and approaches to God, the daye^ a
Communion to a tender Christian (...) been sweet days, when Christ has come
the soul, and said, Behold me, behold me. (...) think the eleven Apostles met
with (...) assurance of their interest in Christ at (...) Communion they were
at with him: O w^ sweet intimations were these, This is (...) body which is
broken for you, and this (...) the New Testament in my blood shed for (...) and
a little after, you are they which have (...) tinued with me in my tentation,
and I appo^ unto you a kingdom.

We come now to the second point wh^^ we proposed from the words, viz. That
(...) assurance is a thing which may be attain (...) so to seek after it, is a
necessary duty: (...) me not be mistaken, as if I said, the have of assurance
were simply necessary to Sal^tion; no, that were a Doctrine as com^^ less upon
the other hand, as the Po^^ doctrine of the impossibility of assuranc^ upon the
other: But the thing I say, is, that the Christians seeking after assurance,
and his real endeavoring to attain unto it, ^s a necessary command of God
which he ^ath bound upon the consciences of his children amongst other Gospel
duties; And certainly, we need go no further for the clearing of this then the
Text it self; what ^^eaneth these peremptory injunctions, Examine your selves
whether ye be in the faith (...) not: Prove your own selves; Know ye not, etc.
but if you will, you may add that word, (...) Pet. 1. verse. 5. and 10.
compared, what ^an be more expressly commanded, and more strongly pressed, then
that Christians should ^end their utmost endeavors for attaining unto this
blessed condition of assurance: Give diligence, yea, give all diligence, yea
the ^ather give all diligence to make your calling and election sure.

From this, we shall only lay before you these Considerations. 1. If the
seeking after ^ssurance be a necessary duty, then these three things are most
lamentable. First, That there are so many in this Generation who are pure in
their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their iniquity; they flatter
themselves with a rotten assurance, that has no other foundation but their own
imagination: they never knew since the first day they were Baptized and did
begin to profess Christ, what it was to mortify one lust, nor ^eriously to
wrestle against one temptation, and yet they want not a strong persuasion of
their interest in Christ: But ah, will ye stand in awe, lest ye meet with such
a d^^ f^ll disappointment, as (when ye thi^^ are in the very gate of heaven)
even th^^ fall backwards to the very bottom of (...) and when ye expect a
kindly welcome (...) the Lord of Glory, as one who thinks (...) have been in
Covenant with him this (...) years, ye meet with that dreadful summ^^ Depart
from me ye cursed, I know you not.

2. How sad may we be upon this accou^^ that howbeit assurance be an attainable
th^^ and a great many dare not say they have ^^^tained it; yet so little
diligence is used pursuing after it: Is it not very lamentab^^ that many of you
to whom I am speak^^ since first ye gave up your names to Christ a visible way,
and were reputed amongst generation of the seekers of his face, s^^^ ever set a
day or an hour a part to exa^^ whether ever indeed ye were in Christ or (...)
Alas, is heaven of so little moment, is the ^^ving or wanting all the
enjoyments which there of so small concernment to you, tha^ will not be at the
pains as once to enquire ^^ter your interest in the matter: What if (...) of
you were but possessors of a thous^ pound, and your interest or right unto it
(...) certain and questionable, would not your (...) depart from you, and your
rest be unquie (...) you had made it more secure? What the you shall the men of
this generation an^ in the day of the Lord for neglecting th^^ thing necessary,
when they have been so ^^ing themselves about many things, and (...) been so
serious in so many consultation (...) make sure a worm eaten portion in a
perishing world, that the whole wit of Men and Angels cannot secure for one
moment: It is certain, the root of all this slothfulness is Atheism: It is not
possible that we believe ^s really there is a heaven as we believe there (...)
an earth, or that the world to come is as ^eal as that which is present, or
else it must be a strange power in these lusts that keeps us captive, that we
are never suffered to think upon Eternity, nor to ask where we must ^^dge when
this cottage we carry about shall fall about our ears. O will ye think upon it
how serious and pressing that command is, (...) Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence
to make your calling and election sure, when the Lord says, Give all
diligence, will ye give no diligence, and when he says, make your calling and
election sure, will ye leave upon uncertainty, I said to the foolish, deal not
so foolishly.

3. It is most lamentable, that since assurance is attainable, yet men live so
contentedly under the want thereof: how strange is it that many are so seldom
on their knees complaining of their uncertainty, if Christ were precious unto
you, would it be so, I am sure there are some of us here that have had the name
of Christians I know not how long, that never had one sad thought about the
want of assurance: when we look upon the desolations, vastations and
plunderings in the world, how many of us can cry out. They have taken away my
gods, and what have I more; but when we speak of heaven we care not who deprive
us of our portion there. I will not limite the Lord, no^ termine what he may
do, but believe it, (...) one to a thousand, if many Christians of (...) age
have a pleasant night and comfortable (...) sing of their eyes, they are such
underva^^ of assurance: I may fear, that lamenta^^ shall be heard upon the
deathbeds of (...) O poor wretched wandering soul where art (...) going: and
it is no wonder it come to the when we are so long in beginning to ask (...)
question. And now I close with this (...) thing, that I think beyond all
question (...) souls that live contentedly under the want (...) assurance, are
the careless daughters that d^^^leth at ease; Christ and they are at a
rema^^able distance; it must be a cold winter and dark night (at best) as to
their present (...) lowship with God.

A second consideration from this point (...) that if the seeking after
assurance be so necessary a duty, then let me beseech you to po^der with your
selves what means are fit (...) you to use that ye may attain it, and if ye
(...) quire what these means are, I shall only (...) before you some few.

1. That ye would be much in the exerc^^ of Faith, I mean the direct acts of
Faith (...) whereby the sinner from his sense and fe^^ing of his wants, lays
hold on Jesus Christ closing with him, and leaning upon him (...) a full supply
out of his fullness: for indeed there are two great faults amongst the Lord
people, some do seek assurance of Faith, before ever they seek to have faith.
2. Some (...) much more taken up in debating their ^^dences, whether they be
real or not, then they are instrengthening their evidences, so that most of
their time is spent in questioning: O! is this a real evidence of assurance;
where as more actual believing in Christ and gripping to the promises, and
less disputing, were the shorter and surer way, that word is most clear, Ephesians.
1.13. After ye believed, ye were sealed with the spirit of promise, that is, ye
got assurance, but not before ye believed: and ye know, it is said, Matthew. 9.2.
And when Jesus saw their faith, he said, son, be of good comfort thy sins are
forgiven thee, so then it is clear, that to be much in believing, is the
nearest way to assurance.

2. Ye would be much in believing the general truths and promises of the
Gospel, and frequently meditating of them; all assurance is by a practical
sylogisme; the first proposition whereof must needs be a Scripture truth: And
certainly, the firm assent to that truth, and the souls delightful meditation
on it, is often blessed of the Lord as a special mean whereby the conscience is
helped to make the assumption, and also to bring forth the conclusion: For
instance, we see with what strength of affection Paul acts his faith on that
word, 1 Timothy 1.15 This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance,
Christ Jesus came to save sinners; and presently we see what follows on it of
whom I am the chief, then is his assurance; for doubtless he means, that he
was the chief of saved sinners, yea, certainly, a sinner thus exercising
himself, will often find so much sweetness in the general truths, (...)
cannot but put to his own name.

3. diligent in the exercise of all sp^^tual graces and Christian duties, that
the among the best means of attaining to (...) rance, is manifest from 2 Pet.
1. Give all (...) ^ance to make your calling and election sure: (...) ^ndeed it
is very observable, that the dilig^^ there mentioned, is not a diligence in
disp^^ing and questioning about our election, (...) diligence in the practice
of duties and gra^^ as is clear from ver. 5. Give all diligence ((...) the
Apostle) Whereto? in adding to your (...) virtue, to your virtue knowledge, and
to knowledge temperance, etc. and then verse. 8. If (...) do these things, ye
shall neither be barren (...) unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ; he does not say in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ simply, but
of our Lo^^ Jesus: importing that, that the result of diligence in these
graces, shall be the knowledge of Christ as ours, and of our intere^^ in him:
and then he adds (upon the other hand) he that laketh these things, is blind
(...) cannot see afar off, this is, he cannot see far (...) any spiritual
matter, and so not in the matt^^ of his interest. O therefore, think not the ye
will get assurance by lying down with (...) sleggard upon your bed, or by your
for^^ prayers, or your anxious debates, but if ev^^ ye come to assurance, ye
must be striving (...) in an agony, for so the word imports, whi^^ is used to
express our diligence in Christian duties.

4. As ye would be diligent, so if eve^ would come to assurance, ye would be
tender and circumspect in your walking, that is (...) clear word, Psalm. 50.
last verse, To him that ^^dereth his conversation aright, will I show ^he
salvation of God, and Isa. 32. The effect of righteousness is peace and
assurance for ever: ^h the untender walk that many of us have: it is no wonder
to see us walk in darkness, ^uch stinking gross vapors that arises off our
conversation, cannot but engender clouds that hinder us from seeing God, and
certainly such pearls as Assurance is not given to dogs and swine, lest they
tread upon them.

SERMON VIII.
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith? prove your own
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates?
THere are two great balances into which men do weight themselves; there are
some that weight themselves in the balance of deceit, who ^hink that in all
their labors there is no ini^ui^y to be found, yet God who is the weigher ^f
the spirit, when he shall weigh them, will ^^grave this upon their forehead,
Thou art ^eighed in the balance, and are found light: (...) but there are many
who approve themselves, whom Christ shall never appro^ There are many that call
God Father, (...) he will not call Children, and many th^^ Christ Husband, whom
he will not call (...) 2. There are some who weigh themselve in the balance of
the Sanctuary, who (...) so lide and most spiritual grounds do (...) this
conclusion, I am my beloveds, and (...) desire is toward me, who can with
boldn^^^ and confidence look Christ in the face, (...) say thou art mine, and
with much spiri^^^ confidence, take him in their arms, and (...) out, he shall
be eternally mine: and (...) there is not a more pleasant life than to (...)
taking him every day in our arms, and to (...) crying out, am I not made up in
him, am I no^ made up in him.

Before I come to the words, there (...) three great and most soul concerning
errou^ amongst the Christians of these days, th^^ we desire ye may consider.
1. There (...) many that are more desirous to know wh^ they are, then what they
should do; th^^ are some are more taken up to know whither they be justified
and sanctified, then (...) be indeed justified and sanctified; and the^ are
more desirous to know if they be (...) Christ, then indeed to be in him: and
therefore we find many who do spend a gre^^ deal more time disputing that
question; (...) there am I in Christ or not, then they do (...) using of these
means by which real un^^ and communion with him may be attain^^ But oh, will ye
once study more to be in (...) and that shall be the shortest way to (...) to
the knowledge of your being in him. The second great error is, that some are
more desirous to know what they should do, the^ they are desirous to do what
they know (...) Are there not many of us that have this question, Wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, and yet we do not know his Commandment is with
us; that we should do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with (...). A^ third
error is, that we are more in talking of Christ, then in believing in him, or
closing with him: Some of us think to win to hea^^n by discourses, if we can
talk of Christ, ^e think all is without debate or controversy; but alas, there
are many who were sweet talkers of Christ, that are cursing Him this day in
hell. And I would only say this by the way, if there be any of you that have
win to any soul persuasion of your interest in Christ, I entreat you if you can
put the conclusion upon record, that in such a day of such a Month, and such a
Year of God, you then did win to cry out, I am my beloveds, and he is mine: It
seems to have been David's practice, Psalm. 16.2. O my soul thou have said unto
the Lord, thou art my Lord; and it was Jeremiahs practice, Lam. 3.24. The Lord
is my portion says my soul, I say, ye should even mark that conclusion as they
did, that when tentations come, and begin^ to assault you, ye may look to your
record that ye have set down, and be ashamed to misbelieve. It is true, that
for a little while our assurance at best will be but ebbing and flowing, but I
hope ere long, we shall be above the reach of misbelief, and above (...) ^^^ch
of fears, I hope ere long, we shall (...) no more, we shall be jealous no more
(...) we shall question our interest no more (...) ^hen all our disputings and
questionings shall ^e sweetly drowned in that infinite ocean of ^ernal delight
and fruition of God. O (...) ^ectants of heaven, expectants of heaven, are ^e
not ^^king after this day, are ye not look^ng after it: I know not what we do
here, (...) we be not walking forward every day: he i^ upon his way; O to see
him, we will even ^and and wonder at him: I hope the day i^^oming when we shall
never lose our grips of Christ any more, he is coming, he is coming (...) and I
think if Christ would give a Pass, we would long to go hence: O what streets
are these that are there, is there any here who is ^roaning for heaven, be of
good comfort, I ^ope ere long he shall come, he shall come and wash all tears
from our eyes.

Now at the last occasion, when we spoke upon these words, we ^old you that
there, ^as five or six things which we intended to ^onsider in them. The first
was, that such (...) thing as a distinct and well grounded per^^asion of our
interest in Christ was artain^ble; and of this we have already spoken. The
second thing is, That concerning thing ^oble and excellent thing assurance,
there^^^re many mistakes among the people of^^ ^^d, and to make this evident,
it is clear first (...) this Text, from that serious and acorate^ ^arch in this
matter, which the Apostl^^ ^^tteth these people unto, as we cleared unto you
from the force of the words; and his doubling of these exhortations, T^y your
own selves, prove your own selv^^. 2. From the many commands which the Lord
has left upon record that we should not be mistaken concerning our assurance,
1 Cor. 3.18. Let no man deceive himself, Gal. 6.3. If a man think himself to be
something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself, and therefore does the
Apostle add, Let every one prove his own work, and verse. 7. Be not deceived.
3. The point is clear from this, that we find in Scripture many who have been
mistaken most dreadfully in the matter of their assurance, Hos. 8. Israel
cries out, my God we know thee, and yet Israel was in a great mistake, for in
the words following. verse. 3. Israel had cut off the thing that was good, and
Prove. 30. verse 12. we find there, A generation that are pure in their own eyes,
and yet are not washed from their iniquities. 4. It is clear from this, that it
is a great design of Satan the great deceiver, that we might be mistaken about
that noble and weighty point of our Assurance of being in Christ: Is there not
a power given unto him from Christ to deceive the Nations; I may say, that in
no point does he more prevail to deceive us then in this: if profanity kill its
thousands, delusion kills ten thousands, and this delusion its twenty
thousands. Lastly, Does not this prove how much a Christian may be mistaken in
the matter of his Assurance, even that name which is given to our hearts, Jer.
17. ver. 9. It is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, and who
can know it; no doubt this may show (...) (though there were no more) how (...)
our hearts are to deceive us, making us (...) entertain a delusion in stead of
truth, and i^^^ brace a shadow in stead of substance.

The next thing that we have to speak (...) you upon this point, is to show you
whe^^ these mistakes do lie, and what are the^^ false grounds by which so many
do decei^^ their own souls in this matter; and her^^ there are two sorts of
persons whom we must inform. 1. There be some who upon mos^ unwarrantable
grounds do conclude that their interest in Christ is sure, when indee^^ it is
not. 2. There be some (upon the othe^^ hand) who from sad mistakes of
themselved, and the Lords dealing toward them, (...) that they have an
interest, when indeed they have. The first sort are the worst, and in the most
dangerous condition, and they build upon these six false foundations, which we
beseech them to consider.

The first is, their supposed sensible e^^ joyments, some Christians in these
times esp^cially do meet with some flashes of light and joy which they have not
been (it may be) acquainted with before, or at least, not (...) such a measure,
or in such a sensible mann^^^ and upon this they presently cry forth, (...)
beloved is mine, and I am his. I shall no^^ dispute with such about the reality
of these enjoyments, or how they came to know tha^^ these are such as proceed
from a saving wo^^^ of the Spirit of Grace, but waving th^^^ (...), give me
leave to say this much of (...) enjoyments and sensible manifestations (as to
the point in hand) they may be sometime a good supporter to underprop a
Christians assurance when it tottereth, but never a good foundation whereon he
may lay the first stone of that building: and therefore, he is the wiser
Christian who first tries the reality of his interest in Christ by other
blessed fruits of righteousness and holiness before he trust the reality of
sensible enjoyments, how sweet or comfortable soever they may seem to be. 2.
Some build their assurance upon the number and bulk of their duties, without
confidering the frame of their spirit, and the principle from which they flow,
they use prayer, and reading, and conference, they wait upon Ordinances, and
are always there where the means is thought to be most powerful; and upon this
they take up themselves in their own arms, blessing themselves as that poor
man, Luke 18. I fast twice a week, I pay tithes of all that I possess: But
alas, they do not consider that they do but build their house upon the sand,
which the first blast of a temptation will overturn, because not only all our
duties when weighed in the balance, may be found light, but when put to the
trial may be found empty, dead, and lifelesse things, wherein the Lord's soul
can have no pleasure. 3. Some are mistaken in the matter of their assurance, by
judging themselves by the Law, not knowing or not regarding the spiritual
meaning thereof: Paul was a gallant man (in his own apprehension) when he was
without the Law, that is, when he knew (...) the spiritual meaning of the Law,
he though^ himself the most eminent Saint in all his Nation, and as he shows
us, Phil. 3. he could compare with any of them, but when th^^ Lord opened his
eyes, we see, he put himself last in the roll of Saints, and first in the roll
of sinners, Romans 7. He was alive without th^^ Law, that is, thought himself
living and reigning above his sins; but when the commandment came, that is,
when it came to (...) knowledge, and he saw the spirituality of it, sin
revived, and he died, then he saw how that he had triumphed before the victory
(...) he then saw all his sins alive, and, as it wer^^risen from the dead, and
himself a dead ma^^, lost and undone in the estate he was in. O how many are
there amongst us in Paul's first condition, alive without the Law: O how many
destroy themselves with this, they think there is not a sin forbidden in all
th^^ Law of God but only Ten, but alas, th^^ fool, thou errest in this, not
knowing the Scriptures; should thou not judge thy self by th^^ spiritual extent
of the meaning of the Law and that divine commentary which the Apostle James
has set forth upon it, where in he shows thee, That if thou be gui^^^ of the
breach of one point, thou art guilty of (...) and by that infallible exposition
which Christ himself the blessed Law giver has set dow^^ Mat. 6. whereby he
discovers adultery the heart and in the eye. O atheist, the must take up the
Ten Commands, and ^^scribe guilty to them all: And let me (...) you this, if ye
will subscribe the Law to Christ, He will subscribe the Gospel to you; if thou will sincerely say, I am guilty. He will as sincerely say, I have pardoned;
Soncy daughter, be of good courage, thy fins are forgiven thee.

Fourthly, Some build their assurance upon the apprehension of their hatred of
some particular sin, that albeit it was sometimes as their right hand, or their
eve, yet now they can pluck it out, or cut it off: But O! will thou but
consider, some sin may be made weak, and the soul (though not upon a right
principle) brought to hate it, and to cry unto it, get you hence, and yet the
interest of Satan may be strong in the heart.

The fifth mistake is of many who judge themselves, because they go a greater
length then the former, and are kept free from a^^ gross outbreaking sin; how
many are there who go sleeping down to hell with this? (...) am no drunkard, no
adulterer, no murderes, no thief nor whore; this long have I lived in the town,
and they were never born that can say, I wronged them: and so they adventure
their soul upon this, they never committed any gross sin. But I beseech you be
not deceived, remember how that wretched man did speed, Luke 18.11. I am no
extortioner, nor adulterer, nor even as this publican, etc. poor creature that
he was, Christ gives not a testimonial to every one who take it for
themselves; and I must tell some of you, that there may be desperate atheists
without God, and without Christ in the world, and yet be free of gross out
bre^^ing sins: I do not think, but many of the who crucified the Lord of Glory,
were kept from other gross sins: What know thou O man that there is more
favor showed to thee, in that thou art kept from some gross sins, when yet
thou have a di^perately wi^ked heart, then is showed to the devil, when some
links of his chain are ^^ken in, and restraining power, keeping (...) in from
his ourmost bounds. God will sometimes restrain a hypocrite, or a heathen, a^
it was said of Abimelech, and God restraine^ him: there may be a cord put upon
thy jaws, when thou art far from having the power of conquering grace. It may
be also that all that abstaining from outward outbreakings, proceeds but from
outward disadvantages, and not from any fear of God, or respect to him, yea,
not so much as from the fear of any eternal punishment: Are there not many
amongst us. I believe it, there are many, that take away shame, and Church
censure, or civil punishment, and other inconveniences of that sort, and set a
thousand hells before them, they would not bekeeped back from one sin, but
would take their hazard of them all: Yea, is it not wa^^ of tentation, and
nothing else that hinders many from gross out-breakings; if Satan would come
but with a kindled match there wants no more to set tongue and hands and all
on fire of hell, O wretched soul, do but ask thy self how often thou (...)
rempted Satan, when he would not tem^^^ thee, and how often thou have followed
a tentation when it fled from thee; yea, when the Lord has hedged up thy ways
that thou could not overtake thy lovers, how many a long look have thou sent
after them, and what lustings of thy spirit within; and do ye think that heart
sins are nothing, although thou had no out breakings what were the matter of
that; if thou had not a tongue thou would break the third command, and curse
God in thy heart, if thou had not an eye, thou could commit adultery in thy
heart; if thou had not a hand, thou might commit murder in thy heart. O
therefore build not thy assurance upon this, that thou have made clean the
outside of the platter, when yet all filthiness is within.

The sixth false foundation upon which (...) am sure too many build their
assurance, is, their gifts and parts, and especially upon these two, the gift
of prayer, and the gift of knowledge; but believe it, it is not much to be a
Christian in tongue, but it is much to be a Christian in heart; know ye not
that this will cast out many, We have prophesied in thy Name, and in thy name
cast out devils. No doubt, these had been excellent slourishers, and if the
tongue would have done it, they had been highly advanced; but yet ye see these
men meet with a depart from me, I know you not. Ah, think upon it, he is not
the best Christian that is the best Orator. Religion that is pure and
undefiled, consists more in the affection, then in the tongue, and more in
practice, then in Profession; I beseech you, when you cast up your (...)
whences of assurance, consider how we^^ have done, and not how well ye (...)
spoken.

The seventh false ground whereby (...) do misjudge themselves, is, their
suppo^^ peace of conscience: O says one, my (...) science does not charge me
with any th^^ I thank God I have a quiet mind, and noth^ trouble me; but ah,
poor wretch, will (...) tell me, may not the strong man be with and therefore
all is at peace; a dumb con^ence, and a seared conscience, is a dreadplague.
Know thou not that many (...) I shall have peace, though I walk in the (...)
gination of my own heart, and because (...) say so, the Lord shall not spare
them, (...) the curses in His Book shall ly upon them.

The eighth false ground, is, the appro^tion of other Christians, so that if
they (...) the approbation of some such exercised C^stians, or if they have the
approbation such a Minister, that is the way to sile all their disputings. O
curred be the p^son that puts his trust in men who ^liars; O man or woman,
let me assure (...) this, if ye had a testimonial to presen^^ Christ,
subscribed with all the hands of ^^ry Christian that ever ye were acquai^^
with, this will be enough for Christ to re^^ you and it both, I know you not,
and there depart from me. There is an emphasis in (...) word, I know you not,
as if he had said, (...) not much though all others know you, know you not.

The ninth false ground, is, their diligent observing all the Ordinances, their
going to Preachings, and their going to Commanions, and running to and fro,
pretending this end, that knowledge may be increased; but know it, there are
many that have sitten down at a Table with Christ here, that shall never sit
down at the higher Table with him hereafter: Are there not many that shall say
unto Christ in the great day, Have we not eaten and drunken in thy presence,
unto whom Christ shall say, depart from me, I know you not.

The tenth false foundation, which is the strong delusion of Atheists, of which
no doubt there are many here to day: is the building of their eternal
happiness upon this, I never met with a cross, I never knew what it was to
have a sad day; but to thee I shall only say, It may be thou never had a
joyful day, neither in all thy sinful pleasures under the Sun; but let me
tell thee, it is had divinity to conclude, therefore I am in the way to heaven:
It may be it were better reasoning, (and though I will not say it, yet it
comes nearer truth) I had never a cross, therefore I am going on in the way
to hell: O will thou but consider, what if He be heaping coals upon thy head,
and fatting thee to the day of slaughter? What if this word be your portion?
Eat, drink, and be merry while you are here, for to morrow thou must eternally
die. What are all your pleasures? and what are all your honors: and what are
all your possessions? What are they must bring us back to Christ, and Christ,
send us back to the Law, and deliver us (...) to it, not to the condemning
power (...) as before, but the directing and gu^^ power of it as a rule of
holiness; so the Christians whole life must be a sweet and (...) stant
traveling between Christ and the (...) when thou have broke the Law, fly
(...) Christ to take away thy guilt, and when (...) have closed with Christ,
come ru^^ out again in his strength to perform (...) Law.

The fourth mistake, is, that Christian judge of their estate by the measure of
the graces, more nor by the sincerity of the some Christians, if they find not
love in s^^ a degree, and if they find not repentance such a degree,
immediately they begin^ raze the foundations, and do call their (...) joyments
delusions, and their faith presu^^tion, and their mortification hypocrisy;
(...) I must say this to thee, we should not o^^ weigh our graces in the
balance, but try (...) also by the touch stone, for the smallest (...) of gold
is gold, and the least degree of f^^ i^ alike precious faith, with that the
Apo^^ themselves had.

The fifth ground of mistakes among C^^stians is this. That they compare
themselve more unto the Saints, then they judge (...) themselves by the Word. O
says one, (...) were like David. I would believe, but I (...) not like David,
nor Job, nor Hezeki^^ and therefore there is none of the Saines (...) which I
should go, and if I should call, there (...) none to answer, and why then
should I ^^lieve; I would only say to thee whose ^^jection that is, it is even
David's objecti^n, Psalm. 22.5, 6. Our fathers trusted in thee; (...) they were
excellent men; But what a ^an am I, A worm, and not a man, and yet ^e was put
from that objection: and I would ^^y this, Are ye below him: In what? I ^ope ye
are not below David in necessity: ^ow though ye be below him in grace, if ye ^e
not below him in necessity, ye have so ^uch the more right to believe; for as
we ^id before, necessity gives you a right, and ^he more necessity, the
greater right to be^^eve.

The sixth ground is, That Christians judge of their estate by Christ's part of
the Covenant, and not by their own, rather examin^^g themselves by what Christ
has promised (...) do for them, then by what is left to them ^o do, which
thing if it were headed, would ^ut a close to many of our mistakes and
dis^utings.

Having now laid out some mistakes upon ^^ther hand, the next we would do, is
to ^^opose some considerations to press you (...) guard against these
mistakes, especially ^^e first.

And the first consideration is, That mis^kes about ones interest in Christ,
and assu^^ce, is a most universal and popular evil; is nor one of a city, nor
two of a family, ^t many are mistaken in their interest in Christ: that word,
Prove. 30.12. The^^ a generation that are pure in their own (...) and yet is not
cleansed from their iniquity is not one or two that are under this mist^^ but
it is a generation: And I suppose, the are many of us, we are of this tribe and
^^neration, Matthew. 7.22. He says, many that day shall say unto me, Lord, Lord,
(...) have we not prophesied, and yet he shall (...) unto them, I know you not:
Since it is universal a mistake, I entreat you be m^^ in the search of your
selves, search your ^^selves: Certainly I think, if there were (...) within
this Church one that were under ^^mistake, it should put us all to this, Ma^^
is it I, Master is it I; but how much m^^ since there is a generation of
mistakers, shou^^ it not be our exercise every day to cry o^ is it I.

The second consideration is, That as (...) is a most universal, so also it is
a most i^^ coverable mistake; if ye mistake about the your being in Christ,
there is no making (...) of that mistake; if once ye pass the bord^^ of Time
with this lie in your right hand, (...) am in Christ, there is no hope of
recover eternity will cut off access to make up the mistake: I entreat you go
not down to yo^ grave with this, I am in Christ, when (...) Christ may say, I
know you not: I belie^ it, if ye could have a testimonial subscrib^ by the
hands of all the most eminent a^^ tender Christians that ye have known, (...)
ye are indeed a Saint, and if all the Minist^^ that ever you spoke to should
praise you in ^he gate, and declare you to be a son and daughter of Abraham;
yet when you shall bring up ^our testimonial to Heaven, and the Father shall
read it, and shall ask you where is my Sons Name, if that be nor there, it will
certainly be rejected, and cast over the bar.

Thirdly, It is a soul destroying delusion, this mistake about ones interest in
Christ, is the very ruin of their immortal ^oul, according to that word, Isa.
44.20. (...) deceived heart has led him aside, and what ^s the fruits of it,
so that he cannot deliver his soul, and by consequence it may be said, that
they destroy their soul: I believe it, there ^re many that go to hell in a
chariot of de^usion; we know some Christ guides to Heaven by the gates of
hell, and lets them ^ot see life till they be in sight of hell; but (...) is
true also, there are others whom the ^evil guides to hell, by the very borders
of Heaven, he makes them believe they are welling in the gate of Heaven all
their days, and yet at last they are thrust down to these abitations that are
prepared for the devil and is angels.

Fourthly, If once a person be mistaken about their interest in Christ, they
will have ^hese three notable disadvantanges attending upon them. 1. As long as
he is under this ^istake, he is without all reach of profiting ^y the
Ordinances, for when he hears reaching, he will apply promises, when (...)
should apply threatenings, and upon the other hand, apply threatenings wh^^
should apply promises, and so that (...) should be his medicine, becomes
pois^^ him. 2. As long as he is under this mis^^ it makes him that he cannot
pity not (...) compassion upon himself, that though (...) the most suitable
object of compassion, (...) he knows not what it is to weep over own ruin. 3
Readily all his graces are delusions, all his good motions are but fl^^ and all
his mortification counterfeit, and his tenderness is but the mother of stupid
and therefore guard against mistakes a^^ your interest in Christ I entreat you.

Fifthly, Consider that mistakes ab^^ (...) interest, is a most abiding and
const^^ (...), believe it, if once we mistake^ this, it is one to a hundred if
ever we (...) right again: this is clear, Jer. 8 5. (...) hold fast deceit,
they keep it with both (...) hands: And Isa. 44.20. There is a lie in (...)
right hand, that is, they hold the lie (...) they keep it with all their power;
I (...) if once one be mistaken concerning their terest in Christ, it is hard
to put them (...) it, yea, delusion it is such an abiding the that we find
Christ speaks of it, as (...) would wait upon one before the judg^^^^ seat of
Christ, and as if some would (...) quite their hope of heaven, till Christ
(...) ^nounce that word, Depart from me, I know not, delusion may carry us over
the bo^^ of Time, and lead us in to Eternity.

Sixthly, There is much counterfe^^ ^^igion that is in those days; their is a
painted ^^ith, there is a painted love, there is a pain^ed mortification, and
there is a painted tenderness; some they love shaddows and pistures, and yet
they do not love the very shadow of Christ, and are there nor (...) who think
they are embracing Christ, and yet (...) embracing a delusion and a fancy.

That which thirdly we would speak to from this point, is, to give you some
evidences by which ye may know if the assurance ye have of your being in
Christ, be right or no: Believe it, there are many that draw that conclusion, I
am in Christ, which the devil and their own deceitful heart has drawn, and
Christ never gave consent to it; And I shall propose these seven or eighth
evidences of real assurance, by which ye may discern.

First, A real assurance is a purifying and sanctifying assurance: this is
clear, 1 John (...) 3. Every man that has this hope in him, that is, persuaded
of this that he shall come ^o heaven, He will purify himself, as he is ^ure:
And 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit. O! When a
Christian gets Christ in his arms, he cannot but cry forth, What have I to
do any more with idol: Wh^^ he has once gotten Christ in his arms, he will
answer every tentation that he meets with this, I am not mine own, I am
bought with a price, I cannot now dispose of my self: and if your assurance of
going to ^^ven be not a purifying assurance, be pers^^ed of it, it is but the
devils pillow sowe^der your arm holes: Is it possible a p^^ can be assured of
heaven, and not study linesse, can such a delufion as this o^ take you.

Secondly, A real assurance puts (...) Christian to a pressing and earnest
pur^^ after communion and fellowship with G^^ it is possible for one to be
assured, and (...) to be saying, he is sick of love: this is c^^ Song 2.16, 17.
My beloved is mine, and I (...) his; and immediately follows, Turn the O my
beloved, and be like a roe, or a young h^^ upon the mountains of Bether: And it
is cle^^ Song. 7.10, 11. I am my beloveds, and (...) desire is toward me: and
what follower upon that, She comes and inviteth Chr^^ O come down with me to
the fields, let (...) lodge in the villages. O when gave (...) Christ such an
invitation as this, O precio^ Christ, let us lodge in the villages, and (...)
down to the secret places of the field: a^ Psalm. 63.1. My God, there is his
assurance and immediately follows upon that, Ea^^ will I seek thee, my soul
thirsts after the as in a dry parched land where no water (...) There is a
pressing desire after communi^^ But I would ask you, Are there not m^^ here who
have the hope of heaven (to the apprehension) and yet the desire of c^^munion
with Christ was never with th^^ I desire to say to thee, (be who thou (...) Be
not deceived, God is not mocked, that which thou sowest, thou shall also reap.
I think there are some of us, we would let Christ leave in heaven many days
without giving him one visit, if He would let us alone: But O if we were within
sight of our interest in Christ, how often would this be our complaint when he
were absent, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid
him; or my idol has carried me away from Him, and I know not where to find Him.

Thirdly, Assurance of our being in Christ, will put us to the exercise of
praise; believe it, I think this is one of the most searching evidences of
assurance: There are some Christians they will be convinced for the neglect of
duty of prayer, but for the neglect of the duty of praise, they never have one
conviction; and I tell you the reason of it, prayer is a selfish grace, (so to
speak) but praise is a denying grace, prayer secketh, but praise gives, Exodus
15.2. He is my God, I will prepare him an habitation, and he is my fathers God,
I will exalt him. Psalm. 118.28. He is my God, I will praise him, he is my God,
I will exalt him: What needs David these repetitions, might not one serve? No
says he, I would even spend my days in this, My God, my God, there is much of
heaven in that word, My God, and love commits many sweet hatoligies: Now I
say to thee, was thou ever put to the heart exercise of praise, by this
assurance that thou have this is an evidence indeed, but ala^, ma^^ of us
cannot say it.

Fourthly, A person that lives wi^^^ sight of his interest, Christ is
matchless (...) him, as is clear, Song 2.3. I sat down (...) his shadow,
there is faith and assurance of (...) and what accompanies that, As the a^^^
tree among the trees of the wood, so is my (...) loved among the sons: Christ
has no^ (...) match, says the Spouse, in his sweetness^ his power, his
beauty; and his usefulness (...) above all.

Fifthly, Real assurance is a humbli^^ thing, the assurance of a Christian make
(...) him to sit low in the dust: Was not Jac^^ low in his own eyes, when he
cried out, (...) am less then the least of all thy mercies; Wha^ (...) was not
David low in his own eyes, wh^^ he ^^^ke that word, What am I, and what (...)
^hers house, that thou have brought me (...); and was not Paul a low man in
(...) own eyes, Ephesians. 3.8.16. I am less then the least of all thy Saints, and
when he cry^^ out, I am the chief of sinners: The assuranc^ that is real, it
will make a Christian to (...) down in the dust, and cry out, Woe is me, (...)
am a man of polluted lips.

Sixthly, Real assurance will put him (...) take much pleasure and delight in
the go^^^ about of duties: that word, Psalm. 40 (...) ^y God, says he, that is
his assurance, (...) ^^^ently he subjoyneth, I delight to do (...), O Lord,
this he speaks of himself, (...) off, and likewise as a type of Ch^^^ Psalm.
119.115. Depart from me evil do^rs, ^or I will keep the commandments of my
God; I believe it, the love of Christ when it is much in exercise, it will
constrain us to our ^uty: and therefore this proud transpor^ing assurance in
these days, that sets men above all duties and Ordinances, and make (...)
them count the Gospel as well as the Law (...) beggarly rudiments, and cry out
to their (...) ^ours, Stand aback, for I am holier then them, must needs be a
delusion.

Lastly, There are these three (...) of a real assurance, it is a begotten
^^^rance, (...) is a living assurance, and it is a constraining assurance. The
first two properties of (...) are set down in that, 1 Pet. 1.2. He has
begotten us to a lively hope; Who begat that assurance in thee? I suppose some
have assurance, and it was begotten without travel; but if Christ be not the
father of thy assurance, it will evanish and pass away. And, secondly, it must
be a living assurance, some hearts are dead as a stone, and yet they say they
have the hope of heaven. And, thirdly, (...) must be a constraining assurance,
it will ^ut the Christian to do what he commands, ^ea, if it were the most
pleasant Isaac that we have, if he commands us to sacrifice it, we would put
a knife to the throat of it, and ^e willing to offer it up.

Now after all these evidences, I desire (...) ^^ve a report from you
concerning your ^^ate; What think ye of your selves, are (...) Christ, or no; I
suppose, if Christ (...) come here to day, and put us all to the (...) but
these that are in Christ, we would (...) a thin assembly: I confess, I wonder,
(...) that word does not make us to walk (...) sadness, Many are called, but
few are chos^ Now I ask this question at you all, as in (...) fight of God, and
as ye will one day ans^^ unto him that will be your Judge; W^^^ think ye of
your selves? Is there none (...) that can give a present positive answer (...)
this, Are ye in Christ: I suppose this, if were to go round them that are here,
(...) ask, are ye in Christ, are ye, and ye in Christ O! I doubt much if there
should be m^^ negative answers within the doors, we have so strong a faith some
of us, that since (...) were born, we never doubted of it; But (...) think
(without commending doubting) (...) may say, the faith that thou never doubte^
of, is too like a delusion, and the faith tha^ thou never took pains to keep,
and yet i^ kept it self, that is too like a delusion, the faith that never
knew what it was to put the^ to real seeking of Christ, is too like a delusio^
But let me close with this, be your esta^^ what it will, search and come away;
I thi^^ that is one of the most Gospel invitations th^^ is in all the
Scripture. Lam. 3.34. Let us sea^^ and try our ways, and turn again unto the
Lord: When thou have searched, come away for I tell thee this there will be
nothing th^^ will commend thee to Christ so much as necesity, and I hope there
is none of you, but (...) have enough of this, and know it, if ye (...) not
come to Christ, he will compel you to come, but it shall not be for your
advantage to stay away, till ye be compelled. O persons that are out of Christ,
Come away; O persons that are in Christ, Come away; we must preach that word,
Come away, unto you, as long as ye are here, till ye come and be fixed as a
pillar in the house of God, and go no more out, O study to be near him: O
Christian did thou ever think upon this, and say with thy self, O when shall
I have immediate embraces of blessed Christ? When shall there be nothing
between my heart and Him? till then, we never get Christ near enough, there is
always something between Him and us, till we be above the Clouds: O these
immediate soul infoldings and imbracings of Christ: Are ye never sending a
messenger to heaven, desiring a pass to go away that ye may enjoy them, and
are ye not longing for the day, when the waters of Jordan shall divide
themselves, and the ransomed of the Lord shall pass through* Now let us sing
praises to our King, sing praises, for he has gone up with a shout, and shall
come again, sing praises to our King, sing praises.

SERMON IX.
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith? prove^ your own
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ i^ in you, except ye
be reprobates?
I Think ere long, there are many that (...) passes under the notion of
Professors, (...) that the veriest atheist when he behold^th there walk, may
cry out, Are thou also become like unto one of us: Are there not many here that
are in a golden dream, and in (...) fools paradise, that dream they eat, and
behold, when they awake, they shall be hungry (...) therefore I think it is
incumbent upon us, to search and examine our state, and condition; profanity
has slain its thousands, but delusion and presumption has slain their ten
thousands. It was an ancient complain^ of Christ. Luke 12.57. And why even of
(...) judge ye not what is right; I am per^waded of this, there are many
decreets (...) peace past upon earth, that are never rati^^ed in heaven, there
are many that cry out ^^^^ternesse of death is past, whom yet (...) the sword
of His Justice, shall ^ew (...) (...) our eyes. We told you (...) last
occasion, that we spoke upon these words, there were six things we intended to
speak from them, of the first three we have spoken.

That which we intended to speak to at this time, is, That there is much soul
advantage and spiritual gain, that does redound to the Christian, by the
distinct persuasion of his interest in Christ; this we gathered from Paul's
doubling the command of searching and trying themselves, as if he had said, it
is a business that will be so much for your advantage, that it is incumbent
for you to search and try diligently: And for further clearing of the point, I
shall only give these three places, Rev. 2.17. I will give unto them a white
stone, and in the stone a new name, written that no man knows, but he that
has received it: By the new name, and the white stone, is understood
assurance, and the intimation of it to the soul: This indeed is such a mercy,
that I defy any to make language of it, no man knows it, much less can he
express it, but he that is the professor of it, and that place, Isa. 62 2.3. I
will give unto them a new name, which the mouth of the Lord will name: O what a
name must t^^t be which the mouth of the Lord will name: I think, what he
gives, must be one of the noblest names that ever was given, all the styles
and titles under heaven cannot equal it. And, thirdly, we see David in the 18
Psalm. fo^^d much sweetness and advantage in this, when nine times he has that
word, my: My strength, my rock, my foretresse (...) my deliverer, my strength
and my buckler, (...) horn of my salvation, and my high tower, (...) David,
what needs all those Mys, Dav^^ would answer us, O! he is so sweet in
himself, but O! much sweeter to me, when I pu^ to that possessive note, My.

Now to speak more particularly to the^^ advantages of assurance, The first is,
That a person that is assured of his interest in Christ, he is much in desiring
communion with Christ: Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, (there is his
assurance) where th^^ feedest, and where thou make thy flock to rest at noon,
there is desire of communion, and Song 7.10, 11. My beloved is mine, and his
desire is toward me, there is her assurance, and immediately follows, Come
my beloved, let us go forth into the fields, let us lodg^ in the villages,
there her desire of communion, Song 2.16, 17. My beloved is mine, and I am his,
and what f^lloweth upon that, He feeds among the lillies, until the day
break, and the shadows fly away. Turn my beloved, and be as a roe, or a wild
heart upon the mountains of B^ther, that is i^ short, let me have sweet
correspondency and fellowship with thee, till the day of Eternity shall come
(...) I think the desires of an assured Christian they are like the grave, they
cry continually Give, give, and they never say, it is enough What is the
reason, ye seek so little after fe^lowship with Christ, it is even this, ye
(...) not persuaded of your interest in him; (...) lieve it, if once ye had
attained to the blessed length, as to cry out, Christ is mine, it (...) be a hell
upon earth for you to live at such a distance with him as ye do for the most
part: O but assurance makes absence from Christ an unsupportable burden, Psalm.
22.1. My God, my God, there is assurance, and immediately follows his
complaint, Why hiddest thou thy self from me, Song 3.1, 2, 3. that word, Him
whom my soul loves, made her to weep so much under absence from Christ, and
Joh. 20.13 when the Angels ask the question at Mary, Woman why weepest thou? I
think she thought it a needless question, and she tells the cause of it, They
have taken away my Lord: I think her heart was at her mouth when she pronounced
these two words, My Lord, she spoke them with a great deal of emphasis and
force, could ye resent absence with Christ so little, if ye were assured he
were yours. I confess, it is no wonder when persons loss that which is not
their own, that they weep not much for the loss of it; but O! to loss that
which is our own, it makes it a cross and a burden to us.

Secondly, It makes the soul to have a high and matchless esteem of precious
Christ, Song 5.10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chief among ten thousand:
O says the Spouse, I never saw his like, and I shall never see his like again;
there is much in that My; interest makes her look upon Christ with another eye
nor she would have done, strangers look upon him but as a tree pla^^^ at the
sand, 1 Pet. 2.7. To you that beli^^ Christ is precious. not to every one: A^^
Song 2.2. I sat down under his shadow wi^^ great delight, the reason is,
interest in th^^ words going before, As the apple tree among the trees of the
wood, so is my beloved among the sons; yea, assurance will make ever^ thing in
Christ exceeding pleasant to the soul: as is clear, Song 5 16. My beloved (...)
altogether lovely, or, he is all desires. I tell you what assurance will do, it
will make Christ's person pleasant and precious to the soul, it will make
Christ's Natures pleasant to the soul, it will make Christ's Offices pleasant to
the soul, it will make Christ's Promises pleasant to the soul, it will make
Threatenings pleasant to the soul, it will make the smell of Christ's Garments
pleasant to the soul, and it will make the kisses of His Mouth pleasant to the
soul: O says the assured Christian, there is nothing of Christ but it is most
pleasant, and is all desires (...) His Threatenings are pleasant, they are the
wounds of a friend, and His kisses are pleasant, they are better then wine, His
Name i^ is pleasant, it is as precious ointment powered Forth, His smellings are
most delightsome^ whose countenance is as Lebanon, excellent (...) the cedars:
O to embrace a married Christ, how pleasant is it to the soul; What make^^^ you
to have so low thoughts of Christ (...) this, the want of assurance that He
(...) your Husband.

Thirdly, Assurance will make the Christian patiently to submit to every cross
and sad dispensation he meets with: this is clear, Heb. 10.34. They took with
joy the spoiling of their goods, and what made them do so, They hoped for a
better inheritance, and a more enduring substance: I tell you^ assurance, it
will answer all crosses with this, Christ is mine; when they are afflicted,
assurance will lift up its face, and cry out, Christ it mine, and when they are
reproached, they will comfort themselves with this, Christ i^ mine, I can put
on the Lord Jesus.

Fourthly, Assurance will keep you from apostasy and defection from Christ, 2
Pet. 1.10. Make your calling and election sure, and if ye do this, (says he)
ye shall never fall, Heb. 3.11, 12. It is there set down as a fruit of the evil
heart of misbelief, it makes us depart from the living God, but on the
contrary, assurance knitteth the soul to Christ by a threefold cord, which is
not easily broken. Believe it, the assured Christian can cry out with much
confidence of faith, My moutain stands strong, I shall never be moved; the
assured Christian (...) out with much cheerfulness: In God (...) I praise his
word, in God have I put my trust, I will not be afraid what flesh can do unto
me* yea, he can sweetly sing in the very mouth of danger. The Lord is my light
(...) salvation, Whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of
whom shall I be afraid, Psalm. 27.1.

Fifthly, Assurance keeps all the (...) of the spirit green and flourishing,
it is (...) refreshing dew upon our branches, whi^^ makes every grace sweetly
to blossom (...) its season. 1. It stirs up the exerci^ of love: O how
vigorous are the actings (...) love, when a Christian can cry out, My (...)
loved is m^ne, and I am his, Song. 1.13. M^beloved, there is her assurance. He
is a bund (...) of myrrh, and shall lie all night between (...) breasts, that
is, as long as time shall last, I shall never have Christ out of my heart,
there is love, 1 John 4.19. We loved him, because he loved us first; our hearts
are naturally cold, but love kindles love, the sense of his love to us,
puts our hearts into a heavenly flame toward him again. 2. Assurance
keeps up the exercise of prayer, it is the assured Christian that can pray
best, and to best advantage, and in these three things especially, is prayer
helped by assurance. First, It helps in the point of boldness O but the
assured Christian can go boldly to the Throne of grace, Crying Abba father, and
my Lord and my God. Secondly, It helps our diligence in prayer, Psa^. 63.1. O
my God, there is assurance, early will I seek thee, there is his diligence as
the fruit thereof. Thirdly, It helps the fervency of prayer, as in that same
place, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, there is his
fervency as another fruit of his assurance. 3. Assurance keeps In exercise
and life, the grace of mortification: as is clear by comparing, 2 Cor. 4. verse
last, with 2 Cor. 5.1. We look not after the things that are seen: O Paul, what
aileth you, may ye not take a look of the world, O says Paul, and would ye
know the ground of it, We know if this house of this tabernacle were dissolved,
we have a house not made with hands, eternally in the heavens: my house and my
treasure is in heaven, I must have my heart there, and my eyes also: Would ye
know what would stay your pursuit after the world, study to have the assurance
of your interest in Christ continually with you. And 4. It keeps in exercise
the grace of humility; there is nothing will keep a Christian so humble as
assurance, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Ephesians. 3.8.
there he is all in exalting grace, and debasing himself. It is the misbeliever
and discouraged person that dwells nearest pride; Believe it, misbelief is
big with child of pride and apostasy, these are the two children which that
fruitful mother will bring forth. And, 5. it will help the grace of Repentance:
Would ye know what would make the Christian to repent, it is even this, to take
Christ in our arms and call him ours, Zech. 12.10. They shall look unto him,
that is, there faith and they shall mourn as one mourns for his only son: I
think it is known by experience, the soul never weeps more tenderly under the
conviction of sin, then when he has Christ in his arms, and can say, He is
(...): O how sweetly does they, (...) complain, there is not a fight of Christ
their own, when they have offended, b^^ breaks all their heart in pieces, and
i^ as a sword piercing into the bones, w^ ^^ey cry out, O what a fool was ^ to
offe^ ^uch a precious One, in whom I had so mu^^ ^terest; Was it not sense of
interest the made Mary wash the feet of Christ with h^ ^ears. Lastly, It will
keep in exercise the grace of Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. It is faith wh^t ^^keth one to
rejoice with joy unspeakab^^ ^^d full of glory: Would ye know w^^ ^our graces
are withered? would ye kno^ ^hy all the pleasant plants of God with (...) soul
are decayed? It is this, ye live with (...) sight of your interest in Christ,
believe i^ ((...) so I may speak) assurance will be a w^^ tering to your graces
every morning, and r^ fresh them every hour, it being as a chan^^ through which
divine influence is conveig^^ (...) to the increase of grace, and especiall^
(...) joy.

^he sixth advantage that comes in to the (...) ^ian by assurance of his
interest i^ Christ, is, That it makes death exceedi^^ pleasant and comfortable
to the soul; wh^^^ (...) ^^th douth the king of terrors, and wh^ (...) unto
us? Is it not this, we (...) (...) under a cloud: the assured (...) take death
in his arms, and cry (...) come, O friend: the assured Christi^^ (...) he sees
the chariots his father (...) does with old Jacob rejoice, (...) (...) 23 When
I walk through the valley of ^^e, shadd^w of death, I will fear no evil: that
brought you that length David? I tell ^on why says he, for God is with me,
ver. 4. (...) think I need not fear any thing, when I ^ave God in my company:
It is the assured ^hristian that can cry out, Why should I fea^ ^eath, should I
not laugh at destruction: I ^^ink indeed, the assured Christian neede^h ^ot
fear death, because death to him is the ^eath of all his lusts, the funeral of
all his ^orrows: and is not the day of death his co^onation day, his marriage
day, the day of ^is triumph, and of his entering into rest, and why then should
he fear it.

The seventh advantage is, That a Christi^n being in the state of assurance,
can put the ^ighest account upon the smallest mercy that ^e meets with from
God: the assured Chri^ian look^th upon every mercy as a wonder; (...) is the
assured Christian that cries out, I (...) less then the least of all thy
mercies: there (...) not a mercy he meets with, were it but a ^^op of cold
water, but if he can read this ^n it, that it came from my Husband, and from ^y
Father, it will be better to him then the weerest wine.

Lastly, Assurance does exceedingly help (...) to cheerfulness in obedience: O
that is ^^ema^kable connection that Paul has, Act. ^.23 The Lord whose I am,
and whom I ^^ve: That pass^ge also. 2 Cor. 5.14. is ve^ observable, The love of
Christ constrains ^, etc. Why art ^hou so painful a Minister Paul? Why?
Know thou no man after th flesh, are not led by carnal interests, nor at
sections, art so busy and diligent as all the world counts thee mad? Why?
(says he) love will not let me rest if I would be l^^e or carnal, or fold my
hands to sleep: the love of Christ does always sound that in my ears, that I
was dead, and he has died for me, that henceforth I should not live unto my
self, but to Him who died for me: Now to him who is the first and the last, wh^
was dead, and is alive for evermore, We give praise.

FINIS.

