Great News from Lymerick. An ACCOUNT of the Late Action of Capt. COLE, IN THE
River SHANNON. BEING ^elation of his Taking a French Frigate; as also, of his
Barring up (...) Sale more of French Ships. WITH Account of the Famous
Baldarick Lord OF Donnel's Terms of Submission to Their Majesty's, for Himself,
and Followers To which is added, The late Defeat of the Rebels in the North, by
Colonel Ramsey.
LICENSED, According to Order. 1691.

CAptain Cole, with the Squadron under his Command, and the Artillery-Ships,
arriving in the Bay of Galway, the General sent Orders for their immediate
Sailing to the River Shannon, (as you have already heard:) which said Orders
being effectually executed, he was not long arrived in the said River, before a
French-Frigate taking them ^or a Fleet of their own Nation, fell in with them
near a Place called, Car^ickaholt and was made a Prize; The Ship was very
Richly Laden, having among other Rich Goods, all the Baggage, Coaches, Charging
Horses, ^ate, etc. belonging to the late Monsieur St. Ruth: And, at the same
time, two other Vessels, wherein were Sarsefield's, and several other Ladies of
Quality, with all their rich Effects, very narrowly escaped; which being not
far behind them, and understanding the Fate of their Companion, made all the
Sail they could to Lymerick, for which the Wind very much favored them, and we
hear there are above Thirty Sail more, ready Laden for France, whither they
intended before now, had they not been prevented by Captain Cole's Sqadron. On
Board of these Ships, were most of the French-Officers; whom, as it is said, are
resolved to leave the Kingdom, if possible they can get away, upon the Occasion
of the great Heats and disagreements between Them, and the Irish Nobility and
Officers at Lymerick.

Baldarick, Lord OF Donnel, one of the greatest, and most Ancient Fa^^lies of
the Irish, even equal, in Antiquity, with Those of the OF Neal (...) ^^d whom
the Irish Commonalty Term a Prophet, they having, at (...) pretended Prophesy,
which goes current among them, That this (...) ^^an shall be a deliverer of
their Country, at a time when its brough^ (...) lowest Ebb; and they think now
it is to be fulfilled; for which (...) they invited him, by many Solicitations,
from Spain; where he had sided for many Years. This Baldarick has lately
offered to bring in the Arms of his numerous Followers, which are in the County
of M^ and parts adjacent; and has made some other Proposals to the Government,
provided they will suffer him to take Three Thousand of his (...) to Flanders,
who shall be there employed in Their Majesty's Service, (...) also, Sir Walter
Blake, Colonel Bodkin, and other Irish (...) Colonels fire to Transport their
Regiments.

On the 5th. instant, Their Majesty's Army, under the Command Lieut. General
Ginkle, Decamped from the Town of Birr, and came (...) Night to a Place called
Burraskeen, from which Place they Decamped next Morning, and in the Evening
they came to Nenagh, which (...) had been some time before quitted by
Bdrigadier Carrol, (as you have (...) ready heard) here they rested a little,
and on the 8th. they came to (...) Town of Carrick English, which is in the
Neighborhood of Lymerick, (...) but 5 Miles from the said City, and from
hence, some say, our Gen^^^^ will send a Trumpet to Summon the Governor.

From the North, we have an Account that Lieut. Col. Alexander Ra^^^^^ of
Colonel Venner's Regiment, with 100 of the Army, and about 400 (...) the
Militia, lately made a descent into the Counties of Mayo and Sligo, (...) view
the posture of the Rebels thereabouts; and having detatched (...) Horse and
Dragoons from our Party, to discover if Colonel Sheld^^^^ Horse (as 'twas
said) were in this part of the Country: Lieutenant ^^lonel R^^sey, with the
rest Marched to Ballysidara-Bridge, where he (...) Sir T. O Regan, with 80
Horse, and about 200 Foot very advantagion (...) Posted, to hinder our
Progress; notwithstanding, our Men attach (...) them, at which time Sir Francis
Hamilton, Governor of the County (...) Donegall, coming in with some of his
Militia Horse, and a Troop of ^^lonel Winn's Regiment of Dragoons of the Army;
we pursued the Re^^^^^ for some considerable way, Killed about 40 of them, and
took 19 Pri^^ners; among whom were two Lieutenants, and an Ensign; we had (...)
one Man wounded in this Action, and a Reformed Lieutenant, who fo^lowed the
Chase too far, taken Prisoner: By the time this Action was ^^ded, our Horse
which were detatched to look after Sheldon's, ^etur^ with great Booty, which
they had taken from the Enemy, and brought (...) with them several English Men,
who had been long under the Slavery (...) those Rebels, who taking the
opportunity of our Convoy, brought (...) their Famelies and Stocks.

Letters that came in this day from Bristol, Dated on Saturday the 15th.
instant, (...) an Account of the Arrival there of their Virginia Fleet, and
that the great Flee^ Bound for London, from the said place, was but few Leagues
behind them, and (...) this Morning an Express Arrived from Biddiford, who came
out some time after (...) Post; by whom we have the happy and welcome News of
the Arrival of the great Virginia Fleet in that Road, consisting of 160 Sail;
which Fleet, besides other gre^^ advantages, will bring a vast Sum of Money to
Their Majesty's for Custom, (...) day 300000 l.

London, Printed for N. Kettlewel, by St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1691.


