GENERAL SAILING-ORDERS According to which Masters as have a Mind to sail are
to ruled by.



At ROTTERDAM,

By Isaac van Lochem, Bookseller in the Milstreete, by order of Their
Lordships, the Lords of the Admirality upon the Maze.

GENERAL SAILING-ORDERS.
I. Sailing out of a Road by day.

WHen the Capt: or Comander intends to sail from any Road, he shall put up a
blew Ancient at the Stern, and fire one gun.

II. To sail being at Sea.

If the Capt: intends to sail at Sea, he shall loozen his M^zzen, and put up a
blew Ancient without shooting.

III. Lights put out by night.

In the Night the Capt: shall constantly keep ^ Lights at Stern, and each
Shipmaster one, which shall go about by turns, according to the names
hereunder mentioned, and that Shipper that is at night to carry the light,
shall that afternoon set up his Coullers at Stern, to know whose turn it is,
and none shall offer in the night to sail by that Light-Ship, upon forfeiture
of six Gilders to the Poor, and the Capt: with the Lightship shall sail with
the slowest sailing Ships, by which the Capt: shall continue constantly with,
and the Light-Ship just before him.

IV. Sail by nigt

If the Captain intends to sail by night, he shall set up 3 Lights upon the
Poop, and fire one gun, the other Ships shall also set up one Light, and when
the Captain being under sail, take in his third Light; the other Ships then
shall every one take in their Lights, except he whose turn it is to carry the
Light.

V. Tack by day

When the Captain intends to tack about by day, he shall put up a Jack at the
Stern in place of an Ancient, to give one another a good opening without
damnifying.

VI. Tack by nigt

When the Capt. thinks fit to tack about by Night, he shall set up 3. Lights,
and fire 2 guns, and if any of the Shippers has a mind to tack sooner, he shall
set up 2 Lights, and yet notwithstanding every Master shall be bound to set up
one Light, to prevent all damages upon the forfeit of ten Gilders.

VII. anchor by nigt

If the Capt. thinks to ancker by night, he shall hang up a Light in the
Foreshrowds, fire one gun, and continue his 2 Lights at stern, and then every
Master set up one light, and another to hang in the Fore*shrowds, to prevent
damage to one another, and make a good opening, and when the Capt. continues
his 2 Lights at stern being come to an anchor, every Ship shall also continue
his light.

VIII. Course changed by night.

If the Capt. changes his course by Night, he shall then by those his 2. Lights
at stern hang one Light on the Mizzen shrowds, and fire one gun, the Masters
then shall every one set up one Light, and he that Carries the Light shall set
up 2 and when the Captains Light shall have hung 2 glasses on the shrowds, it
shall then be taken down, and so follow each other conveniently.

IX. In danger by night.

If by Night any of the Masters perceive harm at hand he shall Make as much
noise as he can and make toward the Convoyer as well with shooting as with
fail's fire or with any thing that will make a Noise.

X. by night to lay the Foresaile to the Mast.

If the Capt thinks fit to lay the foresaile to the mast he shall by 3 Lights
at stern with firing 3 guns at some distance from each shot and so drive
together.

XI. At night by Mainesaile.

If the Cap: thinks fit to sail with the mainesaile the Masters then shall
constantly carry one Light to keep together the better. The appointed one
Light-Ship 2 Lights, and the Capt: 3 Lights upon forfeit of 25 Gilders to the
poor.

XII. In distress.

If any of the Ships become to be leckee, losing masts, sails or yards, or any
other inconvenience (which God defend) he shall if by day set up a Bonet or
Canvis on the round top, and if by night set up as many Lights as he can, upon
which the Capt: and if possible all the rest of the Ships shall steer to him
to assist him to the utmost of their power upon the forfeiture of 6 Gilders.

XIII. Stragled by day.

If the Ships straggle from one another, and by day fall out of sight from each
other, he that is to wether shall hale up his foresaile, and missen to discover
his Ship, which the leeward Ship seeing, shall hale or clue up his Sail and
Missen, and the doggers and hoys their Foresails, and missen by which they
shall know one another, and come together.

XIV. Stragled by night.

If the same happens by night, then 2 lights shall be set up at Stern and upon
Deck to make false fire the one Ship haling the other shall answer from
whence the Ship, to which the other shall answer

XV. Perceiving Land by Night.

He that espies any Land o^ shalow Water by night, he shall set up 2 lights at
stern with a Light in the maine Top, and sail to the Convoyer, who then shall
give the needeful sign to tack about, and if it happeas by day, he shall set
up a Princes Flag (a Dutch Ancient) at stern, and sail by the Convoyer.

XVI. The Captain desiring Masters aboard.

If the Capt: has a mind to have the Masters a board to propose any thing
necessary for the voyage, he shall set up a white Flag at stern, and fire one
gun, upon the forfeit of six Gilders.

XVII The Captain desirings to speak with the Masters.

If the Captain has a mind to speak with the Masters, he shall set up a
pendant behind upon the Mizzen peake, and if the Masters have a mind to speak
with the Captain, they shall hoise up their ancient to the ancient staff
double.

XVIII. To drive by night in fine weather.

If the Captain thinks fit with fine weather by night to drive by, he then
shall put up 2 lights behind on the poop, and hoise up a light to the
Flagstaff, and fire 2 guns short upon one another.

XIX. After driving to sail again:

If the Captain after driving intends to sail again, he shall then set up 2
Lights on the poop again, and one Light on the Flag-staf, and fire 2 great
Cannons.

XX. To tak in misty weather.

In the first place the Ships in our Fleet shall keep close together when
they perceive the mist or fog accoming, and being misty shall be very careful
not to make to much sail unless we are forced to a lee shore, and when we are
to tack the Capt: shall fire 2 guns short upon the other, and tack about to
most advantage from the lee shoore.

XXI. In Mist to anchor.

If we are necessited through misty Weather to anchor, the Capt: shall fire 3
guns at some distance from one another, and constantly be beating the drum.

XXII. To sail in a Mist.

And if it be thought fit to set sail again with the mainsaile, the sign then
shall be by 3 guns fired quick upon each other, thereby to get from the lee
shore by the best tack about, or steer such a course, where we are designed
unto, and shall be obleiged every evening to sail below the most Leeward-Ship,
upon forfeit of 25 Gilders to the Poor.

XXIII.

And if the Captain thinks fit with misty weather to drive, and to clue up the
sails, he shall then fire 4 guns in order after each other, and in driving and
sailing often to beat the Drum, or sound the Trumpet, and sometimes fire a
Musket till the Marchants-Ships hear, and answer with a Musket, or also to
beat the Drum, and make what noise they can to keep together, to which the
Masters are to rule themselves thereafter.

The Errors of the Printer are so few as may, be corrected by the sense.


