Columbia University in the City of New York LIBRARY

seal of Columbia University SIGILLVM ^ COLLEGII ^ COLVMBIAE ^ ^ EBORACI
In LVMINE TVO VIDEBIMVS LVMEN

1 PET 11 12 etc.

THE SELIGMAN LIBRARY OF ECONOMICS PURCHASED BY THE UNIVERSITY 1929

A modest Vindication of the Case of John Giffard Gent. And an Answer to the
Reply of the Preservators of Deane Forest.
With certain Reasons why those Iron Works should not be demolished until his
stock be wrought out.
1 IT seems not a little strange to the Vindicator, That the Remonstrance of
Parliament of December. 15. 1641. should be used as an Argument for destruction
of his Iron Works in the Forest of Deane, which by a special Ordinance of
Parliament of October 27. 1645. (notwithstanding the said Remonstrance) were
thought fit by the judgment of the same Parliament to be continued: and by the
same Ordinance assigned wood for the supply thereof. And though the Parliament
did give order to demolish all the Iron Works in the said Forest, and yet were
afterward pleased upon just Grounds and Reasons to continue Mr. Giffards, it
ought not to seem strange to any well-affected persons, especially the
Preservators of that Forest, what the Parliament upon subsequent debate and
mature deliberation have done therein for relief of the said Giffard in
prosecution of the said Ordinance. 2. To the second: And it cannot be construed
less then superlative boldness in the Penner of that Reply, to render the
Order and Result of Parliament as an act of very great injustice, that other
Works that were built upon the inheritance of private Gentlemen in the Forest
were pulled down, though not one of the Owners of the said Works held theirs,
or had wood assigned them by special Ordinance of Parliament, or did petition
for relief, although they were not ignorant the said Vote did concern all other
the Iron Works in the said Forest, as well as the said Mr. Giffards. Besides
the Preservators well know that other Works are continued in the Forest which
have spent the Forest wood, and that one of the said Preservators has lately
begun to build a Furnace within that Forest, which cannot long be kept going
without making use of the Forest wood. And whosoever will without prejudice
view the printed Case of the said Giffard, and the Parliaments Order of
Reference to the honorable Committee of Revenue thereupon, and their Report to
the House, will find sufficient Reasons given for continuance of those Works
till his stock be wrought out, and not grounded upon bare pretenses and
allegations, as by the Preservators is suggested. 3. And why a design of their
progenitors driven on for fifty years and upwards, whom they magnify to have
been men of public spirits, should now (for private interest) be drawn into
example to the utter ruin of a particular person, that has had no wood in the
said Forest but what he has justly paid for, nor has any power or potency
for his protection but the mercy and justice of Parliament, against such
powerful and prevalent Adversaries. And why the just and pious intentions of
the Parliament to relieve a distressed person, should be prejudicated or
interpreted a dashing of the hopes of thousands pretended to be greater
sufferers for the Parliament then Mr. Giffard, he understands not the reason of
that assertion. Neither indeed can it be made appear, that any one of those
thousands (which in truth are but few hundreds) have in any measure
proportionably been so great sufferers as the Vindicator. And there was never
heretofore any president of pulling down Iron Works before the stock was
wrought out, nor any Petition preferred to that end, till of late most
injuriously against Mr. Giffard, whereby it plainly appears there is a sly
design and self-interest driven on by the Petitioners, beyond the preservation
of wood and timber, which was the chief pretense. 4. And is it not a high
presumption in the Penners of that Reply, to assert that what the Parliament
has done or shall do in altering their resolutions, is in a charitable
gratification to the insinuations of a private man, thereby adjudging and
censuring the past and future transactions of Parliament upon bare and specious
pretenses, though in truth founded upon the grounds of justice, equity and
reason, an unparalleled boldness without president or example: And though the
Parliament has been pleased to refer the Petition of the said Giffard to a
Committee of theirs, to consider how the woods of the Forest may be preserved
from consumption by reason of his Iron-works, and how the Petitioner may have
relief, and report their Opinions to that honorable House; yet in opposition
to the said Order of Parliament, they insinuate that the said Giffards just
requests are pretentions rather then real truths, thereby endeavoring to
obstruct the Report, and hinder relief to the Petitioner, till the said
business be examined, though they very well know that if that Report be not
made before the 25. of this instant March, all his works will be pulled down to
the ground, and he thereby totally ruined before he can be heard; and rest not
there, but state an abstruse question, whether it be charitable or honorable to
gratify the desires of one man, to the apparent loss of the State, and
disadvantage of so well deserving a people. But wherein this apparent loss to
the State, or disadvantage to the people lies, they neither do nor can set
forth. For, sufficient security being given that no wood or timber in that
Forest shall be cut or diminished by Mr. Giffard his Servants or Workmen for
his use upon any pretense whatsoever, during the time to be granted him for
working out his stock, which is the Order and Report of the said honorable
Committee of the Revenue, and their opinion that he may have a years time from
Lady day next allowed for that purpose. It is impossible there can be any loss
to the State, or disadvantage to the people; and therefore admires the Penman
does not blush to suggest so great a fallacy, Whereas the continuing of those
Works till the stock (already bought) be wrought out, will be of very great
advantage to this Commonwealth, in keeping down the price of iron, which (since
the late demolishing of some Works in that Forest) is much advanced, and will
be raised higher, if those Works should be suddenly demolished. 5. The fifth is
fully answered in the second Article.
Answer to the Objections against the several Reasons in the Case of Mr.
Giffard, for obtaining time to work out his Stock.
1. FIrst it is alleged, that the greater part of the wood he has coal'd was
timber, but does not nominate any place where the said timber was coal'd, or of
whom it was bought: if the Author and penner of it would have it supposed to be
timber of the Forest of Dean, that is both improbable and untrue,
notwithstanding his pretense of proof by the Commission; for the Surveyor and
four Preservators of the Forest formerly appointed and authorized by the
Honorable Committee of the Revenue to set out the Fellet, and deliver the wood
which was by them sold to Mr. Giffard, (which said Officers in the places where
they live are esteemed by their Neighbors to be men of sufficiency and
integrity) did first bound out the Fellet, and afterward taking the advice of
a Ship-Carpenter, and of a House-Carpenter, did mark all the best timber trees
to stand, leaving the residue to be cut down by his workmen for the use of the
Iron Works; and some of the said Preservators were daily in the said Fellet,
where if they found any tree or considerable piece of a tree after cutting down
that proved to be timber, they marked the same, and caused it to be squared and
preserved for that purpose, diverse of which are yet to be seen in the Forest
within the said Fellet; by which it appears all due care was taken for
preservation of the timber: and the said Officers and an under VVoodward did as
there was occasion, deliver the Cordwood by measure to Mr. Giffard or his
servants, keeping a just account of the same: what has been by him, or to his
use received is duly paid for. He presumes for the Reasons herein expressed,
none will believe that he made such consumption of timber as is suggested, and
hopes that it is not to be imputed to him as a Crime, to have made use of such
wood as he bought and paid for to those that had good authority to sell the
same; he desires no future dealing, only craves leave to work out his stock
already bought, and no more. 2. To the second, Mr. Giffard does affirm that he
has such a stock of Coal made of the Forest wood, as in his Case was truly
alleged, neither can the contrary be made appear, whatever the Author or
Penner pretends, thereby unjustly and maliciously aspersing the said Mr.
Giffard, who though indeed he begs of the Parliament, did never make any brags
of his Policy in the Country, nor has made any Contracts at all for Coal or
VVood since the first of January last, but to the contrary, gave special
command to his servants to buy none at all, and believes they have observed his
command, because he knows of nothing to the contrary. 3. To the third, he
cannot believe his stock of 5000. l. and upward will be worth any thing, if all
the Iron Works in the said Forest be pulled down, for the Charcoals will be
broken in pieces in removing and carriage of them to any other Iron Work, so
that they will not be worth the charge, and for other part of the stock it will
be of as little value, the charge of carrying it so great a distance
considered: and for his twofold answer that Mr. Giffard has no such stock of
the State, by his leave that is not true, for the Coal made of the VVood he
bought of the State is a great part of it, and they can suffer no loss by
giving him leave to work out all his stock with his works which he built and
repaired at his own charge, and paid two thousand pounds for use of them, for
five years, of which above two years and a quarter is yet to come, and
unexpired, but craves only that by the Justice and favor of the House he may
have but one years time, and cannot doubt but that the Parliament for the
Reasons before alleged will think his request just and reasonable, and that he
ought to have the working out his own stock rather then any other man. And
whereas it is by some insinuated, that there be Undertakers that will buy his
stock and make him a gainer, those are but mere delusions to spin out the time*
till his works by the violence of his enemies be plucked down, whereby he may be
silently undone, and left without remedy, but hopes the Parliament will never
suffer so great an injury to be done to him that has served them faithfully
with his life and fortune, and is ready and willing to do the like again, if
they shall have occasion. 4. Mr. Giffard does not desire the continuance of the
Iron Works longer then to work out his stock, which under favor he hopes will
be thought a very just and reasonable request: he is willing the good timber of
the Forest should be preserved for shipping, and is resolved to buy no more
wood at any rate whatsoever: he will not presume to be so saucy to put
interpretations upon the Votes of Parliament, as the Author of this Article
does, and for his undertakers to serve this Nation with foreign Iron, as good
and good cheap as now they have: first, it is manifest it will never be so good,
and secondly, it is much doubted that the undertaking will not long be
performed, it is heartily wished that this Commonwealth (by sad experience)
may not find the contrary. 5. The giving security will be found to be of value,
for no wood or timber can be cut in the Forest for the use of Mr. Giffard
without hazard of forfeiting the Bond, and in case any such thing should be
attempted, the State, may when they please seize upon twenty times the value:
his allegation that goodly trees have fallen to make Coal, is not to be applied
to Mr. Giffards case, neither can there be any such thing laid to his Charge or
proved against him; he cannot justify all the workmen that are employed about
his Iron Works, but is assured that the greatest part of them have been more
faithful to the Parliament, ^hen diverse of those that have put their hands to
the Peti^ion for pulling down Iron Works. 6. And for the sadness of M.
Giffard's condition, and his friends, it is very evident to all, except such as
without cause are, or will be possessed with prejudice against him, it is not a
bare pretense, but a real truth, nor can it be proved by able men, that M.
Giffard has gained any such sums of money as is pretended; for he has had the
works, as to his own use, not two years and three quarters, did pay 2000.l. for
them, besides the building and the repairing, which cost above 1500.l. more,
and above 1100.l. debt due to the State, which he likewise satisfied, was
forced to take up great sums of money to stock the said Works, besides his
particular debts in the Country to several poor men that are not able to
forbear their money, and amongst whom he owes very great sums: these payments
and other deductions considered, it is not probable that any such great gain
should be made in so short a time; the truth is, if his works be pulled down
before his stock be wrought out, he will be so great a loser thereby, that ^t
will utterly ruin him, and many of his friends that are ^ngaged with him: that
he cannot be made a saver by his ^eall stock unless he has time to work it
out, is already answered: It is an easy matter to traduce and scandalize a
man, but a most difficult thing to repair a ruined estate; they humbly and
earnestly desire to be heard for the good of the State, but show not wherein
there is probability of loss, or hope of gain to the State: The design of M.
Giffards adversaries is to retard and obstruct any relief from the honorable
House until his Works be pulled down, and then they well know it will be too
late. And why the penman of this Article should presume to aver, as by the same
is clearly meant, that an Act of Justice and Mercy in the State to relieve a
distressed Petitioner, should be either a damage or dishonor unto them,
without better reasons showed for it, is a Paradox that wiser men then himself
understand not. 7. In the joining issue they spare not to allege any thing
that may make for their purpose, though never so far different from the present
business: It is not hinted in the Case, nor was ever desired, that the Works
should stand any longer then to work out the stock; and as the waste and
spoil of timber made by others in that Forest, does not concern Mr. Giffard,
the same ought not to be urged to his prejudice: If any thing can be laid to
his charge, he desires a fair proceeding by a legal trial, where he may have
liberty to make his just defense, and that he may not be destroyed in an
arbitrary way by a rude multitude, the greater part of which come to pilfer and
steal what they can lay hands on, and covertly carry away. 8. The loss Mr.
Giffard sustained at Cirencester, as it cannot be denied, whenever it shall
be controverted, will easily be proved, and for his supposed gain of 6000.l. in
the Forest, it is a mere fiction hatched in the Penmans brain, and in case he
were a gainer, it is neither just nor reasonable he should be destroyed without
a cause. Their believing that he is not so fit an object of pity as others, is
no rule to the Parliament, the pay that the Petitioner and his son received for
their service; was not half so much as as he laid out to raise his Troop, their
comparisons of other men's affections cannot blast his fidelity, who does not so
urgently insist upon the standing of the Works, but for a reasonable time to
work out his stock, which his judgment does inform him will be both
honorable and profitable for the Parliament to grant, and prejudicial to no
man, except such as desire to raise the price of Iron for their private
advantage, to the manifest damage of the Commonwealth,
All which is humbly submitted to the wisdom and judgment of the Parliament,
and every Member thereof, and their speedy Order thereupon craved, without
which sudden destruction will fall upon

Your most humble servant, JOHN GIFFARD.


