CRVMBS of COMFORT: OR, GRACE IN ITS Various Degrees, and yet Oneness in Kind,
Mat. 14.27.
By Mr. WILLIAM GUTHRIE.
THE Doctrine is thus: Although there is gradual difference in many things in
Gods house, yet there is no essential difference among these things: This no
man does acknowledge. There was a Feast at the Table, that people may partake
of; and there is Crumbs that are not essentially different from these great
Loaves; there is some that sits at his Elbow at the Table; and there are others
that are but Dogs in their esteem, and yet have a true interest, but creep in
among the bearns, and eat the Crumbs that fall from the Table; yet that is
essential bread, as well as the great loaves. 1. What be those things of God
wherein there is such gradual difference? and wherein does it appear? 2. We
shall show, though there be a gradual difference, yet there is no essential
difference. 3. Why the Lord has resolved to keep such a difference, had it not
been much matter, if his Servants had been all one of the same size.

The first thing wherein this appears, there is a difference among the peoples
transgressions; so there is a gradual difference among them in the Law-work,
which prepares Christ's work throughout the Soul: There is some that has such
Convictions, as they can scarcely say, that they have the impression of them
upon their heart; and there are some others, who are kept many days under the
spirit of bondage, and so weighty upon them, as they were going to hang
themselves, or stab themselves, yea some put stone-blind with the terror of
conscience; it has been the mercy of some, that they have not been put upon
that extremity. Then there is a difference in the Lords out-giving of
saving-grace, yet keeping that rule as they take up, God to be God, and Sin to
be sin; yet O, how far are they from that sagacity of Grace and Wisdom that
others partake of! the Lord has given to some to look to Christ, and they dare
do no more; but he gives to others, to receive him in open arms, and he makes
out all his receipts with a different proportion, yet no ground of quarrelling:
and so it is in all the rest of the Graces; some dare not venture upon
suffering, as others; and some gets strength in the temptation to stand.

3. There is a gradual difference in the manfestation of his special
communication of his favor and face, the blinks of Gods face: There was some
got but such a taste, as scarce did they think any thing at all; others have
got Wine and Apples, and so there is some called babes, others young men for
strength, others Fathers for experience: Then there is a gradual difference in
promises, made to all these forementioned sizes, which agrees to the person, as
an instance to them that hungers, and so are differently molded according to
the Parity.

The second thing is to let you see, that there is no essential difference
amongst them, considering the true nature of things themselves, that we have
spoken of, to partake in the meanest size; there is no essential difference
from those who partake in the least, or greatest size. First in the Law-work,
which makes way throughout the souls of people for Christ; some has gotten but
little of that work, yet such has walked afterward; that they durst not say,
but that they had the grace of God, as well as they that have had much of it;
for in both causes there has been a belief of the curse, and propriation of the
curse of the Law to themselves for sin; then the party from the apprehension of
its misery being past hope of all relief from its self, and such a
self-discovery, as emptying it self as full room has been for Christ; and so
its called the like precious faith, but the like strong; so both kind of
persons, there is an impropriation of the fullness of Christ to the heart
joining with it, for therein stands the true essence of faith, when the Creator
applies Christ in the promises to its cause, although it knows not if it come
speed: If it be so, why do we carp, that we have not so much faith as others?
We have the Essentials of Grace in like manner; there is no essential
difference in the Grace of Love; for first, is there not that operating Love to
put him above all the creatures with an invincible respect to him, that all the
waters cannot quench; he keeps still, in both causes, a regard of his commands
upon the heart, upon which the Spirit of God has terminate the love of God,
though ye have not that overcoming obedience to the Commands of God.

Then next in the Grace of Patience, there is a gradual difference, though no
essential: And I know this troubles much the People of God, that they can be so
far different from others in submission, yet dare not say that they have no
grace; yet I will let you see, that it is not the meanest degree of patience,
that they have given way to Christ throughout their soul, and that they have
respect to his Commands, for that must take up the party, for their patience
will not do, if that be not; if ye grant that, then ye must grant this also,
that all the Graces of God are in them in habit: so here is a self-judging, and
cordial justifying of God, and deliberately submits to him in their cold blood;
and when their heart will not submit, they appeal to God for it. Then hereby ye
may apprehend, that there is no essential difference among the Works of Grace,
because the promises are equally cast out to all degrees; so promise is made,
as well to him that looks, as to him that eats: this will hold it out, that
there is as good account of the meanest degree of gracious receipts, and of the
meanest size in difficult cases, and in the day of suffering and testifying for
Christ's interest, as of a people that are of a greater use; and many times the
weakest, that we scarcely expected any good account of at their death, has a
better confession of Christ than the greatest professor; and the reason is,
Christ has gotten his penyworths of the man that was so noted for a professor;
but a poor body, that was never known, goes away to death, glorifying God to
the refreshing of all standers by; then all these different degrees of Grace
are the work of one and the same gracious Spirit, and works one and the same
graces, and work also gracious ends, that says there is no difference
essentially, though there be different administrations and manifestations, and
is uniting to him, and so conforming, that all these gracious administrations
carry on such an end.

The next thing is, Why does God keep a gradual difference? may not he keep a
great stock of faith, patience and love to keep his people comfortable, than to
hold them after this manner? We indeed think so, but he, because the Lord has
resolved to give out diverse Administrations, of which himself is head; and he
will have different members of his body, with which he will be served with
diverse Administrations of the Spirit; he will have eyes, tongue, hands, yea
love more than I do, yet I believe more than ye know.

2ly, This gradual difference the Lord keep, that the ransom may be still in
request; for if we had gotten in our hand, we should have lost respect to the
ransom, the thought of our infirmities, and that we must come to Christ, makes
him precious to us.

3ly, He is pleased to keep this diversity of administration, because earth
cannot bear grace in its perfection; therefore the Lord has hewn it out in a
small measure, for the Lord is resolved to transplant all the trees of grace to
Emanuel's Land, where there is b^thing of the Holy Ghost; we would work no more
if Grace were at its perfection.

5ly, The Lord is pleased to do, because he intends that there shall be a clear
difference between heaven and earth; O how sweet will Heaven, and Christ, and
the fullness of joy at his right hand be to the soul that is never satiate! how
sweet will heaven be to him that never could get corruption mortified, but was
trailed many a day up and down with it.

Infer. 1. Go not away then with an evil report of him, though ye find not
these things in your self, that others of his people has found; and I obtest
you to count Crumbs essential bread, though ye get no more at present, make
sure of the true nature and being of Grace; make sure, that ye have a respect
to his Commands, tho ye cannot get further to any mark of grace. 2. Do not
judge with a spirit of jealousy, because ye are not all of the same size;
there is some below you in understanding the matters of God; that when it comes
to the point, will be as particular in confession of the truth as any. 5. Be
not censorious, though any with many degrees shall fall into corruption. But
then again, if he that has but grace in the third degree, come honorably
throughout, not polluted with the temptation, how aggravating is thy sin? who
has received grace in the sixth degree? But be it known to you, that it is not
degrees of grace that holds up grace to fight with corruption and temptation,
with desertion, but the Sovereignty that makes it stand; for if it were the
degrees of grace that keep a man up, how comes it that he who has the lively
exercise of grace, he is almost overcome of a temptation, and foiled in an evil
frame, and grace at under with him, that he is run down with corruption: Truly
none can give a reason for it, but he who has set bound to the Sea, and said,
Hitherto shall thou come, and no further; has set bounds to a man's
corruptions, that such a length it shall come, and no further; therefore listen
much to God and his Sovereignty, and very little to your own receipts of grace,
yea in the highest degree that men do create, and that with influences of the
spirit. 7. That the gradual degrees of grace and parts is not founded upon
disproportion of natural proprieties. 8. Grace runs in that channel, that most
in forthcoming, where least expected: and this because they are come of an evil
kind, and evil edification, and so few means of grace, and so little
professions; and yet all of these good symptoms of a choice Christian. 9. For
ground of encouragement, the Masters honor and glory, and our well-being is
winded up, that is, our standing steadfast in an evil time, and is the
accomplishment of all the greatest promises in the word, since we have many
sweet clouds and showers of prayers in behalf of those who own the truths of
God; and if we were not more beholden to other men's prayers than our own, we
should be in a poor case; but there will be forthcoming in many, beyond
expectation, in respect of solid acknowledgment, and bearing witness to the
truths of God in a declining time, when people, when great parts will fail: but
there will be rich forthcoming in point of faith; it is easy believing, when no
opposition; to call the Court, when none calls again; but those who durst never
much say great things, they would do, will exceedingly transcend great lights
in testimony-bearing. 10. There will be forthcoming, in point of Charity to
suffering worthy Ministers, and others of his people in strait for him: and I
assure you, that this is not the least piece of Religion. But 4. as the reason
why God takes this way, because it is most usual, that way which we pitch on,
and that person we esteem and mean elect; the Lord trusts it, and it is a
hundred to one and ever he proceed that road way. Now you that are great
professors in the Country, pray you desire not trials; people says, that they
will do this, and that, and the other thing, when called to it: away with your
Romances. 5. We have much hope of some peoples praise, faithfulness and
honesty, who have little or none of themselves. Be not then upon no terms
casten to a dispondency, when the matter comes to a choke, because ye have
nothing promising in you answerable thereto, for he gives out the expenses
immediately, when we are called to disburse, and least expecting it.

Lastly, The eminent shining-professors, let fear of shame, disgrace, dishonor
to your self and Master promote you to be forthcoming for the Masters praise,
in word, thought and deed, and to be practical in patience, temperance,
holiness, and summarily make it all your work, how ye may be to his glory, who
has taken so much pains upon you.

Printed for Alexander Kennedy. 1681.


