THE GLORY Of the LORD ARISING, Shaking terribly the EARTH, AND Overturning
All, Until Righteousness be set up.

BEING An Encounter with the Ministers of the world touching their Maintenance;
wherein they are beaten with their own weapons, confuted by their own
Scriptures and Arguments.

ALSO, A Testimony from the Lord against SWEARING.

With a Word to the Heads of the Nation, and to the Judges of Life and Death.

By those whom the world calls Quakers.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-eagle near the West End
of Paul's. 1654.

THis thing was I moved of the Lord to write forth, which lay upon me, which is
for the good of your souls, and for the good of all people, that you may see
what spirit you act by: if by the spirit of Jesus Christ, it leads into the
and paths of Jesus Christ; if not, the spirit of error, which leads contrary
to Christ's doctrine; and if contrary to his doctrine, mind and life, as it
does openly appear by the fruits of the doctrine of the world. The glory of the
Lord shall arise, and his majesty, to shake terribly the earth, that your
majesty, ye earthly ones, shall be laid in the dust, and your glory and your
renown: for the Lord has brought forth, and will bring forth his Plant of
renown, which makes the earth to shake terribly, and that your loftiness must
be laid down, and the haughty people of the Land be weakened and grow feeble.
The Lord has spoken it, who will dash in pieces, and will overturn all, until
that righteousness be set up, until the earthly part be shaken: for in the
earthly part there lodges his majesty, and his glory, of the earthly man's,
whom the god of the world blinds, and so they push one against another, and are
blind about the Law and Ministry, until the earthly part be thrown down.

The Ministers of the world are proud, that compel men to swear, to be without
the doctrine of Christ, who says, Swear not at all, though the Ministers of
the world have given the Bible to swear by, and the Rulers bring that for a
witness, which witnesses against Swearing.

The Ministers of the world bring many Scriptures, and say, If we minister unto
you spiritual things, it is the least if you minister to us your carnal things.

All Magistrates, I charge you in the presence of the living Lord God of heaven
and earth, Let Priests alone, as touching giving them their maintenance. You
feed them fat, and make them idle; which the Scripture is against: which make
so many of them seek after great benefits, and then they set the people one
against another.

First, let them receive spiritual things, and minister them, before they reap
carnal things; not to reap carnal things, before they sow spiritual things.
Therefore busy not your selves about them, but wait you in that which is pure,
to receive the perfect Law of God, which is upon all sinners and transgressors:
which Law of God is perfect, according to that in the conscience: for, the law
of God is perfect, and endures for ever; and so is that in the conscience; and
so for conscience sake, Let every soul be subject to the higher power: for if
you have not received the Law from God, for conscience sake they suffer, (with
your Law, which is contrary to that in the conscience) and submit to God, who
is the Lawgiver: and herein in all ages has truth suffered, by them who had
made Laws contrary to that in the conscience.

O let all Magistrates, Rulers, and People consider, the Ministers of the world
say they plowed in hope. Have they plowed all this while, some 30, some 40,
some 50 years, and now lost the end of their hope, and are now fain to seek to
the Magistrates for means? Oh horrible! Here they are contrary to the
Scriptures.

And they said, He that planted a vineyard might eat of the fruit of it. O
horrible and shameless vineyard-dressers! does your vineyard bear you no fruit,
who have been planting some 30, some 40, some 50 years, but you must now go
a-begging with Petitions to Magistrates? This is contrary to Scripture: I have
not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. All the
vineyards you have dressed, bring forth nothing but briers and thorns. Such as
you sow, such do you reap, and are fain to beg and seek to the Magistrates for
means. Here you show forth you are shameless vineyard-dressers, and have
fruitless vineyards, as you do show it, and you to be idle; and he that will
not work, must not eat. Have you no fruit, but plowed in vain, and planted in
vain, that all your trees are dry, and never a tree bears fruit? what
husbandmen are you?

Another Scripture they bring: They that minister at the altar, are partakers
of the altar. But this Scripture shames you: for your altar will not maintain
you, but you seek to the Magistrates for means. So here you shame your altar,
and show you never sowed spiritual things, but be them that sow tares, and so
are them that reap tares.

Another Scripture you bring: you say, They that preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel. This Scripture shames you again, and shows your Gospel will not
maintain you, but you seek to Magistrates: and the Ministers of the Gospel are
ashamed of such a pack of Teachers.

He that ploweth, ploweth in hope: he that thresheth, thresheth in hope, and
shall be partaker of his hope. But these are Paul's words, 1 Cor. 9. 10. But
how are the expectations and hopes of these men-teachers perished, that are
fain now to seek to the Magistrates for means, and put up Petitions to them? as
there was a Petition put up lately to the Magistrates of England. How have they
plowed in vain all this while, that no seed comes up* Oh how have they lost
their hope! Oh how have they threshed in hope all this while, and got forth no
corn, but are fain to seek to the Magistrates for means and food! These are
they that have been beating the air, and threshed in vain, and plowed in vain,
and lost their hope; who now cry to the Magistrates for means, and say they may
not be left to carnal people, and their wives after them; and so judge the
Churches to be carnal, which have been all this while sowing, plowing, and
threshing it. O you shameless teachers! people have been led by you long.

And in your Petition you say you prophesied in sackcloth. O you liars, here
you have declared your selves liars to all the Nation. Let all people take
notice: when ever saw you a Priest in sackcloth? Were not many of you the Kings
Prophets, and Bishops Prophets? And take away your Benefits, and you will be no
Prophets. Have not you prophesied on a soft Cushion, and a hundred or two of
pounds for it? But the light of God is arising, that people begin to see you to
be false Prophets, and so deny you.

And another Scripture you bring, The labourer is worthy of his hire; the
workman is worthy of his meat. Woe unto him that oppresses the servant in his
wages. That is the servant, and not the master: he that is learned may read.

But how is it that Ministers of England sue men at the Law for means which
they do no work for, nor are hired, and to them minister no spiritual things,
but rail upon them? O how are these men worthy of their meat, which do no work?
O how do these men take the Apostles words for a cloak to their idleness! How
are these men bereaved of their sense! And is not this unjust, and contrary to
the Law, for a man that I have not hired, nor does me any work, for to go to a
Magistrate and fetch a Warrant, and sue me at the Law, and strain my goods, and
bring the Scripture for his cloak, and tell me the workman is worthy of his
meat, and the labourer worthy of his hire, when I neither hired him, nor set
him to work? And here they are contrary to the Scripture, and contrary to the
Law. O horrible, that ever such should take the Scriptures in their mouths,
which have been upheld by the Magistrates and Laws of the Nation: greedy
shameless men, no Ministers of Christ; which openly declares you to go for
filthy lucre.

Another Scripture you bring: Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that
treads out the corn, as says the Law. O you shameless teachers, your mouths
must be muzled: have you been treading all this while, and no corn trodden out
to feed you, but are fain to seek to the Magistrate? The Apostle says the Oxes
mouth should not be muzled that treads out corn: but here you show that you
have trodden out no corn. O ye idle drones, have ye trodden out no corn yet, but
are the oxen and beasts that are spoiling the corns, but you must seek to the
Magistrates; for you say the people are carnal. O ye fat bulls, no corn trodden
out yet? you have plowed in vain, you have sowed in vain, your hope is in vain.
Ye hypocrites, which now seek to the Magistrates for means, the Lord will open
the Magistrates eyes to see you, which he has done many.

The Ministers of the Gospel said, They that preached the Gospel lived of the
Gospel; they that plowed, plowed in hope; they that threshed, threshed in hope;
and, The labourer is worthy of his meat. But you that will not work, must not
eat: for they that labor are worthy of double honor, and the labourer is
worthy of his hire: but the Law says, Thou shall not put thy sickle into thy
neighbors corn.

Another Scripture the teachers of the world bring, where Paul says to the
Corinthians, he robbed other Churches for sparing them, and had taken upon
other Churches. But which of you teachers of the world have taken upon other
Churches to spare your own where you are? but you sue them at the Law, and seek
to the Magistrates for means, if they will not give it you: and so cast your
selves out of the doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles, and the Churches.

Another Scripture they bring against them that witness the new Covenant, which
meet together in several houses, or in the Fields or Commons, as they which
gave forth the Scriptures did often; which is 2 Timothy 3. and they say they creep
into houses, leading silly women captive, laden with sin, and led away with
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the truth; having the
form, but not the power; must be turned away from. Let all take notice, if this
Scripture turn not upon themselves, who live in the lust: who lives in
headiness, lives in the lust, lives in covetousness; lives in the lust, and he
leads into diverse lusts. O such have got the form, and have led this many
hundred years, led some 30, some 40, some 60, some 80 years, and never able to
come to the truth.

All people take notice, The leaders of the people cause them to err. And who
have led captive all this while? Whether covetous men have not led, drunken men
have not led, heady men have not led; proud, strikers, fierce, despisers do not
lead yet? All people consider whether people have not always been learning of
such which have the form, but not the power. They are to be turned away from.
And such as are strikers and envious, such you may see have led; and then they
will bring that Scripture to maintain it, where the Apostle says, Some preach
Christ of envy, some of strife, and some of contention. That was a time that
few believed that was the Christ: the Apostle himself did not, till it was
revealed in him. But when his Name was spread abroad, and many had gotten the
form, the Apostle bid them turn away from such as had the form, but not the
power: there he did not give liberty to hear envious men, nor vain contenders,
but bids them turn away, and shun the occasion of vain contention: though the
time was, he gave liberty to envious men, and contentious men, and men of
strife; that was the time of spreading his Name abroad: but when they had
gotten the form, and not the power, then bids he all turn away from envious
men, contentious men, and men of strife.

Another Scripture they bring, as Jude, to accuse them that are separated from
the worlds Teachers, which turns upon themselves, which go in the way of Cain,
and after the error of Balaam, who are ordained of old for condemnation. Let
all people see if they go not in the error of Balaam, for gifts and rewards.
And whether the Teachers of the world be such as were sanctified by God the
Father, and preserved in Christ Jesus, and which were to contend for the faith
once delivered to the Saints. Let all take notice, if they be not such as deny
sanctification, and deny perfection: and how do these contend for the faith,
which deny it, and which deny the everlasting Offering Christ Jesus?

Another Scripture they do accuse them with which witness the New Covenant, in
Peter: Who through feigned words and covetousness make merchandise of the
people, who are rioting and sporting in the daytime. Let all people take
notice of this, if this do not turn upon them who are the teachers of the
world, who are covetous, and make merchandise of the people; which were to come
in the last times, which Peter speaks of: and whether Peter was such or no, who
spoke of them which should come after him.

These Teachers of the world, who have told us of threshing in hope, and
plowing in hope, and have threshed and plowed, yet have got nothing: and they
have told us of a mediate Call, and their means was mediate. Now we believe it,
and see it to be carnal: for mediate is carnal and natural; and the natural man
knows not the things of God. And they have told us that the Steeple-house was
the Church, and Sprinkling Infants was their Baptism, and a little bread and
wine was their Communion, and the Letter it was the Word, and the Letter it was
the Light, and Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, was the Original, and the four books
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, was the Gospel, and Oxford and Cambridge were
the two Well-heads of Divinity. And we see all this to be mediate means indeed,
and mediate is carnal and natural; and the natural man cannot receive the
things of God, as it is written. So we do testify against all these, who have
taught us this doctrine, to be no Ministers of Christ.

For we do witness now, the Ministers of Christ, which are the Ministers of the
Word, which tell us God is the Word, Christ is the Light, the Church is in God,
and the Baptism is with one Spirit into one body, and the Cup which the Saints
drink was the blood of Christ, and the bread that the Saints break was the body
of Christ, and the Saints fountain and treasure is God and Christ, and the
Original is the Word: for Pilate had the Original which the world has, Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, who crucified Christ, as the world does: and the world has
the four books, as the chief Priests had the Prophets words, which denied
Christ the substance of the Prophets; as the Priests which have the four books,
deny Christ Jesus the substance now: so earth to earth. Light was before the
world was, and the Word before the world was, and the Lamb of God before the
world was, and the Fountain before Oxford and Cambridge was, and the Word
before Hebrew, Greek, and Latin was, and the Spirit before the invention of
Infants Baptism was, which baptizeth into one body; and the Spirit was, in
which the Communion is, before the table of devils was; which all Saints are
made to drink into. Here are all you threshers and plowers, with your mediate
stuff, and mediate call, are all razed out in the full, and none come to the
beginning, but are all blind guides.

All ye Heads and Rulers of England, who have a Law, and have made a Law to
compel men and people to give their Tithes to the Priests: And if it be so,
that the Priests must have the Tithes, let them act according to the Priests
which did receive Tithes, which had a command to take Tithes, who had
storehouses, that the strangers, the fatherless, and widows thither were to
come, to the storehouses, and be filled within the Priests gates, that there
might be no beggar in Israel. Moses, who was Judge of all Israel, gave forth
this Order, which he had received from God, which was in the first Covenant, a
figure of the everlasting Priest. So ye, if you now compel men to pay Tithes,
and the tenth of their estates, let the Priests have Storehouses, that all the
fatherless, the strangers, and widows in England may thither come, and be
satisfied within the Priests gates; and let them minister of that to them, that
there may be no beggar in England, as there was to be no beggar in Israel. And
so if you do thus, that the Priests have Storehouses to put their Tithes and
the tenth of men's estates in, to fill the strangers, widows, and the
fatherless, that there may be no beggar in England; which if ye then act
according to the figure, ye must not own Christ come in the flesh, as we do,
and that the Priesthood is changed, and the everlasting high Priest witnessed,
over the household of God; and therefore suffer we imprisonment, and our goods
spoiling. And the Law is changed, and Jesus Christ witnessed the end of the
Law, the end of the Priesthood, who is the everlasting Priest, where there is a
treasure that fills all, and to fill all; at whose name shall every knee bow,
and every tongue confess him: for he has enlightened every one that comes into
the world; though the one hate it, and the other love it, yet he that hates it,
it shall make him confess, and let him see his deeds be evil, when he has his
reward: for lo, I come, says he, and my reward is with me, to give to every
one according to their works, whether they be good or evil: he says so, who
has enlightened every one, and gives every one a measure according to their
ability: he says so, who is a King. Now the wicked and slothful servant, that
hides his talent in the earth, from him it shall be taken, and he into utter
darkness must go: he says so, who is the Light of the world, and who has
given to every one a measure: and he says so, whose grace has appeared to all
men, but teaches us, say the Saints, to deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts; which the world, who lives in ungodliness and worldly lusts, turns into
wantonness.

THe word of the Lord to all your Masters or Rulers of Families, and
Mistresses: Rule in power, in love, in wisdom, in patience, with the spirit of
the living God; not with tyranny, not with hastiness, not with your wills: for
then that goes forth to rule for earthly ends; then you would have things
according to your own wills, which is contrary to that in the conscience: and
that rules not well, and that is cross, and must be crossed.

And all you that are servants, labor in love, as unto God, for the earth is
the Lords: not as unto men, but unto the Lord: for he that has more of the
earth then another, that makes the Master. And if you that are Masters or
Mistresses do speak to your servants, to that in their Conscience, to guide
them to the Lord, and to keep them in the fear of the Lord, to labor with love
and singleness of heart, as unto God: If you that are Masters or Mistresses be
not guided by the Spirit of the Lord, but if the contrary nature go to reprove,
it is as beating the air, and upon the earth, and it is to no purpose. But if
you stand in the counsel of God, and be guided by the Spirit of the Lord, and
speak to the Spirit of God in others, you guide them up to God, to do what they
do as unto the Lord. So when you are away, they are the same as when you are
with them. And so the Just comes to rule in all; and he that rules, rules in
love; and he that labors, labors in love, as unto the Lord. For, the earth is
the Lords, and the fullness of it.

The time will come, that as with the servant, so with the Master; and as with
the Mistress, so with the maid. For all being one seed, and all the earth being
the Lords: And here whatsoever is done, is done unto God, and not the servants
of men, where the seed of God is redeemed out.

CHrist Jesus says, Swear not at all: not by heaven, for it is Gods throne;
nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city
of the great King. Neither shall thou swear by thy head: for thou can not
make one hair, white or black. But in all your communications, let your Yea be
yea, and Nay nay: for whatsoever is more, comes of evil. Matthew. 5. 34, 35, 36,
37.

Though you have heard in the old time, Thou shall not for swear thy self, but
perform the oath of the Lord; (Matthew. 5. 33.) I answer: But now God has
brought forth his Son, the Oath of God, whom he swore by himself, (Heb. 7. 21.)
as not finding a greater; who is the end of all Oaths, his Son, who says,
Swear not at all.

Now if you do allege that Jacob swore by the fear of his father Isaac, Genesis
31. 53. and Joseph swore by the life of Pharaoh; Genesis 42. 15. I answer: Christ
Jesus the Oath of God, who says, Swear not at all, reigns over the house of
Jacob and Joseph.

Now if you do allege that Moses swore, who was a servant, I answer: but
Christ is the Son, who says, Swear not at all: and, This is my beloved Son,
says the Lord, hear him. Luke 1. 33. Joh. 14. 9. Matthew. 9. 7.

And now if you do allege that David swore, 1 Samuel 20. 3. 1 King. 2. 22. I
answer: Christ over him is King; David confesses it: who says, Swear not at
all.

And now if you do allege that Solomon swore by the Lord, my answer is this, A
greater then Solomon is here, (Luke 11. 31) which is the Son of God, who says,
Swear not at all.

Now if you do allege that Abraham swore, (Genesis 21. 24.) who saw the day of
the Son; I answer: But when the Son came, he said, Swear not at all; who was
the Oath of God, which the Lord did perform in his Son, the everlasting Oath.
Heb. 7. 21.

And though this was in the old time an Oath to bind the soul, (Numb. 30. 2.)
I answer: Christ Jesus, the Oath of God, the Savior of the soul, says, Swear
not at all.

And the Prophet said, Every tongue shall swear, Isa. 45. 23. I answer: Christ
Jesus, the Son of God, the end of the Prophets, says, Swear not at all.

God swore to David, that out of his loins, according to the flesh, he would
raise up Christ to sit on his throne, Psalm. 89. 49. I answer: He is the Oath of
God, who says, Swear not at all, who put an end to all Oaths.

Though the Prophet Jeremiah did teach the people to swear by the Name of the
Lord; (Jer. 4. 2.) I answer Christ Jesus, the end of the Prophets, says, Swear
not at all.

Though they were then to bind them with an Oath to the Lord, as they had been
bound with an Oath to Baal, so to bring them off that, to be bound with an Oath
to the Lord, (Jer. 12. 16.) I answer: Christ Jesus, the end of all bonds and
oaths, says, Swear not at all.

And though Saul swore in the war, 1 Samuel 19. 1. I answer: Christ, who brings
peace on earth, and good will toward all men, (Luke 2. 14.) says, Swear not
at all: who ends war.

And the Lord swore, and will not repent, (and because he could swear by no
greater, he swore by himself) Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck; Heb. 7. 21, 24. who says, Swear not at all; who is the Oath of
God: and this man which continues for ever has an unchangeable Priesthood: and
this man said, Swear not at all.

And now if you do allege that they swore in the old Covenant, (Levit. 5. 4.)
I answer: Christ Jesus, the new Covenant, says, Swear not at all.

Now if you do allege that they swore in the Law; I answer: Christ is the end
of the Law, Romans 10. 4. and in the old Covenant they swore about earthly
things, Oxen and Asses, and Sheep; but here they were not come to the doctrine
of Christ, which is Yea and nay; who says, Swear not at all; but in all your
communications, let your Yea be yea, and your Nay nay: for whatsoever is more,
is evil.

And if you do allege the Priest was to charge the woman with an Oath, Numb.
5. 19. I answer: Christ Jesus the everlasting Priest, the Oath of God, (Heb. 7.
21.) who is come to put an end to all Oaths, who says, Swear not at all. And
his Apostles, who were taught of him, who preached the Gospel, and witnessed
the High Priest, said, My brethren, above all things, swear not at all: not by
heaven, neither by earth, nor by any other Oath; but let your Yea be yea, and
your Nay nay, lest you fall into condemnation. Jam. 5. 12. Matthew. 5.

Now all you that swear, and bring to swearing, you are fallen into the
condemnation, out of the doctrine of Christ, and by it you are condemned.

Now if you do allege in the Hebrews, that the Apostle said, that men verily
swore by the greater, and an Oath was the end of controversy and strife
amongst men, Heb. 6. 6. I answer: This the Apostle brought as an example among
men, as concerning God, who could not find a greater, he swore by himself,
concerning Christ his son; who said, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchizedeck; who was made with an Oath. And where men are in strife and
controversy, they are without, and have not learned the doctrine of Christ:
for, as the Apostle says, (Ephesians. 4. 20.) we have not learned Christ to live in
strife and controversy: for it is out of Yea and Nay: and such do oppose his
doctrine; as to this day it is in England. A Judge did imprison one because he
could not swear, nor could deny the doctrine of Christ, but kept to Yea and Nay.

Now if you do allege the Angel swore in the Revelation; I answer: The Lord
God says, I bring forth my first-begotten into the world, let all the Angels
worship him, Heb. 1. 6, 8. who says, Swear not at all.

Now you that would bring to swear, and do swear, because the Angel swore, do
worship the Angels, and are in the delusion, and do not hear the Son, (Mark 9.
7.) whom the Angels worship, who says, Swear not at all.

So though they swore in the old Covenant, Christ is the new, who says, Swear
not at all. And though they swore in the time of the Prophets, yet Christ is
the end of the Prophets, who says, Swear not at all. And though they swore in
the family of Jacob, Christ reigns over the house of Jacob, who says, Swear
not at all. And if they swore in the time of the Priests, Christ Jesus the
everlasting Priest, the Oath of God, says, Swear not at all; who says, In all
your communications, let your Yea be yea, and your Nay nay. And the Gospel is
Yea.

Now if you do allege Moses a servant of God swore, Christ the Son of God
says, Swear not at all. And if you do allege that men swore; that was in
strife, and you bring them to swear to oppose the doctrine of Christ, who
says, Swear not at all; but in all your communications, let your Yea be yea,
and your Nay nay. For they who are in strife, have not learned Christ. And if
you do allege the Angels swore, all the Angels must worship the Son of God,
the first begotten which is brought into the world; who says, Swear not at all.

Now if you do allege that Solomon swore; a greater then Solomon is here, who
says, Swear not at all. So the Son is above the Angels, the Son is above the
Prophets, the Son is above the old Covenant, the Son is above Moses, the Son is
above David, he calls him Lord; the Son is greater then Solomon; the Son reigns
over the house of Jacob; the Son is greater then all these, who says, In all
your communications, let your Yea be yea, and your Nay nay.

So having in these Northern parts for witnessing forth the Son, who could not
swear, so for the Truths sake (and the Sons) that it might be set up, and not
trodden down, have I showed forth, that you may all take warning how you swear,
or command men to swear: for if you do, you draw from the doctrine of Christ,
and you draw to evil and you draw into condemnation, and you draw into the
cursed speaking, from Yea and Nay.

Christ Jesus the Light of the world, who says, Swear not at all: but in all
your communications, let your Yea be yea, and your Nay nay, he has enlightened
every one that comes into the world. Now every one loving this light, which
Jesus Christ has enlightened you withal, it will draw your minds up to Christ,
and teach you to know his doctrine, and how to walk in the truth: for this
light in every one is according to Christ's mind, who says, Swear not at all.

Now all loving this light, never an Oath will be heard in the Land: for it
will not let you swear, (but keep you to Yea and Nay) nor do no
unrighteousness. But all that hate this Light, you are swearers, and draw to
swearing, and draw to oaths, and draw to unrighteousness: and this Light of
Christ is your condemnation: the Lord Jesus has spoken it. And to that in
every one of your consciences I do speak, which shall eternally witness me, and
condemn you that hate it: for to that I have cleared my conscience.

Capt. Morley, a Witness of the Truth, and for it, who suffered because he
could not swear, by Judge Packer, because he could not deny Christ's doctrine to
swear.

THe Word of the Lord to this Nation; to all you this is the Word of the Lord:
to that in your consciences do I speak, which changes not; but you change that
act contrary to it; and all your Laws are changeable, that are made with that
nature and mind, that act contrary to that in the conscience. Therefore to
that in your consciences am I moved to speak, to the turning your minds to God,
that you may wait to receive the Law from God, which law is according to that
in every man's conscience; and that no law be made against that in the
conscience. This am I moved of the Lord to command you, and charge you in the
presence of the Lord, and to mind the light in your conscience, which
testifies against all sin, as does the Law of God, which is perfect: and the
Law was added because of the transgressors, not made for the righteous.

Therefore be awarned how you make Laws: for all must be cut down with the
sword of the Lord, which is contrary to that in the conscience. And that no Law
be laid upon Religion: for the Law is for sinners, and transgressors, and who
abuse themselves with mankind, and such as defile the flesh, and whoremongers,
and adulterers, and murderers, and thieves, and all unrighteousness, the Law of
God which is perfect is against; and so is that in the conscience, which is of
God.

And see that your Laws be according to that in every man's conscience: for the
light in every man's conscience is of God: That that in every man's conscience
may witness your Laws, else that in every man's conscience will witness against
your Laws not to be of God. And that must be hewn down with the Word of the
Lord, as God has done before in all Ages: for such Laws persecuted, prisoned,
and crucified them who witnessed for the testimony of a good conscience: and
such did the Lord hew down, which were contrary to that in the conscience; and
their end was misery, as in the generations you may read which are past, whose
Law was contrary to that in the conscience, which did not endure for ever; in
which lodged all the Persecution in all Ages. But the Law of God is perfect,
according to that in the conscience, and does endure for ever. To that in your
consciences I do speak, that you may wait upon God to receive it, lest you be
cut down, as they have been before you, which cut down the Saints with their
Laws, under the name of Opinions and Sects.

Therefore be awarned of making Laws, and that you have no Law concerning
Religion, but let Religion defend it self: for whatsoever is not of God, will
not not stand, but will wither away: but see that your Laws be according to
that in the Conscience, and then it will be against strikers, and who abuse
themselves with mankind, to keep peace; and who defile their flesh, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and thieves, and adulterers; the Law which is
equity, which is according to that in every man's Conscience: for that is
equity, which does not respect any man's person: and that in the Conscience is
equity, and this shall stand for ever, when all inventions and imaginations
will fall and cease, and be cast away from God, in the light which Christ has
enlightened every one with: in it is no Sect, no Heresy, no Error, no Opinion
nor Blasphemy: and to that do I speak, which will eternally witness me.

To the Judges of Life and Death.
Friends,
TAke heed of putting any man or woman to death for Cattle or Money: for with
the Law of God they were to be sold for their Theft, if they had not wherewith
to make restitution. So see that all your Laws be according to that in every
ones Conscience: for the Law of God is according to that in every ones
Conscience; that that in every ones Conscience may witness your Law; else that
in every ones conscience will cry out against you and your Law, and witness the
Law of God, which is perfect, according to that in every ones conscience, and
witness God to be the Lawgiver. And all Laws that are made and acted in the
will of man, contrary to this light of Christ in the conscience, are against
Conscience, and cannot stand, but God has hewed them down, and will hew you
all down, who act contrary to that in the conscience. And see that no Law be
acted upon Religion: therefore take warning: to that in your consciences I
speak, which shall eternally witness me, (and show you the judgment of God
which has passed before you upon the unjust, who have acted contrary to that
in the conscience, and have not received the Law from God) and condemn you that
hate it, when the book of Conscience is opened. To you this is the Word of God.

Here have I let you know, and showed you the Gospel, that that in your
conscience may show you when you act contrary to Christ, who says, Swear not
at all; but in all your communications, let your Yea be yea, and Nay nay: for
whatsoever is more, is evil. And you that bring men to swear, you bring them
into the evil. And, Swear not at all, says the Apostle, lest you fall into
condemnation. And you that swear, and bring others to swear, you are fallen
into condemnation your selves, and draw others into condemnation, and out of
the doctrine of Christ, and from the Gospel, which is Yea and Nay in all your
communications.

To the Heads of England and other nations.
TO all you Heads of England, and Nations elsewhere, which have a Law, and give
it forth, that the Priests should receive Tithes. Moses the Judge of all
Israel, who had received the Law from God, who gave forth orders to the People,
and to the Heads, and to the Priests, which he had received from God: which
Priests had a command to receive Tithes of the people, and of the brethren; and
they had a Storehouse, as in Mal. 3. Bring ye all the Tithes into the
storehouse, that there may be meat in my house; and prove me now herewith,
says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven, and pour you
out a blessing, that there should not be room enough to receive it. And all the
strangers, the fatherless, and the widows were to come within the Priests
gates, that they might be filled and satisfied. Here was the wisdom of God,
that no beggar might be in Israel, and no stranger might beg, nor no widow
might beg, nor no fatherless might beg, but come within the Priests gates, and
be filled and satisfied, that the Lord thy God may bless thee, says the Lord.

And these Priests were a figure of the everlasting Priest, and the Storehouse
of the everlasting Treasure Jesus Christ: for when he was come and preached,
the Apostles said the Priesthood was changed, which received Tithes; and he
said it was a changeable Priesthood, and the Law was changed also: and he
preached the unchangeable Priesthood, and denied the other that was changeable.

Now all you Heads of England, who give forth a Law that men should pay Tithes
to the Priests: and them who witness Jesus Christ the high Priest cannot pay
Tithes for conscience sake: for the light in their conscience brings them to
witness Christ: and with your cruelty in your Law that you have made, it is to
make them pay treble, and cast them into prison. Now if you do act according to
the Scripture, that the Priests which received Tithes, as they did according to
the Law, had a Storehouse to put their Tithes in, that all the strangers in
England, and all the fatherless in England, and all the widows in England,
might come to the Storehouse, and there to be filled with the Tithes, that no
beggar might be in England, no widow to beg, no fatherless to beg, nor no
stranger to beg. What a great deal of cumber would be taken out of the land?
And the Priests should minister it out to them: A figure of the everlasting
Priest which was to come, who ministers out of the everlasting treasure Christ
Jesus. Now if you would do so, you might not own Christ come in the flesh. So
all you that hold up such changeable Priests, and have not received your Law
from God, as they did in the old time; Consider what will become of you, that
do oppress the poor people who witness the Gospel, Jesus Christ the end of the
Priesthood, and witness the new Testament, the end of the old Testament; and
witness the new Covenant, the end of the old Covenant; and witness the
Priesthood which is not changable, but unchangeable, who ministers out of the
everlasting treasure; who was made with an Oath. And when the unchangeable
Priest was come, the Priesthood that was changeable was denied. But these that
are changeable are not made with an Oath: so we cannot hold up this Priesthood
that receive Tithes now; nor we cannot own the Law that gives them Tithes. As
for the Law and Command that God gave forth to Moses, we own that, which was a
figure of Christ Jesus which was to come; the unchangeable Priesthood which the
Apostles witnessed and gave testimony to; and for witnessing him, they suffered
their goods to be spoiled. And now in this Age, many suffer with a National
Law, as at Lancaster- Goal, which never such a thing was read on in the Law of
God, which was delivered to Moses, that any suffered for not paying Tithes, or
was to pay treble damages. Surely, surely, the cry for vengeance will be heard,
which arises from the oppressed souls which lie under the altar.

And the Law of Moses we own in its right place, a figure; but we cannot hold
up these now, much less can we hold up this which God never commanded.

They that did not bring the Tithes into the Storehouse, they robbed God; and
then there was not meat in their house, therefore he commanded them to bring
them into the house, that there might be meat in the house; which was to fill
the fatherless, strangers, and widows. But now these Priests which are
counterfeits, which take peoples Tithes with a Law which they have now from the
Beast, that if any one will not pay them, they prison them, and make them pay
treble.

And so these rob the poor people, and rob the fatherless, and the strangers
and widows, and do not fill them. So the cry is gone up to heaven against them,
and many are almost made beggars by this oppressing Priesthood; their cattle
and their horses taken away from them, and they cast into prison: and others
are sued at the Law by the Priest to pay treble damage: And such are cried up
to be Ministers of the Gospel, Ministers of the Gospel: and if the Lord move
any to cry against them, they are Stocked, or beaten, or prisoned; as in the
North-Jayls 23 in prison now; and many which be prisoners at Kendal, as Captain
Ward, Thomas Robertson, and widow Garner, which has many small children, which
suffer because they cannot pay Tithes; and many others which be in
Kendal-prison, which were moved of the Lord to speak to the Priest, whereof one
was moved to sit in sackcloth, with ashes upon her head, and others which have
been moved to go in sackcloth, A Lamentation for the miserable condition of
this Nation, for to see so much crying up of preaching of the Gospel, and see
so much Strife and debate, and Oaths, and dissension among people. But where
the Gospel is, Strife and contention is ceased, and oppression taken off. But
Oh the Land mourns with this oppressing Ministry, which has not entered into
the ears of the Magistrates. But now is the cry of the people entered into the
ears of the Lord of Sabbath, who will now be avenged of all his adversaries.
And all you unjust Lawgivers, and unjust Judges, to that in all your
Consciences I speak, to be cleared when you are judged by the just Judge, the
God of heaven and earth, whose terror is going out, and will go out, against
all the ungodly. And you have given them a Law to take Tithes; but they have no
Law from God: and they have no Storehouses; and we see that both Strangers,
fatherless, and widows are wandering abroad, and begging abroad; which the
Priests that had a command from God, and did takes Tithes according to the Law,
did fill such.

And so we see that both ye and the Priests are contrary to the Scripture; and
they neither are true Priests under the Law, nor Ministers of the Gospel: for
their practice is contrary to these Priests; which was changeable, which
received Tithes, which was a Figure of Jesus Christ the everlasting Priest, who
ministers out of the everlasting treasure. Him we witness. If we should hold up
the Priesthood which received Tithes, we should deny him come in the flesh, as
all the world does who receive Tithes; and them that take it. So, who preach
the Gospel, deny the Priests which receive Tithes; and who preach the new
Covenant, deny the Priests that received Tithes according to the Law; and who
preach the new Testament, deny the Priesthood that receive Tithes; and who
preach the everlasting Priest, denies the changeable Priests, that received
Tithes, and had a Storehouse, which were changeable things, and witness the
unchangeable Priesthood, and the everlasting Treasure.

And they which had the Storehouse in Moses Law, they were to fill it, and the
Lord opened the windows of heaven, that there might be meat in his house, to
fill the widows, to fill the fatherless, and to fill the strangers, that there
might be no beggar in Israel.

This was in the first Priesthood in the Law; and they had a command; and they
that did not bring their Tithes, you do not read that they made them pay treble
damages. And these things were but to serve in their places, Figures and
Shadows, which were changeable of Him who changes not, JESUS CHRIST, who is a
Priest made with an Oath, which these are not.

FINIS.

