(...) Great and Wonderful PROPHECIES, OF Mr. Patridge, Mr. Coly, Mr. Tanner,
and Mr. Andrews.
Predicting what may befall this CLIMATE of ENGLAND And other Kingdoms, for
this year 1689 With the Account of the memorable Eclipses, and their
Signification, with other remarkable matters worthy of Note.

tripartite arrangement of illustrations depicting a comet, a celestial battle,
and an earthquake, respectively, surmounted by three suns (...) ^ee May Turn
his Wrath Away great Wonders and Str^^^^ (...)



The Great and Wonderful PROPHECIES, OF Mr. Patridge, Mr. Coly, Mr. Tanner, etc.
It Is no wonder, if so many strange Events and Accidents are hidden from the
foresight of Mankind, since so few addict themselves to the understanding the
Caelestial Intelligences, in their sundry Aspects, Motions, Conjunctions and
Configurations, seeing by them as by the Monitors of Heaven, are pointed out
the Rise and Decay of Empires, Kingdoms, and States, Wars, Plague, Famine,
Fire, Losses, and the like, which the more judicious frequently foresee; and
which, by a true and timely Repentance may be averted, and the Almighty Hand
stayed, ever then when it is lifted up to give the Fatal Stroke, as appears by
the Ninevites Humiliation, David's opposing himself to the destroying Angel,
Hezekia's Prayer, that delivered him from appointed Death, and many other
Examples found in Holy Writ, and other Warrantable Records, etc. But not to be
tedious in the Beginning, I now Proceed to give the Reader the Sum of the
Predictions, Prophecies, or Prognostications, for the Year, 1689. As I find
them set down by these Four most Learned and Judicious Astrologers; whose
heitherto approved Truths foretold, have struck the World with no small Wonder
and Amazement.

This Year, says Mr. Patridge, Councils and Consultations, which may be hoped
to very Good Purpose; for at the Post-ventional New Moon; Two Days after its
Ingress, the Moon applies to the Sextile of Saturn, to which may be added the
Conjunction of the Fortunes and the Sextile of the Sun and Saturn, which in the
Starry Dialects, are Arguments of a Quiet and Peaceable Time; and much better
(perhaps) than expected, for there are very Emergencies, Good or Bad, that
happen in the World, but have some Manifestation from the Configuration of the
Heavens; and they from the Beginning of the Year, till toward the Spring, seem
to Denote nothing less than a Stabilitie of Worldly Affairs, were not the two
Infortanes Stars, so called, possited in a Headstrong, Malicious, and
Treacherous Sign; however the Benevolent Positions of the Favorable Planets,
Mittigate the Evil pretended, from whence we may clonclude, and hope for better
Things than many ill Spirited Persons desire; Though to other Countries, under
their Influence to Mars and Saturn in Scorpio, threatened Rebellious Mutinies,
War, Falsehood, Perjury, Violation, or Breach of Leagues, between Neighboring
Princes, Dissensions, Controversies, Murders, with Backbitings amongst
Relations; some siding with one Party or Country, and some with another; having
thus discoursed of the first part of the Year; he proceeds to the second.

Saturn, says Mr. Coly. Scorpio, and Jupiter in Aquarius; it is an ill Wind
that blows no body profit: Things seem to be in a moderate good Posture; many
cry out for Justice and plead much Loyalty, some sticking of an Old Nature,
falls in the Quadrate of Saturn, and Mars threatens a Foot of subtle aged
persons, and usually produces many strange Effects; and this following the Suns
Ingress, some M^levolent Malady is to be feared, and the Aspects being for the
m^^^ part Partamicable, seem thereby to promise Unity, Concord, G^^^ Agreement,
etc. And the Position of Jove in Aquarius, Denotes A^vancement of Worthy Men of
the Long Robe, so that we have cau^^ to hope well, notwithstanding the
Endeavors of some Wick^^ Persons to hinder our Tranquillity; and toward the
Close of t^^ Spring, hope to hear Good News, even such as will prove grates^ to
all honest Minds. From the Spring, proceeding to Summer, (...) says various
Actions and Effects will be produced throughout E^rope, and we may wait to see
the Operation of Great Things, which are promised in Foreign Parts, and such,
perhaps, that many yea^^ before have not produced; for Jove falling Retrogade
into Pisce^ in Trine, and great Reception with Venus; with many other
favorable or friendly Configurations, from whence we may Natural expect as
propitious Influences; for in any ingress of the Sun, the Fortunes are found in
their own Dignities or Reception, the do they influence Virtue and such Actions
as they Naturally signify, shall be exceedingly Augmented: And although Eminent
Change happen yet to the Benefit of Mankind, etc. and Justice Impartial
Executed upon the Great and Powerful, as well as upon the Meane^ sort, all
Things inclining to peace and Tranquillity; and so going on to Antum, or the
last Division of the Year,

This Month says he, meaning September, we have a most hateful Opposition of
Saturn and Mars; attended also with the Opposition of the Fortunes, Jupiter and
Venus, the Square of Saturn and Venus, the Square of Mars and Venus from fired
signs, which are notable Configurations, and usually produce wonderful Effects;
for Mankind is threatened with strange Distempers of Body, as Fevours,
occasioning Megrim, Madness, Phranzies, Appoplexies, Lethargies; with many
other Anonimous Diseases and Unnatural, hard to be cured, and often terminate
in sudden Death, and now expect to hear of many Roberies, and inhumane Actions
amongst Mankind; as also Treacherous Enterprises, and very sudden and amazing
Accidents in many parts of Europe, for Nature still Acts to bring her Works
about:
Marss gives the Pox, but Saturn gives the Gout;
Seas plagued with Pirates, Thieves infest the Land,
Ease proves diseases to each unruly Hand.


and thus much for the predictions of this learned Man, from whence ^e proceed
to give you an account of the Predictions and Astro^^gical Judgments of others
in General, for the year 1689. as taken ^^om their own hands, etc.

In the Beginning of the Year, says Mr. Tanner, SAturn being in the Ascending
part of Heaven, and Jupiter in the Angle of the Earth, signify Insurrections,
opposing Princes, un^ermining Government, as also Mutations and Changes in the
Af^^irs of Princes and States Alterations in Laws, etc. Threatening e^pecially
the Ottoman Empire, and not looking very favorably upon Italy, and some of the
German Princes, who will be detrimen^ed in their Affairs, and others find some
difficulty and heaviness in ^he management of their Estates and Government, and
the quartile ^spect of Saturn and Mars, Denote many bold, daring and unusual
Roberies; and if Saturn shall be in Scorpio, having North Latitude, it
^hreatens abundance of Rain, overflowing of Rivers, and Sea-banks, ^orruption
of Waters; and if Oriential, it Denotes Wars and Con^entions, between Noble men
and their Kings and Governors, etc. Especially those Countries under Aquarius,
Scorpio and Leo: Yet as ^o us, we find that Saturn and Jupiter, are aptly
toward their Trine Aspects, which carry a signification of Love and Friendship
along with them, and in May they are partially so figurated, and so continue in
the following July, intimating Emcassies, Treaties for peace, and hopeful
proposals, which will be promoted by sundry well-designing people, if not
hindered by some Malevolent Aspect, stirring up such as may give it a
disturbance; however, in the following Quarter, ^he Aspects are more
favorable, and give hopes of a great settlemen of Affairs, which God of his
Mercy Grant, especially to these ^ingdoms.

To these we may add what He says in his prediction for the Year, 1689.
THe Configuration of Heaven, (says he) attending the Solar, ^^^gress, are of a
pretty mild and calm Nature, and the heaven Bodies are moderately disposed, as
to their Mutual Aspects, yet Foreign Countries they prove not so favorable,
but threatens the with mortal Action, especially the Turks, Tartars, Polonians,
and yet soon after, Calmness may probably ensue, and we may reason^bly expect
to hear of a greater Calm, though some other Aspect threa^en to keep the World in
Action; nor are the Eclipse of this to b^ held of little account in their
Effects and Significations, according (...) the Rules of Astrology, and since
we have spoke sufficiently of oth^^ prognostical Effects, produced by the
Plannets and Heavenly Bodies what is most Noted of them, is material to be laid
down.

Of the Eclipses, and what is observable from them this year, 1689. according
to Mr. Andrews.
THe Frst Eclipse will be upon the 25th. of March, being of the Moon, between
the hours of 6 and 7 at Night, being a total and centerial Eclipse, and is to
be seen in England, if the Clouds or Mist intercept it not. Its beginning will
be at 39 Minutes past 4 a Clock the beginning of total Darkness will be at 45
Minutes past Five, the the middle or greatest Observation about 44 Minutes past
Six. The beginning of the Moons Recovering Light, about 43 Minutes past 7; and
the end about 49 Minutes toward 8, and at the time of these E lipses, Saturn
is in the Fourth Degree of Scorpio, Retrogade in the ascendant: Jupiter and
Mars are in the Fourth house, Jupiter being in the 23d Degree of Aquarius, and
Mars in the 6th. Degree, thereof the Sun and Caput Draconis, are in the 7th.
house in the 15th. Degree of Aries, and Mercury is in the 6th. house, and in
the 10th. Degree of the same sign, Retrograde; but to come near in this matter,
it is the Opinion of the Learned, that an Eclipse so posited, is of no
Benevolent Nature, but Denotes, Sorrow, Labor, Imprisonment; secret
Contrivences, clandestive Actions, and Negotiations, etc. Wherefore it man may
be reasonably conjectured, that those Countries subject to its ^^^ects, may
happen to fall under some unexpected Disorder; how^^er, we are of Opinion, that
these being only secondary Causes, ^^^mpting and not compelling, may by the
overruling power of God, (...) prevented, for in his hands are the Breath of
Life and Actions of ^ankind, on whom we ought to Rely for our safety and
preservation. The second considerable Eclipse is of the Moon, on the 19th. day
September, about half an hour after 2 of the Clock in the Morning, which will
be a total and centural Eclipse, visible with us, if the Air ^e serene and not
over-cast with Clouds: The beginning will be a^out 15 Minutes past Midnight;
the beginning of total Darkness, ^^out 56 Minutes past one of the Clock; the
middle or greatest ob^^rvation, about 48 Minutes past two of the Clock; the
beginning, (...) recovering Light, about 14 Minutes past three of the Clock,
and ^^e end about 46 Minutes past four of the Clock, the total Durati^^ about 3
hours and 54 Minutes, and the Digits Eclipsed, will be ^o and 39 Minutes, and
the most material Configurations attending ^is Eclipse, are the opposition of
Jupiter and Venus, and of Saturn ^^d Mars, it happening in the Eighth House,
called by Astrologers ^omus, morts and ends in the seventh, which they call the
Angles ^f War, Quarrels, Strife, and contentious Mars is Lord of Aries, where
the Eclipse falls out, is Retrograde and in his Detriment, so that the Effects
may seem to be of no pleasant Importance, as fur^hermore happening in the Fiery
Triplicity, and first Decant of Aries. and in this Case, according to the
Learned, it Denotes the motion of Armies, Death, and Destruction of small
Cattle, Enmity between the Vulgar and Noble sort of people, Murders, Thefts,
Discords, Wars, ^harp Fevours, Apparitions, in the Air, and Mutations in those
parts subject to the sign, wherein it happens, which we earnestly wish may be
Averted from us, and that we may enjoy our Religion, Li^erty and Property, in
peace and plenty. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

