THE REMARKABLE PROPHESIES In Order to the PRESENT TIMES:

The One of GILPINE GIRNIGO, One of the Heritable Poets of the old Thanes of
Gilliquhimnee:

The Other of Sir TRISTRAM, Clerk of the Kitchen to the Knights of King
Arthur's Round Table.

The First, faithfully Translated out of the Original Ersh, by Alister
Mackfaddock, Principal of the College of Laganachadrum:

The Other, out of the old Saxon, by Gustavus Gans, Dreelmaster of Buxstihow.

The Third of Queen GVINIVERE, that was principal Gigot, and dry Nurse, to Sir
Lancelot du Lake; He that was the great Avenger of the Injuries done to cracked
Chamber-maids.

Amsterdam, Printed by Joacim Nosche, Anno DOM. 1665.

The Publisher to the Reader.
Their Prophesies are apted to the Elevations of your Understandings, much
better than he that wrote the Scouts of Cockeny: Yet the Cockeny way is no new
thing; for many are of opinion that D. Rablais Garagantua and Pantagruel was to
typifie, that the late Covenant should bulge out from the ribs of the French
League: Neither is it much out of purpose, considering the insatiability of
their Maws, and how many thousands each of them had devoured. Some Pedants
again are of the mind, that the great Contest of Berkles, Poliarchus and
Archombrotus was not the Kingdom of France in the Person of Argenis, but who
should be Professor of Rhetoric in the College of Sorbon. Others again will
needs have Sydneys bloody Combats of Musidorus and Pyrocles against Amphiolus
and Anaxius, to be grounded upon no other Quarrel, than who should be Knight
at the Parliament for Montgomery-shire; and that old Basilius and Kallander
were two Justices of the Peace in the County that took great delight in
guzelling nappy Ale. But they are highly mistaken, that thought Zelman and
Gynecia a couple of Hermophrodites. No, no. If their delights had been double,
their passions had been mutual: but of this no more. Only I tell you, as to
their Predictions, the weakest Nodle cannot miss in the sense, since every one
takes upon him to interpret Merlin and Thomas the Rymer. If you meet with any
difficulty, it is but some night or other; Go and keep a Rendezvous with some
Coast-side Wives, who will clear you. Farewell,

THE PROPHECY OF GILPINE GIRNIGO.
IT shall fall out in those days, that the thieving and whoring Planets, Venus
and Mercury, shall gender Comets and Meteors male and female, with as great
facility as Aberlady sands cast up Skait bubles: Then will the time be, that
the Cods and Killing in the Northern seas will riot, in as great plenty, with
the Harrigals of Dutch Tarpalians, as the Country Farmers do with stibble-Geese
after the Coronation of their Corn-stacks; And the din Cow of Denmark, that
should have lowed at the Basse, shall be sucked yell by the coast-side Witches
of the Firth; And the black Bull of Barrostownnesse shall be gelt by a
phanatick zeal, because his bellowing so much resembles the great Pipes of an
Organ; And the Goat with the gilded Horn, that was sometime Valentine to a
Venetian Magnifico, shall be gallanted by the black Ram of the Bonrock, that
swam the Loch of the Lowes, and cured three hundred Ews of the Green-sicknesse;
And at the crowing of the Cock of Killimure, the black Hens of Forfar shall
begin to keckle; When the blew Bores of Buchan begin to bristle, it will be
hard to keep the Swine of the Kers of Gowry from briming; The Messengers of the
Marquisat of Minnibole will summond the Haddocks of Balantrae before the Lords
of the Session of Glenape, and charge them upon the account of spoilie, for
eating up the green beer that grew on the hanches of Griven; The Generation of
the Clyd-side Saints, that were begotten upon the steam of Mackgibbons wine,
shall persevere in their Dutch Devotions, among the sanctified Sister-hood of
Clout the Kourches: The Ghosts of those Warriors that fell at Flowdown and
Bannockburn, shall be invited to a Reconciliation-supper by that great
subterranean Monarch King Oberon: The place is Pentland Hills; and to protect
them from the night air, the cloth is to be laid under a Dock-leaf: The
entertainment is Spoon-meat, composed of the juice of Snails, and seasoned with
the seed: of the Fairn. Some three weeks, three days, and three minutes after,
there shall be heard and seen many strange apparitions and threatening voices,
mingled with sorrowful shriekings, in and about Arthur's Seat and Salisbury
Craigs: The Cyclops of Culrosse shall make such noise in soddering of Girdles,
to arm the Curassiers for Gladsmore, that the Common-bell of Edinburgh shall
scarcely be heard betwixt the West India Tullip and the Cross. But the great
expectations the World laid up for that bloody and dreadful day, shall be at a
period, and the Society of Prophecy-mongers may dispose of their Brains for
other Curiosities. Oh! but to think on the Drudgery that comes to the share of
the little Poets, in making funeral Elegies, lamentable Ditties and Epitaphs,
patcht up of as many pieces as was Dametas Armor, in memory of their
slaughtered Friends that are to pe^^^ on that ^a^a^ Lothian Heath. But yet
there is one comfort; Its agreed by articles, the Party overcome is oblidged
never to make war for the future; so that fierce and implacable quarrel, that
has so long continued 'twixt the Amazonian Generations of Heroinaes, shall at
length be decided: viz. The Eastern Vestals, that trade in white sand to scour
the caps, against the Western Widows that deal in Abercorn Mussels. She that
commands the sandy Militia, is Letronia Atramenta, daughter to a laborious
Schoolmaster in Musselburgh: the other is Barbary Bucky, Relict to a New Haven
Oyster-dregger. What the event of the battle will be, the Author says, his
Mephostophiles advises every body that is curious, to repair to the Magistrates
of Haddingtoun, the day after the fight, and there they will get sure
information. Thus much for Gilpine.

The Prophecy of Sir Tristram.
WHen Stranger-stars shall piaff among the celestial Families, with feathered
Mustachoes, and East Friezland beards and a brass countenance, equal to a
French Dancing Master, then shall the Wives of Leith be quit with the Husbands
of Corstorphine; and the phanatick faction of Calidonia shall be so feeble,
that there shall be none to countenance the villainous Act of the West-kirk, but
a few drunken besotted Elders, who (if they had their due) should bestride the
wooden Horse, with a Ruff of Quart-stoups, and a brace of Pint-bottels for
^and-^^^ings. About the same time the pickled Herring in Holland shall be at
twelve stevers a piece; and the Town of Amsterdam, in imitation of Algiers,
shall court the great Turks friendship with a Tribute of Catamites fattened
with butter, milk and black beans. Then shall the Prediction of Sybilla
Loytburnia be fulfilled, viz. That when Mahumet is glewed to the stern of a
Squab-skipper, the Whore of Babel will turn up to Presbyter John, who shall
gender a race of Usurers, whose bounty will furnish the recusant Brethren with
Ringo roots and Mondungoes: Providing still, they oblidge their Bell-men,
Readers and Beadles to conform, in regard they are members not capable of the
Benevolence. In this 1665. the long Wars that was between the Pearling-weavers
daughters of Athens and the Websters daughters of Lacedemon shall be decided by
a Match at Stool-ball, in the fields of Philippi: and the vanquished Party is
to pay a Tanzie-cake of the quantity of an ordinary Millstone. After that,
they are, with a consort of Bag-pipes and Strathdown Trumps, to give a meeting,
in the Plains of Pharsalia, to the Link-boyes of London; where, after they are
wearied with dancing Levaltoes and Pantelons, they will go to pairing, and
beget such a race of Brats of both sexes, as will be sufficient to plant the
Commonwealth of Utopia.

About the same time there will appear a Generation of Renegado stripling
Pedants, who, after they have skaffed a little Philosophy among Foreign
Universities, will return home, fraughted with as many lies, as will either
slide them into some little prattling employment, or furnish them bread and beef
from old Wives, for retailing their Fables. So much for Sir Tristram.

Queen Guinivers Prophecy.
WHen Saturn peeps out of the Clouds, and shows his bushy beard, then the
Mare-swine of the Channel will be vapouring with Dutch Caps, and carrowsing
with their Brandee; and, according to the custom of that Nation, after they
are sottishly drunk, in imitation of these upon whom they are gnawing, they
will go a whitling with their knives, by way of snedding and sneering, and make
such noise in the Valleys of the Deeps, that Neptune will be forced to order
his Life-guards of Sturgeon to go and chastise their intemperance. About which
time the saucy She pherdesse, Urania of Zealand, will be reduced to gather Bait
for the White-fishers of the Texel; and the Belgic Lion shall be so
contemptible, that she will scarcely be admitted in most parts of the World to
officiate the duty of a Cattone for catching of myce. In these days there
shall come a Greek Mountebank to Calidonia, and with him bring an Antilope,
between whose horns shall be fixed a Swing, that will cure old Wives of the
Rickets that is past sixty. Many more strange things; As, the Tinkers on Tinto
top will match with the Black-smiths daughters of Pickentillum: And Count de
Cord a Muscovitter shall marry the Countess Ragotsky; and after they are
largely entertained with Garlick-water by the Hospital Waywood of Walache;
they will, in quest of Honor, repair to the Dominions of Chawfair and
Sunnyside, where the Prince of the Country will entrust the charge of his
Male-fleet to the Count, and that of the Females to his Lady. The Court of
Admiralty on these parts is managed by a Brotherhood of B. B. that, for all
generous and requisite qualifications, they much transcend the Confraternity of
the Rosy Crucians.

In the north part of Albany, the renowned City of Bonaccord from hence shall
never have Spits and Raxes imprisoned, during the holy days of Christmasse:
For he that had his head situate in a Cambrick web (like a plotted Hogs snout
in a large plait) will be removed; and the horns of these that were of his
Tribe, will be so far sned, that there will be no danger from their pushing:
And both the Men and Women of them that are left (even Tam Trampit and his
wife) will despise their conversation. And if any of them, in a fit of
diffidence, mind to skip into the Hot-house of Eternity, there will still be
found Kilmarnoch Edges, and seldom Cany Sweet-pots wants water.

FINIS.

