THE BURGESS TICKET OF BUCKHAVEN, Given to ALEXANDER BRYSON: Within the
College thereof, upon the 32, day of Julius Caesar, School. years.

Suites called, and the Court lawfully Fenced.

By Mother Greg.

EDINBVRGH, Printed in the Year 1682.

blazon or coat of arms
THE BURGESS TICKET OF BUCKHAVEN.
THE Whilk day, compeared personally lang Sandy Tasone, Provost, Tanie Dolers,
and Willie on the Know, Bailiffs; with full consent of the Members of the
College. TO WIT, Dr. Cristopher Pills Principal, and Mr. William Else Rector,
Walter Pigs, Surgeon and Apothecary, Zacherias Silver, Goldsmiths, John Cosh
Blacksmith, Thomas Weddall Spurrier, John Spaills Wright, John Stones Masone,
little John Kistrell Shoo-maker, John Black Tailor, Robert Tasone Baxter,
Alexander Tasone Habberdasher, John Selch Trunk-maker, Hugh Macgie Mirror
Maker, David Grierson Clap-smith, Duncan Mackallum Horner, Thomas Gibson,
Constable-conveener, Richard Wood Miller, Jack Bell crier, Scour Clear
Sword-slipper, Robert Thrippeny White-Iron-man, Thomas Bell Wheel-about,
Francis Plates Peuterer, George Pipes Plummer, Lewis La-haire Perwique-maker,
Thomas Scribes Writer, James Lightbody elder, James Tason^ Hector Aiton, John
Colmer, Joshua van Solingen, James Lightfoot yr John Law, and John Griersone
Printers, Daniel Gold Imbroiderer, Clay-holes Pipe-maker, James Hydes Tanner,
Alexander Tasone, Barber, Lovy Glasier, David Dury Ship-wright, John Main Town
Major, William Rae Wobster, William Mitchell, Heriots Cook, Peter Bungs Brewer,
John Tasone Gardner, Robert Stirrops Saidler, John Tasone and George Jack
Officers, William Daes Gardners Officer, together with the whole Council of
the said Burt, For an new and lawful Election to be made of the Provost,
Baillies, Council, and others thereof. In like manner, compeared personally,
Alexander Bryson, who humbly required his Burgess-ship, who was admitted and
received for Gild-Burgess of the said Burt, with power and liberty to him. To
sell, Canarie, Purle-royal, Pontack, Vine de paris, Ranish Wine, Italian Wine,
Vine de Burdeoux, Brandy, Uscube, Strong Water, Ale, Beer, Sma-drink, Swats,
Setlings, Draff, Schirings, Pourings, and all other smaller Liquors, as
Lemonado, or Water-solis. And to take and kill all manner and sorts of Fishes,
that is within or without their abovenamed Seas, as is hereafter specified,
such as Allegators, Trouts, Eiles, Cross-fish, Brass-Fish, Killing, Ling,
Skate, Codlings, Baggaties, Padles, Haddocks, Herrings, Gremhasking-fish,
Sea-Cats, Potches, Garveis, Whiteings, Whales, Spirlings, Floocks, Sandeils,
Turbets, Stock Fish, Ling, Kipper, Slupes, Carps, Pikes, Mennans, and Watter
Paddocks, and all other the like Commodities. And siklike, to sell and gather
Dulse, Tangle, Sea-ware, Hen-ware, Slaack, and Badderlaick: And also, to gather
Muscles, Cockles, Wilks, Lugg and Lempets, Pintle-fish, Lobsters, Partens,
Buckies, Worms, and all other gray Bait; and therewith to bait the great
Line, small Line, hand Lines, Bang-net, and Casting-net. And also to use the
Wand for slaying and killing of Fishes, such as Podlays and Potches; and to
take Partains, Kavies, Crabs, Palochies, and other Shellfish, with Crook and
Climpet and all other Engines whatsoever. As also to take and kill Selches,
Powarts, Ottars, and suchlike, wherever he can apprehend them either by Sea or
Land. And the said Alexander Bryson, binds and oblieges him to watch, waird,
scot and lot, and in Skaith keep, that the said Burt be not won or taken in by
the Great Turk, the Emperor, the King of Spain, the King of Denmark, the King
of France, or any other Fugitives, Lownes, Vagabounds, Knaves, Whoores,
Harlots, Thieves, Limmers, Tinklers, Lairds, Bairds, Gaberluniemen, and other
Sturdie Beggars: And for that effect the said Alexander Bryson be armed with
Munsmegs, Morter-pieces, Cannon-royal, Cannon-ordinarie, Cannon Serpentine,
French Cannon, Demi Cannon eldest, Demie Cannon, Culvering, ordinary Culvering,
Demi Culvering, Demi Culvering something less, Sacker ordinary, Sacker or
Minian, Falcon, Falconnet, Blunderbush, Musket, Carabeine, Hulster Pistols,
Side Pistols, Pocket Pistols, Bourtrie Guns, Bane Guns, Quite Guns and Pen
Guns; So being provided of all these, ordains him never to want a Hornfull of
Powder, and likewise to be furnished with Sting, Thing, Ling, and Pike-staff,
and all other engines of War, such as was used by Alexander the Great, by
Scanderbeg and Tamerlane, at the Engagements between the King of Britain, the
French, and the Hollander; or that was used at Worster, Dumbar, York,
Newcastle, Kilsyth, Inverkeithing, Pinkie Field, Pentland, Bothwel-bridge, or
at the Bickering between Lies and Edinburgh, or at any other Fight since Cain
and Abell, to that betwixt Michael Bobin and his Wife with the Rock, to defend
the said Burt in time of War and trouble, and not to absent himself in Moss,
Muire, Cleuch, Craig, Brae, Know, How, Hill, nor no uther part whatsomever,
under the pain of poynding of his readiest goods and gear, and tinsell of his
freedom for ever. And gave in his great solemn Oath upon a Skate rumple before
the Lords and Council conveened, not to see any wrong or prejudice to the said
Burt so far as his strength and power can reach. Whilk Act above written was
read and approven in presence of the whole Magistrates and Council conveened,
with many promises to Alexander Bryson of farther preferment and authority, if
he did behave himself according to the uncivil civility of the said Burt. Upon
the whilk compeared Lang Sandy, the most ancient Skipper of the said Burt, and
protested against the said Act and Election* as not being lawfully Elected
without his consent and advice avowing himself to be the eldest blood of the
City, that because his Predecessors having evermore the rule and Government
thereof these many years bygane, past memory of man: And that he and his
Predecessors has been in possession as chief Magistrates of the said Burt,
without tineing of Election, and in continual use and custom to trade and
traffic after the said manner particularly abovementioned, And to have the
first vote, place of Court, and plainte, and all uther privileges in all
preceedings. And for that effect the said Lang Sandy, as having the eldest
right of Provostry, protested and took Instruments in Gideon Wilsons hands,
being the Town Clerk for the time, and presented Hendry Tasone, his eldest son
and Heir, and desired that he should be admitted and received in his place, in
respect he himself was grown, and aged, through much ease, drinking of strong
drink, selling of strong Waters, albeit in his youth, he might have gone
through a large Curting-ring, yet he was subject to great Travel, rowing and
sailing over high and sandy places in the Sea, and by the Art of Navigation to
compass the Seas of soft yird, and hard yird, and west to the Cardown, the soft
Buckie yird, and the west ground of the Craig, the out-ground and in ground of
Pickletillum, the outmost Channel, and inmost Channel, taking up by marks on
the Land, the Fire-bank of Berwick-law, Carlick-muire, and Great-law, Cleuch in
Clachan, the little Lomonds, Drupeis, Keley by the Law, the Lumond by the Loch,
the Cannongate, the Beacon of the Gallow-lee, the Skinoch Dinghall, and
Gridleness. AND therefore, the said Lang Sandy, as being weak and unable of
himself to discharge the Office of Provostry, desiring his son to be admitted
and received in manner foresaid, whilk made great strife and debate among the
head Clans of the said Burt, being all assembled in the said College; TO wit
Tom Tomson, alias black-Thomas, Robie Tason in the Closs, Robs Tasone, alias
white-Willies, Sandy Tasone and Jamie Tasone in the Know, and Willie Tasone in
the Brae, Thumbless Katties Good Man, David's Tasone, Isbells Davie, Junie, lang
Hendries son, Willy Tasone, Bettys Willy, Tams son, Pate Waker, dainty Nansies
son, Junie Walker Lybraes son, and Tanis Dollers lade, all Fishers or Sea
Fleshers of the said Burt, whilk desire they would in no ways grant nor stand
to, neither suffer a young Provost to be, in respect his head would not fill
his Fathers Bonnet: Upon the whilk Lang Sandy Protested and avowed to appeal to
a higher Judge. Whereupon the said Alexander Bryson sworn and admitted Burgess,
asks Acts of Court, Extracted forth of the Court Books of Buckhaven, be me, Sic
Subsc^^bitur. With the Town Seal thereunto affixt.

GIDEON WILSON. Cls. Burgide Buckhaveno.

FINIS.

