INFORMATION FOR The Lord Gray. AGAINST The Lord of Pourie.
THE Lord of Pourie has thought fit to protest against the Lords of Session,
and trouble the Estates of Parliament for remeid of Law in one of the easiest
and plainest cases that possibly could occur, and for its importance unworthie
of the Trouble of this Honorable Court, and which is shortly thus, The Lord
Gray in February 1666, dispones to Pourie for the sum of 21000 Merks the
Craige of Brughtie, with the Salmond-Fishing, Syze-Fish, and other Fishings
belonging thereto, and oblieges him to infeft Pourie in the foresaid Craige
with the Fishings; and to warrant this Infeftment at all hands. And Pourie was
thereupon Infeft under the great Seall, and entered in possession accordingly.

But Pourie exacting the Syze fish accustomed to be paid, with more then
ordinary Rigor, provocks the Earl of Panmure to whose Lands four of the Boats
liable in the Syze fish pertained, to raise Declarator of Immunity, and tho
that Pourie did likewayes raise a Declarator of Servitude on his part; Yet
Panmure prevails and is assoilied, Whereupon Pourie pursues the Lord Gray upon
his (...) the Syze fish of the said four Boats, And the Lords having heard both
parties, did most justly find almost in one voice, that the foresaid pretended
Eviction was no ground of Recourse. Against which Sentence Pourie protests, and
now applies to the Parliament for Remeid of Law.

And for the Parliaments better Information, and the satisfaction of all men in
this case. It is to be adverted. 1mo. That all paid by Pourie for the Craige
of Brughtie, with the Salmond Fishing, Syze Fish, and other Fishings thereto
belonging, was 21000 Merks, whereof there was a 1000 Merks paid to a certain
Person to procure to Pourie this bargain; So that all that was paid to the
Lord Gray was neat 20000 Merks, and for which he got of Rentalled Estate 1200
Merks, and a Hogshead of Wine for the Salmond Fishing, and 230 Merks, with a
Barrel of Salmond of a Few duty, and this by and attour the Syze Fish, which is
the subject of this Contraversie.

2do. That the Syse Fish is not expressly mentioned in the Old Rights: But the
Lord Gray and his Predecessors having come in use to uplift them, Pourie would
have them Insert in his Disposition, tho there was no more intended by the
bargain, but that Powrie should have the Craig of Brughtie, with the Salmond
Fishing, and other Fishing, and pertinents thereto belonging. 3tio. To Evince
that the Syze Fish was only expressed in the Disposition made to Pourie as a
pertinent, and with the hazard of its belonging or not belonging, is evident
from the rental, the Rule of the Barrony, whereof the Syze-Fish makes no
Artickle, because it was in effect only disponed as a pertinent possessed, but
without any assurance of Right. And 4to. It is to be adverted, that the whole
Syze Fish of the Four Boats is not in truth worth more than forty Merks, tho
Pourie Lybels them at 400, and for to Prepossess the Members of Parliament, he
has Printed and Dispersed one of his Old Informations before the Lords, which
the Lords did most Justly Judge to be of no moment; And therefore to sustain
the Lords Sentence, The Lord Gray alleges.

First, That the Syze fish not having been principally disponed, but only
adjected as a Pertinent without any express Limitation, either as to the number
of the Fish or of the Boats, The Eviction or rather the declaring any of the
Boats free can never be a ground of Recourse of Warrandice, and the Reason is,
Because that Warrandice is given and intended for that which is principally and
certainly disponed, but was never yet construed to extend to what was only
disponed Accessorie by way of Pertinent, and the Ratio Rationis, is because
what is disponed Accessorie, and by way of Pertinent, is only disponed with the
hazard, and in the Supposition, That if it be pertinent well and good, and if
not, the Disponer is not liable, because he disponed it only as a Pertinent,
and this is clear in the Ordinary case of Men's disponing Lands with the
Pertinents, or with Moss, Muirs, Fishings, and other Pertinents, where it is
most certain that as to all these Pertinents disponed only Accessorie and not
principally, the Disponer is no farther liable then to make over his Title, and
if any of them be found not to be pertinent the Disponer is free, because all
intended was to dispon what was pertinent, and as such and no farther, which
ground being applied to the Case in hand; It is evident that the Syze-fish in
the Lord Grays Disposition was only disponed Accessorie; And as pertinent, for
the Words are plain, Viz: With the Salmond Fishing, Syze-Fish, and other
Fishings thereto belonging, Or thereto pertinent; Which are the same thing, and
the expressing of the Syze-Fish signifies nothing, since it is only disponed as
pertinent, nor can it be alleged with any color, that the word belonging or
pertinent does only affect the words, (And other Fishings) immediately
preceding, and not the Syze Fish; For it is evident as the light, that the
words belonging or pertinent does affect, and is a qualification of both.

Nor can it be held for a Rule, that whatever is Disponed expressly, and for an
onerous cause falls under the warrandice; Because it is evident, that if any
thing (tho never so express) be only disponed by way of pertinent. It falls no
farther under the warrandice, save to oblidge the Disponer, that he has not done
any thing in prejudice of his Title, talis qualis, and such as it is; But the
true Rule of Law is, that these things do only fall under absolute warrandice,
which are disponed for an onerous cause, principally; certainly, and absolutely,
and not with the qualification of pertinent, which in all sense as well as Law,
does perpetually import its own hazard, and never falls under absolute
warrandice.

2do. For farther clearing of the undoubted ground of Law above laid down; It is
to be remembered, that the Syze Fish are neither in the Old Rights, nor were
they in the Rental of Pouries bargain, nor were they precisely defined either
as to the number of Fishes or Boats, but were only expressed at Pouries desire,
and disponed as belonging, or pertinent to give him a Title talis qualis, and
as his Author had, but no ways to oblidge his Author in absolute warrandice,
which can never with any show of Sense or Reason be applied to anything which
is only disponed as belonging or pertinent; And this is so certain that when
ever it is intended, that any thing disponed, as pertinent, should fall under
the absolute warrandice, It is then expressly provided, that the Disponer shall
warrant it to be pertinent, But if it be only disponed as pertinent without
the foresaid express provision, then in all Law and sense the words Belonging
or pertinent are taxative qualifieing the right, and plainly importing that the
thing is only disponed with the hazard and Talis qualis, as it is, which is
exactly the Lord Gray's Case, as to the Syze-Fish disponed as pertinent, or
belonging, as said is.

3tio. The Castle of Bruchtie was disponed with the Syze-Fish thereto
belonging, And to evince that the Words thereunto belonging, do affect, and
qualify the Syze-Fish, is evident from this Ground, That the Syze-Fish,
without the said Restriction, is indefinit vague and uncertain, which cannot
possibly be the Subject of Warrandice, unless the Syze-Fish had been specified
and determined by the number both of Fish and Boats; And this is so certain,
that if we put the Case, that the Disposition had been of the Craig of
Brughtie, with the Syze-Fish and no more; Must not all Men have understood it
of the Syze-Fish thereto belonging? For otherwise to understand it of all the
Syze-Fish whatsomever, had been plainly absurd, seeing then, That the Syze-Fish
disponed, must be understood taxative of the Syze-Fish belonging or pertaining
to the Craig: With what color of Reason can it be asserted, That the Words
thereunto belonging, do not affect the Syze-Fish, when the Syze-Fish cannot be
otherwise understood; And therefore since the Syze-Fish were only Disponed by
the Lord Geay, as belonging or pertinent; It is evident that they were disponed
with the hazard, and do not fall under the Warrandice, specially seeing that
albeit four Boats be declared free, yet there are six Boats yet remaining,
which is more then sufficient to sustain the Lord Gray's Disposition; Seeing in
Plain Scots, his disponing of the Craige of Brughtie, with the Syze-Fish
thereunto belonging, was neither less nor more, but with the Syze-Fish, whereof
the Lord Gray was then in the possession, and which he was willing to dispone
as Pertinent. and transmit what Right he had with the hazard, and so can never
fall under the Clause of absolut Warrandice.

4to. And for super abundance, it could be demonstratt, (if needful) That
Pourie succumbed in his Declarator against the Earl of Panmure through his own
Default and mismannadgement of the Process, in so far as the Lord Gray having
furnished the Pursuer with two old witnesses, who would have deponed upon more
as 60 years Possession, if they had been interrogat thereon; And de facto, one
of the Witnesses; did depone upon sixty years Possession, and the other
concurring Witness having only deponed in general terms, that the Possession
had been since his Memory, and Pourie having neglected to interrogate him upon
particular years, albeit he was aged 80 years; Yet the Lords found that the
memory of man in general, is not to be extended above 40 or 50 years at most,
from which 50 years 7 years of Panmures Minority being subtracted, and four
years that Pouerie had a Woodset, and Possessed the Lord Panmures Land, affected
with the servitude, being also subduced upon that principal in Law, that res
sua Nemeni servit, which brought the Lord Gray, and his Authors Possession to
39 years allennarly, and so not completing the prescription, was the direct
occasion of Panmures Decree of Immunity; From which the Defender argues two
things. 1mo. That the objection was personal against the Pursuer ( nam
exceptiones ex persona emptoris objectae si obstant venditor de evictione ei
non tenetur Leg: 27. ff: de evic:) 2do. That the immunity is personal to the
Earl as to his own proper lands, whereas the other Heritors who have no
Minority, or personal objection against the pursuer, are still subject to the
exaction.

But the Lord Gray refers himself to the plain grounds of Law and Reason above
laid down, which he is confident are so strong and pregnant for maintaining the
Lords unanimous sentence, that the Parliament will-find it was optime
judicatum; And that Pourie for his groundless and wilful protesting, and
oblidging the Lord Gray to so great expenses and trouble in defending this so
unconsiderable and trivial affair, both before the Session, and now before the
Honorable Court of Parliament, ought to be condemned in large expenses.


