Great News from Germany: OR, A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE DISCOVERY OF A Treacherous
Design To BETRAY the CITY of MENTZ To the FRENCH. With a LIST of the Confederat
Army near the RHINE.
LICENSED, July 1. 1691. J.F.

ONE Consbruk, Commissary-General in the City of Mentz, having kept a secret
correspondency with the French King, in order to betray that City into his
hands, the Plot was discovered in this following manmer:

The French sent a Trumpeter into the City of Mentz, under pretense to ransom
some Prisoners of War, but in effect to deliver secretly some Letters to the
Commissary-General. The Trumpeter staying at the said place somewhat longer
than was expected, the French General was very uneasy about it, and sent the
Marquess de Villacart, Maistre de Camp of the Regiment of Horse of Berry,
Commander of the Carabines, and Nephew to Mo^sieur de Louvois, together with
Monsieur Belleviere, Major of the Royal Regiment of Horse, and Mr. Fellinier,
Captain of a Troop of Horse, toward the City, to try if they could hear any
news of the said Trumpeter; but unluckily for them, they were all made
Prisoners by a Troop of Dragoons, who being sent by the Governor to go in
pursuit of a French Party, met these three abovementioned Officers on their
return. At the Entrance of the Gate of the City they met the Trumpeter; and one
of the Officers that was taken, told him in a great passion, That he was the
cause of their being made Prisoners; and that they would not fail to get him to
be hanged, as soon as they were set at liberty. The Trumpeter did not like the
Proposals; and being besides, a German, he thought it safest for him to return
into the City; and going straight to the Governor, acquainted him with what
had past. General Count Thungen, the Governor of the City, being extremely
surprised at it, sent immediately for the Commissary-General, and asking him
about the Letter, and the Commissary denying that ever he had received one the
Governor sent for Six Hussares, who after having stripped him of all his
Clothes to his very shirt, in the General's presence several Letters of
dangerous concerns were found about him, hidden in some secret places of his
Body. It was plainly discovered by them, that he had betrayed to the French
King all the Measures that were taken in the City; and that he was to set the
City on fire, as soon as the French were come near to Bombard it. There was a
Letter, found about him, writ by the French King's own hand; and another
written by him to the French King; wherein he thanks him for the exact and
regular payment of his Pension, which has been Two hundred French Pistoles a
Month: He tells him, that a great many are teady to asist him in all his
undertakings for the French King's Service; and it is said, he will in few days
be put to the Rack, in order to discover the said Traitors. He himself is put
into Iron Chains, and an Express is sent to seize his Brother, who is Secretary
to the Emperor; his own Secretary, who was secured with his Master, has since
Poisoned himself in the Prison. The Governor-General, Count Thungen, has
ordered all his Goods to be seized at Costheim, where the said Commissary did
reside, amongst which, there was found a Trunk full of French money, and a
silver Service. If this dangerous Conspiracy had not been so opportunely
discovered, the City of Mentz, the taking of which cost the Duke of Lorain so
much pains, and the Germans so much Blood, had been now all in Ashes. The
French have sent a Trumpeter into the City, to let the Governor know, That in
case he did not surrender the three Officers, they would deste^^ the City: But
the Governor has answered them, That upon the throwing of the first Bomb into
the City, he would immediately hang the said three Officers upon the Rampart.

A List of the Confederat Army near the Rhine.
The Forces of the Elector of Saxony.
FOOT. THE Regiment of Guards, 1500 General Schoning's, 1600 Count Reise's,
1000 Sintzendof's, 1000 Duke Christiana's, 1000 Dusteradts, 1000 Two Regiments
of Granadiers, 800 HORSE. The Regiment of Guards, 500 Schoning's, 500 Braun's,
500 Haubitz's, 500 Lifeguard, Braunitz, 500 Two Regiments of Dragoons, 1000
Foot of Gotha. Bibra's, 1000 Neitsch, 1000 The Dragoons of Ramsdorf. 500 Total
13900 The Troops of the Circle of Franconia, 10000 The Troops of Suabia, 10000
The Duke of Wirtenberg's, 6000 Two Regiments of Hussars, 1200 Two Bavarian
Regiments. Three Regiments of Saltzburg. The Regiments of Ziebelsdorf and
Swanenfeld, 3000. The Regiment of Ottingen, 1600 Total 31800. In all, 45700.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1691.


