THE MYSTERY OF FAITH OPENED UP. Or some SERMONS concerning Fa^ two whereof
were not formerly printed. Wherein the Nature, Excellency, and Usefulness of
that noble Grace is much cleared, and the practice thereof most powerfully
pressed. Whereunto are added three other Sermons, two concerning the
Great-Salvation, one of these not formerly printed, and a third concerning
Death.

By that pious and worthy Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Andrew Gray, late
Minister of the Gospel in GLASGOW.

All these Sermons being now carefully revised and much corrected.

John 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God.

Glasgow, Printed by ROBERT SA^, and are to be sold at his shop, (...)

CHRISTIAN READER.
AMongst many weighty and soul piercing sentences that ye will find in these
following Sermons, this is one; That the professors of this age, whether they
go to Heaven or Hell, they will be the greatest debtors that shall be in either
place: the one to the free grace of God, and the other to his Justice. And
certainly, if we speak of these in this time, whose blessed lot it shall be to
inherit the Kingdom, they cannot but acknowledge themselves indebted to his
love, above all that have gone before them, for washing them from such ugly
pollutions, as this generation has been defiled with; for bringing the^
through such great tribulations, preserving them in the midst of so great
tentations, and dangerous snares, and have encompassed them; yea, and still
keeping in the light before them, notwithstanding of so many blasts (if we may
so speak) from all the four winds of Hell to blow it out. And on the other
hand, if we shall speak of these who in this generation shall perish, assuredly
their debt unto Divine Justice must be exceeding great, above all who are gone
down to the pit before them; because the rod of their mercies will be found to
have been many Cubits longer, and many Cubits broader, then theirs who lived in
the preceding ages, and the great things that the Lord has wrought in our
days, have born a greater testimony against the wickedness, hardness, and
atheism of this time, then of many former. But above all, the great measure of
Gospel light that he has no less plentifully offered then wonderfully
preserved to this generation, beyond all our Ancestors, has undoubtedly made
the sin of these who shall utterly reject their own mercy so out of measure
sinful; and their unbelief so exceedingly inexcusable, that their guilt must
needs justify Corazin and Bethsaida, or Sodom and Gomorrah, in that day when
every man shall give account of himself to God. And amongst the many
preaching-witnesses, that (alace! we are afraid) shall compear in that day
against many yet living in their pleasures, and dead while they live; This now
glorified Author cannot but be one, whose testimony must be very condemning,
especially to the vain, loose, negligent, and time wasting youth in this age:
For when he was first drawn forth to the Ministry, he was but a youth indeed,
scarce twenty years complete; for within that age, that by the Constitutions of
this Church (except in case of more than common abilities, which indeed he had)
is required for entering in that great and holy Calling: And for the space of
two years after (which was all the time that the Church enjoyed his labor) he
was helped to press the truths and threatenings of God so home upon the
consciences of his hearers, that as it was observed of him; by one of his most
learned and pious Colleagus, Master Durham, who is now in glory with him, he
did many times cause the hair of their head to stand up: The Lord not only
hereby verifying his Word, that he can take the weak things of the World to
confound the strong; and out of the mouths of babes can perfect his own praise:
but designing also (as would seem of purpose) to send a boy out of the school
for a reprover of the sluggishness of his people, that thereby the aged might
be the more ashamed, and the younger more afraid. Neither do we think that this
was all; but truly when we consider what measure of graces, gifts, and
experiences the Lord did bestow upon so young a person: and then with what
humility, self-denial, gravity, prudence, diligence, authority and moderation,
he was helped to manage these Talents, during that short time of his Ministry.
It may be justly conceived that the Lord brought him forth to be a great
conviction, even to many of us in the Ministry, who came into our Masters
Vineyard long before him and will go out behind him. And indeed to us it
looks somewhat like the Lords taking up of the little child, and setting him
amongst the midst of his contending Disciples, in th^se times, that even they
who would be greatest amongst us, might be the least, and see somewhat of their
own weakness.

As to the little Piece, whatever ye shall find in it, it has this to say for
it self, that whereas many writings in the World do intrude themselves upon the
Press, yet this the Press has violently thrust into the world: For some young
Student, from his good affection to the edification of the Lords people, and
(no doubt) from his high esteem of the precious Author his memory, having given
into the Press a copy of some of these Sermons, being only notes taken from his
mouth when he preached them; no sooner were they seen abroad, but all the
Presses in the Nation fell a laboring about them, so that (if we mistake not)
in less then two or three months time, three or four Impressions were cast of,
yet all of them so imperfect and maimed, that howbeit the excellency of the
matter, and the fresh remembrance of the worthy Author, his name made him very
sweet to many (especially those who had heard him preach) yet the unsuitable
dress wherein they appeared, and their mistakes of the first Writers (they
being hard liable to take up every thing as it was spoken) occasioning diverse
material failings in the sense, besides lesser faults, could not but be a
trouble to those who were acquainted, not only with the singular graces, but
parts also of the eminent Youth. This gave occasion to some friends to speak a
little what way these prejudices, which both the Truth and the Authors name
might ly under, by these uncorrect Impressions. And finding that the Copy which
by providence the worthy young Gentlewoman, who was his wife, had lying by
her, though it was but Notes taken from his mouth, yet was the most correct
that could be found: And that it also did contain the whole purposes that had
been preached upon the Texts; Yea, the whole purposes concerning Faith that he
had preached, according to that method proposed in the first of the Sermons
formerly published. This was undertaken to be revised by some, who albeit none
of the fittest for the employments, yet rather or nothing should be done in the
business, were content to bestow some hours upon it, according as other
necessary employme^ts would permit. And now having sought out all the Notes of
these Sermons, which we could find from other hands, and compared them with the
Copy above mentioned, we do again present them unto the Lords people, not with
any confidence that our pains has put any new luster upon them; only we
have some hopes that the whole subject being now before them, and these things
in the way of expression helped, which either might seem to be somewhat
unpleasant, or liable to mistakes, they shall not now be less edifying, nor less
acceptable then formerlie they were. We did not think fit to make any
considerable alterations, as to the method, or other things of that kind, lest
happily by straining his excellent purposes too much, to shape them to the
ordinary rules, or to reduce them to that order which might best have pleased
our selves, we should have vvronged the matter it self, at least have put them
to a loss who did hear him preach, and it may be now upon their reading things
in that same order as they heard them, will be the more readily brought under
the impressions of that liveliness, power and weights which (it may be)
formerly they felt upon their heartvvhen he was speaking.

If the method do not altogether satisfy some spir, rits, or the explication
seem not so full; or if they firse some introductions which possibly lead not
in so close, or seem not so suitable to the subject of the Sermons; or happily now
and then there be some little digressions from the main purpose, we shall desire
that this may not at all be constructed to be the Authors ignorance of rules
and method, or his want of abilities in humane learning it being well known to
those who were best acquainted with him, that he had a scholastic spirit, and
was in reading far beyond his age and opportunities for studying; but as to all
these, we shall entreat you rather to consider: 1. His age, and that his gift
was but in the very moulding and breaking (as we speak) in the point of order
and method, when the Lord was pleased to call him home from his work. 2. That
every man has his proper gift of God; who in his great wisdom, and certainly
for the good of the Church, does so order, that there is somewhat singular and
peculiar almost in every man's way, as to these things. 3. For any thing we
know, he had never that high esteem of this, or any other of his labors, as to
design any of them for public view, and these are but Notes taken from his
mouth. 4. We are persuaded he studied more his hearers then himself. Ye will
easily perceive when ye have but read a little, that he has been a man of a
very zealous temper; that the great benfil of his spirit, and that which he did
wholly spend himself about, was to make people know their dangerous condition
by nature, and by all means to persuade them to believe and lay hold upon the
great salvation: And truly that a man in such a frame should less attend to
these lesser things, is not to be wordered at. And indeed though these things
be good in themselves, and worthy to be looked to in their own place; yet for a
Minister of the Gospel, in all Auditories, and upon all occasions, to pin upon
every purpose to such a method, and insist unto such a measure of explications
and criticismes upon words, it is but to setter himself, and to starve his
people. 5. Consider the dullness of the most part of hearers in this age, and
how hard a thing it is to awake a sleeping world, and to get them but to think
that it does concern them to hear in earnest; and possibly it was not a small
piece of spiritual wisdom in him (and it may be not unfit to be imitated by
others) to b^gin or end all his Sermons with an awaking word concerning Heaven
or Hell, or Judgment, and the danger of choosing the evil, and refusing of the
good. 6. For digressions, the truth is, that his soul was so filled with such
longings after Heaven and Glory, and so inflamed with the love of Christ,
especially toward the latter end of his race, that when he fell upon those
subjects, upon which you will see most of these digressions are, he could not
well contain himself, nor easily bring off his own spirit, a thing not unusual
to the Saints in Scripture: And howbeit such things might seem somewhat
singular in the time, and not so coherent; yet now we have grounds to
apprehend, that they were often strong influences of the Lords Spirit, stirring
up a lamp, as it were, into a sudden blaze. that was not to burn long in his
Church. But now we shall detain you no longer, only this we may assure you of,
that although these Sermons are neither so exact, nor so full, as doubtless
they would have been, if they had come from the Authors own pen; yet, as I dare
say, they were studied with prayer, preached with power, and backed with
success; so also if ye shall read them with consideration, meditate with prayer,
and practice with diligence, ye shall never find your time nor pains ill
bestowed; but shall have cause to bless the Lord for this, amongst other helps
that he has given, for making you meet for the inheritance of the Saints in
light. That it may be blessed to this end, is the earnest desire and prayer of
your servants in the work of the Lord,

TO. TRAIL. JO. STERLING.


THE MYSTERY OF FAITH OPENED UP.
SERMON I.
JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, etc.


THIS everlasting Gospel, in which there are drawn so many precious draughts
and divine lineaments of the transcendent beauty of a crucified Savior, and of
the riches of his unsearchable grace, is a most precious and excellent thing;
not only because it does contain most absolute and sublime precepts and
commands, in the exercise and obedience of which, we do not only attain unto
the highest pitch in holiness; but likewise, because it contains most rich
and precious promises, in the possession and fruition of which, we are advanced
to the highest pinnacle of eternal blessedness; this is clear in the grace of
Faith; for what does more purify the hearts and stamp it with the Image of the
invisible God, then this grace of Faith? And what richer promises are annaxed
to any duty, then to this duty of believing to wit, everlasting life, and
fruition of God; so that if we had dwelt forty days at the foot of Mount
Sinai, and had been under the greatest discovering and condemning power of the
Law, we may yet come with boldness to Mount Sion, and there embrace Jesus
Christ, who is the end of the Law for righteousness to such as believe: Upon
which Mount he stands, holding forth the golden Scepter of his peace,
desiring us to embrace him, and is crying out that word in Isai 65.1. Behold
me, behold me, O may we not summon Angels, and those twenty four elders about
the Throne, to help us to wonder that ever such a command as this came forth,
that we should believe on the name of the Son of God, after that we had broken
that first and Primitive command, That we should not eat of the forbidden tree!
Was not this indeed to make mercy rejoice over judgment? And, O may we not
wonder at the precious oath of the everlasting Covenant, where^y he has sworn,
that he delights not in the death of sinners? What (suppose ye) were poor
Adams thoughts when at first the doctrine of freegrace, and of a crucified
Christ Jesus a Savior, was preached unto him in Paradise? What a divine
surprisal was this, that Heaven should have preached peace to earth, after that
earth had proclaimed war against Heaven! Was not this a low step of
condescendency, to behold an offended God preaching peace and good will to a
guilty sinner? What could self-destroying Ada^ think of these morning and first
discoveries of this everlasting Covenant; Christ, as it were, in the morning of
time, giving vent to that infinite love, which was resting in his bosom and
precious heart before the foundation of the world was laid? We know not whether
the infiniteness of his love, the eternity of his love, or the freedom of it,
makes up the greatest wonder: but sure these three joined together, makes up
a matculess and everlasting wonder. Would any of you ask that question, what is
Christ worth? We could give (...) answer so suitable as this; It is above all
the Arithmetic of all the Angels in Heaven, and all the men on earth, to
calculate his worth; all men here must be put to a divine non plus. This was
Jobs divinity, Job 28.13. Man knows not the price of wisdom; and must not
Jesus Christ, who is the precious object of faith, and wisdom of the Faither,
be a supereminent and excellent One, who has that name of King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, not only engraven on his vesture (which points out the
conspicuousness of his Majesty) but even also upon his thigh, to point out that
in all his goings and motions, he proves himself to be higher than the Kings
of the earth? And howbeit the naked proposing of the object does not convert;
yet if once our souls were admitted to behold such a sight, as Christ in his
beauty and Majesty, and to be satisfied with the divine rays of his
transcendent glory, then certainly we should find a blessed necessity laid upon
us of closing with him: for Christ has a sword proceeding out of his precious
mouth, by which he does subject and subjugat his own to himself, as well as he
has a sword girded upon his thigh, by which he judges and makes war with his
enemies. We confess it is not only hard, but simply impossible; to commit an
hyperbole in commending of him; his worth being always so far above our
expressions, and our expressions always so far beneath his worth, therefore we
may be put to propose that desire unto him; Exalt thy self, O Lord, above the
Heavens.

But now to our purpose, being at this time to (...) discourse upon that
radical and precious grace of Faith, we intend to speak of it under this
twofold notion and consideration. First, we shall speak of it as it is
justifying, or as it does lay hold upon the righteousness of a crucified
Savior, making application of the precious promises in the Covenant of free
grace, which we call justifying Faith. And in the second place, we shall speak a
little unto Faith, as it does lay hold upon Christ's strength; for advancing the
work of mortification; and does discover the personal excellencies of Jesus
Christ by which we advance in the work of Holiness and divine conformity with
God, which we call sanctifying Faith. However, it is not to be supposed that
these are different habits of Faith, but different acts flowing from the same
saving habit, laying hold and exercising themselves upon Christ indifferent
respects, and for diverse ends. Now to speak upon the first, we have made
choice of these words. The Apostle John in the former verse had been pointing
out the precious advantages of the grace of Obedience, and of keeping of his
Commands, that such an one has, as it were, an arbitrary power with God, and
does receive many precious returns of prayer: As likewise, that one who is
exercised in the grace of Repentance, is Gods delight; which is included in
this, that he does those things that are well pleasing in his sight. And now in
these words he does, as it were, answer an objection that might be proposed
about the impossibility of attaining these precious advantages, seeing his
commands were so large, and that hardly could they be remembered. This he does
sweetly answer, by setting down in this one verse a short compend or breviary
both of Law and Gospel, viz. That we should love one another, which is the
compend of the Law, and that we should believe on the Name of his Son, which is
the compend of the Gospel; and by this he shows the Christian that there are
not many things required of him for attaining these excellent advantages; but
if he exercise himself in the obedience of these two comprehensive
commandments, he shall find favor both with God and man. And as concerning this
precious grace of Faith, we have, 1. The advantages of it employed in the words,
and clear also from the scope, as no doubt all the commands have infinite
advantages infolded in their bosom; which redou^ds to a believer, by his
practicing of them. And 2. the excellency of it holden forth in the words, in
that it is called his command, as if he had no other command but this. And the
Greek particle is here prefixed, which has a great deal of emphasis and force
in it, and this is his Commandment. But 3. there is this also, the absolute
necessity of this grace, holden forth here in this word, his Commandment; as if
he had said by proposing of this command, I do set life and death before you,
and that you would not conceive that it is an arbitrary and indifferent thing
for you to believe or not; but be persuaded of this, that as an infinite
advantage may constrain you to the obedience of it, so absolute necessity must
persuade you to act that which is of your everlasting concernment. And lastly,
ye have the precious object upon which Faith (which is justifying) does
exercise it self, and that is upon the name of the Son of God: and no doubt
faith is that excellent grace which does elevate the soul unto a sweet and
inseparable union with Christ, and is that golden and precious knot that does
eternally knit the hearts of these precious friends together. Faith is that
grace that draws the first draughts of Christ's precious image on our hearts,
and by love does accomplish and perfect them. No, Faith takes hold not only on
the faithfulness of God, that he is a God of truth, and that in him there is no
lie: but likewise it takes hold on the Omnipotency of God, that he is one to
whom nothing is too hard; and on the infinite mercy and love of God, that he is
one who does delight to magnify this attribute above all his works; and these
are the three great pillars of justifying Faith. From the first, it answers all
the objections of sense, which does ordinarily cry forth; Does all his promise
fail for evermore?

And that with his one word, If he has once purposed it, he will also do it;
and if he has once spoken it, he will also make it come to pass. From the
second, it answers all these objections that may arise from carnal reason,
and probability, which tends to the weakening of his confidence. And these do
oftentimes cry out; How can these things be? But Faith laying hold upon the
Omnipotency of God, it staggers not at the promise, but is strong in the faith
giving glory to God. And it is the noble and divine exercise of this heroic
grace of Faith, that these objections of reason and probability, which it
cannot answer, it will lay them aside, and yet close with the promise; which
was the practice of believing Abraham, who considers not his own body being
weak, nor the barrenness of Sarahs womb. As likewise it was the commendable
practice of that woman, Matthew. 15. who not being able to answer the second
trial of her faith from reason; yet notwithstanding, Faith made her cry out,
Have mercy on me, O Son of David. And from the last, a Christian does answer
all the arguments of misbelief, which does arise from the convictions of our
unworthiness and sinfulness; which makes us oftentimes embrace that Divinity of
Peter's, Luke 5.8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man. But Faith taking hold
on the infinite mercy and love of Christ, it answers all with this: He walks
not with us according to that rule of merit, but according to that precious and
golden rule of love and boundless compassion.

But before we shall speak any thing unto you of these things, we would a little
point out some few things to be known as previous to these; we shall not dwell
long in pointing out the nature of justifying Faith: It is that grace whereby a
Christian being convinced of his lost estate, and of an utter impossibility to
save himself, he does flee to the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and unto him
who is that precious City of refuge, and there does abide till our High Priest
shall die, which shall not be for ever. Or if ye will, it is a sweet traveling
of the immortal soul betwixt infinite mercy, and infinite love; betwixt an
utter impossibility to save our selves, and a complete ability in him to save
to the uttermost; betwixt abounding sin, and superabounding mercy: hence Faith
is often holden forth to us in Scripture under that notion of coming, Isai.
55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. Rev. 22.17.
Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he
is able also to save them to the uttermost that come to God by him. And we may
say by the way, that if once a sinner could be brought to this, to count all
his own righteousness but filthy rags, and to believe that a man is as really
justified before God by imputed righteousness, as if it were by inherent
holiness; surely such an one were not far from the Kingdom of God. Neither shall
we stand long to point out this unto you, that it is your duty to believe; for
it is clear, not only from this place, but likewise from Isai 45.22. Look unto
me, and be ye saved, all ye ends of the Earth, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all
ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. John 14.1. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me. Isai. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts,
come ye to the waters; and he that has no money, come, buy without money, and
without price. But oh! it is a great misery of many (and that which may be a
subject of a perpetual lamentation) that we can neither be subject to the Law,
as commanding to obey it, or as threatening to believe it: Nor to the Gospel, as
promising to embrace it, and sweetly to receive it. O but that primative
temptation and delusion whereby Satan did deceive our first father, is that
whereby he yet seeks to catch and delude many souls, viz. That though we eat of
the forbidden fruit, and walk in the vain imaginations of our own hearts, yet
he does suggest this to us; that we shall not die, but shall once be as God; this
is Satan's great and deluding Divinity: And therefore to enforce this great and
precious command a little further, we shall propose these considerations.

First, that the Gospel has laid no obstruction in our way of closing with
Christ, and partaking of the effects of the Gospel; but on the contrary,
shows that the great impediment is our want of willingness, which we lay in
our own way, as is clear from John 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye may get
life; as likewise from Revel. 22.27. where the Gates of the Gospel are cast
open, and whosoever will, are commanded to enter in: So that although you may
father your misbelief upon your inability, or that your spot is not the spot of
his people, yet know that the rise and original of it is want of willingness.
But to make this more clear, we would have you knowing this, that all the
qualification annexed to this commandment of Faith, as that i^ Math. 11.28.
speaks out the qualifications rather of these that will come, then of all
these that ought to come: Or he inviteth these that through the Spirit of
discouragement and misbelief, have the greatest reluctance to come; and may not
that cardinal and soul-refreshing promise, John 6.37. stop the mouth of
misbelief, so that it should have nothing to say? He that comes unto me, I
will in no wise cast out; ye may reduce your misbelief rather to the sinfulness
of your will, then to the sinfulness of your walk, and if once ye could come to
the length of willingness to embrace Jesus Christ, all other objections and
knots should be sweetly loosed and dissolved.

Secondly, consider that though we should pray the one half of our time, and
weep the other, yet if we want this noble grace of Faith, the wrath of God shall
abide on us. What are all the works of these hypocrites, and those glistering
acts of Law-sanctification, but a plunging of our selves in the ditch, Until
our own clothes abhor us? Therefore it is that after the Prophet Zachary has
made mention in the twelfth Chapter of this Prophecy, of making bitter
lamentation for him whom we have pierced, as for an only Son, yet in the
beginning of the 13. Chapter, he makes mention of a Fountain opened to the
house of David, for sin and for uncleanness; which may intimate unto us, that
although we have washed our selves with our own tears, yet there is use of the
blood of Christ, and that we must be washed in that fountain even from our own
rightousnesses, which are but as filthy rags.

Thirdly, consider that great and monstrous sinfulness that is in this sin of
unbelief; we will strain at a gnat, but many will easily swallow down this
Camel: We will tithe mint and annise, and fast twice in the week, but neglect
faith and love, and judgment, which are the weighter things of the Law. And
indeed there are these things which speak out the sinfulness of unbelief. 1.
That when the holy Ghost is sent to convince the world of sin, John 16.9. he
pitched upon this sin, as though there were no other sin of which the World had
need to be convinced: He will convince the world of sin, because they believe
not on the Son of God: and no doubt there is more sinfulness in that sin, then
in many breaches of the Moral Law, it being a sin against matchless love, and
against that which is the remedy of sin. 2. That it is called by way of
eminency, disobedience, as is clear from Heb. 4.11. Lest any of you fall under
the same example of unbelief; or as the word may be tendered, lest any of you
fall after that example of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.3. That amongst all these
that shall be eternally excommunicate from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, those that are guilty of this sin of unbelief, they are
put in the first place, Rev. 21.1. And 4. That unbelief does contradict and
deny these three precious and cardinal attributes of God. 1. Does not unbelief
contradict his faithfulness, and make him a liar? 1 John 5.10. 2. Does it not
contradict the infiniteness of his power? And 3. the infiniteness of his love,
and supposes that there is something too hard for him which his power cannot
reach, nor his infinite love overcome? We may reduce many of our questions and
disputings of his good will to this original, viz. to the disputing of his
power. No doubt, if we belong to him, we shall once sing that note of
lamentation over our unbelief; This is our infirmity, for changes are from the
right hand of the most High.

And lastly, to enforce this precious command of Faith, consider that it is his
command which speaks forth this, that we must not take an indulgence or
dispensation to our selves to believe, or not to believe at our pleasure: and
is it not a strange thing that Christians are less convinced of the breaches of
the Commandment of Faith, then of other commands? They think misbelief to be
but a Zoar, a little sin; and it proceeds either from this, that the
convictions of other sins (as the neglect of prayer, or the sin of swearing, or
committing adultery) do arise from a natural conscience; for there is somewhat
of natures light to make us abominate and hate them; when yet the light of
nature will not lead us, to the convictions of the sinfulness of misbelief, it
being a Gospel and more spiritual sin. Or it proceeds from this, that
unbelief does ordinarily pass veiled under the vizard of some refined virtue,
as humility and tenderness, though that rather it may be said, that it is pride
and ignorance, clothed with the garments of humility. And no doubt, Christ
does account obedience to this commandment of Faith, the greatest act of
humility, as is clear from Romans 10.3. where it is called submission; they
submitted not to the righteousness of God. Or else it proceeds from this,
that we conceive that the commandment of Faith is not of so large extent as
other commands, and so does not bind us to the obedience of it; but know this,
that it shall be the condemnation of the world, that they have not believed on
the Name of the Son of God; and no doubt but it is Satan's great design and
cardinal project, to keep us back from obedience to the commandment of faith,
and that we should not liste^ to the precious promises of this everlasting
Gospel, but should reject the counsel of God against our selves, and refuse his
precious and divine call.

The second previous consideration that we would give, shall be to show you
what are the causes that there is so much disputing of our interest, and so
little believing; that we are unstable as water, marring our own excellency,
spending so much of our time in walking under a cloud, and are so seldom
admitted to read our names in these precious and eternal records of Heaven. No
doubt, these things have influence upon it, viz. 1. That we are more judging of
God by his dispensations, then by his Word, supposing ever the change of
dispensatio^s to speak for the change of our state; this is misbeliefs
Divinity, that when sense cannot read love in hi^ face, but he appears to
frown, and to cast a clou^ over it, then it is presumption (says sense) to
rea^ love in his heart, or in his Word; but know it was self-denying practice
of believing Job, to cry out, Though he should kill me, I will believe in him:
therefore make not dispensatio^s your Bible; otherwise ye will stumble at the
noon tide of the day, and shall halt in your way; knew you never what such a
thing as this meaned, to ascend in overcoming thoughts of his love,
notwithstanding any thing that his dispensations might preach? We conceive,
that if the eyes of our faith were opened, we might see infinite love engraven
on the darkest acts, and most dismal-like dispensations of his to us, though it
be oftentimes written in dark and dim characters to sense.

2. There is this likewise which has influence upon our so much disputing and
misbelieving, viz. a guilty conscience, and the entertainment of some
predominant lust, which oftentimes occasioneth our walking in darkness, and
having no light, This is clear from 1 Timothy 1.19. where that precious jewel of
Faith can be holden in no other place but in a pute conscience, that is that
Royal place wherein it must dwell; and no doubt, if once we make shipwreck of a
good conscience, we will err concerning our Faith. A bosom-Idol when it is
entertained, does exceedingly mar the vigorous exercises of these graces, which
are evidences of our faith; and certainly Grace rather in its degrees, then in
its sincerity, or simple being only, is that which gives the clear evidence of
Faith. Therefore when we find not love in its high and eminent actings, we
hardly win to make it any clearly-concluding demonstration of our Faith.

3. As likewise a bosom idol when it is entertained, makes us to lose much of
our high esteem and reputation of Jesus Christ, which does exceedingly
interrupt the sweet and precious actings of faith. For it is certain, that if
once the immortal soul be united to Jesus Christ by the bond of love and
respect, then our faith will increase with the increase of God, Our
entertainment of a bosom idol is ordinarily punished with the want of the
sensible intimations of his peace, and of our interest in him: so that
sometimes his own are constrained to cry out; God has departed from me, and he
answers me not, neither by dreams nor visions.

4. There is that likewise that has influence upon it, our not closing
absolutely with Jesus Christ, but upon conditions and suppositions. We make not
an absolute and blank resignation of our selves over to Christ, to hold fast
the Covenant, notwithstanding he should dispense both bitter and sad things to
us? but we conceive that Christ's Covenant with believers, is like that Covenant
that God made with Noah, that there should be Summer and Winter, seed time and
harvest, night and day unto a Christian. A Christian must have his night as
well as his day: he must once sow in tears, before he reap in joy: he must once
go forth, bearing his precious seed, before he can return bearing his sheaves
in his bosom: and that this has influence upon our instability, may be seen
from this, that often a Christian after his first closing with Christ, he
meets with desertion in point of tenderness, in point of joy, and in point of
strength, so that his corruption seems now to be awaked more then formerly,
that he wants those seeming enjoyments of him which formerly he had: and that
much of his softness of his heart has now evanished, which is clear somewhat
from Heb. 10.32. And after they were enlightened, they endured a great fight of
afflictions. For the word that is there rendered afflictions, signifies inward
troubles through the motions of sin, as well as outward afflictions, Gal. 5.24.
And God uses to dispense this way to his own, not only to take trial of the
sincerity of your closing with him, but to make our Faith more steadfast and
sure. And no doubt, if we close not absolutely with Christ (when under these
temptations and trials) we will reject our confidence as a delusion, and
suppose it to be but a morning dream: therefore it were a noble and divine
practice of a Christian, to close with Christ without reservation, seeing he
does dispense nothing but that which might tend to our advantage. And we would
say to such as are under these temptations, that if ye endeavor to resist them,
it is the most compendious and excellent way to make your hearts, which now are
dying as a stone, to be as a watered garden, and springs of water, whose waters
fail not, and to make you strong as a Lion, so that no temptation can rouse you
up; but ye shall be enable to tread upon the high places of the earth, and to
sing songs of triumph over our idols.

5. There is this likewise which has influence on it, our building of our
Faith more upon sense then upon Christ or his word; and therefore it is that
Faith is so unconstant and changeable as the Moon, we not knowing what such a
thing means; To hope against hope, and to be strong in Faith, giving glory to
God. And we would only say unto you that erect your confidence upon so sandy a
foundation, that when the wind and storm of temptation shall blow, that house
shall fall to the ground. As likewise, building of your Faith upon sense, does
not abate much of your joy, and much of your precious esteem of Jesus Christ:
It being Faith exercising it self upon an invisible object, that makes the
Christian to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

6. There is this last that has influence upon it, even our sloathfulness in
the exercise of our spiritual duties, by which Faith should be entertained.
Faith is a tender grace, and a plant that must not be rufled, but nourished
through the sap of other precious graces: but we grow remiss in our spiritual
duties, and do turn our selves upon the bed of security, as the door upon the
hinges. And does not our drowsiness cloth us with rags, and make us fall into
a deep sleep, while as, if we were diligent, our souls should be made fat and
rich? Yea, sloathfulness does not only imped assurance of this, that it
hinders the divine communications of his love and respect, by which assurance
may be kept in life, Cant. 5.2. but also, it makes our poverty come on us as
an armed man, and our want as one that travelleth. And withal it lets loose
the chain by which our corruptions are tied, and makes them to lift up their
head, by which our assurance is much darkened and impaired, and our hope is much
converted into diffidence and despair. And we would only say this, it is the
diligent Christian that is the believing Christian; and it is the believing
Christian that is the diligent Christian: there being such a sweet
reciprocation betwixt these two precious graces, that they die and live
together.

Now thirdly, we shall shut up our discourse with this, in pointing out a little
what are those things that do obstruct a Christians closing with Christ, and
believing in his precious Name.

I. We conceive that this woeful evil does spring and rise from that fundamental
ignorance of this truth, that there is a God, as is clear from Heb. 11.6. where
that is required as a qualification of a Comer, That he should believe that God
is: and assuredly, till once this precious truth be imprinted upon our souls,
as with a pen of iron, and point of a diamond, we will look upon the Gospel as
an U^opian fancy, and a deluding notion, to teach unstable souls, who know not
the way to attain unto real blessedness. And truly it is a fault of many, that
they begin to dispute their being in Christ, before they know there is a
Christ; and do dispute their interest in him before they believe his being, and
that there is such an one as is called Christ.

II. Our coming unto Christ is obstructed from the want of the real and
spiritual convictions of our desperate and lost estate without Jesus Christ,
and that our unspeakable misery is the want of him: which is clear from Jer.
2.31. We are Lords, we will come no more to thee. And it is evident from Revel.
3.16.18. that such a delusion as this does overtake many, that they can reign
as Kings without Jesus Christ; and that they can build their happiness, and
establish their carnal felicity upon another foundation: But, O that we could
once win to this, to believe what we are without Christ, and to believe what we
shall be in the enjoyment of him: with the one eye to descend and look upon
these deep draughts, that the mystery of iniquity has imprinted upon our
immortal souls; and withal, to reflect upon the wages of sin, which is death,
and be constrained to cry out, Woe is me, for I am undone: and with the other
eye, to ascend and look to that help that is laid upon one that is mighty, and
to make use of the righteousness of a crucified Savior, that so what we want in
our selves, we may get it abundantly made up in him.

III. There is this likewise that obstructeth our closing with Christ, our too
much addictedness to the pleasures and carnal delights of a passing world,
which is clear from Luke 14.18.19.20.21.22 Mat. 22.5.6. where those that are
invited to come to the feast of this Gospel, they do make their Apology, and
with one consent do refuse it, some pretending on impossibility to come, and
some pretending a^ unavoidable inconveniency in coming. And, O! what a
ridiculous thing is that poor complement that those deluded sinners used to
Christ, I pray you, have us excused? And is not the world the great plea and
argument that they make use of, when they will not come and make use of Christ.

IV. There is this lastly, which does obstruct ones coming to Christ, their
unwillingness to be denied to their own righteousness, which is clear from Romans
10.23. and we conceive, if once these two were believed (which are the great
Tropicks, out of which all these arguments may be brought, to persuade you to
embrace Christ) to wit, the infinite excellency of his Person on whom we are to
believe, and the infinite loss that those do sustain who shall be eternally
rejected of him: we might be preswaded to entertain a divine abstractedness,
and holy retirement from all things that are here below, and to pitch our
desires alone upon him, who is the everlasting wonder of Angels, and the glory
of the higher House. O! did we once suppose the unspeakable happiness of those
whose Faith is now advanced unto everlasting felicity and fruition, and has
entered into that eternal possession of the promises, might not we be
constrained to cry out, It is good for us once to be there? Christ weepeth to
us in the Law, but we do not lament; and he pipeth unto us in the Gospel, but
we do not dance: he is willing to draw us with the cords of men, and with the
bonds of love, and yet we will not have him to reign over us. May not Angels
laugh at our folly, that we should so undervalue this Prince of love, and
should contemn him who is holden in so high esteem and reverence in these two
great assemblies that are above of Angels, and of the souls of just men made
perfect? Christ has now given us the first and second summons: the day is
approaching when the sad and woeful summons shall be sent against us, of
departing from him into those everlasting flames, out of which there is no
redemption: and this shall be the cap-stone of our misery, that we had once life
in our offer, but did refuse it: And though there were four gates standing open
toward the North, by which we might have entered into that everlasting rest,
yet we choosed rather to walk in the paths that lead down to death, and take
hold of the chambers of hell. O! but there are many that think the Gospel
cunningly devised sables and foolishness, (they being unwilling to believe that
which sense cannot comprehend, nor reason reach) and this is the ground why the
Gospel is not embraced, but is rejected as an humane invention, and as a
morning dream, etc.

SERMON II.
JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, etc.


THere are three great and cardinal mysteries, in the unfolding of which, all a
Christians time ought to be spent. First, there is that precious and
everlasting mystery of Christ's love and condescendency, which those
intellectual Spirits the Angels, are not able fully to comprehend. Secondly,
there is that woeful mystery of the desperate deceitfulness and wickedness of
the heart, which no man was ever yet able to fathom and comprehend. And
thirdly, there is that precious mystery of that eternal felicity and
blessedness that is purchased unto the Saints, that once they shall reign with
Christ, not a thousand years only, but throughout all the ages of everlasting
and endless eternity: so that there is this difference betwixt this garden of
everlasting delights, that Christ has purchased to the Saints, and that first
Paradise and Eden wherein man was placed. There was a secret gate in the first,
through which a man that had once entered in, must go out again: But in the
second and precious Eden, there is no access in going out; and all that is to
be known of these three mysteries, is much comprehended in this, to know that
they cannot fully be known. Paul was a blessed proficient in the study of the
first mystery, and had almost attained to the highest class of knowledge, and
yet he is constrained to profess himself to be ignorant of this. Hence is that
word, Ephesians. 3.19. That ye may know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.
And is it not a mysterious command, to desire people to know that which cannot
be known? The meaning whereof we conceive to be this in part, that Paul pressed
this upon them, that they should study to know that this mystery of Christ's
love could not be known. Jeremiah was a blessed proficient in the knowledge and
study of the second mystery; he had some morning and twilight discoveries of
that; and yet though in some mea^ure he had fathomed that deep, yet he is
constrained to cry out, chap. 17. verse 9. The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? And indeed that which Solomon
says of Kings, Prove. 25.3. may well be said of all men, in this respect: The
Heavens for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of man are
unsearchable. The Apostle Paul also was a blessed proficient in the study of
the third mystery, having some morning and twilight discoveries of that
promised rest, and was once caught up to the third heavens, and yet when he is
beginning to speak of it, 1 Cor. 2.9. he declares all men to be ignorant of
the knowledge of this profound mystery of man's blessedness, and cries out; Eye
has not seen nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him. And if there be any
thing further to be known in these mysteries, the grace of Faith is sound
worthy amongst all the graces of the Spirit, to open the seven seals of the
great depths of God. Is not the grace of Faith, that whereby a Christian does
take up the invisible excellency and virtue of a dying Christ? Is not Faith
that precious grace by which a Christian must take up the spots and blemishes
that are within himself? And is not the grace of Faith, that precious grace
that places a Christian upon the top of mount Pisga, and there lets him see
a sight of the promised Land; and does open a door in heaven, through which a
Christian is admitted to see Christ sitting upon his Throne? And faith has not
only a kind of Omnipotency, as is clear, that all things are possible to them
that believe; but it has a kind of Omnisciency, and all knowledge, that it can
take up and comprehend all the greatest mysteries of Heaven, according to that
word, Prove. 28.5. He that seeks the Lord shall understand all things: As if he
had said, there is nothing dark to a believing Christian, as there is nothing
impossible to a believing Christian. As likewise Faith is that grace that must
take aside the vail that is spread over the face of a crucified Christ: and
Faith is that precious Spy thatgoeth forth, and takes up these wonderful
excellencies that are in him. The grace of Love, as it were, is born blind, and
it has nothing wherewith to solace it self, but that which is presented unto
it by this noble and excellent grace of Faith.

Now before we shall speak any thing to these things that we did propose to
speak of at last occasion, we shall yet speak a little unto some things which
are necessary to be known for the distinct uptaking of the nature of justifying
Faith, which is the great commandment of this everlasting Gospel; and that
which we would first speak to, shall be this: What is the reason and ground
that the Gospel conveyance of righteousness and life (and of the excellent
things of this everlasting Covenant) should be through the exercise of the grace
of Faith; for it is not said in the Scripture that Repentance justifies, that
Love justifies, or that Mortification justifies; but it is Faith only that
justifies, and it is Faith by which a Christian inheriteth the promises? So
that is clear that Faith is that conduit-pipe through which are conveyed to us
the great blessings of this everlasting Covenant.

I. And the first ground of it is this, it is through Faith, that all our
blessing may be known to be by love, and by free and unsearchable grace, as is
clear, Romans 4.16. while the Apostle is giving a reason why the inheritance is
conveyed to a Christian through Faith: It is of Faith, says he, that it might
be of grace; for if the inheritance were conveyed to a Christian through a
covenant of works then these spotless draughts of infinite love, and of
unsearchable grace, should not be written on our inheritance, as it is clear,
Romans 4.25. And it is that great design of Christ to make his grace conspicious,
in conveying salvation to us through Faith.

II. There is this second ground likewise of it, that all the promises and
blessings of this everlasting Covenant might be sure and steadfast to us;
therefore they are conveyed to us through the exercise of the grace of Faith;
as is clear, Rom 4.^6. They are of Faith, says he, that they might be sure: or
as the word is, that they might be settled. When the promises of life and of
eternal salvation were conveyed to us through man's obedience, were they not
then most uncertain and unstable? But is not Heaven your everlasting crown now,
steadfast unto you, seeing ye have that golden pillar of Christ's everlasting
righteousness, to be the foundation of your Faith, and the strength of your
confidence in the day of need.

III. There is this third ground why the promises and excellent things of this
Gospel are conveyed to a Christian through the exercise of Faith, that all
boasting and gloriation might be excluded, according to that word, Romans 3.27.
By what law is boasting excluded? Not by the law of works, but by the law of
faith. And certainly, seeing Chirstians have all the great things of heaven
conveyed to them through the exercise of Faith, think ye not that this shall be
your first song when ye shall be within the gates of that new Jerusalem: Not
unto us, not unto us, but unto thee does belong the glory of our salvation. O
what a precious dignity were it but for an half hour, to be admitted to hear
those spotless so^gs that are sung by those thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands of holy angels that are round about this throne! Does
not David, that sweet singer of Israel, now sing more sweetly then he did while
he was here below? Does not deserted Haman now chant forth the praises and
everlasting songs of him that sits upon the Throne? And does not afflicted
Job now sing sweetly after his captivity is reduced, and he entered within that
Land where the voice of joy and gladness is continually heard? Would ye have a
description of heaven? I could give it no term so suitable as this, Heaven is a
rest, without a rest: for though there remain a rest for the righteous, yet
Rev. 4.8. These four beasts that stand before the Throne they rest not night
nor day, crying, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God Almighty; yet there is much
divine quietness in that holy unquietness that is above.

IV. There is this last ground, why the blessings of the Gospel, and life and
righteousness are conveyed to us through the exercise of Faith, that the way to
attain to these things might be pleasant and easy? We a^e certainly persuaded
that the way of winning to heaven by a covenant of works, was much more
un^leasant and difficult; but it is not an easy way of entering into the Holy
of Holies, to win unto it through the exercise of Faith. Are not all wisdoms
ways pleasantness? And are not all her paths peace? Was not that just
self-denial in one that said, he would not take up a Crown though it were lying
at his foot. But, oh! that cursed self-denial does possess the breasts of many,
so that though that Crown of immortal glory and eternal blessedness be lying at
your feet, yet ye will not embrace it, nor take it up: Is not the hatred of
many to Christ, covered with deceit? And therefore your iniquity shall be
declared before the Congregation.

Now that what we have spoken upon this might be more clear, and that the
nature of justifying Faith be not mistaken, we would have you take notice of
these things.

1. That the grace of Faith does not justify a Christian as it is a work, or
because of any inherent excellency and dignity that is in this grace above any
other graces of the Spirit; but faith does alone justify a Christian,
instrumentally and objectively; that is, it is that by which a Christian is
just, by laying hold on the precious object of it, the righteousness of Christ.
And to clear this, we would only have you knowing this, that says does
justify as it closes with Christ; but not because it closes with Christ,
which some vainly are bold to assert, because there is not any dignity or worth
in the act of Faith, enclosing with Christ, that can be the foundation of our
justification; else it were to confound that precious degree of free grace.

2. There is this that we would have you all knowing that faith is not the
instrument of justification (as justification is taken in an active sense)
though it is the instrument of justification. as it is taken in a passive
sense; and the ground of this conclusion is this, because it is impossible that
any actio^ in man can be an instrument of any action in God, and therefore that
phrase that you have so ordinarily spoken of, that faith justifies, it is thus
to be resolved, that we are justified by faith.

3. There is this that we would have you knowing, that betwixt a Christians
clossing by Faith with the righteousness of Jesus Christ and the justification
of a sinner: I say, there is no natural and indispensible connection between
these two; but only there is a connection of divine appointment, and of free
grace; though we once conceive there is a na^ural aptitude in the grace of
Faith to lay hold on the righteousness of Christ, more then there is in any
other grace of the Spirit, as ye may see there is a more natural aptitude and
fitness in the hand to receive then in any other organ of the body.

4. There is this also that we would have you knowing, that a Christian in his
first closing with Christ, Christ (considered as crucified) is the immediate
object of his Faith, and not Christ considered in his personal excellencies.
Hence it is often in Scripture, that Christ as crucified, is holden forth as
the immediate object of just^ying Faith; as is clear, Rom 3.5.24 25. And the
ground of this assertion is this, because that it is the formal object of
justifying Faith which does formerly justify the sinners, and on which Faith
does immediately lay hold, as a ransom to satisfy Justice, and as a
righteousness in which the soul dare venture to be found, when it shall stand
before the Judgment Seat of God: and certainly this is Christ, as obedient to
the death of the cross. And it is likewise clear, that the thing which does
engage the foul to Christ, is not only because he is good in himself, but
because he is good to us.

5. And there is this lastly, that we would have you knowing, that though Faith
does alone justify yet Faith does not justify being alone. Hence is that which
we have often in Schools, Fides justificat solum; licet non solitary; that
Faith justifies alone, though not being alone, as James does speak Faith
without works is dead, and is of no effect.

Now that which secondly we shall speak to, shall be this, to point out to you
some differences betwixt justifying Faith which is in a real believer, and
temporary Faith which is in an hypocrite, and one that is destitute of that
everlasting hope, though he do pretend to have it.

And first, that there is such a thing as temporary Faith, as is clear from
Luke 8.13. it is said there of some, that they believed for a season; yea, in
Acts 1.13. it is said of Simon Magus (who was in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity) he believed. And those in John 2.23. When they did behold
the miracles, they believed on Jesus Christ; and yet we conceive that their
Faith was not sincere, and so this was not saving faith. And indeed ye may see
a difference betwixt these two in the very name temporary; for this is such a
faith as does not continue long with him that has it, but does evanish and
pass away: for as this is certain, that an hypocrite will not always call upon
God, Job 27.10. so that is also certain, that an hypocrite will not always
believe in God. I tell you, that the longest time an hypocrite does keep his
faith, Job has set down in his 18. chapter, verse. 14. Their hope, says he,
shall bring them to the King of terrors, and then it shall be rooted out of
them and their tabernacle; their faith will bring them no further then the
gates of death, and then their faith will flee away as a dream, and evanish as
a vision of the night.

II. There is this difference likewise betwixt them, that temporary faith it
closes with Christ as a Savior, and for righteousness; but it closes not with
Christ as a Prince, and for sanctification: but justifying faith takes Christ
as well for a Prince, as it takes him for a Savior: and if Solomon did discern
who was the true mother of the child, by that that she who would have had the
child divided, was not the mother of the child; so we may say, that they who
would divide Christ in his Offices, it is an evidence that they are not amongst
those who are actually made partakers of the adoption of children: there is
some what of this pointed at in John 6.66. where that which made many who were
his Disciples (and did once believe) desert him, was because of the hardness of
his command. This is an hard saying, who can hear it? And it is certain that it
is a greater difficulty for a Christian to take Christ as a Prince, then as a
Savior, for by that he must make an absolute resignation of himself over to
Christ, never to be reduced. O! when saw you such a sight of Christ, that ye
were constrained to cry out (without a complement) to him: Truly, I am thy
servant, I am thy servant. O! were ye never ravished with one of his eyes, nor
overtaken with one chain of his neck? Believe me, they who see him thus, do
believe that his commands are grievous.

III. There is this difference, that temporary faith is attained unto without
the exercise of the Law; but justifying faith is not attained to without some
measure of the exercise of the Law: this is clear, Mark 4.5. where speaking of
these temporary believers, it is said of them, That the fruit did imediately
spring up, etc. Are there not some (i^ may be here) who think they do believe,
and yet were never in any measure trembling under the discovering and
condemning power of the Law? Is not that a mystery, that one should b^ing forth
without traveling? And is not this a mystery in Christianity, that one should
believe before he has found the pangs of the New birth? I am afraid of this,
that many of us have taken up our Religion at our foot; for there are many who
take up Religion, before Religion take them up. But would you know the
properties of a Christians Faith? It is a begotten faith, 1 Pet. 1.2. and not a
Faith that is taken up at our pleasure. And I would only say these two things
to you, be persuaded of this, that hypocrisy may be soon with a very small
thread, so that the most discerning Christian cannot take up that desperate
enmity that is in them. How long did Judas lurk under the name of a Saint, even
with those that were most discerning? And there is this that we would say, that
amongst all these that shall be eternally excommunicate from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power, hypocrites in Zion shall have the
bitterest cup of divine indignation presented unto them. Hence it is that
Christ when he would tell the worst company that one shall have in hell, it is
always this, ye shall go to that place where hypocrites and sinners are; and so
it would be of your concernment, that by the candle of the Lord ye would search
the inward part of the belly, before ye go down to the grave with a lie in your
right hand, a deceiving heart having turned you aside. We confess, it is sad to
consider those anxious disappointments that many in these days shall once meet
with.

IV. But there is this last difference betwixt justifying Faith and temporary
Faith, that there are three precious effects of justifying Faith, which a
temporary believer cannot win to.

1. To be denied to all his enjoyments and seize, and to walk humbly
under them; for we may say that it is impossible for an hypocrite to be denied
to his enjoyments, he makes such a Deity of them, and worships them, or rather
he worshippeth himself in them. There are three great Graces that an hypocrite
does pursue after (though he rather seeks them as gifts, then as Graces)
knowledge, prayer, and humility: And though it be but little, he can attain of
any of the three, (or rather nothing, in a saving way) yet least of all can he
attain to the last; yea, we may judge that there is always within his bosom a
standing conviction, that he could never win unto that gracious Grace of
Humility. O! could ye never win to this, to count your own righteousness as
filthy rags, and to rejoice alone in the righteousness of a crucified Savior? I
would press this upon you by the way (O Christians of this generation) forget
your perfections, and remember your imperfections: have an holy oblivion of
your seize, but have a divine remembrance of your short-comings: look
more to what is before unperfected, then to what is behind, and thus shall you
evidence true justifying Faith.

2. It is an effect of justifying Faith, to be under some constant and divine
impression of the preciousness of Jesus Christ, according to that word, 1 Pet.
27. To you who believe, Christ is precious. It is not said, that Christ was
precious, or shall be precious; but it is said, he is precious, which does
import (as we use to speak) a continued act. Did ye never know what it was to
dwell twenty four hours under the impression of the matchless excellency, and
precious worth of a crucified Savior? I will pose you with this; Are there not
some here (and else where) that pass under the notion of Saints, that never
knew what it was to dwell half an hour under these high and elevating thoughts
of the preciousness of Jesus Christ? So that we profess we cannot tell whe^er
we shall call him precious or undervalued; but we may conjoin these two
together, that he is a precious, and yet undervalued Christ.

3. By justifying Faith, a Christian wins to mortification of his invisible
and predominant lusts, which is impossible for a temporary believer to win to.
And is there not a great difference betwixt an Idol when it is cast out, and an
Idol when it but goes out? I will tell you the great mortification of
hypocrites, the devil was living in them as one that was a black one, and now
he comes again and transformeth himself into an Angel of light. He was living
in them before by his spirit of prophanity, and now he lives in them by the
spirit of hypocrisy, and counterfeiting of those things that were never clear
seize, while it is the noble dignity of Faith, Acts 15.9. to purify the
heart: but are there not many here who never knew what it was to mortify one
lust for Christ? Can such a delusion overtake you, O Atheists! that ye shall
reign with Christ, if ye die not with him? There is an opinion vented in these
days, that there may be repentance in heaven; and I think it would seem that
the Christians of this age have much of that opinion, we are so little in
repentance while we are here below: but know that Faith and Sanctification are
two inseparable companions: And let me tell you, if you will know the compend
of the precious exercise of Faith, it is this: Faith has three great things
that it perpetually contemplates and views. 1. Faith looks to the promise,
and there it does rejoice and rest upon it. 2. Faith looks to the duties that
are commanded, and there it cries out: Here am I, I will obey and hearken unto
the voice of the Word. And 3. Faith looks to the crown, and there it does
exult and sweetly rejoice in divine expectation. And O what a sight is that, to
behold that everlasting Prince standing at the end of our race, having a crown
in his right hand, with this Motto engraven on it, He that persevereth to the
end, shall be saved! And what a Faith, suppose ye, it shall be thought, when we
shall get on that immortal crown of blessedness? What think ye is the exercise
of those that are above? O Heaven! Heaven! if we did know it! would we not be
in an holy ecstasy of desire, till we were there? And blessed be he eternally,
that has purchased that precious felicity to us.

Now we shall at this time shut up our discourse, by speaking a little to those
things in which a Christian does ordinarily meet with assurance of this
interest in God, and is put to the divine actings of the Grace of Faith; for
there are some sealing times to a Christian.

I. The first time of the sealing is, after the mortification of some
predominat lust and Idol; then they are admitted to read their names in the
precious and ancient records of Heaven, and to see in these books their
unworthy names written by the hand of that everlasting Prince. This is clear
Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes will I give a white stone, and in the stone a
new name written, that no man knows saving he that receives it. And from that
2 Timothy 4.8. Believe me more mortification would make more believing; but would
ye know the original of misbelief? It is the want of exercise of spiritual
mortification of our lusts. I know not where the most part of us intends to
lodge at night, but this is certain, that we live with much contentment with
our lusts, and these predominat Idols that do so much possess us.

II. It is secondly, a sealing time to a Christian; when he is admitted to the
divine enjoyment of these satisfying delights that are to be found in Christ:
When was it that the Spouse cried out so often, My beloved is mine, and I am
his? Was it not when she was brought to the banqueting and his banner over her
was love? Believe me, more communion with an absent Christ would make more
intimation (in a divine manner) of our peace with him. We desire to bless those
that are above the reach of all these disputings and questions that we are so
much subject unto.

III. This is a sealing time to a Christian, when he is much in the exercise of
secret Prayer, and of much conversing, and corresponding with God in that duty,
as is clear in that word from Dan. 2.21. When Daniel was praying at the evening
oblation, ^n the 23 verse, he meets with a divine intimation of his peace with
God; O man, greatly beloved of God, as the Original has it, O man of great
desires; for he was desirable indeed, and precious to him who holds the
Saints in his right hand.

IV. This is also a fealing time to a Christian, when he is called to the
exercise of some great work, and is to be put upon some eminent holy
employment; this is clear, Jer. 1.5. where Jeremiah being called to preach the
Gospel unto such a rebellious people, then he has his eternal election
declared unto him: Before thou wast formed in the womb, I knew thee. Christ, as
it were, gives them that, to be meat to them for forty days, and that in the
strength of it, they may go many a days journey.

V. There is also another sealing time, when a Christian is first begotten to a
precious and everlasting hope; for when at first Christians begin to be
acquainted with Christ, even then sometimes (...) declares to them his
boundless and everlasting love. And this is the ground why some of those who a^
but babes in Christ, are so much in the exercise (...) diligence, so much in
the exercise of the grace (...) love, and so much in the exercise of the grace
(...) tenderness; it is even because of the solemn impresion of their interest
in Christ, that, as it were they are daily taken in to read their own names
(...) legible letters in the lambs book of life.

VI. And there is that last time, that is a sealing time to a Christian, and
that is, when he is p^ under some sad and afflicting dispensation: Wh^ the
furnace is hot seven times more then ordinary. Then does God condescend to
manifest himself (...) his own. When was it that John met with mo^ of the
revelations of heaven? Was it not wh^ he was in the I Will of Patmos, for the
testimony (...) Jesus Christ his Kingdom, and patience of our ble^sed Lord?
Rev. 1.9. And that place, 2 Cor. 4.1^ Though our outward man decay; yet our
inward man is renewed day by day.

Now we would press you to be more serious (...) the exercise of this precious
grace. And I shall (...) you the co^pend of Christianity in these few words 1.
By faith to solace your selves in Christ's invisible virtues and excellencies.
And 2. by hope, to b^ viewing that precious crown, and those everlasting
dignities that are to be given to the Saints. And (...) by mortification, to be
crucifying your idols. And 4. by patience, to be possessing your souls, unti^
once ye shall pass through that dark land, to the valley of everlasting
delight. And as for those that contemn and undervalue the blood of this
everlasting Covenant (and I would have all those that delight not in closing
with Christ, and those who have not misbelief, as their cross, to consider
this) The wrath of the living and eternal God does, abide upon them who do not
believe; according to that word, John 3.36. He that believes not, the wrath of
God abides on him. It is a remarkable phrase; because of this the wrath of God
will not be a pilgrim to a misbeliever, that will turn aside to tarry but for a
night; but the wrath of God (to them who will not believe) shall be their
household companion, and shall dwell with them: And woe, woe to them eternally,
who have this sad and everlasting companion to abide with them, the wrath of a
living God. There is one thing we would have those knowing, that amongst all
those who are eternally to be debarred from Jesus Christ, mi^believers are put
in the foremost rank, Revel. 21.8. There he is to put away the the fearful and
unbelieving. And from 2 Thessalonians. 1.18. When Christ shall come from Heaven with
ten thousand of his Saints: What to do? It is even to execute vengeance on
those that obey not the truth of the Gospel. That is, who do not believe: and I
pose your own hearts with this, whether or not your names be written there in
that roll, amongst those who shall be cut off? And that word, 2 Thessalonians. 2 12.
That they might be damned wh^ be believed not, but took pleasure in
unrighteousness. O but the wrath of a dying Christ, and of a crucified Savior,
is drea^ful! It is more sad and terrible then the wrath (...) God should have
been, if Christ had not die^ I will tell you (O hypocrites in Zion) the wor^
news that ever was published in your ears, and (...) is this, Christ died and
rose again, and to tho^ that are begotten to a lively hope, they are gla^tyding
of great joy, and therein they may comfo^ themselves; but ye may wear a rough
garment (...) deceive, and go to heaven in your own apprehensions? but, O the
sad disappointments that is wanting on many such. And to close with this, w^
would obtest you, as you would answer to you terrible and dreadful Judge, that
shall stand o^ day upon his Throne, which he shall fix in the clouds; we obtest
you by all the joys of heaven and we obtest you by all the everlasting pains
(...) hell, and we obtest you by all the curses that a^ written in the volume
of this book, and by a^ the sweet and comfortable promises that are i^ the
everlasting Gospel; and by the love that yo^ own to your immortal souls; and as
you would not crucify Christ afresh, believe and embrac^ the offers which are
presented now unto you^ Know ye whether or not this shall be the las^ summons
that you shall get to believe? That so^ if ye do reject it, Christ shall come
from heaven and pronounce that sad and lamentable Sentence to you, Depart from
me ye cursed, I know you not. Now to him that can bless these things unto you,
we desire to give praise.

SERMON III.
JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, etc.


IT was a command that Solomon gave unto his son, Prove. 22.26. That he should
not be surety for debt, nor be one of those that strikes hands. But, O! what
spotless breaches of that command has our blessed Lord Jesus committed, when
he did condescend to be surety for our debt, and to pay that which was
impossible for us to satisfy? Has not Christ made a precious exchange with
sinners? He wreathed about his own precious neck, that bond and yoke of our
iniquities, and has given to us that unweariable, easy and portable yoke of
his commandments, amongst which this is one, That we should believe on him:
spotless Christ was made sin for us; that sinful, we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. And is not this the condemnation of the World,
that we will not believe on him? That we will not delight our selves in loving
of him? And I would say this to you, that though ye should weep the one half of
your days, and pray the other half, yet if ye want this noble grace of Faith,
your righteousness shall be but like a monstrous cloth, and filthy rags
before him. For what is praying without believing, but a taking of his blessed
Name in vain? What is our conferring upon the most divine and precious truths
of God without believing? it is not a lying to the Holy Ghost, and a flattering
of God with our mouth? And we would have you knowing this, that there is a
sweet harmony that is now made up betwixt Moses and Christ, betwixt the Law and
the Gospel. The Law brings us to Christ as a Savior, and Christ brings us
back again to the Law, to be a rule of our walk, to which we must subject our
selves. So then, would ye know the compend of a Christians walk? It is a sweet
traveling betwixt Mount Sinai, and Mount Sion, betwixt Moses and Christ,
betwixt the Law and the Gospel. And we conceive, that the more deep that the
exercise of the Law be in a Christians conscience, before his closing with
Christ, there is so much the more precious and excellent advantages waiting for
him.

I. There is this advantage that waits on the deep exercise of the Law, that
it is the way to win to much establishment in Faith, when once we begin to
close with Christ. O Christians! would ye know that which makes the
superstructure and building of grace to be within you, as a bowing wall, and as
a tottering sense? (of that oftentimes ye are in hazard to raze the foundation)
it is this, ye were not under the exercise of the Law before your believing in
Jesus Christ. There are some who do not abide three days at Mount Sinai, and
these shall not dwell many days at Mount Sion.

II. There is this advantage that waits on the deep exercise of the Law, it
makes Christ precious to a man's soul. What is that which fills the soul of a
Christian with many high and excellent thoughts of Christ? Is it not this, to
have the Law registrating our Bond, and putting us (as we use to speak) to the
Horn? That is, to have the Law cursing us, and using the sentence of
condemnation against us. That which makes us have such low and undervaluing
thoughts of precious Christ, is, because the most part of us are not acquainted
with the deep and serious exercise of the Law; that is a mystery to the most
part of a Christians practice. Ye know that there were four streams which went
out from the Paradise of God, into which man was first placed; and so may we
say, that there are four golden streams, by which lost and destroyed, man is
brought back again to this Eden and Paradise of everlasting delights. First,
there is the precious stream of Christ's righteousness, by which we must be
justified. And secondly, there is that stream of his Sanctification, by which
we must be purified. Thirdly, there is that stream of the wisdom of Christ, by
which we must be conducted through this wilderness wherein we have lost our
way. And fourthly, there is that stream of Christ's Redemption, by which we must
be delivered from the power of our enemies; and must turn the battle in the
gate, it is by the Redemption of Christ, that we shall once sing that
triumphant song: O Death! where is thy sting? O Grave! where is thy victory? O,
but all these streams will be sweet and refreshing to a soul that is hotly
pursued by the Law; So long as we see not the ugliness of our leprosy in that
glass of the Law, we have our own Abana and Parpher, that we think may do our
turn; but when once our case is truly laid open to us, then will we be content
to wash our selves in Jordan seven times.

III. There is this advantage that waits on the deep exercise of the Law,
that it makes a Christian live constantly under the impression of the
sinfulness of sin. What is it that makes sin exceeding sinful to a Christian?
Is it not this, he has been forty days in Moses School? And we conceive that
the ground why such fools as we make a mock of sin, is, because we know not
what it is to be under the power of his wrath, and the apprehensions of the
indignation of God.

But now to come to that which we intend to speak of, we told you at the first
occasion that we spoke upon these words, that there were many excellent things
concerning the grace of Faith holden forth in them: The first thing which was
holden forth concerning this radical grace of Faith, was the infinite advantage
that redoundeth to a Christian through the exercise of Faith, and giving
obedience to this command; which we cleared, to be holden forth not only from
the scope, but also from the nature of this command. And now to speak a little
to the point, we shall propose these cosiderations that may abundantly show how
advantageous a thing this excellent grace of Faith is.

I. The first consideration that speaks it, is this, that Faith makes Christ
precious to a soul, according to that word, 1 Pet. 2.7. To you that believe,
Christ is precious. And we would have you knowing this, that Faith makes
Christ more precious to a soul, then sense, or any other thing can make him.
And first, Faith makes Christ more precious then sense, because the estimation
which the grace of Faith has of Christ, it is builded upon the excellency of
his Person; but the estimation of sense, it is builded upon the excellency of
his actings; so that because he is such to them, therefore they love and esteem
him: But that heroic grace of Faith, it takes up the excellency of Christ's
person, and that makes him precious to them. Secondly, Faith makes Christ more
precious then sense, because sense looks to that love which Christ
manifests in his face, and in his hands, and in his feet: But Faith looks
to that love which is in his heart. Sense will cry forth: Who is like to thee,
whose countinance is like Lebanon, excellent as the cedar; whose hands are as
gold rings set with beril, and whose legs are like pillars of marble, set in
sockets of gold? Sense will look to the smilings of Christ, and will wonder; it
will look to his dispensations and actings, and will be constrained to cry out,
Who is like unto thee? But the grace of Faith solaceth it self in the fountain
from whence all these springs and sweet inundations of love do flow. Thirdly,
Faith makes Christ more precious then sense; because Faith looks not only to
what Christ is presently, but unto what Christ is from eternity before time,
and what Christ shall be unto eternity after time; but sense only does look to
what Christ is presently. And ye must conceive that the sweet traveling of
Faith betwixt infinite love from eternity before, and infinite love unto
eternity after; must make Faith to fall in a sea of wondering, and raises the
thoughts to the highest pitch of desire and estimation. Fourthly, we may
likewise add, that the impression of the preciousness of Christ, which sense
makes upon the soul, is not so constant, nor so single, as that which Faith
does make. O, but the grace of Faith gives the Christian a broad look of
Christ, and lets him see Christ clothed with ornaments of glory and divine
Majesty. Sense follows Christ, rather that it may see his miracles and love,
that it may be fed with loaves; but Faith follows Christ, for himself, above
all.

II. The second consideration, to speak the advantage of it, is, that the grace
of Faith, it has, as it were, an arbitrary power with God; so that whatsoever
a Christian shall seek in Faith, he shall receive it. It was the noble gift
that was once given to Faith, that it never should seek any thing and be
denied, according to that word in Matt. 21.22. And all things whatsoever ye
shall ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive it. And that word in John 15.7.
Abide in me, that is, believe; and the promise, is annexed to this: Whatsoever
ye shall ask ye shall receive. And it is clear likewise from the preceding
verse to our Text, that if we obey this command of Faith, Whatsoever we shall
ask of God, we shall receive it. And I would speak these two things to you from
this. First, that oftentimes Christ puts a blank in a Christians hand, who
is much in the exercise of Faith, according to that in Matthew 20.32. Is there
not an ample blank put into that man's hand? What will thou that I should do
unto thee? Christ desires him to fill up the blank with what he would. And
secondly, there is this, which is one of the greatest steps of Christ's
matchless condescendency, that oftentimes when his own have sought in their
presumption a blank to be put in their hand, Christ condescendeth to give it,
according to that strange passage in Mark 10.35.36. the two Disciples who
present this desire to Christ, We desire, say they, that whatsoever we ask,
thou should give it unto us. And presently that is answered: What will ye
that I shall do for you? Christ has an infinite good will to satisfy the
desires of his own: and that which yet more speaks out Christ's boundless good
will to satisfy the desires of all that belong to him, it may be decared in
that word, John 16.24. where he charge his Disciples with this: Hither to,
says he, have ye asked me nothing: ye must not suppose that Peter, James, and
John, never sought a suite of Christ^; but the meaning of that expression is
this: Ye sought nothing in comparison of that which I was willing to give, and
which your necessity did call for at my hands, which ye should have sought.

III. There is this third consideration, to poin^ out the advantage of Faith:
it is that grace tha^ keeps all the graces of the Spirit in life, and
exercise. Faith is that higher wheel, at the motion o^ which, all the lower
wheels do move: if so we may speak, Faith is that Primum mobile, that first
moves and turns about all these lower graces of the Spirit, according to that,
2 Pet. 1.5. Add to your faith, virtue, and to your virtue, patience, and to
your patience, brotherly kindness. First, the grace of Faith keeps in exrcise
the grace of love, as is clear, Ephesians. 3.17. where these two graces are
conjoined. As likewise from Romans 5.1. compared with verse 5. Being justified by
faith. Then this leffect follows upon it, the love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts. And so it is certain, that Faith keeps love in life. Faith being
the spy of the soul, and that intelligencer and precious messenger: it goes
out and brings in objects unto love. Faith draws and brings in objects
unto love. Faith draws aside the vail, and love sits down and solaceth it
self in the discoveries of Faith. Secondly, the grace of Faith likewise it
keeps the grace of mortification in exercise, as is clear, not only from Ephesians.
6.9. but from 1 John 5.4. This is our victory whereby we overcome the world,
even our faith. And it is certain that Faith keeps mortification in exercise,
and advances holiness, not only because of this, that Faith is that grace that
presents to a Christian the absolute purity and spotless holiness of Jesus
Christ; but also because it makes them esteem their idols taste less as the
white of an egg, and they become unto them as their sorrowful meat. The best
principle of mortification is this, the discoveries of the invisible virtues of
Jesus Christ: that mortification which arises from the lovely discoveries of
the excellency of Jesus Christ, is most real and abiding; as those waters which
rise from the highest springs, are not only constant, but likewise most deep
and excellent. Thirdly, Faith likewise has influence upon mortification as it
does take hold of that infinite strength that is in Christ, by which a
Christian is enabled to mortify his coruptions. Fourthly, Faith likewise
makes application of the blood of sprinkling, by which we are purified from
dead works. Fifthly, likewise the grace of Faith keeps in exercise the grace
of Humility, as is clear, Romans 3.27. By what law, says he, is boasting
excluded? It is not by the law of works, but by the law of faith. Sixthly,
Faith keeps in exercise the grace of joy, as is clear, Romans 15.13. Now the
God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing So that ye see the
proper fruit of Faith, is joy in the holy Ghost. And certainly, did we believe
more, we should rejoice more. Seventhly, and lastly, Faith keeps in exercise
the grace of Hope, for it is impossible for hope to be in lively exercises,
except Faith once be exercised, which may be a shame unto you; for how can we
hope to attain the thing that is promised, except our Faith first close with
the promise? So there is this difference betwixt the grace of Faith, and the
grace of Hope? the grace of Faith closes with the promises; but the grace of
Hope, it close^ with the thing that is promised.

IV. There is this fourth consideration, the may speak out the excellency of
the grace (...) Faith. It is that grace by which a Christian does attain to
most divine fellowship, and constant correspondency with heaven. Would y^ have
that question resolved and determined What is the best way not to stir up our
Beloved nor awake him until he please? It is this, be much in the grace of
Faith; this is clear from Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in our hearts by
faith* By the exercise of all other graces, Christ is bu^ a sojourner, that
turns aside to tarry but for (...) night: but by the exercise of this grace,
he comes to take up house with us. I will tell you what Faith is, it is a
ladder that reaches betwixt heaven and earth, by the steps of which, a
Christian does daily go up to heaven, and converse with the higher House. Faith
is that grace, as the Apostle speaks, by which we have access to the Throne
of his grace. Faith ushers in the believer to the Throne; and without it, he
can have no access there, nor joy when he is there.

V. Here is this advantage that attends the exercise of Faith, a believing
Christian is a praying Christian according to that word in Mark 9.24. where
these two are conjoined together Lord, I believe; and then he falls to his
prayer presently, after that confession, Help thou our unbelief. And it is
clear from Psalm. 63.1. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul
Christeth for thee. And sometimes Faith is a most impatient grace; but we may
always say of it that it is a most diligent grace. Oh! is not the neglect of
this precious exercise of Faith, and of the duty of secret prayer, that makes
our lean^ness testify to our face, and makes our souls as a barren
wilderness? I am persuaded of this, that sinc0e Ch is it had any followers, and
since ever this everlasting Gospel was preached in Paradise, the exercise of
secret prayer was never so much neglected; we have turned over all our prayers
into complements with God. We know not what it is to rise at midnight, and
call upon God, and to enquire after our Maker under the silent watches of the
night. O, but it is a sweet diversion from sleep, to retire our selves, in the
silent seasons of the night, from all thoughts about worldly matters, and to
converse with that invisible Majesty.

IV. There is this sixth consideration, to point out the advantage of Faith,
that Faith is that grace that does facilitate a Christians obedience, and
makes it most pleasant and easy: this is clear from Heb. 11.8, By faith
Abraham when he was commanded to go to a strange land, obeyed, and went out,
not knowing whether he went. The word may be rendered, he did cheerfully obey.
And verse. 17. By faith he offered up his only son. Would ye know the reason why
his commands are your burden? And why his preceps are your cresses? It is
because of this ye do not believe. And so it is most certain, that it is
impossible for a Christian to attain to a pleasant way of obedience without the
exercise of faith. Faith holds up the crown to a Christian, and this crown
makes him to obey. Faith gathers strength from Christ, and that strength
makes obedience very easy. Faith takes up the excellency of Christ, and this
makes a Christian to look upon his duty, more as his dignity, then his duty.
And we are persuaded of this, that our chariot-wheel should move more swiftly
(like the chariots of Aminadab) if we were more in the exercise of the grace of
Faith. Would ye know an answer to that question, what is first more requisite
for a Christian while here below? Faith. And what secondly, is most requisite?
Faith. And what thirdly, is most requisite for a Christian? Even Faith. Faith
above all things, and above all things, Faith.

VII. There is another advantage of it, that by Faith our services and prayers
are accepted of God. Would ye know what is the prayer of a Christian that is
not in Faith? It is a smoke in his nostrils, and a fire that burns all the
day. The unbelivers sacrifice is an abomination to the Lord. This is clear from
Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered up unto God a more acceptable sacrifice then
Cain. And we conceive, that there are many unanswered prayers which we do put
up, because we want that noble exercise of Faith.

VIII. And lastly, we shall likewise add this, that faith is the grace by which
a Christian has that pefect and immediate sight, as is were, of great things
that are promised to him. Faith brings a Christian within sight of Heaven,
and Faith brings a Christian within sight of God, according to that word,
Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen. And that noble Paradox
that is said of Faith, Heb. 11.27. By faith Moses saw him that is invisible. Is
it not an impossible thing to see that which cannot be seen? But the meaning of
it is this, that Faiths discoveries of God are as certain and sure as the
discoveries of our bodily eyes are. Faith is an intelligent grace, yea, it is a
most sure and infallible grace. What will Faith not do? And what can you do who
want Faith?

Now to enforce the advantages and excellencies of Faith a little more, we shall
propose to you the disadvantages of that woeful sin of unbelief.

1. There is this disadvantage of the sin of unbelief, that all the actions
that proceed from an unbeliever, they are impure and defiled, according to that
in Tit. 1.15. But unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure,
but even their mind and conscience is defiled, their prayer is unclean; yea, as
Solomon speaks, their plowing in sin; yea, their going about the most
excellent duties (for matter) is an abomination to God, according to that word,
Romans 14.23. What ever is not of faith, is sin. So the want of Faith is the
great polluter of all our actions, and of all our performances.

2. There is this second disadvantage of misbelief, that it is impossible for
one in the exercise of unbelief, to mortify a lust or idol; and we may allude
unto those words in Matthew. 17.20. when his Disciples came to him, and asked him
this question, Why could not we cast out this devil? Tha^ was given as an
answer, Because of your unbelief. Unbelief is that which takes up arms for out
idols, and does most strongly defend them; for there is nothing that will kill
corruption so much as the exercise of Faith: and when that is laid aside, we
have laid by our weapons, and have in a manner, concluded a treaty of peace
with our idols that we shall not offend them, if they do not offend us.

3. There is this disadvantage that waits upon the sin of unbelief, that such
an one cannot win to attain to the grace of establishment, but is always as
the waves of the sea tossed to and fro, until once he win to the exercise of
Faith, as is clear from Isai. 7.9. Except ye believe, ye shall not be
established.

4. There is this disadvantage that waits on it, is the mother of hardness
and stupidity of heart, according to that word in Mark 16.14, where he
upbraideth them because of their unbelief; and then that danger follows, to
with hardness of heart, this is clear also from Acts 19 9. where these two
sister-devils are conjoined and locked together, unbelief and hardness of
heart; because it is unblief indeed that hinders all the graces, by which the
grace of Tenderness must be maintained.

5. There is this disadvantage in the sin of unbelief, that it is big with
child of apostasy from God, and of defection from him according to that word,
Heb. 3.12. Beware lest their be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief (and
there the fruit of it) to depart from the living God. And certainly it is no
wonder that unbelief travels in birth, till that cursed child of apostasy be
brought forth; not only because of this, that an unbeliever loses the thought
of the excellency of Christ, but also because he increases in his thoughts of
love toward his Idols; for Christ does decrease in those who misbesieve, and
their Idols do increase in their love, and in their desires, and in their
estimation.

6. There is this sixth disadvantage in the sin of unbelief, it hinders the
communication of many single workings and tokens of the love and favor of the
most High, according to that sad word that is in Matthew. 13.58. at the close, He
could not do many mighty works there, because of their unbelief. Unbelief, as
it were, laid a restraint on Christ, that he could not effectuat those things
which he was willing to perform. And to shut up our discourse at this time, I
would only add these two aggravations which may somewhat enforce what we have
spoken. I say, there are these two aggravations in the sin of unbelief, even in
his own who have a right (and also his call) to believe. 1. That after that
Christ has given most sensible discoveries of himself ( Wherein we have seen
him, as it were, face to face) yet ye will not believe. This is clear from John
6.36. Though ye have seen me, says Christ, yet ye do not belive in me. There
is not a manifestation of Christ's presence, but it i^ a witness against you of
your unbelief: Would you hear the voice of sense that is rectified? It i^ this,
believe on the Son of God. 2. That notwithstanding of the signal demonstrations
of the power of Christ, yet though it were the mortifying of some lust and Idol
within them, yet they will not believe, but upon new temptations will doubt of
his love to them. Christ preaches Faith by his Word; he preaches Faith by his
sufferings; he preaches Faith by his dispensations; he preaches Faith by his
promises; he preaches Faith by his rods: and if these five instruments will
not engage your hearts to believe, who can move them? Does not his two wounds
in his precious hands, preach out this point of Faith, Believe him? Does not
that hole opened in his side, preach this doctrine, That we should believe in
him? And these two wounds that he received in his precious feet, do they not
preach this, That we should believe on a crucified Savior? And we would only
say this, that sometimes it is the ca^e of his own, that after the convictions
of this, that it is their duty to believe, and also after some desires to close
with Christ, yet they find inability to close with him. Is it not certain, that
to will (to believe) is sometime present with you; but how to perform, you know
not? And I would have a Christian making this fourfold use of such a
dispensation as that (which is most ordinarily) when convictions of our duty to
believe, and some desires to close with Christ, is not followed with actual
performances.

1. To study to have your convictions more ^eeply rooted within you, for it
does sometimes ^llow, that resolutions and mints to believe, are ^ot blessed with
actual believing, because the con^iction of our duty to believe, is not deeply
im^rinted upon our conscience.

2. Be convinced of that desperate enmity (and that mystery of iniquity) that
is within you, that ^e can have some will to do, without ability to ^erform. We
confess, it is not an ordinary dis^ase in these days, to have such a
contrariety betwixt a Christians will and his practice, our will ^or the most
part being no better than our prastice, but sometimes it is, which may make you
^ry forth, O wretched man that I am, who shall de^iver me from this body of
death?

3. That ye would be much in the employing of Christ, that as he has given you
to will, so also he might make you to do. Christ is about to convince his own
in such a dispensation as that, That Faith is the gift of God; Faith is so
noble a grace that it cannot be spinned out from our resolutions, not from our
endeavors, Faith is such a divine plant, as the Fathers right hand must plant
in our souls.

4. Let it convince you of the excllency of the grace of Faith (for the
difficulty of the attaining to any thing may speak out the excellency of that
thing) there is no sin but it may be easily win at, there is an easiness and
facility to overtake the paths of our Idols, but the graces of the Spirit are
so excellent things, that we must figh^ before we attain them. And you who are
strangers to Christ Jesus (and have never know what it is to close with him) we
would reque^ you in Christ's name to be reconciled to him. What know ye, O men
(or rather Atheists) be this shall be the last summons that ye shall get (...)
believe? And that because ye disobey this precious summons, there shall be one
presented t^ you, that ye cannot sit. I remember of one man who looking upon
many thousands that we^ under his command, weeped over them when he considered,
how that within a few years all these should be laid in their graves, and
should be in eternity. O but it were much of our concernment to be trying our
selves how it is with us; we are not afraid that it is a breach of charit, to
wish, that but one of each ten that are within these doors, were heirs of the
grace of life, and had the solid and spiritual expectation of heaven. I think,
if Christ were to come presently to speak to us, He might not only say to each
twelve that are here, One of you shall betray me, but we are afraid that he
should say to each twelve that are here Eleven of you shall betray me, and but
one only shall pass free. O does it not concern you to enquire where you shall
rest at night; when the long shadows of everlasting evening shall be stretched
out upon you? I think there are some that are so settled upon their lees, that
if they were one day in hell, and saw all the torments that are there, and were
brought from it the next day to live on earth, they would ^ot repent: And more,
there are some that take them up on day to see the joys of Heaven, and bring
them back again, they would not pursue after these blessed and everlasting
enjoyments. O is not Christ much undervalued by us? But I must tell you this,
One woe is past, but behold another woe is coming. O the searchings of those
spirits who are entered into their everlasting pri^on house, out of which their
is no redemption. What shall be your choice, when Christ shall come in the
clouds? I am preswaded there are many, to whom at that day, this Doctrine would
be ravishing, viz. That there were not a death, that there were not a God, and
that there were not an eternity. O! will you believe, That the sword of the
justice of God is bathed in heaven, and shall come down to make a sacrifice,
not in the land of Idumea nor in the land of Bezra; but he is to make a
sacrifice amongst his people, who seemed to make a Covenant with him by
sacrifice. Ah, ah, shall we say that if that argument were used to many; that
within forty days they should be at their long and everlasting home, they
would yet spend thirty nine of those days in taking pleasure upon their lusts.
I am persuaded of this; that there are many who think that the way betwixt
heaven and earth, is but one days journey; they think they can believe in one
day, and triumphant night. But, O it shall be short triumphing that such
Believers as those shall have. Therefore, O die to close with a crucified
Savior; rest on hi^ by Faith, delight your selves in him with lo^ and let your
souls be longing for the day when that voice shall be heard in Heaven, O ho^
sweetly will it be sung! Arise, arise, arise, my lov^ my dove, my fair one and
come away; for beh^ your Winter is past your everlasting Summer is com^ and the
time of the singing of the birds is ne^ When Christ shall come over these
Mountains (...) Bether, he shall cry, Behold, I come, and the sow shall sweetly
answer, Come blessed Lord Jesus come. O what a life shall it be, that with
those two arms you should eternally incircle Christ, an^ hold him in your arms,
or rather be incircled by him? Wait for him for he shall come, and his reware
is with him, and he shall once take home the we^ried travelers of hope.

SERMON IV.
JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that y^ should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, etc.


THere are two great and excellent gist^, which God in the depth of his
boundless love has bestowed on his own. First, there i^ that infinite gift,
and royal donation, his own beloved Son Jesus Christ, which is called, The gift
of God, John 4.10. And secondly, there is that excellent gift of the grace of
Faith, which God has bestowed upon his own, which is also called, The gift of
God, Ephesians. 2.8. Faith is the gift of God. And is it not certain, that these
two gracious gifts ought to engage our souls and hearts much unto him? Infinite
Majesty could give no gift greater then his Son, and infinite poverty could
receive no other gift so suitable as Christ; It was the most noble gift that
Heaven could give, and it is the greatest advantage for earth to receive it.
And we could wish that the most part of the study and practice of men (that is
spent in purfuit after these low and transient vanities) might be once taken up
in that precious pursuit after Christ. We could wish that all the questions and
debates of the time, were turned over into a soul-concerning question, What
shall we do to be saved? And that all the questions, controversies, and
contensions of the times, were turned over into that divine contention, and
heavenly debate. Who should be most for Christ, who should be most for the
exalting of the noble and excellent plant of renown? And that all our judgings
and searchings of other men's practices and estats, might ^e turned over into
the useful search, to prove and examine our selves; whether we be in the faith
or not? And I would ask you this question, What are your thoughts concerning
precious Christ, seeing he is that noble object of Faith? We would only have
you take along these things, by which Christ may be much commended to your
hearts. First, there was never any that with the eyes of Faith did behold the
matchless beauty and transcendent worth of that crucified Savior, that
returned his enemy. There is soul-conquering virtue in the face of Christ: and
there is hea^ captivating, and overcoming power in the beauty^ Jesus Christ.
This first sight that ever persecution Saul got of Christ, it brought him unto
an endle^ captivity of love. Secondly, there is this that w^ would say of
precious Christ, which may engag^ our souls unto him, that for all the wrongs
believers do to Christ, yet has he never an ill word (...) them to his Father,
but commends them; which is clear from that of John 17.6. where Christ do^
commend the Disciples to the Father, for the grace of obedience: They have kept
thy word. And for the grace of Faith, verse. 8. They have believed that the
did send me. And yet were not the Disciple most defective in obedience both
in this, The they did not take up their cross, and follow Christ and also that
they did not adhere to him in the da^ that he was brought to Cajaphas Hall? And
we^ they not most defective in the grace of Faith, as (...) clear from Matthew.
17 17. and likewise from John 14.1. he is pressing them to believe i^ him, and
yet he does commend them to the Father, as most perfect in those things?
Thirdly, there is this that we would lastly say of him who i^ the noble object
of Faith; look to the eminent depths of Christ's condescendency, and then you
will be provoked to love him. Was it not infinite love that made Christ to ly
three days in the Grave, that we might be through all the ages of eternity
with him? Was it not infinite condescendency that made his precious head wear a
crown of Thorns, that we might eternally wear a crown of glory? Was it not
infinite condesendency that made Christ wear a purple robe, that so we might
wear that precious rob^ of the righteousness of the Saints? And was it not
matchless condescendency, that Christ who know no sin, was made sin for us,
that so we might become like unto him, and be made the righteousness of God in
him?

But to come to that which we intend mainly to speak upon at this time, which
is that second thing that we proposed to speak of from these words, and that is
concerning the excellency of this grace of Faith, which we cleared, was holden
out in that, that Faith was called his commandment, which is called by way of
eminency and excellency. There are many things in Scripture, which may sweetly
point out the precious excellency of this grace of Faith, and we shall only
speak to these things?

I. The first thing that speaks out the excellency of Faith, is this, it
exercises it self upon a most noble object, to wit, Jesus Christ; Faith and
Love being the two arms of the immortal soul, by which we do embrace a
crucified Savior, which is often pointed at in Scripture, and we shall point at
these three principal acts of Faith, which it exercises on Jesus Christ, as
the object of it.

1. The first is, to make up an union betwixt Christ and the believer (Faith
being indeed an uniting grace, and that which knitteth the members to the head)
and to make this more fully appear, we would point out a little what a sweet
harmony and correspondency there is betwixt these two sister-graces, to wit,
Faith and Love. Faith is that nail which fasteneth the soul to Christ, and Love
is that grace which drives that nail to the head: Faith at first takes but a
tender grip of Christ, and then love comes in, and makes the soul take a more
sure grip of him. Secondly, ye may see their harmony in this, Faith is that
grace which takes hold (as it were) of the garment of Christ, and of his
words; but Love (that ambitious grace) it takes hold of the heart of Christ,
and (as it were) his heart does melt in the hand of Love. Thirdly, it may be
seen in this, Faith is that grace which draws the first draught of the
likeness and Image of Christ upon a soul: but that accomplishing grace of Love,
it does complete these first draughts, and these imperfect lineaments of
Christ's Image, which were first drawn on the soul. Fourthly, by Faith and love,
the heart of Christ and of the believer are so united, that they are no more
two, but one Spirit.

2. There is this second act that Faith exercises on Christ, and it is in
discovering the matchless excellencies, and the transcendent properties of
Jesus Christ. O what large and precious commentaries does Faith make upon
Christ! it is indeed that faithful spy, which does always bring up a good
report of him: Hence it is, that Faith is called understanding, Coloss. 2.2.
because it is that grace which reveals much of the precious truth of that
noble object.

3. And there is this third noble act of Faith, exercising it self upon Christ,
viz. It makes Christ precious to the soul, according to that word 1. Pet. 2.7.
unto you which believe, he is precious. And if there were no other thing to
speak forth its worth but that, it is more then sufficient; for no doubt this
is the exercise of the higher House to be dwelling on the contemplation of
Christ's beauty, and to have their souls transported with love toward him, and
with joy in him. Reason and amazement are seldom companions, but here they do
sweetly join together, First, a Christian loves Christ, because of Christ's
actings; and then he loves all these actings, because they come from Christ.

2. Now secondly, this points out the precious excellency of the grace of
Faith; it is that grace which is most my sterious and sublime in its actings;
it has a more divine and sublime way of acting then any other grace; hence it
is called The Mystery of Faith, which speaks this, that the actings of Faith,
are mysteries to the most part of the world: and I shall only point at these
things, which may speak out the mysterious actings of the grace of Faith.

1. Faith can believe, and fix it self on a word of promise, although sense,
reason, and probability, seem to contradict the accomplishment of that promise.
Faith it walks not by the low dictates of sense and reason, but by a higher
rule, to wit, The sure word of prophecy, which is clear from Romans 4.19. where
Abraham believed the promise, notwithstanding that sense and reason seemed to
contradict it; He considered not the deadness of his own body neither the
barrenness of Sarahs womb, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. And it
is cle^ from Heb. 11.29.30. where Faith believed their passing through the Red
sea upon dry ground, which was most contrary to sense and reason. Faith be
lieved the falling down of the walls of Jericho, b^ the blowing of rams horns:
which things are most impossible to sense and reason; for sense will of
tentimes cry out, All men are liars; and reason will say, How can such a thing
be? and yet that he roick grace of Faith, cries out, Has he spoken it? He
will also do it. Has he said it? Then (...) shall come to pass.

2. Faith can believe a word of promise, notwithstanding that the dispensations
of God seem to contradict it; as was clear in Job, who professed he would trust
in God though he should ki^ him. And no doubt but this was the practice o^
believing Jacob, he trusted that that promise should be accomplished, that the
elder should serve the younger: though all the dispensations of Go^ which he
did meet with, seemed to say that promise should not be accomplished.

3. Faith can believe a word of promise, even when the commands of God seem to
contradic^ the accomplishment of that promise; this is clea^ in that singular
instance of Abraham's Faith, that notwithstanding he was commanded to kill his
promised seed (upon whom did depend the accomplishment of the promises) yet he
believed that the promises should be performed. And though there were indeed
extrordinary and strange try^ls of his Faith, as he had natural affections to
wrestle with, yet over the belly of all these, believing Abraham he gives
Faith to the promise, and brings his son Isaac to the Altar (though he did
receive him back again) this is clear from Heb. 11.17.18.19.

4. Faith can exercise it self upon the promise, notwithstanding that callenges
and convictions of unworthiness and guilt do wait on the Christian; this is
clear, 2 Samuel 23.5. that although his house was not so with God as did become,
yet he believed the promise; as likewise it is clear from Psalm. 65.3.
Iniquities prevail against me, and yet that does not interrupt his faith; but
he says, As for our transgressions, thou shall purge them away. And certainly
it were a noble and precious act of Faith to believe, notwithstanding of
unanswerable challenges of guilt; the best way, both to crucify our Idols, and
to answer those challenges, is believing, and hoping against hope, and closing
with Christ, this is clear from Isa. 64.6.7. compared with ver. 8. where after
strange challenges, the Prophet has a strange word, but now, O Lord, thou art
our Father. There is an Emphasis in the word (now) for all this, yet thou art
(now) our Father.

5. And lastly, this points out the mysterious acting of the grace of Faith,
that it exercises it self upon an invisible object, even upon Christ not yet
seen, according to that word, 1 Pet. 5.8. Whom having not seen, yet ye love, in
whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, (...) I pose the greater part of
you who are here, whither or not these be two of the greatest parado^ and
mysteries unto you? For is not this a m^stery to love him whom we never saw?
Whom having not seen, yet ye love. To love an absent a^ unseen Christ, is a
mystery to the most part of the world; and is not this a mystery to believe on
his whom we never saw? In whom, though ye see hi^ not, yet believing. And I
shall add this, that Fai^ can hold fast its interest with God, notwithstanding
the most precious Christians should call (...) hypocrites, and not acknowledge
us: this is clear is the practice of Job, and most clear from the word, Isai.
63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Isra^ acknowledge us not.

III. Thirdly, this points out the excellence of the grace of Faith, that
Faith (when it is i^ exercise) is that grace by which a Christian dot^ attain
unto most sensible enjoyments. There is great question that is much debated
among^ Christians, what is the way to win to this happy length, to be always
under the sweet and refreshing influence of heaven, and to have his dew always
coming down upon our branches? I can give (...) answer to it but this, Be much
in the exercise (...) Faith; this is clear from that notion and name pu^ upon
Faith, Isai. 45.22. it is called, a look to Christ, which is a most sensible
act. If ye would know a description of Faith, it is this, The divine
contemplation of the immortal soul, upon that divine excellent and precious
object Jesus Christ: for God never made Faith a liar, and therefore its eye is
never off him that is the noble object of Faith, Jesus Christ manifested in the
Gospel: and it is clear, Ephesians. 1.13. After ye believed, ye were sealed with the
holy Spirit of promise, which preaches out the excellent enjoyments these had
after their closing with Christ who is invisible. Our Faith is called a seeing,
which speaks out this, that Faiths sight of God is as certain as if it did
behold him with our eyes; as is clear, Heb. 11.27. Moses saw him by faith who
is invisible. And we conceive that the ground which makes the most part of us
have such complaints, How long will thou forget us for ever? It is this, the
want of the spiritual exercise of Faith; and are there not some here who may
cry out, It is more then thirty days since I did behold the King: Yea, there
are some who go a greater length, and cry out, I have lived these two years at
Jerusalem, and yet I have not seen the Kings face: Yea, there are some here
whose complaint may go a little higher, and cry forth, These three years and
six-moneths it has not rained on me: but the clouds have been restrained, and
bound up, and the heavens have become brass. And would ye know the rise of
these complaints? It is this, ye are not much in the spiritual exercise of
faith. And to you, I would only say these two words. First, it is easier to
persuade a reprobate that he is defective in the fear of God, and in his love
to God, then to persuade some such, that they are wanting to God in their
says; for they hold fast that piece of desperate iniquity till they die.
Secondly, we would say to those of you wh^ have the valley of Achor for a door
of hope, an^ have tasted of the sweetness of Christ, some (...) you will be
less convinced for the neglect of the duty of faith, then for the neglect of
the duty o^ prayer, or of the duty of keeping the Sabbath day. But I am
persuaded of this, that if the no^ble worth of that transcendent object were
known, we would have a holy impatience unt^ once we did believe.

IV. Fourthly, this also points out the excellency of the grace of faith; it
is that grace by which a Christian is advanced to the highest and most
inconceivable pitch of dignity, and that is to be the child of the living God;
as is clear, John 1.12. To as many as received (...) believed in him, he gave
power or prerogative to become the sons of God. And certainly that noble
prerogative of adoption is much undervalued by many: And I will tell you two
grounds whereon the most part of men undervalue that excellent gift of
adoption. First, they do not take up the infinite highness of God, and what a
one he is, otherwise they would cry out with David; Seems it a small thing in
your eyes, to be a son to the King of Kings? Secondly, we do not take up, nor
understand those matchless privileges which are given to them who are once in
this estate. I am persuaded, if this were believed, that he who is a servant
does not abide in the house for ever, though he that is a son does; it would
stir us up to more divine zeal in our pursuit after Christ.

V. Fifthly, this likewise points out the excellency of the grace of says;
it is that grace by which all othere actions are pleasant to God and are taken
off our hand; as is clear, Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more
excellent sacrifice then Cain: which must be undestood even to all other
duties. And that word, verse. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God,
speaks this also, that by faith we do exceedingly please him. And this is a
most sad and lamentable reproof unto many who are here, that their actions do
not please God, because they are not in faith. Would you know a description of
your prayers? (ye who are hypocrites, and destitute of the knowledge of God) It
is this your prayers are the breach of the third command, in taking the Name of
the Lord in vain, for which he will not hold you guiltless. And would you know
what is your hearing of Sermons? It is an abomination to the Lord; according to
that word in Tit. 1.15. To the unbelieving and impure, is nothing clean. And as
Solomon does speak, The plowing of the wicked is sin; so that all your actions
that ye go about, are but an offense to the Majesty of the Lord.

Now we would speak to these two things, before we proceed to the evidence of
faith, to wit: First, that there is a difference betwixt the direct act of
faith, and the reflecting act of faith: for there may be a direct act of faith
in a Christian, when he is not persuaded that he does believe; but the
reflecting acts of faith, are these which a Christian has when he is persuaded
in his conscience that he does believe. And we would secondly say, that there
are many that do go down to their grave under that soul-destroying delusion,
that they are in the Faith, and yet never did know what Faith is. I am
persuaded there are many whom all the preachings in the world will never
persuade that they did never believe: their Faith being born with them, and it
will die with them without any fruit; but faith being such an excellent grace,
and so advantageous, whereof we have spoken a few things, we shall speak a
little further of it: First, in pointing out some evidences by which a
Christian may know whether or not he be in the Faith. Secondly, I shall give you
some helps whereby Faith may be kept in exercise.

I. Now there is this first evidence of Faith, that a Christian who does
believe, he accounts absence and want of fellowship with Christ, and
communion with him, one of the greatest and most lamentable crosses that ever
he had; as is clear, Psalm. 13.3. Lighten mine eyes, said David, that is, let me
behold, and be satisfied with thy face, and the motive that he backeth it with,
is this, Lest I sleep the sleep of death. David thought himself a dead man if
Christ did withdraw his presence from him, also it is clear, Cant. 3.1.
compared with the following verses, where absence from Christ, and want of
communion with him, was the greatest cross the Spouse had; and it is clear
from John 20.11.12.13. where Mary had a holy disdain of all things in respect
and comparison of Christ. But I will tell you what an hypocrite does most
lament, and that is the want of reputation amongst the Saints; that is the
great god and Idol amongst hypocrites, and thee which (when not enjoyed)
hypocrites, and Atheists lament most; the world, and the lust of their eyes,
when they want these then they cry out, They have taken away my gods, and what
have I more? They think heaven can never make up he loss of earth. And
certainly if many of us would examine our selves by this, we should find our
selves most defective: I would pose all you who are here, who have taken on a
name to be followers of Christ, whether or not ye have been content to walk
thirty days in absence from Christ, and yet never to lament it: Has not Christ
been thirty days and more in heaven without a visit from you? And yet for all
this, you have not clothed your selves with sackcloath: I will not say that
this is an undeniable evidence of the total want of the grace of faith; but it
does eminently prove this, that the person who has come this length, has lost
much of his primitive love, and much of that high esteem, which he ought to
have of matchless Christ: what can you find in this world, that makes you
converse so little with heaven? I think that it is the noble encouragement of a
Christian, when he is going down to his grave, that he has this where with to
comfort himself, I am to change my place, but not my company. Death to the
believing Christian being a blessed transition and transportation to a more
immediate, constant, and uninterrupted enjoyment of God: But I believe, that if
all who have the name of Believers in this generation should go to heaven, they
might have, this to say, I am now not only to change my place but also my
company: For these seventy years I have been conversant with my Idols, but now
I am to converse with more blessed, divine and excellent company. O that ye
might be persuaded to pursue much after an absent Christ! Were it not a sweet
period of our life, to breath out our last breath in his arms, and to be living
in the faith of being eternally with him, which might be founded upon his Word.

II. There is this second evidence of one that is in the Faith: They do
endeavor to advance that necessary work of the mortification of their Idols,
according to that word 1 John 3.3. Every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. Acts 15.9. Faith it purifieth the heart.
And concerning this evidence (least any should mistake it) I would say these
things to you. First the mortification of a Christian, as long as he is here
below, it does more consist in resolutions than in seize, it is certain,
that there are high seize of a Christian, in the mortification of his
Idols; but his resolutions go far above his performances. Secondly, we would
say this. That those Christians who never came this length in Christianity, to
make that an universal conclusion, and full resolution, What have I to do any
more with Idols? They may suspect themselves, that they are not in the Faith:
For a Chr^stian that is in Christ, he is universal in resolutions, though he be
not so in practice, but defective in performances. A Christian may have big
resolutions with weak performances; for resolutions will be at the gate of
heaven, before practice come from the border of hell; there being a long
distance betwixt resolution and practice, and the one much swifter then the
other. And thirdly, We would likewise, say that ye who never did know what it
was to endeavor (by prayer and the exercises of other duties) the
mortification of your lusts and Idols, ye may be afraid, that ye have not yet
the hope of seeing him as he is. And I would say this to many who are settled
upon their lees, and who never did know what it was to spend one hour in secret
prayer for mortifying an Idol, that they would beware, lest that curse be past
in heaven against them. I would have purged you, and ye would not be purged,
therefore ye shall not be purged any more till ye die. That iniquity of
refusing to commune with Christ in the work of ^;ecret mortification, I say;
that iniquity shall not be purged away. And we would once seriously desire you
by that dreadful sentence that Christ shall pass against you, and by the love
you have to your immortal souls, and by the pains of those everlasting torments
in hell, that ye would seriously set about the work of spiritual mortification,
that so ye may evidence that ye have believed, and that ye have the
soul-comforting hope of eternal life. I would only speak this one word to you,
and desire you seriously to ponder it: What if within twelve hours hereafter a
summons were given to you, without continuation of days, to compear before the
solemn and dreadful Tribunal of that impartial Judge, Jesus Christ? what
suppose ye, would be your thoughts? Will you examine your own conscience, what
you think would be your thoughts, if such summons were given unto you: I am
persuaded of this, That your knees would smite one against another, and your
faces would gather paleness, seeing your conscience would condemn you, That you
had been weighed in the balance and found light: O think ye that ye can both
fight and triumph in one day? Think ye that ye can fight and overcome in one
day? Think ye your lusts and unmortified corruptions so weak, and faint-hearted
an enemy, that upon the first appearance of such imaginary champions (as most
part of us are in our own eyes) that your idols would lay down arms, and let
you trample on them? Believe me, mortification is not a work of one day, or one
year, but it is a work will serve you all your time, begin as soon as you will;
and therefore seeing you have spent your days in the works of the flesh, it is
time that now you would begin and pursue after him, whose work is with him, and
whose reward shall come before him.

III. Now there is this third evidence, by which a Christian may know whether
he be in the faith or not; and it is, that Christ is matchless and incomparable
unto such an one, according to that word, 1. Pet. 1.7. To you that believe,
Christ is precious. And that word that Luke has in his 7. chap. at the close:
That she to whom much was forgiven, loved much. Now lest this likewise should
prove a discouragement to any, I would only have you take notice of this, that
a Christian may be a believer, and yet want the sensible discoveries of this,
that Christ is matchlesly precious to him: but this is certain, that when they
are in the lively exercise of Faith, it is impossible then for them not to
esteem Christ matchless: and I would speak this likewise to many who are here;
Have you not been living these ten years in Faith? And I would pose you with
this: Esteem you not your Idols more matchless then Christ and more of worth
then he? It is impossible that there can be any lively exercise of faith, and
not esteem Christ matchless. It is not to say it with your mouth and contradict
it with your heart, will do the business: for if your heart could speak, it
would say, I would sell Christ for thirty pieces of silver; but mine idols
would I sell at no rate. Are there not many of you who love the world and its
pleasures, better then eternity of joy? O! know you not that word, O ye
desperately ignorant of the truths of God! That he who loves the world, the
love of the Father is not in him? And yet notwithstanding of the light of the
Word, yet you would sell your immortal souls, with Esau for a moss of pottage.
O! but it is a poor bargain, when you have sold the eternity of joy, for a
passing world, and for its transitory delights! I would earnestly know what
shall be your thoughts in that day, when you shall be standing upon the utmost
line betwixt time and eternity? O! what will be your thoughts at that day? But
you are to follow on to endless pain, by appearance, and then you are to leave
your idols. I shall only desire that you may read the word, Isai. 10.3. What
will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from
far? To whom will ye flee for help? And where will ye leave your glory? You
shall then preach mortification to the life, though all the time of
mortification shall be then cut off. O but to hear a worldly minded man, when
eternity of pain is looking him in the face, preach out concerning the vanity
of this world, might it not preswade you, that the world is a fancy and a dream
that shall flee away, and shall leave you in the day of your greatest strait?

IV. And there is this fourth evidence of faith, that a Christian who does
truly believe, he is that Christian who entertaineth a divine jealousy, and a
holy suspicion of himself, whether or not he does believe. I love not that
faith which is void of fear: this was clear in the practice of believing Noah,
that though by faith he built the Ark yet he had fear mixed with his faith. I
know that there are some who are ignorant concerning this, what it is to doubt
concerning eternal peace? and more, it is not every one that doubts, that
certainly shall get heaven, fore I think an hypocrite may doubt concerning his
eternal salvation; however, I think the exercise of an hypocrite under his
doubtings, it is more the exercise of his judgment then the exercise of his
conscience. And I may say, that if all the exercise of the Law, which is
preached in these days, were narrowly searched, it would be more the exercise
of light, then the exercise of conscience. We speak these things as our doubt,
which was never our exercise, and we make these things our public exercise,
which was never our private and chamber-exercise. And I think that if all that
a Christian did speak to God in prayer, were his exercise, he would speak less,
and wonder more. We would be speechless when we go to God; for often if we did
speak nothing but our exercise, we would have nothing to say. And certainly it
is true, that often we fall into that woeful sin of desperate lying against the
holy Ghost, by flattering God with our mouth, and lying unto him with our
tongue. And I shall only say these two words, there are some who have this for
their great design, viz. they would be at peace with their conscience, and also
they would beat peace with their idols: they would gladly reconcile conscience
and their idols together. That is their great design. And there are some whose
design is a little more refined; they study rather to be reconciled with their
conscience, then to be reconciled with God: Their great aim they shoot at, is
this, to get their conscience quieted, though they know not what it is to have
the soul-comforting peace of God to quiet them.

V. Now there is this last evidence of Faith, that justifying faith is a faith
which puts the Christian to be much in the exercise of those duties by which
it may be maintained; for we must keep faith as the apple of our eye: and for
that end, I would only give you these three things, by which faith must be kept
in exercise; and a real Christian will be endeavoring, i^ some measure, to
attain unto these.

1. It keeps faith much in exercise, to be much in marking and taking notice
of the divine exercise, and proofs of the love of God, wherewith a Christian
does meet, as is clear from that word in Romans 5.4. Experience works hope. I
durst be bold to charge the most part that are indeed in Christ with this, that
they are too little in remarking, and taking notice of the experiences of his
love. You should mark the place of your experience, and much more you should
mark the experience it self, as is clear from Scripture, that the very place
where Christians did meet with experience in such an enjoyment of God, they
marked it, Ezech. 1.1. By the rivers of Chebar the heavens were opened, and I
saw the visions of God. And Genesis 32.30. Jacob called the place Peni^l, The
place of being, after seeing of the face of God, it was so remarkable unto him.
And we conceive that you would mark these two things mainly in your practice.
First, you would mark, if you can possibly, the first day of your closing with
Christ, and your coming out of Egypt: and we may allude unto that command (if
not more then allude to it) in Deuteronomy. 16.1. Observe the month of Abib, and keep
the Passover unto the Lord thy God; for in the month of Abib, the Lord thy
God brought thee out of the land of Egypt. And secondly, we would have you much
in marking these experiences which have increased your faith, and which have
strengthened your love, and which have made you mortify your idols. These are
experiences especially to be marked.

2. Faith is kept in exercise, and we win to the lively assurance of our
interest in God, which we would press upon you, by being much in the exercise
of secret prayer O! but many love much to pray when abroad, who never loved to
pray when alone; and that is a desperate sign of hypocrisy, according to that
Matthew. 6.5. it is said of hypocrites; They love to pray standing in the
Synagogues, and in the corners of the street, that they might be seen of men.
But it is never said of these persons, that they love to pray alone, only they
loved to pray in Synagogues; but is is secret and retired prayers by which
faith must be kept in exercise.

3. And there is this likewise that we would press upon you, that you would be
much in studying communion and fellowship with God, that so your faith may be
kept in life. And, O what a blessed life were it, each day to be taken up to
the top of the Mount Pisga, and there to behold that promised land, to get a
refreshing sight of the crown every morning, which might make us walk with joy
all along the day! The heart of a Christian ought to be in heaven, his
conversation ought to be there, his eyes ought to be there; and I know not what
of a Christian ought to be out of heaven (even before his going there) save his
lumpish tabernacle of clay, which cannot inherit incorruption till he be made
incorruptible. And I shall say no more but this, many of us are readier to
betray him with a kiss, and crucify him afresh, then to keep communion with
him: but woe eternally be to him by whom the Son of man is betrayed, and that
does crucify Christ afresh: I^ were better that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and he were cast into the depth of the sea. I remember an expression
of a man, not two days ago, who upon his deathbed, being asked by one, what
he was doing? did most stupidly, though most truly, reply, That he was fighting
with Christ. And I think, that the most part of us (if he prevent us not) shall
die fighting with Christ. But know and be persuaded, that he is too sore a
party for us to fight with: He will once tread you in the wine press of his
fury, and he shall return with dyed garments from treading such of you as would
not embrace him: He shall destroy you with all his heart. Therefore be
instructed (least his soul be disjointed from you) as that word in Jer. 6.8.
And least your soul eternally be separated from him. Be instructed, I say, to
close with him by faith. Now to him who can make you to do so, we desire to
give praise.

In the two Sermons next following, you have the rest of these sweet purposes
which the worthy Author preached upon the same Text.

SERMON V.
JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, etc.


THere are two great rocks upon which a Christian does ordinarily dash in his
way and motion toward his rest. 1. The rock of presumption and carnal
confidence, so that when Christ dangleth them upon his knees, and satisfies
them with the breasts of his consolations, and makes their cup to overflow,
then they cry out, My mountain stands strong, I shall never be moved. And 2.
the rock of misbelief and discouragement, so that when he hides his face, and
turns back the face of his Throne, then they cry out; Our hope and strength
is perished from the Lord. We know not what it is to bear our enjoyments by
humility, nor out crosses hy patience and submission. O! but misbelief and
jealousy are bad interpreters of dark dispensations: they know not what it is
to read these mysterious characters of divine providence, except they be
written in the legible characters of sense: misbelief is big with child of
twins, and is traveling till it bring forth apostasy and security: and no
doubt, he is a blessed Christian that has overcome that woeful idol of
misbelief, and does walk by that Royal law of the Word, and not by that
changeable rule of dispensations. We conceive that there are three great Idols
and Dagons of a Christian, that hinders him from putting a blan^ in Christ's
hand, concerning his guiding to Heaven; there is pride, self-indulgence, and
security. Do we not covet to be more excellent then our neighbors? Do we not
love to travel to heaven through a valley of roses? And do we not ambitiously
desire to walk toward Sion sleeping, rather then weeping, as we go? Are there
not some words that we would have taken out of the Bible? That is sad Divinity
to flesh and blood: Through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, we love not to be changed form vessel, to vessel, that so our scent may
be taken from us.

There are three great enemies of Christ, misbelief, hypocrisy, and
prophanity. Misbelief is a bloody sin, hypocrisy is a silent sin, profanity is
a crying sin, those are mother evils. And I shall give you these differences
betwixt them: Misbelief crucifieth Christ under the vail of humility,
hypocrisy crucifieth Christ under the vail of love, and profanity puts him
to open shame. Misbelief denies the love and power of God, hypocrisy denies
the omniscience of God; and profanity denies the justice of God: misbelief is
a sin that looks after inherent righteousness, hypocrisy is a sin that
looks after external holiness only, and profanity is a sin that looks
after heaven without holiness, making a connection between those things that
God has always separat, and separating those things which he has always put
together, so that their faith shall once prove a delusion, and flee away as a
^ream in the night: but let us study this excel^ent grace of true and saving
faith, which shall be (...) precious remedy against all those Christ-detroying
and soul-destroying evils.

But now to come to that which we did pro^ose thirdly, to be spoken of from the
words, which was the sweetness of this grace of faith; no ^oubt it is a
pleasant command, and it makes all ^ommands pleasant: it is that which casts
a ^ivine luster upon the most hard sayings of Christ and makes the Christian
to cry forth, God has ^oken in his Holiness, I will rejoice. We need ^ot
stand long to clear that faith is a sweet, and ^efreshing command; for it is
oftentimes recor^ed in Scripture to the advantage of this grace, that
unspeakable joy and heavenly delight, are ^e handmaids that wait upon it. But
more ^articularly to make it out, we shall speak to these things. The first is,
that this grace gives a Christian a broad and comprehensive sight of Christ,
and makes to behold not only the beau^y of his actings, but the beauty of his
person? And there are these three precious sights that Faith gives to a
Christian of Christ. First, ^t lets the christian see Christ in his absolute
and personal excellency, taking him up as the eter^all Son of God, as the
Ancient of days, as the ^ather of Eternity, as the express Image of his
Fathers person, and the brightness of his glory, and ^his fills the soul with
divine fear and admira^ion. Hence is that word, Heb. 11.28. That we see by
Faith, him that is invisible. As if he h^ said, faith is that grace that makes
things the are invisible, visible unto us. It lets the so^ see Christ in his
relative excellencies, that is what he is to us. Faith takes up Christ as
husband, and from thence we are provoked (...) much boldness and divine
confidence, and with all to see those rich possessions that are provide^ for us
by our elder brother, who was born for a^versity. Faith takes up Christ as a
blesse^ days man that did lay his hands on us both. And from thence it is
constrained to wonder at the condescendency of Christ: It takes him up as
dying and as redeeming us from the power of the grave and from the hands of our
enemies; and the provokes Christians to make a total and absolu^ resignation
of themselves over unto Christ, I serve him all the days of their life in
righteousne^ and holiness. And thirdly, Faith makes the so^ behold those
mysterious draughts of spotless lov^ those divine emanations of love that has
flowe^ from his ancient and everlasting love, since the world began. Would you
know the great grou^ why we are so ignorant of him, who is the study (...)
Angels, and so all that are about the Throne? (...) is this, we are not much in
the exercise of fait^. And if we would ask that question, What is the way to
attain the saving knowledge of God (...) Christ? We could give no answer to it
but thi^ Believe, and again believe, and again believe Faith opens those
mysterious seals of h^ boundless perfections, and in some way teache^ ^he
Christian to answer to that unanswerable question, What is his Name? And what
is his ^ons Name? There is this secondly, that poin^eth out the sweetness of
Faith, that it gives an ^xcellent relish unto the promises, and makes them
food to our souls. What are all the promi^s without faith (as to our use) but
as a dead let^er has no life? But faith exercised upon the promises, makes a
Christian cry out, The ^ords of his mouth are sweeter unto me then the ho^ey
and the honey comb: as is clear from Heb. 11.12.13. It is by faith that we
embrace the promi^es, and do receive them.

Thirdly, the sweetness of faith may appear by ^his, that it enableth a
Christian to rejoice under the most anxious and afflicting dispensations that
he meets with whilst he is here below; as (...) clear from Romans 5.1.3. where
his being justi^ed by faith has this fruit attending it, to joy in ^ibulation,
and likewise from Heb. 10.34.35. ^oth, not faith hold the crown in its right
hand, and lets a Christian behold these infinite dig^ities that are provided
unto them, after they ^ave as a strong man run their race? And when (...)
Christian is put into a furnace hotter seven ^imes more then ordinary, it
brings down the ^on of man Jesus Christ, to walk with them in ^he furnace, so
that they walk safely, and with joy through fire and water, and (in a manner)
they ^an have no cross in his company. For would ^e know what is the
description of a Cross? It (...) want Christ in any estat. And would you know
what is the description of prosperity? It is to have Christ in any condition or
estate of life. What can ye want that have him? And what can you have that want
him? He is that all, so that all things beside him are but vanity. But besides
this, faith does discover unto a Christian that there is a sweet period of all
his trials and afflictions that he can be exposed unto; so that he can never
say that of faith which Ahab spoke of Micajah, He never prophesies good things
to me; but rather he may say always the contrary, faith never prophesies evil
unto me, it being a grace that prophesies excellent things in the darke^
night, and sweetly declares, that though weeping do endure for the evening,
yet joy comes in the morning. And that though now they go forth weeping,
bearing precious seed, yet at last they shall return rejoicing, having sheaves
in their bosom.

And this may bring in the fourth consideration, to point out the sweetness of
Faith, that (...) gives a refreshing sight of that land which is afar off, and
makes him to behold that inheritance that is provided for the Saints in light:
It goes forth to the brook Eshcol, and there does pluck down those grapes that
grow in Emmanucls land, to bring up a good report upon that noble Country we
are sojourning toward, and the city, the streets whereof are paved with
transparent gold. And howbeit it may be a perplexing debate between many and
their own souls, whether or not these eyes that have been the windows through
which so much uncleanness has entered, and those species of lust have been
conveyed into the heart, shall once be eyes of a dove washed with milk, and
fitly set, and be admitted to see that glorious object, the Lamb that sits
upon the Throne? Or whether ever these tongues that have been set on fire of
hell, and these polluted lips that have spoke so much against God and heaven,
and all his people, and interests shall ever be admitted to sing, these
heavenly Halelujahs amongst those spotless quire of Angels, and that assembly
of the firstborn? Or if these hands or feet that have been so active to commit
iniquity, and so swift to run after vanity, shall ever be admitted hereafter to
carry those Palm branches, and follow the Lamb where ever he goes? Or whether
ever these hearts that have been indeed a Bethaven, a house for Idols, may yet
notwithstanding be a dwelling for the Holy Ghost? Though these things, we say,
and such like, may be the subject of many sad debates to some weary souls, and
cause many toffings to and fro till the morning; yet faith can bring all these
mysteries to light, and looking within the vail, can let us see thousands of
thousands, who were once as ugly as our selves, yet now having washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, admitted to stand before
the Throne of God, and serve him day and night.

Now there is that fourthly, which we promised to speak of, concerning this
grace of Faith, from these words, and it is the absolute necessity that is of
the exercise of this grace, which is holden forth in that word, His Commandment
which does import these three things. 1. The all the commands that we can obey
without the commandment of Faith, it is but a polluting (...) our selves, and a
plunging of our selves in the ditch till our own clothes abhor us. 2. The God
takes greater delight in the exercise of the grace of Faith, then in the
exercise of any other. And lastly, that as to the many imperfections which we
have in our obedience, there is a sweet act of oblivion past of them all, if we
make conscience seriously to obey this command of Faith which is indeed the
sweet compend of the Gospel: all these things does most clearly appear, i^ that
believing here is called, His Commandment by way of excellency, as if this were
his only commandment.

But that we may yet a little more particularly point out the absolute
necessity of Faith, there are these things that speaks it forth to the full
1. That though rivers of tears should run down our eyes, because we keep not
his Law; though we should never rise off our knees from prayer^ and should all
our lifetime speak to God with the tongue of Angels; and though we should
constantly obey his commands, yet without faith we should never escape that
eternal sentence of excommunication from the presence of the Lord, there being
no action that does proceed from (...) which can please the Majesty of the
Lord, unless it has its rise from this principle of faith; as i^ clear from
Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. And though we should
offer unto him ten thousand rivers of oil, and thousands of rams, and should
offer up in a burnt sacrifice all the beasts that are upon the mountains, and
the trees that are upon many hills, this should ^e the answer that God should
return to us: Who ^th required these things at your hands? I take no cleasure
in these solemn sacrifices; because there is no way of attaining peace with
God, but through ^he exercise of faith, making use of the spotless
^ighteousness of Jesus Christ. 2. Let us do our ^tmost by all the inventions we
can, to bring ^own our body, and let us separate our selves from ^ll the
pleasures of the flesh; yet all our Idols shall ^eign without much
contradiction, except we do ^nce attain unto this grace of faith, which is that
^ictory, whereby we must overcome the world, and the hand that makes use of
infinite strength, for ^bduing of coruptions, making the Christian ^weetly to
take up that song, Stronger is he that is with us, then he that is in the world.

Form all this that we have said, both of the sweetness of Faith, and the
necessity thereof, we would propose these few considerations, to two or three
sorts of persons.

1. There are some who live in that vain imaginary delusion of attaining to
heaven through a ^ovenant of works, and do neglect to seek salvation by Faith
in the righteousness of Christ; and ^o those who build upon this sandy
foundation, I ^hal say but these two words. First, how long shall ^e labor in
the fire for very vanity? Do ye ever think to put on the cap-stone? Know you
(...) that the day is approaching, when your house shall fall about your ears,
your confidence shall be rejected, and your hope shall evanish as a dream and
flee away as a vision in the night? Secondly, what a monstrous blindness, and
what an unspeakable act of folly must it be, to say that Christ was crucified
in vain? which yet ye do practically assert, when ye go about to purchase a
righteousness through the works of the Law.

2. There are some who are secure in their own thoughts concerning their faith;
they never questioned the reality of it, they never examined it. O ye whose
faith is as old as your selves, ye say y^ never knew what it was to dispute;
and I may say, ye never knew what it was to believe. Thou profane hypocrite,
let me tell thee, a strong faith, and yet strong idols, must needs be a strong
delusion: Thou will not obey the Lord: Thou will no^ pray: thou will not
believe a threatening in all the word: Thou will count all Religion madness and
foolishness, and yet thou will persuade thy self thou believe in Christ. Oh!
be not deceived: God is not mocked; and why will ye mock your selves (...) Shall
I tell you that reprobats have a sad Religion? One day they must believe, and
obey, and pray, and give a testimony to godliness; but, alace too late, and
little to their advantage, Shall no^ he whom all the Ministers on earth could
scarce ever persuade to believe so much as a Heaven o^ Hell, or one threatening
in all the Book of God, at last be forced to believe their own sense, when they
shall see the Ancient of days upon the Throne, and shall hear the cries of so
many thou^and living witnesses come out both from Heaven and Hell, bearing
testimony to the truth, of threatenings and promises, that not one jot of them
^s fallen to the ground, and he would never be ^erswaded to bow a knee to God
in earnest all his ^fe? Shall he not then pray with greatest ferven^y, That
hills and mountains might fall upon him, ^o cover him from the face of the
Lamb? And he that would never submit to a command of God, must he not at last
obey that dreadful command, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
torments? etc. Yea, he who was the greatest mocker ^n the world, shall then
confess, that they are blessed who put their trust in the Lord; as they are
excellently brought in, though in an Apocryphal ^ook, Wisd. chap. 5.4. crying
out with great ter^or while they behold that unexpected sight of ^he glorious
condition of the godly: O here is the men, say they, whom we mocked, whose life
we accounted madness, and their end dishonorable. Be wise therefore in time,
and do that willingly which ye must do by constraint; and do that with
sweetness and advantage, that ye must do at last with loss and sorrow.

Thirdly, there are some who certainly have some hope of eternal life, but
content themselves with a small measure of assurance; and these I would befeech,
that ye would be more endeavoring to make your calling and election sure, and
would be endeavoring to see your names written in the ancient Records of
heaven. And this we shall press upon you by several arguments. 1. Those strong
and subtil^; and soul-destroying delusions that are amongst many, who conceive
they do believe (as we were saying) and are pure in their own eyes, who yet are
not purged from their iniquities. O, are there not many of us that are in a
golden dream, that suppose we are eating; but when we awake, our soul is empty;
whose faith is a Metaphysick notion, that has no foundation, but man's
apprehension? And this shall never bear us through the gates of death, nor
convey us in unto eternity of joy. 2. May not this press you to follow after
assurance, that it is the compendious way to sweeten all your crosses, as is
clear from Hab. 3.17.18. where the conviction of this made Habakkuk to rejoyice
in the God of his salvation though the fig tree did not bear fruit, and the
labor of the olive did fail, and there were no sweetness to be found in the
vine. And from Heb. 10.34. when they take joyfully the spoiling of their goods
knowing within themselves that they had a better and an enduring substance.
This is indeed that tree, which if we cast into the waters of Mar^h, they will
presently become sweet: for is it not below the child of hope to be much
anxious about these things that he meets with here, when he sincerely knows
that commandment shall come forth: Lift up your heads, for the day of your
eternal redemption draws near; even the day when all the rivers of his
sorrows shall sweetly run into the Ocean of everlasting delight? 3. A Christian
that is much in assurance, he is much in communion and fellowship with God; as
is clear from the Song 1.13.14. and Song 2.3. where when once she comes to
that, to be persuaded that Christ was her beloved, then she sat down under his
shadow, and his fruit was pleasant unto here taste; for the assured Christian
does taste of these crumbs that fall from that higher Table; and no doubt, those
that have tasted of that old wine, will not straightway desire the new, because
the old is better. And then, fourthly, it is the way to keep you from
apostasy, and making defection from God: Faith is that grace that will make
you continue with Christ in all his temptations; as is clear from 2. Pet. 1 10.
where this is set down as a fruit of making our calling and election sure, that
if we do these things, we shall never fail. Faith makes a Christian to live a
dependent life: For would you know the Motto of a Christian? It is this self
diffidence, and Christ-dependence; as is clear from that word in the Song 8.5.
that while we are walking through this wilderness, we are leaning upon our
well-beloved. 5. This assurance will help a Christian to overcome many
temptations. There are four sorts of temptations that assault the Christian:
There are temptations of desire, temptations of love, temptations of hope, and
temptations of anxiety, all which a Christian through this noble grace of
assurance, may sweetly overcome. He that has once made Christ his own, what
can he desire but him? As Psalm. 17.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord.
What can he love more then Christ, or love besides Christ, all his love being
drowned, as it were, in that Ocean of his excellencies, and a sweet complacency
found in the enjoyment of him. And as to hope, will not assurance make a
Christian cry forth, Now, Lord, what wait I for (...) mine hope is in thee. And
when the heart is anxious, does not assurance make the Christian to hear the
indignation of the Lord, and partiently submit unto the cross, since there is a
sweet connection between his cross and his Crown? Romans 8.35.36. If he suffer
with him, he shall also reign with him. And lastly, there is this argument to
press you to assurance, that it sweetneth the thoughts of death. It makes
death unto a Christian, not the King of terrors, but the King of desires: And
it is upon these grounds that assurance makes death refreshful unto a
Christian. 1. He knows that it is the funeral of all his miseries, and the
birthday of all his blessed and eternal enjoyments. 2. That it is the
coronation day of a Christian, and the day when he shall have that marriage
betwixt Christ and him sweetly solemnized: and that when he is to step that
last step, he knows that death will make him change his place, but not his
company. And O that we could once win unto this, to seal that conclusion
without presumption, My Beloved is mine, and I am his; We might without
presumption, sing one of the Songs of Sion, even while we are in this strange
land! And taking Christ in our arms, might sweetly cry forth: Now let ^hou
thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Comfort
your selves in this' that all your clouds shall once pass away, and that that
truth shall once come to pass which was confirmed by the oath of an Angel, with
his hand lifted up toward heaven, that time shall be no more. Time shall once
sweetly die out in eternity, and ye may be looking after new heavens, and a
new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. O! long to be with him, for Christ
longs to have you with him.

SERMON III.
JOHN 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, etc.


THere are three most precious and cardinal graces which a Christian ought
mainly to pursue; there is that exalting grace of Faith, that comforting grace
of Hope, and that aspiring grace of Love: And if once a Christian did take up
that heavenly difference that is betwixt these sister-graces, he might be
provoked to move after them most swiftly, as the chariots of Aminadab. And
there is this difference between these graces; Faith is a sober and silent
grace: Hope is a patient and submissive grace: Love is an ambitious and
impatient grace. Faith cries out; O my soul! be silent unto God. Hope cries
out, I will wait patiently for the Lord, until the vision shall speak. But Love,
it cries out, How long art thou a coming? And it is waiting to hear the sound
of his feet coming over the mountains of separation. That is the Motto of Hope,
Quod defertur, non aufertur; that which is delayed, says Hope, is not
altogether taken away, and made void: And that may be the divine emblem of the
grace of Love. It is Sight, enfolding Desire in (...) arms, and it is desire
clothed with wings, treading upon Delay and Impediments. There is this second
difference between these graces; the grace of Faith, it embraces the truth of
the promises: the grace of Hope, it embraces the goodness of the thing that is
promised: but that exalting grace of Love; it imbraceth the Promiser. Faith
cries out, Has he spoken it? he will also do it. Hope cries out, Good is the
word of the Lord, be it unto thy servant according to thy promise. And Love it
cries out in an higher note, As is the apple tree amongst the trees of the
wood so is my well-Beloved amongst the sons. Thirdly, there is that difference
between these graces; Faith, it overcomes temptations: Hope, it overcomes
difficulties; but Love stays at home, and divides the spoil. There is a
sweet correspondence between those graces, in this, Faith it fights and
conquereth: and Hope, it fights and conquereth, but Love, it does enjoy the
trophies of the victory. And fourthly, there is this difference, the noble
grace of Faith, it shall once evanish into sight. That noble grace of Hope, it
shall once vanish into possession and enjoyment, but that constant grace of
Love, it shall be the eter(...) companion of a Christian, and shall walk in with
him unto the streets of the New Jerusalem. And I would ask you that question,
What a day shall it be when Faith shall cede to Sight? What a day shall it be when
Hope shall yield its place to Love; and Love and Sight shall eternally fit down
and solace themselves in these blessed mysteries, these everlasting
consolations of heaven, world without end? And fifthly, there is this
difference, less will satisfy the grace of Faith, and the grace of Hope, then
will satisfy the grace of Love. Faith it will be content with the promise, and
Hope will be content with the thing that is promised; but that ambitious grace
of Love, it will be only content with the Promiser. Love claspeth its arms
about that precious and noble object Jesus Christ. Love is a suspicious grace,
it oftentimes cries forth, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where
they have laid him. So that Faith is oftentimes put to resolve suspicions of
Love. I can compare these three graces to nothing so fitly, as to those three
great worthies that David had: These three graces they will break through all
difficulties, were it an host of Philistines, that so they may pleasure Christ,
and may drink of the well of Bethlehem, that well of everlasting consolation
that flows from beneath the throne of God. Love is like Noah's dove, it never
finds rest for the sole of its foot, until once it be within that Ark, that
place of repose Jesus Christ. And sixthly, there is this last difference
between them, Faith takes hold upon the faithfulness of Christ. Hope takes
hold upon the goodness of Christ; but Love it takes hold upon the heart of
Christ. And think ye not it must be a pleasant and soulrefreshing exercise, to
be continually taken up in embracing him that is that eternal admiration of
Angels? Must it not be an excellent life, daily to be feeding upon the finest
of the wheat, and to be satisfied with honey out of the rock? O, but heaven
must be a pleasant place! And if once we would but taste of the first ripe
grapes, and a cluster of wine that grows in that pleasant land, might we not
be constrained to bring up a good report of it?

But now to come to that which I purpose mainly to speak of at this time. The
last thing concerning Faith that we proposed from the words, was, the object
upon which Faith exercises it self, which is here set down to be the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ. And that we may speak to this more clearly, we shall first
speak a little to the negative, what things are not the fit object of Faith: And
then to the positive, showing how this Name of God, and of his Son Christ, is
that sure ground upon which a Christian may pitch his faith. For the first, ye
must know that a Christian is not to build his faith upon sense, nor sensible
enjoyments. Sense may be an evidence of Faith, but it must not be the
foundation of Faith. I know there are some that ofttimes cry out, Except I put
my fingers into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into the hole of his
side, I will not believe. And indeed it is a mystery unto the most part of us,
to be exercising Faith upon a naked word of promise, abstracted from sense: to
love an absent Christ, and to believe on an absent Christ, are the two great
mysteries of Christianity. But that sense is no good foundation for Faith, may
appear. 1. That Faith which is builded upon fense, is a most unconstant, a most
fluctuating and transient Faith. I know sense has its fits of love, and as it
were, has its fits of faith. Sometimes sense is sick of love, and sometimes
sense is strong in faith; but ere six hours go about, sense may be sick of
jealousy, and sick of misbelife, as ye will see from Psalm. 30.6.7. Sense that
bold thing, it will instantly cry out, My mountain stands strong, I shall
never be moved: but behold how soon it changes its note, Thou hidest thy face,
and I was troubled. At one time it will cry forth, Who is like unto him that
pardons iniquity, and that passes over transgressions? But ere many hours go
about, it will sing a long upon another key, and cry out, Why art thou become
unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail? 2. That Faith which is built upon
sense, it wants the promise of blessedness; for this is annexed to believing,
that is founded upon the word, according to that in John 20.29. Blessed are
those that have not seen, and yet have believed. Nor has that Faith that is
built upon sense, such a solid joy waiting on it, as Faith that is built upon
the naked word of promise; as may be cleared from that word, 1. Pet. 1.8. where
Faith exercising it self upon Christ not seen, makes a Christian to rejoice
with joy unspeakeable, and full of glory: (...) joy that does not attend
believing founded upon sense. 3. That Faith that is built upon sense, (...)
gives not much glory to God: for Faith that is built upon sense, it exalts
not the faithfulness of God, it exalts not the Omnipotency of God. I will
tell you what is the divinity of sense; Let me see, and then I will believe,
but it knows not what it is to believe upon trust, and because the Lord has
spoken in his Holiness. And in effect, Faith that is built upon sense, is no
faith; even as Rom 8. Hope that is seen, is no hope: and therefore when the
Lord sees a Christian making sense an Idol, that he will not believe but when
he sees or feels, this does often provoke the Majesty of the Lord to
withdraw himself from that Christian, and to deny him the sweet influences of
Heaven, and those consolations that are above, so that in an instant he has
both his sense and his faith to seek.

2. A Christian is not to make his graces the object of his Faith; that is,
when a Christian does behold love burning within him, when he does be hold
influences to prayer increasing, and mortification waxing strong, he is not to
build his faith upon them: this was condemned in the Church, Ezekiel. 16.14.
compared with the 15. verse: I made thee perfect with my comeliness? but the use
that thou did make of it, thou did put thy trust in thy beauty, and then
thou did play the harlot. It is certain that grace when it is the object of
our Faith, it does provoke God to blast the lively exercise thereof, and to
make a Christian often times have that complaint; Woe to me, my leanness, my
leanness testifies to my face. I will tell you three great mysteries in
Christianity about grace. The first is, to ride marches between these two; not
to deny what they have, and yet to be denied to what they have: Many times
there is grace-denying, and not self-denying; but this is that we would press
upon you, to be denied to grace, according to that which is recorded of Moses,
His face did shine, and he knew it not: He did misken it, as it were, and was
not at all puffed up with it: for so the words, we conceive, may run. Secondly,
it is a great difficulty for a Christian to be denied to his self-denial, to be
humble in his being humble: for if pride can have no other foundation, it will
build it self upon humility; and a Christian will grow proud in this, that he
is growing humble. Thirdly, it is a difficulty for a Christian to examine his
growing in grace, and not to be puffed up. It is certain a Christian ought to
examine his growth in grace humbly, according to that Psalm. 63.8. My soul
follows hard after thee, thy right hand upholdeth me, He does not only take
notice of this, that his soul did follow after God; but of the measure of that
pursuit, my soul follows hard after thee; and yet sweetly acknowledges it
was not his own feet which carried him, nor his own hand that kept him from
falling.

3. Ye are not to build your faith upon your works, and upon the righteousness
of the Law. I need not stand long to refute that practical Popery that is
amongst us, that thinks we can go to heaven through a covenant of works. I
told you, not long since, what your going to heaven through a covenant of works
speaks, even this horrible blasphemy, that it was an act of monstrous folly
to send Christ to die for sinners: for if you can go to heaven without him, was
not then Christ crucified in vain? And I would tell you now, that this speaks
out your damnable ignorance of the weakness and deceitfulness of your own
hearts. O ye that are so great defenders of Salvation by the covenant of works,
I beseech you, what is the reason that ye break the covenant of works oftener
then any? For there is none that thinks they will go to heaven this way, but
those that are the greatest breakers of the covenant of works. And is not that
inconsistent, and contradictory Divinity, your faith contradicting your
practice, and your practice telling you that your faith is a lie?

4. We must not mix our own righteousness with Christ's as the object of our
believing: This is indeed an evil that often lodges in the bosom of the most
refined hypocrite, when Satan cannot prevail to exclude Christ altogether, then
he is content with that whorish Woman to divide the child; and let the object
of our Faith be half of Christ, and half of self: And the truth is, many of
these poor unwise sons, who stay long in the place of breaking forth of
children, do willingly hearken to this overture, for fear it be presumption for
such poor wretches to meddle too boldly with the riches of Christ, but it were
good such weak ones would consider that word, Romans ^.2, where the holy Ghost
calls the making (...) of his righteousness an act of submission, they (...)
not submitted, says he, unto the righteousness of Christ. O will ye not lay
this to heart, that our Lord will take your believing, or your putting on his
righteousness for an act of great humility, and will take your misbelief as a
marvelous act of the highest pride and presumption?

5. We are not to make providence the object of our faith. I know there are
some that ask the ground of their right of heaven, they will tell us that God
has been kind to them all their days; I would only say to such, He may be
feeding you unto the day of slaughter, and no man knows love or hatred by any
thing that is before him. Thus much of the object of Faith negatively. And now
to speak to it positively, we see the Text holds out Christ himself as that
excellent and complete object of Faith, This is his Commandment, that we
believe on the Name of his Son: And thus Faith closes with Christ under a
fourfold consideration. First, it closes with God in Christ, not with God
immediately and nakedly, for he dwells in light inaccessible, that no man can
approach unto; He is higher than the Heaven, what can we do? and deeper than
hell, what can we know? Job 11. Therefore we must approach unto him through a
vail, even the vail of Christ his flesh; Heb. 10. God is a consuming fire, and
of purer eyes then that he can behold iniquity, a^ therefore we must first cast
our eyes upon tha^ blessed Dayes-man that laid his hands upon us both; and look
unto God as in Christ, reconciling (...) world to himself, and so draw near
unto hi^ through a Mediator, who is the first and the last, and he that lives
and was dead, and is alive for evermore, able to save to the uttermost all the
come unto God by him, seeing he lives for ever to make intercession for them.
Secondly, Faith closes with Christ, as tendered freely in a covenant of
promise: we would have had nothing to do with Christ, if he had not been given
of the Father, and offered himself in a free covenant of promise; but he being
thus holden forth upon terms of free Love, which does utterly abominate hire,
and so noble a proclamation issued forth under the great seal of Heaven, That
whosoever will, may come and drink of the water of life freely. Upon this the
poor creature draws near by virtue of a right, and stretching out the arm^ of
most enlarged affections, does run upon him with that joyful shout, My Lord, my
God: and then makes an absolute resignation of it self to him, which is holden
out in the Scripture, by that sweet expression of kissing of the Son. And there
are three parts of Christ's blessed body that the Christian must endeavor to
kiss and embrace; the mouth of Christ, the hand of Christ, and the feet of
Christ. The kissing of his feet imports the exercise of love, the kissing of
his hands, the exercise of subjection, and the kissing of his mouth, the
exercise of communion and fellowship with him. Thirdly, Faith closes with
Christ, as the purchaser and meritorious cause of all the good we receive. He
is the person that has purchased all these things unto us, and there is not
one blink of love, there is nor the smallest enjoyment that a Christian meets
with, but it is the price of the blood of Christ; Christ's precious blood was
laid down for it. Fourthly, Faith closes with Christ as the efficient and
worker of all our mercies; all our enjoyments are from him as the efficient
cause; that is, he is the worker of all things in us, it is his preciouss
fingers that must accomplish that blessed work of grace, and they are from
Christ as the dispenser of these things. Christ is the great steward of heaven
that does communicate unto believers all the treasures of the higher House; For
him has God the Father sealed. O! but that word that Christ once spoke, is
much verified by himself, It is more blessed to give, then to receive. Christ
is that fountain and treasure in whom all our gifts and graces are ^reasured
up; for before the blessing come to believers, they come to Christ as the head,
according to that word, 2 Timothy 1.9. Which grace was given to us in him, before
the foundations of the world were laid. It was given to Christ before the world
was made, and for that end, that it might be communicated unto all his members,
and so out of his fullness we shall receive, and grace for grace.

But, secondly, the Text holds more part^cularly this excellent object of
Faith, to be t^ Name of his Son, That ye believe in the Name (...) his Son. And
here indeed we may be at a stand* It is long since Agar did non plus all the
wo^ with that question, What is his Name, and wh^ is his Sons Name, if thou
can tell? O how little a thing can be known of him? And, O how brutish is
this generation that knows so much less, then might be known of him in such
a day of the Gospel. But that we may speak a little according to our weak
measure of Faith, as closing with the Name of Christ. His Name is his glorious
attributes, by which he reveals so much of himself in the Scriptures, as poor
mortals can take up. We did show you before, that there was three of these that
were the main pillars (...) justifying Faith, Faithfulness, Omnipotency, a^ his
infinite Love and Mercy. And how from the^ may be answered all the objections
of sense, o^ carnal reason, and of misbelief, arising from convictions of
unworthiness. And certain it is, tha^ faith in all its conflicts, makes much
use of the Names of Christ. And there is not an object tha^ a poor tempted soul
can make, but faith can fram^ an answer to it, out of some of these excelle^
Names of God, or of his Son Christ. It would be a more long-some work, than I
intend, to le^ you see this in all; But I shall only instance tha^ in One
glorious Name of God, by which he proclaims his glory, Exodus 34. The Lord,
the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth: keeping mercy for ^usands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
(...), and that will by no means clear the guilty, etc. think there are seven
ordinary objections which ^ay be answered from that place. First, it is an
^dinary objection which misbelievers do make, that they are under the strength
of their corrup^ion: that they are black as the Tents of Kedar, and not
beautiful as the Curtains of Solomon: And does not the first letter of that
Name an^ner this, that he is a merciful Lord, the one im^orting his ability to
save, and to bring down every high imagination: The other importing is infinite
delight to help those that have no rength, and are under the power of their
adver^ries, the power of God being of no larger ex^nt then this love? There is
that second ob^ection of misbelief, that we have nothing to com^end us to
Christ; but all that we have to boast of, are infirmities and imperfections:
and this ^s abundantly answered from that second letter (...) his name, that he
is Gracious, which impor^th the freedom of the dispensations of his love, that
he walks not with us, according to that ^le of merit; but according to that
golden and ex^ellent rule of love. It is a great dispute whether Mercy or Grace
be the greatest wonder, whether ^he love of Christ, or the freedom of it, be
the ^reatest mystery, sure both these put together ^ake up a matchless wonder?
Thirdly, misbelief will object that we have forsaken him days without number,
and that we cannot trace b^ our apostasy unto the first day of its rise: and
not that abundantly answered from that letter (...) his Name, that he is
long-suffering? This be^ that glorious attribute in God, the glory of wh^ he
defireth to magnify above all his Name. Fourthly, misbelief does ordinarily
propose this objection, that we have multiplied our transgression and have
committed whoordome under every gr^ tree; and have given gifts to our lovers,
even ^ring our idols, so that we may take up that (...) mentation, Is not our
sin great, and our transgresion infinite? And is not this also answered (...)
that letter of his Name, that he is abundant goodness? That though sin abound
in us, y^ grace does much more superabound in him. W^ confess indeed, that
there are some that may w^ under that condition, that if they had no oth^
exercise throughout eternity, but to make confession, they might confess, and
never man any needless repetition. And truly in some (...) spect it is a mercy
that we are mysteries unto (...) selves: for if we did know completely the sev^
abominations of our hearts, and these mysteri^ actings of the body of death, we
would be in (...) zard to choose strangling and death, rather (...) life. Yet
may not one glimpse of that abunda^ goodness satisfy us, and calm the storm?
Fift^ty, says misbelief, we know that we have brok^ our vows and covenants
with God, and that (...) these things that we have taken on, have be^ but as
flax before the fire of temptation; so t^ ^e have no hope that he will have
mercy upon those that have broken wedlock, and have not seen steadfast in his
covenant: But is not that ^undantly answered from that letter of his Name, That
he is abundant in truth; which spea^eth that, That though we deny our selves,
yet he abides faithful, and does not alter the words that has gone out of his
mouth. It is the infini^e blessedness of man, that though he be changeable, yet
they have to do with one that is an unchangeable being. Sixthly, there is that
objection, That notwithstanding all these things are matters of encouragement
to some, yet they know ^ot whether or not the lot of everlasting love has
fallen upon them, and whether their names ^e in the ancient records of heaven.
But this is answered from that letter of his Name, He kee^eth mercy for
thousands; which shows us that great number of those upon whom the lot of
ever^asting love shall fall. And if there were no other ^entence in all the
Scripture, this might be a suf^icient matter of a song, and might make us cry
^ut, Who is like unto him, whose compassions have ^o end? And who desires to
magnify his mercy love all his works. And lastly, misbelief makes his
objection, They have sinned not only against ^ight, not only against vows, not
only after much ^njoyment of God, but even after the application (...)
threatenings, so that they conceive, that their ^aker will not have mercy upon
such. Yet this is ^ally answered likewise from that letter of his Name, He
forgiveth transgression, iniquity and sin which three words do abundantly speak
forth that there is no transgression which he will no^ pardon; there being but
one particular among^ all that innumerable number of sins which lo^geth in the
heart of fallen men, that he declared unpardonable: and there is none of our
disease (...) that is above the infinite art of love; and concerning which, we
can take up that complaint, There is no balm in Gilead, and there is no I
hysician there. And though providence may muster up many impossibilities; yet
let Faith take the promise in the one hand, and impossibilities in the other,
and desire God to reconcile them; That if we cannot see any connection between
providence and the word, yet may we reflect upon the Omnipotency of God, that
can make things that are seeming contrary, sweetly agree together: the
Commentary will never destroy the Text, no^ providence will never destroy the
faithfulness of God. And let me give you this advice, that those objections of
misbelief which you cannot answer, and in a manner puts you to a non plus;
and when ye have looked over all the Names of God, ye cannot find an answer to
them: slight them and cover them, as we have often told you, w^ the practice of
believing Abraham, Romans 4.19. where that strong objection of misbelief
appearing before his eyes, the deadness of his body, a^ the barrenness of
Sarahs womb; it is recorded (...) him, he confidered not these things; as it
were, (...) had a divine transition from the objections (...) misbelief to the
acting of faith: and this is cle^ from Matthew. 15.25.26. where that strong
objection of misbelief being proposed against that woman, that she was not
within the compass of Christ's commission, she has a noble way of answering
with this; Lord, have mercy upon me. And (if so we may speak) Faith has a kind
of divine impertinency in answering the objections of misbelief; or rather a
holy slighting of them that gains the victory, when cavelling with
temptations will not do it. The like also may be instanced in his Sons Name: O
how glorious titles are given to that Prince of the Kings of the earth, and to
that Plant of renown, upon which the weakest faith may cast anchor, and ride
out the greatest storm. I shall not detain you long on this subject; but this we
would have you know, that there is no straint or difficulty that a Christian
can be exposed unto, but there is some name or attribute of Christ that may
sweetly answer that difficulty, and make up that disadvantage. Is a Christian
exposed unto afflictions and troubles in a present world, let him comfort
himself in this, that Christ is the shadow of a great rock in a wearied land.
Is a Christian under inward anxiety and vexation of mind, let him comfort
himself in this, that Christ is the God of peace, and of all consolation. Is a
Christian under darkness and confusion of spirit, let him comfort himself in
this, that Christ is the Father of lights, and is the eternal wisdom of God. Is
a Christian under the convictions of this, that he is under the power and
dominion of his lusts. let him comfort himself in this, that Christ is
redemption; yea (that I stay no longer) if it were possible that a Christian
could have a necessity that he could not find a Name in Christ to answer it, he
may lawfully frame a Name to Christ out of any promise in all the book of God,
and he should find it forthcoming for the relieving and making up of that
necessity, God would not disappoint his expectation.

There is yet one thing further, in reference to the object of Faith, which we
shall desire you to take notice of; and it is the way of Faiths closing with its
noble object, and its resting on him; and this we conceive may be excellently
taken up by our considering of the many several Names that Faith gets in
Scripture, beyond any other of the graces of the Spirit. It is called looking,
Isai. 45.22. Looking unto me. It is called, abiding in Christ, John 15.4. Abide
in me. It is called, a keeping silence unto God, Psalm. 37.7. My soul, trust in
God: or as the word is in the original, My soul, be silent unto God: and that
in Psalm. 62.1. My soul waits: or as the word is, Truly my soul is silent unto
God. Likewise Faith is called a leaning, Psalm. 7.15. I have leaned upon thee
from my mothers womb. Faith it is called, an eating of Christ's flesh, John.
6.53. Faith it is called, a casting of our burden upon God, Psalm. 55.22. Cast
your burden upon God. And Faith it is called, a coming unto God, Matthew. 11.28.
And according to these different names, there are seven noble properties and
matchless differences of this grace of Faith. The first is, that this is the
grace by which a Christian does enjoy much communion with God: hence it is
called a looking, which imports that Faith is a continual contemplation of
the immortal soul upon that precious and excellent object Jesus Christ. There
is that second property of Faith, that it is that grace by which a communion
with God is maintained; hence it is called, an abiding in God. It is that grace
which makes Christ and the believer to dwell together. The third property of
Faith is, that it is a most submissive grace; hence it is called, a keeping
silence unto God. Faith as it were, knows not what it is to repine. It is the
noble excellency of Faith, it never knew what it was to misconstruct Christ. It
is the noble excellency of Faith, it never knew what it was to pass an evil
report upon Christ. Faith it will promise good things to a Christian in the
darkest night: for when Love asks Faith that question, Isai 21.11.12.
Watchmen, what of the night? Watchmen, what of the night? Or, when shall the
morning break? Faith answers it with the words that follow (only a little
inverting the order) The night comes and also the morning. The morning is
approaching that admits of no following night. There is that fourth property
of Faith, it is the grace that keeps a Christian in perseverance, by its
building upon the Rock: hence it is called, a leaning upon God: for a Christian
by faith, does perpetually join himself to Christ, so that whatever trouble he
be cast into, by Faith he comes up out of that wilderness, leaning upon his
Beloved: and by Faith he is led up to the Rock that is higher then he, where he
may sit in saftey, and even laugh at death and destruction, when assailing him.
There is that fifth property of Faith, that it is the grace that brings
satisfaction: to the spiritual senses of a Christian, by a close and particular
application of Christ, as the nowrishment of the soul: hence it is called, an
eating of the flesh of Christ. There are three senses that Faith satisfies;
Faith satisfreth the sense of sight, it satisfies the sense of taste, and it
satisfies the sense of touch. Faith will make a Christian handle that eternal
Word of life. Faith will make a Christian see that noble plant of renown: and
Faith will make a Christian taste and see how gracious the Lord is. And, no
doubt, those that have once satisfied their sight, they will be longing to
satisfy their taste. There is that sixth property of Faith, it is that grace
which gives rest unto a Christian: hence it is called, a casting of our burden
upon him. It is, as it were, the soul giving unto Christ that unsupportable
yoke of our iniquities, and taking from Christ that easy and portable yoke of
his commandments. And seventhly, there is that last property of Faith, it is
that grace by which sanctification is promoved: hence it is called, a coming to
Christ. It is the soul in a divine motion, and traveling from the land of
Egypt, unto the land of Canaan. Faith, it is the soul in a pleasant motion from
the land of the North, the land o^ our captivity, unto the land of perfect
liberty, all along going out by the footsteps of the flock, and walking in that
new and living way, even in him who is the way, the truth, and the life.

And now for a more full application of this, we shall speak but two things
further. 1. We would have it considered, that there are some that come unto the
covenant of promise with less difficulty, and after a more divine and
Evangelick way; and there are some that close with Christ in a more difficult
and legal way: There are some that before they can come to Mount Sion, they
must dwell forty days at Mount Sinai: There are some before the decree of
heaven shall be given to them, they must roar as an ox, and must cover
themselves with sackcloath, having ashes upon their heads: We must be a Benoni,
before we be a Benjamin; that is, we must be a son of sorrow, before we can be
a son of consolation. But this is certain, that Christ leads sometimes some
to himself through a valley of roses. And I would only have you take notice of
these two, which though we conceive they be not infallible in the rule, yet
oftentimes experience makes them out to be truth. 1. That there are three
sorts of persons who are most ordinarily brought under great terror ere they
close with Christ. First, those who have committed some gross and abominable
sin that is most contradicting unto the light of nature. Secondly, that person
that sins much against light before conversion: Hence it is observed in all
the Books of the Gospel, and in the Book of the Acts, there was a more Gospel
and love-way of converting the Gentiles, then was of converting the Jews: See
Acts 2.37. there is a sharp law exercised amongst them who had crucified the
Lord of life: and Acts 9. Paul that had been a grievous persecuter, at his
conversion, he is first stricken dead to the ground, before he be made a
captive of the love of Christ, and constrained to cry out, What will thou have
me to do? But look to Acts 8. and chap. 19. and there ye will find a more fair
and smooth way of begetting sons to Christ. And thirdly, that person that is
much in conceit of his own righteousneses, he uses to be brought to Christ
through much terror and exercise of the Law; that is clear in Paul, his
condition also, Phil. 3. and Asts 9. compared: and certainly whoever thinks
to come that length in self-abasement, and will count, as the Apostle does in
that Chapter, must dwell many days at Mount Sinai, and learn his Arithmetic
there. 2. We would have you take notice of this, that though the person that is
brought to Christ in a more smooth and Evangelical way, may have the
preeminency of the person that is brought to Christ, after a more legal and
terrible way in some thing; yet we conceive that a Christian that is brought to
Christ through much of the exercise of the Law, and through many of the
thunderings of Mount Sinai, after he has won to see his righ^ in Christ, he is
more constant in the exercise of Faith; and the reason of it is, because that
a^ ordinary ground of misbelief, is our not distinct ^ptaking either of the
time of our conversion, which is oftimes hid from those persons that are
converted in a more Evangelick way; as likewise this, that those persons that
are brought to Chirst in a more Gospel chariot, are sometimes put to debates
whether ever they were under the exercise of the Law; and this makes them
often (as it were) to raze the foundation, and to cry forth, My hope and my
strength is perished from the Lord. And now to shut up our discourse; we shall
add this one word of exhortation, that ye would carefully lay hold upon that
noble object, and exercise your faith upon him; and I shall say but this, that
all these that have this noble grace of Faith, and that are heirs of that
everlasting inheritance, there is a fourfold crown prepared for you: there is a
crown of life that is prepared for him that shall fight that good fight of
Faith: but what may you say is a crown of life, except we have joy waiting upon
that life? For what is life without joy, but a bitterness and a burden to it
self? therefore ye shall have a crown of joy; but what were a crown of life, and
a joy, except we had the grace of holiness, and were complete in that?
therefore ye shall have also a crown of righteousness: but what were life, joy
^and righteousness without glory? therefore ye shall have likewise a crown of
glory: but what of all these, if that crown should once fall from our head, and
we should be deprived of our Kingdom? therefore take this to make up the rest,
it is an eternal crown of glory. That word in Prove. 27. near the close, the
crown (says Solomon) does not endure for ever; but this precious crown that
the hands of Christ shall fix upon the head of an overcoming Christian, this is
the motto that is engraven upon it, Unchangeable and Eternal, Eternal and
Unchangeable. And, O what a day suppose ye that shall be, when that precious
crown shall be put upon our heads? What think you will be the difference betwixt
Christ and believers in heaven? They shall have these four crowns, which are
indeed one; but Christ shall have upon his head many crowns, according to that
word, Rev. 19.12. But let me say one word also to you who are strangers from
God, and are destitute of the grace of Christ, and will not by faith close with
this excellent object, there is a fourfold crown that once shall be put upon
your heads: but do not mis-interprete the vision, there is a difference betwixt
the Butler and the Baker: ye may prophecy good things to your selves, but
there is a crown of death which ye shall once have put upon your heads, ye shall
be always dying, and never able to die: There is a crown of sorrow that ye shall
have put upon your heads, when ye shall eternally sigh forth that sad
lamentation; O to be annihilate and reduced unto nothing! When the reduction of
you unto nothing would be a heaven, when ye shall be tormented in those
everlasting flames. And I would say this by the way, ye will be all miserable
and comfortless one to another: there will be no ground of consolation that ye
shall reap, for the community of your sorrow shall increase the degrees of that
sorrow. And there is another crown also that ye shall put on, and that is a
crown of sin, in stead of that crown of righteousness. Would ye know your
exercise, O ye that are predestinate unto these everlasting pains? would ye
know your exercise? It is this, ye shall eternally blaspheme and curse the God
that made you. I am persuaded of this, that the terrots of hell will afflict
you more, and does, then that of the sinning prepetually in hell. You would
think nothing, many of you, to be in hell, if there were no pain there; for the
exercise of sin, it would be your delight and life: but be persuaded of it,
that when your conscience is awaked, the exercise of sinning shall exceedingly
aggravate your pain. And there is this crown, lastly, that ye shall put on, and
that is, the crown of shame: The Prophet Isaiah makes mention of a crown of
pride; but you that have put on that crown of pride, you shall once put on that
crown of everlasting confusion and shame, when you shall not be able to lift up
your eyes to him whom you have pierced. I would fain desire you to know what
would be your exercise at these three days, what will be your exercise when
death shall be summoning you to remove, and you shall first be entered heirs unto
those everlasting pains. I am persuaded you will reflect much: Will ye not
reflect upon many Sermons that you have heard, wherein you have been invited to
partake of the sweet offers of salvation? I remember of one that upon his death
bed cried forth, A world for time, a world for one inch of time! Onethat
perhaps did hold his head high, and no doubt was greater then the greatest
here: His crown would not purchase one inch of time, but dying with this, Call
time again, call time again, that petition was denied: and so shall it be, I
fear, to the most part that are here. I think it was a pretty Hieroglyphick of
the Egyptians, they painted Time with three heads: the first head that painted
out Time that was past, was a greedy wolf gaping; which imported this, that our
Time past was misspent, and there was nothing left, but like a wolf to gape for
it again. And there was that second head of a roaring lion round, which imports
the Time present, and for this end was so painted, that people might lay hold
upon their present opportunities, otherwise it would be the matter of their
ruin, and their eternal undoing. And there was that last head, which was of a
deceitful dog fawning, which signified that people they deceive themselves with
the Time to come, thinking they will be religious at their death; and that they
will overcome at their death. But this is a flattery no better then the fawning
of a mad dog. I think we may learn much of this, even to be provoked to lay
hold upon our golden opportunities, that we sell not our Time, but that we buy
it. There are two things that a Christian must not sell; that is, sell not the
Truth, but buy it; and sell not your Time, but buy it. I am persuaded of this,
that one moment of time is worth ten thousand worlds, if improved. And I would
ask you, What advantage shall you have of all things that you have tormented
your selves about, when Time shall be no more? I suppose indeed this is an
ordinary evil amongst the people of this age, of which we have our own share
and portion. There are many that envy godliness and the godly, the excellent
ones that are in the earth, and think it is pleasure to vent their malice
against such. I know that ordinary practice it is older, by a thousand years,
then themselves, that they presecute godliness under the name of hypocrisy:
They call godliness hypocrisy, and upon that account, they begin to speak
maliciously against it. Only I would ask you this question, What will you say
in that day when Christ will ask that question of you, that Gideon asked of
Zeba and Zalmunna, Who are those that you killed with your tongue? Must it not
be answered, Every one did resemble the person of a King? O! will you not
believe? Will you not close with Christ? I know it is ordinary that we run upon
these two extremes; sometimes we do not believe the threatenings of the Law, and
sometimes we will believe the promises of the Gospel. But I would only desire
to know, what if it had been so ordered in the infinite wisdom of God, and that
all the letters of this book should have been threatenings, what should have
been our lot, if all the promises should have been scraped out of it? But
certainly this must be your lot, all the promises of the book of this covenant
shall be taken from you, and all the curses thereof shall be a fleeing roll
that shall enter within your houses, and there shall eternally remain. Know this,
O you that are enemies to Christ, know it, and think upon it: Every battle of
the warrior is with confused noise, and with garments rolled in blood: but
that war which Christ shall have against the hypocrites in Zion, and those that
are ignorant of him, and will not close with him, it shall be with fuel of
fire, and eternal indignation. O! what will be your thoughts, suppose you, when
Christ shall come with that two-edged sword of the fury of the Lord, to enter to
fight with you? It is no delightsome exercise. O that you were not almost, but
altogether persuaded to be Christians; and that once Christ might conquer you
with that two-edged sword that proceeds out of his mouth, that so you might
subject your selves to him, and make him the object of your faith. Now to him
that has engraven upon his vesture, and on his thigh, that he is the King
(...) Kings; and the Lord of Lords, we desire to give praise.

A SERMON Concerning the GREAT SALVATION.
Heb. 3.2. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him?


THis everlasting Gospel which is preached unto you, is that glorious Star,
which must lead us to the place where blessed Christ doth^ly. This Gospel and
glad tidings of the great Salvation, is come near unto you: And Christ is
standing at the everlasting doors of your hearts, desiring that ye would open
unto him. There is that one great request, which heaven this day has to
present unto you, and it is, that ye would at last embrace this great Salvation
freely offered by him. It is the thing for which ye are called to mourn this
day, that since the days of your fathers, and since the beginning of your own
days, ye have stopped your ears from the sweet and chanting voice of this
blessed Charmer. Ye would never dance to Christ when be piped; Neither would ye
weep to him when he lamented.

But to come to the words which we have read unto you: The Apostle in the
former Chapter, had been discovering most divinely of the matchless and
incomparable excellencies which are in our Lord Jesus. And in the first verse
of this second Chapter, he draws forth an exhortation from his former
doctrine, which in short is this, That they would take heed to the blessed
doctrine of the Gospel, and not at any time to let it slip out of their minds;
and that they would keep this Gospel as a Jewel of great price, and would not
sell it, but that they would be induced to buy it. And this exhortation he
presses by two arguments.

The first argument is in the second verse, where he says, If the word spoken
by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a
just recompense of reward, etc. That is, if the transgression of the Law which
was delivered but by the ministry of angels, and every disobedience to it was
so severely punished; let that provoke you to take heed that ye transgres^ not
the precious Gospel which was spoken by the Lord himself.

The second argument in the words which w^ have read unto you, and it is taken
from the certa^ and infallible stroke of the justice of God, which shall come
upon those who slight this great Salv^tion: It is impossible; says he, that
there (...) be a City of refuge for those who slight this great Salvation.

Now in the words which we have read, there are these six things to be
considered.

I. First, that it is an evil incident to the hearets of this precious Gospel
and great Salvation, to flight and undervalue it: This is clearly presupposed
in the words; otherwise there had been no ground or access for the Apostle to
threaten so terrible things against the slighters of it.

II. The second thing to be considered in the words, is, that the stroke and
ruin of those who flight this great Salvation, is certain and infallible, it
will surely come upon them: This is clear from these words, How shall we escape?
As if he had said, There is no imaginable way for us to escape, if we neglect
(this) so great salvation. We may have a city of refuge when we are pursued by
the Law, or when we are pursued by afflictions; and we may escape when we are
pursued otherwise by the Justice of God: but if once we slight this great
Salvation, there remains no city of refuge (no door of escape left open) unto
us: for where will the person flee that slighteth this great Salvation?

III. There is this third thing whereof we shall take notice from the words,
that the stroke of the Justice of God comes justly upon them who flight this
great Salvation: and truly it is a most equal and reasonable stroke, which is
also clear from the words, How shall we escape, if we neglect ^o great
salvation? Where he puts it home to their consciences, as if he had said: think
ye not that it is just and righteous, that if ye slight this great salvation,
there should not be a door of escape left open unto you. He puts the
question home to their conscience, to answer, yea, or no.

IV. The fourth thing to be considered in the words, is this, that the
slighting this great Salvation is a sin that has many aggravations which
attend and wait upon it. And it has two great aggravations from the words
which I have read; the first great aggravation in that word of the Text, great
salvation; as if he had said, If it were not a great Salvation, you might have
some cloal^ or excuse for your slighting of it: but seeing it is such a great
and eternal Salvation, there is now no cloak left for your sin. The second
aggravation is from the certainty of this Salvation, in these words, which at
first began to be spoken b^ the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by those tha^
heard him, viz. his Apostles; whereby he tells them, this great Salvation is
no notion nor fancy, but a most certain, sure and real salvation which yet they
slight.

V. The fifth thing whereof we shall take notice from the words, is this, That
there are no persons (be who they will, Minister, or people) who slight this
great Salvation, that shall have a door of escape. Hence is it that the Apostle
puts himself amongst the rest, saying: How she we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation? the is, How shall I Paul escape, if I neglect so great
^alvation, and so srustrat the grace of God?

VI. Sixthly, we would take notice of this from the words, that not only
heart-despising of ^is great Salvation, but even also the very negle^ing of it,
has a certain infallible and unspea^able ruin attending upon it.

Now before we begin to speak to any of these ^ix things (which we have
observed from these words) there are these two things whereunto we shall speak a
little for clearing of the words. First, what is meant here by great Salvation.
Secondly, how it is said that Christ was the first prea^her of it.

First, we conceive that by the great Salvation (...) understood the Gospel, as
is clear, Ephesians. 1.13. where it is called, the Gospel of our salvation; and Acts
13.26. it is called, the word of this salvation; ^o that by the word of this
salvation, is under^ood the Gospel, and those precious offers which ^re
contained in it. And we conceive it may be ^alled a great salvation, in these
eight respects.

I. First, it is called the great Salvation in repect of the price which was
laid down for it; here being no less price laid down to purchase his great
Salvation, then the blood of the Son of God. From whence then does Salvation
flow unto you? It comes running to you in a stream ^f the blood of the Son of
God: This is clear, Heb. 9.12. Neither by the blood of goats and calves, ^ut by
his own blood he entered in once unto the holy lace, having obtained eternal
redemption for us.

II. Secondly, it is called a great Salvation in respect of the many
difficulties and oppositions which ly in the way of bringing it about. What
great impediments, suppose ye, lay in Christ's way before he could accomplish
and bring about this great salvation? Was not the justice of God to be
satisfied? Was he not to die, and to be made like unto one of us? Was he not to
ly in the grave? And was he not to bear the torment of hell before this great
Salvation could be accomplished and brought to pass? There were such
impediments in the way of bringing about this great salvation, that if all the
Angels in heaven had been set to work, they had been all crushed under it; had
it been but that one great impediment to satisfy the justice, and pacify the
wrath of God, even that was a pass, through which none could go but the eternal
Son of God. It was so guarded, that none durst adventure to enter it (much less
could any win through it) sav^ he only who was mighty to save.

III. Thirdly, it is called a great Salvation, (...) respect of that high
estimation which the Saint have of it. O what an high estimation have the
Saints of this Gospel-salvation! There is no mercy which they think comparable
to this; all other mercies are but little Zoars, in comparison of the great
mercy and Gospel-salvation.

IV. Fourthly, it is called a great Salvation, (...) respect of those noble
effects which this Salvation brings about and produces. Some of (...) great
effects of the Gospel, David has cleared Psalm. 19.7.8 9.10. Is not this a
great effect (...) this Gospel-Salvation, to bring us out of nature into an
estat of grace? And that is an effect of this great Salvation. Is not this a
great effect to make us who were enemies, become friends? And that is an effect
of this great Salvation. Is not this a great effect to make us who were moving
in the way to hell, move in the way to heaven? And that is an effect of this
great Salvation. Is not this a great effect, to make us who were so far off, to
be now made near? And yet that is an effect of this great Salvation. And is not
this a great effect, to make us who were dark^ess, become light in the Lord?
And that is the great effect of this Gospel-Salvation. Yea, I may ^y time would
fail me to tell of all the great effects of this great Salvation. But, O will
ye come and see, and that will best resolve the question unto you, what the
noble effects of this great Salvation are.

V. Fifthly, it is called a great Salvation, in respect of the great advantages
which does redound to the person who embraces it. First, is not heaven a noble
advantage? And that is the gain which attends the embracers of this great
Salvation. Secondly, is not Jesus Christ a notable ^dvantage? And yet he is the
advantage which ^ttendeth the embracers of this great Salvation. Thirdly, is
not eternal communion with God a ^oble advantage? And that advantage attends
^e embracers of this great Salvation. Fourthly, (...) not eternal liberation
from the body of death a reat advantage? And that attends the embracers of
this great salvation. Fifthly, is (...) eternal singing in the enjoyment of God
a great advantage? And that attends the embracers o^ this salvation. Sixthly,
is not eternal seeing o^ God, as he is, a great and noble advantage? And yet
this (as all the former) attends the embracers of this great salvation. Yea,
would ye be rich? O then embrace this great salvation Would ye be honorable?
Come and embrathis great salvation. Would ye be eternal happy? O come then and
partake of this gre^ salvation.

VI. Sixthly, it is called a great salvation, i^ respect of all other
salvations that ever were accomplished. There was never a salvation or ^ctory
obtained by any General or Captain (un^ a land or people) that could have the
name great salvation, in comparison of this.

VII. Seventhly, it is called a great salvation in respect of the authority of
it: We have sp^ken of the greatness (as to the meritorious caus^ of it, and how
great things it does effectuate; a^ also in respect of the authority of it, it
is a gr^ salvation. Would you know who is the Auth^ of this great salvation? It
is Christ, Heb. 5.^ He became the author of eternal salvation to (...) them
that obey him. And must not this salvat^ be suitable to him who is the Author of
it? T^ is one of the most noble and irradiant beams the majesty of the Son of
God the Mediator, t^ he is the Author of this great salvation.

VIII. Eighthly, it is called a great falvat^ (...) respect of the continuance
and duration of it. It is not a salvation which is but for a day: but it is an
eternal salvation, Heb. 9.12. He obtained eternal redemption for us.

Now the second thing whereunto we shall speak for clearing of the words, is
this, viz. How it is said that Christ was the first preacher of this eternal
salvation. We do not think that the words are to be understood, that the Gospel
and this great salvation was never preached before Christ came in the flesh:
but we think the mea^ing of the words may be one of these three, if ^ot all of
them.

I. First, that all the preaching of this great ^lvation under the Law, did
come very far short (...) the point of fullness, in comparison of Christ's
reaching of it; therefore is Christ said to be the first preacher of this great
salvation: as if he had said, I know Adam he preached of this great salvation,
and Enoch he preached of this great sal^ation, and the twelve Patriarchs they
preached ^f this great salvation; and all the Prophets who ^ent before Christ,
and are now in heaven, they reached of this great salvation: but all their
reaching deserved not the name of preaching, in ^mparison of Christ's: for never
man spoke as he ^ike. Thus Christ was the first great preacher (...) this great
salvation.

II. Secondly, this may be the meaning of it, at Christ was the first preacher
of this great sal^tion, in respect of his clear way of preaching (...) it: for
he was the first preacher of it without types and shadows: He was the first
preacher (...) it clearly and fully, with so much demonstration and power of
the Spirit.

III. Thirdly, the meaning of this (the Christ was the first preacher of this
great salvation) may relate to his appearing to Adam in Paradise, when he
became the first and great preacher of this salvation, when he did speak that
word unto him, The seed of the woman she tread down the head of the serpent.
The first glorious preaching of this great salvation was wh^ Christ preached to
Adam in Paradise. And the was the first and glorious morning of this bless^
Gospel.

Now we shall speak a little to the first of the^ six things which we have
observed from the^ words, viz. That there are many within the ^sible Church who
are neglecters and slighters this great salvation: (Do ye not all take w^ it?)
it is clear, Matthew. 23. toward the close, (...) chap. 22.5. where those
persons being invited come to the marriage, or feast of the Gospel, it said of
them, they made light of it; which are the same words in our Text. And Luke
14.^ where they were invited to come, it is said, The all with one consent
began to make their exc^ And Isai. 28.2. This is the rest wherewith ye s^ make
the weary to rest, this is the refreshing, (...) they will not hear. Now is
there a person h^ who dare deny this charge, that he is a slighte^ this great
salvation? I confess, I am afraid (...) you will not take with it; therefore I
shall prop^ these eight sorts of persons who are slighters of this great
salvation: and charge you, as you will answer to God one day, that you search
your hearts whether you be amongst the number (in the catalogue) of the
slighters of this great salvation.

I. The first sort of persons who are slighters of this great salvation, are
those persons who go about to establish their own righteousness, and will not
submit to the righteousness of Christ: in a word, it is that sort of persons
who think they may win to heaven by a covenant of works, and will not take the
Gospels way of traveling to heaven in the covenant of grace. And surely there
is not a person here who has not that cursed in^lination to be as little
obliged to Christ for his salvation, as he can: We would go to heaven without
the way, which is Christ. And, believe me, there are many in this Congregation
who go thus about to establish their own righteousness. And I shall propose six
sorts of persons who ^all under this first rank.

1. The first sort, are those who trust on their own civility, and think that
will carry them to ^eaven: those are the persons who go about to stablish their
own righteousness. Say they, I de^y the world to say any thing to me, I was
ever^ore an honest man, and I trust therefore that I ^hal go to heaven. But I
say to thee, O Atheist I that thou art, thou shall never win to heaven by ^ose
means, till thou come to Christ with this, ^ll my righteousness are as filthy
rags.

2. The second sort, are those who build their confidence upon their denial of
their good works, but yet never come this length to make use of Jesus Christ.

3. The third sort, are those who build their confidence upon their duties:
they think they will come to Heaven by their good prayers, by their reading,
and by their fasting, like unto that Phatisee, Luke 18 11. I thank God, I am
not like other men, for I fast twice in the week: I pay tit^er of all that I
possess. But I say unto thee, thy dutie^ will never bring thee to Heaven, if
Christ be not the end of all thy duties, nor can you perform a duty without him.

4. The fourth sort of persons who fall under this first rank of slighters of
the great salvation, are those who trust on their convictions. If the have once
been convinced of their sin and miserable estate, they think there is no more
to d^ Christ will never reject them; so they sit dow^ and build their hope upon
these convictions.

5. The fifth sort of persons, are those wh^ build their confidence upon their
resolutions; (...) they, oftentimes have I resolved to be a bette^ man then I
am; therefore I think (which is (...) first delusion of many) that God will
accept (...) will for the deed: but it had been good for man such a word had
not been in the Bible, or the their cursed eyes had never read it. But kn^
this, that though thou had as strong resoluti^ as Peter, or as good wishes as
Balaam had, if the never labor to bring them to practice, God she say to thee,
Depart from me, I know you not. Any of you who build upon your resolutions, you
will build upon a sandy foundation, these being many times a goodness, but like
the morning dew.

6. And the sixth sort of persons who fall under this first rank of slighters
of this great salvation (and wherein the evil is most subtle) are those who
build their salvation upon their graces; these also go about to establish their
own righteousness. But I say to such, their graces cannot be the foundation of
their hope, although they may be as evidences to strengthen their hope. Now,
are there none here who fall under this first rank of stighters of the great
salvation? Or are there none here who will confess they have gone about to
establish their own righteousness? I say to thee who wilt confess, put a rope
about thy neck, and come to Christ; for he is a merciful King. I say to thee,
come to Christ with this, All my righteousness is like filthy rags. And if thou will come with this in sincerity, he shall say, Bring forth the white robe, and
put it upon him. If thou can be brought to speak that in sinceri^y to Christ,
there shall be no more betwixt Christ and thee, but, Come and cloth him with
the white ^obe.

II. Secondly, those persons slight the great Salvation, who delay their taking
hold of the ^recious offers of the Gospel: for there are many when we preach
this Gospel, and when we ^old out the great Salvation unto them, who ^ay, I
will follow Christ, but I must first go home and bury my father; and so they
delay to take hold of this great Salvation. But I say to you, whoever you be,
that thus delay to take hold on this great Salvation, you are the slighters of
it. Is there a person within these doors, who dare but acknowledge that he has
slighted this great Salvation, and delayed to embrace it? O! tell me, what do
your consciences speak? Are there any but they must acknowledge they come under
this second rank? And I say to you who have thus delayed, will you yet embrace
it? I say even unto you who are old men, now past sixty years, and have
slighted this great Salvation so long, yet this day this great Salvation is
offered unto you. What say you to it? O! what do you say to this offer? Are ye
saying, I must now delay and not receive this great Salvation, till min^
harvest be by and over? I say unto thee, the the harvest of the wrath of God is
ripe, and (...) shall put in his sickle, and cut thee down. I she say no more to
those who thus slight this gre^ Salvation, but this, Why stand ye all the day
(...) the market place idle, and doing nothing? (...) will you be at last
induced to take and embra^ this great Salvation, before it be hid from you eyes.

III. Thirdly, those persons are the slighte^ of this great Salvation, who
complement w^ Christ when they are invited to come and pe^ take of it, and say
silently to the Mioister, or ^ther to their own conciences: I pray you, have
(...) excused at this time; as those, Luke 14.18. (...) I would only ask of
such, Have you any lawful excuse why you will not come and partake of this
great Salvation? Is there any person here that has any lawful excuse to
present? I shall never take that off your hand, Have me excused. But be sure of
this, I shall never excuse you, but accuse you: therefore I desire that those
persons who have slighted the great salvation, by complementing with Christ,
that they would complement no more with him at all, but now embrace it.

IV. The fourth sort of persons who slight this great Salvation, are those who
give way to ^iscouragements and unbelief, so that they will not come and
partake of this great Salvation: I say, such of you are slighters of it, and
Christ ^ill esteem you such. Oh, if ye knew the worth and virtue of this great
Salvation, there would not be a temptation you could meet with, that would
hinder you from embracing it! But if ^hou could not answer these temptations,
thou could not own them: I say unto such under^aluers and slighters of the
great Salvation, as dis^uraged persons (And those who stay long in the ^ace of
the breaking forth of children) that when ^ou cannot answer your objections,
which hinereth you from closing with Christ, I entreat ^ou, disown them, as if
ye heard them not. Say (...), Think ye this lawful? I say, it is both lawful
and expedient; for it was the practice of belieing Abraham; He considered not
his own body ^ing dry as an old stick, nor the deadness of Sarahs womb. He did
not consider these things, which might have been objections to keep him from
believing. He might have started at these two objections; Alace! I am old: and
that objection could he not answer: And my wise is past childbearing; neither
could he answer that objection. What then did he with them? He slighted them
both, and considered them not. Secondly, I would say this to you who thus
slight it, because of discouragements: If ye did know the worth of the great
Salvation, which is in this Gospel-redemption that is offered to you, although
ye had an army of objections to go through, ye^ would go through them, to get a
drink of the water of this Well of Bethlehem.

V. The fifth sort of persons who slight this great Salvation, are those who
will not do so much as take care and give pains to hear this great Salvation
offered unto them: For there are some persons, who (if they come to the Church)
desire to fit farthest off, and so never take care to hear a word of this great
Salvation; and such are dreadful slighters of it. Like unto these mentioned,
Jer. 6.10. To whom shall I speak, and give warning that they may hear? Behold
their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken. Isai. 28.12. But they
would not hear. Jer. 7.10. Who say, we an^ delivered to do all these
abominations: Yet they di^ come and stand before him, in the house which i^
called by his Name.

VI. Sixthly, those persons are slighters of the great Salvation, who, when
they hear it, are (...) more (nay not so much) affected with it, then if (...)
were telling unto them the most senseless hisony of Thom as the Rymer, or some
other old ^ble. Like unto these mentioned, Jer. 6.10. The word of the Lord is
unto them a reproach, they have no delight in it. I would pose you all, as in
the sight of the Author of this great Salvation, ^hen of women, did you ever
see your selves; or ^ook ye ever pains, to bring up your hearts to ^he love of
this great Salvation? Was it ever the ^ejoycing of your hearts, that Christ
died and ^ose again? I do certainaly believe it, and I am ^rswaded, that there
are decrees past in heaven ^ainst many of you, That in hearing ye shall hear, at
not understand; and in seeing, ye shall see, and ^l not perceive. For God has
made your hearts ^rder then the flint or adamant, so that ye shall ^esuse to
return when he does exhort you. Be^eve me (if I may so speak) I think there is
as such probability that the stones in the wall would hear (if we would speak
to them) as ^on as many of you.

VII. Seventhly, those persons are slighters, of ^is great Salvation, who never
did complain ^at they wanted a right to this great salvation, ^hope some of you
are now convinced, that y^ ^ver came within the compass of this great sal^ion.
I say yet unto you, if ye did never spend ^e hour in secret weeping and
lamenting, be^ase ye had not a right to this Gospel redemption, it is but too
probable you had never yet a ^he to it. Yea know it, that such of you would
little care to let precious Christ depart without any grief of heart. I think,
if this were voiced within this house to day, Whether or not shall Christ go and
depart? I doubt if there would be many heart-dissenters, though many
tonguedissenters. Oh! I fear there would be many hearts here, saying: O Christ!
depart, and go thy way: Yea, there are many Gadarens here, who prefer their
kine and swine to precious Christ, and would beseech him to go out of their
coasts.

VIII. Eighthly, those persons slight the great Salvation, who never took pains
to engage their hearts to take hold of Christ and the Gospel. Christ is near to
you this day; The great Salvation is near to you, and is now, even now offered
unto you; therefore are there any who will take pains to lay hold on it? I
obtest you all who are here, by the beauty and excellency of him who is the
Author of this great Salvation, that ye come and partake of it. I obtest you by
all the joyes^ heaven, that ye embrace this great salvation. I obtest you by
all the terrors in hell, that ye embrace it. I obtest you by the promises of
the everlasting covenant, that ye embrace it. I obtest you by all the curses
that are written in this book o^ the covenant, that ye embrace it. I obtest you
by the love you owe to your immortal souls, that (...) will once be wise, and
come partake of the gre^ Salvation. May I now have it, say thou? Ye^ I say
unto you all, ye may have it to day; ye man be partakers of it before ye go
hence. And so b^ fore I proceed any further, I do in the Name a^ authority of
him who sent me here to day, and is the Author of this great Salvation, freely
offer it unto you to day. But I know there will be eight sorts of humors within
this house to day, in relation to this great Salvation which is now offered
unto you.

1. I think there will be some of Gallios disposition here to day, that will
care for none of these things: yea, there are many here that will not give a
fig for the rich offer of the great Salvation. But I say, cursed be that person
who puts on Gallios temper to day, that will care for none of these things.

2. I fear there will be many of Pilats humor here to day, who will say, they
find nothing against the man, yet will cry forth, Take him, and crucify him.
They find no fault with Christ, and yet will be content that he be crucified.
Now can ye say any thing against Christ, who is the Author of this great
Salvation? Produce your strong arguments. Are there any here who have any thing
to say against him? I am here to answer in his Name. I hope there is not one
here who has any thing to say against the Author of this great Salvation: And
why then do ye not take him? See unto your selves that there be none of Pilats
humor here to day, that will cry out, Ye find nothing in Christ why he should
not be received, and yet will be content that he be crucified.

3. There will be many of the Jews humor here to day, who cry forth, Away with
Christ, away with Christ, and give me Barabbas. But, oh! what a hellish word is
that, Away with spotless Christ, away with transcendent Christ, and give us the
world? Now are there any here who will be so gross slighters of this great
salvatio? Will ye slight this great salvation, and embrace your idols, which
shall once prove a crown of thorns unto you.

4. There will be some of Felix humor found here to day, that will say, O
Christ, go away at this time, and I will hear thee at a more convenient season.
But I say unto you, who will not hear me to day, nor embrance this great
salvation, I shall defy all the Ministers in Scotland to assure you, that ye
shall get another offer, if ye send me away to day. There is not one that can or
dare engage that the great salvation shall be in your offer any more. Therefore,
I say, let none of Felix temper be here to day, that will say, They will hear
Christ at a more convenient season.

5. There will be some of Balaams temper to day, who will desire to die the
death of the righteous, and to have their last end like his; yet they desire
not to live the lise of the righteous. But I say unto you, ye shall never die
the death of the righteous, if ye live not the life of the righteous.

5. There will be some of you here to day, who, I hope, at least will be of
Agrippas humor, that will say, Thou have almost persuaded me to be a Christian.
I say unto thee, O will thou quickly out with that word almost, and put in that
word altogether and say, O precious Christ! thou have altogether persuaded me
to be a Christian. However, if thou come no greater length, I entreat thee come
this length, that so thou may cry out, I am almost persuaded to embrace
Christ the great Salvation; and may be ere long ye will come further.

7. There will be some of Judas temper here to day, who will betray Christ for
thirty pieces of silver; yea, some would sell Christ, heaven, their idols and
all, for less then thirty pieces of silver.

8. I think there will be many of Esaus profine temper here to day, who will
sell their birth^ight for a mess of pottage. Now will ye enquire at your
selves, Am I the person that will give my birth right for a mess of pottage?
Does mine heart say, I will sell my birthright, because I am hungered, and
ready to die? What will it profit me, give me a moss of pottage, and I will
quite my birthright? I know there are not a few such here to day: therefore I
entreat you, enquire at your selves what is your humor. Oh! shall the great
Salvation that ye have slighted so long, (...) slighted this day also? And shall
there be none to embrace it? Oh! enquire, and stand in aw, lest the wrath of
the most High pursue you.

Now I shall give you these seven considerations, which may provoke you not to
slight, but ^mbrace this great Salvation.

1. The first consideration, that the not embracing this great salvation; is
one of the greatest acts of folly that can be, Jer. 8.9. They have rejected the
word of the Lord: and immeditatly it is subjoyned, And what wisdom is in them?
And so Solomon does assure you, they cannot be wise who neglect this great
Salvation, Prove. 1.7. Fools despise wisdom and instruction. Therefore may I not
say unto you, be ye who ye will, though ye were the greatest heads of wit in
all this place, ye are but stark fools, as long as ye neglect this. But would
you be wise indeed, and wise unto eternal life? Then I entreat you, come and
embrace this great Salvation.

2. The second consideration to provoke you not to slight the great salvation,
is this, that the ruin and destruction of the slighters of it, is most certain
and infallible, Jer. 11.11. where speaking of slighting the covenant, which is
indeed the same great salvation, there is a therefore, put to the threatening.
Therefore thus says the Lord, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not
he able to escape. I defy you all, who are the slighters of this great
Salvation, to find a backdoor, when Justice shall pursue you; for there is no
door to escape, if ye embrace not this great Salvations but the earth will
disclose your iniquity, and heaven will declare your sin.

3. Thirdly, let this consideration provoke you not to slight this great
Salvation, that Christ is exceeding serious and earnest that ye should embrace
it: And I think that Isai. 28.23. speaks out his exceeding seriousness, where
so^ times he beggeth of his hearers, that they would give ear and hear his
voice, saying: Give ear, and hear my voice: hearken; and hear my speech. What
needs all these exhortations, but that Christ is most serious that they would
embrace the great Salvation? And, O that there were a person here to day, as
serious to the bargain as Christ is! But be who ye will, that slight this great
Salvation, believe me, the day is coming wherein ye shall cry out: Alace, for my
slighting of it! Will thou therefore think presently with thy self, O thou
slighter of this great Salvation! What will thou say of thy slighting it? When
the devil shall be leading thee in through these dark gates of hell, O slighter
of the Gospel! how many alaces will thou cry, when thou shall be passing through
these dark gates into thy everlasting prison? Will thou not then cry out, O me,
a slighter of the everlasting Salvation! whether am I now going? Alace, now for
my slighting of the Gospel! And as thou passest through, thou shall meet with
numbers of miserable comforters. There is not one in that prison, who can
comfort thee; but many dreadful alaces shall thou then both cry and hear, if
thou embrace not this great Salvation.

4. Fourthly, let this provoke you not to slight the great Salvation, that ye
will get it for a very look. O ye within this house to day, ye will get this
great Salvation for one look, Isai. 45.22. Look unto me and be saved, all the
ends of the earth: For a very look ye will get this great Salvation: and do ye
ever think to get heaven at a lower rate?

5. The fifth consideration to provoke you not to slight this great salvation
any more, is this, There is not one of you who is a slighter of is, but your
slighting it shall increase your immortal bonds. Man or woman, be who thou will,
when thou art slighting this great Salvation, thou art but platting a cord
wherewith to bind thy soul eternally in these unquenchable flames, Isai. 28.22.
Be ye not mockers, lest your bonds be made strong. I say therefore unto you,
old men, mock not, lest your bonds be made strong. Old women, near unto your
graves, mock not, lest your bonds be made strong. Young men, be ye not mockers,
lest your bonds be made strong. Young women, who are in the flower of your
time, mock not, lest your bonds be made strong. But now, alace I will there for
all this, be a person here to day who will be a mocker of this great salvation.

6. The sixth consideration to provoke you not to slight this great salvation
any more, is this: Ye know not but that your days may be near, unto a close. I
say you know not but the day of the preaching of this great salvation may be
neat unto a close. What know thou, O man, or woman! but this shall be the
last Sermon that ever thou shall hear concerning this great salvation? And yet
for all this, shall we be sent away without one consent to embrace or receive
it? O will ye be persuaded to look to Christ, and so to take him?

7. The seventh consideration to provoke you not to slight the great salvation,
is this, That there is a five fold salvation comprehended under this great
salvation.

1. The first is this, Come and partake of this great salvation, and thou shall
have salvation from thine idols: And hereby I do proclaim liberty this day unto
captives: I am sent forth this day with the keys of your prison house, to open
your prison doors unto you, if ye will embrace this great salvation. I say unto
you, O ye prisoners, come forth and show your selves; for the keys of your
prisonhouse are with us, to open your prison-doors unto you; therefore, O come
forth, and embrace this great Salvation! Will there be any (shall I think) here;
that will refuse to come forth? O go forth and flee from the land of your
captivity, and from the house of your bondage.

2. Thou shall have salvation from thy darkness and from thine ignorance. I say
unto you who understand no more of God nor the stones of the wall, I command
you come forth, and partake yet of this great salvation, and unto you shall
light arise, even the dayspring from on high shall visit you.

3. If ye will come and partake of this great Salvation, ye shall have
deliverance from all your fears. Do thou fear that thou shall be poor? Come
and partake of this great salvation, and ^hou shall be delivered from it. Art
thou afraid of hell? Come and partake of this great Salvation, and thou shall be
delivered from that fear. Art thou afraid at the wrath of God? Then come, I
say, and partake of this great Salvation, and thou shall have redemption from
that and all thy fears. With him is plenteous redemption and he can make thee
quiet from the fear of evil.

4. If thou will come and partake of this Salvation, thou shall have
deliverance from all thine anxieties, and from all thy cares. Ye are now
careful and anxious about many things; come, and partake of this great
Salvation, and it will make you careful, but only for the one thing necessary.

5. If ye will come and embrace the great Salvation offered unto you this day,
ye shall be helped before ye go hence, to sing that Song, O death! where is thy
sting? O grave! where is thy victory? Now, O will ye come and embrace this
great Salvation, And ye shall be more then conquerors through Christ who loves
you? Are there therefore any here to day, that would have victory over the
devil, and over their own heart? Then come and embrace this great Salvation and
then your victory is certain.

But now to press home this great Salvation upon you a little further, there
are nine sorts o^ persons who are invited to come and partake (...) this great
Salvation offered this day. And (...) charge you, answer to your names when ye
(...) called, and delay not to come.

1. First, I invite and call here to day, all who are willing to come and
embrace this great salntion. Now, are there any of you here to day, who are
called willing? Then I invite you to come and embrace this great salvation.
Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him come. But, oh! are there none here to day,
who are named willing? I entreat you, if there be any, do not deny your name,
but come when you are called, and embrace this great Salvation.

2. Secondly, those persons who thirst for it, are invited to come, and partake
of this great salvation, Rev. 22.17. Let him that is athirst, come. Now If
there be any here who are named thirsty, let them come and partake of this
great salvation, and they shall be satisfied.

3. Thirdly, are there any money-less folk here to day? Let them come and
partake of this great salvation. Are there no money-less folk here to day? I
mean not that money or coin in your purses, but want ye money? That is, want ye
righteousness? Then I pray you come and partake of this great salvation. I say,
are you so poor that ye have nothing but the fear of hell? Then I pray you
come. If there be any here who has nothing to commend them to Christ, but
necessity? I say unto all such, O come, come, come, and partake of this great
salvation.

4. Fourthly, those persons are invited to come, (and I wish there were many
such) who are weary: but oh! Are there none here to day who are called weary?
Are you not weary in pursuit of your sins? If there be any such here to day, I
say unto you, O weary folk, Come, come, come, and partake of this great
salvation, and of this excellent Gospel-redemption that was purchased at so
dear a ra^e.

5. Fifthly, Those who are heavy laden are invited to come, (and I think all
of you may answer to this name) are you heavy laden? O then come! But are
there none here who are heavy laden with sin, with misery, and estrangement
from God? If there be any such here, I say unto thee, old men, or young man, be
who thou will, O come and partake of this great salvation.

6. Sixthly, Are there any here to day who are called blind? I say, if there be
any of you who think you want eyes to see the precious excellencies of Christ,
I invite you to come and partake of this great salvation.

7. Seventhly, Are there any who are called lame here to day? I say unto such,
O come, come, come, and partake of this great salvation; for we are sent forth
to day to call in the blind and the maimed, and the lame, that they may come
and embrace this great salvation; therefore are there none here to day who may
be called such? A^ you neither blind nor lame? I hope many of you will not deny
that you are such; therefore I say unto you, O blind, halt, and maimed, Come,
come, and partake of this great salvation.

8. The eighth sort of persons invited, are those who are sick; therefore if
there be any sick folk here to day, be who you will, I say unto you, O come and
partake of this great salvation; for the whole need not the Physician, but the
sick.

9. Ninthly, Are there any here to day who snow not their name, or their
condition? I say unto you, O nameless folk, come and partake of this great
salvation; Come to Christ for the knowledge of your souls condition: Come as a
^meless one, and he shall not reject thee; though by cause were so evil that
thou could not give it (...) name; for of all that come unto him, he sends
none away.

Now where do you find your name and sur^ame? O do you not know it? I hope now
you may know; therefore I entreat you answer to it, and so come away, and
partake of this great salvation.

But I am afraid there be many strong iron bars in the way of some of you,
which you cannot win over. Ah, how fast are some souls locked in Satan's snare!
And therefore I shall speak a little for discovering of those bars that hinder
from embracing his great salvation, that so you may be the better helped to
remove them.

I. The first great iron bar which keeps folle from embracing this great
salvation, is the bar of ^gnorance; and I am afraid that this (as a mighty bar)
hinders many of you: You are ignorant of your selves, and of the condition of
your souls; you are ignorant of the Law, and of its severity, and you are
ignorant of the precious Gospel in its ^ondescendency. O pray unto God, that
for Christ's sake, he would break that great bar of ig^orance; for till that be
done, Christ may take up that complaint, Jer. 5.4. Surely they are foolish,
they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. I say this
bar of ignorance keeps you from embracing this great salvation.

II. The second bar which keeps many from closing with Christ, is, the bar of
presumption; for some will cry out, What need have I to embrace the great
salvation? Have I it not already? But I say unto thee, O fool, thou art, by all
appearance, yet in bondage. O that this evil bar of presumption were put away;
for it is one of the greatest impediments which lies in the way of our
embracing this great salvation that is in your offer to day: Therefore I say
unto you, if you will come no further, I entreat you, come this length, to
confess that you want this Gospel-salvation, and that you are indeed strangers
to this Redemption purchased by Christ.

III. The third bar that keeps persons from embracing this great salvation,
is the bar of unbelief: you believe not what we say to you about this great
salvation. I know that some of you are of the Stoics and Epicures humor, who
cry out* What means this man? He seems to be the setter forth of some
strange God. But I say unto you, I am not the setter forth of any strange God,
but it is Jesus of Nazareth whom I preach unto you* Alace! some of you think
this great salvation to be some morning dream, or some golden fancy* But I say
unto you, it is neither a dream, not fancy; but a real truth that we preach
unto you.

IV. The fourth bar that keeps persons from embracing this great salvation,
is the bar of discouragement; this strong bar keeps many so fast, that they
cannot embrace this great salvation, though it be freely offered unto them. I
shall say no more to you who are such, but counsel you to do as those four
Lepers did, 1 Kings 7.4. who sat at the gate of Samaria, who said; Why sit we
here till we die? If we say; we will enter in the City, then the famine is in
the City, and we shall dye there: and if we sit still here, we dye also. Now
therefore come, and let us fall into the Host of the Syrians; if they save us
alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall but dye. Even so say I unto
you, that if you abide in the state of unbelief, you shall surely be undone;
therefore go forth, for you know not but God may work a great salvation for
you: and if you will quite your unbelief, and close with Christ in the offer of
this great salvation (by Faith) you shall have no more to do, but eat and
drink, and divide the spoil.

V. The fifth bar that withholds persons from embracing this great
salvation, is the bar of ^lingness: Ye will not come to me that you may have
life. And alace! This is an Iron bar indeed, by which all that are in hell have
barred themselves out of Heaven. Alace! shall you be such wretches also? O what
a dreadful sound is that, Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! Will thou not be made
clean? When shall it once be? Ah! Turn you, turn you, why will you dye? Why will
you slight this great Salvation? O will none of you this day embrace it?

VI. The sixth bar that withholds persons from embracing this great
salvation, is the bar o^ worldly-mindedness: Many of you are so fixed to the
world, that you cannot come and close with this great salvation. I may allude
to that word spoken of Saul, 1 Samuel 10.22. That he hid himself amongst the
stuff; for many have buried and nested themselves in the midst of the world,
that they cannot embrace this great salvation.

VII. The seventh bar which keeps many from embracing this great Salvation,
is the bar of hard-heartedness: there has such a stupidity and hardness of
heart seized upon many, that let Christ preach as he will to them (by his Word,
or by other dispensations) they are no more moved, than if his Word and
dispensations were a thousand miles from them. O that strong bar of hardness of
heart, when shall the Omnipotent hand o^ God break it?

VIII. The eighth bar that hinders many from embracing this great Salvation,
is the ba^ of sloathfulness: Many of you cannot be at the pains to embrace it:
but I say unto you, the^e (...) but small pains in the way of godliness: I
(...) unto you, it may so easily be had, that it is i^ your offer to day; and
if you will, you may p^ forth your hand and take it. Consider therefore what
you will do. O will you despise it? I say will you still neglect and despise
it? Will you but read that dreadful word, Acts 13.40.41. Behold ye despisers,
and wonder, and perish. Tell me freely, Would you have us to return this answer
to him who sent us, that you are despisers of the great Salvation? Say to it,
are there none of you who (for all this) will consent to partake of this great
Salvation? O captives and prisoners, and you who are in the bonds of Satan,
will you come and partake of this great salvation, and you shall be made free?
I have an act of release for you to day, if you will come and make use of it,
you shall be set at liberty. But oh! shall the prison doors be cast open, and
yet none come forth? But that I may come to a close, I say yet unto you, O poor
Prisoners, go forth, go forth, and partake of this great salvation. Oh! will
you not come forth? What holds you in? the foundation of your prisonhouse is
shaken to day, therefore if you will but come forth, and cast a look to Christ,
your very shakels shall fall off your hands, and you shall be as those who were
never bound. Now I leave this with you, and to make you think upon it, I shall
speak these five words to you, and I entreat you think upon them.

1. First, I have excellent tidings to tell you; (I hope some of you will give
ear to them) viz. there is a great Person come here to day, and that is the
Mighty Author of this great salvation, who has brought everlasting
righteousness with him, desiring you to make use thereof; it is his desire that
you would take his excellent gifts at his hand. These I say are the tidings
that I have to preach unto you: and I hope never to be declared a liar for what
I preach unto you: I say yet unto you, that Christ the Author of the great
Salvation, desires to give it freely unto you, if you will but take it. But, O
will you not take it? I think if you did see an hundred men lying in prison or
dungeon without all light, bread or water, and a great Prince coming to them;
saying, I desire you all to come forth, and partake of this great liberty,
which I bring unto you; and every one of them should answer, I scorn to come
forth at this time: would you not think them exceeding great fools? And yet I
fear this act of great folly falls out in many of your hands to day; that when
Christ has given us the Keys of your prison doors, and they are opened, you
will not come forth: But I must entreat you yet to come forth and show your
selves. For who knows but we may be commanded to shut your prison doors
again, and to seal them with seven seals, with an unalterable decree from
Heaven, never to be recalled? Wherefore, O ye Prisoners, go forth, go forth,
from you^ prisonhouse.

2. Secondly, I would say this to you, (...) is not without much ground that
this Salvation (offered to you) is called a great Salvation. ^ know a little
paper of two or three sheets mig^ contain all the salvations that ever man
obta^ned, but the World would not be able to conta^ all the books which might
be written to the commendation of this great salvation: Yea, (unto (...) who
will embrace it.) I say, First, if thou find not this salvation above thy
faith, then go thy way when thou art come: But I know thou will find it both
above thy faith and hope. Secondly, if thou find it not above thy desires when
thou art come unto it, then go thy way again; but were thy desires as the sand
upon the Sea shore, thou shall find always more in this Salvation than ever
thou could desire. Thirdly, if this Salvation be not above what thou can
conceive; then go thy way when thou art come to it; but think of it as thou
can, it shall always be above thy thoughts of it. Fourthly, if this Salvation
be not above thy opinion of it, then go thy way when thou art come unto it; but
I know thou will find it far above thy opinion of it. Therefore seeing it is so
great a salvation, as that all the World could not contain all the books that
might be written in the commendation of it: O! will you embrace it, even to
day, while it is in your offer?

3. Thirdly, I would say this unto you, Be persuaded that there is no sin that
will more provoke the Majesty of God to punish you than the sin of slighting
this great salvation. Bring forth these Murderers, says the Lord, (of the
slighters of this invitation) and slay them before me. I entreat you enquire at
your own hearts, what you will answer when you are reproved for flighting of
it. Old men, will you ask at your own hearts what you will answer to Christ
when he shall propose that question to you, why slighted you the great
salvation? Old women, what will you answer when he shall say to you, why
slighted you the great Salvation? Young men, and young women, inquire at your
own hearts what you will answer, when Christ shall say to you, why slighted you
the great Salvation? Can ye imagine any answer to that question? O dreadful
shall the Wrath of God be, that shall be executed upon the slighters of this
great salvation!

4. Fourthly, I would say this unto you, that Heaven is waiting to hear what
acceptance the offer of this great Salvation does get among you. Here is the
great Salvation, here is the offer of it, and here is the commendation of it;
what say you to it? Is it not an excellent Salvation? Is it not a free
Salvation? Is it not a great Salvation? Is it not an eternal Salvation? Why
then do ye not welcome it? Can any of you say any thing to the discommendation
of it? I know you cannot: Yea, I dare say, your own hearts are admiring it as
most excellent; and therefore, O will ye accept it! Alace, shall there be none
here who will be found accepters of this great Salvation, so freely offered
(...) day.

5. Fifthly, I would say this to you, let all the Angels praise him who is the
Author of this great Salvation. All the Saints round about the Throne praise
him who is the Author of this great Salvation. All those who are expectants of
Heaven, praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. All ye to whom
this offer is made, praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. O
Heaven, praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. O all ye Fowls of
the Air, praise him who is the Author of this great Salvation. O Fire, Hail,
Snow, Vapors, stormy Winds, and Tempests, praise him who is the Author of this
great Salvation. All the Tribes of the earth, praise him who is the Author of
this great Salvation. Our own Souls, praise him who is the Author of this great
Salvation: And all that is within us, bless him who is the Author of this great
Salvation. O! who would not praise him, who is the Author of this great
Salvation? Are there any here that will refuse to commend him? O! Think upon
him, and let not this be a day of slighting him. Now, where are your hearts at
this time? I will tell you where many of your hearts are, they are thinking
upon the World: But I am sure, there are not many of them thinking upon this
great salvation. Now, what resolution mind ye to go away with to day? Oh! have
ye (...) resolution beyond what ye had when ye came hitherto to day? Are there
any here who have his resolution, To whom shall we go, but unto him who is the
Author of this great salvation, who alone has the words of eternal life? Even
the Lord breath it upon you. Or is this your resolution, that through Christ's
strength, forsake ^im who will, ye will never forsake him? O! ^ave ye this
resolution, That ye will esteem more highly of the great salvation then ever ye
did? O that the Lord would keep these in the imaginations of the thoughts of
your hearts forever. But as for you who have no resolutions to embrace this
great salvation: O! wherewith shall I commend it unto you? Do not your own
necessities commend it? But if nothing can persuade you to come away and
embrace it, then this place shall be a heap of witnesses against you; for it
has heard all the words of the Law which he has spoken unto you, Josh. 24.

Oh! cast your eyes upon these pillars of the house and stones in the walls: I
take them as so many witnesses, that they may speak and testify against you
in the great day of the Lord, if ye neglect this great salvation to day.
Therefore, as ye go away, be thinking upon it, and whether or not ye mind to
embrace it now while ye may have it. This day I set life and death before you:
I have set before you both the great salvation, and the great damnation: And, O
that ye had understanding in all these things, that ye being wise might be
provoked at last to embrace this great salvation; the which we do yet again
entreat you to think upon. Is not Heaven looking upon (...) at this time, to
see what ye will do with this great offer of salvation, which I have this day
from the Lord presented unto you? Now to him that (...) persuade you to embrace
this great salvation this Gospel-redemption, this blessed Myst^rie into which
the Angels desire to pry: T^ him who can bring you back from the pit, a^ can
enlighten you with the light of the living: To him who has the keys of your
prison, Who can open, and none can shut; and can shut, and none can open: To
him, who has all power in Heaven and in earth communicate. To him, who can
deliver you from the power of the grave, and can set you free from all your
enemies, we desire to give praise.

SERMON II.
Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him?


THere are two great and most ordinary complaints in these days. First, there
are many who complain, that their estats and persons are in bondage, and that
they are sold for slaves to the hands of strangers: But, O that we could turn
over the complaint to this, that our souls are in bondage, and that we are yet
in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, that so we might be
provoked to long for the great Salvation that is in our offer! 2. There are
many complaining, and not without much cause, that there is now such a
toleration of errors; But, O will thou complain also of this, that within thine
heart there is a toleration of lusts: is there not an act of toleration
concluded in thy breast, that the devil and all his company may reign in thee
^t pleasure? Oh! have ye not need of great salvation? Shall I tell you, that
Christ is courting you to embrace it; and that he puts on all his most
glorious robes, and manifests himself unto you, as a suitor, making offer of
himself, and of his great salvation? O! tell me, have ye seen him? Or do you
think to see him this day? What robes has he on? There are five glorious robes
wherewith he clothes himself, when he condescendeth to manifest himself to his
people.

First, he comes to his own with the garments of salvation, according to that
word, Zach. 9.9. Rejoice, O daughter of Sion, greatly: shout, O daughter of
Jerusalem; for behold, thy King comes unto thee: he is just, and having
salvation. Ay, your King is come here to day, and will ye not fall in love with
him, when he is clothed with the garments of Salvation? Can ye ever have a
more conquering fight of Christ, then when he is clothed with such an
excellent robe, and offering you salvation?

Secondly, he appears to his own sometimes in garments dyed in blood,
according to that word, Isai. 63. verse 1.2 Who is this that comes up from
Edom, with dyed garments in blood, as one that treads the wine fat? And now I
say to you (...) will not look to Christ when he appears in the garments of
salvation, have ye a heart to refuse him who has fought such a combat for you,
who has trod the Wine Press alone, and has stained all his garments with the
blood of thy enemies? Or, is there any here, who dare refuse his salvation,
when they see how he treads his enemies in anger, and trampleth them in his
fury, and thus, sprinkleth their blood upon his garments. O! tremble at this
sight, and seek quarter from him in time, or he shall dye his garments with the
blood of thine immortal foul.

Thirdly, Christ appears unto his own, being clothed with these humble robes
of condescendency, when he came in the similitude of sinful flesh. O! what a
sight was that, to behold the Prince of heaven clothed with our nature? What a
sight was that, to behold him that was clothed with light, as with a garment,
to be clothed with our infitmities; yet he condescended to cloth himself
thus, that we might have access unto him, and be partakers of his gifts? O! can
we refuse him, when love has thus pressed him to put on the beggars weed, that
he might say to worms, ye are my brethren, and my sisters?

Fourthly, Christ sometimes manifests himself, being clothed with the
garments of beauty and ravishing majesty such was the sight that the Spouse got
of Christ, Song 2.3. As the Apple Tree amongst the trees of the wood, so is my
Beloved amongst the sons. And Song 5. when she saw him (...) and ruddy, and the
standard bearer of ten thousand. And such was that joyful sight of him, when
his garments was as the light, and white as the snow, which he had at the
Transfiguration, when these glorified ones did come, as it were, Ambassadors
from that higher House, to make him a visit.

And fifthly, Christ he sometimes appears to his own in robes of dreadful
majesty, and terrible highness and loftiness, when the foul upon the first
sight of him remains dead, and there remains no more life in them: such was
the sight Daniel got, in the tenth chapter: and such was the sight that John
got of Christ, Rev. 1.17. And I would ask of all that are here, What a sight
have ye gotten of Christ to day? In which of all these robes have ye seen him?
It is true, we are not to look to the extraordinary sights of him; but yet if
ever thou have seen him in any of his wooing robes, sure he has appeared
matchless; and how then shall ye then refuse him?

But now to come to the words I was speaking unto you of; The first thing in
the words; to wit, that there are many who live under the offer of this great
Salvation, that do slight it, and do not embrace it. And now I shall only add
a few things further unto you. 1. Let me propose a few considerations, to
persuade you to embrace this great Salvation. God forbid we go away before we
embrace this Gospel-salvation: and therefore I charge you in his Name, go not
away before ye embrace it. And to press it home upon you, there are these eight
or nine properties (...) this great Salvation that is offered unto you the day.

And first, it is a free salvation; ye have n^ more ado but to put forth you
hand and take it O! come and take it. Christ has foughten for this Salvation,
and there is no more required o^ you, but to come and reap the fruits of his
victory Whoever will, let him come; there is nothing that should move you to
stay away. O captives, bondslaves to satan! O prisoners of hope! will ye come
and partake of the great Salvation? What holds you from coming away, and
partaking of it? It is freely offered unto you. Ay, believe it: Christ requires
no more of you, but that ye should come and take it out of his hand: If ye
consent to obey, the bargain is ended; ye shall eat the good of the land, Isai.
1.

Secondly, this great salvation is a complete salvation that is offered unto
you to day: this is clear, Luke 1.71. That we might be saved from our enemies,
and from the hands of all that hate us. There is not an enemy that is in the
way; but if thou will come and partake of the great salvation, thou may have
victory over it; so complete a salvation is it that is in your offer this day.
O! shall we pass away, and not embrace it? O! shall our cursed hearts
undervalue this complete salvation, that is come to our door? Believe it,
salvation is near unto you, if ye will take it.

Thirdly, it is a wonderful salvation: it is such a salvation as the Angels
desire do pry into it: and it is such a salvation, that all the Prophets
desired to pry into it. It is almost six thousand years, since all the Angels
of heaven fell into a sea of wonder at this great salvation. It is almost six
thousand years since Abel fell into a sea of wonder at this great salvation.
And what think you is his exercise this day? He is even wondering at this great
salvation. Would ye ask at all the Angels in heaven, would they not all say, O!
embrace the great salvation? Would ye ask all the Saints that are above, would
they not advise you to embrace the great salvation? Should ye ask at Adam,
would he not say, O! embrace this great salvation? Could ye ask at Abel, would
he not say, O! embrace the great salvation? And would not all the Patriarchs
say unto you, O! embrace the great salvation? And do not all that have tasted
of the sweetness of it, cry out unto you, Come and embrace the great salvation?

The fourth property of this salvation is, that it was bought at an exceeding
dear rate: it is a dear salvation. Would you know the difference between
Christ's coming to this salvation, and your coming to it? It is this: Christ was
forced to travel through all the armies of the Justice of God. He was forced to
drink of the cup of the wrath of God, before he could come to purchase this
great Salvation; and now what is required of you to obtain this? We may say no
more, but put out our hands and take it. Will ye look to the price that was
laid down for this Salvation? There is not a wound in the body of Christ, but
it says, This is a dear salvation. There is not a reproach Christ met with,
but it says, O! is not this a dear salvation? There was not a necessity that
he was put into, but it says, Is not this a great and dear salvation? O Sirs!
will ye not come and take this great salvation, this dear salvation? What must
I give for it, say ye? I say, ye must give nothing for it: come, and take it
without money, and without price. It was dear to Christ, but it shall be cheap
unto you. O! is it not cheap unto you? I assure you, if ye will come to the
market to buy the great salvation, there is none of you that needs to stand
for the price of it. O! come and take it, and have it, and there shall be no
more pricing.

Fifthly, it is an everlasting salvation, that ye shall enjoy the fruits of
throughout eternity, as is clear, Heb. 9.13. He became the author of eternal
redemption unto us. It is a salvation that the devil can never be able to get
out of your hand: if ye take it, ye shall never be robbed of it again. O come,
and partake of this great salvation, whereby the gates of hell shall never
prevail against you.

Sixthly, it is a noble and honorable salvation: it is not to be taken out of
one slavery to another, but it is to be taken out of prison, that we may reign,
Luke 1.71. compared with verse 74. it is, That we being saved, may serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. I say,
^ome, come, and partake of this great salvation, that your glory may be
increased, and that ye may be exalted above the Kings of the earth.

Seventhly, it is a most advantageous Salvation: What are the advantages of any
Salvation, that are not to be found in this? Is there not peace to be found
through this salvation? Is (...) not liberty to be found through this
Salvation? Is there not eternal enjoyment of God to be found through this
Salvation? Yea, all Salvations are in this one Salvation.

Lastly, it is a Royal Salvation, for it comes to us from and through the Son
of God: Christ is the Author of it: and we conceive Christ may be said to be
the Author of this Salvation, in these respects. 1. He is the meritorious cause
that did procure it: It was the price of his blood that was laid down for to
purchase this great Salvation. 2. He is the fountain from whence it flows,
according to that word which we have cited, Heb. 5.9. He became the Author of
eternal salvation. 3. He is the person that fitteth out spirits for the
partaking of it: and it is he that removes mountains out of the way, that we
may have fair access unto the great Salvation. 4. It is he that must persuade
our hearts to embrace, and to take hold of it. He stands without, and cries
to the heart to embrace this great Salvation: and he stands within, making
the heart to cry out: Content, I will embrace the great salvation: He is indeed
the person that commends and does point forth this great Salvation unto us.
He is that noble Minister of it. It began first to be preached by him.

Now is there any of you that have fallen in love with the great Salvation,
that ye may try your selves? I shall give you some evidences of the persons
that are near unto this great salvation. 1. Is thine estimation of the great
Salvation increased, be what it was in the morning when thou came hither? Is
thine estimation of the great Gospel-salvation a foot higher then what it was
in the morning? I say unto thee, thou art not far from the great salvation;
come away. 2. Is thy desire after the great salvation increased, be what it was
in the morning? Have thou stronger desires after the great salvation, then
before thou came hither? That is an evidence thou art not far from it. 3. Is
thy thoughts of the necessity of the great salvation greater then they were?
Think thou that thou have more need of the great salvation, then ever thou
thoughtest before? And is thine opinion and thoughts of saving thy self, less
then they were before thou came hither? Art thou forced to cry out. None but
Christ can save me? I say, thou art not far from the great salvation: will thou
come away! O that you would once seal this conclusion with much
heart-perswasion, I am undone without Christ, I am undone without Christ, who
is the Author of this great salvation. Are there any of you that are sensible
that ye are in the fetters of sin, and in the bonds of iniquity? Are you
brought to the conviction of this, that you are ye in the gall of bitterness?
I say, if thou be brought to this length, to be sensible of thy bonds, and art
crying out, O Redeemer? hasten, and come away: I say, If thou be sensible of
thy bonds and imprisonments, and crying out; O thou that wast anointed from
eternity to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to
them that are bound! O hasten, and come away, and redeem me, even poor me,
sinking, sinning, perishing, self-destroying me? thou art not far from the
great salvation. 4. Art thou a person who begins to weep, because thou have
been so long a stranger to Christ, and the great salvation? Old men that are
here, How long have you been strangers to the great salvation, and to the
Author of it? Now will you shed one tear for your estrangement; and cry out; Woe
is me, that Christ and I have been so long asunder. I say, if thou have come
that length, thou art not far from the great salvation: Come away. O pity
yourselves: make haste, make haste, and come away.

But now in the third place, let me give you some evidences, by which you may
know more clearly, whether or no you have embraced this great salvation, that
you may know your selves, and that you walk not down to your grave with a lie
in your right hand.

The first evidence of a person that has embraced the great salvation, is,
that he will have an high esteem of the Savior and Author of (...) great
salvation. Have thou a matchless esteem of matchless Christ the Savior of the
World? Tha^ is a speaking evidence unto thee, thou art a partaker of the great
salvation. Art thou come (...) this length, that thou criest out: None but
Christ none but Christ; it is a speaking evidence, the thou art come to be a
partaker of the great salvation, when thou can cry out that word, Exodus 15.3.
The Lord is my strength and my song, he alone is become my salvation. If Christ
has become thy salvation, then it is like he has become thy long. I would ask
this of you, Were you ever brought this length, that you durst not adventure to
praise Christ alone, but was forced to call in all the creatures, and say: O
magnify the Lord with me? O that is an evidence that you have embraced his
salvation.

Secondly, those who have embraced the great salvation, will study to maintain
and keep their grips of it; they will study to hold fast so precious a jewel:
this is pressed, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
us free: Yea, they will study to walk sutably to this noble mercy; at least,
they will strive and endeavor to do it, as is also pressed in that same verse. I
say, if thou have been made a partaker of the Gospel of Salvation, thou will
strive to keep thy self from the power of those things that once triumphed over
thee.

Thirdly, a person that is a partaker of the great salvation, he will have a
high esteem of this mercy and salvation: So Paul, when he speaks of it here,
he cannot but put some note of excellency to it, calling it, the great
Salvation; therefore, I say, if thou have embraced the great salvation, thou will have so high esteem of it, that not to be so subjected to it as thou
should, or to be in subjection to the power of thy lust in any measure, will
be thy burden and affliction: The man will be sorry when he is brought forth
from the House of his bondage unto the red Sea: He will be sorry, that when he
should have songs of triumph over his idols put in his mouth, that they should
sing songs of triumph over him.

Fourthly, a person that has embraced the great Salvation, he will be longing
sometimes for the day when this Salvation shall be complete, when he shall sing
that song with that numerous multitude which cannot be numbered, Revel. 7.9. O
what a day shall it be, when thou shall begin to sing that song? After this,
says he, I beheld, and lo a great multitude of all people which no man could
number, of all people, nations and languages, stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands, and they
cried: And how cried they? They cried with a loud voice. They would not mutter
the song, not sing silently; but cried with a loud voice: And what did they
cry? They cried with a loud voice, salvation unto our God who sits upon the
Throne and to the Lamb. I would only ask of you (...) partakers of the great
Salvation, what songs shall be put into thy mouth, when the waters of Jordan
shall divide themselves, that the ransomed o^ the Lord must pass through? When
thou shall sin that song, Psalm 115.1. Not unto us; not unto (...) but unto
thee belongs the glory of our salvation* O what a day shall that be, when that
excellen^ song shall be put into thy mouth! Yea, what a day shall it be, when
thou shall be clothed with these excellent garments that are made mention of,
Isai. 6.10. so he has clothed thee with the garments of salvation; and he
has covered thee with the robe of righteousness. O what robes are these! Did
you ever see such excellent robes as these must be? I think, we will misken our
selves. O do you not think, we will misken our selves, when we shall put on
these excellent robes! Now therefore is the bargain closed, or will ye go away
before ye take this great salvation? Dare ye go out at these doors, and neglect
the great Salvation? I would ask this of you, think ye it will not be most sad,
that Christ should tell this in Heaven of you to night; I was preached to a
pack of stones; that none of them would love me? Will ye not be feared that
this report shall be carried back to Heaven of you? For what report can Christ
carry back but this? Now is the cord of this great salvation let down unto you:
is there none of you that will take a grip of it? Will ye flighter after it:
Will ye make this a rejoicing day in Heaven, that is a fasting day unto you:
and the way to make it so, is, to embrace the great salvation. Now what say ye
to it, old men? Let me speak to you, and ask your thoughts of the great
salvation, Gray hairs should be a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness, Old men, speak your minds, that young men may not have your bad
examples: What say ye of this salvation? Is it not a most glorious salvation?
Is it not a most excellent salvation that is in your offer? I entreat you,
speak your minds: tell Christ ye are content to take the great salvation;
otherwise, whoever he be that will not partake of this Gospel-Salvation, I in
the Name and authority of Christ our Master, denounce eternal and irrevocable
war against him: Put on your harness, ye shall not boast when ye put it off
again: The wrath and fury of God shall come upon you to the uttermost, if ye
embrace not this great salvation. Other wars are but for a time: the greatest
Captains that ever the earth did carry; are now laid down in the sides of the
pit, and their swords broken under their head. Armies of ten hundred thousand,
an hundred years time have laid them all in their graves, and ended all their
contests; but there is no discharge of this war that shall be concluded betwixt
Christ and you: It shall become an eternal and most terrible war, which shall be
but beginning when time is ended. Now peace or war, which of them will ye
choose? Dare ye send a charge to Christ, and say, Ye will defy him? I am
afraid there will be two things that many of us will report to day. First, I am
afraid there be many that will give Pharaohs report to the offer of the great
salvation, and say: Who is the Lord that I should obey him? I tell you who he
is, He is glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders. O embrace
him before he go hence, and give not Pharaohs report, lest ye be drowned in the
sea of his wrath, whence there shall be no recovery. Secondly, I fear there
will be many here to day, that will give Demas report to his precious offer: I
will go and forsake Christ, and embrace this present World. O bad exchange!
Cursed be he that shall make it: will ye be of Demas humor. I fear there has
been many of that humor of a long time: but, I entreat you, once be wise before
you dye. I confess that Proverb, Old fools, are twice fools. I think, old men
that will not embrace the great salvation, I think ye are triple fools. What
wait ye for? Is there any thing can afford you any satisfaction but this great
salvation? Now are ye convinced, old men, that Christ is waiting for your
answer. I entreat you, before ye go hence, speak your minds what ye think of
the great Salvation. Is it not a lovely Salvation? Is it not lovely now? What
say ye to it? I am to go away, and the offer is to be taken up at this time;
and it is hard to say, if ever ye shall have an offer again. I would only say
this to you, and be sure of it; though I should never be a partaker of this
great salvation, yet I shall be a witness against you that are not partakers of
it. I tell and declare unto you, I shall be a witness against (...); if ye
embrace not the great Salvation. Now, old men, are ye persuaded to embrace it?
Let me obtest you by the beauty of Christ, come and partake of the great
salvation, ye that are travalling upon the borders of eternity. Now, if ye will
give no more, give this, will ye go home and think upon it? I shall not be
uncharitable, nor enter to judge your thoughts. I fear there shall be many
declared and found guilty amongst us, t^ we have declared unto Heaven, we will
not c^brace the great Salvation, but have trodden t^ blood of the Son of God
under foot. Now I i^ treat you, every one of you, ask of your selves ye be the
persons that will presume in your hea^ to do so. Now I shall leave it with you,
let it b^ witness against you. I shall leave it with this; (...) come away, old
men, young men, old women a^ maids, come and embrace this precious Gospe^
Salvation. Ye may say, ye bid us come, but w^ cannot come: I desire no more of
you, but w^ come with this, Lord, I am content to come, but cannot come. Come
once to that; for if once (...) be content to receive it, it will not be long
before ye be able to receive it. Now shall Christ d^ part, and will none of you
say, ye are content (...) take him? Will ye charge your own conscienc^ with
this: am I content to take Christ and the great Salvation! O blessed, blessed,
blessed be he that (...) the Author of this great Salvation, and blessed b^ he that
gets any of the ends of the cord of the great Salvation, that we sink not under
the wra^ and fury of the Lord! Come and embrace the great Salvation: and again,
I say, come, and (...) brace it: for what can ye have, if ye want it* And what
can you want, if you have it? I she say no more, but close with that word,
Isai. 6^ verse 21. Behold, the Lord has proclaimed to (...) ends of the World,
to those that are far off. W^ has he proclaimed? Say ye to the daughter Sion:
Behold thy salvation comes behold it com^ I say to you that are the ends of
the World, Salva^ion is brought near to you: Stout-hearted, and ^ar from
righteousness, the great Salvation is ^rought near unto you, and will ye send
it away? Oh! consider what ye are doing. And to him that can persuade you to
embrace the great Salvation, we desire to give praise.

A SERMON Concerning DEATH.
Psalm. 86.48. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? etc.


IT is very hard to determine where all that are here, shall be within thirty
years: for even ^ere that time come, many (if not all) of us who are here, shall
have taken up our eternal ^odging. And whether we shall take it up in the
^eternity of joy, or the eternity of pain, is also ^hard to determine: Only
this one thing I am sure of, that all of us shall shortly be gone: And ^ere long
the shadows of death shall be fitting upon ^ur eyelids, and our eye strings
shall begin to ^reak. Therefore I would the more seriously ^nquire of you, What
would you think if death were approaching this night unto you? Thin^ you that
Jesus Christ is gone up to prepare place for you, even for you? Surely, I think
w^ are all near to eternity: and there are some hearing me to day, whom I defy
the World to assure that ever they shall hear another Sermon: Therefore I
entreat you all to hear this preaching, as i^ it were the last preaching that
ever you should hear: and, O that we could speak it, as if it were the last
Sermon that ever we would preach unto you. Believe me, Death is another thing
then we take it to be: Oh, what will many of us do in the day of our
visitation, when desolation she come from afar? Where will we flee for rest?
and where will we leave our glory? Old rich men where will you flee when death
assaults you? Old poor men, where will you flee where death assaults you? Old
women, where will ye flee when death assaults you? Young men where will you
flee when death assaults you? Young women, where will you flee when death
assaults you? It was an ancient observation o^ David, Psalm 39, 5. That God had
made (...) days as an hand-breadth; which either may relate to the fourfold
estate of man, viz. his infancy his childhood, his manhood, and his old age
Or it may relate to the fourfold time of his life viz. his morning, his
fore-noon, his afternoon and his evening; yet all our lifetime is but a day.
And, O think you not that our day is near unto close?

Now before that I begin to speak to any thi^ from the words, I shall speak a
few things to these two questions, which I conceive may not altogether be
unprofitable.

Quest. 1. Whether it be lawful for any to desire to dye, and to return unto
their long and endless home? Whether it be lawful for one to cry out, O time,
time, flee away, and all my shadows let them be gone, that so long eternity may
come.

Answ. I say, it is lawful in some cases for one ^o desire to dye: For it was
Paul's desire, Phil. 1.^3. I am in a strait betwixt two, having a defire to
^epart, and to be with Christ which is far better. And 2 Cor. 2.2. We groan
earnestly, defiring to ^e clothed with our house which is from Heaven. (...)
long greatly till the twentieth one year of my Age come, when my minority shall
be overpast, that I may be entered Heir of that matchless inhe^itance. But to
clear in what cases it is lawful to ^esire to dye.

1. I say it is lawful to desire to dye, when it ^oweth from a desire of
uninterrupted fellowship and communion with Christ, and conjunction ^ith him;
this is clear, 2 Cor 5.6. Knowing ^at whilst we are present in the body, we are
ab^nt from the Lord; therefore verse 8. We are illing rather to be absent from
the body and to be ^esent with the Lord. As also it is clear Phil. 1.^. I am in
a strait betwixt two, having a desire to part, and to be with Christ, which is
far bet^. It was his great end to have near and un^ixed communion with Christ:
What aileth you Paul? might one have said, may you not (...) content to stay a
while here: Nay, says Paul, (...) desire to be gone, and to be with Christ.
Wa^ thou never with him here, Paul? I have bee^ with him, says he; but what is
all my be in^ with him here, in comparison of my being with him above, While I
am present in the body, I am but absent from the Lord. Therefore I will never
be at rest, says he, get what I will, until I get Christ, until I get those
naked and immediat^ embracements of that noble plant of renown^ the flower of
the stalk of Jesse, who is the light of the higher house, the eternal
admitation o^ Angels.

2. It is lawful to desire to die when it flowe^ from the excellencies of
Heaven, and from a desire to partake of those excellent things that a^ there;
this is clear, 2 Cor. 5.4. We groan being burdened, or as the word is, We
groan, as they (...) are pressed under a heavy burden, that we may (...)
eloathed upon, etc. What aileth you to groan so Paul? O! says he, I groan that
mortality may (...) swallowed up of life.

3. It is lawful to desire to dye when it flowet from a desire to be freed from
the body of Death and from those temptations that affault us, a^ from those
oppressions whereunto we are man subject by it. Doubtless Paul desired to dye
(...) this account, when he cried out, Romans 7.24. (...) wretched man that I am,
Who shall deliver (...) from this body of death! He longed greatly for (...)
day, wherein he should be made white like (...) wings of a Dove, covered with
silver, whose fea^ers are of a yellow gold. O! Christ, says Paul, (...) am as
one impatient till I be above, where I shall be clothed with those excellent
and cleanly ^obes, the righteousness of Christ. Oh! says Paul, I think every
day a year, till I shall be possessed of that Kingdom where satan cannot tempt,
and the creatures cannot yield, and where I shall ^e free from all my fears of
sinning. Now in all ^hese respects who would not desire to dye? But ^o guard
these, I would give you these four Cau^ions.

1. Caution, Your desires to dye should not be peremptory, but ye should desire
to die with submission to the will of God; so that although he would fill up
fifteen years more to your life, you should be content to live it out.

2. Caution, When your desires are hasty, and off hand, suspect them; for some
when they meet with any outward cross (without all deliberation) will cry out,
O to be gone, O if I were dead! But your desires to dye should be deliberate,
but not hasty or rash.

3. Caution, It is not lawful to desire to dye because of personal affliction.
Many when they meet with bitter afflictions, will cry out, O to be gone! They
long for death, even upon that account: such were Jobs desires, Job 20.21.22.
and chap. 6. verse. 7.8. O that I might have my request, even that it would
please God to destroy me, etc. This desire was very unlawful.

4. Caution, It is not lawful to desire to dye, when thy predominant idol is
taken away from thee, yet such was Jonahs desire, chap. 4.23. Jon^ thought his
credit and reputation (which was h^ idol) was gone, and could never be regained
therefore he wished to dye. But I would say the to you, that some will have ten
desires for death, when they have not one desire for Heaven. And what moves
Christians to be desirous to dye? It is not so much because of their hope, as
because of their anxiety; it is not so much because of their confidence, as
because of their impatience. But I say unto you, when your desires of death are
not accompanied with desires of Heaven, suspect them. I would say this, that
there are some who will have ten desires for death, when they will not have one
for the death of the body of death: But it were good for thee who art such, to
be desiring the death of the body of death, then should thou be in a more
suitable frame to desire to dye. 3. Some will have hearty desires to dye, and
yet when death comes they will be as unwilling to dye as any: It has been
observed, that some who have much desired to dye, when death came, have cried
out, O spare a little that I may recover strength, etc. There is a great
difference between a desire to dye, and death it self. It is an easy thing to
desire to dye, but it is a very great business to meet with death, and to look
it in the face when it comes. We think death ere it come near to us, to be but
childrens play, but when we meet with it, it makes us change our thoughts: for
it is a great business to dye.

Quest. 2. Is it lawful for a Christian to desire to live when he is summoned
to dye?

Answ. In some cases is it lawful for a Christian to desire to live, even when
he is summoned to dye; which is clear from the practice of David, Psalm. 39.13.
where he prays that the Lord will spare him a little: it is also clear from
the practice of good Hezekiah, Isai. 38.3. when he was commanded to set his
house in order: for he should dye, and not live; he cried forth, Remember now,
O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and
have done that which was good in thy sight; and Hezekiah wept sore. Or as the
word is in the Original, he wept with great weeping: but to guard this, take
these two Cautions.

Caution 1. Thy desires to live (when thou art summoned to dye) should not be
peremptory, but with submission to the will of God, that if it be his pleasure
to remove thee presently out of time, thou should be content to dye.

Caution 2. Thy desires to live should have gracious principles, and also a
very gracious end, as is most clear from David, Psalm 39.13. where he says, O
spare me a little that I may recover my strength, before I go from hence, and
be no more: his desire to live, was that he might have victory over his Idols;
as if he had said, my desire to live, is, that I may have strength to wrestle
with, and overcome my idols: and without all controversy, Hezekiahs desire was
a most precious and well-grounded desire: However, I would say this unto thee,
that thou should examine thy desires to live, as much (if not more) as thy
desires to dye; for we are ready to shun death, if we could; but he is that
universal King, unto whom all of us must be subject ere long.

Now in the words that are read unto you, there are these six things which may
be clearly observed from them.

First, that it is a most true and infallible truth, that all persons shall once
see death; as is clear in these words: Who is he that lives, and shall not see
death?

Secondly, that this truth, that we shall once see death, is not much believed,
or thought upon by many; therefore it is that the Psalmist doubleth the
assertion: Who is he that lives, and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his
soul (that is, his life) from the hand (that is) from the power of the Grave?

Thirdly, that sometimes a Christian may win to the solid Faith of this truth,
that once he must dye; this the Psalmist wan unto, as it is also clear in that
word (who) Who is he that lives, and shall not see death?

Fourthly, that the certainty of this, that once we shall dye, should be kept in
our mind; therefore that note of attention, Selah, is put to it, as if he had
said, Take heed that there is none living that shall not dye.

Fifthly, that howbeit some persons put the evil day far away, as if they were
not to see death; yet is the day coming when they shall see death, and death
shall take them by the hand.

Sixthly, we shall take notice of this from the context, that the Christian who
is much in minding the brevity of his life, will believe the certainty of his
death. The Psalmist was speaking of the shortness of his life in the preceding
verse, and in this verse he speaks of the certainty of death.

Now as for the first of these things observed, viz. That it is certain and
most sure, that we must all once dye: I hope there are none of you here who
will deny it, although I confess some few of you believe it: yet said the woman
of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14. We must all dye, and be like water spilt upon the
ground, that cannot be gathered up again; and God does not accept the person of
any. And Job 30.13. I know thou will bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living. And it is very clear, Eccles. 8.8. There is no man
that has power over the spirit to retain the spirit, neither has he any power
in the day of death; and there is no discharge in that war, neither shall
wickedness deliver those that are given to it. It is also clear, Heb 9.27. It
is appointed unto all men once to die. So it is most clear that we must dye. I
remember of one Philip King of Macedonia, who had one substitute for this very
end, to cry at his chamber door every morning, Memento mori, memento mori,
momento mori: Remember thou art to dye. And it is reported to have been the
practice of the Nobles of Greece, that in the day wherein their Emperor was
crowned, that they presented a marble ston^ unto him, and he was enquired after
what fashion he would have his Tombstone made? Which practice speak this unto
us, that although these were most destitute of the light of the Scriptures,
they were very mindful of death. Believe me, death may surprise us before we be
aware: for it is most certain that we must dye; but there is nothing more
uncertain then the way how, and the time when we shall dye.

Death will surprise some, as it did Abel, in the open field, Genesis 4.8. Death
will surprise some, as it did Eglon, in his parlour, Judges 3.21. And death
will surprise some, as it did Saul and Jonathan, in the flight, 1 Samuel 31.

Now in speaking unto this point, I shall first speak a little to those
advantages which attend those that live within continual fight of death.
Secondly, I shall give you some considerations to press you to prepare for
death. Thirdly, I shall give you some directions to help you to prepare for
death. And then we shall proceed unto the second point of doctrine which we
observed from the Text, and shall speak a few things from it unto you, and so
come to a close for this time.

First then, we conceive there are these seven advantages which attend those
who live within the continual sight of this truth, that they must dye.

First, the faith of approaching death, will make a soul exceeding diligent in
duty: This was our blessed Lords Divinity, John 9.4. I must work the work of
him that sent me, while it is day: the night ^meth when no man can work: That
i^, death is approaching, therefore I must work. It is clear also, 2 Pet. 1.12.
compared with verse 14. In the 12. verse, Peter is exceeding diligent in his
duty, and the ground of his diligence is in the 14. verse: Knowing that shortly
I must put off this my tabernacle, etc. Yea, it is even the Epicures argument,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. And should not the Christian
much more cry out, Let me watch, and pray, for to morrow I may dye. I say, if
the Epicures did make use of that notion, to make them vigorous in the pursuit
of their pleasures; O how much more should a Christian improve it, for making
him vigorous in the pursuit of his duty? Therefore, I say unto you all, O! be
diligent, for your night is drawing near. O Christians, and expectants of
heaven, are you not afraid lest you be nighted before you have walked the half
of your journey? For if you be nighted on your journey to Heaven, before you
come to the end of your race, there is no retiring place whereunto you may turn
aside to lodge; therefore, O work, work, work, while it is day; for behold
death is approaching, and then shall we all be called to an account.

2. The faith of approaching death will make a Christian exceeding active in
his duty: he will not only be diligent, but also exceeding serious and zealous
in the exercise of his duty: This is clear from that notable exhortation,
Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might: and the
reason is, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
grave whither thou go. Wherefore, O be active while you are alive; for you
shall never work any more after you are dead: and if ye leave but one work
undone, there is no doing of it after death: There is no work, says Solomon,
in the grave, therefore, O be active.

3. The faith of this truth, that we must all dye, will help a Christian to be
exceeding mortified to the things of a present World. Oh, covetous men and
women! would you shake hands with cold Death but once every morning, I should
defy you to pursue the World so much as you do. Paul was much in the
meditation of his change, which made him, 2 Cor. 4.18. to overlook those things
that are temporary: While we look not, says he, to the things that are seen,
which are temporal; but to the things which are not seen, which are eternal.
Therefore chap. 5.1. Knowing that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens; therefore in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon
with our house which is from Heaven. What aileth you, Paul, might one have
laid, may you not take a look of the World? No, says he, for I know that if
this earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, I have a house with God,
not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens. That is, I know that ere long
the pins of my Tabernacle will be loosed, and it will fall down about my ears,
therefore I must look for another dwelling house. And 1 Cor. 7.24. The fashion
of this world passes away; therefore, says he, verse 32. I would have you
without carefulness, caring to please the Lord. And Phil. 4.2. Let your
moderation be known to all men; the Lord is at hand. As if he had said, death
is approaching, and at hand; therefore, I entreat you, be sober. But I think
many of us will be found, like Saul hid amongst the stuff; that is, we will be
lying amongst the midst of the pleasures of this passing World. But I say to
thee who art such an one, that death will break the strings of thy harp, and
thy music will quickly cease. O! but death will make thee have a low esteem of
the World. O! blessed is the person who has those thoughts of the World all
along his way, which he shall have of it at his death! Have not the most cursed
wretches been forced to cry out: Oh! I would give ten thousand worlds for
Christ? Have not some persons (who have had the Moon upon their head, and that
have made their belly their God) being forced to cry forth at death: O cursed
person that I am, that ever I made the world my God! Alace, that I contented my
self with the World! Therefore, I say unto thee who art such an one, O! stay
thy pursuit after the World, for death is approaching, that will cause all thy
worldly comforts to evanish.

4. When a Christian believes this truth, that he must dye, it will be an
exceeding great restraint to keep him from sinning, as is clear, Job 31.13.
compared with verse 14. where Job reckoning over many good deeds done by
himself, says: What then shall I do, when God rises up? And when he visits,
what shall I answer him? As if he had said, Sirs, mistake me not, I am not
boasting much of my self, for I could not have done otherwise; else what should
I do when God rises up: How could I answer to God, if I had done otherwise? I
think it were a notable practice for each of you, when temptations begin to
assault you, to say: O temptation! what shall I answer to God when he rises up
to reprove me, if I should yield unto thee. Likewise Eccles. 11.9. where
Solomon dissuading young men to pursue after vanity, brings this as a reason:
Know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee to judgment?
Therefore, I say unto thee who art often tempted to sin, let death and
reckoning with God be still in thy sight, and I defy thee then to embrace half
so many temptations as now thou do. I entreat you, to answer all your
temptations with that one word: What shall I do, when he rises up? And what
shall I answer, when he visits me?

5. When a Christian lives within the sight of this truth, that he shall once
see death, it shall make him exceeding patient under every cross wherewith he
meets: Such a Christian will hardly meet with a cross, but he will quiet
himself with this; Death will put me beyond this cross: This is but a cloud
that will quickly pass away. And for this cause did David so composedly put up
that desire, Psalm 39.4. Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my
days. He was sure that the knowledge of his end would put him in a sober and
patient frame.

The sixth advantage is this, The faith of approaching death, will teach the
person that has it, to study saving wisdom; this is clear Psalm 90.12. where
David puts up this request: So teach us to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom. As if he had said, I will never think my self
wise, till I know that blessed piece of A^ithmetick, How to number my days. I
would desire every one of you all, to think with your selves every morning when
you arise. Now we are an hour nearer unto eternity then we were before: and at
the end of every hour, Now we are a day nearer unto eternity, then we were
before. I say, think often, yea always thus, We were never so near death as we
are now; for oh! are we not all nearer to eternity to day, then we were ye
sterday?

The seventh advantage attending the faith of approaching death, is this, That
it will make a Christian very careful in preparing for death: it is impossible
for one to believe really that death is approaching, and not prepare for it.
Say what you will, if you be not careful in preparing for death, you have not
the solid faith of this truth, that you shall dye. Believe me, it is not every
one that thinks he believes this truth, that believes it indeed. And, O how
dreadful is it for an unprepared man to meet with death? He desires not to
dye; yea, he would give a World for his life; but dye he must, whether he will
or not; for death will not be requested to spare a little when he comes: and
therefore, I say unto you: Set your house in order, for you shall surely dye.
Old men and women, Set your house in order, for surely ye must dye. Young men
and women, Set your house in order, for to morrow ye may dye, and be cut off in
the flower of your age. Think not that there are any who can sell time: for I
say, you shall never get time sold unto you. Alace! I feat the most part of
persons that dye now, death finds them at unawares: for indeed the persons
that dye amongst us, when we come to visit them, we may give you a full
account of them; for we think they are all comprehended under these four sorts.

First, when we go to visit some persons on their death bed, they are like
unto Nabal, their heart is dying and sinking, like unto a stone within them:
they are no more affected with death, then if it were a fancy. Alace, for the
great stupidity that has overtaken many! Therefore, I entreat you, delay not
your repentance till death, lest the Lord take away your wit, so that you
cannot then repent, for your senslesness and stupide frame of spirit.

A second sort we find in a presumptuous frame, saying, They have had a good
hope all their days, and they will not quite it now: they will go down to the
grave with their hope in their right hand, or rather they will go down to the
grave with a lie in their right hand: they live in a persumptuous frame, and
they dye in the same delusion: for when we tell them that by all probability
they are going down to hell: they answer, God forbid! I was all my time a very
honest man, or woman. But I love not that confession; for there are many such
honest men and women in hell this day.

The third sort we find have some convictions, that they have been playing the
fool all their days; but we can get them no further: I shall only say to such,
To go down to the Grave with convictions in their breast, not making use of
Christ, is to go down to hell with a candle in their hand, to let them see the
way: and truly the greater part that dye, dye in this manner.

Fourthly, there are some whom we find in a self-righteous frame, trusting upon
the covenant of works, and their own merits, and trusting by these to go to
heaven; yet neglecting the offer of Christ's righteousness: But, alace! we find
not one of a thousand in this frame, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, that is best of all. And scarcely do we find any in such a frame, O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Therefore I say unto you who are all here; O will you mind death before it take
hold on you! Oh, mind your work now! for you will find that death shall be work
enough for it self, though you leave no work till then.

The eighth advantage that attends the Christian believing this truth, that
once he must dye, is this; Death will not be so terrible to him; as it is to
many when it comes. What think you, makes death a King of terrors? What
makes many to shake like the leaf of a tree, when they are summoned to appear
before Gods Tribunal? It is even because of this, they have not been thinking
on death before it came, so as to prepare for it: and I fear many in this place
may be feared for death; and that when it comes to them, they will say unto
death, as Achab said to Elijah, Have thou found me, O mine enemy! Surely, death
will take you, and bring you to the Judgment Seat of Christ: therefore study
by all means to think ofren upon it, and make ready for it; for, believe me,
death is a very big word; for it will once make you stand with horror in your
souls, if your peace be not made up with God. I know not a more dreadful
dispensation, then death and a guilty conscience meeting together.

The second thing that I shall speak unto from the first observation, viz. That
it is a most certain and infallible truth, that all persons shall once see
death, shall be to give some good considerations for pressing you to prepare for
death.

The first consideration is this, that to dye well, and in the Lord, is a most
difficult work; therefore I entreat you, prepare for death. It is a difficult
work to communicate aright: it is a difficult work to pray aright; and it is a
difficult work to confer aright. But I must tell you, it is a more difficult
work to dye aright, then any of these: it is true, it is more difficult to
communicate aright, then to pray aright; yet it is much more difficult to dye
aright, then to communicate aright; for it is a most difficult work to dye in
the Lord. Death will put the most accurate Christian that is here to a
wonderful search; and therefore I will tell you nine things that death will try
in thee. 1. Death will try both the reality and strength of thy faith; it may
be easy for thee to keep up faith under many difficulties, but death shall put
thy faith to the greatest stress that ever it did meet with. Yea, know this,
that the faith of the strongest believer may get, and ordinarily does get, a
set at death, the like whereof it never got before; therefore prepare for
death. 2. Death will try thy love to God; some persons pretend much love to
him, but death will propose this question to such a person, Love thou him
more then these? Love thou him more then thy wife? More then thy house? More
then thy friends? But your unwillingness to dye, gives us much ground to fear
that many have little love to Christ, but much to the World, and so dare not
answer the question, Lord, thou know that I love thee. 3. Death will try thy
enjoyments; some of you may be ready to think that you meet with many
enjoyments, so that you might reckon, as you think, to forty enjoyments, and
sweet outlettings; but beware that death bring them not down to twenty. I have
known some who thought they had met forty times with God; but when death came,
it made them take down the count to the half: therefore seeing death will try
the reality of thine enjoyments, O prepare for it. 4. Death will try thy
patience: thou may seem to have much patience now, but when death comes
(thou art put to dye) it will put thy patience to a great trial; therefore
prepare for it. 5. Death will try the reality of thy duties, yea, even those
duties wherein thou had most satisfaction, as thy communicating aright in
such a place, thou hopest that is sure; thy reading the Scripture at such a
time aright, thou hopest that is sure; thou prayedst at such a time aright, and
hopest that is sure, thou meditatest in such a place aright, and thou hopest
that is sure. But, believe me, death may make thee change thy thoughts: for
there are some persons who have communicated and prayed, etc. as right as any
in this generation, who, for all that, will not find six duties wherein they
can find satisfaction at death. 6. Death will exceedingly try thy sincerity
when it comes: An hypocrite may go all along his whole way undiscovered, yet
death may bring him to light, and make it appear what a man he is. 7. Death
will discover unto thee hid and secret sins, of which thou never had a thought
before; yea, albeit thou thoughtest these had been forgotten, death will let
thee see them standing between thee and the light of his countenance. 8. Death
will accurately try thy mortification: Some think they have come a great length
in mortification; but, believe me, death will try it, and put it to the
touchstone. 9. Death will try thy hope whether it be real or not. I shall only
say this, that all the other graces must low their sails to faith, and so it
is, faith must carry us through, being that last triumphing grace which must fit
the field for us, when all the other graces will faint and ly by. It is faith
that must enter us fairly within the borders of eternity. It is faith must
gainstand all the temptations of death; yea, all the other graces, as it were,
stand by, and see faith strike the last stroke in this war.

The second consideration to press you to mind death, is this: That ye are to
dye but once. O! labor to do that well which you are to do but once, and the
wrong doing of which can never be helped: If ye pray not aright, ye may get
that mended; and if ye communicate not aright, ye may get that also mended:
but, alace! if ye dye not aright, there is no mending of that: Therefore, O
prepare for death, that ye may dye well, seeing ye are to dye but once.

The third consideration to press you to mind death, is this: That ye are
pronounced blessed who dye in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which
dye in the Lord. O let that provoke you to prepare for death, that so ye may
dye in the Lord, that is the only way to make you eternally happy. I confess,
it is a question difficult to determine, whether it be more difficult to dye
well, or to live well? I shall not answer it, but rather desire you to study
both.

The fourth consideration to press you to prepare for death, is this; viz. That
though thou put all thy work by thy hand before death, ye shall thou find that
death shall have work enough for it self, yea as much as thou shall get done. It
will then be much for thee to win to patience, it will be much for thee to win
to the sight of thy justification, and it will then be much for thee to win to
assurance: O then, is it not needful for thee to put all thy work by thy hand
before thy latter end come? Wherefore I may say to you, as Moses said in his
Song, Deuter. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that
they would consider their latter end! O that ye had this piece of divine
wisdom! I pray you, consider that sad word, Lam 1.19. She remembered not her
last end: and what of it? Therefore she came down wonderfully. So will the
down-coming of many in this generation be wonderful, who consider not their
last end.

The fifth consideration for pressing you to prepare for death, is this, viz.
That their labor shall end, but their works shall not be forgotten, as is clear
from that forecited place, Rev. 14.13. They rest from their labors, and their
works follow them; and is not that a glorious advantage?

The sixth consideration to press you to prepare for death, is this, viz. That
death may come upon you ere ye be aware: ye know not but death may surprise you
this night, before ye go home to your houses: and therefore let that press you
to study a constant preparation for death.

The seventh consideration to press you to prepare for death, is this, viz.
That as death leaves you, so will Judgment find you: If death shall leave you
strangers to Christ, ye shall appear before his Judgment Seat strangers unto
him, therefore, I entreat you all, to prepare for it. I think that noble
practice of Paul, exceeding worthy of imitation, 1 Cor. 15.31. I dye daily,
which I think does comprehend these three things. 1. That Paul had death always
in his sight. 2. It comprehends this, that he labored to keep such a frame as
that every moment he should be ready to dye, so that whenever death should
put the summonds in his hand, he should be content to answer. 3. It
comprehends this, that he labored to lay aside and remove all things out of
the way, that might detain him from laying down his tabernacle. O says Paul, I
labor so to clear my self of all hindrances, as that when ever I shall be
summoned to remove out of time, I may willingly lay down my life. Therefore I
would ask you this question, viz. When did you make your last testament? I
think it were suitable for us to be renewing our latter-will every day, for in
so doing, Paul made an excellent testament, the better of which none that died
since have made, 2 Timothy 4.7.8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith; these are very sweet articles: and then he
adds, Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, that the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day. And think ye not that very
sweet that he would leave something unto you in Christ's Name? viz. And not for
me only, but for all them that wait for his appearance. Now I come to the third
thing proposed, viz. To give some directions for helping you to prepare for
death.

Direct. 1. I entreat you, be much in preparation for death every day: for it
is even a preparation for heaven, to be taking a fight of your grave and latter
end every day.

Direct. 2. I entreat you, be much in these duties. First, in self-examination,
that your comp^ may be clear with God; for many a ragged count shall we have
when death and we shall meet. Secondly, be much in the exercise of repentance,
that so ye may have every fault and corruption in you mourned for, before death
and you meet. Thirdly, be much in the exercise of faith, making your calling
and election sure. Fourthly, be much in the exercise of mortification, and that
will help you to keep a loose grip, not only of the World, but also of your
other idols: and if ye be much in these, ye shall undoubtedly be prepared for
death.

Direct. 3. Be much in minding the excellent things of heaven: a Christian that
would be prepared for death, should have all his thoughts and conversation
there. I think it would be an excellent help, in preparation for death, to take
a sight of the crown every day.

Direct. 4. Labor always to keep a good conscience, void of offense toward God
and man. I say, labor to keep thy conscience clear, and that shall be a
continual feast unto thee.

Direct. 5. Slight not any known duty, do not crucify any conviction, neither
break any resolution: put these three together, and that will exceedingly help
you to prepare for death: I say, see that ye adventure not to slight any known
duty: see that ye adventure not to crucify any conviction: and see that ye
adventure not to break your resolutions.

Now we come to the second thing which we observed from the words, viz. That
this truth, that we shall once see death, is not much believed by many of us:
and to make this appear, we shall only give some evidences unto you, to prove
that we are not as yet prepared for death.

1. Evidence. Does not the unspeakable stupidity that has overtaken many, say,
that we are not people prepared for death? Alace! many of us would find our
selves in a most stupid temper, if we were presently to dye: for many of us are
no more moved with the threatenings and terrors of God, then if they did not
belong unto us: and this says, We are not as yet prepared for death.

2. Evid. That we are not prepared for death, in our pursuing so much after the
vain and passing delights of a present World. Many of us rise up early, and go
to bed late at night, and eat the bread of sorrow all the day, and load
themselves with thick clay. And I am sure, that such a person (being night and
day taken up with the World) is not prepared for death. I remember a word
recorded of such a wretched one who was exceeding rich; said he, I would give
so many thousands of money, if death would but give m^ one day; yet he got it
not. And, O how suddenly will death surprise many of you, as it did him.

3. Evid. Which speaks forth our unpreparedness for death, is our impatience
under every petty cross that we meet with: for the prepared Christian will be
patient under very sharp crosses.

4. Evid. That we are not prepared, is our not endeavoring to live within
sight of our interest in God: Oh, if we were prepared for death, durst we live
in so much incertainty of our interest in God, and of our assurance of heaven!

5. Evid. Some of us can let our idols lie in our breast six years without
repentance, and will never study to mortify them, nor repent for them; and
surely such are not prepared for death.

Now I entreat you seriously, to mind what has been said, and that ye may the
more seriously think upon it, I will tell you some material challenges, that
your conscience at death will present unto you; therefore take heed that ye may
know how ye will answer.

1. Challenge, Is the slighting of much precious time, and sinning away the
precious offers of grace. O what will ye answer to that challenge when death
shall present it to you! Death will say (or rather thine own conscience at
death) what ailed thee to sin so many hours, without either praying, reading,
or meditating? Now have ye any thing to answer when death shall present this
challenge to you? I entreat you, premeditate what ye will say: I entreat you,
prevent death by presenting it first seriously to your selves.

2. Challenge. That death will present unto you, will be for the killing of
many precious convictions which ye have had. What will each of you answer at
death, when your conscience proposes this challenge unto you? Thou metst with
such a challenge at such a time, and went home and crucified it. And at another
time thou metst with another challenge, and went home and crucified it. These
challenges will be laid home to thy door, therefore think on them.

3. Challenge. Death will charge you for a formal hypocritical way of going
about duties: I say your conscience will then tell you, that ye went to such a
communion with a selfish end; and ^ another time, ye prayed hypocritically and
formally: And what will ye have to answer when ye meet with these challenges? I
confess, I know not what ye can answer to these. But I charge you, be thinking
what ye will answer: for it may be that these convictions shall ly on your
consciences, that even this day you have heard two searching Sermons, and did
meet with some convictions, but made no good use of them; yea, and it may be ye
did sleep all that time. O! that will ye answer, when it will be said to you,
(...) went to such a Sermon, and sleeped all the one: and ye went to such a
Communion, but had no other end before your eyes, but to be see^ of men? I
entreat you, consider presently wh^ you will answer to these.

4. Challenge. Will be for your breaking many precious resolutions. It will be
said to some of you, that at the Communion in this place, ye took on vows, and
did break them: I am sure y^ connot question the Justice of this challenge
therefore see what ye will answer.

5. Challenge. Ye slighted many precious offers of the Gospel. O men and women
in this City! what will ye answer to this? I was often exhorted to take Christ,
and yet would never take him. What will conscience say to that, when death shall
table it before you? I tell you what you must then answer: O cursed I, that
ever refused Christ in the Gospel! And ye shall then b^ confounded, because this
is your sin. Believe me, there was never an offer of this everlasting Gospel,
and of Christ in it, made unto you, that shall not at death (before or after it)
be brought to your remembrance. And, O how sad and doleful will it be to you,
when Christ shall open the Book where your sins are written, and begin with the
sin of slighting the great Salvation! Thus I invited you, when you were twelve
years old, but ye would not come. I invited you when you were thirty years old,
but ye would not come. I invited you when you were sixty years old, and ye
would not come. What will ye answer to this? Have ye any thing to say? Or must
ye not stand speechless before your Judge, when he shall put home this
challenge unto you? Therefore think seriously upon it, how ye will answer to it.

6. Challenge. Will be for your sinning oftentimes against light: And, O how
painful and sad a challenge will that be at the day of death, when it will be
said, Thou sinned with a witness in thy bosom, that thou wast doing wrong. Thy
conscience will say, Oftentimes I did tell thee this is sinful, yet would
thou not abstain from it: And what will ye answer to this?

7. Challenge. Oftentimes ye sinned upon very small temptations, and what will
ye answer to that? Must ye not then confess it, and say, Oh, how often have I
deserted Christ, and embraced my idols upon a small temptation! Now, I entreat
you, be thinking what ye will answer to these seven most material challenges,
which certainly shall be presented to you at death. I assure you, ye must either
answer all your challenges in Christ, else ye will not get them well answered:
Therefore, I would exhort you, to embrace the Gospel, and Christ in it; that so
let death propose never so many challenges unto you, ye may answer them all, as
David did, viz. God has made with me an everlasting covenant: And that will
answer all your challenges: Though my house be not so with God, yet I have the
everlasting covenant to ^il^ my salvation upon.

Now to press you to make use of Christ, I shall give you these four
considerations.

Consideration 1. If ye embrace not Christ now, death will be very unpleasant
to you. O what else can comfort thee, when going through the region of death,
but this, I am Christ's, I am Christ's? Is there any other thing can comfort^
thee in that day, but only this, I am Christ's and he is mine?

Consideration 2. If ye embrace not Christ and the great Salvation now, it will
be an hundred to one if ever ye get time or liberty to do it, when ye are going
to dye. For although many delay their closing with Christ till death, yet
scarcely one of a hundred gets favor to grip Christ at death* Therefore
think on it; for you will not get your mind so composed at death, as ye
imagine, nor all things done, as ye suppose: therefore now embrace the great
Salvation.

Consideration 3. If ye delay your closing with Christ till death seize upon
you, ye shall never be able to make up that loss. For will the dead rise and
praise God? Or shall any one come from the Land of forgetfulness, to take hold
upon a crucified Savior? Therefore, O will ye take him for your Salvation.

Consideration 4. If ye will take Christ now, he shall be your guide when ye are
going through the valley and shadow of death. And, O how blessed is the person
that can sing that word, Psalm 48.14. This is my God, he will be my guide even
unto death. If ye can sing that pleasant song, O how may ye be comforted when
your eye-strings shall begin to break! O how happy is he who can say, Though I
walk through the shadow of death, yet will I fear no ill; for I know that the
Lord is with me! Now this is the acceptable day, and the year of Salvation:
therefore, do not delay, but embrace Christ, lest death surprise you ere ye be
aware, and so the acceptable day be lost. But unto these who think they may
delay till death, I say, surely there are many damned Atheists in hell that
(sometimes) did think as ye think, I will make all wrongs right when death and
I shall meet: I hope that three days repentance will satisfy for all my wrongs;
for I am sure there are many in hell, who did never get three days to think
upon their former ways. Therefore, O come, come and embrace Christ presently.
Now are ye all persuaded of this truth, that ye shall once see death? Then study
a tender walking; for, believe me, there are many of us that shall go through
death with many bruised bones, because of untender walking before God: We know
it is not the multitude of words can persuade you to embrace Christ, for many
of you never minded the thing; but believe me, death will preach these things
unto you in a more terrible manner then we can do at this time. Therefore I say
to each of you, O prepare to meet thy God, for if death find you in an
estranged estate from God, I defy the Angels in Heaven to free you out of that
estate; and the day is coming, wherein thou shall cry out, O slighter of the
great Salvation that I am, I would give ten thousand worlds for one Sermon
again that I once he^ wherein Christ was freely offered to me, when the shall
be tormented without hope of remedy therefore while it is to day harden not
your heart^ for your late wishes shall not be granted when are gone, if ye make
not haste. O therefore has^ haste in time, and come out from the land of your
c^ptivity, and from the house of your bondage, a^ take Christ for your
Redeemer, the guide of yo^ youth and old age. Now unto him who can le^ you
through all these steps betwixt you and Heven, be eternal praise. Amen.

FINIS.

