Mr. HEWER's Reply TO THE Petition of the Tanger-Inhabitants.
Article I. THat in the Years 85 and 86 there were granted me (as Treasurer for
Tanger) two Privy Seals of 50000 l. each, for paying the Arrears due to the
Petitioners and Garrison there, at the time of its demolishing.

Answer. It Is acknowledged.

Art. II. That I have received upon these Privy Seals 90000 l.

Answ. The Total received thereon is 72200 l. and no more; there resting unpaid
of the same at this day 27800 l.

PROOF, A Constat from the Exchequer, under the Hand of Sir Robert Howard.

Art. III. That I did for a long time clandestinely keep from them, the
knowledge both of the said Seals and Money; making to my self in the mean time
considerable profit of the same.

Answ. The little Truth, or possibility of any, in this Suggestion, appears; 1.
From the diversity of the Public Offices (accessible to all Enquirers) through
which every Privy Seal, as well as Exchequer Payment, necessarily passes; to
the rendering the concealment of either wholly impracticable. PROOF, The known
Number (no less then 6) and Methods of those Offices.
2. From their having had in constant Pay, a Messenger and Solicitors of their
own appointment and Number, daily attending between the Treasury, the
Exchequer, Themselves, and Me; for the looking after and advertising them of
every day's proceeding, relating to this Affair. PROOF, Their own Hands.
3. From a Comparison easy to be made, of the Dates of my Receipts for Moneys
out of the Exchequer, and those of theirs upon their Payments from Me. Which
will be found seldom distant 3 days, never 7; but on the contrary, the
advancements of Money on my side for the most part to precede by much greater
distances, the actual Payments from the Exchequer to me. PROOF, Sir Robert
Howard's forementioned Certificate; their own Original Acquitances; and my
frequent Reports of both to the Lords of the Treasury.



Art. IV. That I have (besides my Salary from the King) taken from them upon
every Payment, 12 d. poundage and 4 s. per l. Composition-Mony, amounting
together to 25 per Cent. necessitating them to compound or sell me their
Arrears upon my own Terms.

Answ. 1. That 12 d. per l. was by Their own joint Order to Me in writing,
stopped out of every of their Payments; to be disposed of by a distribution of
their own, among several Persons by themselves named (of whom My Self but one)
in express Requital for a Service, nothing relating to my Treasurership, which
they then owned to have been done them in the collecting, examining, and
adjusting, the numerous, perplexed, and clamorous Reckonings and Scores
depending at Tanger, at the time of its demolition, between Them and the
Military Officers there. A Work of several Months continued Labor; and what
for the Moment of it, they owe the Recovery of their whole Estates there
entirely to. And for the acknowledgement thus made for it; as it was on My part
neither desired nor expected, but came long after the Service was done; so was
it done with so declared a Satisfaction on Theirs, as to have been afterward
by themselves not only frequently confirmed; but in a Representation of their
own, to the Lords of the Treasury, touching the Method of My then Payments to
them (even with this Defalcation) reckoned for no Abatement. PROOF, The
Originals of their said Order, Representation, and other Papers under their
Hands.
2. That as to the 4 s. per l. the pretended Composition-Money; I have it to
observe, that for so much of their Debt, as the Lords of the Treasury thought
fit to enable me to discharge with Money in specie, the same was strictly made
good to them as I received it, without the least Defalcation, other then that
before mentioned. But when, upon the Lords becoming less satisfied herein, from
some later Notices that touched the general Merit of the Petitioners Claims, and
their being thereby led to a Backwardness in further burthening the King with
the Charge of Extraordinary Interest for raising Money for them, the Petitioners
found themselves unable by any applications to obtain, for many Months
together, any further Supplies; notwithstanding a Proposition they had long
before made to their Lordships, of abating 6 per Cent. per Annum for two years,
toward the easing his Majesty in that Charge. They became restless Soliciters
to me, for the employing my Credit (with the aid of the Allowance they had so
unsuccessfully offered to the Lords) for procuring them the advance of their
Monys upon the Fonds I should next be supplied with toward it. Which from my
regard to the Condition of the Petitioners, and at the instance of the late
Noble Lord, my Honored Friend the Lord Dartmouth, their known Patron, I was
prevailed with to do; and did it with such effect, as by my own Credit alone,
and Friends, to have raised them every Penny they have since received; and with
it cleared the whole of what either of Right, or by Promise in his Majesty's
Name from that Noble Lord, they then had, or now have to pretend to, payable by
my hand, from the King. And this upon terms of Abatement so much beneath what
is here suggested of 4 s. per l. and yet more, that of 25 per Cent. as not to
have exceeded 2 s. per l. or 5 per Cent. Which is lower by 1 per Cent. than
what themselves (as before) had offered to the Lords for the same Service, with
no acceptance; and was not only received as an Office most grateful to them at
the time of its Transaction, but has ever since with like Thankfulness been on
all occasions acknowledged to me by them for such. PROOFS, Their Proposition to
the Lords, with other Evidences under their Hands, besides an Appeal to their
own Memories.



Which being the Case of these two Defalcations (both of them by their own
Desires, and both for their own Service only) I do, as Treasurer, utterly
Disclaim the having received from any of them the least Consideration in the
Execution of my Office, other than the bare Salary allowed me for it by the
King. But so much the contrary, as out of a singularity of Tenderness to the
Petitioners, to have wholly remitted to them a Claim to Poundage, which
Universal Practice through every Part of the Public Service, both by Land and
Sea, makes a Right of the Treasurers, upon all Stopages for Debts made by
Consent for the Use of private Creditors.

And so much I value my self upon the Sincerity of my Proceedings past, and the
Truth of all my present Allegations herein, as to be ready to repay Ten-Fold,
for every Penny I shall upon Proof be found to have directly or indirectly, by
my self or others, taken or received, from any one of the Petitioners, upon any
Account whatever, beyond what I here declare.

Art. V. That through my unjust Dealings, many of these Inhabitants have
perished, and some of them in Goal.

Answ. How far this may in Fact be true, I know not. But this I know; that as
this is the first time of my ever meeting with it; so is it not (be it true) to
be charged upon the want of any thing within my Cognizance due to them from the
King, or within my own power to have been otherwise helpful to them in. Witness
the Many of them, whom I have succored, both by my private Charity and other
good Offices; And Some, who at this very day owe their Freedom to my only
Forbearance of them, for Moneys due and unsatisfied, which in their Distresses
I have supplied them with, upon None or at most upon Common Interest.

PROOF, Their own Memories, or (that failing) other Evidences ready to be shown
them under their Hands.

Art. VI. That I have 20000 l. upon these Privy Seals at this Day Resting in my
Hands.

Answ. So far is it from my being Debtor, either in this or any other Sum upon
these Seals; that every Penny of Money I have paid to the People of this Place
since Midsummer 1688. (which is now little short of 7 Years) has been out of my
own Purse, to near 3000 l. more than ever I received thereon. And this, without
a Farthing of it Reimbursed, or any Fond yet supplied me for securing its
Reimbursement, to this Day.

PROOF, My several Reports of the State of my Receipts and Payments to the
Lords of the Treasury; with the general and particular State thereof
accompanying this.

Art. VII. They therefore Pray, That I may be obliged to Account for the said
Moneys.

Answ. An Account goes herewith of every Sum, great and small, by me Received
and Paid upon each of these Privy Seals; showing the Value of each Sum, the
distinct Day of each Receipt and Payment, the particular Hand from or to which
the same has been so Received or Paid, and on what Account.

PROOF, The Exchequer- Constat for my Receipts, and Original Acquitances for my
Payments.

Art. VIII. And that I may Pay them their just Due.

Answ. The Gross of their Debt from his Majesty, payable by Me, was cleared
within the Year 1687, and the small Remainders thereof, since. So as to have
left no one Penny of this their Tanger-Debt (to which alone his Majesty stood
Entitled by any Promise of the Lord Dartmouth's) unsatisfied to any one
Inhabitant of them (within my Notice) for full 6 Years past.

PROOF, The forementioned Accounts and Reports, with their own Original
Acquitances.

Which having said, and therein valued my self upon no Private Assertions of my
own, or even my Oath (which yet, if required, I am ready to give) for the Truth
of any Particular; but upon Evidences, either wholly incontestable, or such as
the Petitioners themselves are most concerned to support the Credit of; I take
Liberty only of subjoyning this one Appeal for the Whole, to the Right
Honorable the Lords of the Treasury, before whom this Matter has wholly lain.
Whether within the Ten entire Years of its Negotiation, any one Word of
Complaint, or Exception thereto, has ever come before their Lordships; from
whose Hands, and under the Protection of the Noble Lord before Named then
Living, they could not have wanted a quick Relief; without needing to have
Exposed, either Themselves to the Consequences of so many Years Want of it, if
Due: Or Me (if otherwise) to the Disappointments, which such an Interval might
have brought upon any Accomptant, less Fortunate in the Order and Preservation
of his Papers, than on this Occasion it has been my good Hap to be.

And from whence it comes at this Distance to be now first raised by them, will
receive a satisfactory Opening, so soon as by this my Answer and its Proofs, I
shall have acquitted my Self as I ought, to the Contents of their Petition.


