THE CONDUCT and CONVEYANCE OF OUR Fathers and Martyrs Testimony. In The CHURCH
OF SCOTLAND. Justified and Continued.

The Parallel Testimony in 38 and 49 Reciprocal, with the present Testimony
against Popery, Prelacy, Liberty of Conscience, Stated and Delineated, from the
Bible, Reason, and Testimony of History.

Job 17.9. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands
shall wax stronger and stronger.

Cypr. Ep. ad Carth. Fratribus in plebe consistentibus Examinabuntur singula
presentibus and vobis judicantibus.

By W. H. Minister of the Gospel, and prisoner at Edinburgh, January 9th; 1690.

Printed in the Year 1690.

THE clamant case of Confession in keeping the word of Gods patience in order
to transmitting of a testimony, among the Primitive Christians, was
Magnanimously maintained against Paganism by Culdees, by the Tabrits of
Bohemia, by the Lollards of England (so named) the Protestants Evidenc^ clearly
delineat, notwithstanding all the World did dip their pens in poison, and
sharpened their tongues in Gall: Calumni^ audacter, and semper aliquod
haerebit; glour with their eyes, and gore with their tongues, hate nickname
rail, which word of GODS Patience, gifts, yea graces, without supply of grace,
even the power of GOD: Adam in in the estate of innocence when he had wisdom at
his will, and reason at command^ could not maintain, (yet Scotland once styled
the life guard of Heaven, whose strength did ly in their tongues before the
Crown rights of Heaven, were betrayed into the hands of Tyranny, and lawless
Liberty, even the Declarative and Mediatory glory of Christ) was not only among
the first of the Conquest o^ Christ's Kingdom, but even, also then when 32 parts
of the world, 27 were Pagan, 5 degenerate to worship wood and stone, one
embraced che Oligarchical Tyranny of Prelacy; the remnant of Bohemia and
Scotland, and Joshua Gianevel in Piedmont, and many others, witness Birkbers
Protestant Evidence, (tho GOD did scum the remnant) concerted and marvously
grapled for the pure and powerful testimony of our Lord, for the Kirk and
Kernel thereof. Hence some neatly, tho critically, yet heartily allude to
Scotizei: In the Revelation, that is, shall darken the seat of the beast, viz.
Scotsmen; it being a Covenanted Nation to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 15. and Jer. 50.6,
7. tells us the fruits thereof, what ever the irregularities of an Oath may
be, yet are not the circumstances conversant about the Act of swearing, but the
intrinsecal matter of the Oath which do annihilat the obligation thereof:
witness the Confession of the learned Dr. Sanderson, tho an enemy, who ever
read with Granosalis, plainly perceive the vainity of this Distinction, the
Relaxation of the matter, and strength of an Oath; he terms it, materiam and
vim juramenti: Yet Arnisaeus Doct: Pol: Leydeker, etc. And all agree, my will,
contract, according to what my knowledge reaches, and in so far am I bound to
espouse mutually persons, lives, goods of the Covenanted party, much more when
there is a positive law of GOD, against Idolatry, Prelacy, liberty of
Conscience, which we have illustrate in the Dimentions of the Primitive
Bishops, commenserat according to their pastoral relation: Ignatius stiling
them, Fraternity, Consociations, and Presbytery, Printed at London in the 84
from the Historical Relations of Holingshead, Pamelius, Albaspineus, Sylvanneus
History; Tho much more may be read in the books of Gods Judgments on perjured
persons. In that Roll of Ezekiel called Opisto grapha 9. chapter having the
foreside, all our sins the backside, all our Judgments. And in the 17 of
Ezekiel, As I live says the Lord, its my oath, ye have broken my Covenant, ye
have despised. Zedekiah, Whom God roasted in the fire, for breach of Covenant,
shifted the Watchmen; because Jeremiah preached one thing, Ezekiel the clean
contrary; Jeremiah told him he should be carried down to Babylon, Ezekiel, he
should never see Babylon: Yet God reconciled them both to his ruin, his eyes
were picked out of his head, he never saw Babylon; The same end fell to Almerick
King of Jerusalem, Vladistaus breach of Covenant with the Turks, Harold the
last King of the Danes that ever reigned in England, for his breach of
Covenant, with William Duke of Normandy. Thus have we Absolutely consisidered;
now Relatively the case, Paul to the Romans 13.11. Tells us, Its high time to
awake for our Salvation, is nearer then when we believed; As knowing the time
to awake from sleep, tho signs Diagnostick of former, and Prognostic of
future times, easily ventilat, all Objections in a transient view of the same.

Moral Signs, are palpable in a long delay of common equity betwixt man and man.

Evangelical, a spirit of Gospel love, and frame suitable to a Deliverance,
where that Porter of prejudice that stands sentinal at the hearts of men,
against truth is removed, 1 John 3.14.

Forenscical, or the Court of Justice, Isaiah 16. v. 12.13.

Political signs hitherto these 28 years appeared, when pynts of Protestants
and Saints blood have been shed; for which we may rationally fear, Tunns of
others, the Effusion of blood the Lord prevent: Yet shall we trust to Micah
5.5. Ecclesiastical signs are plain, the Church waxing, not weaning, fair as
the Moon, clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army with Banners; Ministers having
fire in their Tongues to kindle Zeal in Peoples breasts, the Kirk the Kernel.
Military signs are a praying Army, when Moses hands knocked off from Prayer,
Amaleck prevailed; certainly when Aemilius a Pagan would not give over
sacrificeing till a sign of Victory, much more we, Martyrological 1851 Martyrs,
have sealed this with their Blood. Caelestial by Perpendicular and presaging
Comets, portending ing chiefly the computation of seven Seals, seven Trumpets,
seven Vials, pouring out on Babylon: Yet may all dread the cup of God's wrath
go round, and drops falling upon us the Lord avert a besom of destruction. Nor
do we want Accademical signs, few Metaphisical heads, much more Theological
hearts; Arminianisime planted many years ago, not yet eradicated; hence is
Scotland's glory stained by illiterate and raw profane, and polluted
Nurseries. Neither do we trust to Immediate Mission, or Revelation yet
Prognostic Symptoms, are patent penitential. 3 Jonah 8 Man and Beast cried to
the Lord, the Heathen deputed a day for mourning, to eat the bread of mourners,
and drink a cup of their own tears.

Testimonial where the Testimony is not flung at our heels, but Valiantly
propugned. Critical a glorious Manifestation of the Mediatory Kingdom of Christ
before the day of Doomsday, whether it shall be by a formal sworn Covenant, or
more Glorious Discovery, I shall not determine. Zech. 14. No Cannanite in the
House of the Lord, that is, none mak'n slaves of the souls of men,
Architectural, that is not only a regular Disposition of the Members of a Work,
but a Symmetrical proportion to that glorious work of Reformation in our
Fathers days; Homogenical and Organical, The right our Fathers had to hold a
Christian Society among themselves, by public Societies, and the exercise of
their Ministry the property peculiarly of believers; since Faith, Piety and
Charity binds us to an external Society, without which they cannot be called
sheep, not in respect of their ordinary Pastors, but in respect of their Faith
in Jesus Christ. To note, that it is Faith and not the Ministry, which makes
the Society, and by consequence renders their Assemblies Lawful and Necessary:
Yet (mind I am a perfect Enemy to the 32 Sects of England, and abhore the right
of gifted Brethrening) my Testificates, plainly make appear to the Provost and
Solicitor of Edinburgh, who read them, but especially my writting against them
at London, whereby for truth, I became the object of their Malice. Tho the
External Society, be common to good and bad, Wheat and Tares, mingled
externally in the Body of the Church, yet the right of External Society resides
in the Faithful only. His Mystical Body for which he dyed, the Seed which he
Sowed with his own hand, against the Harvest, Isa. 7. Who has required this of
thy hand, to tread in my Courts! And Ps. 51. What have thou adoc to read my
Covenant, and Laws. The Tares have communion, only by accident, till the
Harvest. Austin. Lib. 7. C. 5. Teaches plainly that the Power of the Keys
Binding and Loosing, is given to the Church of the truly Faithful, in
Opposition to the men of the World, that are mixed with them. They then having a
right to be in a Religious Society, over whom Christ is Supreme Lawgiver, Isa
35. Their Law binds the Elicite Acts of the Conscience, of all indefinitely:
Hence Sun, Moon, Stars, are said to bow to Joseph, that is to the Church. (yet
we safely maintain a Co-ordination of Powers and Sub-Ordination of Persons. Its
the Elegant saying of the Honorable Lord Brook of England, if the Church
swallow up the State inflowes Superstition and Idolatry: If the State swallow
up the Church, inflows Atheism and Ignorance. Hence Paul draws the inference of
the Authority, which the Lord has given to us, not for your destruction, but
for your edification; which right the Church, has at the bottom, her formation
and subsistence, as secretly in a good and sovereign hand preserved: In
Parenthsi know this is no negative, much more a positive separation, as the
noble Orthodox party against the Arians meeting, as they could sometimes in
their fields. But rather a standing still. Jer. 15.19, 21. Till men return to
their old principles. 38 and 49. Amongst all our signs none more penetrating
and pierceing, then Desertion, Penal, Medicinal or Probatory. The first, when
God judicially delivers up a man to hardness of heart as Pharaoh. The 2 and 3,
a blessing for the future, but a judgment for the time; and some may say oh,
that they could water the steps of their backsliding with tears; the fear of
man brings a snare, he that trusts in the Lord shall be delivered, the sun of
righteousness running under a cloud that they cannot read their evidences for
Heaven, has been burdensome to some, tho I knew others and the same persons in
the like case, might attain to have their thoughts break the Clouds, there soul
a chronicle of the love of Christ, a psalm book of his praise. Yet lustful
Gallants may carouse at leisure, their powder hair may forget the dust, were
their skin as thick as the Whales, the Bullet of Death will pierce them. Of
such was one Parker of England, who mocked at aquaintance with God, and obtained
his short Heaven and long Hell, a sun of wealth and prosperity, before a
thunder bolt of Vengeance: Nor are they better, who wash Sarans face with a
color of Religion.

Naked truth, that needs not the purple partociny (even though of Constantine
extorts me to speak? that thereby I may be seen, about those dozen of years
wandering, which God booketh down, and will the Innocents, and Sufferers tears
bottle up. It pleased the Lord after my license and formal trial at London, to
order my lot in the company of Holy and faithful Mr. Welsh in the west of
Scotland, by whom I was invited to preach; Mr. John Cuninghame, and Mr. John
Black, and M. W L. being present: Then the Church of God in Scotland like a
Ship among the Jaws and Waves of Tribulation: sore tossed, many of her Passengers
drowning, and her Skippers and Watch men, rowing ashore to save to save their
life. I kept the fields and other places for some time after: Bothwel in the 81
then being induced and invited by others, inclined to that my self, I went for
Holland to print, the Testimony of the Church of Scotland, against Popery and
Prelacy; the Conveyance thereof in all the Centuries, and in each period of
time. At Leith being perceived, and my Brother in Law taken, the Coppies
cancelled, and I escaped and went for London: Where falling happily acquainted
with a vertuos person, the Earl of Anglesey I wrote a Reply in 4 to. to the
Cassandrian Doctrine emitted from one of the Frogs of Antichrist: The book it
self bears the Tittle, Scotland pulling down the gates of Rome, Christ against
Antichrist, the Lambs friends against the Dragons followers, with some remarks
historically upon the Comet Star, and examination of the Popish Confessions,
and description of the Romish Morals: ^o which my Name is affixed. Which was
prin^ed about that fatal conjuncture of time, the death of the famous Lord
Russel: from thence returning to Scotland. I privately resided at Whiteborn,
till one Armillan younger, who received the Sacrament, as Presbiterian, as
Test-man, as Papist all in 11 years time. Cowardly and Craftily, apprehended
and abused me cruelly; 4 years before having plundered and pillaged the whole
Country, and my Chamber and Books amongst the rest; for which he and others,
God in providence shall fetch to a Court of blood shed and oppression; he not
being satisfied with perjury and forgery of my hand writting; which he pretend
he had, but debauched men's and women's consciences to 400 Oaths, he and others,
in a day; till at last he landed in Adultery, with his servant, and Murder of
the same child, the woman being presently executed at Air for the same; did
depone (he escaping by the policy and power, of Craigy Wallace.) I being
carried prisoner to Glasgow, Falkirk, and other places, in a pitiful manner. I
was staged before the Counsel for Lybels and Books, and preaching in the
Fields, at the resentment of which, I cannot cover the sentiment of my
thoughts, but with grief, that the fear of Man, did so prevail to hinder more
full and faithful Testimony: Yet w^ I kept free that my heart, and the
Tem^tation never meet with Oaths, Bonds, (...) This being over, I returned to
the West, an^ publicly preached; and then went for London where that Book was
printed Gods Garden hedged and watered. In reference to an Essay o^ Antidote
against distractions, in Gods worship; coming too speedily from London hom^
again, and embraceing an Invitation did preach, upon the 33 of Isa. The Lord is
our King, the Lord is our Lawgiver. where I asserted the headship of Jesus
Christ.

Then again was I apprehended, at the order of Buchan, and some others, and
guarded 10 weeks, and 4 days, in the Dungeon of Air; where the Arm of the Lord
rescued me, and two other old men, from my Enemies; who had blood in their
Teeth, and abominations in their mouth, 9 Zec. I brake out, the Sentinalls
sleeping. Now this is the third time of my imprisonment as was reported by the
(Right Honorable Earl Crawford's order) the provost of Edinburgh, and the
Solicitor, coming into the Prison, did question me upon several heads, and
afterward did take away my testimonials to peruse, and did return the same by
a Macer, not only my License and Ordination but Testificates of my former
Deport^nt; the Testimony privately and pub^kly I maintain, I openly yet
Reverendly ^ed out; I was against Popery, Prelacy, Li^y of Conscience, and that
through Grace, I ^olved to dye by the Acts of the Assembly and 49. as consonant
to the Analogy of ^th and holy Bible. I cannot omit what (...) betwixt Me and
the Reverend Mr. J. W. (...) at Glasgow, then at Ecclesom, who at the ^inning
of the Popish Toleration, was swal^wed up, by this Jonahs Whale: Boggle not,
^es he, since ye ventered your neck with Mr. J. R. ^erly, I plainly prohibit
him to own it or (...) Address, as Diametrically against our ^sciples, when
Julian summoned hell to (...) him, the Devil gave him the engine of ^ration.

There remains one Objection unremov^tho a thread bare Argument: thus it is,
as (...) had conversed with one Dunbar, one of the ^ans in order to my
deliverance, a horrid (...) wicked lie, even such as they branded (...)
Worthies formerly: For I take GOD (...) witness, I never spoke with one of
them, (...) I knew him either name or surname, (...) or figure, save him who
was my Anta^ist, against whom I wrote, the examina^ of the Popish Catechism,
neither did debate (...) him, or converse an hour in all, and that in a public
Coffee-house; so let the (...) of hell smoke out of their mouths and ha^lies,
the Devils babes, hot coals of Juni^ are prepared for false Tongues; sin is
(...) Souls sickness, Confession the souls vo^ which the 8 Levites, in the 9.
of Nehemiah, (...) Precept, by Pattern, acknowledge be^ they lay one Stone in
Gods house, the (...) of Defection, having blown out the eye (...) the World:
Darkness says Jeremiah, (...) the Earth, gross darkness the People. After s^
days deliberation, scrutiny and due exaa^nation of my Principles, Papers,
Persist^ and Adherence to the Acts of Assem^ The Right Honorable the Earl of
C^ford, personally with a Macer, came to (...) Prison door and ordered my
Liberat^ having every day entered the List, (...) Episcopal Clergy and Gentry,
and Tolera^ Truth, with its Energie did sufficiently ^dicate me. Hence
Ministers are to cont^ for the Faith, once delivered to the Saints, (...) by
suffering, were it to seal with their Bl^ what they speak with their mouth in
(...) Chair of Truth, for the same indivi^ Truths, the former Lords Days at K^
Kirk, and Drumshorlin moor, preceding (...) Imprisonment; I plainly Preached,
w^fully and freely, I did aver before My (...) Provost. From Jer. 50 Come join
your selves the Lord in a perpetual Covenant: I could not pass from the
Reformation, and Protestation relating thereto, for the Lawdable Laws of my
Masters house, tho I should have gone the gate of Mr. Rennick: These were the
individual words to My Lord Provost and Solicitor; For Illustration and
Confirmation whereof, take a Transient view of the Assemblies Acts.

Acts of the General Assembly Sess. 23. Dec. 17.
Anent the Entry and Conversation of Ministers, its expedient that the Acts of
Assembly holden at Edinburgh, March 4. 1595. Be ratified and put in Execution
in every Presbytery; And to that end, get a Coppie under the Clerks hand,
whereof the Tenure follows Sess. 7. March 26. of the Assembly at Edinburgh,
1596. Concerning the Defections of the Ministry, the same being at length
read out and considered, in order to see the Kirk and Ministry purged, to the
effect, the Work may have better success; they think it necessary that this
Assembly be humbled for want of such care, as became in such points, and that
some Zealous and Godly Brethren in Doctrine, lay them out for their
Humiliation; and they make Solemn promise before the Majesty of GOD, to make
new Covenant with him, for a more careful and Reverend discharge of their
Ministry And that speedily the Corruptions and Enormities of the Ministry
be Remedied, to Avert the impendant Judgments in order thereto. Sess. 8. August
17. Containing the Causes and Remedy of the bygone Evil of the Kirk. The Kings
Will and Pleasure is, That all Questions about Religion and matters
Ecclesiastical, be determined by the Assembly of this Kirk: And Moreover, that
no Persons blaked with Public Defection, have power to Vote in the Lords
House, till they condemn Doctrinally these Defections, etc. Hence are condemned
the sordid and sullen Apprehensions of many, whereby their vile Aspersions are
wept off; etc. As suffering honest men, intended the unchurching of the
Ministry, and easting off of the same, when nothing is designed nor desired,
save reducing of the Church to the Rules of her Husbands house. Hosea 2. v. 1.3.

The Church of Scotland was unite 45 years, by by means of Discipline.

FINIS.

