THE CASE OF James Haviland, Of the Isle of Purbeck, in the County of Dorsert,
presented to the view of every Impartial Reader; But more particularly to the
Inhabitants of the Isle and County aforesaid.
GEORGE KING, Rector of Langton-Matravers; and James Parkins, Rector of
Corf-Castle in the Isle and County aforesaid, who call themselves Ministers of
the Peaceable Gospel of Jesus Christ; have contrary to the terms of that Gospel
and contrary to the Practice of all the Apostolic Ministers recorded in the
New Testament, proceeded against the said James Haviland, for the Claims which
they severally had upon him for Tithes.

That their Practice is contrary to the terms of the Gospel, will best appear
by setting down the Terms of it as they are recorded by the Evangelist, Luke
2.14. Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will to Men. These
two Rectors pretend to be Ministers of this Gospel, and do yet compel
Maintenance, and from such who Contientiously refuse to pay them, they have in
a cruel manner endeavored their Ruin, as in the present Instance of James
Haviland, whose Houshold-Goods, Linen and Wearing Apparel they have seized to
many times the value of the Tithe which they demanded; yet not content with
that; they did seize and carry away two Bibles, which though they call it the
Only Rule of Faith and Manners, they did deprive the Man of that, and expose
the Rule it self to be Sold to Feed their Bellies.

But this their Doings as they are not agreeable to the Nature of the Gospel,
so neither are they agreeable to the (...) of the Apostles and Primitive
Christians, who did Preach Freely the Gospel of Jesus Christ, according to our
Savior's command to his Disciples, Matthew. 10.8. Freely ye have received,
freely give. And the Apostle testified he did keep himself from being
burdensome, by Labor, working with his Hands, 2 Cor. 11.9. 1 Cor. 4.12. Though
its not to be expected that these Rectors will be inclined to follow the
Apostles Example, because they cannot in truth say they became Ministers in the
same manner which he did, when he says, I was made a Minister according to the
Gift of the Grace of God, given unto me by the effectual working of his Power,
Ephesians. 3.7. Though after th^^ manner it is that the Ministers of Christ now do,
and ever did receive their Ministry.

Surely it behooves the People to consider how disagreeable these two Rectors
are in their Ministry and Practice to the true Ministers of Christ, who never
did as these do, Violently take away the Goods of those they do not Preach to.
In this their Practice they are condemned even by Austin the Monk, and those
that came with him, according to the Testimony of Bid, the Church Historian,
who says, lib. 1. cap. 25. At ubi sibi datam, etc. They entered, where Mansions
were given them, and began to imitate the Apostolic Life of the Primitive
Church, in continual Prayers, Watchings, and Fastings, Preaching the Word of
Life to whom they could, rejecting, as Strangers, the things of this World,
receiving from THOSE whom they taught, those things ONLY which were Necessary
to sustain them; and in all things lived according to the Doctrine they taught,
ready to Suffer, or also to Dye, in testimony to the Truth which they Preached.

This was about the Year 600, and though there were many great Corruptions entered
the Church at that time, yet in this particular of the Maintenance of
Ministers, she wa^ so happy as Bed^ says, as to imitate the Apostolic Life of
the Primitive Church.

It is not to be doubted, but that the Primitive Christians in the Apostolic
Times, did when there was occasion, very willingly administer to the necessity
of the Ministry: And it cannot fail that any Man who is called to be a Minister
of Jesus Christ, as Paul was, but those to whom he preaches, will cheerfully
supply his Wants. But not to urge th^^ single Instance only from Bid, it may
be shown they were so far from making any pa^ to their Priests who did not hear
them, that they would not receive Alms from any wh^ were not in their
Communion: The Instance is this, there was a Synod celebrated in Ireland about
the Years 450, or 456, by Patritius, Isservin, Auxilius, and others, (...) the
Canons of which Synod, as given by Henry Spellman, the 12. and 13. are, 12.
Quicunque Christianus excommunicatus fu^rit nec ejus cleemesyna recipiatur. 13.
Eleemosynam a Gentibus offerendam in Ecclesiam recipi non licet.


Spellman. Concilia, etc. Orbis Britannici Tom. primus. p. 52.

But since there is at this Day such very great alteration, That These Rectors
who pretend to be Christ's Ministers, do like those the Prophet mentions, (...)
3.5. He that puts not into their Mouths, they even pr^pare War against him.

They might ^et, one would have thought, (...) within some Bounds of M^desty:
For if their design had only and (...) gotten from James Haviland, what was
their pretended d^e for Preaching, the (...) has made provision, that it may
be very speedily, and with much less charge obtained. But throwing aside all
Modesty, and common Humanity, these (...), have neglected that way of
procedure, that they might of set purpose and design, ruin the Man and his
Family; of which intent they have given full proof, as may be seen by the
underwritten Inventory of Goods which they seized, carried away, and sold,
amounting by estimation to 50 l. Which is a Sum many-fold the value of the
Tithe demanded.

James Haviland of Corf-Castle, in the Isle of Purbeck, and County of ^orset,
was prosecuted upon the Statute of Treble Damages, by George King, Rector of
the Parish of Langton-Matravers; and also by James Parkins, Rector of Cors
Castle aforesaid, in a Suit of Tithes, and the Jury finding for each of them to
the value of Forty Shillings, for which Judgment and Execution is awarded each
of them Seventeen Pounds. And on the third, fourth and fifth Days of the second
Month, 1700. Walter Frampt^n, John Riges, Gervis Cross, and Priest Parkins's
Servant Lawrence Simonds, took and carried away from him the said James
Haviland, the particular Goods following, by estimation amounting to the value
aforesaid.

First, Two BIBLES. Twenty one Yards and half of Blue Linne, or Dowless.
Thirteen Yards of Broad Dowless. Thirty One Yards of Narrow Dowless. Two
Feather-Beds. Four Feather-Bolsters, one Flock Bolster, and one Dust-Bolster.
Four Feather-Pillows. Two Ruggs. Six Sheets. Nine Bed-Blankets. Three
Bed-Coverlets. Three Canvas Bolster-Clothes. Two Table-Cloths. (...) ^oats; two
great or top Coats; and two House body Coats; four pair of Breeches. One Brass
Warming-pan. Two Pewter Platters. One pair of Boots. Two great Brass Kettles,
and one small Brass Kettle. One Bell-Mettle Pot. One Brass Pot. One great new
Towel. One great new Trendle. Two new Half Hogsheads. Eight Joint-Stools. Six
Leather-Chairs. One large Table-Board with its Frame. One Oak Table-Board of
eight Foot long without a Frame: One other long Table-Board with its Frame: And
one Round Table-Board with its Frame. One Poudering-Tub. Five Deal-Boards. One
pair of Tongs, and one Fire-pan. Four Beer-Vessels. One Steel-Quern, or
Hand-Mill, for to grind Malt. Two Winnowing-Sheets. Four Sacks, and two
Two-Bushel Bags. Three Pecks and half of Wheat. One Peck and half of Beans.
Four Sives to winnow Corn withal. Two Rush-bottom Chairs. One Ax. Thirteen
pound of Bacon. One (...) (...) ^upboard. One Coffer. One Pillion, and one
Panel, with Footstool and Girts. One Brewing-Fat, or Vate. One new Strap-Rope.
One Box. One great new Oak Press or Wardrobe to lay and hang Clothes in. One
standing Bedstead with the Cord and Mat. One Half-head Bedstead, with the Cord
and Mat. About Four Load of Cleft Wood, and other great Wood. One Pocket-Knife
which cost 2 s. 6 d. One Pocket-Handkerchief; and one Holland Cap that was in
some or one of the Pockets of the Clothes.
LONDON, Printed by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street; and
at the Sign of the Bible in Leadenhall-street, by Leadenhall-Market, 1700.


