AN ACCOUNT Of Mr. EDWARD SCLATER's RETURN to the Communion of the Church of
ENGLAND: And of the RECANTATION he made at the Church of St. Mary Savoy, the
Fifth of May, 1689. Dr. BURNET, Bishop of Sarum, Preaching the Sermon there
that Forenoon.
By ANTHONY HORNECK D. D.
THose, who have Power and Authority to command me, thinking it requisite, that
Mr. Sclater's Return and Reconciliation to the Church of England should be made
public, in Obedience to their Order, I shall impartially set down the
Beginning, Progress, and the Public Declaration he made of his Outward
Repentance; I say, Outward for the Church judges not of things Occult and
Inward, and by that means, give the Reader an Opportunity to exercise his
Charity. It was about the beginning of April last, that Mr. Sclater sent a
Friend of his to me, to desire me to admit him to the Communion at the Savoy,
and the Motive alleged, was, That he had not only given my Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury Satisfaction in the Sincerity of his Repentance, but was ready to
make a free and formal Retractation of his former Errors, before me, and to
assure me, that nothing but Conviction, and Evidence, and a clearer sight of
the Truth, had wrought this Conversion in him; and the Reason, he said, why he
chose to Receive the Eucharist at the Savoy, was, because he intended to live
thereabout, in a House of his own, and there to betake himself to such an
Employment as he should be capable of.

The News of his Repentance, though the juncture of Time was Temptation enough
to suggest some Idea's, which might incline me to a Smile, yet I entertained,
with all the Gravity and Seriousness as became a Divine, and a Christian, that
ought to be pleased with the coming back of a straying Sheep, and much more of
a Shepherd who had lost his way.

But the Admission of such a Person, though neverso penitent, appearing to me a
matter of more than ordinary Consequence, I soon resolved, not to determine
anything, till I had consulted with my Diocesan, the Lord Bishop of London. I
was willing enough in the mean while to hear the Reasons and Motives of this
intended Change, which, upon Enquiry, I found to be these, That he had been
mistaken, deceived and deluded, with plausible Arguments, and specious
Pretenses, and hopes of finding greater Truth and Piety, and Severity of Life,
in the Romish Church, than in our Communion; which mistaks he was now so
sensible of, that he was ready to retract any thing he had said or writ against
the Doctrine of the Church of England. And when hereupon I acquainted my Lord
Bishop of London with these his Confessions and Protestations, his Lordship was
pleased to refer the whole matters to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, under whose Jurisdiction he had lived a great part of his time, and
to whose Cognizance and Determination the Difficulties, attending his
Readmission into the Church, did more immediately belong. After this, his
Grace, being importuned, and earnestly entreated, to declare his final
Resolution, and to order the way and manner of a public Acknowledgment of his
Faults, his Lordship was pleased to desire Mr. Gee to gather out of Mr.
Sclatter's Book the most Offensive Passages, with an Intent, to have them
inserted in his Recantation; and Mr. Needham, his Grace's Chaplain, at the same
time, was ordered to take notice of such Consessions, and Penitential
Acknowledgements, as Mr. Sclater had made in his Letters and Addresses to his
Lordship, in order to make his Retractation full and comprehensive, and
Satisfactory to the Auditors and Spectators, before whom it was to be read and
pronounced; and in the framing of this form of Revoking his Erroneous
Doctrines, I was commanded to assist, which I was very ready to do, It being
very agreeable to my Inclination to promote, and wish well to all Acts of
Christian Charity.

This being done, and dispatched on Saturday the Fourth of May, and Mr. Sclater
giving his Consent to the Retractation we had drawn up, and his Grace approved
of; Mr. Sclater accordingly appeared next day at the Savoy, and after the
Morning Service was ended, just before the Psalm was sung, in a very full
Auditory, and in the presence of a very great Throng of people, and in the
Hearing of my Lord Bishop of Salisbury, who did me the Favor to Preach that
Morning, with a Loud and Audible Voice, and with Tears flowing from his Eyes,
Read, Pronounced, and Repeated, the Recantation which you have at the end of
this Relation.

An Acknowledgment of this Nature, I thought, could not but be surprising to a
Congregation, who had no Notice of it aforehand; and therefore to prepare them
for the Retractation, I spoke to them in the words following:

Beloved Hearers; By Order and Direction of my Superiors, I am to acquaint you,
That there is a Person in this Congregation, who having some time since
deserted the Communion of the Church of England, and gone over to that of Rome,
and now detesting what he has done, sensible of the Errors of his Ways, does
earnestly desire to be readmitted into the Bosom of that Church, which he has
forsaken.

The Person, thus penitent and sensible, is Mr. Edward Sclater, late Vicat and
Minister of Putney; Touched with a sense of the Offense, and Scandal, he has
given to the Church, both to the Clergy and Laity, and all the Members of the
Church of England, he chooses to appear this day before this Congregation,
publicly to profess his unfeigned sorrow for that great Offense, to make some
Reparation for the Scandal.

It was about Christmas last, when he made his first Application to the Lord
Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and adress'd to him several Letters, Declaring his
abhorence of the Popish Doctrines in general, and those particularly which he
had offered to defend in a Book published to that purpose, together with the
Motives that oblidged him to think of forsaking that Erroneous and Idolatrous
Church, into which, through mistake of their pretended Piety, and Ignorance of
the Danger of their Doctrines, he had been drawn and enticed.

His Grace, after due Consideration of his Protestations, and Promises, was at
last content he should be admitted to Lay-Communion, injoyning withal, since he
had reproached, calumniated, abused* offended and scandalized the Church of
England, to make a public Recantation of his former Erroneous Tenets and
Opinions, which Penance, (if a Duty may be called so,) he is ready to perform
this day before you all. It Is very probable there may be found abundance of
persons, who will be loath to extend their Charity to a Belief of the Reality
and Sincerity of his Return; but to such I must crave leave to say, that as it
is not for us to usurp the Authority of God, who alone is the Searcher of all
Hearts, so till we see manifest Proofs to the contrary, our Religion binds us
to believe the best, and to forgive, and receive him as a Brother: Brethren, If
a Man be overtaken in a Fault, ye which are Spiritual, restore such a one in
the Spirit of Meekness, considering thy self, least thou also be tempted; Gal.
6 1. This was the Rule the Apostle gave to Churches of Galatia, and it would
look very strange in us, if we should not follow that direction, especially,
when our great Master has charged us, Take heed to your selves, it thy Brother
trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him, and if he
trespass against thee 7 times in a day, and 7 times in a day, turn again to
thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. Luke 17. 3.

Were it so, that the Ancient Discipline, especially that of the African
Church, had been kept up, the Penitent, who appears before you, have submitted
to a far more more rigorous Task, even the Religious Hardships of some years,
before he could have been admitted to the Holy Eucharist, but the reviving of
these Ancient Severities, being rather an Object of our pious Wishes, than a
thing practicable in this Iron Age; a public Retractation, Confession,
Acknowledgment, Declaration and Protestation, before an All-seing Eye, and in
the Face of a whole Congregation, is as much as can be rationally desired.

And now Mr. Sclater, having thus told your Case to the Congregation, I do
entreat, desire, and admonish you, to confirm what I have said, by your own
free, deliberat, and considerate Profession before many witnesses.

Mr. Sclater, the degrees of your Sin, ought to be answered by the degrees of
your Sorrow, and Contrition; your Apostasy has been public, and your
Repentance ought to be so too. And may the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who sent his Son into the World to save Sinners, and to call them to
Repentance, give you a Repentance, never to be repented of, that your future
Conversation, and blameless Life, may do as much good in the World, as your
former example has done harm.

After this Preliminary Discourse, Mr. Sclater read, in the hearing of the
whole Assembly, this following Retractation.
I Edward Sclater, late Curate of Putney, being unfeignedly sorrowful for the
Sin I have committed, and the Scandal I have given, by my late shameful
forsaking of the Communion of the Church of England, and joining myself to that
of Rome; and having made my most earnest, and repealed, suplications to the
most Reverend Father in God the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury for his
Permission, to make the best reparation I am able, for the great injuries done
to the Church by that my Scandalous Defection, in hopes of being again admitted
to Communion in her Holy Offices, Do here, in the presence of the All-seeing
God, and under most serious Apprehensions of Judgment to come, heartily and
freely, make the following Acknowledgement.

First, As to the Romish Doctrines, concerning the Infallibility and Supremacy
of the Pope, or Church of Rome, and that Salvation cannot be had out of that
Communion: I do utterly Renounce them, as contrary to the Word and Truth of
God. And I do unfeignedly Assent to the Doctrine of the Church of England, set
forth in her 39 Articles of Religion.

Moreover, I utterly Disown all those many false and scandalous passages
contained in that unhappy Book, which I styled, Consensus veterum; heartily
wishing, I had never published it. More particularly* I Renounce those
disparaging and false Expressions, concerning the Rule of Faith, and the Use of
it, in the Church of England For whereas I there wrote, That the Canon of
Scripture in the Church of England, was no other, but what her own Members were
pleased to allow; that the Private Spirit was the Support of the Protestant
Faith; and that I myself, whilst in that Church, might have Choice of an
hundred Faiths in Her. I am now fully convinced, That the Church of England
does receive the very same Canon of Scripture, and the same Creeds, which have
in all Ages of the Church been most Universally received, as containing all
things Necessary to Salvation: And that She has due recourse to the Ancient
Fathers, and the Authority of the Church; as the most effectual Means for
repressing the Extravagancies of each Man's private Spirit, and for the
maintaining of Truth, and Peace, and good Order in the Church. And having now
more seriously considered these Things, I sincerely think, the Testimonies of
the first six Centuries to be most fairly interpreted by the Divines of the
Church of England, and must own, That I myself did allege them very partially
and corruptly, in behalf of Transubstantiation, and other Errors of the Church
of Rome.

Secondly, Whereas the usual Boastings of the Romish Emissaries had made me
hope, to find an Eminent Piety in that Communion; I most freely profess, and I
speak it from my own Observation of two years and upwards, that That Religion
has approved it self to me utterly contrary to my Expectations.

My own Devotion was so effectually checked, that although Mass was said most
days in the Week in my House, yet I did not Receive for several Months
together, nor found any I clination to do it: Because I could never believe,
that there was neither Bread nor Wine remaining after Consecration. Nay, the
oftener I saw the Elements after Consecration, the less I could believe it,
though, I confess, I strove my utmost.

My whole Family frequently complained, that they were nothing bettered by the
Service, it being performed in Latin. And, do I what I could, they could not
understand what was meant, nor what themselves were to do, while the Priests
were to Officiate.

I found the Priests very zealous for gaining Proselytes, but very negligent of
their proper Charge. They would spend hours every day, upon Wavering
Protestants: But scarce Catechize Children once a fortnight, and then too not
above half a quarter of an hour, and without any Exposition.

I found, what I did not believe before, that Confession was practiced by them,
as a means to gain Awe and Authority over the Laity, (the Priests pretending a
Right to know every thing that was said or done in the Family:) And yet it was
neglected by themselves. For they would celebrate Mass without it, although, to
my knowledge, they were guilty of very heinous Sins. So that my Expectations of
an extraordinary Piety in that Communion, were very far from being answered.

Thirdly, I do sorrowfully, and with Shame acknowledge, That my seeking and
accepting a Royal Dispensation to receive the Profits of Ecclesiastical
Perferments, when I knew my self incapable by Law, and was persuaded in my
Judgment, that I ought not to Officiate; and yet at the same time paid another
for doing what I thought He ought not to have done, was a just occasion of very
great Scandal, and might have proved fatal to the Church and Kingdom, if many
had followed my wicked example. My best Pleais, (if I may mention any) That I
did not then discern the secret Intrigues of that mischievous Faction. But I
hope, no Pious and charitable Heart will conceive, I can now be so blind, as
not to see what every Man sees; viz. That their Aim and practices tended to the
Subversion of All that was either Law or Religion.

After All, I am sadly sensible That what I have heretofore said, written, and
done, may justly render my Sincerity suspected, even in these my Confessions.
But, if a diligent search into the Secrets of my own Soul, If a deep affliction
of Spirit for what is past, If the strongest Desire of being reconciled to that
Communion I have so wickedly forsaken, If the firmest Purposes of evidencing
all these by suitable Actions for the future, be Proofs of being sincere; I am
sure, I am so, and I desire your Charity in Praying for me, (and may the
Almighty graciously answer your Prayers and mine!) that as the Church does
compassionatly receive me into her Communion; so God will be pleased in Mercy
to ratify her Act, and Receive, me, a Returning Penitent, to his Pardon: And
grant, that I may recover his Favor, and the Assistances of his Holy Spirit,
that my Repentance bearing some proportion to my Crime, the remainig part of my
Life, (short as it is like to be) may be spent in his True Faith and Fear, and
to his Glory. And I do here, in the presence of God, his holy Angels and this
Congregation, protest, that I have done all this freely, without Equivocation
or Reservation, and do solemnly promise and Oblige my self, to continue in
sincere and constant Communion with the Church of England to my Life's End.

EDWARD SCLATER.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TO give Light to some Passages in the Historical Part of these Papers, and to
let all Men see, with what Earnestness Mr. Sclater sued for a Reconciliation,
and what Arguments he went upon, to convince himself of a necessity of
returning to the Church of England, it is thought fit to add some of his
letters written with his own Hand, both to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and others, who were known to him, in order to his being
Readmitted to our Communion.

LETTER I. To Mr. Hutchins, Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Danby.
Dear Friend,
WHen my Observations for two Years and upward, below mentioned, had made me
reflect upon the Doctrine of Infallibility, so wounded mortally by their own
practices, I found I must needs lower the Notion, or be engaged in impossible
Work of making Contradictions true. I think it cannot be denied, but the Church
in every Nation is so far irrefragable that it is Unchristian to contradict Her
in the least undecent manner, but am perfectly convinced by the present Bishop
of Lincoln's Book, that the Romish Church has infallibly allowed and approved
of many, not only Errors, but Unchristian ones. That I did not see this so well
before, was, perhaps, in the Providence of God, that I might see it the better
now. I shall be highly to blame, if I ever cease to be truly sorrowful for the
unhappy Want of his Informations.

Yet, that I left the Church of England for Interest, I utterly disclaim; and
assure you. That I was not so short sighted, nor so little versed in their
practices, to be any thing dazzled with that prospect: I knew several Instances
long ago of their not only neglecting, but avoiding, those they thought they
had secured, for fear of Applications of that sort: Besides, I have declared to
several, that it were not at all prudential in them, to encourage proselytes
upon that account, for so they might have many Converts, and few Christians;
many for the Loaves, and few for the Bread of Life. Nay, so far have I been
from making any such Application, that a Noble Lord of that Communion can be my
Witness, I assured him, I never would make any, and, I am sure, I have been as
good as my word; it is some small comfort to me in the midst of my hearty
Sorrows for my Fault, that my Fault is, I think, so much the less. 'Twas not
Gain I aimed at, but their Piety, (as I was mis informed) surpassing all other
Communions in the World.

The name of a Church of that extent, pretended to be so united in all the
Truths of the Holy Jesus, and withal, so full of Piety, as all their Writers
boasted of, methought, was as glorious a prospect as this World could yield,
and well it were if there were such an Heaven upon Earth; Who would not be glad
to see it? Who would not be more glad to be in it? But I now conceive, it must
be our prayers, because as yet it can be no more than our Hopes; for in my own
House, I have had one Priest at one time so eager for the Pope's Infallibility,
even extra Cathedram, that he has plainly assured me, I should beyond Seas be
Burnt for an Heretic for my contesting against it: And another, as eagerly at
another, condemning the former for his fierce insisting upon a Point, that
might give disgust, and impede their progress in making Proselytes.

Having too rashly swallowed the Doctrine of Infallibity, (God of his infinite
Mercy Pardon my Rashness) my main inquiry was the Eucharist; a point, of all,
the most difficult, that I was Dazzled with its sublimity, will not be a wonder
to any Man: That it is mysterious, every good Christian will say; nay, that it
is Tremendum Mysterium. Now that one Man highly distasted at the low
Expressions of some Protestants, should fly too far from them, is just as
natural, as, that another equally distasted with the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, should fly as far from it. This, I humbly conceive, states
my Case.

Nor was it long before I found, I had taken too far a flight, I could with
ease believe as Real a Presence as they would have me; if they will call this
Transubstantiation, I should not disbelieve it, but I could not give over my
Faith to the annihilating the Elements; nay, the oftener I saw it after
Consecration, the less I could believe it, tho, I confess, I strove my utmost
to force my Faith up to it, but it would not do. Here I began to condemn my own
Rashness, and inconsiderat Precipitancy, nay, to think must at last become an
Infidel, and believe little more that there is a God, which even Nature it self
would teach me) when I must believe, God bids me believe, what I began to find
every day more and more impossible for me to believe. Here I began to mistrust
I had mistaken Zeal and fervent Expressions of some of the Fathers concerning
this high Mystery, quoted in an unhappy Book, for the ancient Doctrine of the
Church, and that must lower their high Raptures to a more intelligible and
rational Sense.

So that since Whitsontide last, tho Mass was said most days of the Week in my
House, yet I have never Received, and, more than that, could not find in my
self much inclination to Receive.

Antecedent to which, you know, is Confession, which I began very much to
mistrust was a mere piece of Formality, as practiced by them, especially as to
my own particular, with whom it was not enough to confess many idle Words, many
angry Expressions to my Boys when unruly or undiligent, but I must name a
particular Sin, or I could not be absolved, one at least, (I suppose he
expected a huge matter) but any one served turn, and then the business might be
done. I could not well tell the Hearts of them, but it seemed to me, either a
way of giving Absolution very easily, or else the squeezing out a particular,
they might, if they please, make use of, toward the obtaining the greater Power
over us, and keeping us by consequence in more Awe; especially when I also
considered, That two other Priests, guilty, to my knowledge, of more heinous
sins, than, I bless God, I had any to confess, received every day, without
Confession or Absolution, (unless they could confess and absolve themselves;)
however, I could not but account their so officiating rather a Desecration than
a Consecration.

To tell you, that I was never thoroughly satisfied in the Points of Liturgy in
an unknown Tongue, and non participation of the Cup, is but to tell the plain
Truth. I must confess, I huddled them both into the Power and Authority of the
Church, and so their Arguments went the easier down. But as to the first, I
found manifest ill Consequences from it, my whole Family, besides my self, not
only totally Ignorant of what was meant all the while the Priest was
officiating, but, do what I could, at a loss in what they had to do themselves,
and still complaining, (my Wife especially) that she was nothing satisfied or
bettered. But one thing I cannot ommit: She was visited with the violent Pain
of the Sciatica, we both of us desired the Priest to pray for ease of her Pain,
which he refused with this uncomfortable Reply, That she must bear what God was
pleased to lay upon her. I could not but think Counsel, though very good, without
Prayers of the Church, very uncomfortable. Perhaps, his Breviary had no such
provision in it. Though at the same time the little Children would frequently go
to their Manuals and Beads in her behalf

A third Observation I made, was, of their almost utter neglect of informing
and instructing those under their Charge, (it was enough, it seems, they were
so) seldom, sometimes not once a fortnight, Catetechising tender little Ones,
and when they did it, a short foddering, not above half a quarter of an hour
served the turn, and that without any Explanation either of Question or Answer.
But yet, to give them their due, if they could find one abroad that would so
listen to their discourses, as gave them any small hopes they were to be
prevailed upon, they would spend hours every day with them; but this, methought
looked like stealing of Sheep, and starving of Lambs To back this, their
Negligence was altogether as great in other Duties of a Family, for even on
Sundays not one word but the Mass, and then all their Work was totally done:
Not so much as calling us to Prayers in the Afternoon, nay rather signifying to
us the no necessity of them by their continual Absence from us at the time we
were at them, but frequently taking a walk at that time.

A fourth Grievance was, That in our Discourses, especially the Subject of
Praying for the Dead, I told the Priest, That every time I said Requiescant in
pace, I could not for my Heart forget my dead Mother: He asked me, If she was a
Catholic? I told him, No. He replied, I must not by any means use that Prayer
for her. 'Twas very harsh, I thought, and so much uncharitable, that it seemed
to me unnatural, I am sure, she led a better Life than he, more Just, more
Devout; and believe, her Ignorance will plead for her before the great Tribunal
more effectually, than all the Sanctity he had in him.

Nor was their Carriage in my House less troublesome and unhandsom, as this
single instance (among many) may sufficiently make appear. One of them finds
one of the School boys very fit for his purpose, and his Office was, When this
Priest at any time should be absent, to observe all the Family without
exception, and to give him an account, when he came home, of all that had
passed, or had been spoken: Which my Wife chiding the Boy for, the Priest
managed him in it in these words: (Why, is there any thing to be said or done
in this House, and I must not know it?) This was a Yoke upon me I never so much
as dreamed of, for, till then, I thought my self Master of my own House, and my
House my Castle, tho never after so long as I had such an overtopping Dominion
over me.

That these Particulars can be reconcilable with that Piety I expected to find
in that Church, I shall for ever think impossible: So that as to the Unity of
the Church, I must conclude, it must consist, (Pardon the newness of the
Expression) in being Nerv'd and Sinew'd to Dissenting Members in Fundamental
Points and Charity: And I can now easily conceive, how Errors and Ignorance
might creep into the Church, whilst the ancient Governors of that Church were
more eager of Dominion, than careful of Doctrine, and their Inferiors aimed
more at Gain, than Godliness.

Sir, These, as I told you in my last, are but Personal Observations in my own
Family, but ex pede Herculem, whatsoever the Learned Writers of the Church of
England have Writ of their more public Exorbitancies will now easily find
belief with me upon the score of these, which my own experience has found too
true. When his Grace shall, according to his wonted Candor, receive this
unfeigned account of my Disgusts, I hope, he will assure himself, that my
Repentance is as unfeigned and sincere, as these are so true, that I can safely
take my Oath of, before any Judicature in the whole World, a thousand times
over. In the mean time, I do assure him, I condemn my self greatly, and cannot
enough, for my unadvised and rash embracing that Religion, that has approved it
self to me so utterly contrary to my expctation. I have nothing to assure him
of my unfeigned Sorrow for my Fault, but the words of my Mouth. God only knows
the Heart, upon all the Examination I can make, I am unfeignedly sorrowful for
it. None but our Savior knew the Hearts of Enemies, yet his Church by his
command have always forgiven Penitents. I presume none will be a greater
follower of his Example and Precepts, than my Mother the Church of England,
whose Pardon I as comfortably hope for, as I humbly beg it, I never yet heard
her Clemency denied it: I humbly beg her to admit me to her Communion, upon the
Terms the Primitive Church admitted the ancient Lapsi, whether of the Clergy or
Laity.

LETTER II. To His Grace the Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY.
May it please Your Grace,
ACcording to what you have been pleased to Command, I have sent You my unhappy
Book, and also my firm Resolution to retract all, or whatsoever in it shall be
thought fit to be Retracted. In the mean time, as I have signified to your
Grace already, so I again repeat it, (having more seriously considered and
compared the late Practices, and past Usurpations of the Church of Rome,) I
sincerely think the Testimonies of the first Six Centuries most fairly
Interpreted by the Divines of the Church of England* My Lord, I humbly beg my
speedy Reconciliation: Pass by my rash and inconsiderate Aberration, and
compassionate my afflicted Spirit. If Sorrow quite overwhelm, What will become
of a Soul out of Communion? This is my great Grief. But, my Lord, as Flesh and
Blood, I cannot but be much concerned also for the aching Hearts of a miserable
Family, continually in Tears, because ruined (without some speedy prevention)
by my Folly. The God of Heaven and Earth make my humble Petition successful
with your Grace, and that I may once more Subscribe my self

Your Grace's most Dutiful and Obedient Son and Servant EDW. SCLATER.

LETTER III. To His Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury:
May it please Your Grace,
THose few Rays of Comfort, my Dear Friend Mr. H. brought me last, I hope will
spread themselves into a much larger brightness. Your Grace has promised to
admit me to your Presence: My Heart full of Thanks is too little a return for
so great a Clemency. Yet pardon an afflicted Spirit, if I think every Minute
very tedious till that happy time come. I understand by him, the great Obstacle
of my farther Relief and Comfort, is, the suspicion of my sincerity: I cannot
condemn it, the Hearts of Men are only known to him that made them. I wish I
may testify the sincerity of mine, with the best assurances possible to be
thought of, and will be glad of any assistance that can inform me of better
than I can inform my self, vae soli. But, what I can as yet do only in Words,
shall with Gods Assistance be always confirmed by future Actions and Endeavors
suitable to them.

Till I removed, I was at too great a distance from the possibilities of
discerning the secret Intrigues of that mischievous Faction, being totally
taken up in my daily Imploys, and therefore easily detained under their strong
Delusion. But I hope no pious and charitable Heart will conceive, I can now be
thought so blind, as not to see what every Man sees, viz. That their Aim and
Practices tended to the subversion of all that was either Law or Religion.
Impiety may be so cunningly daubed over with Artificial Colors, as may (if not
blind,) yet dazzle the best of Eyes; but can it do so, when it is manifest? I
humbly hope much better things will be thought of me, and Charity will plead
for me in some such form as this, (a better I shall never wish) Forgive him, he
knew not what he did,

My Lord, To those, whether of the Clergy or Laity, whom I have formerly made
sorrowful for my Follies, I shall always hereafter make this return of
Thankfulness, I will ever make it their comfort, that they find me an Object of
that Joy, that even Angels in Heaven have at the Conversion of a Sinner: Those
that mistrust my Sincerity, I will still, by what Methods I can take, endeavor
to manifest to them, they also ought to come in, partakers of that Joy.

I have spent no small time in searching my Heart, for an affection toward
those former Delusions that may lurk behind; and do assure your Grace, I find
no one, nor any thing but an abhorrence of them: Nay, my Prayers have been
already, and ever shall be, that all deluded by them, may speedily get from
under them.

And now, my Lord, my Heart is full of Supplication to your Grace for
Compassion, that I may be Reconciled. I Will not give your Grace the trouble, the
Reading the long Enumeration of them. The Sum of them is this, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven and before Thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants; So shall Bread, and not Husks, be
once more the Food of

Your Graces most humble Petitioner, E. S.

LETTER IV. To the Reverend Dr. Battely.
Reverend Sir,
PArdon an afflicted Spirit the giving you the trouble of delivering the
enclosed to his Grace, if I have presumed in so doing, put it upon the account
of that Christian charitable office of receiving a Stranger, which God reward
to you, with the entertaining, (though not an Angel) yet once more a good Man, and

Your much obliged Servant, EDW. SCLATER.

LETTER V. To His Grace the Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY.
May it please Your Grace,
I Have Writ to One perverted to the Church of Rome by Mr. Sclater's Example.
Mr. Wilkinson, though I assure your Grace, I cannot call to mind who he is, or
that ever I converst with any Man of that Name; however, I pray God, what I
have Written may be successful upon him. I humbly beg I may receive the Blessed
Sacrament. My continual Prayers are for your being restored to perfect Health,
and that you may live long to Gods Glory, and the Good of the Church;

I am, Your Graces most Obedient Petitioner* E. S.

Printed at London by Edward Jones, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, Anno Dom. 1689.


