THE WONDERFUL and TRUE RELATION Of the Bewitching a Young Girl in IRELAND,
What Way She was tormented, and a Receipt of the Ointment that She was cured
with,

Printed in the Year, 1699.

The true and wonderful Relation of the Bewitching of a young Girl in
Ireland; What Way She was tormented, and a receipt of the Ointment She was
cured with.
IT seems hard to unruly Minds, that GOD should keep intellectual Souls so
strange to the unseen World of Spirits; that We know so little of them, that
our Knowledge of them is no more by the Way of Sense; But there is in it much
of GOD's Arbitrarie Sovereign Power, and much of His Wisdom, and much of His
Justice, and also of His Love.

But to see the Devils and other Spirits ordinarily would not be enough to bring
our Atheists to the saving knowledge of GOD, without which al other knowledge
is vain. They that doubt of GOD, the most perfect, eternal, and infinite
Being, while they see the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Sea, and Land, would not
know Him by seeing created Spirits, and finding that almost all the Atheists,
Sadducees, and Infidels, did seem to profess that were they but sure of the
Reality of the Apparitions and Operations of Spirits, it would cure Them; I
thought this the most suitable Help for them.

I confess it is very difficult to expound the Causes of all mentioned in these
Histories of Witches and Spirits: But proved Matters of Fact must not be denied,
but improved as well as well as We can, and And I confess very many cheats of
pretended Possessions have been discovered which have made some weak
injudicious Men think that all are such. Two sorts of persons have often been
found Deceavers,

1. Persons prepared and trained up purposely by Papist Priests, to honor
their Exorcisms, You may find in Print of the Boy of Bilson, Petrius who
afterward I heard turned Quaker at Bristol, many such like are recorded in
History.

2. Lustful, rank Girls and young Widows, that plot for some amorous
procacious Design, or have Imaginations conquered by Lust, though I think when
they come to a Furor Vterinus, Satan often setts in.

The Instances tell Us, 1. that the state Converse, Policy, Laws of the Aerial
World or Regions, are much, though not wholly, unknown to Us here. 2. And so is
the natural State of the departed Souls of wicked Men, as to their having
Bodies or no Bodies, their Power, their Wits, their Motions, and Passions. 3.
and also, whether they be proper Devils when joined with, or of another
Species. 4. And it is hard to know by their Words or Signs, when it is a Devil,
and when is an Humane Soul that appears. 5. and it is unsearchable to us, how
far God leaves invisible, intellectual Powrs to free will about inferior
things, suspending his predetermining motion tho not his general motion and
concourss and whether those called Fairies and Goblins are not such.

But as all these, and more such, are unknowen to us, so GOD sees it meet for
us that it should be so, and we should not so much as desire or endeavor that
it might be otherwise.

But we may know (which must suffice us) That no Spirits can do any thing, but
by GOD's will or permission

But now to come to this true relation which my eyes did see all along and many
Hundereds did see which they can atest to this day say Atheists what they will
I was not blinded in it.

At Antrim in Ireland a little girl in the ninth year of her age, for beauty,
education, or birth inferior to none where she lived, having inocently put into
her mouth a Sorrel leaf, which was given her by a Witch that begged at the
door, to whom she had first given a piece of bread, and then some Beer, it was
scarce swallowed by her, when she began to be tortured in her bowels, to
tremble all over, and then to be convulst, and in fine, to swon away and fall
as one dead. Several Doctors being caled (for at the forsaid place where these
things happned in May School. it is customary for to practice physic) though they
so* many Days experimented the Remedy usual in this Case; The Child found no
relief, but was still aflicted with very freqent and most terrible Paroxisms;
whereupon, as the custom of the Country is, they consult the Ministers of that
place, but they had scarce laid their Hands on Her when the child was
transformed by the Demon in to such shaps as a man that has not beheld it
with his eyes, would hardly be brought to imagine. It began first to roll it
self about, and nixt to Vomit Horse Dung, Needles, Pins, Hairs, Feathers,
bottoms of Thread, Fieces of Glass Window Nails draven out of a Cart or Coach
wheels, an iron knife above a span long, Egg and Fish shells in the mean while,
her parents and those of the neighborhood, observe that whenever the Witch
came near the House, or so much as turned her eye toward it, even at the
distance of two hundredth paces, the poor Child was in much greater torment then
before, insomuch that she could by no means be easy of her fit, or show one
sign of life until she was at a very great ^nce from Her. This Witch was soon
(...)pprehended, and confessed both this, (...)ite other the like Feats, for when
(...)ngled and burnt, being desired by the Minister who assisted Her in Her
last Agony, and at that Moment on which depends Eternity; when the Executioner
had now fitted the Rope to her Neck, that she would dissolve the Spell, and
ease the Child, she said it was not in her Power because the Ember-Weeks were
past since she had bewitched Her; adding, that should she undo the Villainies
she had perpetarted, the child would not so quickly recover, for the two other
Witches, whom she named, had also given her mortal Infections, from the Effects
whereof she could not without Difficulty, and much time, be delivered, the
Mother as in a despicable case, brought her Daughter to me about the middle of
September, and I had her with Me some weeks What I then saw, heard, and
handled, because I know many Physicians, those especially that are averse that
there can be Witchas, will hardly believe it upon my Narrative; So may GOD help
Me, as I shall most truly relate what I saw. The Day after this unfortunat
child came to my house I took care to send for a Minister who still lives here,
while he was yet 50 paces from my Chamber, the Girl fell down as one deprived
of Life; I took her for dead, For she had not so much as the least breath: her
Fingers and Toes, (which if I had not seen it my self, I could not have
believed it,) were so writhen and convulst, that the exterior or third Joint,
sttuck so hard unto the second, a thing which is scarce possible narurallie,
that they might seem to have been fastened together with the stiffest Glue: I
endeavored to thrust a Golden Bodkin betwixt them, and after an Iron Nail, a
Wooden Spindle, etc. but all in vain; the Mother seeing the Child fall, For she
would never go one step from her, said, the Ministers were comeing, she had no
sooner said this, but they knocked at the Door: when they were come in and
lighted a Candle, as soon as ever they had read the first Words of a Chapter of
the Gospel of S. Matthew, the Girl which hitherto had lain more immovable than
any dead Corpse, fell a shaking all over, Her Fingers and Toes continuing as
they were, with that Violence that she could not be held still by six of us, by
no means We could use; my self who with all my strength essayed to hold her
Head, observed it both by my sight and feeling, to be writhen as by an
Ophisthonick Convulsion, together with Her Neck toward her shoulders; in the
mean time, her belly was ra^ed up to a prodigious bigness and was nearer her
Throat, than Her Thighs: and that with so great a Noise and Grumbling of Her
Bowels, that all present could hear it at above ten Paces distance. The Sound
was the nearest to that which is caused by tempestuous Waves under the Prow of
a ship; all this while the child vomited sevral of the abovementioned things I
begged the Minister, out of Compassion to Her, to forbear his reading, he had
scarce pronounced the last syllable, when in an instant she lay as quiet as
possible, and after He had quited the House, and was at a considerable distance
off, she undid her fingers and Toes, and open her Eyes, and straight way stood
up, and when she had weept a little, and chid her mother for sending for the
Minister, though she never saw them, nor as she said, heard them, she presently
began to eat, drink, and play with her equals just as if nothing had ailed her,
but upon the Minister's returning to do his office, she was as formerly, I saw
her this while cast up Feathers, Bundles of Straw, above the bigness of my
thumb, with pins stuck across the straws, Points woven of Thread of several
Colors, and a row of Pins stuck in a blue paper, as fresh and new as any sold
in the Pedlar's stall: In fine, every thing as the innocent child affirmed,
which she had seen in the Witches basket when she begged, which favors plainly
of Devilsm, and which all the Philosophers in the World, are not able to solve;
for by what Operation could every thing she had seen in the basket, be conveyed
in the same kind and tale into the Bowels of the child, except the Devil
himself was not assisting? But when I saw all she had cast up, was perfectly
dry, and without the least wet, I told the Ministers and several learned men
present (for I called many out of desire of being the better informed) that
surely our Eyes were enchanted; for that these things could not possibly come
out of her Body, For how could it be that the pricking of so many Pins, should
bring up no Blood? How could a sharp knife come up the narrow throat of a young
child without cutting the passage I added that it was my Opinion that these
things must be convyed privately some way from some other Place, and then by the
malicious Demon that took pleasure to deceave us, drop from the Child's Lips
into our hands and that I was brought to mind of a Verse in Ovid, which I never
understood, but now less than ever, it is this,

Devovet absentes simulacraque cerea singit,
Et miserum tenues in jecur urget Acus.
Curses the absent, then forms waxen shapes
Runs into the Liver Needles --
The words are spoken of Maedea a Witch, but the child herself being immixt
with us in our debates and of a capacity above her years, soon resolved this
difficulty, for we doubt not said she, but that these things com out of me, and
with that she caught my Hand, and put it to her Throat; feel, said she, a Pin
without an head comeing up, and which will come up presently, I felt and
immediately when I thought verily I held it fast betwixt the fingers of my left
Hand within her Throat, I perceaved it to be forced violently from me, and
presently seeing the child about to spit, I received in my right Hand, and I
have showed since to several incredulous persons, and still keep it by me to
show to the Curious, with Parots Feathers, Thread, Straw and other like
Materials. In like manner I have frequently at other times felt the ends of
Points, while they were yet in the very orifice of her stomach, and while they
were comeing up, and ready to come out of her Mouth, all who were curious to
make experiments imagined they could hold the end of the Point in the middle of
her Throat, but the crafty Demon defeated all their Attempts.

After she had exorted for some weeks to no Purpose, her mother had great
desire to carry her to a Doctor near to Dublin who was belived by the vulgar,
to be very famous in the curing of these but staying several days without
any effect they bring the child back to my house, not on Jot the better but the
worse by a Hydrophobia or as I would rather call it a Stygrophobia or
fearfullness of moist things, so called; very sad and disconsolat, and
disparing of her life, Yea, praying for her death she came back to me, about
the midst of Autum refusing not only wine, beer, meed, and all water; but also
boiled meat, and bread steept in broth or wine, and at last wheat and wheaten
bread I belive because the one was made with milk, and the other with water, as
is usual with us, for which reason for forty days time, she lived on nothing
but Apples, Raisins, Nuts, Almonds and other fruits proper to the season yet
for all this-the rosy blush in her cheeks was not diminished, nor the milky
snow of her forehead, at last for fifteen days and nights together, she took
neither meat nor drink how she could Pass so many days without eaither meat or
drink: I confess my self ignorant; but that so it was, I do avow, and all my
family are ready most solemnly to depose upon Oath; on the sexteenth day when
she had of her own accord, asked for some drink, and taken it she no longer
refused food. I thought then season to have recourse to natural means, not
omitting divne exercise and I prepared the decoction ex fuga Daemonum of
southeren wood, Mugwort, Vervene etc. and after I had used her a while to that
drink, I sent her home: in the Intrim tumbling over all the books, I could
find, at last I light on Bartholemew Carrichters, secret^ who in XII. Chap. of
his 2 book describs a certain medicine proper to this malady finding this
mightly recomended in Horstius his medicinal epistles, Epist. I. Sect. VII. in
Hector Schlands letter to Grigory Hostrus dated in the year 1612. I write to
the Apothecary in Dublin in whose shops I thought it was sold promising any
rate for the unguent and prescription but receving no advice from them, and
being day and night solicitus for the Child's recoverie I took Carrichter again
into my hands, and having much ado to understand him by reason of a mistack of
the printers who had printed in one word Hoter bletter beer which should have
been in three, I at last a long time after for want of necessary materials,
caused the following unguent to be made. Take of Dogs Grease well dissolved and
cleansed, four Ounces; Of Bears Grease eight Ounce; Of Capons Grease, four and
twenty Ounces; three trunks of the Misletoe of the Hazle while green, cut in
pieces and pound it small, till it become moist; bruise together the wood,
leaves and Berries, mix all in a Vial, after You have exposed it to the Sun for
nine weeks; You shall extract a green Balsom, wherewith if you anoint the
Bodies of the Bewitched, especially the parts most effected and the joints,
they will certainly be cured, as has been proved by the child, who has been
now perfectly well since only an the days of the Ember-weeks do what she can
she is seized with a certain transient melancholy.

And this is the reason why I have ingenously communicated to the world, the
abovementioned Prescription, concealed by others, and ordered it to be printed
for the Good of others that may have the like; So Farewell.

Daniel Higgs.

FINIS.

