Unto the right Honorable, the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, The PETITION of Sir John Hill late Colonel of the Regiment at
Fort-William.
Humbly shows,

THat whereas Captain Allan Catheart, Captain James Menies, and Captain Thomas
Hamilton, Officers in your Petitioners late Regiment, having presented a
Petition to the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, alleging that I, my
Lieutenant Colonel and John Forbes my Factor, had detained in their hands a
considerable part of the said Captains their pay unaccounted for, pointing at
the several Sums received by the Lieutenant Colonel, for defraying the
Expenses of his several journeys to London in the Regiments Service, and that
he had benefited himself by the said journeys, and did little or no service to
the Regiment. And they also crave that John Forbes may be ordained to produce
the Count Books and Bills of the Regiment, all which matter your Lordships has
remitted to a Committee to hear both parties Procurators, and to report. Your
Petitioner with all humility, begs leave to represent how groundless this
Complaint is, and also to State the true steps of my Administration of the
Regiments Affair, as follows.

1. Your Petitioner established Mr. Forbes as his Factor for uplifting the
Regiments pay from the general Receivers, and to remit the same either in
specie. or to answer such Bills, as I, or any I should empower, to draw upon
him from Invernese or else where, and which Money, either remitted by Bill or
otherways, was always given to these appointed to pay out of the Weekly pay of
the respective. Companies of the Regiment, lying in Garrison at Fort-William or
else where, and the said Mr. Forbes came up from Edinburgh to Fort William,
sometimes twice, and always once every year, and compted fully and fairly for
his Intromissions, and delivered to the commanding Officer of each Company a
stated account of Charge and Discharge, and delivered to them a Credential or
Receipt under their own hands of the Article that was paid out by him, and Mr.
Corsbie and John Grant who were the dispensers of the Money remitted in manner
foresaid to the Garrison and Pay masters of the Weekly pay of the whole
Companies of the Regiment. Compted also for their Intromissions at the said
time: and produced their Books, wherein were insert a Receipt, either by the
commanding Officer of each Company himself, or by those they authorized to
uplift their Companies pay Weekly, for every Article stated in their Discharge,
and the foresaids receipts were immediately after perusal, and Examination
cancelled by the Officers themselves, lest they should be probative against
them at the next compting, whereupon Compting being so fairly stated, Receipt
delivered up, Bookscancelled as said is, the said Mr. Forbes obtained a full
and ample Discharge from the commanding Officer of each Company, o^ their own
Companies, and subalterns full pay, discharging him and all others of all
Accounts preceding the dates of the said respective Discharges, which
Discharges the said Mr. Forbes reported to me, and at the same time made up the
Accounts of the Clothing, and it any balance was, the same by my order was
delivered in to the Play Master for Subsisting the Regiment, till more Money
should come up, and for defraying the Expenses of the Emergencies and
Exigencies of the Regiment, and after perusal of the foresaid Discharges and
Examination of the Clothing Accounts, being all verified by instructions and
credentials uncontestable, I accordingly gave to the said Mr. Forbes his full
and ample Dicharge with a clause of Registration, Discharging him and all
others of their Intromissions, preceding the date of the said Discharge, and
all the Captains of the Regiment at every Compting received stated Abstracts of
all their Pay by way of principal and Additional Account, which was paid to
them by Mr. Forbes and the Pay-ma^ at the Garrison, which Accounts if they will
but produce before your Lordships, ye (...) not only easiely perceive how
unjust the Complainers are, but also that every Office^ the Regiment has
received all the King allows them, by the establishment, and not sixpence
detained from them for any contigencie of the Regiments Expenses whatsoeue^ So
that it surprises your Petitioner, how any Complaint should be sustained, after
solemn a way of Transacting matters by Count and reckoning, and Discharges.

2. Your Petitioner as being Colonel to the Regiment, had the undoubted and
ab^lute Right of disposing of the Retention-Money; not only for the Clothing,
but fo^ther necessary uses in relation to the Regiment; for by the constant
practice of (...) Scots Forces abroad and at home, and by His Majesty's special
Decisions, if any Col^el keep his Regiment in good order, well Mounted with all
necessar Abuiliments for Soldier whatsomever; If by the Colonels care and
Industery, any thing be saved (...) the Clothing Money, it belonged to the
Colonel as his just perquisit, and an Rew^ for his extraordinary care and
Diligence, and Conduct in his Regiments Affairs, and defraying the contingent
Expense the Colonels are usually at, in Supporting the C^cerns and Interest of
the Regiments: And it is very well known both by my Officers a^ others, that no
Regiment in His Majesty's Service upon the Scots Establishment, (without
derogation to one or other) was better Mounted, and appointed than my Regiment
always was upn all occasions not so much as Combs to their Heads and Buckles
their Shoes, but I provided them with, and looked after the Welfare of the
Soldiers if they had been my Children; and within eight Months of the
Regiments Disbanding, Clothed all of them with double Mounting, to wit, each
Soldier with a new p^ Coat, red Coat, two Linen Shirts, a pair of Bretches,
Shoes and Stockings, with ne^ Buff^belts, and Baginots and Patterntashes, and
new Capes: And each Sergeant with new Scarlet Coat mounted with Gilded Buttons,
and broad Gold Lace and other Furniture conform; and after I had certain
knowledge that the Regiment was to be Disbanded, I paid out 80 lib. sterling
for Cravates which I gave to my Officers to divide amongst the Soldiers to
Encourage them, that if His Majesty should after yard have occasion for them,
they might the more willingly and readily Engage in the Service: S^ that it
appears not, by what Title the Complainers can pretend to the Remains of the
Clothing Money, if any were, that pertains of right to me as said is.

3. Your Petitioner can boldly affirm that there was never any Colonel in my
circumstances more open handed and Liberal, both to the Officers and Soldiers
than I was, i^ regard that of-times when there was any thing saved in the
Clothing Money; I complemented my Officers, in so far as, that at one time I
bestowed for 40 beaten silver Husk^ or Collars, and as many Silken Sashes which
cost upwards of 1000 Crowns: And also at another time I bestowed on my
Sergeants, 26 Silver beaten hilted Swords, with Buff^belts and large Silver
Buckles which cost about 7 lib. sterling per price, besides several
considerable Gratifications in Money bestowed on my said Officers as I thought
they best deserved, and nothing thereof they ever did, or could acclaim as
their Right; but I could have kept all in my own Pocket, and by which Acts of
Liberality, I have Enriched my Officers, and Impoverished my self. And have
also defrayed all the incident Charges that happened to befall the Regiment
without exacting one Sixpence from my Officers, although I could have made them
pay a part thereof if I had so pleased, even out of their own personal Pay, a
great deal of it having been expended at their importunity, and for their
designed and endeavored good, and I cannot think that these my Deeds of
Liberality, and Destributions on such special considerations entitles the
Complainers to challenge an Interest in the Remains of the Retention (if any
were) whether I will or not, or otherways than as I was pleased to distribute
the same.

And your Petitioner craves leave to be so just to lieutenant Colonel Forbes
as to acknowledge, that the Money I gave him was for going five or six several
times to London, and Flanders the Regiments errands; and doing the Regiment
some very good offices, although (...) his last journey his endeavors failed
him, and some of which expenses and errands, the Colonel humbly offers the
following Account.

1. In the year 1692, Lieutenant Colonel Forbes then Major to the Regiment,
was sent to London to represent the circumstances of the Regiment and Garrison
of Fort-William and particularly that they had not a Minister to Preach the
Gospel, and that the Establishment of the Regiment wanting a Gunner and
Matrosses wherefore I was necessitate to apply the pay allotted for the
Minister, To pay the Gunner and two Mattrosses seeing at that time the Clannes
that were in Arms against the Government were not reduced, and the Garrison was
environed with Enemies on all hanos. And also to represent that the Poor
Soldiers were in straits through the want of Bed-cloths, and Fyring for the
Guards and Drugs for use of the Soldiers, in which Journey the
Lieutanant-Colonel was successful, and procured His Majesty's most Gracious
Letter to the Thesaury anent the said matters; As also obtained an Addition of
the Gunners Pay, to the Establishment at the rate of five sh. sterling per diem.
And also 150 lib. sterling. per Annum, to buy Bed-Cloths to the Poor Soldiers; As
also 100 lib. stirl. to buy Fyring, and 30 lib. to buy Drugs per Annum, in all
time coming, during the standing of the Regiment. And for which Journey, and so
good Services, I only gave to my Lieutenant Colonel 160 lib. sterling. But he
declared he spent 100 lib. sterling more of his proper Money, and no part of the
160 lib sterling. came out of any of my Officers Pockets, but out of the
Cloathing-Money.

2. In the Year 1694, the Regiment labored under great hardship, especially
the Poor Soldiers, because of the Dearth of all Liquors, by reason of the heavy
Excise, paid by the Brewers to Sir Thomas Kennedy, Tackimen of the Annexed
Excise, and to Adam Gordon of Additional Excise, and to their Subtacksmen, so
that a poor Soldier could not get a Pint of Ale under a Groat, and three
shilling the worst, which occasioned the poor Soldiers to drink the Water of
the Place, which is truly either Brickish or Mossie, and unwholesome, whereby
they contracted Fluxes and Scurvies, whereof many ^yed, so that I Commissioned
my Lieutenant Colonel to go to London; because I could not leave the Garrison my
self, to represent the hard circumstances of the Soldiers and he accordingly
went, and upon Audience of his Sacred Majesty, obtained his Majesty's Letter,
not only to exeem the Garrison of Fort William, from payment of any Excise in
all time coming, and to keep it out of all subsequent Tacks, but granted
Warrant to the Lords of the Thesaury to give Abatement to the Principal
Tacksmen of the Excise of 90 lib. sterling for that current Year, as the Copy
of the Kings Letter. Dated the Day of February 1695 does ver^e, with all which
the Lords of the Thesaurie having complied the 90 lib. sterling was refounded,
and the Garrison freed from Excise thereafter. As also about the said time the
Fonds for the Armies Pay falling short, the Lords of Thesaury did reduce the
Regiment to half Pay, wherewith it had been impossible for them to subsist; so
that I was necessitate to cause my Lieutenant Colonel to stay at Cover, to
represent the Difficulties the Regiment would ^ly under, if so dealt with,
anent which his Majesty was also graciously pleased to hear him fully: and
although the Lieutenant Colonel met with much Opposition, some of the
Colonels of the Scots Forces being then at Court, and insinuating that the
Garrisons Difficulties was not so great as was represented, only of purpose to
disappoint them of their Pretenses, because it was certain, the better and more
Pay that Regiment got, though in contemplation of its hard circumstances, the
rest of the Army would get less and worse pay; yet after all. His Majesty was
graciously pleased to take the Regiments case to his Consideration, and Ordain
the Lords of Thesaury to make distinction in the payment, betwixt my Regiment
and the rest of the Forces, and to pay the Regiment as formerly; as the Copy of
his Ma^esties Letter dated the 28 of February 1694, does more fully narrate;
and the Expense of this so long and laborious an Expedition being exchange and
all 410 lib sterling was also paid out of the Cloathing-money, and no part
thereof came out of the Officers Pockets although they were all benefited
thereby, not only by having hail pay in place of half pay; but likewise both
Officers and Soldiers, had the drinking their Liquors Excise free, and better
and ^heaper. And the said 410 lib. sterling being but the Lientenant Colonels
neat Expen^es, I leave it to any thinking person, if he deserved not a
Gratification beside.

3. In the year 1695, the Lieutenant Colonel, and one Captain Farquhar in the
Colonels Regiment, went from the Garrison to London, and from that to Flanders,
and served as Volunteers at the Siege of Namure and returned from Flanders by
way of London, where the Lieutenant Colonel did the Regiment Service; and that
Campaigne cost him at least is he declares, 500 lib. sterling before he
returned to Scotland, but no man can say that he demanded any thing for his
Service done to the Regiment at that time, and therefore I bare making mention
of it.

4. In the year 1697, when the Peace was concluding, the Officers of my
Regiment at the Garrison. Addressed me to send Lieutenant Colonel Forbes to
Flanders, to use his Interest and Endeavors for the standing of the Regiment:
and they would hear of none to go but him, because he had formely been so
successful in obtaining favors for the Regiment and if I be not very much
mistaken, some of the compleaning Officers that were then (...) the Garrison,
went with several others of the Officers to Inverness where the Lieutennen^
Colonel was posted, and importuned him to undertake the Negotiation and
brought hi^ to the Garrison, where all the Officers that were then present,
unanimously solicited (...) to let him go, which Solicitation I shifted, and
purposed to divert the Offic^ from any such Resolution, assureing them that
they behooved to pay all the Lieutennen^ Colonel his Expenses out of their own
Pockets, and one of the three complaining Offic^ then answered with an solemn
Oath, that he rather would pay his proportion of whatev^ Expenses the
Leutennant-Collonel would be at upon that occasion out of his proper p^ than
that his Journey were longer retarded, for the sooner he went away it would be
(...) better; So because of the Officers Importunity, I complied with their
desire, and (...) next day with their unanimous consent, dispatched the
Leiutennant-Collonel, and g^ him Instructions, with which he immediately went to
London, and from that to Flande^ where the King and Court was, and there I
believe my Leiutennent Colonel used his b^ Endeavors for the Regiments
Interest, and came from Flanders to London, and then waited full four Months,
hoping the best and fearing the worst, and still using his b^ Endeavors,
although they proved unsucesful, and the very complaining Officers, would (...)
allow him to dispare of the Regiments standing, but sent him up Letters of
Recommendat^ from their Friends, to great men at Court, and alwise adviseing
him to spare no Expen^ in the Affair, which oblidged him to stay longer, and
make new Attempts, which put h^ assuredly to great Charges, and the
Leutennent-Collonel his Expenses in the said Negotia^on, amounted to 500, and
odd lib, Serling only. The remander of the 720. lib. condesce^ed on by the
Complainers, was for the Exchange of the Bills, and a 100. lib, given to Capt^
Mackulloch, and Captain Farquher, who were truly deserving of it, upon several
Consideration^ unnecessary here to be mentioned, and no part of the said 720.
lib. sterling, came out (...) the Officers their pockets nor was stopped of
their pay, but was paid out of the Clothing Money; And as to the 200. lib.
complained of as received by the Leutennent-Collonel (...) is all the
Remuneration he received, for his extraordinary Toil and Fati^ in going the
Regiments Errands, and no part of the said Sum came out of the Officers Pu^ but
allennerly out of that Fond, which I could have applied as I plea^ and the
Lieutennent Colonel might have justly contended for more than (...) said Sum,
in regaird, That 1. At at the modeling of the Regiment, the said Lieutennent
Colonel brought 600 Pee-coats, and as many Shoes and shirts to the Regiment,
which (...) never got any Allowance for, tho his said doing saved a
considerable Sum to the Regiment, and was the first occasion of my having any
Remains of the Clothing Money. And 2. He gave the Granadeer Company 60 Bags,
Badges, Paterntashes (...) B^giners, at the value of 30 lib. sterling. And 3.
The said Lieutenent-Collonel before (...) Agent was employed, he not only did
the Regiments Business; and received the first (...) Months Fay of the Reigment
at Edinburgh, but likeways brought the same up upon (...) own Charges and
Expenses to the Garrison, for which I think he at least should have (...) same
Fees that the Agent has had Monthly since that time, which will amount to no
(...) than 80 l^b. sterling and upwards, and I might add to this a great many
other Reasons, wh^ is needless to trouble your Lordships with; and if I were to
make an Account of the Advanta^ and Casualities that some of the complaining
Officers have had since their coming to (...) Reigment, and that with very
little trouble or Fatigue, (whereof neither the Lieutenent C^lonel nor I neither
had nor could have any share) your Lordships would find them very (...) kind
and now how this groundless Complaint comes about, is to me a matter of
Admiration. F^r at the clearing and disbanding of the Regiment, there was not
the least Mention of a^ such Complaint, but on the contrair. And of 200 or 300
lib. that remained of Ballan^ of the clothing Money, I gave to the commanding
Officers of each Compa^ some part grtutioslie, as will appear by thestated
Accounts in their own hands, not so mu^ very Pole Money, Agent Fees, and a
great part of their Pondage, but I paid:

May it therefore please your Lordships, not only to Assoilie your Petitioner
from such a grundless and unkind complaint; But also to absolve
Lieutenant-Collonel F^bes and the Agent, That they may not sustain any trouble
or loss, through the most faithful services, which they have not only done to
your Petitioner; But likeways to t^ Regiment. And your Petitioner shall ever
pray.

Sic Subscribi^ John Hi^


