To his Grace, His Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament. Mr. Allexander Higgins of Craigforth,
Humbly shows,
THat where John Callender having given in to your Grace and Lordships a second
Petition, either contradicting in a most calumnious manner, the matter of Fact
represented in my Petition, or telling a Story, that does not at all meet with
his Case; which is done industriously to amuse the World, and to alleviat the
gross Crimes, and absurd Practices, that are proven against him: Being the
ordinar remedy that Malefactors use in the like Case, till the very Sentence be
pronounced against them: But I being in Libello, founded upon a Probation
already adduced, the half whereof is sufficient to pr^cure a Warrant to
prosecute a Criminal, for putting such unaccountable Tricks upon the Public.
It is hoped with all submission, that no such Impudent denial of the true
Matter of Fact, can put a stop thereto; And if your Grace, and the Honorable
Estates of Parliament, will be pleased to ordain the Sub-Committee upon that
Affair, to compare the Depositions and other Instructions with what is
represented by me in my said Petition, it will be found, that I have used very
much Precaution, that I might not exceed the true Matter of Fact; and if it
shall be found otherways, I am willing to subject my self immediately to the
most severe punishment that can be thought upon: So that it is humbly expected,
that your Grace and Lordships will think it the Concern of the Public, that
your Petitioner acting in a Public Capacity, by virtue of His Majesty's
Commission, this matter should be put to a speedy trial, which will both
vindicat me, and make his foresaid Petition a considerable aggravation of his
Guilt, in stead of having the success that he most fraudulently designeth by it.

In the next place, the said John Callender (to complete his Cavelling in his
said Petition) makes a Counter-charge of some pretended Crimes against your
Petitioner, viz. the Suborning of Witnesses, and granting double Rights: But to
demonstrate that these Sham Calumnies are most ridiculous, and used by him of
purpose, to divert the course of Justice against himself. I not only heartily
comply that he should insist against me, but also, that (in case I be found
guilty in the least of what he has the groundless impudence to assert) the
punishment due by the Acts of Parliament to such Crimes, may be doubled against
me. Neither shall I offer (in compensation of this false Accusation) to mention
his manner of dealing with private persons, both of the Nobility and Gentry,
which is so much noised abroad through the Nation.

May it therefore please your Grace, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament,
to ordain the said Sub-Committee to compare the foresaids Depositions, and
other Instructions, with my foresaid Petition for my Vindication: And if their
Lordships have not time to determine the matter themselves, during this Session
of Parliament, To remit to the Lords of Justiciary the Criminal part of that
Process; And to the Lords of the Thesaury and Exchequer, to state and conclude
the count and Reckoning, according to the desire of my foresaid Petition,

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

