MILLED LEAD, DEMONSTRATED To be a better and more durable Covering for
Buildings, etc. and above 20 per Cent. cheaper than Cast-Lead can be; supposing
that to be 16 s and this but 13 s a Hundred.
And also for Sheathing Ships against the Worm, better, and above Cent. per
Cent. cheaper than the ordinariest Wood-Sheathing can be.
TO prove the first, only two Axioms, or moral Truths (which will need no
probation) are required to be granted, by which the Matters of Fact evident in
the Case may be examined.

Sun being allowed to be the common Cause of drawing, and consequently of
cockling and cracking a Lead-Covering, the Beams thereof, which fall with equal
force upon an unequal Body (such as a Sheet of Cast-Lead is) must draw the
thinner and weaker parts more than the thicker and stronger.

Plumber, or at leastwise two of the Chief Master-Plumbers in London, joining
together, shall (upon a Wager or Trial of Skill, wherein their Interest is
highly concerned) undertake to cast Sheets of Lead, not thinner throughout the
whole Sheet, than the Size required, and very little thicker in any place, they
will cast as well, and as near equality, and the Size given as they can; and
that the Sheets cast by them in such a Trial, or at least in two such Trials,
ought to be taken for the greatest certainty, Standard, and best Casting any
Plumber can pretend to; or at leastwise that such Casting is much better than
what any Customer in the common course of their Trade can expect from them.
This being granted.

From the first Axiom it follows, That if the Plumber could Cast exactly equal
to the thinner parts of his Sheet, his Cast-Lead would make a better Covering
than to be thicker in one place than in another; for that the thicker and
stronger parts resisting the Sun beams more than the thinner and weaker, those
parts must stay behind whilst the weaker move; which motion by degrees cockles
and cracks the Sheet; whereas if the Sheet were exactly equal as the
Mill'd-Lead is, it would by the equal force falling thereon, move or stay
equally as the Mill'd-Lead does, where no other Cause or Accident occurs. Here
note also, that this excess of thickness in some places, is not only
unnecessarily paid for, but it helps forward the ruin of the rest.

Mill'd-Lead for Coverings Better.
Wherefore Mill'd-Lead, which is exactly equal, though no thicker than the
thinner part of a Cast-Sheet, must be allowed to be a better, and more durable
Covering than Cast-Lead.

The Mill'd-Lead Company having in the Year 1678. made a Proposal to the then
Navy-Board, to make their Scuppers of Mill'd-Lead, one Mr. Parsons a Plumber
they had employed in that Work, opposed it; pretending, That although their
Cast-Lead was not exactly equal, yet the inequality was so inconsiderable that
the Mill'd-Lead Scuppers being proposed at 4 s a hundred more than theirs, they
would be much dearer to the King. The Board then asked him, What allowance of
inequality he required? He answered, Not above half-a-Pound in Ten: Whereupon
they ordered each to make 36 Scuppers of three several sizes and thickness,
viz. of 8 pound, 10 pound, and 12 pound to the foot-square; which caution to
the Plumber, That his Lead should not be thinner in the thinnest parts than
their Demand, as little thicker any where as he could: Which he undertook; and
both sides having sent in their Scuppers, the Mill'd-Lead which could easily be
conformable to any thickness desired, weighed but 8 hundred, 1 quarter 26
pound; whereas the Cast-Lead Scuppers weighed 12 hundred 3 quarters 10 pound,
about part instead of 1/25 more: This so much exceeding his Undertaking, and he
pretending carelessness of Servants, and other Excuses, the Board ordered a
second Trial upon (double the Number) 72 Scuppers; when he took to his
assistance one Mr. Whitehall, another Master-Plumber, who made part thereof;
and it cannot be imagined but these Plumbers now used all their Skill and Care;
notwithstanding which, the weight of their whole 72 was 25 hundred 1 quarter 12
pound; whereas the 72 Mill'd-Lead Scuppers weighed but 16 hundred 3 quarters 10
pound; about the same proportion with the former; which at 26 s per hundred (
the Cast-Lead Scuppers being then 22 s) was above 27 per Cent. cheaper to the
King. This appears more at large in a Memorial presented to the Navy-Board in
May 1690. and Printed page 115. in a small Book lately published, treating
(amongst other new Inventions and Improvements) of the Mill'd-Lead for
Sheathing Ships, etc. and its Excellency in preference to Cast-Lead for all
other purposes whatsoever, and the Plumbers suggestions, decrying the same,
therein proved, to be idle, scandalous, and false, as well as the Shipwrights.

Diverse other Trials of other kinds were afterward made by direction of the
present Navy-Board, with which they being farther satisfied, contracted for the
Mill'd-Lead in general, for all Services of Their Majesty's Yards; declaring in
their Instructions to the Officers, That they had (amongst other Faults) found
upon several Trials made, that the Cast-Lead was so unequal and uncertain, they
could not have what they demanded, nor depend thereon for Their Majesty's
Service, as they could do upon the Mill'd-Lead; and therefore ordered them to
demand that only for the future, laying their old Plumbers, their Lead, and
Solder totally aside.

From the Second Axiom, and only those two Trials abovementioned, it plainly
appears that the Plumbers (let them or their Friends pretend what they will)
cannot Cast within equal to the Size given through the whole Sheet: Wherefore
(it having been proved above, that Mill'd-Lead is for that reason at least
better, and will in use go farther) whatsoever the Price of Mill'd-Lead be less
than more than Cast-Lead, it must be granted that Mill'd-Lead is so much the
cheaper.

Mill'd-Lead for Coverings Cheaper.
Now the Price of Mill'd-Lead, at the Rates above-supposed, being but about
more, the same is above 20 per Cent. cheaper, as well as better than Cast-Lead,
which was to be demonstrated.

For 3 C. of Cast-Lead at 13 s is 39 s and 2 C. of Mill'd-Lead at 16 s is but
32 s which being 7 s less, it is almost 22 per Cent. cheaper.

32 -- 7 100 -- 21 87 Or, 21 l 17 s 6 d

But if some are unwilling to grant that Mill'd-Lead is better, and will go
farther than Cast-Lead, in so great a Degree as, here is Latitude enough, let
them allow half as much, and take or any Degree under (the Plumbers usual Price
being 14 s a hundred;) within which Limit, or Proportion of Inequality, sure
they will be satisfied that Milled Lead is enough better and cheaper (besides
the benefit of a more beautiful and lighter Covering) to recommend it to their
Use, it being one considerable advantage also, that they are sure they shall
have the Mill'd-Lead equal smooth and sound, and of what thickness they demand;
whereas the Plumber can cast but by guess, and that liable to concealed
Blow-holes, and Sand-holes, as the Plumbers call them, and where they happen,
must also hasten the decay; which holes the Mill opens, and enlarges so, that
it discovers all the defects of Casting, but hides none; tho it is falsely
pretended it closes those holes which the Sun opens again: and if the Plumber
Casts so, as to bring the Charge less, or equal to the Price of the
Mill'd-Lead, the Customer (if he carefully examines it) will find it to be so
much thinner than the Mill'd-Lead in some places, as well as thicker in others,
as to render that Covering at least 20 per Cent. worse; as is above
demonstrated.

As to the Plumber 's pretense, That their Covering being heavier, it will
yield more Money again when both come to be stripped: It is not worth the
answering, when it shall be considered, that Mr. Hale offers in his
Advertisement (Published by it self, and Printed also in the Book
abovementioned, p. 93. to keep any Mill'd-Lead Covering, of 100 l Value, that
he lays but of 7 pound to the Foot in good repair, for 41 Years (to name a Term
certain and sufficient, tho it must probably last much longer) for 5 s a Year:
And that the different value of the Old Lead, after 41 Years (if the Cast-Lead
should be supposed to lie so long) to be paid in ready Money is not worth
speaking of, if no regard were had to the damage a House may sustain by the
leaking of a Cast-Lead Covering, and charge of patching it with Solder in the
mean time.

Now as to the Mill'd-Lead Sheathing.
THE Antelope, a Merchant-man of about 600 Tun, Sheathed with Mill'd-Lead,
Mill'd-Lead Sheathing Better.
having been employed in His Majesty's Service this last Summer, had her
Sheathing viewed at her return into the Dock by Mr. Shepherd, and other
Merchants her Owners, who declared themselves very well satisfied therewith;
the same lying on very well, and firm, as at first doing, saving two or three
small Places, where the Anchor-fluke had torn it: To prevent which, for the
future, it has been thought fit to sheath over the Lead with Boards in the Wake
of the Anchor and a-long about the Waters-edge, that Boats, or other Vessels
coming on Board, or lying by her sides, may do the Lead-sheathing no damage,
although the Shipwright has carried his Wood-sheathing lower than was necessary
for that purpose (for Reasons best known to himself) contrary to the Owners
Order. There was also a place rubbed off about two hands breadth on one side of
the Keele, supposed to be done by an Anchor-stock, she coming so often to an
Anchor in this Service, that the sheathing could not be liable to suffer so
much damage perhaps in a whole East India Voyage, as the Commander has
certified. And for her * Rudder-Irons, The main reason of the different
duration and very short lasting of some Rudder-Irons over others must be the
slight working, and purging 'em from their more gross and earthy Parts with
Fire and Hammer; for the Smith being paid by weight, will find temptation to
work 'em as slight as he can, seeing that the more labor and charge he is at,
the less money he shall receive for his Work.
which were new put on with her sheathing about 8 months before, some
Shipwrights, and their Friends, would have persuaded them that they were eaten
so very much that it was dangerous to send her to Sea again without shifting
them, and that the Lead-Sheathing was the cause thereof; giving for Reasons,
that the Water passing by the sides of the Ship, it was so tinged by the
venomous quality of the Lead-Sheathing, that making a kind of eddy or or dead
Water at the Rudder, it did there eat and corrode the Irons in this
extraordinary manner they talk of; to which, Mr. Hale being present, was
desired to give his Answer, but he told them, He thought it deserved none, till
they had given a better Reason then he had done already (namely the great
variety and difference in the composition and working the Rudder-Irons) for
their unconstant and different duration, always known to have been before
Lead-Sheathing was thought on, has been since, and ever will be upon all Ships
sheathed either way, or not sheathed at all; and that their lasting has been as
short and unconstant upon those others, as these sheathed with Lead, as he can
prove if necessary, which effects ought to have been on all, as equal and
constant as their causes are, if the sheathing either way were concerned
therein: Whereupon the Shipwrights Reasons against the Lead-sheathing, and for
shifting the Rudder-Irons (which if they could have obtained upon this Ship,
how causless soever, would have much countenanced their Clamor) appearing very
weak and groundless, Mr. Shepherd, with his Partners, in the presence of
diverse other Merchants, declared, That if ever he sheathed another Ship it
should be with Mill'd-Lead, (this being the third they had applied this
sheathing to within this Twelvemonth) and that this Ship (which was designed
for a long Voyage) should go to Sea again with the same Rudder-Irons without
any amendment. Since which (notwithstanding all the clamor and noise the
Shipwrights make about this sheathing's rubbing off, and eating the
Rudder-Irons) one Mr. Haines Merchant has lately sheathed another Ship with
it, called the Fortune, bound for ^uiney. Thus much, with what is proved more
at large in the In that Book it appears that all Objections as to rubbing off
by Cables lying on ground, etc. upon 5 years Experience and about half asoore
Ships sheathed, were removed to the Navy-Boards satis^action, who then
contracted for the Lead-sheathing; and, after that, this clamor about the
Rudder-Irons (never heard of before) was started when they found the other
would not do.
Book above-men^^oned, may sufficiently satisfy the unprejudiced as to the
Rudder-Irons; and the ^heathing, being Metal which the Worm cannot enter, is a
full Demonstration that ^is Mill'd-Lead is a better sheathing against the Worm
(the first and only thing in^ended by sheathing) than the Wood sheathing can be.

Now as to its cheapness, Mill'd-Lead Sheathing above Cent. per Cent. Cheaper.
suppose an ordinary Wood sheathing cost 10 d a foot square, and that two such
sheathings be allowed to last 7 years with Graving once or twice a year; and
that for a Ship of about 600 Tun (which contains about 5400 foot of sheathing)
but 40 l a year be allowed for her Graving, this, in 7 years time, with the
first charge of those two sheathings, would amount to 730 l

Note. Nothing is required under or over this Sheathing, the Plank being
brimm'd and the Seams (...) caulk'd, and some long Bristle-brushes on Board, to
clean it once in two or three months, or as occasion offers, which yet fouls
not so much as a Wood-sheathing does.
Suppose also that a Mill'd-Lead sheathing would cost 15 d a foot, and that one
such sheathing be continued on but for the same term of 7 years, which (if the
Ships Seams or Plank do not require its Stripping for other repairs) may last
for any defect in the Sheathing it self twice as long, or longer, (as
Experience has sufficiently shown) with some small repairs for accidental rubs,
which, with a little quantity of the Lead and Nails reserved on Board, any one
may mend as opportunity offers. This 5400 Foot would cost the Owner, with
allowance of only part for the old sheathing at stripping, but 253 l 2 s 6 d
which would be 476 l 17 s 6 d saved in his Pocket out of his 730 l that the
Wood sheathing must have cost him in these 7 years time, if the Graving upon
such a Ship had stood him in no more than 40 l a year, as is above supposed.
Nay, if one such Wood-sheathing would last the whole 7 Years, suppose but 45 l
a year (which may be computed at much more) for the Graving, and the
Lead-sheathing will be still above Cent. per Cent. cheaper, which was to be
demonstrated, there remaining 34 l to spare, which may probably be more than
the Lead-sheathing will require, to repair accidental rubbs all the time.

Besides this, there are many other Advantages; for this Sheathing stiffens a
Ship so, that she will bear more Sail, and is an undeniable security against
the Worm, without any hindrance to Sailing, which the great thickness and
roughness of a Wood Sheathing must obstruct.

And further, That Sheathing it self is more destructive to the Plank, it being
well known, that when one Plank or Board is doubled, or clapped close, lying
hot upon another, the undermost, in some time, will be doted, which in a Wood
Sheathing must rot the Oakam also the sooner, whereas a Lead Sheathing
preserves the Plank cool and sound, and the Oakam, perhaps, twice as long.

There is, besides the constant Employment of this Mill'd-Lead about Houses, a
Church built in Well-Close, called the Danes Church, lately covered with it,
notwithstanding the Plumbers are as industrious (it being their Interest also)
to raise Stories, and make as great a noise against this Lead, and as
senseless, as the Shipwrights do.

The Book abovementioned may be had at the Booksellers following, viz. At Mr.
Hensman's Shop in Westminster Hall, Mr. Dring at the Harrow and Crown next
Cliffords-Inn in Fleetstreet; The Harp in St. Paul's Churchyard; The Leg and
Star over against the Royal Exchange; And the Mill'd-Lead it self of any
thickness, from a Pound in a Foot, to 20 or more, for Lining of Casks or Boxes,
Brewers Backs, Fishmongers, Distillers and Dairy Vessels, Cisterns, Gutters,
Pipes, Crowning of Vaults to prevent Leaking, and for Covering of Signs to
Paint on, as the Mill'd-Lead Sign is, and for Coffins, or any purpose
whatsoever, where Sheet Lead may be used as well as Covering Houses, and many
other things that Cast-Lead cannot be applied to. This Lead is of the usual
breadth of 3 Foot, and may be had above twice as long as any Plumber pretends
to Cast, if need require to save drips, and comply with the length of
Coverings. These Rates are not raised, although now at the reprinting of this
Demonstration the Price of Pig-Lead is at least 30 s a Foddar dearer than when
these Rates were set.
The present Rates being for 6 l per Foot, and all thicker at 16 s a hundred;
and for each Pound in a Foot square thinner 12 d a hundred more, at the Mill,
or Water Carriage paid to any place upon the River about London, if the
Quantity be considerable, but for small quantities under a Tun^ the Customer
pays Boat Hire, or in lieu of Carriage 6 d a hundred more at the Shop, and for
odd Pounds under a Quarter 2 d and 2 d half penny the thinner sort, and Solder
also at 6 d a Pound, which the Plumbers by Combination have hitherto kept up at
9 d

At the Lead-Mill at Deptford, or at the Mill'd-Lead Sign in Aurange-street by
Red-Lion-Square, where Mr. Hale now lives, who can furnish the Customers with
able Plumbers to work his Lead as there is occasion.

Merchants that transport Sheet-Lead abroad, will doubtless find a better
Market for this than the other; and if they, or any else, having occasion for a
quantity, shall think fit to send Piggs, or old Lead, into the Mill, they may,
upon discourse with Mr. Hale, save something farther considerable herein also.

This Printed Sheet may be had at Mr. Hale 's House, the Lead-Mill, or at any
the Booksellers Shops abovenamed, Gratis.

LONDON: Printed November 20. 1695.


