A detection Of the Shipwrights new Tricks in Combination wi^^ Captain Ely,
against LEAD-SHEATHING. Practiced upon the Trumbal-Gally in Mr. Wells' s Dock,
Aug. 31. MDC XCIX.
^lso an Account of the Lead-sheathing upon the WEEDAW. Together with a new
Publication of the charge thereof. At 12d. a foot.
ONe would think the Shipwrigh^ might be content with their profitable Trade of
Building and necessary Reparation of Ships, which wi^ continually bring wealth
and work enough to them, let their Owners preserve them as well ^s they can,
and Sheath with Lead that will: But it is not the bare profit perhaps of Wood
^heathing that makes them so obstinate against Evident Truth, though that be
considerable also. They who ^ive not by the Preservation, but by the Damage and
Decays of Plank and Shipping, which the Worm and ^^^d-sheathing do various ways
promote, cannot be recon^^d to Lead-sheathng, Vide the Papers formerly
published, particularly the Certifica^e of the 6 Commanders that viewed the
Antelope's Lead-sheathing, in presence of the Navy-Board, aftermentioned.
which ('it is fairly proved by Reason and Experience) does much preserve them:
And there^^ the Shipwrights in combination with one Captain ^ly, formerly a
Shipwright also, and now the English East(...) Companies Husband, bend all
their force and false suggestions, as the Old o^es are baffled, with new tricks
(...)ppose it, as appeared more particularly of late upon the Trumbal Galley.
which (having made one East India (...) age in her Lead-sheathing, and being
taken into the said Company's service) was brought into the Dock to fit, and
(...) very next day Mr. Hale, appointed by Mr. Whaley her Owner to meet him
about 5 in the afternoon at the Ships side, (...) ^iew her Sh^athing to mend
what might be ^ami^s; when they were strangely surpised to find the
Lead-sheathing (...)lly stripped off. But to satisfy the Owner; they told him,
(as he did Mr. Hale the next morning) that Captain (...) had brought an Order
from the Company, that she must be sheathed with Wood, and dispatched
forthwith, which (...) same day, about noon, meeting with some of them, who
signed the Order for fitting her out,) he found to be (...)tively false; they
never having Order^d her Lead-sheathing to be stripped off, or, if there were
cause for it, to (...)ose Wood-sheathing upon him, as they declared to him in
Mr. Hale's presence, at which he seemed to be very (...)ch concerned that he
should be put to such unnecessary charge.

But if his Captain, (who was not present at this ^^ripping, and who also had
formerly been a Shipwright) was (...)senting or co^^iving at it, it is supposed
(his Ow^^^ having left all things to his ordering, as he says) he was (...)ly
able to pacify him, when he found how much (...) had saved him of the usual
charge of the Wood sheathing, (...)ch doubtless the Shipwrights amongst them
had agreed to allow, be it what it will, rather than this Lead-sheath(...)
should be continued, or a new one put on, as Mr. (...), upon his discourse
afterward with Mr. Whaley, can give very (...)d reasons to believe. But as for
the hasty stripping, this nimble operation that could not stay one day for a
fair (...), sufficiently declares to all indifferent persons the concern they
lay under, least its excellency should appear, for (...) there been any thing
material to complain of, they would certainly have exposed it to be seen by
every body.

^he Sheathing being stripped, there appeared one place upon the Garble-strake,
on the Starboard side aba^^, where (...) Worm had eaten, which Captain Ely.
having e^pied, mightily bounced of his discovery, till the Owner said he (...)
do Mr. Hale that right, to tell him that the Lead ha^ by an accident been
rubbed of in that place at her first (...) out of the Dock. But the thing they
in^^^^ed on, that required her stripping was, that the seams wanted (...)
aulking, some said they were not well done at first, though to those that went
down with Mr. Hale, they seemed all (...) ^ell; But why new Ca^lking here, and
not under the Wood-sheathing above, which was done at the same (...)? and as
they told the Owner, need not be stripped these 10 years, 'twas readily answered,
the Lead-sheathing (...) decayed the Oakam under it; but be that as it will,
stripping was resolved on by Captain Ely, right or wrong; (...) told her Owner
before she was put into the Dock, that the Lead-sheathing must come off, at
which he being (...) what moved, said the Ship was his, and he would see very
good cause for it, first; but it seems it was agreed (...)ngst them, that for
that reason he should not see 't at all. And, let Captain Ely deny, or say what
he will to (...) use himself to his Masters, for abusing their Authority, the
great Zeal and Concernment he is transported with, (...) senseless (...))
against the Lead-sheathing, relating to this Ship as well as those already gone
in the Compa(...) Service, who would have sheathed with Lead, if they had been
permitted, does so much discover his great Ignorance (...) Prejudice, that no
body believes him, nor minds what he says, but such as are obliged to comply
with his Power (...) Office.

The ^ame Trick was formerly played for the better justification of stripping
the Antelope's first Lead-sheathing (all (...) a sudd^in) to Cau^k her Seams
without acquainting her Commander, Captain Hammond, he having said too ma(...)
Truths in favor of it; but he affirming to her Owner, Mr. Sh^pheard, that the
Seams were very good and sound, (...) appointed a ti^^ to hear them all
together, when Mr. Hale producing some of the Spun Yarn that lay in her Seams
full (...) Pi^ch, fr^sh and strong as at first, the Shipwright was forced to
own it to Mr. Shepherd, and said, that the (...) indeed, were (...) and good
next the Lead, but that they were rotted from within Board, and not well (...)
at first, which (...) new Caulking, and for that reason, as also to new drive
her Iron-spikes, which had been (...) from her (...) building, He found it
necessary to strip her sheathing, not because 'twas Lead, for had it been a
(...) never ^o good, he said, it must come off. But if Caulking after one
Voyage be made an excuse for (...)riping, Why do^^ they Caulk better at first?
The true reason must be, because a Lead-sheathing is to be brought (...); And
if these Tricks and Pretenses will serve, to be sure a Lead-sheathing (though
'twould last as long as the Ship) (...) be stripped every Voyage.

If Owners will still believe the Shipwright, and suffer themselves to be thus
imposed upon, Who can help it? But if their Commander, Master, or some body
else that understands it, they can trust, will be constantly by, but for 2 or 3
days, and see the searching and caulking of every Seam, and sound Oakam driven
themselves, certainly their trouble or expense would be very well recompensed;
for (^his objection being once removed) they could have no pretense thus to put
the unnecessary charge of a new sheathing upon them. Though Mr. Hale has
sufficiently cleared this matter about the Seams, as well as other things, in
his An^elope's Evidence, Printed in May School. Several Months before she was
new Sheathed, which some of them should ^^ve Answered, and put his name to it,
if they had had any thing to say against the Truth thereof, while the Ships
sid^^, with her seams and sheathing lay in the Dock to be seen by every body,
which would easily determine the point, and certainly they had done it, under
those provocations, if they had had any thing material to say against it: But
they could never answer that, nor any other of the Papers, he has been obliged
to Print, to vindicate the exce^lency of his Lead-sheathing, against their many
false suggestions, and idle stories they had raised about it. But the Truth of
that Paper appears by the Testimony of six Experienced Masters, and Commanders
of good credit, who in presence of the Navy-Board, viewed the Antelope's
Lead-sheathing, and the Plank and Seams where it was stripped, and have justified
it under their hands among other things, That (not to mention the known damage
of the great Iro^^-Nails, of the other) they found the Lead-sheathing did
preserve the Plank better, more cool, smooth and sound and the Oakam longer in
the Seams, than a Wood-sheathing could do, besides its certain security against
the Worm, and great benefit in Sailing, etc.

The Weedaw Friggot having made her Voyage in her Lead-sheathing, to Guinea,
and the West Indies, was brought into Mr. Fowl^^'s Dock at Lime-house, the
19th. Instant* to be fitted out for the same Voyage again, where any one may
find her sheathing and seams under it, very good and sound, in respect of the
sheathing it self, and no cause for stripping, save only in those places where
the Shipwright had mixed Elm Plank with the Oaks, which being doted and rotten,
was shifted, about a tenth part, which was with little charges new sheathed
with Lead: But where upon searching the Plank was sound; they found the Seams
sound also, and no need of stripping the whole sheathing, as the
Trumball-Galley was, to new caulk her Seams, pretending the Lead-sheathing had
rotted the Oakam under it, as abovementioned. The Foe had visited her sheathing
two nights before she came into the Dock, but finding themselves discovered by
the Watch, who was set for that purpose, after they had torn off about two
Foot, they got off to the shore, being pursued, they left their Boat and ran
away.

Lead-sheathing to that of Wood, may be true, yet the thing can never do; for
^f the Shipwrights find they cannot keep it out, they will agree to leave some
places so defectively Caulk'd about the Seams, or Trunnel-holes, etc. not
discovera^le by the eye, which shall soon become very Leaky, and then lay the
fault upon the Lead-sheathing. Thus the Owners being over persuaded, or always
i^ fear of ill Caulking, will be unwilling to venture it, and so the
Lead-sheathing will fall; and if Mr. Hale will carry it on, he must get a Dock
of his own.

This ill Caulking may, by the Owners care, and little charge, be prevented by
the means abovementioned: Ans. 1.
Or they may reserve the Caulkers (which is not the Carpenters) work to
themselves, and employ those the^ can trust to see it well done, unless the
Shipwright will lay this Trick aside, and undertake for the goodness of h^^
Seams, that they shall last (at least) as long under a Lead as under a
Wood-sheathing, which (it is plain from wh^^ is proved by Reason and Experience
as above) preserves them better.

But if they will not, certainly if Owners would but consult their interest
also, which is very consid^rable 2.
in this matter, they would not suffer their own Reason and Profit to be thus
invaded by the Tricks a^^ Interest of the Shipwrights, to their great charge
and damage to their Ships and Sailing; but agree amongst themselves to oblige
the Shipwrights, who get their living by them, and vast profit otherwise, by
new Building a^^ necessary Reparation of their Ships) to permit them quietly to
preserve their Hulls by careful Caulking and Le^^-sheathing, or any ways else
they think fit.

As for Mr. Hales taking a Dock purposely for that Work, there is no need, nor
reason for that, for if (...) 3.
Lead-sheathing be countenanced, it is not to be supposed, one or two Docks
would be sufficient to dispatch all (...) will sheath with Lead, many of which
may happen at the same time. He is indeed off'red by a Shipwright to (...) a
Hulk in a convenient place to Careene Ships of any burden for his
Lead-sheathing, which (as he is infor(...) may be better done, and Caulk'd also
upon the Careene, than in a Dock. But this Shipwright is afraid to (...) till
he can receive some assurance that the Lead-sheathing will go on, that he may
not expose himself to (...) and the ill will of his Fraternity for nothing.

Now for the further encouragement of those that shall make use of this
Lead-Sheathing hereafter, although (...) Antelope' s Evidence abovementioned, and
other Printed Papers, its much greater cheapness (as well (...)ness) is fully
proved at the rate of 14d. a foot, in respect of an East India Wood-Sheathing,
at (...) Penny, and even of an ordinary Streights Sheathing of 7d. a foot, by
the graving saved, duration (...) of the Lead when stripped. Mr. Hale hereby
proposes to do it for 12d. a foot with the same thickness of (...) 3 l. to the
foot, and the same Nailing at 1 inch distance, close driven in the Seams, with
the Nails h(...) hitherto used, approved by long experience everywise proper
for the work, allowing only for extraordinary (...)ness of the bottom of the
Keel and Cut-water, as that shall be required to be done; and for abundant
(...)tion against Beats and Lyters, he will Sheath over and between the Wales
with Lead a third part (...) and double nailing, driving one between each;
Provided always, that there be no Wood-sheathi(...) ^bove, and that the
Carpenter or Caulker may have no pretense of business to do on the side he is
at work, (...) has hitherto by their Spawles, Stages, etc. caused him great
trouble and damage, but that the Ships (...) be prepared (by paying, and
parcelling the Iron-Work, Spun-Yarn in the Seams, or otherwise, as they shall
(...) fit) ready to bring the Lead-sheathing on, desiring only that he may have
the use of the boards an (...)terials in the Yard, to make his Table for his
Plumbers to open and fit his Lead, and for Stages (...)nient to bring it on,
and a room as near the Ship as may be to lock up his goods till his work be
done.

Or to enforce this Improvement for public good as well as benefit to those
that use it, (although his Patent b(...) in being, yet) if any one thinks he can
perform the work of Sheathing cheaper, and as well with Nails of h(...)
providing, he is willing to sell them his Lead at the rates published, which
others pay for Houses, and (...) purposes, viz. 16 s. a Hundred, for the
thicker sorts of 6 l. to the foot and upwards, and for the th(...) sorts 12 d.
a hundred more for each pound in a foot less: Or if they please to buy their
Lead themse(...) and send it in to his Mill at Deptford, he will Cast and Mill
it for them, and return them Weight (...) Weight in Milled Lead, at 5 s. a
hundred for the thicker sorts, and 12 d. a hundred for each poun(...) foot
thinner as aforesoid.

Mr. Hale lives at the Mill'd-Lead sign in Orange-street, by Red-Lyon-Square,
who undert(...) all Lead Work about Churches, Houses, etc. as well as
Sheathing, having Plumbers and (...) Workmen to perform the same, and sells his
Solder for 6 d. a pound.

LONDON, Printed September. 27. 1699.


