THAT The bringing on Boards above, and Paying the Plank with Stuff under a
Mill'd-Lead-Sheathing, is Damageable, more Charge, and altogether Unnecessary;
Plainly proved from Experience as well as Reason.
SINCE the Shipwrights see the Mill'd-Lead Sheathing is like to go on, and that
they can impose upon Merchant-Owners no longer, they are willing to play at
Small-game, rather than stand out. They prevail with some to believe it
necessary to sheath a Struck or two with Boards, to fend the Ship-sides from
Boats and Lyters, which, they say, will rub off the Lead-sheathing; and having
obtained that, they can make bold with a Struck or two more; and, if suffered
to go on, they will bring it down to the Keel in time. They have advanced very
fair for it already, the Trumbal-Galley, a Ship between 3 and 400 Ton, bound for
the East Indies in the Company's service, being this present October 1697,
sheathed with Mill'd-Lead in Mr. Kirby's Dock, had a Board-sheathing (under
this pretense) brought down seven Boards on the Sides, and more before and aft
upon the Bows and Buttocks, where no Boat or Lyter comes; above one third of
the whole Sheathing. All which, upon due consideration of what follows, will
appear from Experience, Reason, and Common Sense, to be wholly unnecessary.

I. From EXPERIENCE.
None of those Twenty Ships of the Royal Navy that were sheathed with
Mill'd-Lead (all totally up above the Wales, as high as any Sheathing goes) had
any such Board-sheathing at all, only some of them had a Sheet of Copper, or
two-inch Plank, nailed on in the Wake of the Anchor; and if any such Damage had
happened from Boats or Lyters, we should certainly have heard of it; for this
Objection (as well as rubbing off by Cables, Hawsers, lying on Ground,
smallness and shortness of the Nails, etc.) was made at the beginning, which
with the rest obstructed the Contract with the Navy-board, till upon Five Years
Experience, on Ten Ships in that time sheathed with Milled Lead, (and that but
of 2 l. or little more, to the foot, whereas this now used is full 3 l.) that
Board found all these Objections proved but Surmises, which however not being
capable of a Negative Answer, till Time should try the Truth thereof, they
forbore entering into a Contract, till they had found upon sufficient Proof and
Experience all those Objections were answered, and the Lead-sheathing fully
approved of by them; as they declared in the Preamble of their Contract, which
then they entered into with the Mill'd-Lead Company for 20 Years to come, that
they might secure to the Crown the Benefit thereof at the terms agreed. And
when Seven Years after this its Adversaries, taking advantage of the Company's
Neglect and Differences amongst themselves, had (by false Suggestions that this
Sheathing did in an extraordinary manner eat the Rudder-Irons) prevailed with
that Navy-board to make a Report to the Lords of the Admiralty against it; and
now, when Twenty Ships were sheath^d therewith, they never had the Confidence
to mention any of the Old Objections, (which they knew would be falsified, the
Sheathings themselves, or good Evidence, being easy to have recourse to) and
which certainly they would have done, if there had been any thing material, of
what kind soever, to be objected against it, besides this New Whim of eating
the Rudder-Irons, nothing else but barely that being complained of, or so much
as mentioned in that Report, which discovered no great Good Will that Board
themselves had at that time for the Lead-sheathing, what Right soever they had
formerly done it upon their Contract. And this of the Ironwork having been
proved false and ridiculous, it would be very hard if its Enemies should be
permitted to revive the old Objections again; this were to dance in a Circle,
which would never end.

II. From REASON.
1. If this suggested rubbing off by Boats and Lyters were true, the Damage
cannot be considerable, and the Danger nothing, whereas the Wood-sheathing is
at least the same it was before, worse, and abundantly dearer; as has been
shown elsewhere.

2. No Boat or Lyter can come at it under Water; and for the Gunnel or upper
parts, that may bang or rub against the Ship-sides, it must be above Water
whenever it happens, and then it must be seen, and when seen, it may be
presently mended, Lead and Nails being always ready on board for that purpose,
which however perhaps may be prevented with common Care, usual in other cases,
by Fenders of Juncks, Wooden Rollers, or the like, hung over the Ship sides in
Harbor.

3. Reason would that they should rather sheath below with Boards, where the
rubbing off (they talk of) by Cables, Hawsers, and lying on Ground, is more
dangerous and out of sight: But if that Fear be conquered, as Lead-sheathing
the Bottom owns, methinks there should be no Difficulty of admitting it above,
where the Worm eats most, (as is known it does between the Load and Light
water-line) and the Lead-sheathing so certain a Security against it, which the
Boards are not, but serve for a Feast only, to entertain the Worm a Voyage or
two: And if the Lead-sheathing should rub off in some places, (which is not so
easily done as some fancy) it is with little Charge easily mended, as is said,
and the Sheathing still as good as at first bringing on.

There is one thing more which the Shipwrights would fain retain, as being some
Against paying the Sides.
profit to them, and damage to the Lead-sheathing, which is paying the Plank
with Stuff under the Lead-sheathing, as they have used to do under their
Wood-sheathing. This also by sufficient Experience appears to be altogether
unnecessary and inconvenient, besides the Charge thereof to the Owners; as
follows.

1st. It was by the Inventers of the Mill'd-Lead-sheathing proposed at first,
and afterward practiced upon all those 20 Ships that were formerly Sheathed
therewith, that the Ship-sides should be well Brim'd and the Seams well Caulk'd
with a Thread of Spun-Yarn, or Hair, laid in to fill up the Seams even with the
Plank, the Boltheads, Braces, or other Iron work to be parcell'd, and over all
to bring on the Lead, without paying with any Stuff, how thin soever, which
leaves an unevenness in the Lead, by the Hammer's pressing the soft Body that
lies between, in driving the Nails home; as is visible upon all those Ships
that have lately been Sheathed with Lead, and is always complained of by them,
but the Cause and (...) Remedy never hearkened to, upon the Shipwright's
pretense, that this paying with Stuff is absolutely necessary to preserve the
Plank.

2ly. Now if it has been found by Experience, that the Plank, after hardening,
by Briming at first when Lead-sheathings were brought on, have continued firm
and found under those Sheathings for Seven, Eight, Ten, or Twelves Years
together, without any cause of Complaint, which must have appeared at their
Strippings, and been Complained of by its active Enemies, if any Damage had
come to the Plank by this omission of paying, of which no Complaint was ever
heard, nor ever objected at first among their other surmises, which probably
they forgot then, but would have been sure to have remembered if they had found
any such thing upon Stripping any Ship afterward: But the contrary thereof was
then very remarkable, that their Plank was found to be as smooth and found
under their Lead-sheathings (in particular the Dreadnought's, which had been on
near Twelve Years) as at first doing.

This must certainly convince any unprejudiced Person, that this paying of the
Plank under a Lead-sheathing is also altogether unnecessary as well as
inconvenient and chargeable, and consequently they will lay it aside for the
future.

There is one thing lately objected that was never heard of before, viz. That
the Milled Lead is of a drying nature, which lying upon a Seam above Water,
drys and shrinks the Oakam, whereas the same being covered with a parcelling of
Canvas, preserves the Oakam moist, and makes it last much longer, without new
Caulking. And it may be true, though this proceeds from no drying quality in
the Lead, more than if the Seam were covered with Copper, Tin, or any other
Metal, which being exposed to the Sun and Air, will doubtless be dryer upon any
thing it is laid than Canvas dipped in Stuff, till it be dried and the Virtue of
the Pitch exhausted, which may still be laid upon such Seams, and if they see
cause, may bring a piece of Sheathing-Lead over it, which must still preserve
it longer. A quite contrary Quality was once objected against the Mill'd-Lead,
when it was employed in the Navy, to line the Bread-Rooms, that they had
discovered such dampness and moisture therein, that did corrupt and spoil the
Bisquet, upon which it was discontinued, though it is known nothing preserves
things better: And several Pursers Certificates were produced, that their
Bisquet was preserved much better and longer when their Bread-Rooms were lined
with Lead than before, as has been shown already.

October, 1697. THO. HALE.

This Paper, with some others, and the Book also about the Milled Lead for all
purposes, may be had at Mr. Nelme' s, a Bookseller over against the Royal
Exchange, and at Mr. Basset' s by Temple Bar.


