THE Irregular and Disorderly State OF THE Plantation-TRADE Discussed, and
Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the Right Honorable the LORDS and
COMMONS in Parliament Assembled.
THAT the present Parliament Assembled together with Resolutions to Promote
Trade, was the Apprehensions of most, and the frequent Considerations about it,
by the Lords and Commons, since this Session began, confirms the Truth of it;
and whilst they are taking Care of some particular Branches of the Trade of the
Kingdom, I humbly take leave to Recommend another Branch of its Trade not yet
considered of, and which, when well weighed, and enquired into, may possibly be
found to deserve the Regards of a Parliament as much as the East India, or any
one other Branch whatsoever; and that is, The Trade to the Plantations.

To have this Trade settled on a Regular and Sound Foundation, I humbly conceive
concerns England very much, in regard Colonies Abroad are Planted, Maintained
and Protected at a very great Expense of Treasure; and a Specimen of that may,
I presume, be seen by the Accounts of the present Charge of the War, now lying
before the Honorable the House of Commons, and which doubtless must swell very
high: But that which Affects the Kingdom as its greatest Treasure, and of which
there is no Account kept of its Disbursments, is the Expense of our People, a
Treasure which can no way be compensated, nor satisfied for, but by such a way
as may conduce to supply the Kingdom with People for our People; for else, were
our Plantations so many Mines of Gold and Silver, yet should we be weakened and
impoverished by the having them.

Spain is a lively Instance and Proof of this, who from the greatest Monarchy
in Europe, is declined to what it now is, and who have commenced their
Declension gradually from the time they Dispeopled Spain to Plant in the
West Indies; all the Treasure of the Indies which they have in their power, and
fetch yearly to Spain, not being able to Recompense the Loss of their People;
and this instance may serve to confirm the Truth of a Position that is already
agreed on by all, as far as I know at least, as unobjectionable.

That all Kingdoms or Governments are Strong or Weak, Rich or Poor, according
to the Plenty or Paucity of the People of that Government.

And that England may not split upon the same Rock Spain has done, should be
not only every English Man's good Wish, but ought to be as much their
Endeavors; and I can heartily say, it is the only Motive that draws me to cast
in my poor Mite as an Essay toward it, and as a Necessary Consequence of the
before-going Position.

All such Means as tend to draw our Hands from us, and which at the same time
creates not Means by which we may be supplied with as many, or more Hands, in
the room of them, are pernicious, and as they shall obtain, may in the Issue be
Destructive.

Manufacture in the Plantations, is that very Means by which the Kingdom is
drained of its People, and is so far from giving us the Means by which it may
be replenished with People in the room of them, that it deprives us of that
only Means that is left us for it.

Manufacture promoted in the Kingdom, is the only Means by which the Kingdom
may be replenishd with People in the room of those sent to the Plantations; for
as the Prey to the Eagles, Manufacture is to the People; where that is, there
they will be gathered together.

On these Two Heads I beg leave Humbly to suggest some few Considerations, to
show the Prejudices and the Disorder, Manufacture of Sugar in a part of
Barbados, does occasion at present, to the Essential Interests of the Kingdom,
and the further Mischiefs it will bring, as it shall obtain and increase.

And then to show the Benefits and Advantages that would accrue to the Kingdom,
by Discouraging or Suppressing it, and by injoining all Commodities that are
the Growth of the Plantations to be Imported in their first Product.

Manufactury in the Plantations, (even as Manufacture) does need, and draws
more People than is necessary for Product, and is a Motive to our People to
leave the Kingdom, and indeed puts a Necessity upon them so to do, for it
thereby deprives us of Manufacture at Home, by which they are Employed.

Manufactures of Sugar in Barbados, although but to the degree it has already
attained, is such an Error in the Foundation of the Interests of the Kingdom,
as respecting the Plantation Trade, that no Structure of Good, or Benefit to
the Kingdom, can be Built upon it, and is the Cause that the Navigation is very
much lessened Homeward; and by despoiling us of Manufacturing in the Kingdom,
prevents a Navigation and Trade Outward, of Sugar Manufactured wholly and
entirely, and which once we had to a very great degree, and is the chief Cause
that the Manufactory and Navigation (which are the only Fruits proposed, as the
Returns and Repayment of all Charges upon the Plantations) is conveyed to the
Dutch and Hamburghers without any Charge to them; without Charge did I say?
Nay, they are well paid for it; as for instance, There was Exported from the
Port of London only, from Midsummer 1687, to Midsummer 1688, as the
Custom-house Books will show, Six Thousand Four Hundred Seventy Four Tuns of
Sugar, which was Navigated in their own Ships, as they usually do; and they
drew back out of the King's Revenue 19448 l. 19 s. 6 d. and I question whether
the whole Duty on Sugar for this last Year amounts to so much; and stood them
in so much Cheaper than the English Manufacturer could Buy them in our own
Markets. And by the Advantages of Navigation, Manufacture and Trade to most
parts of Europe, of this After-Manufactured, may be guessed the Loss the
Kingdom has through the want of it.

Manufacture of Sugar in Barbados, is not more Injurious to the Manufacture
and Navigation at Home, then it is Mischievous to that part of Barbados, and
all the rest of the Islands who do not Manufacture their Sugar; for as they are
Obliged, as indeed they ought, to bring their Sugars into the Kingdom, they
find their Disappointment of a Market here, by reason of the Discouragement
their Buyers lie under from the Barbados Manufacture, for they must have more
or less Money for their Sugars, according as the number of their Buyers are,
many or few. And to give one instance of this also, the Refiners in the Year
1690, through a Surprise of a quantity of Barbados Manufactured Clayed (not
Refined) Sugar and Molosses, brought in one Fleet from Barbados, Lost not less
than Twenty Thousand Pounds in about Thirty Sugar-houses in and about London;
and I am apt to think it could not be less than Fifty Thousand Pounds to the
Importers of Unmanufactured Sugar; for the Refiners ceased working for near
Twelve Months after, and the Importer all that while depended almost wholly on
the Courtesy of Foreigners for a Price for their Sugars.

If Manufactory of Sugar in Barbados be permitted, then will it be not only a
Motive, but a strong Invitation to the rest of That, and all the other Islands,
to do the like.

And the Indulgency of Manufacturing of Sugar, will induce and persuade to a
Manufactory of Cotton-wooll, which Now is a Manufactory that Imploys possibly
some Hundreds of Families in the Kingdom,; and this is begun already in Fact,
in some measure.

And as an Attendant on that, will follow the Manufactory of Dying also, that
is another great Manufactory in the Kingdom; for the Wool and Materials for
Dying, such as Indigo, Logwood, Fustick, Nicarague-Wood, are all the Growth of
the Plantations, and places adjacent thereto; and the Dying-Woods being
Imported at present in great quantities, as well as Sugar, Employ a great
number of Ships yearly.

I shall not strain the Point, if I add, there is danger of Losing the
Navigation almost entirely, for there is not the least degree of any
Manufacture that is used upon the Plantations, but to a proportionable degree
to what it does obtain, the Navigation is diminished; and if all their Products
be Manufactured there, then New England, who now do in a great measure share
with us in the Navigation already, may possibly Ingross the whole in time; they
Building Ships, and Trading not only with the Plantations, but directly for
Spain; with Fish, etc. at present, it cannot be doubted, that they do, or will
deny themselves of carrying any Plantation Goods there, or elsewhere, where it
stands with their Interest so to do. It Is far from me to grudge the Advantages
of any, especially English Men, in what part of the World soever they be; but
that Old England shall be made to depend upon the New, or any of its Colonies
or Plantations, or that they should be Enriched, to the Exhausting the Kingdom
of its People, which are its Riches and Strength; or Navigation, which are its
Walls and Defense; or that the Lesser should be preferred to the prejudice of
the Greater, cannot be the Desire of any Honest Man.

Objection, But why is the Loss of this Manufactory laid at the Door of the
Barbados Manufacturers, when as the Refiners had some Exportation Trade,
before the late Impost Duty was laid, and which gave the Forreigner 2 s. 4 d.
Draw-back? And since that it was, that the Exportation Trade was lost, and
therefore that must be the true Cause.

Answer, It Is true, that this was an accidental Cause, and yet the Barbados
Manufactury, the Main and Original Cause, for that (as Worms or Vermin that
destroys the Roots of a Tree, makes it liable to be blown down by every blast
of Wind) weakens this Interest of Manufacture at home, so as every Forreigner
may wrest it from us; but had there been no other Cause than this Draw-back,
then might the Exportation Trade have been Retrieved, since this Cause is
removed; but it is evident it is not so, nor never like, whilst the Original
Cause remains; and which is the Cause that there are not above Fifty
Sugar-Houses in England, although we have Six Islands that are
Sugar-Plantations; and Holland has about One Hundred Sugar-Houses, and Three
of them, as big as Twenty of the biggest we have, and Employ Seventy Thousand
Pounds Stock each, and yet has but one Plantation of its own; and Hamborough
has about Fourscore Sugar-Houses, and not one Plantation of its own, and both
depend upon England and Portugal for their Supplies: And yet Sugar which is the
Growth of our own Plantations, is as much in our Power as Wool is, which is
the Growth of the Kingdom; and I doubt not but in time, it will be thought to
deserve as much our Care to preserve for Manufacture; and the rather, because
Navigation will be more promoted by this, than that of Wool.

I humbly hopes, that enough has been said to show that the Plantation-Trade
in the State it now is in, is Irregular and Disorderly, and that the Charge of
it is Englands, and the Fruits thereof is Reaped betwixt the Hollander and
Hamburgher on the one Hand, and the Barbados Manufacturer on the other; and
the Kingdom, and all the rest of the Plantations, are the Sufferers. The next
thing to be considered of, is,

How the Plantation-Trade may be settled on such a Regular Foundation, as that
it may be reciprocally Advantageous to the Kingdom, and all the Plantations in
general; and I humbly conceive the Methods to be used for it are very easy,
provided the Gentlemen concerned in the Interest I have been speaking against,
would be content to come into the general Interests of the Kingdom, and set up
Sugar-Houses in the Kingdom, instead of those in Barbados; let them enjoy the
Houses set up there, as Planters; and those set up here, as Refiners or
Manufacturers; and why not? They will then stand upon an Equal foot with the
rest of the Plantations there, and with the Manufacturers here, and so make up
one Family as it were, one United Interest; they will then be provided for
equally with all the King's Subjects; and for these Gentlemen to expect to be
privileged above all, I presume will be thought to be too much; and to be
privileged to go on with an Interest that stands in Opposition to, and poisons
all the Interests of the Kingdom in its Manufacture, Navigation and
Plantations, is unreasonable to desire, even to a Crime.

I wonder not, that there are so few Sugar-Houses in the Kingdom, but rather
that there should be any, under the Difficulties they have always struggled
with; and were they not a Frugal Industrious People, they could not continue a
Being in the Kingdom, although Refining of Sugar has been here before ever we
had Plantations, and had then, their Supplies for Manufactury from Portugal and
the East Indies; but I wonder, that some Gentlemen should so despise and
contemn them for their fewness, always arguing, that they are not worthy of
being considered, because few, and a small Interest, although made so purely by
themselves: I am well assured they are not few, as being a Monopoly or
Corporation; for they are none, and their Trade is open and free to all, and
were there due Encouragements for it, there is no doubt, but there would be
enough of it, and why England may not have as many Sugar-Houses added to what
now is, as there are Sugar-Houses in Holland, Hamborough, Flanders, etc. that
depend upon the Water of our own Fountain, the Sugar of our Plantations for
their Supply, I know not, and those in Barbados added to them; the Key of this
Fountain is in the Hands of our Conservators; and who will, I doubt not, as
soon as they see these Streams have run waste, or upon Strangers so long, turn
them toward the Kingdom at last.

The Methods, that with all Submission, I would propose for making the
Interests of the Kingdom and Plantations, to be Mutual and United, are,

That the Manufacturers in Barbados, may be obliged to Import their Sugars
unmanufactured, as all the other Islands now do, viz. Jamaica, Nevis, Antegoa,
St. Christophers, Monserrat, and a great part of Barbados.

By Importing their Sugars thus, they give us an entire Navigation homeward,
which now is greatly lessened; they will take away the true cause why this
Manufacture is so little in the Kingdom, and wrested from us by Strangers, and
give us an opportunity by increasing this Manufacture, to replenish the Kingdom
with People in the Room of those they want from us; and as by some necessary
Laws to encourage it above Foreigners, this Manufacture may be wholly in the
Kingdom; and thereby multiply Buyers at home, which is the Interest of the
Plantations, erect a new Navigation with Sugar Manufactured to all Parts of
Europe, not only to the East Country, Spain, Italy, Turkey, Flanders, where, in
some measure, we once had; but even to Holland and Hamborough it self, who now
have both the Navigation and Manufacture of it from hence; and thus England may
be made the Mart of Sugar for all Europe and it is pity that a small Fly; of a
Manufactury in Barbados, should spoil this great Pot of sweet Ointment: And
that I may show how Practicable this is, it may not be amiss to represent how
useful this would be, by the tastes of Exportation we have had to the places
above mentioned, as I am very well informed.

The East Country Trade was pretty considerable, and to whatever Value there
was of Manufactured or Refined Sugar Exported there, saved so much Silver in
the Kingdom, for the Balance of that Trade is against us, for we must have our
Stores for Ships, and they will have our Silver, since they like not our
Commodities; Sugar was a Commodity they did like, but the Dutch could supply
them Cheaper, by reason of the Draw-back, as already mentioned.

As the Trade to the East Country saved our Silver, so that to Spain brought
us Silver in the lieu of Sugar; and that to Turkey and Italy, Silk, Grogoram
Yarn, Oils, etc. Commodities that create and help on Manufacture in the
Kingdom, which Employs many thousands of Hands.

By the tastes we have had of the Exportation-Trade, may be seen what may be
done much more; I do not know, but that next to the East India Trade and
Fishery, this Manufacture and Benefits arising from it, makes the third great
Article of Trade to Holland above all other; and that they which are such known
Judges of Trade, should so esteem this, as with all their Might and Cunning, to
grasp at it, should quicken us, as much in our endeavors to preserve it to our
selves; and this may be Noted, That they do not suffer any Sugar to be
Manufactured on their Plantations, but that it shall be brought home
unmanufactured; and all that, is not above Ten or Twelve Sail of Ships a year.

Objection, But will not the giving over of Manufactury of Sugar at Barbados,
give encouragement to the Dutch and French, etc. to Manufacture theirs on their
Plantations, and so be able to under-sell us at Foreign Markets?

Answer, If the French, Dutch, or any other will be so Impolitick, as to Weaken
and Impoverish their Kingdom, and Destroy their Navigation, (as by setting up
Manufactury in the Plantations they certainly must) I do not know why we should
fear that, for England will be the better able to deal with them upon any
Difference; but I presume there is no grounds for such Fears; and the only
Instance we have of such a Method of Trade, is Portugal, whom, although they
were the first that settled Sugar Plantations in Europe, have not yet grown
Rich by them, neither in People nor Navigation; nor never can, in such an
Irregular Method as Manufacturing on the Plantations; Nay, they are in a
manner, beat out of the Sugar Trade, and their Examples must be avoided, unless
we would be content with the same Success; but were it not thus, yet is there
neither Dutch, French nor Hamburgers that have the Advantages we have of so
many Plantations; shall we not be able to out-sell the Dutch that has but one
Plantation, and the Hamburger that has none, when we have Six Islands that are
Sugar Plantations? Besides, the Objection is weak, and at best, is but an
Argument of the Slothful; There is a Lion in the way, says he: Such
Counselors, if they had an Interest in Namur last year, as now they have in
Barbados, with as good grounds might have advised not the taking of Namur, for
fear the French should take it from us again; for to forbear Improving our
Trade, for fear others should take it from us, is giving of it, for fear we
should lose it, and that when there is no danger neither.

I hope none will insinuate, as if I desing'd to persuade, from laying out our
Treasure and people to all the occasions of the Plantations; those especially,
who have not, neither from the Motives of Profit by Manufacturing, nor by
reason of their loss in having their Buyers at home balked, been drawn from
their Duty in Importing their Sugars unmanufactured; and they are five of the
six Islands, and part of the sixth; they have done their part, and will always
deserve the Care and Helps of the Kingdom whilst they persist; and it is the
Barbados Manufactury alone, that spoils the Harmony in the Interests of
Kingdom and Plantations.

It Is so usual in treating of a general Interest, to aim at a particular one;
That I may possibly have raised some Expectation of wondering what mine is, and
to satisfy such, I have only this to say, As I have Treated of the General
Diffusive Good and Advantages of the Kingdom; if that takes place, there is no
good Englishman but shares in it, either in his Estate, or in his Content and
Satisfaction; if mine does not lie in the Kingdom's Interest, I am content to
go without it; I have delivered nothing but what I believe to be true, and from
the Impression it had upon may own Apprehension, it is possible I may have
delivered matters in too conclusive a Style; but with all Humility and
Submission, I desire to present them to the Consideration of the August
Assembly of Parliament, as Humble Suggestions only; from which possibly may be
gathered by Their Great Wisdom, something as a Grain of Wheat from amongst a
great deal of Chaff, that may through Improvement in Their Hands, be of use to
the Kingdom and Plantations.

I think I can heartily say, That no By-Ends could have prevailed with me to
give or take this trouble, but a sincere Zeal for my Country, which has a
great many Doors by which goes out its Disbursements, and whilst I did know of
any shut against its Reimbursements, of this high Moment, I could not be
silent: I am told, it is a Cause that wants Friends, to Recommend it; and I did
then conclude it wanted Friends, because it wanted being made known: I have
according to my poor Endeavors, Represented it as Intelligible as I could; and
doubt not, but some Worthy Patriots will take it up and promote it, even for
its own sake, or rather for the Kingdoms sake.

FINIS.

