INFORMATION For the Moderator of the Presbytry of Glasgow and the Agent for
the Kirk, Against The Titulars and Tacksmen of the Teinds within the Paroch of
Calder, and the Heretors of the said Paroch for their Interests.
THE Paroch of Calder being a part of the Subdeanery of Glasgow, the Teinds of
the haill Subdeanry did formerly belong to the Duke and Duchess of Hamiltoun,
and were purchased by the College of Glasgow, from the said Duke and Duchess
about the year 1656.

Before the College purchased these Teinds, there had been Application made to
the Presbytery of Glasgow, by the Heretors of the said Paroch of Calder, for a
Visitation and Perambulation of the Paroch, in order to the Erection of a new
Kirk. And accordingly the Paroch being duly Perembulat by the Ministers
Commissionat from the Presbytery upon their Report that the Paroch was so
large, and the People so numerous therein, (being above 1500 Communicants,) and
the way so impassible in the time of any wet Weather, there was no possibility
to travel to the Church, the Presbytry found an absolute necessity of a new
Erection, and seriously recommended the perfecting of the same to the civil
Judicatory, as their Act thereupon dated the 27th of June 1649, lying in Process
bears.

The prosecuting of this new Erection, according to the appointment of the
Presbytry, being obstructed by the troubles of these times, how soon soever the
Country came to any Settlement, this Erection was so obviously necessary, that
in anno 1656, the Presbytry of Glasgow did again Perambulat the said Paroch by
Mr. John Carstairs, Mr. Patrick Gillespie then Principal of the College of
Glasgow, with other Ministers, who, after much pains and diligence, for the
space of two whole Days, did Perambulat the same, and found the said Erection
necessary, and reported the same to the Presbytry, who approved thereof, and
recommended the same to the civil Judicatory, for establishing and perfecting
thereof, in the same manner as it had been done, in anno 1649. And for an
evidence of their Zeal and Pains in that matter, did set down the place where
it was fittest the new Church should be built, and expressed every particular
Room whereof the new Paroch should consist, as the Act of the Presbytry lying
in Process will testify.

No sooner was the Government of the Church restored against the Usurpation of
Episcopacy, but as soon the Presbytry of Glasgow became convinced of the
benefit and necessity of what that Presbytry had done in order to a new
Erection at Calder, in the years 1649, and 1656, which good design of theirs
had not been hindered, but by the Troubles, first in the State, and then in the
Church; wherefore, the Presbytery having seen and considered both these Acts,
did ratify the same, and recommend the new Erection to the Commission of
Plantation of Kirks, to be accomplished and perfected according to Law, as
their Act dated in anno 1697 lying in Process bears.

In proscecution of their several Acts and Recommendations from the Presbytry,
there is Summonds raised before the Commission for Plantation of Kirks, for
erecting the new Church within the Paroch of Calder, and modifying a Stipend
for the same, whereupon the Lords and others of that Commission having
appointed a Perambulation of that Paroch of Calder, by some of their own
Number, who having made Report of the foresaid Perambulation, finding a new
Erection absolutely necessary, both for the Ministers sake and the People, the
same is now about to be advised.

At the Perambulation, made by Warrant of the Commission, Mr. John Law one of
the Regents of Glasgow, having compeared in name of that College, did Object
against the Perambulation, and pretend, that the Teinds of that Paroch, being a
Fond for a Profession of Theology within the said College of Glasgow, could
not be diverted or applied to any other use, to the prejudice of the College;
and therefore, at the advising the Report, it is like Compearance may be made
for the College, and the same Pretenses pled, to hinder the new Erection.

To which it is answered for the Pursuers, 1. That the College Right being the
same now that it was in anno 1656, and the Principal of the College upon that
Perambulation having found a new Erection necessary, and subscribed his consent
thereto, it is hoped neither the College, nor the present Members thereof,
will come short of, nor so far condemn the Zeal of so faithful and pious a
Minister, and their own Precedessor the then Principal, as to oppose the said
Erection. 2. Their Teinds being no part of the original Foundation of the
College, nor mortified them as a part of their Revenue, but purchased from the
Duke of Hamilton for a price, they can be in no other case then other singular
Successors could have been. And therefore, as it would never have been
contraverted, that if the Teinds had remained with the Duke of Hamilton, they
would have been liable for this new Erection, so they must be liable in like
manner when acquired by any singular Successor; and the Case is the same as to
Teinds, being liable to the Stipend of the Church, as it is to Lands for
payment of his Majesty's Cess and Public Burdens; for as mortified Lands are
free, yet Lands acquired by Hospitals or Colleges, are still liable as the
Lands of any other Heretor, and so as the College of Glasgow would be liable
for the Cess and Public Burders of Lands, if they acquired, so they must
likewise be liable for a Stipend, and Augmentations, as a natural and
unseperable Burden upon them, by whomsoever they be acquired, because,
originally debentur parocho, and so by transmission of Rights can be deprived
of a suitable Maintenance out of them. 3. This was so far understood to be the
intention and meaning of Parties, both Buyer and Seller, the time of this
Purchase, that it will not be denied, but the Disposition made by the Duke of
Hamilton in favors of the College, was expressly burdened with new Erections
and Augmentations, and the College having acquired them in that manner, can
never plead to be exempted from that Burden by any voluntar Deed of their own
afterward, whether by a voluntar Resignation in his Majesty's Hands or
otherwise, but notwithstanding thereof these purchased Teinds must still remain
subject to the Burdens natural to them, and by express Paction and Condition
entailled upon them by the Disposition.


As to the pretense that their Teinds are the Fond for a Sallary to the
Professor of Theology in the College of Glasgow.

It is answered, 1. That there was a Professor of Theology established and duly
provided, for in that College long before the year 1656; And therefore that
Provision could never be inverted to any other use, to derive the Burden of a
Professor upon their Teinds, which could never be liable thereto in the manner
they were acquired in prejudice of a new Erection and competent Provision for a
Minister. 2. Not only was the Professor of Divinity duly provided for by the
Constitution of the College, but the Teinds of the Paroch of Govan were gifted
by his Majesty in favors of the principal of that College, as a Sallary for
his being a Professor of Divinity therein: And therefore seeing competent
Provision was made for two Professors besides their Teinds; That pretense can
never be sustained to hinder this new Erection. 3. Besides the two Provisions
for Professors of Theology abovementioned, his Majesty has been pleased to
bestow 100 lib. S^erling yearly out of the Bishops Rents for that very end and
use; And therefore, since there is a three fold Provision without any burden to
their Teinds; Its hoped the Lords of the Commission will not hinder this
Erection upon pretense of a fourth superfluous and unnecessary Provision in
favors of one single Professor, who by his Principals cannot own the Plurality
of Benefices. 4. Et separatim, The Sub Deanery of Glasgow whereof the Parish of
Calder is a part, is a Benefice that consists of near to 50 Chalder of Victual
yearly of Parsonadge Teinds, besides a Grassom of 12000 Merks payable by the
Heretors to the College every 19 years, when their Tacks expires; And likeways
besides the Viccardge Teinds which properly did belong to the Minister of
Calder as Viccar to the Sub-Dean; So that when 24 Chalders of Victual are paid
to the three present Incumbents of the Sub-deanry, and although eight Chalders
are granted to this new Erection, which is desired, yet there remains 18
Chalders Victual, whereof allowing 12 to a Professor there remains still 6 to
the College, so that the Professor of Theology is no ways prejudged by this
new Erection. 5. The College themselves are so little sensible of the want of
a Fond wherewith to maintain their Professor, that since their Summonds were
intented, that they have given 1200 Merks yearly to two new Professors, viz.
the one of History and the other of Mathematics; So that the College cannot
pretend neither the want of a Fond for a Professor of Theology, nor so much
Poverty as they plead.


As it is evident from the above Reasons, that there is no difference as to the
Teinds of Calder betwixt the College and any other Titular and by the
Perambuation 1656, lying in Process, that Mr. Gillaspie then Princip^l
acquiesced to this new Erection; So Mr. Dunlop the present Principal at a
meeting of the Presbytery having proponed his Objections, and received
satisfactory Answers thereto that he was fully convinced of the necessity of a
new Erection in that Parish, that the Pursuers are confident, that he will not
mar, obstruct or Divert so good and pious a Work; And there can no pretense of
the least Inconveniency from this Erection be alleged by the College as an
encouragement for other Parishes to seek the same, For as to any of the other
five Paroches where they have Right to the Teinds, that there are four of them
so small that they are incapable of a new Erection, and the fifth is not a
Parish of so many Communicants as to need two Kirks, not being so many be 5 or
600 as the Parish of Calder, and beside these Teinds belong to the College by
another manner of Right, viz. Mortifications and other Rights.

In Respect whereof the Report ought to be advised, and the Kirk erected, and a
Stipend modified in the Terms of the Lybel.


