The humble and hearty Representation and Engagement of the Collective body of
the City of London, and propounded by them to the Free-Commoners of all the
Counties, Cities, Towns and Boroughs of the Kingdom of England, and the
Dominion of Wales, to, and with both Houses of PARLIAMENT, and each one to
other.
WE cannot but deplore the sad Condition of this lately flourishing Kingdom,
which by the effusion of so much English blood already shed, and the expense
of loss of so many millions of Treasure, the present commotions in some
Counties, the imminent danger of the invasion of Forrainers, (and thereby more
great and bloody Wars assuredly to ensue) together with the general
unsettlednes and unsatisfiednesse of the whole Kingdom, which do all threaten
the irrecoverable Plunging of this poor Kingdom into the bottomless Gulf of
despair and ruin.

All which was we must attribute chiefly and before all things to the many
crying sins, of which this whole Kingdom, has been guilty, justly provoking
God to be angry with us, and thus severely to chastise us* that we may be
humbled under his Mighty hand: so we cannot but observe those manifest and more
mediate causes of this our great afflictions, which we can attribute to nothing
so much and more obvious and apparent, Then to the great distance and
misunderstanding, which now for many years, has continued betwixt his Majesty
and the two Houses of Parliament; The happy composing of which we with patience
continue to expect in Gods good time to see effected: and now much the rather
are our hopes quickened, our hearts cheared, and we refreshed, that
(notwithstanding the late Votes of both Houses of no address to his Majesty,
nor of his Majesty to them, (which struck us with extreme amazement) we
perceive God has affected your hearts, not only to Vote an Address to his
Majesty, but also to intend a personal Treaty with Him, the only probable way
(under God that we know of) to effect a perfect good understanding, Union and
agreement betwixt his Majesty and you (so much desired by all) and so to
restore once more the blessed voice of Peace to this now languishing and dyeing
Kingdom.

And as to so good a work, we doubt not, but you have the concurrent wishes and
hearty prayers of the Generality of the Kingdom, we being confident that the
hundredth man, that has a considerable interest, in the either real of
personal, in the Kingdom, but from his soul desires it, and will in no sort
oppose it, yet because we understand that there wants not some who having some,
present power in their hands; do intend and are very likely to the utmost of
their ability to impede and hinder you in so good a work.

We crave leave to let you know, that what you have don or shall hereafter do,
in order to a personal Treaty with his Majesty and to the perfecting of an
agreement betwixt him and you, shall not only be received by us with all humble
and affectionate acknowledgement. But also we do solemnly promise and engage
our selves, as in the presence of Almighty God, to, and with you, and each one
to other, that we will to the utmost hazard of our lives and fortunes,
maintain, assist and defend you in it against all persons whatsoever, enemies
to the said personal Treaty and Peace.

We have nothing further to beg of you. But conclude with our hearty prayers to
God for you, that be would establish and confirm you in those ways of Peace,
into which we hope you are with sincerity now entered: That so you may have the
honor to be the repairers of Breaches, and Restorers of Peace, and we the
Comfort to sit every one under our own Vine and Figg Tree. Blessing you, and
God for you, which that we may do, shall ever be our prayers.

All Free men in the City of LONDON, into whose hands this paper shall come,
are requested to under write and send it forwards, that so it may be presented
to the Lord Mayor and Common Council; and from them to the Honorable Houses
or Parliament. All Counties, Cities, Towns, Boroughs, and all Freeholders of
this whole Kingdom are requested the same.


