A HUE and CRY AFTER THE Worst of Murderers, In the CASE of the DUKE of
BVCKINGHAM.
NOtwithstanding the Providence of God, and the good Success that he has
afforded from time to time in the Discovery and Defeating Subornation to
others, as well as in the Case of that Hellish and Damnable Conspiracy, for the
Murdering and taking away the Life of the Duke of Buckingham, by hiring false
Witnesses, of whom, no less than Nine Persons were Indicted last Term, as also
Le Mar and his Mother, the last Westminster Session; Yet, by the ensuing
Informations may plainly appear, that the unwearied Imps of the Devil being
frustrated in that of Le^ Mar, are industriously setting up another Villainy,
either of the same Nature, or for Rapes, Treason, or any thing, to murder a
Peer by a Form of Justice, and such a Peer, that none of these Conspirators
dare attempt openly to Assassinate, as of late has been damnably practiced
upon others.

That therefore these Miscreants may be found out, if possible, the several
Informations are here published, and if any Person can discover all or any of
these Persons, be they never so Great, to the end they may be apprehended, they
are desired to give Notice to his Grace the Duke of Buckingham at his House at
Cleveden, or to Mr. Edward Whittaker in St. Thomas Apostles, London, and they
shall be very well rewarded for their Pains, and their Charges born.

The Information of Mary Jenkins alias Wright, of Covent Garden in the County
of Middlesex, taken on Oath before Sir William Waller, one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, and City and Liberty of
Westminster, this 25th of March 1680.
THIS Informant says, That about Christmas last two Persons came to this
Informants Lodgings in Exeter Street; one of those Persons was a very Gentile
young man, that wore a light colored Chamblet Cloak, and the other a Tall
Gentleman; both of which, by their Carriage and Habits, this Informant believes
were Persons of Quality; and says, that at their first coming the said Persons
did tell this Informant, that they had heard that this Informant had Money
owing her by the Duke of Buckingham, and offered their Service in helping this
Informant to the said Money, and says, that the said Persons came again to
this Informant, and then plainly told this Informant, they knew the Lord Duke
to be a Great Rogue, and a Person that wa guilty of doing wicked things, and
that it would be of great service to the King and Kingdom, to have his Life,
which they were resolved to have whatever it cost; and told this Informant
further, that if she would swear Buggery against the said Duke, or any thing
else that they would direct her, then this Informant should have Money and Gold
enough, and at the same time pulling out a handful of Gold out of one of their
Pockets, offered it to this Informant, provided she this Informant would swear
Buggery against the said Duke, as they would direct her, and also promising
this Informant to provide a Lodging for her, and all things necessary for her
and her Child; and to encourage this Informant to do such a wicked Act, did Use
many Arguments to persuade this Informant so to do, telling this Informant that
the King himself and the Council would stand by her in it, and told this
Informant, that she might see how well Mrs. Le Mar was provided for, and what
Money she got by doing the like Business, and how well she was rewarded by
Persons of Quality. And says, that the said Persons told this Informant, that
they had several Persons would swear as they would have them, but they were not
of such Credit as this Informant, and therefore they pressed this Informant
earnestly to do it; and at other times threatened this Informant, in case she
would not yield to them, although this Informant told the said Persons, she
knew nothing against the Lord Duke, nor would swear against him for the World;
And says, the said Persons came again on Monday night last, and sent for this
Informant into Lincolns-Inn-fields, under the Arch, in the Name of some of the
Duke's Servants, and then they pressed this Informant earnestly to swear
against the said Duke, as they would direct her, and would have carried this
Informant to some House, but this Informant not yielding any thing to their
Designs, the said Persons bid the Informant consider of the Matter, and give
them her positive Answer on Friday next, when they would again meet her, and
told her, they did not care, they would have it done, or else it should cost
them their Lives, for they would have either his Life or he should have theirs;
but if it was discovered, it was but a Pillory Business, and did tell this
Informant that they did not know but that the Duke might be Indicted the next
Court sitting, or to the like effect: And says, that she, this Informant, has
discovered how she was thus tempted, both to my Lord Arron, and my Lord
Vaughan, and to Esquire Mansfield, and others of my Lord's Servants, and would
have had their Advice how to avoid these temptations; and says, that they have
found her out at her new Lodgings, which this Informant took on purpose to
avoid them, for that they had threatened this Informant to take away her Life,
in case she refused to swear as they would have her; and the said Persons told
this Informant, that they had sworn the Dukes Death, which he well knew, and
pulled out a Paper out of one of their pockets, ready prepared, wherein was
contained, what they would have suborned this Informant to swear to, which was
about Buggery and Rapes, and other Crimes which this Informant knew nothing of.

MARY WRIGHT.
Cor. me

William Waller.



The farther Information of Mary Wright Gentlewoman, taken upon Oath before Sir
William Waller, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the County of
Middlesex, and City and Liberty of Westminster, this 6th day of April 1680.
THIS Informant further says, that since her last Information, the Persons
therein mentioned, did not come according to their Appointment, but that night
or the next night after, which they had appointed, there came a Footman in a
Livery with a Flambeau in his hand lighted, about twelve of the Clock at night,
and called to this Informant, and this Informant answered him out of her
Window, he told this Informant, that the Persons that appointed to meet her
about the Business she knew of, could not come that Night, but they would wait
on this Informant some other time, and this Informant shall have further Notice
thereof. And this Informant says, that on Friday last, a Gentleman sent for
this Informant out, by a strange Boy, and this Informant coming out with him,
was met by the Gentleman, who put himself and this Informant in a Coach, and
drew up the Window, and carried this Informant to Red-lyon Fields nigh Grays
Inn, and there set down, and so walking there, told this Imformant, that he
came from the Gentlemen that had before been speaking to this Informant about
swearing against the Duke of Buckingham, and told this Informant, they
presented their Service to her; and this Informant demanding why they came not
as they promised, he told this Informant, that they feared this Informant had
betrayed them, for that they had a Letter sent them by one that belonged to the
Duke, that had given them Intimation, that this Informant had been at some of
the Duke's Friends, and so were afraid to trust this Informant, and pulled out
the Letter, and showed the backside to this Informant, but this Informant not
owning she had discovered it, he renewed the same Discourse of persuading this
Informant to swear against the Duke, as before she had been desired by those
Persons; and to encourage this Informant, did tell this Informant plainly, that
she need not be afraid to swear against him, for there was Money enough to be
had, and that there was one Lord in the Tower, would give this Informant three
or four hundred pound, besides what others would give, and being demanded who
that was, he would not now declare till next time; but this Informant asking
what it was she must swear against the said Duke, was told it was either
Buggery or Rape, or some such things as they should direct, and what need this
Informant care, she should be brought off; if it came to the worst it was but a
Sessions Business, and but a Fine, and that shall be taken care of, and told
this Informant, that no Money was to be got, and these times would not last
always, and they did look upon this Informant to be a credible Evidence, and
being known among the Council and Persons of Quality, it would be more
Advantage than all the rest of the Witnesses they had; and told this Informant,
they would send for her away to be kept at some Lords House, where she should
be made much of, and told this Informant that the Money the Duke owed her would
never be paid, for his Money should be divided shortly, for they would have his
Life whatever it cost, though they hired all the Witnesses in Town, and bid
this Informant be careful, and give no Notice, and says, that they would feign
have had this Informant to go before a Justice to swear, as they would direct.

Mary Wright.
Capt. fuit cor. me

Will. Walller.



SINCE this last Information, there come one Lick a Footman in a Livery, about
twelve of the Clock on Saturday night last, to Mrs. Wrights Lodging in Little
Catherine-street in Exeter-street, he discoursed her to this Effect, that he
came from those Gentlemen she knew of, about the Business against the Duke of
Buckingham, and told her, that they were resolved to go on with their Design,
notwithstanding all, and if she would yield to them, she should have double
what before the Gentlemen had offered her, and should be s^hed away by an
Order, and she and her Daughter taken care of, and be brought to a place where
she should see many she knew, and he told her, that she need not fear the Duke,
for they were resolved to have his Head, before the Lord Danby should stand his
Trial, and a great deal of such like Discourses. And while he was talking with
Mrs. Wright, she overheard some Persons call to him to come away, and Answer
was made, yes my Lord, and she says there was a Coach came to the Lanes end,
just before she was knocked up, and believes it was the very same Persons that
had been with her under the Arch in Lincolns-Inn-Fields; and when they met by
the Arch there was one in a plain Habit, bushed yellow Hair, wearing a Sword,
that did walk to and fro, and sometimes come to them, threatening to force the
Gentlewoman to comply with them, which Person is judged to be an Irish man, and
one that solicits Business, and those Gentlemen that then met her, one of them
was since seen in a Mourning-Coach, a young brisk man, slender, and not very
tall, but very gentile.

This being the Usage to the Duke, it is not impossible if these Villains go
undiscovered, but others hereafter may find the like, therefore it is earnestly
desired, that all good People will labor to discover some of those Persons,
for they have been so bold, as to go from Place to Place, to hire Witnesses,
and offer Money as men bid for Horses in Smith-field, so much they will give as
Earnest in hand, and so much when the Work is done, and they are free Chapmen,
for they offer to be at any thing, either Treasons, Rapes, Murder or Sodomy,
any thing and any way, to have his Life.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for T. F. and are to be sold by W. Davis in Amen-Corner 1680.


