INFORMATION For the Ministers in the Diocese of Aberdene Cited before the
Parliament.
IT is not unknown to most of the Kingdom, that the Ministers of the Diocese of
Aberdeen, gave full and sufficient Evidence of their firm Adherence to the
Protestant Religion, and that in the most dangerous times. After it pleased God
to bring about this Revolution, and to Establish His Majesty upon the Throne,
they did submit unto, and own His Majesty's Government, and sent several
Addresses humbly supplicating for Protection, and had repeated Assurances
thereof given them under His Majesty's Hand, through the benign Influences
whereof, they lived in their Charges peaceably and Christianly setting about
the Office of their Ministry.

It having pleased the Honorable Members of this current Parliament, to
abolish Episcopacy, thereafter to Establish Presbeterian Government, and having
lodged the power in the persons of the then surviving Presbeterian Ministers,
and such as they had admitted, or should admit; there was a Meeting of a
General Assembly indicted, which accordingly met, but there being none
admitted, or present to represent the Nother^ Diocces, the said Ministers did
humbly Address themselves to His Majesty, who thereupon at the next General
Assembly recomended to the Members thereof, to admit of their Brethren who
conformed to Episcopacy, in the Terms of a formula, which His Majesty was
graciously pleased to concert for them.

Conform, and in Obedience to His Majesty's Letter, the Ministers foresaid sent
their Commissioners to the General Assembly, who in the terms of the said
Formula, offered to unite with their Presbeterian Brethren, that so any further
Divisions in this Church might be prevented, and the Whole Ministry of the
Nation might be duly represented in a General Assembly, but this their Address
being rejected, they returned re infecta.

Thereafter the General Assembly having appointed Committees, to go through the
North, for Planting Vacancies, and doing some other things for which they had
given them particular Instructions, and accordingly these Committees having
cited some of the Episcopal Ministers before them, they with some others of
their Brethren did meet, and having drawn up some four or five Queries,
relating to their Eclesiastical Jurisdiction, to be presented unto the said
Committee, where to they desired Resolution 'er they could be clear to submit
themselves unto them; to which when they got no Satisfactorie Answer, the
Ministers foresaid did with all Submission to the Civil Government, enter their
Protestation and appealed to His Majesty for Protection.

The Committee judging that thereby their power is incroached upon, did Address
His Majesty's high Commissioner and Estates of Parliament, for redressing
Grievances: and those that more immediately concern these Protesters are.

Primo, That they meet in their pretended Presbyteries and Synods, and Act as
if they were Legal Judicatories. 2. That diverse of them have intruded into
vacant Churches, without any legal Call, Allowance of, or Application to any
Church Judicatory for that Effect. 3 That the Committee when in the North, met
with several Protestations from the Episcopal Ministers, which were
Declinatures of the Authority of the Church Judicatures, tending to perpetuat
Schism, and a manifest contempt of the Law.

This Address being read in Parliament, it was recommended to the Honorable
Committee appointed for Security of the Nation, to consider it, and to call
before them the Ministers concerned in these Protestations: and accordingly
they being Cited and Compearing, it pleased the Praeses and other Members of
that Honorable Meeting, to Ordain them to give in Answers to their several
Points underwritten, viz. Primo, By what Authority they kept Meetings. 2. How
they came to present the Queries to the late Committee of the General Assembly.
And 3. How they vindicat their Protestation from clashing with the Civil Power.
In the Terms of which Ordinance, they having the next day Compeared, gave in
their following Answers, viz.

As to the first, viz. By what Authority they keep Meetings, etc. They
declared, they did not keep any authoritative Meetings, as Church Judicatories,
but only for Consultation and Deliberation, how to demain themselves in their
several Charges, for suppressing Sin and Vice, and advancing the Interests of
the Gospel: And they being under no Censure from any Judicatorie, whether Civil
or Ecclesiastic, they thought they might continue in such Meetings from time
to time, being all along under His, Majesty's Protection. As to the Second,
viz. How they came to present the Queries to the Committee of the late General
Assembly? Its answered, that they were encouraged thereunto by the eight
Article of Instructions, given by the Assembly, to the Committee foresaid,
wherein its seriously recommended to them, and they peremptorly required to
take all pains to Inform, Convince and Satisfy all such persons of their
Mistakes, who think that they had receeded from their known Principles, and
having had no previous Opportunity of Conference, for removing their Scrouples,
they humbly conceived that they were obliged to lay hold upon that Occasion.
And had there been any Christian and Ministerial Conference afterward allowed
them, it is like, before this time their Debaits and Doubts might have been
buried, and these things removed out of the way, which are the Occasion of
their sad and woeful Divisions.

As to the Third, that their Protestation does clash with the Civil Power, It
was Answered, That as hitherto they have owned his Majesty's Authority, by
praying for his Majesty, keeping the Fasts and Thanksgivings appointed by the
Government, and are resolved to continue in so doing. So it was never their
Design or Intention to do any thing which might seem to contradict their
constant Profession and Practice, neither will they own or adhere to any thing
which may appear to be inconsistent therewith: And finally, had they ever
thought that this their Appeal and Protestation, would have given any offense
to the Civil Power, they would never have entered or presented the same.

By all which it may appear, that as hitherto they have endeavored to live
unblemable in their Lives and Doctrine, so they have been so far from designing
to do any thing that might be offensive to the Civil Government, that they have
hitherto entirely depended upon his Majesty's gracious Favor and Protection;
and therefore they in all humility expect, that his Majesty's high
Commissioner, and honorable Estates of Parliament will be convinced of this
their sincere Vindication, and allow them the same Protection they have had
from His Majesty, they behaving themselves as good Christians and Loyal
Subjects in their several Stations.

That his Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and Honorable Estates of
Parliament may be the more convinced, that the presenting of these Querries was
out of no Designed Contempt, but that these Ministers were Encouraged so to do
by the Instructions from the Assembley to their Committee, there is here
subjoyned the Eight Paragraph thereof, as it is contained in the 11 Act of
their Assembly, Entitled Act approving Overturs anent a Commission of the
General Assembly, and Instructions thereto, the words whereof are. And it being
Informed, that several aspersions are laid on the Ministers and Judicators of
the Church, by some Persons, as if the said Ministers and Judicators, and
receded from the known Principals thereof, in Relation to the Constitution and
Government of the Church, contained in the Confession of Faith, though the
contrair thereof be Evident, not onlj by the Ministers, their owning of, and
Adhering to the said Confession, wherein these Principals are contained, but
also by the whole Course of their Ministry: That therefore, the General
Assembly require the said Commission, to take all due Pains, to Inform,
Convince, and Satisfy any such Persons of their Mistaks, that they may be
Reclaimed


