My dearly beloved Friends and Brethren whom the Lord has reached unto, and
visited with his heavenly power, by which you have boen gathered to himself to
eat of the finest of the Wheat.
MY love once more in the Covenant of Eternal life, and love is to you all,
being often in my remembrance night and day, with sufferings with you who
suffer, and with prayers to the Almighty God that you may all stand fast,
having your loins girt about with truth, and shod with the power of the
Almighty, that no briars nor thorns may stop nor hinder you in the passage to
your good Land, but go through them in the heavenly seed, that none of you may
want bread, nor water to drink, For God has set open his Heavenly Fountain of
living Waters ^or all his Children to drink at, but old Belial and his sons
would stop these living streams, that the Sons of God might not be refreshed to
stand against all his fiery darts and temptations; for Friends it is the
enjoyment of the sweet presence of God, which will encourage you all to stand,
not forsaking the assembling of your selves together, to worship the Lord as
the Saints used to do in the primitive times, for we are come blessed be God,
to the primitive spirit, the spirit of Christ, which was in the primitive
worshippers, by which they worshipped God, for which they went through many
sufferings as may be read at large in the Scripture, and suffered joyfully the
spoiling of their goods, they knowing a better and a more enduring substance,
thus it is that muny of us are come to the same stage for the same testimony,
and the Devil has a desire to try us, and many of his slaves is running up and
down like Saul's to persecute the Saints, Well we are Engaged for the truth, and
our peace with God we prize above all, and they have nothing to charge us with
justly but for worshipping God, for we wish well for the Government and all
souls, that we under them might live a peaceable life in all honesty and
Godliness which seems to be so struck at, and Vice to grow: Well the God of
Heaven has given us an ^nderstanding, and a measuring line, and an eye to see
with, by which we see, measure and understand what the effect of these things
will be, that God will render vengeance in flames of fire, upon ungodly men,
and all who hold truth in unrighteousness, for alas it is a vain thing for our
enemies to think to affright us by robbing and spoiling of us, for our estates
and lives, though precious to us, yet nothing in comparison of the precious
enjoyment of the living presence of the dreadful God, before whom all men must
give an account, where all Faces shall gather paleness, whose hands has been
imbrewed in the blood of sufferings of his own seed, so my fear friends every
where my love and life does flow forth dearly to you, and the Lord arm you all
with patience and boldness and let all these things drive you nearer and nearer
to your beloved, and let ^one murmr and say the Lord delayeth his coming, for
God will come and plead the cause of his own seed, and none to save self by
^ndirect means, but seek to please your maker, you that honor God God will
honor, and keep together in all your meetings, as sheep ^^one fold, for the
Devil would scatter you whom God has gathe^ed, and feed of the living bread,
and keep clear in your under^tandings minds and spirits, out of reasoning with
flesh and blood, that no vail may come over any in which the enemy lodges, and
^he Lord sanctify you all to himself, that you may be like the sheep from
Mount Gilead every one bearing twain, that there may be no ^orah nor Demas
amongst us not none like the rich man, who went way sorrowful when he was to
deny all for Christ; but that you ^ay be like Daniel, and the three Children,
and the holy Apostles, when they charged them to speak no more in Christ's name,
would ^ot obey, but chused rather to obey God, let this be your choice, and
Ages and generations to come will bless God for you, as we ^ave done for them
who are gone before us; so continue in the faith and love, and the Lord exalt
righteousness in the Earth, and lay low ^^e Kingdom of sin, for Babylon must
fall, and the Lamb must reign and does reign in many which is the cause the
Devil is so eager, for ^^e Flesh wars against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the Flesh, so live in the Spirit, and grow in it, and the wonderful
counsello^ preserve you single hearted, and keep you over all storms, for (...)
calm will come again, and the joy of the Lord which is as the joy of the
Harvest fill all your Souls with joy and peace in believing, and the Lords
blessings and peace rest and remain, with and amongst you all, for ever and
ever, Amen.

Middlesex the 20. of the 9th. month. 1670. Your Friend and Brother in the
Heavenly Seed, Stephen Hubbersty.
Let this be read in your Meetings every where.



THE END.

