To His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament;
The Petition of Alexander Hamiltoun of Kinkel.
Humbly shows,
THAT where by the Claim of Right. It is provided that all Forfaulters, Fines,
loss of Offices, Imprisonments, Banishments, Persuits, persecutions, tortours,
and rigorous executions, in the time of the late Reigns be considered, and the
parties leised, redressed; True it is, that your Petitioner being guilty of
nothing, save Ecclesiastic non conformite; Yet in March 1675, A Garrison of
Soldiers were put in your Petitioners House, and possessed the same, forceing
him and his Family to flee from it, when his Wife was bigg with Child, and knew
not where to retire; And these Soldiers seized upon the Plenishing of your
Petitioners house, and upon all his Corns in Barn or Barn-yeard, which were in
value above Ten Chalders of Victual, which at that time gave a very
considerable price; So that his damages at that time sustained in his
Plenishing, horse Kine, and Corns, did extend to above six Thousand Merks, and
farther within a few weeks thereafrer your petitioner was intercommuned as a
fugitive and rebel, in which hardship and distress your Petitioner continued
for the space of 14 years, and all that time never returned to his own house;
But for three years of the 14, was under an Indictment of high Treason, and lay
Prisoner in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, for the space of eighteen Months, and
the last six years thereof, was confined to the Town of Edinburgh, Whereby it
appears, That your Petitioners Sufferings, Loss and Persecutions, have been
very great. As also, That in all that time, your petitioner could neither
prosecute nor defend any Rights pertaining to him, but was exposed to the
running of all prescriptions, for no Fault nor Negligence could be reckoned on
his part.

May it therefore please Your Grace and Lordships, To take the Premises to
your Consideration, for Reparation of your Petitioners Losses, and Sufferings,
in such manner as shall be thought most effectual. And farther to Declare, That
in case there be any Prescriptions run against your Petitioner, that the said
fourteen Years of your Petitioners Distress may not be reckoned, but
discounted. In respect it is evident, That your Petitioner was utterly non
valens agere, which in all Law hinders the course of Prescription. And your
Grace and Lordships Petitioner shall ever pray.


