The Humble PETITION OF THE Protestants of France, Lately presented to His Most
Christian Majesty, By the Marshall Schomberg, and the Marquis of Ruvigny.
A true Copy in English.
SIR,
WE your Subjects of that Religion (which we call the Reformed) do, with most
profound Reverence, cast our selves at the feet of your Majesty, that so we may
represent the many aggrievances which have been ^^^ped upon us, one after
another, and may most humbly beg some effectual resentments of the same, from
your justice and goodness.

The Edicts of the Kings your Predecessors, and particularly those of Henry the
Great, and Lewis the Just, which your Majesty most authentically confirmed at
your happy Inauguration, and since by diverse and sundry Declarations have
always had regard to those of the said Religion, which consists of a
considerable part of those people which God has committed to your charge: And
as such, they have not only been permitted to exercise their Employment ^^^d
Arts, and Trades, whereby they gain their Livelihood, but also have been
promoted to Places of Trust and Honor, as effects of their Merit and Virtue;
They have also enjoyed a Liberty of Conscience, by a free exercise of their
Religion and Discipline in all places privileged by the aforesaid Edicts, and
Commissioners also have been appointed to take care, that there should be no
infringements or violations thereof.

There have been also Courts of Justice consisting of men of both Re^^gion,
that at all times the Protestants might be assured of impartial justice both as
to their Persons, and Estates. And the Gentlemen particularly had right, to
place in their Fee-Farms those of one or the other Religion, without any
difference: In short, your Petitioners enjoyed almost the same freedom and
advantages, as the other Subjects of your Majesty.

It is true, Sir, that these were the Concessions of the Kings your
Predecessors, and of your present Majesty, and have been established with such
circumstances, as the Edicts themselves call a perpetual and an irrevocable
Law, designed purposely to keep your Subjects both of one and the other
Religion in perfect amity. And your Petitioners can confidently averr, that
they have so demeaned themselves under this Law, and Privileges, as never to
have rendered themselves unworthy thereof. But on the contrary have gained this
advantage, that your Majesty has made many solemn and gracious Declarations,
testifying the entire satisfaction your Majesty has conceived of the Zeal and
Loyalty of your Petitioners, in times of most hazard and difficulty. And now,
SIR, we need not search the Histories of many years, to demonstrate the
difference of our present condition, from those times; for it is now but a few
years since your Petitioners have not only been made incapable of being
admitted into public Offices, but discharged of those in which they were
invested, and in which they had always served with honor and fidelity.

For contrary to the true intent and words of this Edict, they have taken from
your Petitioners the privilege of equally entering with others into the
Commission of Consulats, and the Municipal Offices of Towns, even in those very
Corporations, wherein your Petitioners are the greatest in the administration
of the Civil Government, and management of that Money which is levied upon them.

They have not now in many places any admittance to the meanest Office in the
Public, nor are they licensed to exercise those Arts and Trades whereby they
gain their sole livelihood and subsistence.

They can reckon up at least 300 Protestant Churches, which in the space of ten
years have been demolished, notwithstanding that some of them have been
expressly named in the Edict of Nantes, and others comprehended within the
limits and sense thereof.

The Commissioners which are always ready to receive Process against your
Petitioners, yet stop their ears to their complaints; and if they do take
notice of them, it is with a corrupt and partial sentence, and often times the
Catholic Commissioners pronounce Judgment against your Petitioners, without
the intervention and assent of those of their Religion.

Those who have changed from the Protestant to the Catholic Religion, not
finding that quietness of conscience which they expected therein, so that they
have returned again to their first persuasion, have been exposed to most
rigorous penances, under the term of Relapse, and the Ministers and
Consistories have been liable to be suppressed.

If any of the Catholic Religion become Protestants, they presently persecute
those to whom they applied themselves for clearing their doubts or declaring
their belief, pretending that thereby they come within the compass of that
crime, which is called Subornation.

The Chambers of this Edict are not only incorporated with the Parliaments;
against the express sense of the Edict, but are extinguished wholly, and
suppressed.

The Children of your Petitioners, though born in their Religion, ar^ often
taken from them, before they have attained to that age which the Edicts allow
them, before they are obliged to declare the Religion which they resolve to
profess: And if hereupon they address themselves to your Commissioners,
advising them to put in execution the Edict, they either refuse to take
cognizance thereof, or else elude it in that manner, that for several years
together they take not the least notice of their complaints, nor have the
ordinary Judges any regard thereunto.

They will not suffer the Protestants to entertain more then one Schoolmaster
in the Town where they live; and though the Children amount to 2 or 3000 in
number, yet they will not allow more then one Master for them all.

Your Petitioners have been much surprised by a Declaration issued out for
changing the form and tenure of their Synods, by placing certain Catholic
Commissioners for Assistants therein; which being entirely contrary to the
meaning and substance of those Edicts, and Declaration of Lewis the 13th. set
out in the year 1623. and to the custom always observed, has no other
foundation then those pretenses which reflect on the honor of your
Petitioners, and that fidelity which they have ever professed toward the
service of your Majesty.

The Bishops under color of their Visitations, and by virtue of an Order of
Arrest from your Privy Council, have pretended to suspend the exercise of the
Religion of your Petitioners for several weeks.

The Clergy which have entered the Protestant Churches, to hear the Sermons
which are there preached, do object unto the Ministers matters which they never
uttered, or take advantage of certain terms which cannot be avoided in
Controversy, to form a criminal Process against them before a Judge, who is
pre-possessed with a prejudice against them; and in the mean time the Clergy do
not cease to justify themselves against the Petitioners, by such courses as
are expressly forbidden by the aforesaid Edicts.

The Chief Justices of several places, to whom matters relating to the Edicts
did never appertain, do now undertake by unknown methods of procedure, to
interdict or supend the Ministers of whole Provinces.

In fine, so far are they proceeded, as to make a Declaration, forbidding
Protestant women to make use of other Chirurgions, or Midwives then those which
are Catholics, that so their Children may be dipped in water by them in case
of necessity: which as it is directly opposite to the sense of the Edicts, so
it is also to the Principles of that Religion which your Petitioners profess;
for their consciences will never allow them to consent hereunto, because that
as on one side, they cannot believe that Baptism is of an absolute and
indispensable necessity, where death prevents the due care and cautions we use
to obtain it; so on the other side, your Petitioners have that just reverence
to so great a Sacrament, as not to commit the same to the administration of
Lay-persons, nor believe that such dipping or sprinkling with water, can ever
supply the place of Baptism.

These proceedings, SIR, and many more of them very considerable, are more
easily mentioned in general, then to be troublesome to your Majesty in a recital
of the particulars, which are either notoriously known to the World, or to be
justified and made good by Attestations which your Petitioners have in their
hands, together with Judgments, Arrests and Declarations. All the World, which
observes the low condition unto which your Petitioners are reduced, begin to
consider them, as persons exposed to the malice and persecution of those who
desire their total destruction.

Nothing more can be added to the general consternation of those, who profess
the Protestant Religion in all parts of your Kingdom; so that many for fear, or
for necessity, have been forced to abandon their dwellings, and seek their
repose in the Dominions of Strangers: such as remain here, are detained by the
love they bear to their Native Country, or by some difficulty they find in the
disposal of their Estates; though the greatest number are obliged with an
affection to your Majesty and your Government. In all these aggrievances, SIR,
your Petitioners have no other defense and protection, under God, then the
justice and clemency of your Majesty, by which they have formerly had access to
your Sacred person, which has ever lent a gentle ear to the just complaints of
your Petitioners, having nominated Commissioners of your Council particularly
to examine their Cause, and make report thereof to your Majesty: but the great
Wars which your Majesty has lately maintained, have diverted this care to
greater thoughts, whereby the evils and oppressions of your Petitioners have
been multiplied and increased.

And now, SIR, since your Majesty enjoys the triumph of those glorious
successes with which God has favored your designs, and that your People
expect likewise to share some part of the fruit of their labors: your
Petitioners hope, through the justice and gracious goodness of your Majesty,
that no distinction shall be made between your Petitioners and your other
Subjects, left whilst some are in joy, and at rest, the others should mourn,
and groan under oppressions.

For which Reasons, SIR, and because your Petitioners have ever entertained the
same Zeal and Fidelity to your Service; may it please your Majesty to make
known unto the Lords of your Council, Presidents, and Attorney-Generals of
Parliaments, to Super-intendents, and Commissioners executing the Law, that
your Royal Will and Pleasure is, that the Edicts be observed and executed; and
particularly to encharge such Commissioners as are already named by your
Majesty, or shall be hereafter named, that they examine the Memorials and
Papers of Justification, which your Petitioners shall produce, and to inform
your Majesty thereof; and especially to the Secretaries of State, that a due
report may be made thereof, and of those aggrievances and burdens which are
most oppressing, that so your Majesty being truly made sensible thereof, may
act therein according to your gracious pleasure. And your Petitioners shall
continue their vows, and prayers for the glory of your Majesty, and for the
prosperity of your Sacred Person and Kingdom.

FINIS.

