The humble Address of your Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the
Peace, and Commission-Officers of the County of Glamorgan.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Obedient Subjects after the publication of
Your Majesty's most Gracious Declaration, do in most humble manner acquiesce to
your Majesty's most just Reasons, for your Dissolving the two last Parliaments;
We do from the Bottom of our Hearts, render your Majesty thanks for your so
gracious Condescension in giving your Subjects Reasons for your so doing; when
we acknowledge it your Majesty's undoubted Right and Prerogative to Call and
Dissolve Parliaments, according to your Royal Will and Pleasure; and we rejoice
and lay hold of your most Royal Promise therein, to Govern this your Kingdom,
by the known Laws thereof, as now established in Church and State; for that
thereby we are secured in our Religion, Lives Properties, both against Papists
and usurping Phanaticks, Your Majesty's firm resolution of not departing from
what you had formerly Declared concerning the Succession of your Majesty's
Royal Crown, is none of the least signs of your Majesty's Conscientious Justice
and Love to the Peace of this Nation. We therefore hereunto subscribing, do
humbly Declare. That we will adhere and stick to your Majesty's Person, all
your Rights and Prerogatives, and the support of your Majesty's Government with
our Lives and Fortunes; and now we pray that your most Sacred Majesty may have
a long and prosperous Reign over us, and that after you, your lawful Hei^s and
Successors may Sit in the Throne to the Worlds end.

Dated the 8th. day of August in the three and thirti^^h year of your Majesty's
Reign.
The humble Address of your Majesty's Lieutenant, Deputy Lieutenants, Officers
of the Militia, the Justices of the Peace, Clergy, Freeholders, and Gentry of
the County of Northumberland.
We Your Majesty's remotest, yet most Loyal Subjects, for ever confirmed in the
fullest Obedience, and greatest Gratitude imaginable to your Sacred Majesty, by
our sad experience and Sense of what we have suffered heretofore in our
Fortunes, our Liberties, and the Lives of our dearest Relations, the Tragical
Cosequence of that most horrid Regicide acted upon your Royal Father of
Glorious and Blessed Memory, when we reflect upon those horrid Actions and
Preceedings;

And having seen with our Eyes the late Endeavors and Practices of many men of
the same Principles tending to the subversion of the Government of Church and
State, never to be effected without destruction of your Royal Person, and your
most Illustrious Brother, in which our Lives, our Liberties and Properties must
of necessity be involved:

Now apprehending our selves preserved under God, next and immediately by Your
Majesty's prudent foresight and extraordinary Care, we do with greatest
Transport of joy, and hearty Thankfulness, return your Majesty our most humble
and express Acknowledgement for opposing, with such incomparable Resolution,
the Arbitrary and unnatural Proceedings against the udoubted right of your
Succession in the Person of your Royal Brother, the greatest Example of Trust
Duty, and Obedience to your Sacred Majesty, and when your Princely Wisdom shall
think fit to call a Parliament at any time, and in any place, both which are
entirely and absolutely in your Mayesties power, we will mainly endeavor that
from this County shall be elected such Members, as shall not be tainted with
Arbitrary and Commonwealth Principles, and such as shall duly consider your
Majesty's just demands as their best Rules to concur with, as to supplies of
Money, or other your great Affairs of State, so unreasonably obstructed by some
men in the late Sessions of Parliament, to the danger of your Dominions and
Interest abroad, and to the prejudice of your greatest Concerns at home.

And being infinitely obliged by your Majesty's condescending to sit out your
late Declaration to our full satisfaction, we clearly Discern and Confess your
reasons to have been of sufficient weight and ground for your late Royal
Proceedings in the Prorogations and Dissolations of the two last Parliaments;
and humbly beg your Majesty's Gracious Opinion and Acceptance of us and our
unfeigned humble Address; assuring your Majesty, that we will to the last Mite
of our Fortune, and Minute of Life, stand for the perservation of so good and
Gracious a Prince, and your Royal Successors (in the duecourse of Descent) your
Royal Prerogative and Rights of the Crown, the Portestant Religion as it is now
estableshed by Law, and the known Laws of the Realm; and heartily pray for your
Majesty's Life and happovernment.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Sacred
Majesty, 1681.


