A HUE and CRY AFTER A JACOBITE, OR LOUISIAN: And a True Character to Know and
Distinguish HIM.
Licensed August the 5 th.

A JACOBITE or Louisian, is a certain Animal of the Doubtful Gender, with an
English Face, a French Heart, a Jesuits Conscience, and an Irish Valor, a
Creature with a Brazen-Forehead, a Thick Skull, Hair Brains, Bogtrotting Feet,
Supple Hams, and Blood-thirsty Arms. He prusues the last Syllable of his Name,
to Bite and Stab a Christian to the Heart, and afterward Begs his Pardon, that
he was mistaken, assuring that no more Blood, (till he has another
Opportunity,) shall be shed upon his account he Displays a Red Banner, with the
device, or Motto, of Ninny Mac Nero, Jemy Transub, to show that he maintains
the cause of the Scarlet Whore, but is grown of late so wonderful Bashful at
the approach of an Enemy, that he avoids and shuns his Company as Beggars do a
Whipping-post, yet he boasts that he is of the Race of Noddites, and retains
the Principles of Cain the Murderer, and bears the Arms of Issachar, being an
Ass Couchant, and seems descended from Esau. being so ready to Truck away an
Invaluable Birth right of Liberty, and Property, for a French Kickshaw and a
Nauseous Mess of Irish Pottage; he styles himself an English man, yet acts in
all things as Antipodes to his Native Country, and pretends high, and Swears,
God dam him, he is of the Church of England; but as he understands not her
Doctrine, so he dishonors her by his Lewd Conversation, and is looked upon by
his Parishoners as a Thief, who secretly steals himself therein, to give
opportunity to let his Complotters in to Rob the house. He is a Grab Protestant
that Crawls Backwards toward Ireland, or at Best, the Cars Foot, which the
Romish Monkeys makes use of to pull their sinking Cause out of the Fire.

This Creature is a Protestant in Masquerade, a Jesuits Advocate, a Popish
Solicitor, a King James's Votary; and though they Load him like Asses with
Burdens, has not the wit to foresee they only put upon him to do their
Drudgery, and must expect Polyphemus's Courtesy, To be devoured the Last; to
talk Soberly with him of Religion, he flaps you over the Mouth with Fanaticism,
and Faction, and Confutes you with the Appellation of Confounded Whigg, and
though he was one of the first that assisted in Endeavoring our Blessed
Reformation, pursuing those Wild Boars that would have rooted up the
Constitution, and break the Balance of our happy Government, yet for want of
the gratification his Ambitiom aimed at, turns a Grumbletonian Rebel to King
William, Sowing the Tares of Sedition, but will reap Hemp in Exchange, and the
Hangman will have the Cutting of many of them of the Simples: His discourse is
all Sham, Noise, and Nonsense, whose Wit and Courage bears equal force with
that of his Cause. His Breeches are empty of Cash, to cheat the Pick-pockets
withal. Whereby you may know him by the Chalk on Peoples doors, and that he is
certain in nothing, but breaking of his word.

In fine a True Jacobite, is Transubstantiated into a State Catterpiller, which
devours every green thing in a flourishing Kingdom, being far more pernicious
and destructive to this British Isle, then the Locusts and Caterpillars were to
Egypt; for they Stab Liberty and Property to the very Heart, that themselves,
like Beasts of Prey, may wholly live upon Spoil and Rapine, fit Subjects only
for Nebuchadnezzar, to herd with the wild Asses in the Desert, to tell a First
Rate Jacobite, of the Glorious Progress of King William's Arms, against the
Enemy in Ireland, he Replies, what is that to the Success of the Fleet, and the
designs of that Invincible Monarch the Grand Lewis, who with his Missionary
Draggoons is on the Coast, to settle both the Protestant Religion, and King
James in the Throne: to Ask him, who shall adventure to put the Chain about the
Lions Neck when he comes amongst us? he will Answer, we ought to trust
Providence, and Consider of that afterward, Preaching up the Doctrine of Jure
Divino-ship, Non-Resistance, and Passive Obedience, and has the Vanity to
Cajole us, That the French King will Religiously preserve both our Liberties
and our Laws, using the Protestants with the like tenderness as his own
Subjects, meaning the Hugonots; But he is grown of late so squeemish that a
Lawful Oath strangely disturbs his Maw, but on a sudden the Muligrubs have
Violently possessed him, and is taken with a fit of Singing Lacrymae to his
Cause; the Truth is, to miscarry thus in Projects, would make a Priest
out-swear a loosing Gamster. But Chears and Bouys himself up, with the
Glimmering prospect of a French descent, though it is not in the least doubted,
the Destruction they design for this Nation, will Revert upon their own Heads,
and then their Boasted Loyalty will extend no farther, then a few Drunken
Healths, turning Rebel to the Idol they set up, for let him Roar and Swagger
what he can, he will continue no farther Faithful, than as his Prince drops his
Pence, for its not the Cause, like that of Old Hodg. but the Crust he barks for.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh* 1690.


