True News from Reading: OR, An Exact Relation of the Prince of Oranges Victory
over the Kings Forces there, on the Nineth of this Instant December, 1688.
In a Letter to a Friend.
My Good Friend.
HEre we have been in the midst of these late hurries, the King's Armies
Marching backward and forward by us; then the Princes, and now many Marching
back again to Winter Quarters; it is in vain to write of matters backward, now
things are carried so forward; only I observe no Printed Paper has given a
Tolerable Account of the Memorable Engagement lately at Reading; all I have
seen are False and Foolish, I suppose none Printed True, or of any worth: Take
this as the most Exact, my self being near the Spot, and knowing the whole from
Eye Witnesses; The Kings Army, the Rere Guard, having left Reading upon the
Approach of the Princes Vanguard, about Seven Troops of Horse and Dragoons of
Scotch and Irish, came back again on Sat^rday the Eighth Instant, and there
kept strict Guard; the Town being in great fear of Plunder, Fire, etc. But a
certain Gentleman sent Three Messengers to N^wberry, to the Princes Army, to
come away and Save the Town; at first they were taken for Spies, but bringing
proof they were good Men, Orders were given for Two Troops to March at Two of
the Clock in the Morning; they they came on very slowly all the way, that they
might be the more Serviceable in Action: The Kings Soldie^s had set a Sentinel
on the Church-Tower, who by firing a Gun, gave notice of their approach (but
they came not the great Road, and so were not seen till very near) so Trumpets
sounded, Drums beat, and they stood ready; but then immediately the Dutch came
in, Riding Furiously through several Streets, holding their Bridle-Reins on
their Little Fingers, their Pistols on both Hands lying close flat down on
their Horses, Crying, Hollow, Boys, Hollow; (at which there was a great Shout
in the Town and, Away Women, away Women; so they charged the King's Soldiers
as they found them; Twelve Charged about Two Hundred in the Marketplace; Six
leapt their Horses into St. Mary's Churchyard over the Stone Steps, and drove
out the Dragoon Musketeers that lined the Church-Yard-VVall, and others in the
Churchyard; the People being at Church all this while: Thus they Charged every
where so Furiously, that the Kings Soldiers Ran, and they pursued, Killing
some, Taking others; they Killed about Eightteen, VVounded several, took about
Sixty Horses; they Pursued them even to Twiford Parish, where lay a Regiment or
more: One Dutch Cornet was Killed (his Horse being Shot under him, then several
Firing upon him) and one Common Trooper: All the ways were spread with Boots,
Hats, Coats, Swords, etc. of the Kings Soldiers that fled; some came about
Twelve of the Clock to our Town without Shoes, etc. Onthe Twelfth Instant I saw
the Cornet's Funeral after the Martial Manner: Three Colors were taken, one of
Irish Dragoons, and two of Scotch Horse; the Town ^ooks on it as a Wonderful
Deliverance; for they showed themselves Impatient for the coming of the Princes
Army, and some of the Wounded Soldiers of the King's Army have declared, that
as soon as Church was ended, they were to have Killed the People, Plundered for
themselves, and to have set fire on the Houses; But Est Deus ^n Coelis qui
Providus omnia Curat.

Yours, T. I.

London: Printed for G. L. in the Year 1688.


