May it Please THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
I Could not have presumed to approach your Majesty's Royal Presence with a
Book of this Nature, had I not been assured that, when the weighty Affairs of
your Government permit it, your Majesty has frequently shown your self inclined
to favor Mechanical and Philosophical Discoveries: And I may be bold to say,
that if ever Book was worthy the favorable acceptance of a Prince, this
wherein so many and so great Discoveries concerning the constitution of the
Visible World are made out, and put past dispute, must needs be grateful to
your Majesty; especially being the Labors of a worthy Subject of your own, and
a Member of that Royal Society founded by your late Royal Brother, for the
advancement of Natural Knowledge, and which now Flourishes under your Majesty's
most Gracious Protection.

But being sensible of the little Leisure which Care of the Public leaves to
Princes, I believed it necessary to present with the Book a short Extract of
the Matters contained, together with a Specimen thereof, in the genuine
Solution of the Cause of the Tides in the Ocean; a thing frequently attempted,
but till now without success: Whereby your Majesty may judge of the rest of the
performances of the Author.

The sole Principle upon which this Author proceeds to explain most of the
great and surprising appearances of Nature, is no other than that of Gravity,
whereby in the Earth all Bodies have a tendency toward its Center; as is most
evident: and from undoubted Arguments its proved, that there is such a
Gravitation toward the Centers of the Sun, Moon and all the Planets.

From this principle, as a necessary consequence, follows the Sphaerical Figure
of the Earth and Sea, and of all the other Caelestial Bodies: and though the
tenacity and firmness of the Solid Parts support the inequalities of the Land
above the level; yet the Fluids, pressing equally and easily yiedling to each
other, soon restore the Aequilibrium, if disturbed, and maintain the exact
Figure of the Globe.

Now this force of Descent of Bodies toward the Center is not in all places
alike, but is still less and less, as the distance from the Center increases:
and in this Book it is demonstrated, that this force decreases as the Square of
the distance increases; that is, the weight of Bodies and the force of their
Fall is less, in parts more removed from the Center, in the proportion of the
squares of the distance. So as for Example, a Tun weight on the surface of the
Earth, if it were raised to the height of 4000 miles, which I suppose the
semidiameter of the Earth, would weigh but of a Tun or 5 hundred weight: if to
12000 miles or 3 semidiameters from the surface, that is 4 from the center, it
would weigh but 1/16 part of the weight on the surface, or a hundred and
quarter: So that it would be as easy for the strength of a man, at that height,
to carry a Tun weight, as here to carry a hundred and quarter. And in the same
proportion does the Velocities of the fall of Bodies decrease: for whereas on
the surface of the Earth all things fall 16 foot in a second, at one
semidiameter above this fall is but 4 foot; and at 3 semidiameters, or 4 from
the center it is but 1/16 of the fall at the surface, or but one foot in a
second: and at greater distances both weight and fall become very small, but
yet at all given distances is still some thing, though the effect become
insensible. At the distance of the Moon (which I will suppose 60 semidiameters
of the Earth) 3600 pounds weigh but one pound, and the fall of Bodies is but
16/3600 of a foot in a second, or 16 foot in a minute; that is, a body so far
off descends in a minute no more than the same at the surface of the Earth
would do in a second of Time.

As was said before, the same force decreasing after the same manner is
evidently found in the Sun, Moon and all the Planets; but more especially in
the Sun, whose force is prodigious; becoming sensible even in the immense
distance of Saturn: This gives room to suspect that the force of Gravity is in
the Celestial Globes proportional to the quantity of Matter in each of them:
and the Sun being at least ten thousand times as bigg as the Earth, its
Gravitation or attracting Force, is found to be at least ten thousand times as
much as that of the Earth, acting on Bodies at the same distances.

This law of the decrease of Gravity being demonstratively proved, and put past
contradiction; the Author with great Sagacity inquires into the necessary
consequences of this Supposition; whereby he finds the genuine cause of the
several appearences in the Theory of the Moon and Planets, and discovers the
hitherto unknown laws of the Motion of Comets and of the Ebbing and Flowing of
the Sea. Each of which are subjects that have heretofore taken up much larger
Volumes, but truth being uniforme and always the same, it is admirable to
observe how easily and how satisfactorily Solutions are given in very abstruse
and difficult matters, when once true and genuine Principles are obtained: And
on the other hand it may be wondered that, notwithstanding the great facility of
truth, and the perplexity and nonconsequences that always attend erroneous
suppositions, these great discoveries should have escaped the Acute
disquisitions of the best Philosophical Heads of all past ages, and be reserved
to be recorded to Posterity, among the Glorious Acquisitions your Nations
justly promise themselves, during the course of your Majesty's happy Reign over
us:

The Theory of the Motion of the primary Planets is here shown to be nothing
else, but the contemplation of the Curve Lines which Bodies cast with a given
velocity, in a given direction, and at the same time drawn toward the Sun by
its gravitating Power, would describe. Or, which is all one, that the Orbs of
the Planets are such Curve Lines as a shot from a Gun describes in the Air,
being cast according to the direction of the Piece, but bent into a crooked
Line by the supervening tendency toward the Earths Center: And the Planets
being supposed to be projected with a given force, and attracted toward the
Sun, after the aforesaid manner, are here proved to describe such Figures as
answer punctually to all that the Industry of this and the last Age has
observed in the Planetary Motions. So that it appears that there is no need of
solid Orbs and Intelligences, as the Ancients imagined, nor yet of Vortices or
Whirlpools of the Celestial Matter, as Des Carts supposes; but the whole
affair is simply and Mechanical performed, upon the sole supposition of a
gravitation toward the Sun; which cannot be denied.

The Motion of Comets is here shown to be compounded of the same Elements, and
not to differ from Planets, but in their greater swiftness, whereby
overpowering the gravity that should hold them to the Sun, as it does the
Planets, they fly off again, and distance themselves from the Sun and Earth,
so that they soon are out of sight: and the fewness and inaccuracy of the
observations Antiquity has left us, are not sufficient to determine whether the
same Comet ever return again. But this Author has shown how Geometrically to
determine the Orb of a Comet from observations, and to find his distance from
the Earth and Sun, which was never before done.

The third thing here done is the Theory of the Moon, all the Inequalities of
whose motion are proved to arise from the same principles, only here the effect
of two centers operating on or attracting a projected body comes to be
considered; for the Moon though principally attracted by the Earth and moving
round it, does together with the Earth move round the Sun once in a Year, and
is according as she is nearer or farther from the Sun, drawn by him more or
less than the Center of the Earth, about which she moves; whence arise several
irregularities in her motion, of all which the Author in this Book, with no
less subtilty than Industry, has given a full account. And though by reason of
the great complication of the problem, he has not yet been able to make it
purely Geometrical, it is to be hoped, that in some farther Essay he may surmount
the difficulty, and having perfected the Theory of the Moon, the long desired
discovery of the Longitude (which at Sea is only practicable this way) may at
length be brought to light, to the great honor of your Majesty and advantage
of your Subjects.

All the surprising Phenomena of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea are in like
manner shown to proceed from the same principle; which I design more largely to
insist on, since the matter of fact is in this case much better known to your
Majesty than in the foregoing.

If the Earth were alone, that is to say, not affected by the actions of the
Sun and Moon, it is not to be doubted but the Ocean being equally pressed by
the force of Gravity toward the center, would continue in a perfect
stagnation, always at the same hight, without ebbing or flowing; But it being
not to be denied that the Sun and Moon have a like principle of Gravitation
toward their Centers, and that the Earth is within the activity of their
attractions, it will plainly follow that the equality of the pressure of
Gravity toward the Center will thereby be disturbed; and though the smallness of
these forces, in respect of the Gravitation toward the Earths Center, renders
them altogether imperceptible by any experiments we can devise, yet the Ocean
being fluid and yiedling to the least force, by its rising shows where it is
less pressed, and where it is more pressed by its sinking.

Now if we suppose the force of the Moons attraction to decrease as the square
of the distance from its Center increases (as in the Earth and other Celestial
Bodies) we shall find, that where the Moon is perpendicularly either above or
below the Horizon, either in Zenith or Nadir, there the force of Gravity is
most of all diminished, and consequently that there the Ocean must necessarily
swell by the coming in of the water from those parts where the pressure is
greatest, viz. in those places where the Moon is near the Horizon: But that
this may be the better understood, I thought it needful to add the following
Figure, where M is the Moon, E the Earth, C its Center, and Z the place where
the Moon is in the Zenith, N where in the Nadir.



Now by the Hypothesis, it is evident that the Water in Z being nearer, is more
drawn by the Moon than the Center of the Earth C, and that again more than the
water in N, wherefore the water in Z has a tendency toward the Moon, contrary
to that of Gravity, being equal to the excess of the Gravitation in Z above
that in C: And in the other case, the water in N, tending less toward the Moon
that the Center C, is left behind, by as much as is the difference of the
Gravitations toward the Moon in C and N. This rightly understood, it follows
plainly that the Sea, which otherwise would be Spherical, upon the pressure of
the Moon, must form it self into a Spheroidal or Oval figure, whose longest
diameter is where the Moon is Vertical, and shortest where she is in the
Horizon; and that the Moon shifting her position as she turns round the Earth
once a day, this Oval of water shifts with her, occasioning thereby the two
floods and ebbs observable in each 25 hours.

And this may suffice as to the general cause of the Tides; it remains now to
show how naturally this notion accounts for all the particulars that has been
observed about them; so that there can be no room left to doubt but that this
is the true cause thereof.

The Spring Tides upon the new and full Moons, and Neap Tides on the Quarters
are occasioned by the attractive force of the Sun in the new and full
conspiring with the attraction of the Moon and producing a Tide by their united
forces: whereas in the Quarters the Sun raises the water where the Moon
depresses it, and the contrary; so as the Tides are made only by the difference
of their attractions. That the force of the Sun is no greater in this case,
proceeds from the very small proportion the semidiameter of the Earth bares to
the vast distance of the Sun.

It is also observed that caeteris paribus the Aequinoctial Spring Tides in
March and September, or near them, are the Highest, and the Neap tides the
Lowest; which proceeds from the greater agitation of the Waters, when the fluid
Sphaeroid revolves about a great Circle of the Earth, than when it turns about
in a lesser Circle; it being plain that if the Moon were constituted in the
Pole and there stood, that the Spheroid would have a fixed position, and that it
would be always high Water under the Poles, and low Water every where under the
Aequinoctial: and therefore the nearer the Moon approaches the Poles, the less
is the agitation of the Ocean: which is always greatest where the Moon is in
the Aequinoctial, or farthest distant from the Poles. Whence the Sun and Moon,
being either conjoined or Opposite in the Aequinoctial, produce the greatest
Spring Tides; and the subsequent Neap Tides, being produced by the Tropical
Moon in the Quarters, are always the least Tides; whereas in June and December
the Spring Tides are made by the Tropical Sun and Moon, and therefore less
vigorous; and the Neap Tides by the Aequinoctial Moon, which therefore are the
stronger; hence it happens that the difference between the Spring and Neap
Tides, in these Months, is much less considerable than in March and September.
And the reason why the very Highest Spring Tides are found to be rather before
the Vernal and after the Autumnal Equinox, viz. in February and October, than
precisely upon them, is because the Sun is nearer the Earth in the Winter
Months, and so comes to have a greater effect in producing the Tides.

Hitherto we have considered such affections of the Tides as are Universal,
without relation to particular cases; what follows from the differing Latitudes
of places, will be easily understood by the following figure.

Let A p E P be the Earth covered over with very deep waters, C its Center, P,
p, its Poles, A E the Aequinoctial, F f the parallel of Latitude of a place, D
d another Parallel at equal distance on the other side of the Equinoctial; H, h
the two points where by the attraction of the Moon it is highest water; K, k
two places 90 degree from the former, where it is low Water. The Spheroid
described upon the diameters H h, and k K, shall nearly represent the figure of
the Sea, and C f, C D, C F, C d shall be the hights of the Sea in the places f,
D, F, d, in all which it is High Water: and seeing that in twelve hours time,
by the diurnall rotation of the Earth, the point F is transferred to f, and d
to D: the hight of the Sea C F will be that of the high water when the Moon is
present, and C f that of the other high water, when the Moon is under the
Earth: which in the case of this figure is less than the former C F. And in the
opposite parallel D d the contrary happens. The Rising of the Water being
alwais alternately greater and less in each place, when it is produced by the
Moon declining sensibly from the Equinoctial; that being the greatest of the
two Highwaters, in each diurnall revolution of the Moon, wherein she approaches
nearest either to the Zenith or Nadir of the place: whence it is that the Moon
in Northern Signs, in this part of the World, makes the greatest Tides when
above the Earth, and in Southern Signs, when under the Earth: the Effect being
always greatest where the Moon is farthest from the Horizon, either above or
below it. And this alternate increase and decrease of the Tides has been
observed to hold true on the Coast of England, at Bristol by Capt. Sturmy, and
at Plymouth by Mr. Colepresse.

But the motions hitherto mentioned are somewhat altered by the libration of
the water, whereby though the Action of the Luminaries should cease, the Flux and
Reflux of the Sea would for some time continue: This conservation of the
impressed motion diminishes the differences that otherwise would be between two
consequent Tides, and is the reason why the highest Spring-Tides are not
percisely on the new and full Moons, nor the Neapes on the Quarters; but
generally they are the third Tides after them, and sometimes later.

All these things would regularly come to pass, if the whole Earth were covered
with Sea very deep; but by reason of the sholeness of some places, and the
narrowness of the Streights by which the Tides are in many cases propagated;
there arises a great diversity in the effect, and not to be accounted for
without an exact knowledge of all the circumstances of the places, as of the
position of the Land, and the breadth and depth of the Channels by which the
Tide flows; for a very slow and imperceptible motion of the whole body of the
water, where it is (for example) 2 miles deep, will suffice to raise its
surface 10 or 12 feet in a Tides time; whereas if the same quantity of water
were to be conveied upon a channel of 40 fathoms deep, it would require a very
great stream to effect it, in so large Inlets as are the Channel of England and
the German Ocean; whence the Tide is found to set strongest in those places
where the Sea grows nar^owest; the same quantity of water being to pass through
a smaller passage: this is most evident in the Streights between Portland and
Cape de Hague in Normandy, where the Tide runs like a sluice; and it would be
yet more between Dover and Calais, if the Tide coming about the Island from the
North did not check it. And this force being once impressed upon the water,
continues to carry it about the level of the ordinary hight in the Ocean,
particularly where the water meets a direct obstacle, as it is at St. Malo's;
and where it enters into a long channel, which running far into the land,
grows very straight at its extremity; as it is in the Severn-Sea at Chepstow
and Bristol.

This sholeness of the Sea and the intercurrent Continents are the reason that
in the open Ocean the time of high water is not at the Moons appulse to the
Meridian, but always some hours after it; as it is observed upon all the West
Coast of Europe and Africa, from Ireland to the Cape of Good-Hope: in all which
a S. W. Moon makes high Water; and the same is reported to be on the West side
of America. But it would be endless to accont for all those particularities,
which are consequences of this Hypothesis; as why Lakes, such as the Caspian
Sea; and Mediterranian-Seas such as the Black-Sea, the Streights and Baltic,
have no sensible Tides: For Lakes having no communication with the Ocean, can
neither increase nor diminish their Water, whereby to rise and fall; and Seas
that communicate by such narrow Inletts and are of so immense an extent, cannot
in a few hours time receive or empty Water enough to raise or sink their
Surface any thing sensibly.

Lastly to demonstrate the excellency of this Doctrine, the example of the
Tides in the Port of Tunking in China, which are so extraordinary and differing
from all others we have yet heard of, may suffice. In this Port there is but
one Flood and Ebb in 24 hours; and twice in each Month, viz. when the Moon is
near the Equinoctial, there is no Tide at all, but the Water is stagnant; but
with the Moons declination there begins a Tide which is greatest when she is in
the Tropical Signs: only with this difference, that when the Moon is to the
Northward of the Aequinoctial, it flows when she is above the Earth, and Ebbs
when she is under, so as to make high Water at Moons setting, and low Water at
Moons rising: But on the contrary the Moon being to the Southward makes high
water at rising and low water at setting, it Ebbing all the time she is above
the Horizon. As may be seen more at large in the Philosophical Transaction Number.
162.

The Cause of this odd Appearance is proposed by Mr. Newton, to be from the
concurrence of two Tides; the one propagated in six hours out of the great
South Sea, along the Coast of China; the other out of the Indian-Sea, from
between the Islands, in twelve hours, along the Coast of Malacca and Cambodia.
The one of these Tides, being produced in North Latitude, is, as has been said,
greater, when the Moon being to the North of the Equator is above the Earth,
and less when she is under the Earth; and contrariwise the other Tide that
comes out of the Indian-Sea, being raised in South Latitude, is greater when
the Moon declining to the South is above the Earth, and less when she is under
the Earth: so that of these Tides alternately greater and lesser, there comes
always successively two of the greater and two of the lesser together every
day; and the high water falls alwais between the times of the arrival of the
two greater Floods, and the low water between the arrival of the two lesser
Floods. And the Moon coming to the Equinoctial, and the alternate Floods
becoming equal, this Tide ceases and the Water stagnates: but when she has
passed to the other side of the Equator, those Floods which in the former order
were the least, now becoming the greatest, that that before was the time of
high water now becomes the low water, and the converse. So that the whole
appearence of these strange Tides, is without any forcing naturally deduced
from these principles, and is a great argument of the certainty of the whole
Theory.

If by reason of the difficulty of the Matter, there be any thing herein not
sufficiently explained, or if there be any material thing observable in the
Tides that I have omitted, wherein your Majesty shall desire to be satisfied, I
doubt not but if your Majesty shall please to suffer me to be admited to the
honor of your Royal Presence, I may be able to give such an account thereof as
may be to your Majesty's full content.


