Christ's last SERMON, OR, The everlasting estate and condition of all men in
the World to come.

Exactly describing the Everlasting, Blessed, and Happy condition of the
Children of God in Glory for ever: With the everlasting, endless, and
easelesse condition of Wicked Men in the World to come for ever. Set forth for
the Comfort of the Godly, and for the Terror of the Ungodly,

By a godly, able, and faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, J. H.

Col. 3 4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also upon
with him in glory.

Mat. 25.34.41. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world. Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDREW ANDERSON, Anno DOM, 1664.

Courteous Reader.
THere are lately published some useful and profitable Sermons, viz.

Christ's first Sermon. A Key to open Heaven-gate. The true Christians Pathway
to Heaven. The Plain man's Pathway to Heaven. Heavens Glory and Hells Horror.
The dreadful Character of a Drunkara. There are also several other small
Books needful to be bought and read, viz. Bessie Clarkson of Lanerk. The Lady
Culrosse Dream. The last Goodnight. The History of Doctor Faustus. The History
of Fortunatus. The History of Roswall and Lillian. The History of Guy Earl of
Warwick. No Jest like a true Jest: or, The History of Captain Hynd.
All which, with variety of other Stories are to be sold by Andrew Anderson.

CHRIST'S LAST SERMON: OR, The everlasting estate and condition of all men in
the world to come.
John 14.2, 3. In My Fathers House there are many Mansions, if it were not so,
I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go I will come
again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am there ye may be also.


OUR blessed Lord and Savior having in the foregoing Chapter acquainted his
Disciples with His departure from them out of this world, He comes here in
this, and the three following Chapters, to give them his last fare-well-Sermon,
and therein He endeavors principally to comfort the sad hearts of His
Disciples, who were now disconsolate, and cast down in the spirits, under the
sense of so great and sad a los^ as the loss of their great and only Lord an
Master, Jesus Christ: For whom they had le^^ and lost all: Christ having
acquainted them wit^ His going out of the world, they thereupon presently begin
to be dejected and cast down at thi^^ sad news. Lord, said they, have we left
all, an^ followed Thee, and will thou now leave us? shall we now be exposed to
the difficulty and dangerous of the wide world? No, says our Savior, bi^^^
not discouraged, let not your hearts be troubled it is for your good that I go
away: In my Fathers, House are many Mansions, I go to prepar a place for you:
And if I go, I will come again and receive you. You shall be no losers by My
going away from you, I will surely make you a^^ mends for all your loss:
There are Mansions of joy in Heaven, that will abundantly counter vail all
your wordlie losses. If I go away, it is for your good, for I go to prepare a
place for you: And though you have not my bodily presence, yet you shall have
my spiritual presence: I will send you another Comforter that shall abide with
you for ever. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you: That is,
by My Spirit, to guide you and direct you into all truth, and to bear up your
hearts under all those troubles and temptations, which ye shall meet withal in
the world.

Having thus briefly given you the scope of ^he whole, I come now to the words
themselves, ^^com whence I raise these four Propositions? first, that there are
mansions of glory in heaven for the people of God hereafter: In my Fathers
House are many mansions. 2. I note from ^ence, that Christ's ascension was to
prepare a place for Believers; I go to prepare a place for you. 3. That Christ
will certainly come again ^^nd receive Believers to Himself: I will come ^gain
and receive you. 4. and lastly, which shall briefly insist upon, I note from
hence, that those mansions of glory prepared by Christ or Believers in Heaven,
will abundantly recomense and make good all the losses and all the crosses
which Believers may meet withal in the world.

I shall begin with the first of these, that there ^re mansions of Glory for
Believers hereafter. The point is so plain from the words themselves, that I
shall only give you a place or two of Scripture; in the 84. Psalm, verse. 11.
The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will ^e withhold from
them that walk uprightly. Eye ^ath not seen, ear has not heard, neither has
is ^^ntred into the heart of man to conceive the things which God has provided
for them that love him. Cor. 2.9. Come ye blessed (says your Savior) inherit
the kingdom prepared for you, Mat. 25.34. Several other Scriptures I might
give you, b^^ I shall proceed to the uses of this useful poin^ Is it so then,
that there are Mansions of Glor^^ for the godly hereafter? then I note from
henc^ the unspeakable misery of all wicked men bo^^^ here and hereafter: Is
there glory in heaven f^^ Believers? What is there then in hell for
Unb^^^lievers? if glory be the portion of the godly, wh^^ will the lot and
portion of wicked men b^^ The wicked (says Psalm. 9.17.) shall be turm^^^ into
hell, and all the Nations that forget Go^^ Wicked men shall have no part nor
portion those glorious Mansions, they are prepated onl^ for the godly: Wicked
men may indeed (which shall but further agravate their sorrow) behold t^^
Saints received by Christ into glory, as Dives b^^ held La Zarus in Abraham's
bosom, but it w^^^ afar off. Wicked men may at the last day he^^^ that blessed
sentence fo Come ye blessed, but the again also they shall hear, I and that with
a vengeance too, that woeful sentence of, Go ye curs^ into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil an^ his Angels. It is impossible for wicked men, I me^
such as live and die in sin unrepented of, to ent^ into heaven. Know ye not
(says the Apostle, 1 Co^ 6.9.) that the unrighteous shall not inherit (...)
Kingdom of God. The Evangelist St. John, Re^^ 20.21. speaking of the world to
come, which (...) foresaw in his heavenly vision, I saw (says he) t^^ dead,
small and great stand before God, and the Books were opened, and another Book
was opened, which is the Book of Life: And the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in those Books, according to their works. All the
ways of men, both good and bad, are exactlie written down both in the Book of
Gods everlasting Rememberance, and in the Book of man's own particular
Conscience? And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; And Death and Hell
(that is the grave) delivered up the dead which were in them; And they were
judged every man according to their works. And whosoever was not found written
in the Lambs book of life, was cast into the lake of fire: There Is the event of
this judgment to the wicked. But what success the Righteous shall there have
he sets down in Chap 21. Verse 3. Behold (says he) the Tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God: And God shall wipe all tears from
their eyes. And there shall be no more death neither sorrow, nor cursing:
neither shall there be any more pain. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things and I will be his God, and he shall be (...) ^on. A blessed privilege
indeed, but what remains for the wicked? See what follows in the eight Verse.
The fearful and unbelieving, the abominable and murderers, whoremongers,
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone. A most dreadful Scripture; the Lord awaken
every secure sinner, and give them hearts to consider these things before it be
too late: For as the Prophet Malachy faith, Mal. 4.1. The day comes that shall
burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be
stubble: and the day comes that shall burn them up (says the Lord Hosts) that
it shall leave them neither root nor branch. Then shall they call upon the
mountains to cover them, and upon the ^^lls to fall upon them, to hide them
from the fierceness of the wrath of God. O consider this all you that forget
God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Secondly, if there be such mansions of Glory for Believers hereafter, I note
from hence the desperate folly and madness of all those who neglect or despise
their own salvation. Ye will not come to me (says our Savior, Joh. 5.40.)
that ye might have life. This is the condemnation; that light is come into the
world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil.
Christ and salvation is freely offered to all in the Gospel: Christ invites all
to come; Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters, Isa. 55.1. Rev.
22.17. The Spirit, and the Bride say, Come: and let him that is athirst, come:
and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. And as Christ
invites all to come, so he receives all that does come: He that comes to me, I
will in no ways cast him out (says our Savior, Joh. 6.37. What think you
sinners of these Scriptures? will ye come to Christ and accept of life and
salvation, or will ye wilfully cast away your own souls for ever? You see here
Christ offers himself to you freely, if you will but receive him. Come unto me
says our Savior, Mat. 11.28.) all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will refresh you. What (...) of the (...) will ye come (...) and be saved (...)
you be so de^peratly mad as to destroy your own most precious and immortal
souls? When I behold the lives of most men, my very heart trembles to think
what will, everlastingly, become of their precious souls; all the care they
take is for their bodies, how does money come in, and how they shall get
riches; but they never consider how it goes with their souls: Ah sinners, are
your bodies everlasting? Is this world everlasting? Can any thing but heaven
make you happy? Are not your souls everlasting? will ye rather cast away your
souls, then leave your lusts, for sin and you must part, orelse heaven and your
souls will never meet? He that does not leave his sins on this side the grave
by Repentance, shall find (...) sins to meet him on the other side the gravel
(...) condemn him. If you live in your sins, ye sha^ die in your sins: Yea, die
everlastinglie for you sins. Sinners, I beseech you consider, are yo^ fit to
die, are you fit to live in another world are you prepared for heaven? If not,
let me te^^ you, you are fit for nothing but hell, and hell^ prepared for you.
Sinners, what do you do What do you mean to do are you yet a sleep? Al^ Lord,
what a harvest will hell have in these sin full days? What preparations do men
make so heaven? Are not they that were filthy. filthi^ st^ll? What men were,
that they are still: Thoug^ God is every day tumbling men into their graves yet
no man mends his pace for heaven. Sinners you hear all this, but can you bear
all this? Le^ me give you two or three properties of a man fitted for hell, and
I beseech you try and examin^ your own souls by them.

The first property of a man fitted for hell, i^ Obduration: A stone you know
is fitted to descend, it is its property to fall, downwards: Hardness makes
fitness. The way to Hell is from burning to burning, from a seared Conscience
to a damned soul.

A second property of a man fitted for wrath is alienation; estrangednesse to
God speaks fitness to wrath, and it is a sign that the Soul is fitted for utter
darkness. There are but two steps to death, first, the sinner says he will
have no fellowship with God: And secondly, God says, he shall have no
fellowship with him: Now is the sinner judged, now fit for hell, then judge ye,
the Execution only is wanting: And the Devil is not usuallie backward to
perform his office: The sinner is upon the Gallows as it were, he wants but
turning off, unless Christ steps in with a reprieve, that soul is utterlie
lost.

A third property of a man fi^ted for Hell, is Profaneness: Profaneness is
the badge of a wicked person: Wickedness in the life speaks out a cursed soul.
You may know what Country men are of by their Language: By their Fruits ye
shall know them. When men's words and works are the Language of Hell, what need
any further inquiry what Country men, or to what place they belong: You may
read Hell in their very faces. The tree is known by his fruit, says our
Savior, Mat. 7.20. Men's lives foreshew what their ends are like to be: As the
Tree falls, so it lies: As sinners live, so they usuallie die: Every man's life
lively bespeaks what they are, and what they shall be hereafter: If men will go
on in the broad way of sin, you know where their journies end will be: Broad is
the way that leads to destruction, Mat. 7.13. I know not what lives you live,
but to be sure you may either spell Heaven or Hell in them. If ye would know
the frame of your souls, then view your lives; your souls breath out themselves
either into the bosom of God or the Devils and into whose bosom you breath out
your souls here in this life, into that bosom you will certainly b^eath them
out in death. Fitting grace for heaven you see is no trifle, your eternal
estate depends upon it. Sinners, why do you put off this work as a trisle, and
why do you put it off till death? I dare say, that man would never be holy if
be could help it, that will not be holy till he die; he would never have to do
with Christ if he could avoid, that will not be acquainted with him before he
is ready to leave this world: when death is fitting the soul for hell, then,
and never till then to be looking after heaven. Ah, Lord, that ever those men
should have precious and immortal Souls to damn themselves: they that look no
after heaven till they come to their deathbeds, are usually crossed in their
folly; they are then either surprised with infirmities of body, and so
disinabled to perform so great a work; or else surprised in their souls, and so
unfitted and indisposed to it: either they have no strength or no heart to it,
and so dye in their sins, and perish eternally. Wicked men would never leave
sinning, if they did not cease living, and that is one reasont to justify the
infiniteness or everlastingnesse of the punishment of wicked men in hell. The
damned in hell are under easelesse and endless sufferings, because they would
have sinned always, if they had lived always: wicked men would have no end of
their lives here, they would live ever, that they might sin ever; therefore the
Lord gives them a life, not such a one as they would have, but such a one as
they deserve to have, which is indeed a death for ever: wicked men shall die
eternally for sin, because they would have lived eternally in sin.

In the third place, I beseech you note from hence, what a blessed thing it is
to be a Child of God: Is it so, that there are mansions of Glory for Believers
in Heaven hereafter, then Believers are the only happy Men and Women in the
World. Were it not for the hopes of Heaven, the condition of Gods Children
might be sad enough. if in this life only we had hope, we were of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. But the hopes of Gods Children are in the life to
come; therefore they are of all men most blessed. The happiness of a Child of
God is not in what he enjoyes here below, but in what he shall enjoy hereafter
in Glory. The best things of a Child of God are unseen things: Whilst we look
not (says the Apostle) at the things which are seens, but a the things Which
are not seen: For the things which are seen are temporal but the things that
are no^^ seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. And in 1 Pet. (...) 3, 4. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to His abundance
mercy has begotten us again unto a lived hope by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dea^ To an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled that fades
not away; reserved in heaven for you who are kept by the power of God, through
Faith unto Salvation. The Apostle here excellent^^ sets forth the condition of
a Child of God, and that in several Regards. First, They are b^ gotten again,
by Christ, to an Inheritance possibly they may lose all here below for H^^
sake: But yet here is the comfort of a Child (...) God, he is Heir to a great
Estate in the ne^^^ World: There is an Inheritance for him, an^ that is a sure
one: In six Regards: First, I^^^ not a corruptible, but an incorruptible one.
S^^^ condly, it is an undefiled one: And thirdly, it (...) a lasting, yea, an
everlasting one, it fades no^^^ away. Fourthly, it is reserved for them ti^^
they come to age. Gods Children, in this life are not at full age, therefore
they are nor cap^ble of enjoying so great a happinesss, which God will
hereafter bestow upon them. Fifthlie, it reserved for them in a safe place.
Many mo^^^ leave great estates here for their children, whi^^ they are often
cheated of; But the Inheritance of Gods Children is reserved by God for them in
Heaven where neither Moth does corrupt, nor These steals away. And lastly, as
the Inheritance is reserved for the Children of God, so the People of God are
preserved for their Inheritance: Henven if reserved for them, and they are
preserved for Heaven: They are kept by the mighty power of God through faith
unto Salvation.

Fourthly, are there such Mansion of glory for Believers hereafter, then I
beseech you try and examine your own souls, whether or no ye be in the faith:
And let me exhort you in the Name of Christ, seriously to set about the work
of Salvation. You see what great and glorious things there are laid in store
for Gods Children hereafter: Then I beseech you, labor to get an interest in
Christ here, that so you may partake of those glorious Mansions hereafter. How
greatly should the consideration of these things draw out our hearts, in
longings and pantings after God? When shall I come and appear before God? says
David, Psalm 42.1. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my
soul after thee, O God: My soul thirsts for God for the living God. When
shall I come and appear before God? And if David and such longings after the
enjoyment of God in his Ordinances here, what desires thought we to have after
the full enjoyment God himself in glory hereafter. Are there (...) mansions of
glory to be had hereafter, W^^^ manner of persons ought we to be then in all
manner of godliness?

And then lastly, If there be such Mansi^ of glory, then let me exhort you all,
even now this your day, to set your hearts at work seeking after those great
things of Eterni^^. Let every Soul of you thus reason with you selves, Are
there such glorious things hereafter, and am I the man or woman that shall
^^joy them? I remember a story of Gauls, w^^ having once tasted the sweet Wine
of Ita^^^ presently enquired after the Country, and ^^ver rested till they had
gotten it. I have he^^ given you, as it were, a fore-taste of that H^venly Wine
which Believers shall drink hereafter in Glory; now if you find any sweetne^^
in it, let not your hearts be at rest till you com^^ to the Country it self,
where are Rivers those sweet Pleasures, and that for evermore. Martyr suffering
death, one asked him the cau^^ why he suffered? Says he in the words of t^^^
Apostle, Eye has not seen, ear has nor heart neither has it entered into the
heart of man^^ conceive the things which God has prepared f^^^ them that love
him. The naming of wh^^^ wrought so effectually on the man's heart, that ^e
immediately became a Christian, and after ^ffered death of His Names sake. You
have ^ad not only one, but very many Scriptures ^pened to you, I beseech you
let not all be in ^ain. We read in Mark 10.17. how the young ^an came running
to Christ, saying, Good Matter, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? O that
you, ever you that hear me this day, would ^ow also come running unto Christ,
saying, What shall we do to partake of these glorious things here revealed?
Methinks, those things should greatly encourage you all, old and young ^^ich
and poor, now to get an interest in Christ. ^ou that are poor, and have but
little in this world, consider there are as great things in ^he world to come
for you, as for others. The ^^oorest Beggar shall have as great a portion in
^he world to come, as the greatest Prince. Nothing in this world can satisfy a
chils of God: ^ll the glory of the world its but the portion of Reprobate: and
will a Reprobates portion ^erve you? will a Dogs portion satisfy you? I
^ccount all things in the world (says the Apo^le) but as dung. Phil. 3.4.
There are other things to be sought after; See what our Savior ^aith, Mat.
6.33. Seek ye first the king dome of ^eaven and the righteousness thereof: let
that (...) your first endeavor. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, though
the passage benever so stra^^^^ yet if it be the way to glory, strive to enter
(...) thereat. Consider, God has given you N^^tures, capable of such glorious
things as (...) are, God might have made you bruit Bea^^ and then there had
been an end of you: (...) God has made you creatures capable of (...) highest
excellency, and therefore being of (...) a Nature, it highly concerns you to
seek af^^ such things as may give satisfaction to you^ souls. Men live as if
they were capable of (...) things else but meat, and drink, and clothes; if
there were no higher things which conce^^ our souls hereafter. The heathens
could (...) lieve that man was created for greater thing then these here below:
and if we who have (...) great and glorious things revealed to us in (...)
Gospel, shall we neglect the looking after then how just shall our condemnation
be? For (...) shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2.3.

I come now to the second Point, and that (...) this; That Christ's Ascension
was to prepar^^ place for Believers: I go to prepare a place (...) you. As
Christ came down from heaven to (...) for sinner, so Christ ascended up to
Heaven that believing sinners might live with him hen^^ after. Had not Christ
ascended into Heaven He had not finished the work of our redemption and indeed
the great support of a Child of God (...) yes in his consideration. It Is Christ
that died, yea, rather that is risen again, and now sits at the right hand of
God, making intercession for us, Romans 8.34. Father, I will (says Christ, John
17.24.) that those whom thou have given ^^me, may be with me where I am. If
Christ be not risen (says the Apostle) then is our preaching vain, and our
Faith is vain, and we are yet in our sins. But, as sureas Christ died. so the
Apostle proves. 1 Cor. 15. that he rose again, and ascended up into heaven.
That Is an excellent Scripture, Romans 4.25. He was delivered for our offenses,
and raised again for our justification. Our blessed Savior first appearing to
Mary Magdalen after his Resurrection, presently sends her to his Disciples with
the joyful news of his Ascension, John 20.17. Go to my Brethren, and say unto
them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father; to my God, and your God. O how
joyful is the consideration of Christ's Ascension to a Child of God? Now may a
Child of God say, he has a friend in the Court; and a friend in the Court, we
use to say, is betcer then a penny in the purse. Every Believer has Christ for
his friend in the Court of Heaven, and that is more worth to them then thousands
of gold and silver. Christ is in heaven pleading the cause for Believers: If
any man sin (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 2.2.) we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ righteous. And it is good for Believers (...) Jesus Christ
is in heaven pleading their cause w^^ God: so it is good for them that he is
there (...) senting and perfuming all their Prayers to (...) the Father.
Whatsoever it is that we want that may do us good, Christ is ready to beg^^ us
of His Father. Father (says Christ) these may friends, and for them I have
shed my blo^^ therefore, O Father, I will that they may with me, to behold my
glory. That is an excel^^ Scripture, Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able (...) to
save to the uttermost those that come unto (...) by him: seeing he ever lives
to make interces^^ for them.

Is it so then, that Christ Ascension was prepare a place for Believers, then
this short encourage Believers to be willing to do or (...) any thing here for
Christ: What was that made the Saint suffer so joyfully (...) Christ? was it
not this, the assurance of God love in Christ to them? What was it that (...)
up Jobs spirit so patiently under all his suff^^ings? I know (says he) though
worms dest^^ my body, yet my Redeemer lives, and I sh^^^ see Him with these
eyes. We know (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1.) if our earthly house of this
berna^er nalce were dissolved, we have a building of Jod, an house not made
with hands, etrnall in the heavens. The assurance of heaven will make as
willing to do or suffer any thing for Christ. There is that in heaven that will
abundantly re^ompence and make good all our losses on earth. O Christians, I
beseech you consider, you can (...) either do too much or suffer too much for
the getting of heaven. The Apostles were as great sufferers for the Kingdom of
Heaven as ever any were, and yet what account did they make of it? We reckon
(say they) that the suffering of this present world, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. If we suffer
with Christ, we shall also reign with Christ, 2 Timothy 2.12.

A third point I noted was this, That Christ will come again, and receive
Believers to Himself: The point is clear from the words themselves, I will come
again and receive you. But a little to illustrate the Point, I shall endeavor
to show you by Scripture that it is so: And secondly, how it is so. First, that
it is so, that Christ will come again, see that positive Scripture in Acts
1.10. And while they looked steadfastly into heaven, behold two men stood by
them in white apparel, which also said, Ye men of Galileo, why stand ye here
gazing up into heaven? his same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven,
shall so come in like manner as ye ha^^ seen him go into heaven. Here is the
point y^^ see confirmed by Scripture, and that by (...) mouths of Angles: As
sure as Christ is gone heaven, and as sure as he now fitteth at Go^ right hand
in Heaven; so sure will he come gain at the last day, and receive Believers
(...) Himself. And then how Christ will come: (...) shall come in power and
great glory, Matthew. (...) 30. And secondly, He will come sudden^^ even as a
thief in the night. First, he sh^^ come in power; irresistible power against
s^^ners. I beseech you sinners consider, you (...) not be able to stand when He
appears, for as (...) is all powerful in himself, so will He come at^^ded with
an innumerable company of glori^^ Saints and Angels. Behold (says Jude) (...)
Lord comes with ten thousand of His Sai^^ to execute judgment upon all, and
to convi^^ all. 1 These. 1.7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall (...) revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angles (...) flamming fire, taking vengeance on them
th^^ know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lo^^ Jesus Christ, who shall
be punished with everla^^ing destruction from the presence of the Lord, a^^
from the glory of His power. Though God b^^ long suffering toward sinners, yet
will he no^^ always suffer sinners to go unpunished. The So^^ of man shall come
in His glory, and all the holy Angels with him, Mat. 25.31. And second lie, he
shall ^ome suddenly and swiftly: Swiftly, even as the ^^ightning. And
suddenly, as a thief in the night, (...) Pet. 3. Those scoffers there mocked
and scof^^ed at the doctrine of Christ's coming to judgment; But says the
Apostle in the ninth verse, Though the Lord be long suffering, yet he is not
^^ack concerning his promise: But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in
the night. Though sinners may think Christ long, yet they shall find him sure.
The coming of Christ will be sudden to sinners in two respects: Sudden in
regard of their expectation; He will come before they look for Him; and sudden,
in regard of their unpreparednesse: Christ will come to sinners before they are
ready for Him, they will be then to seek for Oil in their Lamps. Christ (as one
says) though he has leaden feet, yet he has iron hands: though God be long
ere he does strike, yet when He does strike, He will be sure ^^o strike home.
Yet a little while and He that ^^sh all come will come, and will not tarry.

Now the use which I shall make of this point shall be only this: Will Christ
come again and receive Believers? then let me exhore you all to believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ: Would you be received by Christ into glory, then I beseech
you labor to receive Christ unto your souls by believing. If Christ do not
live in you by faith here, you shall never (...) with Christ in glory
hereafter. It is unbe^^ that is the soul-damning sin: He that believe not is
condemned already, John 3.18. He that ^^lieveth shall he saved, but he that
believes (...) shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. He that believ^^ on the Son has
everlasting life; But he t^^ believes not the Son, shall not see life, but
(...) wrath of God abides on him, John 3. 36.

Another Use which I must make of this poi^^ might be this, To comfort and
encourage (...) people of God in all their sufferings and loss^^ Art thou in
poverty? Does the world frown (...) thee? Are thy afflictions and losses many
a^^ great? Let not your hearts be troubled: Ch^^^ is gone to prepare a place
for you, and Ch^^ will come again and receive you; Therefore (...) not
discouraged. What though you meet w^^ many rubs and stops in your way? Yet you
m^^ be sure to get to glory at the last. Consider the through many tribulations
we must enter i^^ the Kingdom of Heaven.

The fourth and last Observation which I o^^ served, was this, That those
Mansions of Glo^^ prepared by Christ for Believers in Heaven, w^^ abundantly
recompense and make good all the Losses and all the Crosses which Believers m^^
here meet withal in the world. Let not yo^^ hearts be troubled, in my Fathers
house are m^^ ^^y mansions. Sell all (says our Savior) and follow me, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven.

For further prosecution of this useful Point, I shall proceed to handle it
first doctrinallie, and then Applicatorilie; And for the Doctrinal part, I
shall endeavor to show you first, what those Mansions of glory are which are
laid up for Believers: And secondly, what those losses are which Believers may
here meet withal: And ^^hen lastly, how those Mansions of glory do make good
the losses and crosses which Believers meet with in the world: And to begin
with the first, what those Mansions of glory are which are said up for
Believers in heaven: And all that ^^an be said of this, will be but as it were
the lighting of a Candle to the Sun: For it comes infi^^telie short of the
skill either of men or Angels ^^o express, as the Apostle says, Eyes has not
^^een, ear has not heard, neither has it entered in^^ the heart of man to
conceive the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor.
(...) 9. The glory of the glorified Saints in hea^^en is so exceeding
glorious, that it is not pos^^ble for all the tongues of men or Angels to
ex^^ess it. But by the way, to give you some glimp^^s of this most excellent
glory, consider a little ^^hese following particulars.

First, in heaven we shall have the everlasting ^^refence of God Himself: there
we shall see God as He is, not by faith, but by sight, clea^^ and fully. I
shall see him (says holy J^^^ with these eyes. Now we see as it were throug^^
glass darkly, but there we shall see God fac^^ face. We shall see Him as we
are seen. Th^^ and there we shall be ever with the Lord, as (...) Apostle has
it, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. We shall enjoy G^^ in heaven freely and fully without let or
in^^ruption; Though the Saints may possibly m^^^ with many and great
impediments, and him rances in the way unto Heaven, yet in Hea^ there shall be
nothing to hinder or inter^^ their joy. It is possible that a Child of G^^^ may
have his skin pulled over his ears, as so^^ of the Apostles had in their way
unto Hea^^ yet being gotten into Heaven, nothing shall (...) lest or trouble
them at all. What an unspe^^able inconceiveable comfort will it be, Chri^^ans,
to have and enjoy the presence of (...) God who is all, and has all, and will
be e^^lastinglie all in all to His people for ever: Wh^^ having not seen (says
the Apostle) we sire to love: In whom believing, we rejoice w^^ joy unspeakable
and full of glory. And if (...) fight of Gods presence by faith be so glori^
what then will be full fruition and enj^^ment of God Himself be? O!
unspeakables (...) full of glory.

A second thing which I would speak to, (...) indeed I must but speak to it, is
the perfection of grace that shall be enjoyed in heaven? O Christians, when ye
come to heaven, then ye come to full age in heaven. The spirits of just men
shall be made perfect, and the bodies of the Saints shall be made glorious even
like the glorious body of Christ. There we shall do the will of God perfectly.
In heaven there is no sin, nor temptation to sin, no not so much as a vain
thought, or an idle word: And as there is no sin, so there is no Satan. There
shall be no more need of Sermons, nor Sacraments, nor Prayers: But the whole
work of the Saints in heaven will be to sing Praises and Hallelujahs to God for
ever and ever.

Thirdly, in Heaven there is fullness of joy, Rivers of pleasures at Gods
Right hand, and that for evermore, Psalm 16.11. And those Rivers of pleasures
shall flow in, and from the presence of God himself, as the Fountain of all
those joies, which have infiniteness and eternity in them, without the least
dram of sorrow: For God shall then wipe away all tears from our eyes, and there
shall be no more sorrow, Rev. 21.4. The Rivers of the Saints joy in Heaven, as
they are without bank, so they are without bottom: Our Masters joy will then be
so great, that we his Servants shall not be able to contain it: There is
nothing in Heaven but what is matter of joy, our Fathers house, our Inhe^^tance
our Kingdom, our Crown and Glory our sight of Gods Face. That is an excellen^
speech of David, Thou shall make me (says he full of joy with shy Countenance:
Heaven is boundless, yea, a bottomless Ocean of joy an happiness, the
society of blessed Angels, at glorified Saints. In a word, the joies of Heaven
far exceeds all the joies that can be thought o^^ upon earth: Not only the joy
of Marriag^^ and the joy of Harvest, but also they joy of Fait^^ and the joy of
Ordinances, which are all swa^^lowed up by this great Ocean of joy: Nothin^ can
disturb or diminish the joies of the Saints (...) Heaven.

Fourthly, as there is fullness of joy in Heaven, so there is excellency of
glory; Perfection of glory shall be the Saints Robes: In Heaven they shall
shine as the Stars for ever and ever Dan. 12.5. In the one and twentieth of the
Revelations, St. John speaking of the new Jerusalem, exactly describes the
glory thereof: It is City, whose walls are Jasper, and the stre^^pure Gold,
clear as Crystal, whose foundation are of precious Stones, and the gates
thereof (...) Pearls: And if this new Jerusalem, the Church of God here below
be so glorious, how exceeding glorious then is that heavenly Jerusalem which is
above? Heaven, as one says, is the Palace of the King of Glory, the Presence
chamber of the great God, whose Presence it is that makes Heaven to be Heaven:
There indeed would be no Heaven, if God Himself were not there. In Heaven God
makes His Glory visible, both to Saints and Angels: Thence it is called a Crown
of Glory, an eternal weight of Glory: Glory shall then and there cover the
Saints all over, from top to toe, both within and without, their Souls shall
there be made glorious in knowledge, wisdom, and understanding, and their
bodies shall be made like the glorious Body of Christ; The bodies of the Saints
in Heaven shall be free from all necessities of nature, as food, and raiment,
sleep, and the like. In Heaven there shall be no need of these things.

Secondly, in Heaven the bodies of the Saints shall be freed from all natural
infirmities, and deformities, sickness: diseases, pains, or such like bodily
infirmities: There shall be no Cripples, no Blind nor Diseased ones in Heaven:
Heaven is an healthful Country, there is no sickness, nor death, no poverty
nor disgrace in Heaven: Our bodies shall be clothed in Heaven with life and
immortality by Christ: Christ will there change our vile bodies, and make them
like His glorious Body, Phil. 2.21. Did Moses face shine when he beheld but the
glory of Gods outside: Did Stephens face shin^ with Angelical splendour or
brightness, ho^^^ gloriously then shall the glorious bodies of th^^ Saints
shine when they shall stand before the Lord of Glory? The Saints then shall
be, a^^ the Psalmist expresses it, All glorious within their clothing shall be
all wrought gold. Th^^ glory which Gods People shall see and enjoy i^^ Heaven,
will infinitely oblidge them to spen^^ eternity there. Take a little view, a
foretast^ as it were of the Saints glory in Heaven. First it is great, an
exceeding, excessive, and eternal weight of glory, as Saint Paul expresses
(...) 2 Cor. 4.17. The glory of Heaven is the glor^^ of glories, joy
unspeakable and full of glories unu^terable and unconceiveable: Therefore it
called, Glory to be revealed, Romans 8.18. S^^ a little the greatness of this
heavenly glories these two things: First, the vessels that ta^^ it; Secondly,
the resemblance that sets it forth. The vessels that take in this glory are
the sou^ and bodies of Saints, whom the Apostle call Vessels of mercy prepared
unto glory: First for the soul here in this life: The whole wor^^ is not able
to fill or satisfy one souls. The so^^ is capable of more then the whole world
is ab^^ to give it: But the glory of Heaven, th^^ will fill all the souls of
all the Saints brim-full. W^^ read of some Saints that they live their full
^aies: They had as it were their ballyful of ^his life, but in the life to come
all the Saints shall be filled full of Glory. Secondly, for ^he bodies of the
Saints, though they are Vessels of less quantity then the soul, yet the world
(...) not able to fill or satisfy the body to the full: ^^s to instance in the
Eye and the Ear, those ^^ttle Members of our Body. We use to say of ^ome, that
their Eye is bigger then their Bel^^le: The little Eye at one glance can take
into (...) more then half the world; And what abundance of noise and found will
the Ear receive at ^^nce. The Eye is not satisfied (as the Wiseman says,
Eccles. 1.8.) with seeing, nor the ^^ar with hearing. Those little members of
our ^ody are either clogged or tired out, before ^hey can be filled or
satisfied with those things: ^ut not only the souls, but even the bodies of The
Saints in Heaven shall be filled top-full of Glory, from the crown of their
heads to the sole of their feet. In Heaven the everlasting doors of our souls
shall always stand wide open to receive the glory of Christ in the streams
thereof: and then shall Christ the King of Glory come in, and dwell with them
for ever.

Secondly, the greatness of the Saints Glory in Heaven may further appear by
the resemblances that sets it forth: First, the glory of Kings upon their
Coronation day: That greatly sets forth and illustrates the greatness of
Saints Glory in Heaven: For in Heaven Saints shall all be crowned Kings, and
sh^^ reign as Kings for ever in Glory: They shall herit the Kingdom (as our
Savior says, M^^ 25.34.) prepared for them from the foundation the World.

2. The Glory of the Stars that also resem^^ the Glory of the Saints in Heaven.
One Star fereth from another in Glory, 1 Cor. 15.41. the very bodies of the
Saints in heaven shall (...) shine all the Glory of all the Stars; Yea, the
(...) Glory of the Sun it self, which out shiner all Glory of the Stars. See
what our Savior sa^^ Mat. 13.23. Then shall the Righteous shine fo^^ as the
Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father.

3. The Glory of the glorious Angels, th^^ another resemblance of the Saints in
Glo^^ the Glory of the Angels, that far exeeds all Glory of all the Stars, yea,
and all the Kings Monarchs of the world: But the Saints in H^^ven shall be like
unto the very Angels, M^^ 22.30. Or as St. Luke has it, Luk, 20. Equal to the
Angles in Glory.

4. The Glory of Christ Himself, who is L^^ of Glory, that resembles and sets
forth the Gl^^ of the Saints: When Christ comes to be glori^^ in his Saints at
the last day, then shall the Sai^^ appear with Christ in Glory. Christ is the
Glo^^ ^f the Saints here, and Christ will be the Glory of the Saints hereafter:
Christ will then put His Glory upon them, and they shall shine with the Glory
thereof Then they shall be like Him, as St. ^^ohn says 1 John 3.2. For we
shall see him as he is. Then the bodies of the Saints, which have lien ^^n the
dust, shall arise and put on beautiful gar^^ents, even the Robes of Glory.
Christ will then change their vile bodies, and make them like to ^is glorious
body: The Saints shall be made con^^mable to Christ in Glory. Is not then the
Glory of the Saints in Heaven exceeding great? You ^^e it is a King-like, a
Star-like, a Saint-like, an ^^ngel-like, yea, a Christ-like Glory.

Secondly, the Glory of Heaven is solid, subtantial, and weighty: the Apostle,
2 Cor. 4.17. ^^lls it, an exceeding eternal weight of Glory. ^^'s like to
precious things, as Gold and Crowns, ^^e more weighty they are, the more worth
is in ^^em: Hence the Original word sighifies both Weight and Glory. Whereas on
the contrary, ^orldly glory, that is light and frothy, having no ^^bstance nor
reality in them, they are only shadows that appear, and then vanish away: A
fashion, as the Apostle calls it, 1 Cor. 7.31. that passes ^way: It is like a
Picture that has only shape and color, but no life; mere fantasy, a sound
and no more.

Thirdly, Heavenly Glory that is permanent and durable, it is lasting; Yea, an
eve^ing glory: It is perpetual, it shall never nor decay: But worldly honor
and glory, th^^ transitory, inconstant, perishing, and passing way like a
feather in the air: it is only seen blown away with the wind, 1 Pet. 1.24. the
glory of man is as the flower of the gra^^ in the morning it flourishes, but in
the eve^^ it is cut down and withered.

Fourthly, the Glory of Heaven is satisfy and contenting; They that enjoy it
shall fire no more: But for worldly glory, they have most of it, still desire
more: but the S^^ in Heaven shall have as much of Glory as (...) can hold, yes,
more then their hearts can (...) or desire. All the Saints in Heaven shall
(...) We are rich, and are full, we have all, an^^ bound. 1. In Heaven there is
plenty of wea^^ peace, and safety, rest, and reward: Plenty wealth without
want. The Treasures of ^^^ven cannot be corrupted: There is no moth rust, nor
thieves to steal them away. Heaven Treasures can never fail, they are like the
dows Oil, they increase upon the Saints: T^^ are bags that wax not old,
unsearchable rich Ephesians. 3 8. The Gold of Glory can never be^^ or summed up.
Secondly, in Heaven then plenty of peace without trouble, safety with danger,
triumph without war: There all enemies shall cease, our bodily enemies shall
^^e be reconciled unto us: And the enemies ^^ur souls shall be all cast into
the lake of fire brimstone. In Heaven there is no bloody ^^n to kill a
righteous Abel; No luxurious So^^ites to vex a righteous Lot; No Ishmael off;
No Shimri to curse; No Esau to terri^^^ No Rabshekah to rail; No Herod to
perse^^ the people of God; No Judas to betray a our. In Heaven there is peace,
not for term ^ats, but for ever and ever. Thirdly, in ^^ven there is plenty of
rest without weariness; ^e is no work to do but what is pure delight; only work
of the Saints in Glory will be to (...) Praises and Hallelujahs to God for ever
and (...). Heaven will be a place of ease and rest to weary: There remains a
rest for the ^^^ple of God, Heb. 8.9. It Is possible they may ^yred (as it were)
here with doing the work God, or wearied with suffering persecutions the sake
of Christ, But there remains a rest them hereafter. O what a sweet expression
is (...)! Art thou troubled and turmoil'd here, thou it have rest hereafter.
Blessed are the dead ^^th die in the Lord (said the Spirit) they rest ^^^m
their labors, and their works do follow ^^^m, Rev. 14.13. Fourthly, in Heaven
there is ^^nty of reward: Do you here suffer for righteousness sake great is
your reward in heaven, says our Savior, Mat. 5.10. Do you suffer for Christ
here, you shall reign with Christ hereafter glory. The light afflictions of a
Saint here, we work for him an exceeding and eternal weig^^ of glory
hereafter. Upon this account our blessed Savior calls on us to rejoice in our
sufferings, Mat. 5.12. Rejoice (says he) and be exceeding glade, for great is
your reward in heaven What we suffer for God we suffer for the Kingdom of God,
and upon that score the Saints a^^ said to be counted worthy of the kingom of
Go^^ 2 These. 1.5. The sufferings of this life are n^^ worthy to be compared
with the glory that shall be in the life to come. Do you labor hard he^^ for
God and his cause; do you spend, and a^^^ you spent in his service? perhaps you
may be bu^ poorly requited by men: O but consider, heaven is a large recompense
of everlasting reward. It said of Moses, Heb. 11. That he chose rather suffer
afflictions with the people of God, then enjoy the pleasures (the seeming
pleasures) of si^^^ for a season. For indeed they are but seeming pleasures
which continue but for a season: An^^^ counted the reproach of Christ greater
riches them^^ all the honors of Egypt. For, says the Apostle^^ He had respect
to the recompense of reward Moses could see glory to come through all the
sufferings of this life. Heaven is our great Lord and Masters joy, where all
his faithful servant shall be received and rewarded to all eternity. Fifthly,
In Heaven there is good company, blessed society; God and Christ, and the holy
Spirit: Millions of millions of blessed Saints and glorious Angels. Then shall
the Saints be gathered to their Father, yea, to their fathers and ^^iends who
are gone to Heaven before them. And is it not a happiness think you to be among
our friends? do you not think that time well ^ent here, which you spend in the
enjoyment and embracements of your friends society, whose ^^ve and favor is
altogether inconstant and ^^angeable? you may be taken from them, or they from
you in a moment; O but your friends (...) Heaven they are immortal, and their
love is ^^changeable; they and you shall then and there ^^ve for ever, and
enjoy one another, and rejoice ^^ne with another for ever: but your dearest
^^iends on earth must die, they must leave you, ^^^t your joy in Heaven shall
no man take from ^^u. In Heaven there is God your Father, and Christ your Head,
and Husband, and Savior, there, even in his humane nature wherein he ^^ffered
death on the Cross for you: and your ^omforter, God the holy Spirit is there,
yea, ^^d all your friends. How mightily do children ^^^ng to go home to their
fathers house, or a wife (...) her husband: so earnestly should our souls
^^sire to go to heaven, our fathers house, to Christ our head and husband,
where there is good pany only, and that to all eternity.

And then lastly, the Glory of Heaven is stant and permanent: In Heaven all is
safe sure, all things continue there fixed and imm^able. Heaven is an
Inheritance settled upon Saints for ever, and sealed unto them by broad Seal of
Christ's Blood.

I have showed you in part what those ^^sions of glory are, which the Saints
shall e^^^ hereafter: I come now, and I must be brief ^^ving a little touch on
it already, to show what those losses and crosses are which B^^vers may meet
withal here below: and first the losses which you may meet withal in (...)
world. What are they? poor trifles, a (...) pebble-stones as it were; a little
earthly t^^^ sure it may be, such as is not considerable: S^^^ little what
those worldly enjoyments are wh^^^ possibly thou may lose for Christ's sake:
F^^ thou losest nothing for Christ here, but wh^^ vanity and emptiness; broken
Cistrens that (...) hold no water. For as one says well. A w^^full of honors
or pleasures cannot satisfy one (...) with any solid comfort. Thou may as
soon (...) thy Chest with Grace, as thy heart with Go^^ There is not that in
the Creature which (...) look for: Experience tells us, a man may at o^^^ have
a house full of Gold, and yet a heart ful^^^ sorrow: They that enjoy the most
of the world cannot say they have enough, therefore the loss of it is not
considerable, not to be comparers with the gain of Heaven. Seconly, there is
nothing thou losest for Heaven, but what is the portion of the wicked: Wo^dly
comforts are wicked men's portions: Yea, and ^^^s all the portion that ever they
shall have either here or hereafter, Son, remember (says Abraham to Dives
being in hell) that thou in thy lifetime re^eivest thy good things. They that
have their Heaven in this world shall have nothing in Heaven in the world to
come. Thirdly, thou can ^ose nothing for Christ that can be profitable to
^hee: All the outward good things of this life cannot sanctify, nor purchase
one dram of saving Grace for thee: They may prove share to ^hee, or be
occasions of sin to you, or draw you from Christ, as they did the Young Man in
the Gospel, but they will never drive you to Christ: and commonly they that
have most of Gold have ^east of Grace, or rather no Grace at all. And as they
cannot sanctify you so they cannot save you: They can neither she^^er you from
the judgments of God here, of from the stroke of ^eath; Neither can they
preserve you from hell hereafter. Rich Dives went to hell, when poor Lozarus
was carried unto Heaven; Wordly things cannot purchase Heaven, if the whole
world would lend you their shoulders, th^^^ could not lift you up to Heaven.
Fourth there is nothing here below that is certain, (...) things under the Sun
are mutable, sublu^^^ enjoyments, more changeable then the Mo^^^ inconstant
even as the Wind, certain on^^ in uncertainties: And as they are uncerta^^^ so
they are corruptible and perishing. Ch^^^ calls them meat that perishes, Joh.
6.27. (...) things which either moths or rust may consu^^ or thieves may steal
away from you, or they (...) be destroyed by fire: which if you do posse^^
while you live, yet you must leave them beh^^^ you when you die: For as we
brought noth^^^ into the World, so it is certain we shall carry (...) thing out
of the world. 1 Timothy 6.7.

Fifthly, outward enjoyments are often v^^ troublesome, they bring many fears,
many ca^^ much sorrow and vexation: There is a car^^ get, and a care to keep
riches, as the Wise n^^^ faith, All is vanity, so is it also vexation of
^^^rit. Worldly comforts they are like Roses, th^^ have sharp prickles as well
as sweet flowers. man may have much bitterness in his least (...) comforts
here, therefore do not think much (...) part with all things here below for
Christ; (...) thou shall be no loser by the bargain; Thou sh^^ receive an
hundred fold more in this life, and the world to come eternal life, Mark 10.30
I come now in the next place, in a word, to ^ew you what these Crosses are
which Believers do oftentimes undergo for the Kingdom of Heavens sake: and they
are very small and in^^siderable also, in respect of the glory that follows.
The Apostles endured as much tribulations for the Kingdom of heavens sake as
possibly should be, yet what did they think of it? We ^^ckon (says St. Paul)
that the afflictions of this ^se are not worthy to be compared with the gloly
that shall be. For first, they are but light: our light afflictions. And as
they are light, so they are ^^or short; they are but for a moment: Our light
affliction (says the Apostle) which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and ^^ternall weight of glory. Hence it is that the ^^ints of
old were so joyful in all their tribulations: hence they rejoiced that they
were counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ.

I shall come now to show you how it is that ^ose Mansions of glory in Heaven
will make ^ood all our losses and crosses upon earth: and his appears further
for these reasons. For first, (...) you have heard already, the glory of the
glo^^fied Saint in heaven is infinite, and durable: and therefore must needs
exceed and make good (...) their losses, which as you have also heard, are ^^te
and uncertain. We use to account more of ^ose things which are durable and
lasting, than those things which are of no certainty.

Secondly, The only, yea, all the treasures the Saints are laid up in Heaven;
and what ne^ any care for losing a few triffles so long as the treasure is
safe? If a man lose a few triff^^^ yet if he have a safe treasury to go to, he
(...) soon make good so small a loss. Beloved, all t^^^ things you do enjoy
here are but triffles; but t^^^ things which you shall enjoy hereafter in
h^^ven, are no less then a treasure: a rich tr^^sury, the storehouse of God
himself, into (...) which he has been treasuring up for his Sai^ from the
foundation of the world. I might much larger herein: but I will conclude all i^
word or two of Application.

Is it so then that those mansions of Glory p^^^ pared by Christ for Believers
in Heaven, (...) abundantly recompense and make good all (...) Losses and
Crosses which Believers meet with in the World? The I beseech you set your
fections upon things above, and not on things low. You see we live in slippery
times, we ca^ not say that any thing is certain here: O the labor to be sure
of something hereafter. If the can not keep thy earthly inheritance, then
bout to get an inheritance in heaven.

Secondly, for I must be brief, If there be s^^ glorious mansions in heaven:
then labor to p^^^ pare your souls for heaven. But how shall we this, may some
say? I answer, These five way 1. Would thou prepare thy self for heav^^ be
fruitful then in well doing, always abounding in the works of the Lord: be
sure to get that work done which God sent you into the world to do; growing in
grace is going to heaven: and grace here will make you fit and meet for glory
hereafter. 2. Would you prepare for heaven? labor to purge your selves then
from all sin, by being unpotted in the world; for as Heaven is a place of
happiness, so it is a place of holiness, into which nothing that is unclean can
enter: it is only the ^ure in heart that shall see God, Mat. 5.8. 3. Would you
prepare for heaven? then get ^our selves into a posture of readiness to leave
he world and go to Heaven every day, that ^ou may up and be gone when ever
death calls ^or you: so that when death comes, you may ^ave nothing to do but
to die. Death will not ^ait when he comes: if ye are not fit to die, ye ^re
not fit for heaven: death will not carry that ^oul to heaven that is not ready
when he comes. ^f you are not ready to die when ever death ^omes, let me tell
you, ye are not fit to live in another world. You know not at what hour Christ
^ay come or send his messenger Death for you: ^erefore be always ready for
heaven, because ^eaven is always ready for you. When the ^idegroom came, they
that had Oil in their ^mps, grace in their hearts, they went in to the ^^riage:
but for those that wanted oil, the door was shut against them, and they were
shut from the marriage feast. They that have la^^ without oil, profession
without grace, shall ^ver enter into Heaven. 4. Would you prepare for Heaven?
then your title to Heaven cleared and confirme^^ you: what man is there, that
having purch^^ a great Estate, that will be so foolish as n^^ get a sure title
to what he has purchased? (...) we are strangers and pilgrims, as all our fa^^
were; but heaven that is our home, our coun^ our Fathers House, our Inheritance:
O should we then labor to make that sure to souls! and having made that sure,
labor in the next place, to keep up your Evide^^^ First, keep your Evidences
for Heaven and fair, for Satan will endeavor to blot t^^ Secondly, keep them
safe: the Devil wi^^ them from you if he can; and if ye lose Evidences, what
have you to show for Hea^^^ If your writings be lost, how will you get
Inheritance? Then, whatsoever you do, ge^ ^surance of heaven; for first,
assurance of he will take off your hearts from the world: rance of those things
above will make you ^ing to part with all things here below, co^^ you in all
your tribulations, and bear up hearts under all discouragements, as it did
vids, Jobs and Paul's. Evidence for Heaven lie warm at your hearts when natural
hea^^^ ^yes; when you lie upon your death beds, they ^ill be a sweet taste to
your Souls: when you ^eel no taste or comfort in meat or drink, assu^ance of
Heaven will comfort you: when all ^ings fail you, assurance of Heaven will
pre^are you for all changes, it will fit you for your ^eat change. Assurance of
life eternal will ^onquer the Grave for you, and unsting Death ^o you: it will
make you sing, yea, to triumph ^n the way to heaven, over death and the grave.
They that have Heaven assured to them, have more joy and gladness put into
their souls, than ^ll the world besides. Assurance of salvation will ^ngage you
to trust God for all things, and evi^ence God to your souls, it will make you
to love and delight in him, fearful to offend, careful to ^lease him.
Thirdly, Assurance makes men ^uspicious of themselves: they that are assured
that they shall stand, will be sure to take heed that they do not fall: they
that shall be saved, ^ill labor to work it out with fear. Fourthly, ^ssurance
makes the soul humble; the higher the ^oul is in assurance, the lower it will
be in humi^ity. But how shall we know that our assurance ^or heaven is right?
Take these following Rules. 1. Right assurance will make you more holy: every
man that has this hope purifies himself as God is pure. Right assurance for
Heaven will ^ngage your souls to be holy in all manner of conversation: Having
therefore these promises. dearly beloved, cleanse your selves from all thinesse
both of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Right assurance will make the soul
to pe^vere to the end; receiving the end of your fa^ the salvation of your
souls. But how shall get this assurance? 1. By having a godly (...) row for sin
wrought in thy soul. Christ gives (...) to none but to the weary. 2. Examine
your he^^ and lives by comparing them with the Word God. 3. Assurance is
obtained by a holy, constant, and careful use of the Ordinances of Go^ in
joining both the end and the means togeth^^ it will make you as careful to use
the means, confident to expect the end of your faith, the ^^vation of your
souls. It does not feed men w^ vain hopes, that they shall escape hell thou
they live in sin, and go on in the broad way t^^ leads to destruction. They
that would come heaven must be careful to use the means,(...) they must walk
in that strait and narrow w^ unto holiness and righteousness, which on leads
unto life and salvation.



And lastly, is it so then that Godliness is great g^ yea, it is the best gain?
Has God made thee g^ly, The lines are fallen to thee in a pleasant place, t^^
have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16.6. It is enough, the have all: though it may
be thou have but little the world yet thou have a propriety in God: G^^ is
thine, thy portion is Christ, he is thy Jes^^ thy all; Labor then to be
conformable to Go^ godliness is Gods likeness. Has God given you ^ace? God
has done more for you than if he and given you a thousand worlds. Are others
^ch, and art thou poor? have others plenty of ^old and silver, and have thou
little or none ar all? ^onsider, has not God given thee that which is finitely
better than all the Gold and Riches of ^he World: Faith, that is more precious
than Gold that perishes: Wisdom, that is better than ^bies? yea all things that
can be thought of are ^ot comparable to grace. If grace be thy portion, ^lory
will be thy portion: and thou have more ^use of content, than if thou had all
the world ^or thy portion without grace. What though others be richer than
thee, yet thou art better than there is. The righteous is more excellent then his
neigh^r. Are others had in honor and art thou de^pised? let me tell thee, if
thou have the favor of God, thou have more honor then all the world ^n give.
Are thy troubles greater nor others? conder, God sees them good for thee; thou
can or tell how to be without them: It is good for me says David) that I
have been afflicted, They that ^ave endured the most of afflictions here, will
be and to be the happiest people in all the world ^reafter, for through them we
enter into glory. through many tribulations we must enter into the king^m of
heaven. Unto which Kingdom the Lord, his infinite mercy, bring us all. Amen.

FINIS.

