INFORMATION For John Hamilton of Gilkerscleugh Against John VVeir of Newtown.
THe said John Weir having in July 1690 given in a Petition to the Parliament
representing that in the late times there had been some Civil Action depending
betwixt him and Gilkerscleugh, whereby he was so stirred up against Newtoun,
that during the Dependence, Gilkerscleugh threatened that if Newtoun would not
desist, he would inform such words against Newtoun as should be Treasonable,
condescending at the same time upon the Words, and that accordingly thereafter
Newtoun was taken and made Prisoner in Edinburgh, and got an Indictment to
answer before the Justices for the said Words, as also that he appeared as a
Witness, and in the precognition deponed, conform to the Libel. But that the
other Witnesses, viz. Alexander Bailie and Andrew symonton not proving
sufficiently, he was continued Prisoner till February 1686, that he was
dismissed upon a a Bill to the Council, and subsuming that the said Process and
Imprisonment was occasioned by Gilkerscleughs malice against him, and that he
was thereby put to the Expenses of above 500 lib, sterling, and concluding
against Gilkerscleugh, and the other two Witnesses that that may be decerned
conjunctly and severally to make payment of the said Sum with the Annualrents
thereof since the date and time of expending the samen, which having come to be
called before the Committee of Fines and Forfeitures, and being debate and
Probation taken: and all these Actions that was depending before the Committee
of Fines and Forfaultures are now remitted to the Committee for Security of the
Nation, that the Parties may be heard before them, Gilkerscleugh before he make
any particular Answer to the foresaid groundless and fa^se Representation, he
humbly offers to the Consideration of the Parliament, that he in his Minority
being advised by (...) to ^ho^e the said John Weir one of his Curators, upon
this Ground and Pretense that he was an Agent and Writer, and so could serve
Gilkerscleugh in any Affair that he had depending at Law, and he being allowed
to intromet with the whole Rents of Gilkerscleughs Estate, and others belonging
to him, whereof to this hour Gilkerscleugh could never get an Account, and
albeit he will be Debtor to Gilkerscleugh in great Sums of Money, as also the
deceast Gilkerscleugh, the Defenders Father being Cautioner for John Weir the
Pursuers Father in Law to James Johnstoun of Cariffen for a considerable Sum,
whereof the Pursuer by his Contract of marriage betwixt him and his Wife, was
obliged to make payment, and relieve the Cautioner, in respect the said John
Weir had disponed his Estate to the Pursuer, who married his eldest Daughter,
yet so far was he from paying thereof, that he suffered Gilkerscleugh his
Pupills Estate to be apprysed for the same, the Legal whereof is now expired,
through the Default and Fraud of the Pursuer, so that it is evident that the
Pursuer will be Debtor to Gilkerscleugh in greater Sums than he is worth.

This being premised, It is answered for Gilkerscleugh. 1. That its not so much
as alleged in the said Lybel, that he meddled with any of Newtouns Estate,
either as Fine of Forefaulture, or that he any other manner of way meddled with
any thing that belonged to him, so that he not being able to lybel in the terms
of the Act of Parliament anent Fines and Forefaultures, he has patched up the
said false and irrelevant Stories contirved by him, of purpose to force from
Gilkerscleugh a Discharge of the foresaid just Debts, for which he knows he
will be liable: And whereas it is alleged that Gilkerscleugh was stirred up
against him, upon the account of Civil Actions depending betwixt them, the same
is grossly calumnious, seeing Newtoun had never any ground, nor did intend any
Action against Gilkerscleugh, but on the contrary he intented an Action against
Newtoun to relieve him of the said Debt, for which his Father was Cautioner,
and which Newtoun by his Contract was bound to satisfy, as said is, and he was
so conscious that the said Pursuit was just, and that he will be liable, that
he was necessitat to use a most disingenuous Shift to stop the Process, by
debarring Gilkerscleugh with Horning: So that it was absolutely false to
pretend that he had any Process against Gilkerscleugh, which might have stirred
up Gilkerscleugh against him.

2. If the Libel as it is conceived were true, as it is most false, yet it is
no ways relevant. 1. Because the words alleged to be informed by
Gilkerscleugh, are not lybelled as they ought to have been. 2. If the words had
been lybelled, then they would either be Treasonable or not, and if they were
such, then he was bound to have informed, otherways he himself would have been
liable in the pain of Treason for concealing, or they were not Treasonable, in
which case Newtown would have sustained no prejudice thereby. 3. It is notourly
known, that there was previous Cognition taken by these who had Commission
through the whole Western Shires, what one man knew against another, and
obliged them to depone upon Oath, otherways they were sent to Prison; as also
it was an ordinary Question (whom ye do know that knows any thing of such an
Affair) so that as a person was obliged to tell who were Contestes, and one
these Precognitions the Indictments at the Circuit Courts were taken out, and
Newtowns Indictment consists of many more Articles than these words alleged to
be informed against him by Gilkerscleugh, which were separately relevant; and
if the words had been treasonable as Newtown pretends, then he was obliged to
discover the same, especially when he saw a severe Example before him of the
Lord of Deuchall, who was forefault for Concealing only that which was
whispered in his Ear by Sir John Cochran, who craved of him sum Supply for the
Earl of Argyle.

3. Seeing there was so universal a Precognition taken, as said is, all that
Gilkerscleugh can pretend to have informed was the Words spoken to him by
Newtown, and it is thought strange how the dilating of these can be pretended
to be the only ground of his Imprisonment, seeing there is four or five separat
Articles in his Indictment, every one thereof was relevant to infer Treason,
and which cannot be prtended that ever Gilkerscleugh knew or informed of,
because Newtown was indicted in June 1683 at the Circuit-Court, wherein it is
specially lybelled, that he sent his Man and Horse to Bothw^l, and that he took
a sham Instrument against his Servant at Lanerk, protesting that he was
innocent of his going, and that he only sent his man to bring back the Horse,
but not to join with the Rebels, and that was the first thing that made him be
taken notice of at Lanerk, and Gilkerscleughs Deposition is not taken till
October 1683, which was after the Indictment, so that it is ridiculous to
allege that Newtowns Incarceration proceeded from Gilkerscleugh, seeing Newtown
had been formerly Indicted, and declared Fugitive for not appearing, and who
upon his return and coming in was relaxed upon his taking the Test. 2. As
Newtoun was relevantly Indicted before Gilkerscleugh was ex mined, as said is,
so it was groundless to pretend that any thing could be fixed against
Gilkerscleugh upon that account, seeing by the Depositions adduced, it is
clearly proven that Andrew Symontoun and Alexander Baillie said that they would
declare what would hang Newtoun, and that they would follow him to the Gallows.

4. As the Representation made in the foresaid Complaint, is Calumnious and
Irrelevant, so it is against sense to think that Gilkerscleugh could have any
Design to have Newtoun forfeit, because Newtoun being Debtor to him in great
Sums of Money: If Newtoun had been forefeit it would have ruined Gilkerscleugh.
And further, to show how absolutely groundless the said Lybel is, and how
Gilkerscleugh was against the forefeiting of Newtoun, that if need were he
could prove by Littelegil Eldershaw, and Mr. John Brown, who were Witnesses in
Newtoun's Exculpation at that time, that Gilkerscleugh frequently said to them,
He could heartily wish, some means could be fallen upon to cast him from being
a Witness, which clarly demonstrats that he had no design to get him forefeit.
And the truth was, after he was liberate by taking the Test, all that befell
him thereafter, was by his own default, seeing he, to ingratiat himself with the
then Chancellor, he went and told several idle Stories about the Scots-men he
had conversed with at London, and what their Design was, who did report the
samen tot^e Council, and who did immediately order a Macer to carry him before
them; and they finding that he prevaricat in his Examination, they thereupon
immediately sent him to Prison, where he continued till he was brought to a
Trial for the Crimes of Treason: And it is notourly known, how Newtoun has
oppressed and abused the Country in several things, and of late he Committed a
gross Malverse and breach of his Trust, in so far as in the year 1686 or
thereby, he being commissionat by the Duke of Hamilton to uplift some Rests of
the Tax^tion, he did grossly offer to defraud the Duke, and oppress the
Country, which being represented to the Council, he was imprisoned and fined
in 500 merks.

5. If there were any relevancy in the foresaid Lybel, as there is not, for the
Reasons foresaid, yet he cannot be liable, because he is secured by the Act of
Indemnity in September 1688, by which, all Crimes, Offenses, Delinquencies, and
Transgressions of whatsoever nature or quality, committed, acted or done, by
any one Subject to another, by Word, Write, or any other Act of Commission or
Omission, which directly or indirectly may import by any inference or
Construction, the contravention of any Law, Act of Parliament, Custom or
Constitution of this Kingdom, or may infer any pain or punishment against any
of the Subjects, to the prejudice of their Lives, Fortunes, Estates or
Reputations, either ad vindictam publicam vel privatam, either for Damnage or
Interest, are Indemnified. And Discharges any of the Subjects to be called in
question for the samen, either Civily or Criminally: and Ordains that the said
General Indemnity shall be interpret in the most favorable and comprehensive
Sense the same can admit of for security of the Subjects in the Premises: and
what is now lybelled against Gilkerscleugh, if there were any relevancy or
truth in the thing, as there is neither, the samen does clearly fall under the
Act of Indemnity.

6. If such a lybel as this should be sustained, it might be a ground of
thousands of Process of that nature, for all Persons that were contained in the
Porteous Rolls, may upon as good, and better Reason raise such Actions against
the Witnesses who were likewise Informers. So that if such an Action should be
sustained, it would be of a dangerous Preparative to the whole Nation. And it
cannot be instanced that ever there was such an Action pursued, far less
sustained.

It was answered for Newtoun, that he had an Action of Poinding of the Ground,
depending against Gilkerscleugh, which was the occasion that he was irritate
against him, and albeit he was chosen one of Gilkerscleugh's Curators, yet he
had no Intromission except only with 700 lib. or thereby, and his Obligement to
relieve Gilkerscleugh was only conditional, in case his Father in Law should
disburden the Estate of other Debts which was not dene: And that it is
sufficiently proven by the Depositions of the Witnesses, Gilkersclugh to have
informed Treason against Newtoun, and that it appears by the Process against
Newtoun, that the Advocat past from all the Lybel, except as to the Expressions
informed by Gilkersclugh, and the reason of his Imprisonment by the Council
was, because he would not inform against Cesnock and the other Scots-men at
London, and the Reason why he was fined was, because he allowed the Town of
Linlithgow to make use of the Copy of a Suspension as a Principal, and the Act
of Indmnity does not meet this case, because it could not take away any Parries
private Damnage and Interest, and by the Claim of Right, nothing in the late
times should be drawn in Consequence.

It is Replied for Gilkersclugh. 1. That he never knew any Action that Newtoun
had, depending against him, neither does he instruct any such Process, and it
is not like that he would have pursued any such Action against Gilkersclugh, if
there had been any Ground for it, as there is not, seeing he knew that he was
debtor to Gilkersclugh in great Sums of Money.

2. It is absolutely false which Newtoun alleges, That albeit he was one of the
Curators, yet he did not Intromet, except only with a small Sum, seeing it is
notourly known in the whole Country* that he was the sole intrometting
Curator, and uplifted the Rents during all the years of the Curatry, As also,
he intrometted with, and disposed of the Movables, which was of a considerable
Value: And the account of his Intromissions being drawn up, and allowance given
of all his Payments, he will be yet resting Gilkersclugh above 30000 lib. So
that it is evident, that all that Newtoun designs by his groundless and
calumnious Pursuit, is only of purpose to frighten Gilkersclugh from pursuing
Newtoun for his justs Debts, and to force him to some disadvantagious
Transaction: For the truth is Newtoun knows very well, and so is it known to
all the Country about that he will be Debtor to Gilkersclugh in more than all
he is worth.

3. As to that Pretense that Newton was only obliged to relieve Gilkerscleughs
Father of the Cautionry, upon condition that Newtones Father in Law should
disburden the Estate of other Debts, this is like the rest of Newtouns
calumnious Alledgeances, for there is no such condition in Newtouns Contract of
Marriage; but he is expressly obliged to relieve Gilkerscleughs Father of the
Cautionry, which will appear by the Contract it self, if Newtoun would produce
it.

4. As to what is alleged that Gilkerscleaughs should have informed Treason
against Newtoun to be sufficiently proven. It is Replied. 1. That the former
Answer is opponed, that it is no ways Criminal to inform of matter of Treason,
seeing by the Laws of this and all other Nations, every man is obliged to inform
against any person that is guilty of Treason: and if such an Action as this
should be sustained it would absolutely hinder all persons hereafter to inform
matter of Treason, and how prejudicial that might be to the King and the
Nation: The Parliament may easily judge. 2. As it is not possible, that such a
Complaint can be sustained to make any Man liable for Damages without
overturning the fundamental Laws of the Nation, so neither is the said
irrelevant Complent proven, for the Lybel resolving in these two points, such
as the time of Newtouns Imprisonment, and the cause of it, that it was
Gilkerscleughs informing treasonable Words against him, but so it is that none
of these two Points are proven. For first, as to the time, it being alleged
that he was two years and a half in prison, the Witnesses only declares that he
entered to prison in the year 1683, and that they saw him in Prison in the year
1685, but does not mention the particular time they did see him in prison, nor
that he was in Prison all the time. 2. As to the Cause of his Imprisonment, it
is not proven against the Defender, neither can it be pretended that it was
upon the account of any Information Gilkerscleugh gave against him, seeing
Newtoun acknowledges by an Information signed under his Hand lying in Process;
That the oecasion of his being put in Prison was, that he refused to inform
against Cessnock and other Scots Gentlemen at London, which clearly takes off
all the conjectural Probation that Newtoun has Adduced against Gilkerscleugh,
as if the Case of his Imprisonment had been Gilkerscleugh's Information against
him. 3 Several of the Witnessess aduced by Newtoun, and particularly George
Ogilvie declairs that he was sent by Meldrum to the Tolbooth of Hamiltoun, to
get Information from Gilkerscleugh against Newtoun by which it is evident that
he did not give any Information till he was required by these Commissionat by
the Government which is the very time libelled that Gilkerscleugh should have
given the Information, and it being become Relevant by the Committie, and
before the time libelled, or at the same time which is all one, Gilkerscleugh
was required to give Information by these who was Commissionat by the
Government, relevant to Liberate him from this Groundless Persuit, and this
being Proven by the Pursuer's own witnesses; Gilkerscleugh ought to be
Assoi^zied, even conform to the Terms of the Committies former Interlolocutor.
4. The only Witness that Newtoun makes Use of, for proving that Gilkercleugh
Informed Treasonable Words against him are John Hamiltoun of Ellershaw and Mr.
John Brown, and all that they Depon is, that they heard Gilkerscleugh say, that
if he did not get his own, and Right in an Affair that he had with Newtoun that
he should follow him to the Gallows, and if he got not him Hanged, he should
Stick him, which might have been some Words that Gilkerscleugh said in Passion,
but there is nothing in these Words, or in all the Depositions in the Terms of
the Libel, that Gilkerscleugh should have Informed Treasonable Words against
Newtoun nor so much as that he did Inform against him; so that it is Impossible
that such a Probation can be sustained to make Gilkerscleugh liable for Damages
if the Libel was otherways Relevant as it is not. 5. It is clear from the
Deposintions that the Persons who Threatened to Inform against Newtoun, were
Andrew Symintor and Alexander Baillie, so that as it is evident by the said
Probation, that any thing that was said by Gilkerscleugh was not any
Treasonable Words that Newtoun should have spoken, nor that he Informed against
him, so that it is clear by the said Probation, that Syminton and Baillie were
the Persons that Threatened to Inform, and not Gilkerscleugh. 6. As to
Gilkercleugh's pretended Actual Informing; There is none of the Witnesses
Depones except George Ogilvie who was Clerk to Meldrum's Commission; and who
Declares that he was sent by Meldrum as said is, only there is another named
Alexander Ogilvie who is an Old blind sottish Body, and when he was first
Examined, he was not ^xamined in presence of the Party, nor before the
Commission but in a Private house, and albeit the first Deposition seems to
Concur with George Ogilvie yet he thereafter Emitted a Declaration upon Soul
and Conscience, that he did never see Gilkerscleugh in the Tolbooth of
Hamilton, nor did know that Gilkerscleugh gave any Information against Newtoun,
only he heard George Ogilvie say so, which being but a Hearsay does not Prove,
And albeit there were Concurring Testimonies as to that Particular yet it makes
nothing against Gelkerscleugh, seeing any Information he gave, was given to
these that had Commission from the Government being required for that Effect,
as appears by the Testimonies of the Witnesses, which he desires may be Read.

5. It was callumnious to allege that the Cause of Newtoun's Imprisonment, and
of being Fined by the Council, was only for holding a Copy of a Suspension for
a Principal; it being nonesense to say that the Privy Council would Fine a man
for such a thing as that which is ordinary and that which is no Crime, but the
true Reason of his Imprisonment was because he was endeavoring to Defraud the
Duke of Hamiltoun and Oppress the Country, and Malverse in his Trust, he being
Employed by the Duke to Charge the Town of Lithgow, he took likeways Money from
the Town and procured them a Suspension against Duke Hamiltoun.

6. The Act of Indemnity is opponed, which clearly meets this Case and has been
many times sustained both before the Lords of Session and Justiciary, for
freeing Parties both from the Crime and Damnage, and Interest, and the Claim
of Right does no ways concern cases of this Nature which can only be understood
of Declarations, doings and Proceedings in the Late Government that were
contrair to Law, But it was no ways contrair to Law for the King to give an
Indemnity to His Subjects, for if that were Sustained, then the Claim of Right
might altogether take away the Act of Indemnity, and make it ineffectual which
was never yet pretended, as also by the same Reason the Claim of Right might
take away all Remissions given to any Party that had been granted these Forty
years by past, and what a Dangerous preparative that might be any man might
easily judge, and seeing such Acts of Indemnity has always been Sustained in
the ordinary Courts of Justiciary to Free the Parties both quoad vindic^am
Publicam et pritatam, and Damnage, and Interest, it ought likeways to be
sustained to Liberat Gilkerscleugh in this Case, if the Libel were otherways
Relvant and Proven as it is not, and Acts of Indemnity are Landmarks which are
Sacred, and ought not be Removed, nor so much as touched, and if they should
not be sustained in that Sense and Latitude, and conform to the Express Words
of the Act, it might Occasion a great deal of Confusion on the Nation, and
would Frustrate the very End and Design of granting such Acts of Indemnity.

In Respect of all which Gilkerscleugh Ought to be Assoilzied from his
Groundless, and Calumnious Persuit.


