(...) FOR The Earl of Roxburgh, and (...) his Brother (...)
THE Deceast Lord Ballenden be virtue of a Faculty in his Patent of Honor,
Named Mr. John Kerr youngest Son to the Ea^l of Roxburgh (now Lord Ballanden)
to succeed him in his Dignity and Honors, and substitute others of the Earls
Sons to him, and failz^eing of all these and the Heirs Male of their Bodies, he
substitute the 2d Son of the Earl of Roxburgh for the time being. And to
maintain the Honor, he Dispones to the Lord Ballenden and the Heirs of Tailzie
about 200000 merks, to which the Earl of Roxburgh adds more than 60000 merks;
All which is strictly Tailzied under several irritancies, and the Members of
Tailzie prohibit to Contract Debt, or do deids whereby the Estate may be
deteriorat, in prejudice of the succeeding (...) of Tailzie, providing alwise
it be Lawful to the said. John Lord Ballanden. and other Members of the
Tailzie, to uplift the sums Ass^gned they alwise Reimploying them in favors,
and in the Terms of the Tailzie.

The Lord Ballanden has greatly exe^ced the power of uplifting the sums
Disponed be the late Lord Ballenden to him, and other Ho^rs of Tailzie without
Reimploying the same: And there being yet fourscore thousand merks of the
Tailzied sums in the Earl of Roxburghs hand, the Lord Ballendine has raised a
Declarator against the Earl of Roxburgh Declairing it Lawful to him, to uplift
the fo^esaid sum of fourscore thousand merks, conform to the Reservation and
power in the Tailzie without necessity of reimploying the same, that not being
his the Debitors Interest, But the Interest of the Heirs of Tailzie.

The Earl of Roxburgh makes no opposition, but Mr. William Kerr his Brother*
and next Heir of Tailzie failzieing Lord Ballendens Sons, has raised a
Declarator against the Lord Ballenden, for Declairing that it may not be Lawful
for him to uplift, nor for the Earl to pay the foresaid fourscore thousand
merks, unless he reimploy the same upon Heritable security in the Terms of the
Tailzie; And thereupon has Arre^sted in the Earl his hands, and Mr. William
appeared for himself, and though both the E: and he gave the Honors suitable
to the Relation to the Lord Ballenden; Yet considering his Lordships
Circumstances, being Blessed with a numerous Family, and that Mr. William is the
next Heir to his Sons, and desires nothing more, than what was given for
mantaining the Honor and Dignity of the Family may be Employed and preserved
for that end; And that the (...) in the Earl of Roxburgh hands may either so
continue or be secured in the Terms of the Tailzie; And for this end, he urged
that part of the Tailzie at the Letter B, whereby power is reserved to the
Heirs to uplift, receive, and Discharge the Sums of Money above-written,
providing allwise they employ the same of new again upon Lands or other
sufficient Heritable Security for mantenance and preservation of the said
Family; And do not by their Deeds deteriorat and prejudge the same, from whence
it is clear, that the power of uplifting is qualified with a Provision to
Reimploy; And so the present Declarator against the Earl of Roxburgh can not be
insisted in nor take effect without Reimploying, which is more clear from the
Clause immediately proceeding whereby it is expressly provided and declared, that
it shall not be leisum nor Lawful to the said John Kerr now Lord Ballenden,
and remanent Heirs of Tailzie and provis^on, nor their Heirs to sell, annalzie,
or dispone Redeemablie or Irredeemablie the sums of Money, Lands, and others
thereby provided to them, or to Contract Debts, or do Deeds whereby the samen
may be evicted, or apprysed from them.

It was answered for the Pursuer, That by the Tailzie he has the power of
uplifting, and the Earl of Roxburgh Debtor, is sufficiently secured be his
Discharge as has been several times found be the Lords, in the Processes
against the other Debitors, and the Earl of Roxburgh has no concern in the
Reimploying, that being jus tertii as to him.

And as for Mr. William Kerr, the Declarator and Arreistment at his instance
has no Foundation, he not being next Heir of Tailzie, but the Pursuers own Son,
to whom he himself is Tutor and Administrator, and so he having the power of
uplifting is the only proper Judge of the Reimploying, wherein no person is
concerned, but his own Son, and not any remot Heir, who its hoped shall never
succeed.

It was Replied* that the Earl of Roxburgh does not urge the reimploying, but
only that the sums are Arrested in his hands at the instance of Mr. William
Kerr, who replies that though he be a Remot Heir of Tailzie, yet seeing the
Pursuer nor his Son can do no Deed to prejudge his Succession, he has very good
Interest to oppose the uplifting unless the same be Reimployed in the Express.
Terms of the Tailzie, and the Honor due to the Contracters of the Tailzie,
besides the Express provisions thereof ought to Oblige both Pursuer and
Defenders to the strict Observance thereof, and there are few Families in
Scotland who would not accept a less value in the same terms, and dutifully
perform the provisions and will of the Contracters; And it cannot be seen nor
thought by what means or upon what Ground the Lord Ballinden can pretend to
uplift any of the Tailzied Money without reimploying the same.

Mr. William Kerr has likewise good action against the Lord Ballenden, for
reimploying of the Money already uplifted, and for declairing his irritating of
the Tailzie by uplifting, and not by Employing; Yet being more concerned in
preserving to the Lord Ballenden's Sons what is extant, then in debarring the
Lord Ballendine from the Liferent thereof, he forbears at this time to insist
in that Declarator, so be it the Lord Ballenden either continue the Money where
it is, and satisfy himself with the Annualrent or if he uplift, that the same
be Reimployed in the Terms of the Contract upon good Heritable Security
Rendering the like Rent or Annu^lrent Yearly, which is the Express Design of
the Tailzie, whereby at the two doub^e W: W: It is provided, that the Heirs of
Tailzie may do no deed whereby the Estate and Living may be Deteriorat or
Rendered in an worse Condition at their Deceasses, when the next Heir shall
Succeed th^n ^t was at the Death of William Lord Ballenden, and that under
Strict Instances now if the lifting of Money, and not Reimploying, or
Reimploying not to the Value be not an Deterioration of the Estate, and Living
from what is was when William Lord Ballenden the Granter of the Tailzie
Deceast, let any Man judge, and i^ there be but on small part Extant of the
Taillzied Sums to maintain the same Dignity, which formarly was supported by
the whole, it is most Rational and Just, that these Remains be Tenderly
handled, Carefully preserved, and Employed to the best Advantage,

As to the pretense that a Remote Member or Heir of Tailzie has no Interest to
Crave Reimployment, It is an obvious mistake, for there is a jus q^^sirum by
such restrictive Clauses to all the Members of Tailzie, whose Succession in
their order, the makers did intend to secure thereby. So that all the Members
of Tailzie have an Interest, that it be not broke: And consequently may pursue
such actions as is necessary for that Effect.

Thus Process was Sustained upon the Lady Tarrase 's Interest and Diligence;
Tho, at the Time only a Remote Heir in Humbyes Tailzie, and Process was
likewise Sustained at the instance of the Remote Heir of the Tailzie of Ayton;
Tho he was cast upon another Head. As also it is frequent, that Children of a
Marriage may Pursue for Securing of what is provided by their Mothers Contract,
tho they cannot be Heirs, nor have Access to the Subject during their Parents
Life, and if paraleles were Necess^r^; It Is certain, that in the matter of
precedencie, a Nobleman may contravert the Rank of another, after whom, he
could not immediately follow at the time: But it is Enough, that this brings him
nearer. But there needs no Remote Reasonings in so clear a point; For if the
Interposing of Remoter Members or Heirs of Tailzie were not allowed, when the
Subject is about to perish, then the present Heritable possessor, having the
command of the next Immediate Heir: might utterly f^ust at the Tailzie as to
the Substitutes, without any possibility of Remeed, which is against Law and
common Sense.

And whereas its pretended, that the Lord Ballendine has already Obtained
several Decreets against his Debitors: It is Answered, that this is nothing to
the present purpose, because in these Decreets there was no Compearance for the
Interest of the Substitute Members of Tailzie, who alone had Interest to
obstruct the Payment otherwise then upon Reimployment at the Lords sight that
being Incompetent to the Debitors, and as to the pretense that the Lords are
not to interpose; It is plain, that now upon Mr. Williams Craving it. Conform
to the Conclusion of his Process Repeated Incidenter, the Lords may and ought
to do him and the Rest of the Substitutes Justice therein. Besides that its
most frequent in many other cases, to decern or find the Letters orderly
proceeded, the Pursuer Reimploying at the Ordinars Sight. It being most
certain, that an Elusory Reimployment, such as upon a House without Rent, upon
Movables to be Consumed; In a word, upon a Babble whatever might be the pretium
affectionis of it, in place of a Solid Stock, that might Answer the Design of
the parties of preserving a Fund Suitable to the dignity of the Heirs of
Tailzie, will never be permitted in such a case.

Whereas it was Alleged for the Pursuer, that the Arriestment Signified
nothing, because it follows the Fate of the Declarator, which will Determine
both, Its Answered; that this is a mistake of the case,

For the Declarator has two Conclusions, being articulatus Libellus, one in
Relation to the 80000 Merks, as yet unuplifted in the Earls hands, that it
cannot be uplifted but on Reimployment, as to which only Mr: William Repeats it
in the present Process. But quoad, the other Conclusion that the Lord Ballenden
ought to be Decerned to Reimploy about 200000 Merks already uplifted by him, on
which Dependence Arriestment is laid on in the Earls hands. Mr. William must
carry His Process to the Roll; Since he neither does not can now insist in it.
But in the mean time, the Earl Contends that be cannot be in tuto to pay till
this Arriestment be loused, Seeing it will stand upon the Second Conclusion of
the Lybell, whatever come of the first, which, alone can be Determined in the
present Process.

In Respect whereof, etc.


