INFORMATION For VVhytefield Hayter, and James Chiesly Merchants in London, and
Partners.
Against The Skinners in Edinburgh.
THe said Whitefield Hayter, etc. all Scotsmen besides himself, and some
residing here, having attained to more than ordinary perfection in the Ai^t of
dressing and coloring of Leather, making of Glews and Parchment, and entered
in Society and Co-partnerie, and stocked a vast Sum of money for carring on a
considerable Trade there with; they did mean themselves to the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council, and craved that they might be declared to be free
Manufactorie, and have the privilege of the same, and accordingly conform to
the Act of Parliament 1661, obtained the desire of their Petition, and were
allowed all the Privileges competent by Law to a Manufactory; Against which
Act the Skinners having reclaimed by a Petition, representing all that was
possible for them to do, and craving that the said Act might be recalled, the
said Lords were pleased upon Answers given in by the said Whitefield Hayter
most readily to refuse the desire of the Bill given in by the Skinners, and to
adhere to their former Act with this Addition, that the said Hayter and
Partners should set up in no Burgh-Royal within this Kingdom, unless upon
Invitation, and with the Consent of the Burgh, and that they should take
Scotsmen both to be Partners and Apprentices, and communicate the Secret of the
Trade to such Apprentices, upon the faith of, and conform to these two Acts,
the said Hayter and Partners did increase their Stocks, and have been at vast
Charges and Expenses for carring on the said Manufactory this while bypast; But
(as it would appear by the instigation of the Skinners) the Privilege
competent to them as a Manufactory, not being pleasantly allowed them, and the
Partners being unwilling to mortify more Money unless they had an Act of
Parliament in their favors, they meaned themselves to the Parliament, craving
that the Act of Council might be Ratified, and they have an special Act in
their own name, against which it is informed, the Skinners did compear and
object. 1. That the said Hayter and Partners had no Skill in dressing and
coloring of Leather, at least can pretend to no better Skill therein than the
Skinners themselves, and have offered no Specimen of their Airt, and do offer
to make appear that they can dress Marikin and Shambo, which the Partners
cannot pretend to do, and are content to produce Specimens of that same
Leather, to which the Partners pretend Skill, and unlesss there were great odds
of their Skill, the Partners ought not to have the Privilege of the
Manufactory, and that by the said Erection, they and the hail skinners of the
Kingdom sustain prejudice, in so far as that Skins are bought up by them, and
exported out of the Kingdom, so that the Skinners cannot have enough of the
Product of this Kingdom to serve the Leidges but at dear Rates. 2. That if the
said Manufactory be free of public Burden, they will be able to out-sell all
the Skinners who bear a proportion of these Burdens, and so inhance the said
Trade, as also other Manufactories may be encouraged to be set up to the
prejudice and Ruin of other Trades. 3. By Erecting such a Manufactory, there
will arise a considerable Diminution of the Kings Customs, at least the
Tradesmen and others would come to be overcharged by their Immunity. 4. The
said Skinners have Seals of Cause confirmed by several Acts of Parliament
erecting them in an Corporation, and granting them many Privileges, and
particularly that none should be allowed to exercethe Skinner Trade, but such
as are admitted by the said Incorporation.

Whytfield Hayter and his Partners, need make no other answer but shortly this,
that all these Objections were under the Lords of Privy Council their
Consideration the time of their pronouncing their Acts, and particularly their
second Act, and that the Opposition made by the Skinners, is chiefly of design
to have a Monopoly of dressing of Skins in their own hands, which may clearly
appear from this, that there being only One in the Kingdom who knows to dress
Leather: the Skinners at least some of them has taken him bound to Work, to
none but themselves. However more particularly it is answered, 1. that what is
represented by the Skinners themselves anent the Exportation of Leather, does
fully evince the Partners Skill in dressing of Leather, seeing if the Leather
were not dressed better than ordinar, it could not be so Exported as the Skinners
do complain it is, and seeing the Encouragment of the Exportation of t he native
Commodities and Manufactories of the Kingdom does so much tend to the Advantage
both of His Majesty's Customs, and of the whole Nation: it is hoped that the
Skinners Argument founded upon the great Exportation of Leather occasioned by
the foresaid Manufactory, will be so far from Tending to their prejudice, that
on the contrair, the Copartners will retort the same, and make it an Argument
why the Act of Parliament ought to pass in their Favors and as to any thing
that is founded upon the Skinners Skill in dressing Shambo and Marikin: the
Copartners are not concerned therein, seeing it is no part of their
Manufactorie: but as to any specimen of their Art, if need beis they are
willing to give the same when required, but as said is, the great Export
(albeit it be not so great, but there always remain sufficient to serve the
Skinners, and a great quanity of Skins even in the Wool are yearly Exported,)
is a sufficient Demonstration and Proof of their Skill.

It is answered to the 2d. and 3d. that the same is of no moment in respect
that the Partners have been at vast Charges and Expenses in setting up their
said Manufactorie, which will more than balance any Immunity they may enjoy
besides that always there is Encouragement given to ingenious Spirits for
promoting of new Inventions and Manufactories, and the Advantage arising by the
Immunities being but small, the Skinners their proportion of Releif will be
very inconsiderable, and will bear no Proportion with the Advantage they and
the Leiges will reap by the Encouragment of the said Manufactorie, especially
these whose states consists in Sheep and Cowes, neither will the King sustain
any prejudice thereby, seeing the Thriving of the Nation is His Majesty's great
Interest and Desire, and that as said is, the Kingdom is much bettered by the
Export, besides that the forsaid Export will occasions the Import of
Commodities, which will augment His Majesty's Customs, much more than they were
diminished throw not paying of Duty for Export.

It is answered to the 4th that the Seal of Cause does no waves meet the
present Case, seeing, conform to Act of Council, the Co-partner are not to set
up within any Burgh Royal, far less within the Town of Edinburgh.


