BY THE LORD DEPUTY AND COUNCIL.
Licensed according to Order, March 22. 1688/9.

TYRCONNEL.

WHEREAS several Persons in the Province of Vlster, and the Town of Sligo, in
this His Majesty's Kingdom, have entered into several Associations, containing
no less offense than High Treason, and thereupon formed themselves into several
Parties, dividing and marshalling themselves into several Regiments, Troops and
Companies, marching well armed up and down the Country, to the great Terror of
the King's liege People, in manifest breach of the Law and of the Peace of this
Realm. And having resolved within Our Selves to prevent the effusion of Blood,
as long as it was possible, by using all peaceable means to reduce the said
Malefactors to their obedience, have of late issued a Proclamation, setting
forth the said Disorders, requiring all the said Parties to disperse, and
repair to their several Habitations and Callings, assuring every of them of His
Majesty's Pardon and Protection. And whereas We find the said Offenders,
instead of complying with Our said Proclamation, still to persist in their
wickedness, by continuing in actual Rebellion, breaking of Prisons, and
discharging of Prisoners, secured by due course of Law, for Robberies,
Felonies, and other heinous Crimes, by seizing upon His Majesty's Arms and
Ammunition, imprisoning several of His Majesty's Army, disarming and
dismounting them, killing and murdering several of His Majesty's Subjects,
pillaging and plundering the Country, and daily committing several other acts
of Hostility; and sinding no other way left to suppress the said Rebellion, We
the Lord Deputy have caused a Party of His Majesty's Army, under the Command of
Lieutenant General Richard Hamilton, to march into the Province of Vlster, to
reduce the Rebels there by the force of Arms, the consequence whereof cannot be
but very fatal to that Country and the Inhabitants thereof, and will
inevitably occasion the total ruin and destruction of that part of His
Majesty's Kingdom; the consideration whereof has given Us great disquiet and
trouble of Mind, that a Country well planted and inhabited, should now, by the
insolency and traitorous wickedness of its own Inhabitants, he brought to mine
and desolation, which we are still willing to prevent, if any spark of grace be
yet remaining in the hearts of those Conspirators, hereby declaring
notwithstanding the many Affronts by them put upon His Majesty's Government
notwithstanding the several acts of hostility by them hitherto committed, that
if they will now submit and become dutiful Subjects, His Majesty's mercy shall
be extended to them, excepting the persons hereafter excepted. And in order
thereunto, We the Lord Deputy and Council do hereby strictly Charge and Command
all such Persons in Arms in Vlster, or the Town of Sligoe, forthwith to lay
down Arms, and that the principal persons amongst them now in the North do
forthwith repair to the said Lieutenant General Richard Hamilton, and deliver
up to him their Arms and serviceable Horses, and to give him Hostages as an
assurance of their future Loyalty and Obedience to His Majesty. And that all
their Adherents do deliver up their Arms and serviceable Horses to such person
and persons as he the said Lieutenant General Hamilton shall appoint to receive
them. And We do also further Charge and Command all the principal persons of
other Commotions and Insurrections in Sligoe to repair forthwith either to Us
the Lord Deputy, or to Colonel Mac Daniell at the Boil, and to deliver up
their Arms and serviceable Horses, and to give Hostages as security for their
future peaceable deportment, and their adherents to lay down their Arms, to be
delivered up together with their serviceable Horses to the said Colonel Mac
Daniell; We the Lord Deputy hereby giving safe conduct to such of them as will
submit according to this our Proclamation. And we do hereby further declare,
that such of the said persons as shall give obedience to these Our Commands,
(except the persons hereafter excepted) shall have His Majesty's protection and
pardon for all past offenses relating to the said Commotions and Insurrections;
but in case they shall be so unhappy as to persist in their wicked Designs and
treasonable Practices, We the Lord Deputy do hereby Command all His Majesty's
Forces to fall upon them where ever they meet them, and to treat them as Rebels
and Traitors to His Majesty. Yet to the end the innocent may not suffer for the
crime of the nocent, and that the committal of inhumane acts may be prevented,
We do hereby strictly Charge and Command His Majesty's Army now upon their
march to the North and all other His Majesty's Forces, that they or either of
them do not presume to use any violence to Women, Children, aged or decrepit
Men, Laborers, Plowmen, or Tillers of the Ground, or to any other who in these
Commotions demeaned themselves inoffensively, without joining with the Rebels,
or aiding or assisting them in their traitorous actings and behaviors. But in
regard Hugh Earl of Mount Alexander, John Lord Viscount Massereene, Robert Lord
Baron of Kingston, Clotworthy Skevington Esquire Son to the Lord Viscount
Massereene, Sir Robert Colvill, Sir Arthur Rawdon, Sir John Magill, John
Hawkins, Robert Sanderson, and Francis Hamilton Son to Sir Charles Hamilton,
have been the principal Actors in the said Rebellion, and the persons who
advised and fomented the same, and inveigled others to be involved therein, We
think fit to except them out of this Our Proclamation, as persons not deserving
His Majesty's mercy or favor.

Given of the Council Chamger at Dublin, the 7th day of March, 1688. A. Fytton.
C. Granard. Lymerick. Bellewe. Will. Talbot. Tho. Newcomen. Rich. Hamilton.
Fran. Plowden.

GOD Save the KING.
Dublin, Printed by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham, Assigns of Benjamin Took,
Printer to the King's Most Ex^ellent Majesty: And Reprinted at London for T. G.
and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, next the Black Bull in the Old-Bailey,
1689.


