Dr. Jaque's VINDICATION Against Mr. Kirkwood's DEFAMATION In his Plea before
the Kirk, and Civil Judicature of SCOTLAND.

Dr. Jaque's VINDICATION, AGAINST Mr. Kirkwood's DEFAMATION In his Plea before
the Kirk, and Civil Judicature OF SCOTLAND.
NOT the Vanity of appearing in Print, but the necessity of self Vindication,
has obliged Dr. Jaque, thus publicly to take notice of a late Scurrilous
Pamphlet Entuuled Mr. Kukwoods Plea before the Kirk and Civil Judicatorie of
Scotland. The like of which (all things being considered) was never Written in
any Language, by any Persuasion, being both Profane, Blasphemous, and Obscene:
He is in the whole Process of his book instigated, not only by an Unchristian,
but an Ungenerous Inhumane and Sordid Spirit, which does so highly ferment his
Gall, that he is at length, forced to spew it out, though to the defiling the
Personages, and Charecters, of the most Reverend, Pious, Learned and Judicious,
Members, and Judicatures of this Renowned and Reformed Church, which will
notwithstanding all his false Suggestions, be living Witnesses against his
malicious Calumnies; And so very inconsistent is the Crazy-Headed Pamphleteer,
with himself, that even what he so Satyrically inveighs against in others. viz.
An endeavor to ruin his Reputation and Fame, he makes his own Practice, and
that most Cowardly and Invidiously, stabbing as it were under the fifth Rib,
without giving a fair Challenge for self Defense; this was often allowed him,
as he evidenceth by the many Instruments he took in the presence of the several
Judicatures, before whom his cause was beard, and Witnesses Examined on the
matter; He had fair play according to the Discipline of the Church, but allows
not the least Umbrage of the like to another, but takes false and malicious
report, as a sufficient evidence and ground to vent his Reproaches, and
endeavors himself to aggravate the matter, with his Pedantick Rhetoric, and
even racks his shallow Wits, to find words sufficiently Emphatical,
Hyperbolically to express the Hainousness, of the Imaginary Crime conceived in
the Vacuum of his Choleric Brain: This he does to a stranger of another
Nation, not in the least concerned in his affair, without any provocation from
the Person he defames, or candid Apology for Traducing his Name, and that in
the most Public and Celebrated manner, publishing it in Print, and thereby
exposing the Reputation of a Gentelman, wholly unknown to him, to the Obloquy
of the Censorious World, and to all the disadvantages that he charges the
Reverend Judicatures with, as to himself.

Whatever Mr. Kirkwood may think of the matter, he may assure himself the
Gentleman he abuses, is not of so Phlegmatic a Constitution, as to let such
an Injury pass unresented, and must therefore expect to be called to a legal
account for his procedure in that affair.

In the Second Act of his Comme-Tragedy, (for such on a strict perusal his
Pamphlet will be found, and even such as will be his't off the stage, of Truth,
Modesty and Honor) he brings in Dr. Jaque, Son to Mr. William Jaque and Mrs.
Stones (as he calls her) for a part in that scene, he introduces them with a
lie, assuring the Auditory, that he will pass by that famous business, that
fell out at Mr. Jaques house at Bsggar, but at the same time hurrys them off
the stage with a huy-an-cry, as guilty of the most notorious Crimes,
endeavoring at the same blow, to ruin the Reputation of Mr. Jaque, the Dr.
and Mrs. Stone.

That the world may therefore be undeceived and Mr. Kirkwoods Malice, more
plainly detected, Dr. Jaque, thinks it highly requisite to publish, the
following plain and Faithful account, of the whole matter, relating to Mrs.
Stone, both for his own Vindication, and likewise for the Information and
Satisfaction, of such who are as yet unacquainted with the Truth of the matter.

Know then that Mrs. Stone spoken of, in Mr. Kirkwoods 2d part page 38 is the
only Daughter, of Mr. Arthur Stone, an Emment Merchant in London, and a Member
of the Common Council of that City, a Man of Good Report amongst all he deals
with, of great Piety and Candor, and an Oppulent Man as to his Wordly
condition: His Wife likewise a Woman of great Piety and Integrity, was the
nearest Relation (except a Mother) to Dr. Jaques Wife, and therefore upon all
occasions showed great Respect and Civility to her Kinswoman, and the Dr. Mr.
Stones Daughter, and Dr. Jaques Wife being bred up together, from their
Infancy, contracted a very Endeared Friendship and Love, such as continued, Ad
extremum Mortis, without the least Violation, their Endearments so mutual at
all times, that they each did partake of the others Prosperity or Adversity.
The last time Dr. Jaques Wife and he were at London, before they came to
Biggar, where she died, they Lodged at Mr. Stones house, and then it was that
Mr. Stones Daughter discovered to the Drs. Wise and him, that she was Married
to one Daniel Vanderkisiee a Dutchman, and intimated her resolution of going a
way along with him, unknown to her Father and Mother; which to prevent, the Dr.
assured her he would discover it to her Parents; she very much resented the
Drs. freedom; however her Fathers friendship, and her wellfair, being
principally aimed at by him, he did divulge it first to her Mother, who took a
convenient time, and then disclosed it to her Husband; they were both highly
inc^nsed at their Daughters folly, and would not for some time see her, but
confined her to her Chamber, until they should enquire into the Condition, and
Circumstances of the Man, with whose person they were formerly acquainted, this
they speedily did and found that he Cohabited with an other Woman, who was
reputed his Wife, and by whom he had several Children then living; Mr. Stone
and his Wife, from hence concluded that the Covetous Man's design was only to
get Money from them and to get what he could from their Daughter, some things
of value (having been already conveyed to him by her) And therefore they
resolved with the advice of Friends, not to suffer their Daughter to go to him,
if possibly, they could prevent it, being well assured that it would be their
Child's ruin, if they suffered her to go with him, Therefore they entreated Dr.
Jaques Wife to use her endeavor to prevail with her Kinswoman to leave London,
and to go with her and the Dr. to their house in Yorkshire, which being agreed
to at length after much difficulty, Mr. Stones Daughter consented, and did go
down into Yorkshire with Dr. Jaques Wife Mr, Stone allowing Twenty pound
starling per Annum, for his Daughters Board. It was likewise Mr. Stone and his
Wifes desire, that their Daughters unfortunate Marriage should be concealed,
and that she should still be called by her Maiden-Name, resolving to use their
utmost effects to get the Marriage disolv'd by a Divorce; Dr. Jaque and his
Wife not forseeing the mischeifs that ensued upon it, consented to their
request. Notwithstanding the watchfulness of the Drs. Wife and his, over their
Kinswoman, yet did she maintain secret Correspondence with her Husband, and
several private mettings they had (as has been since discovered) the Dr. and
his Wife having promised to Visit their Relations at Biggar, took Journey, for
Scotland, and at the desire of Mr. Stone and his Wife, took their Daughter
along, both to see Mr. Jaque and his Wife (with whom she had formerly been
acquainted at London; and also to give her a diversion, by Traveling, being at
that time some what indisposed through Melancholy under the apprehensions of her
unfortunate Wedlock. Mr. Stones Daughter, being at Biggar continued her
Maiden-Name, according to the desire of her Father and Mother, Dr. Jaque never
having been taxt by any as to her Marriage, till after she brought forth her
Child.

It Is confessed by Dr. Jaque, that he was extremely faulty and inconsiderat, and
that only his promise to Mr. Stone and his Wife at London, led him into so
Egregious an Act of Imprudence and solly, as not to make known her
Circumstances to Mr. Jaque and his Wife before her delivery; He is so far from
Extenuating his Crime, that he is willing to aggravate it against himself, and
as a punishment has ever since suffered the displeasure of Mr. Jaque, and been
an Exile both from his favor and presence.

It pleased the Lord about six weeks after Dr. Jaque came to Biggar, to Visit
his dear Wife with a Malignant Fever, (which was at that time very frequent
through out the Country,) of which she died the Eleventh day, to the great grief
and Affliction of all concerned in her, but Especially of Dr. Jaque and her
Kinswoman Mr. Stones Daughter: There were no means left unused for her
Recovery, but all proving ineffectual Dr. Jaque by her death lost not only the
best of Wives, but a considerable yearly income which depended on her life; And
the Dr. can with boldness Challenge the whole World to say that from the first
hour of his Marriage to the last period of his Wifes life, there ever appeared
the least Symptom of discord or unkindness, nay all beholders who were
conversant with the Dr. and his Wife in the whole time of her Sickness, must do
Dr. Jaque the Justice to say, that Mutual Endearments were continued between
them, without the least Diminution: One particular evidence of which was, that
the afternoon before she died, being apprehensive that her Change drew nigh she
called for Mr. Jaque her Father in Law, and his whole Family, and after she had
declared to him the Assurance she had of an Interest in Christ, she desired
that he would draw her last Will and Testament, which was to make the Dr. her
Executor, and to settle all that was here is on him and her Child after his
decease. The Affliction that Dr. Jaque was under for so great a loss was so
Apparent that envy it self cannot detract from the Juss Praise due to him on
that account.

Mr. Stones Daughter was likewise under so much trouble, for the loss of so
near a Kinswoman, and dear a Friend, and laid it so much to heart that it
hastened in all probability her Travail before the time she reckoned (having as
she declared according to her own count six weeks longer to go] so that she was
brought to bed soon after the death of Dr. Jaques Wife, it so happening that
Dr. Jaque being called to Lanerick some time before, on some Extraordinary
occasion, was there surpised with the news of Mr. Stones Daughter having
brought forth a Child in Mr. Jaques house, where at he was extremely troubled,
both because of the Vexation and Disquietude it brought to Mr. Jaque and his
Family: Dr. Jaque immediately on the news repaired to Biggar, and satisfied Mr,
Jaque so far as he was able in the matter; Mr. Stones Daughter produced also
her Certificate to Mr. Jaque from the Minister who Married her, but Mr. Jaque
was so incensed, both against the Dr. and Mr. Stones Daughter, for not
timeously discovering her Marriage and being with Child, that he would neither
patiently hear, nor yet give Credit, to what could be said for his
Satisfaction.

And therefore Mr. Jaque wrote immediately to London, to Mr. Stone the
Gentlewomans Father, and had from himself a full account, that his Daughter was
unhappily Married to his great Trouble and Grief, to one Vanderkistee,
together with the other Circumstances as before related; Mr. Jaque likewise
wrote to Mr. Buroughs, his Son in Law [then living at London but now in Kelsoe]
that he should find out this Vanderkistee, and get an account of the matter
from him; this Mr. Buroughs, did according to direction, and had from
Vanderkistees own mouth the assurance, that he was Lawfully Married to Mr.
Stones Daughter, that he had both Beded and Boarded with her, and could have
access to her when he pleased, these things are evidently to be made appear by
Mr. Stones and Mr. Buroughs their Letters in Answer to Mr. Jaques, which the
Dr. supposes Mr. Jaque may still have by him; and the same thing Mr. Buroughs
does now viva Voce, declare to all that speak to him on that subject.

Mr. Stones Daughter being brought to bed in Mr. Jaques house, stayed there
(though contrary to Mr. Jaques inclination, if he could have helped it) till she
was so far recovered, as to be in a condition to Travail: Her Father in the
mean time, having an account of her condition, both from Mr. Jaque and from her
self, sent her a Bill of Ten pound starling, payable at sight by Mr, Watson
Merchant in Edinbuegh, to defray the necessary Charges that such a condition
required. The Gentlewoman was no soonet able to stir about, but M. Jaque
required her to be gone, and hereupon she went with her Child to Edinburgh, and
having received her Money, she returned to England: However being but weak at
the time of her departure, she took Mr. Jaques austere Carriage ill, as did her
Father also and Mother at London when they came to hear of it, in that Mr.
Jaque did not show their Daughter, more Tenderness in the time of her
necessity; so that Mr. Jaque has born the reflections, both of Mr. Stone and
his Wife for his unkindness to their Daughter, and also of his Enemies in
Scotland, for not being more severe to her, and on the account of such like
Reproaches is his anger more highly aggravated against Dr. Jaque.

This is the plain but true account of that Business which fell out in Mr.
Jaques house in Biggar, which Mr. Kirkwood has endeavored to aggravate to the
Disrepute and Disgrace both of Mr. Jaque and the Dr. He calls it the famous
Business, that deserves so severe a touch, and as he says was accompanied with
such dreadful Circumstances; but were it, as he maliciously would represent,
and as he industriously endeavors to pawn it on the Faith of the World, it
were a very infamous Business. Mr. Kirkwood has (its confessed) a very
peculiar gift of expression, but he is equally unhappy in it as he is in his
Rethorick, for an Hyperbole with him is Instar Ommum; and for his Logic a man
may safely adventure to deny the Conclusion, there being no relation between it
and the Premises, let now the thinking, and unprejudiced part of the World judge
what reason Mr. Kirkwood has to abuse either Mr. Jaque or the Dr. on the
account of that Business, or basely to insinuate under the disguise of Common
Report, that the Child brought forth in Mr. Jaques house was the Drs. had Mr.
Kirkasood taken half the pains, to find out the truth of the matter; which he
industriouly has done to Print malicious and false Calumnies he had
undoubtedly been undeceived, and saved himself the trouble of inserting that
Paragraph. But poor man! he has now undenyably demonstrated to the World, the
Crazieness of his Intellectualls, and given a sufficient Testimony that he has
the Rickets in his understanding, and that Rooted Envy, not Polish't Reason,
had the Ascendant, when he by Scribbling undertook to asperse, and if possible
to lesson the Authority, and Reproachfully to Ridicule the Discipline of this
Ancient and Renowned Church, which for it is great knowledge in Government and
Experience in Disciplne, is preferable to any Reformed Church abroad, as is
confessed by the Learned of other Nations.

Ex Vngue Leonem, (To make Mr. Kirkwoods own words militate against himself) no
unbiased Reader, but may easily through his whole Pamphlet, discover the
malignancy of his Spirit, and that it is not particular Persons or Judicatures,
but the whole Church as now by Law Established, that he Levells at, and in so
doing strikes at the highest powers of the Nation, who have by their Civil
Sanction restored the I resbyterian Government of the Church, and committed it
to Ministers of that Persuasion; And even at the King himself, who Honors the
Church Judicatures with Honorable Persons, to sit with them as His
Representatives, and also by His most Respectful Letters, which are Extant in
Print, The Honoutable, Pious and Learned Nobility and Gentry of this Ancient
Kingdom, who favor the Church Judicatures, with their presence and Assistance,
as Ruling Elders, are not exempt from the severe and false Censures, which Mr.
Kirkwood casts on the whole Church, (with which, as he audaciously boasts he
contends) of Partiality, Injustice, Envy, Malice, Ignorance and Falsehood, and
his Impudent Incivility advances to such a pitch as to make the whole Church
an Herd of Savage wild Boar's, Styling them the beasts of Ephesus: The
Profaneness Blasphemy and Obscenity, contained in Mr. Rirkwoods Pamphlet, is
such as cannot pass the Observation of the diligent Reader, and deserves a
severe Animadversion; His Blasphemous Parable about the Ass; His Immodest
Representation, of things which God and Nature ordain to be kept secret, and
his Ignomious contempt of the whole Ministry, and Rabshekah like railing
against them, together with his Profane and Blasphemous drolling upon
Scripture Phrases, his horrid Assertion that he led some of the General
Aslembly down to Hell to Tame them, and round about the whole Confines of
Eternity, and such like are all sufficient proof both of the Corruptness of his
Pen and Heart, it may also be remarkt how unworthy the Pamphleteer is of being
entertained in common converse when he is so base as in Print to Publish every
ordinary Dialogue, that past between him, and those that discoursed with him;
and that which superlatively aggravats his Impudence is, that he is so foolish,
furious and Inconsiderate, as to shelter his monstrous and menstruous Brat,
under the Noble wings of so Virtuous a Countess, the Modesty of whose Sex, and
Honor of whose Quality cannot but induce her to abhore, and with detestation
to Resent the same.

Should Mr. Kirkwood be let pass with such Affronts without being Branded with
some public mark of Infamy, he would Glory in his shame and this Ancient
Kingdom and Church, which is Applauded and Honored both by the Voices and
Writings of the Learned Abroad and of Neighbor Nations, for its Antiquity and
Purity, would be greatly reflected on. It Is not to be doubted but the Venerable
Church, will sustain their own Quarrel, and by Answering Mr. Kirkwood's
Pamphlet, decypher the Author in his proper Colors. He is indeed the Object
of Pity rather than Envy, and it is to be feared that the old saying, Quos Deus
vult perdere, prius Dementat, will be verified on him.

FINIS

