A DECLARATION of the LORD DEPUTY AND COUNCIL, For setting apart Thursday the
14th day of October next, as a day of solemn Fasting and Humiliation,
throughout this NATION; With the Grounds and Reasons thereof.

By the Lord Deputy and Council.

ORdered by the Lord Deputy and Council, That this Declaration be forthwith
printed and published.

THO. HERBERT Cl. of the Council.

DVBLIN, Printed by Will. Bladen, Anno Domini, 1658.

By the Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL.
H. Cromwell.
GOD blessed for evermore, who works all things after the Counsel of his own
will, and gives no account of any of his matters, having lately taken from our
heads our Chief Ruler, under whose shadow we said we shall live, (the
Instrument of his Hand, whereby he has wrought great things in and for these
Nations) calls out aloud upon us to consider it, and to lay it to heart,
(otherwise we may be sure there is evil to come) and to prepare to meet our
God, even because he has done this unto us. We judge it our duty also to call
upon all that fear the Lord in this Land, to labor that they may be found of
him with us, in ways of unfeined Humiliation and Reformation, if it may be a
lengthening of our tranquillity: For, when the people turns not to him that
smites them, neither do seek the Lord of Hoasts, what can be expected but that
he should set up Adversaries, and join their enemies together, who shall devour
them with open mouth? And in order to an universal Abasement and Amendment of
our selves, we think it most seasonable and needful to stir up our selves and
all under our care and charge seriously to consider, That when Gods judgments
of a public and general concernment are abroad in a nation or among a people,
such a people ought to take special notice of Gods judgments: Those that will
not see when his hand is lifted up, he will make them both see and feel too,
before he has done with them. It was EPHRAIM'S folly, not to know when gray
hairs, (signs of a decaying and declining condition) were here and there upon
him; And it is one of the highest points of wisdom in the world to hear the
audible and awful voice of the Rod, and him who has appointed it. They ought
also then to search out why the Lord contendeth with them, to confess, lay to
heart, and humble themselves solemnly for their sins, procuring such judgments;
To pray and seek Gods face earnestly; To reform themselves and their ways
thoroughly and sincerely; This is the work whereunto the Lord at this day
calls us. And oh that our LORD, when he comes to take a view of us, might
(through the help of his blessed Spirit) find us so doing!

Consider we also that God has taken away, and threatened to take away Chief
Rulers and Governors, and him that holds the Scepter; both, for the Sins of
the Chief Rulers themselves: as, for not believing fully in God, for not
Sanctifying God before the People, and other miscarriages: and for the Sins of
the people under their Rule and Government; as, their relying and trusting to
their own wisdom, way, and Arm of flesh, rather then on the Lord; their
forgetting and forsaking God; their despising his word and warnings; their
mocking and misusing his messengers; their persisting and proceeding on still
to do wickedly, even in despite of all Gods mercyes, and judgments; their
grieving the Spirits of their Rulers, by their discontents, murmurings and
strivings, and the like: And for the sins of the Prophets and Ministers, their
unfaithfulness, not discovering the peoples iniquities for preventing their
captivity and calamity; but seeing vain and foolish things for them, and for
the sins of former Rulers, their Idolatry, Blood guiltiness, Profaneness, these
may bring on judgments and ruin, notwithstanding the zeal and sincere
endeavors of their Successors for a reformation. How should the thoughts of
these things pierce our hearts, together with the sense of this severe stroke,
wherewith the Lord has at once smitten, not only these three Nations, but all
the professors of the Protestant Religion.

Let us also consider further, that God having honored a people with great
Privilidges, Deliverances and Salvations, does sometimes after all the good
that he has done them, again do them hurt, judge and destroy them; and that
especially, for their ingratitude toward God, notwithstanding all his great
goodness, when they render not again according to the benefit done unto them;
for their turning away their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turning
their back upon him, his Worship and Ordinances; for their Unbelief, Idolatry,
Uncleanness, height of Impiety, and profaneness; for their Sorcery, Blood,
Oppression, and violence, dishonest gain, and theft, profanation of the
Sabbath, pollution of Gods Ordinances, violation of his Covenant, Cursing,
Swearing, and for swearing; for their Murmuring against God and his
Vicegerents when afflictions press them; for their Barrenness under the means
of grace, and contempt of the messengers thereof; for their hatred to
Reformation, and Enmity against Christ and his Kingdom; and for their
incorrigibleness and impenitency in all these, notwithstanding all his
smitings; Now shall not the Lord visit for these things? and shall not his Soul
be avenged on those that wallow in the guilt and filth of them? And are there
not with us, even with us, such Sins as these to be found against the Lord our
God? Are there not gross Heresies and horrid Blasphemies in the midst of us?
much Superstition and Idolatry, Ignorance, and Blindness, not only of the
Papists, but of the generality of Protestants also? deadness and
unprofitableness under the most lively and powerful means; neglect, contempt,
reproach and profanation of all the Ordinances of the Gospel, and instituted
worship of the Lord Jesus. What abuse of the glorious and dreadful name of the
Lord our God, not only by customary and rash Oaths and imprecations (which are
usually interwoven with the language of the Natives,) but also by formal giving
and taking of oaths even in Courts and places of judicature, and by sleight and
heartless discourses of Divine things; most men vain-gloriously aiming more
therein to express their own gifts, then to attain or exercize grace, or to
minister and communicate it unto others? What despising, undermining, and
opposing the work, call, office, and persons of Gospel Ministers? What
profaning the Lord's Day, not only like beasts in ways of pleasure, but like
Devils spending that day in sin against the Lord, which should be spent in
nigher communion with him? What unthankfulness for mercies enjoyed? What
fighting against God after mercies, under mercies, yea with our very mercies?
What loathing and making light of all that which we have and do receive,
because of the absence of some particulars which we desire? And has not Blood
here reached blood? under the guilt whereof these Lands may yet justly be made
to mourn; the blood of the Innocent shed by Enemies, and even the blood of the
nocent shed by our selves, in an undue manner, without that grief and
tenderness of Spirit which became the followers of the Lamb the Lord Jesus.
What panting has there been amongst us after the dust of the earth, as if all
would not suffice for every man to take an handful? What laboring to load our
selves with thick clay? What covetous and greedy heaping up wordly Riches?
without regard to be rich in good works, rich in faith, poor in spirit? what
seeking rather after a seeming then a real greatness; rather to be great in the
sight of men, then in the sight of the Lord? what resolving to get earth,
though with the loss of Heaven? what oppressing the poor Inhabitant, to ease
and gratify the rich, in the apportioning and applotting the public burdens
and taxes? what depriving the poorer sort of the price and purchase of his
blood and labor, by hard and circumventing bargains and insnaring agreements?
and yet that daughter of the horse Leach still crying, give, give.

What divisions and breaches have there been amongst Brethren? and how many
sinful consequencies of those divisions? whispering, slandering, backbiting,
reviling, and an anger which tears perpetually, (whereof God complains by
the Prophet AMOS.) What sinful compliances even of subordinate Magistrates,
Justices of the Peace, Officers of the Army, Ministers of the Gospel, and
others, with the unfruitful works of darkness? not only omitting the due
Execution of the good Laws concerning Reformation: but too much patronizing
wicked men in their evil ways for carnal ends; by which means also that great
work of our Generation, in subduing the Irish Papists to the scepter of JESUS
CHRIST, and removing from them the occasions of sin, in their usage of many
barbarous and brutish customs, has been in all places obstructed; and in most,
totally neglected. How little have godliness and honesty been regarded by many
Magistrates, as if to see to these were not included in their Commission? How
little have many Ministers attended the catechizing the ignorant, visiting the
sick, rebuking the profane, instructing from house to house, the due exercize
of discipline, and right administration of Sacraments? whereby not only the
popish and profane have been more alienated than ever, from the truths and ways
of God: but ignorance, heresy, heathenism and atheism increased; and through
long fasting from the Institutions of Christ, many have lost their stomachs;
and some, that very life which appeared formerly to act in them; and others
unworthily partaking thereof, have been hardened and nuzled up in their evil
ways, and sealed up under wrath and condemnation? How have Family duties in
most places been neglected, even to provoke the LORD to pour out his wrath upon
them, as upon the heathens that call not on his name? What infidelity and
distrustfulness have prevailed in many spirits, in relation to our late Supreme
Magistrate, as if the Author of our mercies did not continue, and his cause the
same, if that eminent instrument were removed? Though we have so many precious
promises, so many strengthening experiences, as stays and props to our hope,
even under the greatest shakings, and many soverain Cordials to prevent
fainting; God not having left himself without many witnesses to his mercy,
even to this day of trouble and treading down, which otherwise would have been
indeed a day of grief, and of desperate sorrow. And how great has been the
Ingratitude and murmuring peevishness of others, as if our mercies were not
mercies, because themselves were not the pipes of conveyance; or because those
waters came not so plentifully into their Cisterns as unto others?

These and such like sins as these, seem stamped (as it were) on the face of
this judgment, and are to be especially eyed in the frown thereof. And are they
Christians, are they men, who are without the sense of these things? Have we
like sheep, wandered from our Shepherd, and from one another in this our
sunshine? It is just for our God to send such a storm to drive us together,
and into his fold. Have we played with the candle that burned so brightly among
us, consuming himself to guide and refresh these Nations, or have we puffed at
it? it is just for God to put it out.

And does not the LORD now call from heaven unto us, as sometimes he did to
backsliding ISRAEL, Gather your selves together, yea gather your selves, search
and sift your selves, O Nation not desired, before the decree bring forth,
(which seems now to hasten to the birth) before the day pass as the chaf,
before all your light, and joy, and peace and plenty be blown away by the blast
of the Lords displeasure; before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you,
before the day of the Lords anger come upon you? And we can not forbear, but
call upon all the Lords people in this Land, as MOSES sometimes did to the
Israelites, Who is on the Lords side among you? Consecrate your selves to day
unto the Lord, even every man by punishing and witnessing against sin in his
son, and in his brother; and especially by doing execution upon it in himself;
That he may bestow a blessing upon us this day. Let us with one heart and mouth
say, To us belongs confusion of face, to our Princes, to our fathers, and to
our children; because we have sinned against the Lord; Let us bewail and repent
of our former doings, which were not good: not only by sorrowing for them,
(for there is sorrow enough even in hell;) not only by wishing them undone,
(for so far even Judas went;) but by true repentance from dead works, turning
again to the Lord to serve the living God. Let all the Magistrates of the Land,
let all the Gospel Ministers, let all the Officers and Soldiers, let both
great and small renew their Covenant, and engage their souls, and give the hand
unto the Lord, and unto Us, who do stretch forth ours unto you, saying, Come
and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn and he will heal us, he has
smitten and he will bind us up.

And for our further help both in returning to him, and gaining some
comfortable evidence that he does accept us, and will heal us, It is ordered,
That Thursday the fourteenth day of October next, be kept as an Holy day of
Fasting and Prayer unto the Lord, That thereon we may afflict our souls before
him, and lament, not so much the fall of our Crown and chief ornament, as our
sins that caused it: That the eyes of all our Tribes, as of one man, may be
toward the Lord, to beg mercy for his poor Church here on earth, scattered over
the face of the whole world: That the Rightousness thereof may go forth as
brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a lamp that burns: and particularly,
for that part thereof which his own Right Hand has planted in these Nations,
That he would extend peace unto it, like a River, and glory like a flowing
stream; and to that end, That he would make his face to shine upon his Servant,
whom the good hand of his providence has now set over us; that as he has
called him to this great and weighty work, so he would carry him through it all
his days in the everlasting Arms of his power and goodness, to the glory of
his own name, and the joy of these Nations; that so, he may prove the Minister
of God indeed to us for good, for all manner of good, natural, moral, civil,
Spiritual; That he would bless his HIGHNESS Councils in these three Nations,
and cloth them with a spirit suitable to their stations: and all other inferior
Magistrates; That the mountains may drop down new wine, and the hills flow with
milk; that the mountains may bring forth peace unto the people, and the little
hills by rightousness; That he would bless his HIGHNESS Forces both at home and
abroad, by land and sea; with the continuance of a spirit of love and
faithfulness, and with good success in all their lawful undertakings; That he
would establish and strengthen his confederacies with other Nations, so far as
may tend to the propagating the Gospel, and to the preservation and prosperity
of the poor Protestants in other Countries; That he would set up burning and
shining lights in all the dark corners of this land, and bless the labors of
those whom he has already set and made faithful to the bringing in and
building up of many souls, through the fellowship of the gospel, in an
everlasting fellowship with the Father, and the Son, by the communion of the
holy Ghost.

And it is further Ordered, That the Sherifs of the several Counties in this
Nation, do forthwith (after receipt hereof) distribute the said Declarations to
all and every the Ministers within their respective Balywicks, to the intent
that seasonable and public notice may be given unto the People by the
Ministers in every their respective Parishes and Congregations, upon the
Lord's Day preceding the said fourteenth day of October. And the said Ministers
are also to read this Declaration unto the People, at their being assembled
upon the said Fast Day, appointed to be celebrated. For the better observation
whereof, the servile works of men's ordinary Callings are to be forborne upon
that day.

And all Sherifs, Mayors, Governors of Garrisons, Justices of the Peace,
Constables, and other Officers Civil and Military, are to take care that the
said day be solemnly kept and observed.

Dated at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 24. day of September, 1658. W.
Steel Can^. R. Pepys, Miles Corbet, William Bury.


