EDINBURGH, The 20 Day of February 1689 Years.
INTIMATION By the Town Clerk of Edinburgh, to the whole Burgesses of the said
Burgh, concerning the Election of their Commissioners to the Meeting of the
Estates of this Kingdom, which is to be Holden the 14 th Day of March 1689
Years.

WHereas by an Letter from his Highness the Prince of Orange given at St.
James's the 5th day of February in the year of our Lord 1688/9, direct to the
Town Clerk of Edinburgh; Requiring him upon the Receipt of His Highness Letter
to make public Intimation of the famine on the first Market Day at the Cross
of the Royal Burgh of Edinburgh, in the usual manner; and to appoint a Day, to
be at least Five Days after the said Intimation, for the whole Burgesses to
Meet and Choose their Commissioners for the said Meeting of the Estates at
Edinburgh the 14th Day of March next, and that a Copy of His Highness Letter,
and of the Clerks Intimation, containing the Day of Election, be left Affixt on
the said Cross, the Burgesses and Commissioners being Protestants, without any
other Exception or Limitation, and that the said Clerk report his Diligence
therein to the said Meeting, as is fully contained in His Highness Letter. In
Obedience, and in Pursuance of the Order of His Highness Letter, These are to
make public Intimation to the whole Burgesses of the Royal-Burgh of Edinburgh
being Protestants, that they Meet and Conveen within the Parliament House, upon
the Twenty Eight Day of February instant, at Eight of the Clock of the Morning,
for Electing and Choosing their Commissioners to the said Meeting of the
Estates; And likewise as previous to the more orderly carrying on of the said
Election, and for preventing Confusion, and that none may have Vote in the same
but such as are Protestants, and has Interest by being Burgesses; Therefore
these are to make public Intimation, that all Protestant Burgesses of the said
Burgh, produce their Burgess-Tickets to the Clerk in the Town-Council-House of
the said Burgh, where they shall be attended daily by him and his Servants,
from Eight of the Clock in the Morning till Six of the Clock at Night, and that
from and betwixt the Twenty and the Twenty Seventh of this instant Month of
February, to the effect a Roll of their Names and Designations may be taken up
by way of Alphabet, that every Burges may be called according to the said Rolls
upon the foresaid Day of Election.

J A. ROCHEID Cls.

WHEREAS the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Scotland, met at White Hall,
at Our desire, to Advise Us what is to be done, for Securing the Protestant
Religion, and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of that Kingdom, according to
Our Declarations, have desired Us, for the attaining these Ends, to call a
Meeting of the Estates, to be holden at Edinburgh, in March next.

WE being Desirous to do every Thing that may Tend to the Public Good and
Happiness of that Kingdom, have Resolved to call the said Meeting against the
Fourteenth Day of the said Month of March next; and do therefore in pursuance,
and according to the Tenor of the said Advice, Require you upon the Receipt of
this Our Letter, to make Public Intimation of the same on the first Market Day
at the Cross of the Royal Borough of Edinburgh in the usual manner, and to
appoint a Day, to be at least Five Days after the said Intimation for the whole
Burgesses to meet and choose their Commissioners for the said Meeting of the
Estates at Edinburgh the said Fourteenth Day of March, a Copy of this Our
Letter and of your Intimation, containing the Day of Election to be left affixt
on the said Cross. The Burgesses and Commissioners being Protestants, without
any other Exception or Limitation. And that you Report your Diligence herein to
the Convention.

Given at St. James's the fifth day of Feb. in the Year of Our Lord 1688/9. W.
H. Prince of Orange.

To the Town Clerk of the Town of Edinburgh.

