M. JURIEU, the Famous French Protestant Divine, his Account of the present
Persecution of the Protestants in France.
HE says, That he has assurance from good hands, that the present Persecution
does not advance Popery in France; but on the contrary, makes it lose its
credit, for the Violence of the persecuters, and the Complaints of the
persecuted, has occasioned many People to enquire into the Reformed Religion,
that would not otherwise have done it: That the seizing of Protestant Books
has occasioned their falling into the hands, and the convincing of many Men of
Sense, that would otherwise never have seen them: That the people in many
Provinces long for a Reformation: That there are great Cities of many thousand
Inhabitants, where one third of them are enlightened: That within this 15 years
there have been more Papists converted in that Kingdom than ever: And that
whereas formerly many of their Ecclesiastics, who pretended to turn
Protestants, were mere Libertines, it is otherwise now, those of them that come
over being generally Persons of great Parts and Piety; and that if the
Protestant States were as zealous to advance Truth as the Papists are to
destroy it, many Popish Ecclesiastics of Note would desert that Church, which
be begs Protestant Sovereigns to take into Consideration.

He adds, That for 40 years the Papists in France have been divided amongst
themselves into Molinists and Jansenists: That there is a new Sect sprung up
called Quictists; and that the Socinians begin to grow very considerable
amongst them, and have for a long time had footing in many of their most famous
Convents. That he is well assured, that they generally read Episcopius, whence
they drink in Pelagianism, and after wards that which the Bishop of Meaux calls
a moderate Socinianism, which is confirmed by M. d. Valone, formerly a Canon of
the Monastery of St. Genevive, who has lately renounced Popery, and joined
himself to the French Church at Nuremborg in Germany, he says, in his Book,
that in all the Monasteries of the Canons Regulars of St. Genevive, there is a
Party who call themselves Scripturists, or the Little Church, and either
publicly espouse the Socinian Tenets, or maintain that it becomes great Wits
to be for an universal Toleration: That the General, and all the great Officers
of the Society, were of the Cabal: That M. de Valone having given Information
of this, was thrown into Prison by the General, where he had like to have lost
his Life, but being sustained by the Abbot of Vrbec, he procured an Order by
the King to discharge the Abbot of St. Geneviva, and the rest, and that the
Society should choose others in their place.

M. Jurieu adds, That Popery is in a worse Condition in France than ever: that
it is in the hands either of the Mad persecuting Clergy, who ruin its Credit
by their Cruelties, or in the hands of Laics of no Religion, who Mock at all
their Mysteries; and that the number of such is so great at Court, and even
amongst the dignified Clergy, that it is almost incredible.

Then as to the State of the Protestant Religion there, he says, There are
still above a Million of Protestants in France; that notwithstanding the last
Persecution is more cruel than the first, the Zeal and Courage of the
Protestants is greater and greater; that not only particular Persons, but whole
Communities have boldly declared they will go no more to Mass; and that they
have done thus not only in the Hill Country of Languedoc, Rochell, Saintonge,
etc. but in a hundred other places, where they met the Intendants in
multitudes, in their best Apparel, as if they had been designed for Victims at
the Altars, and cried out unanimously, That they would rather die than go to
Mass. That the Intendant Baville, and his Italian Relation Count Broglio,
thought to have given a fatal blow to the Reformation at Castres, where they
Quartered the Soldiers upon the Protestants to live at Discretion, to exercise
all manner of Cruelties upon them, to plunder them, and to torment their
Bodies, that they should have no rest nor sleep; that they imprisoned and
banished those that had distinguished themselves by their Zeal, deprived the
Parents of their Children, and committed all manner of Barbarities upon them;
yet, notwithstanding all this, they had not prevailed upon more than 7 or 8
Persons to promise to go to Mass, and that the Protestants throughout the whole
Nation had shown the like Christian Fortitude, whereas, in the first
Persecution, their Defection and weakness was but too general.

He takes Notice of the several Methods which have been contrived by the
Persecutors, to expel the Protestant Religion out of France; as that of a
general Exile; which was opposed by some of the great Men, as prejudicial to
the Kingdom: And that of a general Massacre; for which Orders were dispatched
to the Intendants and Governors of the Provinces; but that the Couriers were re
called upon the Advice of a certain Grandee. He questions the Truth of its
having proceeded so far; but doubts nor of its having been proposed and
debated. And upon the whole draws this Conclusion, That there is no Ground to
fear the total Ruin of the Reformation in France; God will complete his Work,
but Lewis XVIth shall never finish his.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Glasgow by Robert Sanders, One of His
Majesty's Printers. School.


