HIS MAJESTY'S Most gracious Declaration to all His loving Subjects, Commanding
their Assistance against the Prince of Orange and his Adherents.
JAMES R.

WHEREAS the Most Christian King, in pursuance of the many obliging promises he
has made Us, of giving Us his effectual Assistance for the recovering of Our
Kingdoms, as soon as the condition of his Affairs would permit, has put Us in a
way of endeavoring it at this time, and in order to it, has lent Us so many of
his Troops, as may be abundantly sufficient to untie the hands of Our Subjects,
and make it safe for them to return to their Duty, and repair to Our Standard;
and has notwithstanding for the present, according to Our desire (unless there
should appear further necessity for it) purposely declined sending over Forces
so numerous, as might raise any jealousy in the minds of Our good Subjects, of
his intending to take the Work wholly out of their hands, or to deprive any
true Englishman of the part he may hope to have in so Glorious an Action, as is
that of Restoring his Lawful King, and His Ancient Government (all which
Foreign Troops, as soon as We shall be fully settled in the quiet and
peaceable Possession of Our Kingdoms, We do hereby promise to send back, and in
the mean time to keep them in such exact order and Discipline, that none of Our
Subjects shall receive the least injury in their Persons or Possessions, from
any Soldier or Officer whatsoever) tho an Affair of this nature speaks for it
self, nor do We think Our Selves at all obliged to say any thing more upon this
occasion, than, that We come to Assert Our own just Rights, and to deliver Our
People from the oppression they ly under; yet, when We consider how miserably
many of Ou^ Subjects were ^ed into the late Revolution by the Artifice of ill
Men, and pa^ (...) ^ince of Or^ ^eclaration, which was taken upon trust, and
easily believed then, (...) ^otoriously (...) ^ll the parts of it, consisting
no less of Assertions that have been evident ^v'd, than of Prom^^es that were
never intended to be performed; to prevent the like delusions for the time to
come, and to do, as much as lies in Our Power, to open the Eyes of all Our
Subjects, We are willing to lay the whole matter before them in as plain and
short a manner as is possible, that they may not again pretend mistakes, or
have ignorance to plead for any false steps they shall hereafter make toward
the ruin of their own, and their Countries happiness.

And herefote, to take the matter from the beginning, it cannot be forgotten,
that as soon as We had certain notice of the Prince of Orange's unnatural
design of Invading Our Kingdoms, with the whole Power of the United Provinces,
We first took the best care We could to provide for Our defense (...) which We
seemed effectually to have done, when We had put Our Fleet and Army into such a
condition, that tho His Most Christian Majesty, who well saw the bottom of the
design against Us, against Himself, and, indeed, against the Peace of Europe,
offered Us considerable Succors, both by Land and Sea, We did not think it at
all necessary to accept 'em at that time, as resolving to cast Our Selves
wholly (next to the Divine Protection) upon the Courage and Fidelity of Our
English Army, which had been with so much care and tenderness formed and
obliged by Us. And having thus prepared to oppose Force to Force; We did, in
the next place, apply Our Selves to give all reasonable satisfaction to the
Minds of Our good Subjects by endeavoring to undeceive them, and to let them
see betimes and whilst the mischief might easily have been prevented, how fatal
a ruin they must bring upon their Country, if they suffered themselves to be
seduced by the vain pretenses of the Prince of Orange's Invasion However, so
great was the infatuation of that time, that We were not believed 'till it was
too late. But when he was obliged to throw off the Mask by degrees, and that it
began to appear plainly that it was not the Reformation of the Government (which
yet was a matter that did not at all belong to him to meddle with) but the
Subversion of it that he aimed at, that so he might build his own Ambitious
designs upon the ruins of the English Nation; and when the Poison had
insinuated it self into the vital parts of the Kingdom, when it had spread over
our whole Army, and so far got into Our Court and Family, as not only to
corrupt some of Our Servants that were nearest Our Person, and had been most
highly obliged by Us, but not even to leave Our own Children at that time
uninfected; when Our Army daily deserted on the one hand, and on the other hand
Tumults and Disorders increased in all parts of the Kingdom; and especially
when shortly after, the Revolution came on so fast, that We found Our Selves
wholly in Our Enemies Power, being at first confined by them in Our own
Palace, and afterward rudely forced out of it under a Guard of Foreigners,
We could not then but be admonished, by the fate of some of Our Predecessors in
the like circumstances, of the danger We were in, and that it was high time to
provide for the security of Our Person (which was happily effected by Our
getting from the Guard that was set upon Us at Rochester, and Our arrival in
France; the only part of Europe to which We could retire with safety) that so
We might preserve Our Selves for better times, and for a more happy
opportunity; such as is that which, by the Blessing of God, is at present put
into Our Hands.

Upon what foundation of Justice or Common sense, the Prince of Orange's
Faction in England were plea^^d to treat this escape of Ours out of the Hands
of Our Enemies in the Style of an Abdication; a word, when applied to Sovereign
Princes, that was never before used to signify any thing but a free and
voluntary Resignation of a Crown, as in the Cases of the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, and the late Queen of sweden; and what a strange superstructure they
raised upon this weak Foundation, that a Company of Men Illegally met together,
who had not Power, even by their own Confession at that time (for it was before
they had Voted themselves a Parliament) to charge the Interest of the meanest
Subject; should yet take upon them to destroy the whole Constitution of the
Government, to make an Ancient Hereditary Monarchy turn Elective; and then
assuming to themselves the Right of Election, should proceed to settle the
Succession in so odd and extravagant a manner, are Transactions that need not
be repeated: They are too well known to the World, to the great reproach of the
English Nation, and the grounds upon which they are Built, are too vain and
frivolous to deserve a confutation. Every Freeholder of England is, in this
Case, able to make his own observations: and will, no doubt, examine a little
better than hitherto he has done, what assurance any private Man can have of
keeping his Estate, if the King himself shall hold His Crown by no better Title.

But since some Men that could not say one word in defense of the Justice of
these proceedings, would yet take great pains to show the necessity of them,
and to set forth what extraordinary good effects were to be expected from so
very bad a Cause; We do not doubt but the Nation has by this time cast up the
account, and when they shall have well considered, what wonders might have been
performed with less expense of English Blood than that which has been
unnecessarily trifled away in this Quarrel; that such a number of Ships of War
have been lost and destroyed in the Three Years last past, as might alone have
been sufficient to have made a considerable Fleet: That more Money has been
drained out of the Purses of Our Subjects in the compass of that time, than
during the whole Reigns of many of Our Predecessors put together; and that not
as formerly, spent again, and Circulating amongst them, but Transported in
Specie into Foreign Parts, and for ever lost to the Nation: When these and
many other particulars of this Nature are cast up, it must certainly appear at
the foot of the Account, how much worse the Remedy is than the fancied Disease,
and that, at least hitherto, the Kingdom is no great gainer (...) the change.

The next consideration is, what may ^bly be exp^ (...) time to come: And as to
that, no better Judgment can be made of an^ (...) events than (...) that is
past: And doubtless from the observation of the Temp^ (...) Complexion (...)
^s and the Maxims of the present Usurper, from the steps he has already taken,
when it was most necessary for him to give no distaste to the People, as well as
from the Nature of all Usurpation, which can never be supported but by the same
ways of fraud and violence by which it was first set up, there is all the
reason in the World to believe that the beginning of this Tyranny, like the
Five first Years of Nero, is like to prove much the mildest part of it; and all
they have yet suffered, is but the beginning of the miseries which those very
Men who were the great Promoters of the Revolution may yet live to see and
feel, as the effect of that Illegal and Tyrannical Government, which they
themselves first imposed upon the Kingdoms.

And yet the consideration must not rest here neither: For all wise Men ought,
and all good Men will tkae care of their Posterity, and therefore it is to be
remembered, that if it should please Almighty God, as one of his severest
Judgments upon these Kingdoms for the many Rebellions (...) Perjuries they have
been guilty of, so far to permit the continuance of the present Usurpation,
(...) We should not be Restored during Our own time, yet an indisputable Title
to the Crown will survive in the ^n of Our dearest Son the Prince of Wales, Our
present Heir Apparent, and His Issue and, for default of that, in the Issue of
such other Sons as We have great reason to hope (the Queen being now with
Child) We may yet leave behind Us; and what the consequence of that is like to
be, may easily be understood by all that are not Strangers to the long and
bloody contentions between the Houses of York and Lancaster, and whoever shall
Read the Histories of those times, and there shall have presented to him as in
one view a Scene of all the miseries of an intestine War, the perpetual
harrassing of the Poor Commons by Plunder and Free Quarter, the ^^^n of so many
Noble Families by frequent Executions and Attainders, the weakening of the whole
Kingdom in general at home, and the losing those advantages they might in the
mean time have procured for themselves abroad, cannot but conclude that these
are the natural effects of those struglings and convulsions that must
necessarily happen in every State, where there is a dispute entailed between an
injured Right and an unjust Possession.

There is another consideration that ought to be of weight with all Christians;
and that is the calamitous condition of Europe, now almost universally engaged
in a War amongst themselves at a time when there was the greatest hopes of
success against the common Enemy, and the fairest prospect of enlarging the
bounds of the Christian Empire, that ever was in any Age since the declining of
the Roman: And so far from any hopes of a General Peace before Our Restoration,
that no rational Project of a Treaty can be formed in order to it: But that
once done, the thing will be easy, and We shall be ready to offer Our
Mediation, and interpose all the good Offices We can with His Most Christian
Majesty for the obtaining of it.

Since therefore We come with so good purposes, and so good a Cause, the
Justice of which is founded upon the Laws both of God and Man, since the Peace
of Europe as well as of Our own Kingdoms, the prosperity of the present and
future Ages is concerned in the success of it, We hope We shall meet with
little opposition, but that all Our Loving Subjects according to the Duty and
the Oath of their Allegiance, and as We hereby Command and Require them to do,
will join with Us and assist Us to the utmost of their Power.

And We do hereby strictly forewarn and prohibit any of Our Subjects
whatsoever, either by Collecting or Paying any of the illegal Taxes lately
imposed upon the Nation, or any part of Our Revenue, or by any other ways to
abet or support the present Usurpation. And that We may do all that can be
thought of to win over all Our Subjects to Our Service, that so, if it be
possible, We may have none but the Usurper and his Foreign Troops to deal
with, and that none may be forced to continue in their Rebellion by despair of
Our Mercy for what they have already done; We do hereby Declare and Promise in
the Word of a King, that all Persons whatsoever how guilty soever they may have
been (except the Persons following) Viz. The Duke of Ormond, Marquess of
Winchester, Earl of Sunderland, Earl of Bath, Earl of Danby, Earl of
Nottingham, Lord Newport, Bishop of London, Bishop of St. Asaph, Lord Delamere,
Lord Wiltshire, Lord Colchester, Lord Cornbury, Lord Dunblane, John Lord
Churchill, Sir Robert Howard, Sir John Worden, Sir Samuel Grimston, Sir Stephen
Fox, Sir George Treby, Sir Basil Dixwell, Sir James Oxenden, Dr. Tillotson Dean
of Canterbury, Dr. Gilbert Burnet; Francis Russel, Richard Levison, John
Trenchard, Esquires; Charles Duncomb, Citizen of London, (...) Edwards, (...)
Napleton, (...) Hunt Fisherman, and all others who offered Personal Indignities
to Us at Feversham; except also all Persons who as Judges or Jurymen, or
otherwise have had a hand in the Barbarous Murder of Mr. John Ashton, and of
Mr. Cross, or of any others who have been Illegally Condemned and Executed for
their Loyalty to Us; and all Spies and such as have betrayed Our Counsels
during Our late absence from England) that by an early return to their Duties,
and by any Signal Mark of it, as by seizing to Our Use, or Delivering into our
Hands any of Our Forts, or by bringing over to Us any Ships of War, or Troops
in the Usurper's Army, or any new-raised and Armed by themselves, or by any
other eminent good Service, according to their several opportunities and
Capacities, shall manifest the sincerity of their Repentance, shall not only
have their respective Pardons immediately past under the Great Seal of England,
but shall otherwise be considered and rewarded by Us as the Merit of the Case
shall require. And for all others who after the time of Our Landing shall not
appear in Arms against Us, nor do a^^ Act or thing in opposition to Our
Restoration, the Persons beforementioned (...) accepted, We (...) provide in
Our first Parliament (which We intend to Call with (...) by a Gene^ (...) of
Indemnity; that so the Minds of all Our Subjects may be as (...) at ease, as
(...) ^sons and Properties will be secure and inviolable under Our Government.

Provided always, that all Magistrates who expect any benefit of Our Gracious
Pardon, shall immediately after notice of Our Landing make some public
Manifestation of their Allegiance to Us, and of their Submission to Our
Authority; and also Publish and cause to be Proclaimed this Our Declaration as
soon as it shall come to their hands; and likewise that all Keepers of Prisons
immediately set at liberty all Persons Committed to their Custody upon the
account of their Allegiance and Affection to Us, or be excluded from any
benefit of our Pardon.

And We do hereby further Declare, that all officers and Soldiers by Sea or
Land now engaged in the Usurpers Service, who shall after notice of our Landing
at any time before they engage in any Fight or Battle against Our Forces, quit
the said illegal Service, and return to their Duty, shall not ^^ly have their
respective Pardons, but shall likewise be fully-satisfied and paid all the
Arrears due to them from the Usurper, and that even the Foreigners themselves,
who have been as well in Troops, as single Persons, drawn into the Kingdom, in
order to List them as there should be occasion for the opposing our return, and
continuing our People in the oppression they lie under, may not be altogether
driven to despair, We do promise, that all such of them who shall, as
aforesaid, before they engage against any of our Forces, lay down their Arms,
and claim the benefit of our present Declaration, shall have their Arrears
satisfied, and care shall be taken for their Transportation to their respective
Countries, or elsewhere as they shall reasonably desire.

And We do hereby further Declare and Promise, that We will Protect and
Maintain the Church of England, as it is now by Law Established in all their
Rights, Privileges, and Possessions, and that upon all Vacanc^^s of
Bishoprics and other Dignities and Benefices within our disposal, care shall
be taken to have them filled with the most Worthy of their own Communion.

And whereas more Tumults and Rebellions have been raised in all Nations upon
the account of Religion, than upon all other pretenses put together; and more
in England than in all the rest of the World besides; That therefore Men of all
opinions in matters of Religion may be Reconciled to the Government, that they
may no longer look upon it as their Enemy, but may therefore think themselves
equally concerned in the Preservation of it, with the rest of their fellow
Subjects, because they are equally well Treated by it, and being convinced in
Our Judgment, that Liberty of Conscience is most agreeable to the Laws and the
Spirit of the Christian Religion, and most conducing to the Wealth and
Prosperity of Our Kingdoms, by encouraging Men of all Countries and Persuasions
to come and Trade with Us, and settle amongst Us: For these reasons We are
resolved most earnestly to recommend to Our Parliament the settling Liberty of
Conscience in so beneficial a manner, that it may remain a lasting Blessing to
this Kingdom.

Lastly, It shall be Our great care by the Advice and Assistance of Our
Parliament, to repair the Breaches, and heal the Wounds of the late
distractions, to restore Trade, by putting the Act of Navigation in effectual
Execution, which has been so much violated of late in favor of Strangers, to
put Our Navy and Stores into as good a condition as We left them, to find the
best ways of bringing back Wealth and Bullion into the Kingdom, which of late
has been so much exhausted, and generally We shall delight to spend the
remainder of Our Reign (as We have always designed since Our coming to the
Crown) in studying to do every thing that may contribute to the
Re-establishment of the Greatness of the English Monarchy upon it is old and
true Foundation, the United Interest and Affection of the People.

Thus having endeavored to Answer all Objections, and to give all the
satisfaction We can think of, to all Parties and degrees of Men: We cannot want
Our Self the satisfaction of having done all that can be done on Our part,
whatever the Event shall be, the disposal of which We commit with great
resignation and dependence to that God which Judges Right: And on the other
side, if any of Our Subjects shall after all this remain so obstinate as to
appear in Arms against Us, as they must needs fall unpitied under the severity
of Our Justice after having refused such Gracious offers of Mercy, so they must
be answerable to Almighty God for all the Blood that shall be spilt, and all
the Miseries and Confusions in which these Kingdoms may happen to be involved
by their desperate and unreasonable Opposition.

Given at Our Court at St. Germans, the Twentieth Day of April in the Eighth
Year of Our Reign. Per Ipsum Regem Manu propria.

Printed at St. Germans, by Thomas Hales, Anno Domini. MDCLXXXXII.


