INFORMATION FOR MR. ALEXANDER HERIOT Minister at Dalkeith.
In Relation to the Lybel against him, before the Presbytrie at Dalkeith, and
the Sentences thereon.

And Petitions to the Lords of Their MAJESTY'S Privy Council

The Appeal given in by the said Mr. Alexander Heriot to the Synod of
Midlothian, containing a short Information of the Progress of that Process, to
that time, is as follows.

MOderator, Being conscious of my Innocence, and finding my self Wronged, and
Injured, I here Appeal from this Synod, to the first General Assembly, when it
shall meet; And in the mean time to their Majesty's Protection, for Justice and
Relief; And since the Law allows the Liedges a competent time to give in the
Reasons of their appealls, I here Protest within Twenty four hours, to give in
the Reasons of this my appeal to your Clerk; And withal, I protest that this
be Recorded by him. And upon all I take Instruments.

The Reasons of Appeal of Mr. Alexander Heriot Minister at Dalkeith, from the
Synod of Midlothian, to the next Lawful General Assembly, And to their
MAJESTY'S Protection for Justice, and Relief in the mean time.
THERE being a Lybel given in to the Presbytery of Dalkeith against the said
Mr. Alexander Heriot, and the Lybel bearing it to be given in in the Name of
the Parochiners, the said Mr. Alexander Heriot and Parochiners compeared, and
craved that the Ingivers of the Lybel might be condescended upon, and that they
might own and subscribe it; And that in regard that the said Heretors and
Parochioners did not only Viva Voce, but by a Write under their Hands Disclaim
and Disowne it except Alexander Calderwoode, and a few (...) popall. And albeit
no Lybel ought to be admitted without a Pursuer; yet the Presbytery refused to
condescend upon the Ingivers of the Lybel, or to ordain them to own and
subscribe it. Likeas, none had the confidence to own it, except the said
Alexander Calderwood, who sat among them as one of the Ruling Elders, and who
is notourly known to be the said Mr. Alexander Heriot's declared Enemy (although
without cause) and who invented and reported most false Calumnies against him,
of which when he was challenged, his answer was, That whether they were true or
false, he had thereupon taken two hundred of the Parochioners from his
Communion; And a Declinator being given in against him as Informer and
Promotter of the Lybel, which not only consisted in the knowledge of the
Presbytery (who had no other Information but his) but which was likewayes
offered to be proven be his Oath; yet notwithstanding thereof, against all Law,
Reason, and good Order, the Presbytery would not remove him, but allowed him to
sit as one of Mr Heriot's Judges, and appointed him one of the Examinators of
the Witnesses: And he forgetting that station, informed and tampered with some
of them, and threatened others, as to what they should depone; And the Witnesses
being overawed and interrupted in their Examinations, and not allowed to
declare the hail Truth in complext matters of Fact, whereby the Depositions may
be lame and weak, and carry a quite contrary meaning of the Truth, of what the
Witnesses offered to depone; And some of the Witnesses having desired that they
might see and read their own Depositions before they subscribed them, the same
was absolutely refused, with this Expostulation, What? do you distrust us? and
do you question our Clerk's honesty? And thus they caused these Witnesses
subscribe what was written, so that there may be left out the material parts of
their Depositions, which cleared their Minister. And not only are there several
Articles of the Lybel, which are not upon these Heads, to which the Trial of
the Regular Clergy is restricted be Act of Parliament, and which are in
themselves alterius fori, but likewayes there was an additional Lybel raised
against the said Mr Alexander, and without any Citation given to him thereupon,
or Copy Sight or Notice given to him thereof; Witnesses are examined, then all
which there can be nothing in judicial Procedures more Partial, Pernicious, and
Unjust. And Mr Alexander Herriot having appealled from the Presbytery to the
General Assembly, the Presbytery notwithstanding thereof proceeded, and found
the Lybel Relevant and Proven; and therefore, and in regard of Mr Heriot's
Contumacy (as they termed his Appeal to the General Assembly, which sat in
October last) they suspended him from the Ministry, and referred him for
further Censure to the General Assembly. But the General Assembly having found
no Contumacy in the Appeal, they referred him to the Synod. And now the said Mr
Alexander does again Appeal from the Synod, and from any Sentence they shall
give in this Matter, to the next lawful General Assembly, and in the mean time,
to Their Majesty's Protection for Justice and Relief. For their Grounds and
Reasons.

Primo, There being a Petition given in by the Heretors and Parochioners of
Dalkeith to the Synod, attesting, the said Mr Alexander his Faithfulness in the
Ministry, and his Innocence as to the things Lybelled against him; and craving,
that according to the Act of Parliament, the Depositions of the Witnesses might
be made patent, that they might be the better Redargued; yet the Synod suffered
not the said Petition to be read.

Secundo, The said Mr Alexander having represented to the Synod the foresaid
Procedure of the Presbytery against him, and having craved that the Depositions
of the Witnesses, might be read before him, and that he might have a Coppie of
the Aditional Lybel, which he had never seen; and that conform to the Act of
Parliament, the Depositions of the Witnesses might be made patent to him, to
the end that he might have a Copy thereof, to the effect he might the better
clear himself, from any thing that may seem to be deponed against him; yet
notwithstanding thereof, (and contrare to Law) the same was also refused by the
Synod, and undoubtedly for this Reason, That the Probation was weak, and might
not abide the Light nor Trial, for Veritas non quaerit Angulos.

Tertio, The said Mr Alexander represented to the Synod, That he was informed
that one of the Articles deponed against him, was, That he should have danced
about a Bonfire the 14 of October 1688; And that the same was the only Article
proven against him, which he instantly redargued, for the said 14 day of
October 1688 fell upon a Sunday, and that the Witnesses and haill Inhabitants
of Dalkeith cannot but declare, that there was never Bonfires at Dalkeith upon
a Sunday, so that they deponed falsely. And the Dancing about a Bonfire being so
public an Act, that not only the Witnesses that have deponed it, but likewayes
many others would have seen it, and all the Inhabitants of Dalkeith would have
heard of it, if it had been true: Yet notwithstanding thereof, all the
Neighbors to that Bonfire, and hail Inhabitants of Dalkeith will declare and
depone, that they neither saw nor heard of their Minister dancing at that, or
any other Bonfire; yet notwithstanding of that cl^^^ Conviction, and redarguing
of that (...), the Synod had no regard thereto, affirming that there was no
help for it now, it being so deponed, which is no other thing than as if they
had said, that they were not concerned tho it were false, for it was so
deponed; and which is so consequential to a clear and positive Redarguing, and
Improbation of the Article, and Probation thereof, that the prejudice and
design of the Synod to proceed against the said Mr Alexander upon whatever was
alleged, although without Probation, or upon a Redargued Probation, is evidently
manifest.

Quarto, The said Mr Alexander represented to the Synod, that he had formerly
Appealled from the Presbytery, and that it was but too evident from what is
above narrated, that they were his Party. And which was further demonstrate
from this, That, the said Presbytery and Alexander Calderwood, did in face of
the Synod not only interrupt the said Mr Alexander when he was speaking; but
likewayes debated and reasoned against him as Parties, so that it could not but
be expected, but that they would do more when he was removed out of the Synod,
and therefore the said Mr Alexander declined the Presbytery, and Alexander
Calderwood as his Judges, and craved that they might not fit to judge him; yet
notwithstanding thereof, against all Law and Justice, they were not removed.

Quinto. Several Members of the Synod interrupted the said Mr. Alexander, while
he was Vindicating himself, in the face of the Synod, and craving a sight of
the Additional Lybel, and Deposition of the Witnesses; And cried out, That the
same should not be granted to him, as if every one of them had had a Decisive
Voice, and which is without Example in any Judicatory, for any of the Judges to
interrupt the Defenders speaking, and to cry out their Opinion, or rather
Sentence, before the Defender be removed; And which openly discovers their
Prejudice, Design and Resolution of proceeding against the said Mr. Alexander,
although without just cause.

Sexto. The Prejudice and Design of the Synods proceeding against the said Mr.
Alexander, on the said lame, weak, and null probation, is evident, in so far as
several Members of their Number did speak and deall with him to demitt, or that
otherwise they would depose him. And there is no thing more certain, than that
they would never have Dealt with him to demitt, if the Probation against him
had been good; Their malice to the Regular Clergy being such, as that they
would rather Depose them for Immoralities, and Errors in Doctrine to Publish
them, than to suffer them to Demit, and get off without stain, when they are
guilty of the same. But Mr. Alexander being Conscious of his own Innocence
refused to Demit, but rather to suffer there Extremity, from which he hoped
GOD in his good time would Vindicate him. And therefore it being evident from
the Grounds forsaid, that the Synod has behaved themselves most partially, and
against all Law and Form: The said Mr. Alexander does therefore Protest
against the Synods further Proceeding in the said Matter, and appeals from
them, and from any sentence they shall give therein, to the next General
Assemblies, And to their MAJESTY'S Protection, for Justice, and Relief in the
mean time; And Protests, That the said Lybels, and Witnesses Depositions taken
thereupon, may be preserved, and not put out of the way, That so the same (and
not Copies thereof) may be produced to the next General Assembly; Or to any
their Majesty's shall be pleased, out of their Royal Authority, to appoint to
consider the same: And that as the said Mr. Alexander will publish and disperse
his Appeal, and his Answers to the first Lybel; Which he only did see for his
own Vindication from any sentence that shall follow hereupon; So he expects,
and earnestly Desires, that the said Synod may Print both the Lybels against
him, and Depositions taken thereupon, for vindication of their Justice, (if
they can conceive they have done right:) But which Mr. Alexander hopes will
rather vindicate his Innocence. And further, Mr. Alexander Craves, and
Protests, That this his Appeal may be insert in the Books of the Synod.

Notwithstanding of the Appeals foresaid, the Synod proceeded, and Deposed the
said Mr. Alexander from his Ministry, And thereupon the Eldership of the
Parish was invaded, and some few, (severals of them scarce worth to be noticed
as Residenters,) have usurped the power of electing Elders, and have elected
many more than the number formerly used, purposely as they think, to make the
greater Figure; although but of the most inconsiderable of the Paroch; And of
Design to Call, Impose, and Obtrude a Minister upon the Rest against their
will, contrare to the Laws of Charity, Practices of Christian Churches, and
profession of Presbyterians. Notwthstanding, that the said Mr Alexander Heriott
his Appeal does preserve his Right, and keeps all in statu quo, the time of the
Appeal, while it be discust.

Whereupon, not only the said Mr. Alexander Heriott, but likewise the Heritors
and Parishoners of Dalkeith have given in a Petition to the Lords of their
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, That they may be pleased to discharge
the Calling of a Minister while the Appeal be discust; And that in the mean
time, he may be restored to the Exercise of his Ministry. And that the
Presbytrie of Dalkeith; And others havers of the Lybels given in against him,
and Depositions of the Witnesses may make the same patent to him, as Law
appoints; That he may know what is lybelled, or may seem to be proven, to the
effect he may the better clear himself of the samen, which is nothing but false
lies and calumnies: And whereof severals of the Presbyterian Ministers, who
have seen the Lybels and Depositions; Affirm, that there is nothing proven. But
the dancing about the Bon-Fire, which is not only clearly redargued to be false
as said is, there being no Bonfires either on the foresaid day, nor for several
months either before or after; But likewise if the persons who have deponed it
were known, and re-examined, it will be found, they have deponed falsely; And
that they have been dealt with so to Depone; And that this Falsehood may not be
discovered, not only are the Depositions kept up, contrar to express Law and
Act of Parliament; But likewise, no notice can be gotten who were the persons
who have deponed it, that they may be insisted against.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Lords of their Majesty's Privy Counsel, are
not Judges competent to the sentences of Ecclesiastic Courts, and that as they
cannot put in Ministers in Churches, so they cannot meddle with sentences of
Depositions. It is answered, 1 mo. That be the 1: Act 8 Parl: Ja: 6: It is
Statute and Ordained, That his Majesty, and Council shall be Judges competent,
To all Persons Spiritual and Temporal, in all matters. And to pretend, that the
Council is not Judge competent to sentences of Ecclesiastic Courts, is no
other then to affirm, That these Courts have an Arbitrary power, and may do
wrong at their pleasure without Remeed or Control. For it is evident, That Mr.
Herriot is most unjustly pursued and Deposed. And it is also evident, that if
it be not Redressed be the Council, he will never be Restored be those
Ministers, who have dealt so unjustly with him.

And whereas, it is alleged, That as the Council cannot put in Ministers, so
they cannot meddle with Sentences of Deposition. It is answered, That the
Council has not the power of Admission and Ordination of Ministers. But if a
Minister having a lawful Call, the Presbytery should refuse to Admit and
Ordain him, albeit they have nothing to object against him, upon Application to
the Council or Session, Letters will be direct to Charge the Prebyterie, to
Admit and Ordain him; but multo magis in this case, where a Minister is deposed
from his Ministry; as likewise from his Benefice, (which is his Livelihood and
Maintenance) And yet most unjustly, and without Ground or Reason; The Council
is the most propper Judge, for restoring him against the foresaid Oppression,
Injury, and Unjust Sentence.

And for a farther evidence of this unjust Sentence, it is Humbly desired, that
the LORDS of Their MAJESTY'S Privy Council will be pleased to take notice, That
in the first Lybel there are many Articles which are not Relevant; and it is
said, that there is none of them proven, but the Dancing about the Bonfire: And
yet the Presbytery by their Sentence, found the Lybel Relevant and Proven,
which must be understood as to the hail Articles of the Lybel complexlie, then
which there is nothing more false, as will appear by the Lybels and
Depositions, if they were produced. And yet thereupon Mr Heriott is first
suspended be the Presbytery, and referred be them to the General Assembly for
farther Censure, as if great Immorralities in Life, and Errors in Doctrine, had
been proven against him. And the Synod (to which the Assembly remitted him)
following the steps of the Presbytery, deposed him. Now when Presbytery and
Synod, have acted thus contrare to express Law, and have done open and manifest
Unjustice; (and whereof all that heard of it are convinced and sensible) And
having stated themselves Parties against him, there can be no Remedy expected
from the said Unjustice, Injury, and Oppression, unless the Lords of Their
Majesty's Privy Council interpose their Authority.

If it be alleged, That be the late Act of Parliament, The Act of Supremacy in
Church matters is Rescinded; It is Answered, That the Act of Parliament 1669 is
Rescinded, which extended the Supremacy to the Ordering and Disposal of the
External Government and Policy of the Church, and to the Enacting of
Constitutions, Acts, and Orders in the Church. But the foresaid Act of K: Ja.
6. his 8th Parliament, is not Rescinded, which is only as to the Judging of
Ecclesiastic Persons in matters complained upon; And which power is inherent
to the Crown, otherwise there should be Regnum in Regno; And Church
Judicatories should have Arbitrary power, without Redress or Control, as said
is.

And whereas, some Persons have strongly asserted, to the Lords of Their
Majesty's Privy Council and others. 1 mo. That Mr. Heriot was never re^u^ed a
^ight of the Lybels and Depositions, but that they were given him. 2 do. That
the Presbytery and Alexander Calderwood were removed out of the Synod, upon Mr
Heriot's Declinator against them. It is Answered, 1 mo. That he did many times,
and with great earnestness, crave a sight of the Lybels and Depositions, both
in the Assembly and Synod; which was refused as a hundred persons who heard him
will witness, and none of the Clerks of Assembly, Synod, or Presbytery (in
whose hands and custody the Lybels and Depositions are) will dare to affirm
that ever they were given to Mr Heriot to see. 2 do. Mr Heriot at his first
appearance before the Synod, Declined the Presbytery and Alexander Calderwood
from being his Judges, they being his Parties: And before Mr Heriot gave in his
Appeal, he was four times removed while the Synod considered the Defenses, he
made for himself; and none of the Synod can affirm, that the Presbytery and
Alexander Calderwood were removed with him; but at his return after the several
Removals, he found them always present, and the said Alexander Calderwood: And
several others of their number did in face of the Synod debate against him,
when he made his Legal Defenses: Which, the Synod having unjustly repelled; he
thereupon Appealled, and immediately came away; so that there is nothing more
certain, then that the Presbytery and Alexander Calderwood, sat as his Judges
after Declinator. And it was upon these two grounds among the rest, that Mr
Heriot Appealled from the Synod; Because they refused him a sight of the Lybel
and Depositions, which Law allowed him; and that the Ptesbytery and Alexander
Calderwood sat as his Judges, albeit they were his Parties, which is certainly
true. And albeit after the Appeal, and Mr Heriot's going away, the Presbytery
and Calderwood were removed, at the time of the Vote of Mr Heriot's
predetermined Deposition; it does not take away the truth of the reason of the
Appeal, That they sat as Judges before the Appeal.

And whereas, besides the false Alleadgance of Dancing about a Bonfire, there
is now other Articles suggested to be proven. Mr Heriot makes no Answer
thereto, because of the unceriainty thereof, hoping that the Lords of Their
Majesty's Privy Council, will in their Justice, and conform to Law, Ordain the
Lybels and Depositions of Witnesses to be seen, and then Mr Heriot can openly
clear himself, from whatever shall appear to be proven against him.

In Regard whereof, The Lords of Their MAJESTY'S Privy Council are Judges
Competent, to this Injury, Injustice and Oppression; And the Desire of the
Petitions ought to be Granted.


