J R

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the KING. A PROCLAMATION, Signifying His Majesty's Pleasure, That all Men
being in Office of Government at the Decease of the late King, His Majesty's
most Dear and most Entirely beloved Brother, shall so continue, till His
Majesty's further Direction.
JAMES R.

FOrasmuch as it has pleased Almighty GOD, lately to Call unto his infinite
Mercy, the most High and Mighty Prince, King Charles the Second, of most
Blessed Memory, the Kings Majesty's most dear, and most entirely beloved
Brother, by whose Decease the Authority and Power of the most part of the
Offices and Places of Jurisdiction and Government within this Realm, and in the
Realm of Ireland, did cease and fail, the Sovereign Person failing, from whom
the same were derived. The Kings most Excellent Majesty, in His Princely
Wisdom, and Care of the State (reserving to His Judgment hereafter, the
Reformation and Redresses of any Abuses in Mis-government, upon due Knowledge
and Examination thereof) is pleased, and has so expressly signified, That all
Persons that at the time of the Decease of the late King, His dearly beloved
Brother, were Duly and Lawfully possessed of, or Invested in any Office, or
place of Authority of Government, either Civil or Military, within this Realm
of England, or in the Realm of Ireland, or in any other His Majesty's Dominions
belonging thereunto; And namely, all Presidents, Lieutenants, Vice-prefidents,
Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Deputy-Lieutennants, Commissioners of Musters,
Justices of Peace, and all others in place of Government, either Meaner or
Superior, as asoresaid; And all other Officers and Ministers, whose Interests
and Estates in their Offices are determined, or ceased by the means
aforementioned, shall be, and shall hold themselves continued in the said
Places and Offices, as formerly they held and enjoyed the same, until His
Majesty's Pleasure be further known.

And that in the mean while, for the preservation of the Peace, and necessary
Proceedings in Matters of Justice, and for the Safety and Service of the State;
all the said Persons of whatsoever Degree or Condition may not fail, every one
severally, according to his Place, Office, or Charge, or proceed in the
performance and Execution of all Duties thereunto belonging, as formerly
appertained unto them, and every of them, while the late Kings Majesty was
living.

And further, His Majesty does hereby Will and Command all and singular His
Highness Subjects, of what Estate, Dignity, or Degree they or any of them be,
to be Aiding, Helping and Assisting, and at the Commandment of the said
Officers and Ministers, in the performance and Execution of the said Offices
and Places, as they and every of them Tender His Majesty's Displeasure, and
will answer for the Contrary at their uttermost perils.

And further, His Majesty's Will and Pleasure, and Express Commandment is, That
all Orders and Directions Made, or Given by the Lords of the Privy Council of
the late King, in His Lifetime, shall be Obeyed and Performed by all and every
person and persons, and all and every Thing and Things to be done thereupon,
shall proceed as fully and as amply as the same should have been Obeyed or
Done, in the Life of the said late King, His Majesty's most dearly and entirely
beloved Brother.

Given at the Court at Whitehall, the Sixth Day of February, in the First Year
of His Majesty's Reign of England, Scotland, France and Ireland.
London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: and by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1684.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom, 1685.


