I7 R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE LORD DEPUTY AND COUNCIL.
TYRCONNELL.

WHEREAS we are informed that several disaffected persons within this His
Majesty's Kingdom, have been of late very industrious by false Reports, and
malicious Insinuations, to suggest to many of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, as
if we His Majesty's Chief Governor intended to Govern under His Majesty here,
otherwise than by the known Law of this Land of Ireland, and as if some of His
Majesty's Loyal Subjects should stand in hazard of being disturbed and
disquieted in their just Liberties, Properties and other Rights due to them by
Law, which Calumnies Have been heightten'd and encouraged some few fiery
Spitits in the Pulpits, by taking upon them to treat of Matters that do not lie
within their Province; for which Aspersions there was not the least ground, but
the perverse honor and wicked Principles of the Authors, since His Sacred
Majesty has given all His Subjects frequent assurances of His Gracious
Resolutions to Govern them by Law, and to Protect them in their respective
Properties and Privileges according to Law, Which Resolutions of His said
Majesty He has given us His Deputy in particular charge of observe and signify
to all His Subjects. For the removing therefore of all Fears and Iealousies
proceeding from such scandalous suggestions from the Hearts of His Majesty's
Subjects here, and for quiting the Minds of the People: And to the end that all
His Majesty's Good and Loyal Subjects may with cheerfulness apply themselves to
their particular Concerns, Trade and Vocation: We the Lord Deputy and Council
Do hereby Publish and Declare, That We will, by the Grace of God, apply all Our
Care and Industry to yield exact and perfect Obedience to His Majesty's said
Commands: and do hereby Publish and Declare in His Majesty's behalf, that We
shall take diligent Care that all His Majesty's Subjects within this Kingdom,
of what persuasion in Religion or Degree, whatsoever they be, shall be
Protected in their Just Rights and Properties due to them by Law, and in the
free Exercise of their Religion, provided they persevere in their Duty and
Allegiance to His Majesty, without giving any occasion of Disturbance to the
Peace of the Kingdom. And for the further Preservation of the public Peace of
this Realm, We do Charge and Require all Persons whatsoever, to forbear
speaking any undutiful or irreverend Expressions of His Majesty's Sacred Person
or Government. And We do Require all His Majesty's Judges, Justices,
Magistrates, and Officers, to take particular Care that all persons that shall
be discovered to be guilty of spreading such scandalous Reports, or using such
malicious Insinuations, shall be prosecuted according to the utmost rigor of
the Law, To the end the just Punishment to be inflicted upon them, may terrify
others from committing the like Crime.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 21 th Day of February, 1686. A
Fytton C. Franc. Dublin. Granard P. Antrim. Roscommon. Drogeheda. Tyrone.
Longford. Lymerick. Gormonston. Galmoy. Nettervill. Rosse. J. Macartie. John
Keating. He. Hene. John Davys. Th. Nugent. De. Daly. Stephen Rice. Will.
Talbot. Rob. Hamilton. Tho. Newcomen. N. Purcell. Tho. Sheridan.

GOD save the KING.
Dublin, Printed by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham Assigns of Benjamin Took,
Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty; And Reprinted at Edinburgh by
the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1687.


