DEAR SOVEREIGN,
MAy it please your Majesty, to accept my thanks for your gracious Act in
restoring the Charter, surely your Majesty was as an Angel to divert Judgment
from your Ancient City, the Lord make your Majesty a Wise Physician to heal the
Wounds of this Nation, and I doubt not but that your Majesty has the Nature of
an Indulgent Father, who values the Lives and Interest of his Children before
the Gain of the World. Therefore I humbly beseech your Majesty to make Peace,
for Blessed is the Peace maker, for why should War obtain that which Peace may
do, for it is very destructive, and the Winner may prove a Looser, and it was
the Council of our blessed Savior who Exhorted his Disciples to agree with
their Adversaries whilst they were in the Way. And therefore I entreat Your
Majesty, to satisfy the Dutch if possible, for I find all men in general and
willing to fight for your Majesty; but your Majesty cannot blame us if we are
not willing to fight for Rome, because they own such Doctrine as Christ and his
Disciples never taught, to Judge all to be Heretical and Damned but their
selves, and yet at the same time own themselves Catholic Christians, which is
a clear Contradiction, therefore there is a necessity they should renounce such
Errors as these are, to give some assurance, that whilst we fight your
Majesty's Battle, we may not promote theirs; then I dare to Promise your
Majesty Victory, for we shall have the Spirits of English Men to fight your
Battle, but Rome darkens your Glory, and the fear of Popery has been the sole
Cause of all our Differences; I do not condemn all Roman Catholics, for I
really think that there is Brave and Worthy Men amongst them that will be
precious in Gods sight, but yet I think they do not wisely to stand in
opposition against Christ Intentions, for he never intended to Exalt the Virgin
Mary, and the Pope, but to make God All in All; that we throught him and for
his sake might obtain the hopes of Salvation. Oh! that it would please God that
our Differences were at an end that we might have an happy Unity, which is the
Prayer of your humble Subject, Servant and Souls Well wisher.

Elinor James.


