His Majesty's SPEECH, With the Journal of the House of Commons.
May 30th. 1685. My Lords and Gentlemen,
I THANK you very Heartily for the Bill you have this Day presented Me, and I
assure you the Readiness and Cheerfulness with which it was Dispatched, is as
acceptable to Me, as the Bill it self, after so happy a Beginning; You may
believe I would not Call upon you unnecessarily for an extraordinary Supply;
But when I tell you that the Stores of the Navy and Ordnance are extremely
exhausted; That the Anticipations upon several Branches of the Revenue are
great and Burdensome; That the Debts of the King my Brother to His Servants
and Family, are such as deserve Compassion; And the Rebellion in Scotland,
without putting more Weight upon it than it really deserves, must oblige Me to
a considerable Expense extraordinary; I am sure such Considerations will move
you to give Me an Aid to provide for those Things wherein the Security, the
Ease, and the Happiness of My Government are so much Concerned. But above all,
I must Recommend to you the Care of the Navy, the Strength and Glory of the
Nation, that you will put it into such a Condition, as may make Us Considered
and Respected Abroad; I cannot Express My Concern upon this Occasion more
suitable to My own Thoughts of it, than by assuring you, I have a True English
Heart, as Jealous of the Honor of the Nation, as you can be; And I Please My
Self with the Hopes that by Gods Blessing, and your Assistance, I may carry the
Reputation of it yet higher in the World, than ever it has been in the time of
any of My Ancestors. And as I will not Call upon you for Supplies, but when
they are of Public Use and Advantage: So I Promise you, that what you give Me
upon such Occasions, shall be Managed with Good Husbandry, and I will take Care
it shall be Employed to the Uses for which I ask them.

Saturday, May 30th.
SEveral Petitions concerning undue Elections, referred to a Committee of
Elections. Leave given for a Bill, for Reviving the Act of the Coynage. Sir
Thomas Player and Colonel Whitley, attended and produced an Abstract of their
Accounts. Ordered that they attend the House on Monday. The Speaker to Write to
Sir Gilbert Gerard and Colonel Birch, to bring in their Accounts. A Bill for
the continuance of an Act for the Re-building of North-hampton Road. The House
attended His Majesty. A Motion being made for the supply upon His Majesty's
Speech. The House went into a Grand Committee. Resolved Nemine Contradicente.
That a Supply be given to His Majesty for the Repairing of the Navy and
Ordnance, and the Stores for the same, and for those other Occasions mentioned
in His Majesty's Speech. That toward the said Supply, an Imposition be laid
upon all Wines and Vinegar. Resolved that the Imposition to be laid upon Wines
and Vinegar, be the same that was laid thereon by an Act of Parliament, made in
the twenty first Year of His late Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for
Granting to His Majesty an Imposition upon all Wines and Vinegar, imported
between June 24.1670. and June 24.1678. Res. That the H^use do on Monday go
into a Grand Committee to Consider further of a Supply for His Majesty.
Ordered, That a Bill be brought in by Mr. Solicitor, for the granting of the
said Supply on Monday next.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.


