THe Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament, To all
Parsons, Ministers, Lecturers, Vicars, and Curates, and also to all our
Justices of the Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Churchwardens,
Collectors for the Poor, and Headboroughs, and to all other Officers, Ministers
and People whatsoever, as well within Liberties as without, to whom these
presents shall come, greeting.

Whereas the Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses of the Borough of Barwick upon
Twede, on behalf of several of their Neighbors, have humbly presented unto the
Parliament their humble Supplication and Petition, thereby certifying and
setting forth, That a sad and lamentable Fire brake out in the said Borough,
upon the Eight day of June last past, which was so suddenly dispersed by the
Winds (which blew extraordinarily violent) that it destroyed Five and thirty
Houses with Housholdstuff and Goods amounting to the value of near Three
thousand pounds, as it has been estimated by persons appointed to value the
same. And therefore the said Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, did by their said
Petition humbly pray the Parliament to Authorize them by Letters Patents under
the Great Seal of England, to gather and receive the charitable contributions
of well disposed persons toward the relief and succor of the Sufferers by the
said Fire. Which Petition the Parliament having taken into their serious
consideration, and well weighing the same, have thereupon Ordered, That a Brief
be granted under the Great Seal of England, for a Collection of well disposed
People in the several Counties and Cities hereafter mentioned, for relief of
the persons who have suffered the said great losses by the said Fire.

Know ye therefore, That we have given and granted, and by these presents do
give and grant unto the said Major, Bailiffs, and Burgesses of the said Borough
of Barwick upon Twede, their Deputy and Deputies; the Bearer and Bearers
hereof, full Power, License, and Authority, to ask, gather, receive, and take
the Alms and charitable Benevolence of all good and well disposed people,
whatsoever inhabiting within the Counties of Cumberland, Northumberland,
Westmorland, Durham, and York, and in the City of York, and County of the same
City, the Cities of Durham and Carlisle, the said Town and Borough of Barwick
upon Twede; the Town and County of Newcastle upon Ti^e, and the Town and County
of Kingston upon Hull, and in all Cities, Towas corporate, privileged places,
Parishes, Villages, Hamblets, and in all other places whatsoever, within the
said Counties of Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmorland, Durham, and York, and
not elsewhere, for and toward the recovery of the said Losses of the said
persons sufferers by the said Fire. Which being a business of so Christian and
of so great concernment to the said Persons sufferers by the said Fire, will
doubtless find ready acceptance with all such as have any thing of Bowels and
Compassions in them, who will thereby be easily provoked to such a cheerful and
liberal Contribution as shall be answerable to so great a loss

Wherefore we will and command ^ou and every of you, that at such time and
times as the Deputy and Deputies, (the Bearer and Bearers hereof) of the said
Major Bailiffs, and Burgesses of the said Borough of Barwick upon Twede, by
them thereunto Deputed by Deputation under the Seal of the said Borough, shall
come and repair to any of your Churches, Chapels, or other places, to ask and
receive the Gratuities and charitable Benevolence of the said good and
charitable Christians, quietly to permit and suffer them so to do without any
manner of your Lets or Contradictions, and you the said Parsons, Ministers,
Lecturers, Vicars and Curats, for the better stirring up of charitable
Devotions, deliberately to publish and declare the Tenor of these our Letters
Patents, or the true Copy or Brief hereof unto the people upon the Lords Day
next after the same shall be tendered unto you by the said Deputy or Deputies,
exhorting, persuading and stirring them up to extend their liberal
Contributions toward so good and charitable a work, and you the said
Churchwardens of every Parish, and Collectors for the Poor, where such
Collection is to be made as aforesaid, together with such honest active men
there, as shall be nominated by the Minister and your selves, are hereby willed
and required to collect and gather the Alms and charitable Benevolence of the
said charitable and well disposed people not only Householders but also
Servants, Strangers and others. And for the more effectual advancement of this
pious work; you are to go from house to house in your respective Parishes upon
the Week days to gather the Alms of the said good people, and what shall be by
you so gathered in the said Parishes and Places, to be by the Ministers and
your selves endorsed on the back side of these our Letters Patents, or the true
Copy or Brief hereof in words at length and not in Figures, which endorsement
is to be subscribed with the hands of you the said Ministers, Churchwardens,
and such in each Parish or place as shall assist you in such collection, and
also to be registered in the Books of your respective Parishes and the sum and
sums of money so gathered and endorsed, you are to deliver to the said Deputy or
Deputies, the Bearer or Bearers hereof, upon his or their demand, and to no
other person or persons whatsoever, whose receiving thereof with his or their
Acquittance or Acquitances, shall be your sufficient discharge for so doing

And we do by these presents give and grant unto the said Major, Bailiffs and
Burgesses of the said Borough of Barwick upon Twede, their Deputy and Deputies
the Bearer and Bearers hereof, full power, license and authority to send or
deliver true Copies or Briefs of these our Letters Patents unto all
Congregations that are not distinguished by Parishes in any of the said
Counties, Cities, Towns Corporate, Parishes, Villages, Towns, Hamblets, or
Privileged places first showing unto their Officer or Officers, or some of
them, these our Letters Patents under our said Great Seal: Which said Officer
or Officers, or some or one of them, upon serious consideration of this pious
work, are hereby desired to exhort and stir up their respective Congregations
to this charitable and pious work, and to receive their Benevolence, endorsing
the Sum or Sums so given on the backside of such true Copies or Briefs of these
our Letters Patents as shall be delivered unto them as aforesaid, in words at
length, and not in figures, two or three of them subscribing the same
Endorsment, and paying the Sum or Sums so gathered, and delivering the said
Copies and Briefs so as aforesaid endorsed and subscribed, to the Bearer or
Bearers of these our Letters Patents so as aforesaid deputed upon his or their
demand, and to no other person or persons whatsoever, Whose receiving thereof
with his or their Acquittance or Acquittances shall be their sufficient
discharge for so doing. Which said Bearer or Bearers of these our Letters
Patents are hereby willed and required forthwith to pay and deliver all the
Moneys by them so to be received as aforesaid by virtue of these presents,
together with these presents and the said Copies and Briefs endorsed as
aforesaid, unto our welbeloved Lionel Davison, Henry Howitson, and William
Rogers Gentlemen, whom we do by these presents name, constitute and appoint the
Treasurers of all such Sum and Sums of Money as shall be collected and received
by virtue of these our Letters Patents, unto whom or any two of them the same
is and are to be delivered and paid at or in the now dwelling house of the said
Major of the Borough of Barwick aforesaid for the use and behoof of the said
sufferers by the Fire aforesaid.

And lastly for the prevention of the pawning or selling of these our Letters
Patents, to the end to defraud or defeat the said sufferers of the benefit
hereof, and for the more assurance of faithful and equal dealing in the
receipt, account and distribution of the Moneys hereby to be collected, Our
will and pleasure is, that no man shall be employed to collect any of the said
Moneys by virtue of these our Letters Patents so to be collected as aforesaid,
but such only as shall be appointed thereunto by deputation under the hands and
seals of the said Treasurers or any two of them, And that the Moneys collected
and raised by virtue hereof shall be by the said Treasurers or two of them
disposed of to the said pious use hereby intended, and according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents. And therefore we do hereby will and
require the said Treasurers or two of them to pay the said Moneys so to be
collected as aforesaid unto the said persons sufferers by the said lamentable
Fire proportionably according to the just losses of each of them; Any Statute,
Law, Ordinance or Provision heretofore made to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. In witness whereof We have caused these our Letters to be made
Patents for the space of One whole Year next after the date hereof to endure,
and no longer. Witness Our selves at Westminster the Nine and twentieth day of
July, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred fifty and nine.

By Authority of Parliament. CARVILE,


