Mr. Keith's SERMON, Preached on May the 12th, 1700. At Dr. Bedford's Church,
BEING Saint George's Butolphs-Lane, by Billings-Gate.

On LVKE the 1st. and Verse 6th. And they were both Righteous before GOD,
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the LORD Blameless.

You are to take Notice, this is the Genuine Copy.

LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR; and Sold by most Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1700.

Mr. George Keith's SERMON, etc.
LUKE, 1st. Chap: Verse. 6. And they were both Righteous before God, walking in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless.


Beloved,
YOU have an Account of a Priest, or Teacher, with his Wife, both which being
ancient, and as Saint Luke here says, Righteous too before God, walking in all
the Commandments and Ordinances blameless; yet for all those gay pretenses, the
Man was turned Infidel, and did, or at least could not believe the Commands and
Ordinances of the Lord; and so in Justice was stricken Dumb, because he did not
believe God's Words, which shall be fulfilled in their season, verse. 20. Now in
taking my leave of my Old and well-Beloved Friends, namely the People called
Quakers, to which I was once joined, and made (as Zacharias was) a Teacher
among them; and (according to their and my weak Opinion) righteous before God,
walking in (as they and I thought) all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord blameless, etc. But since growing in Years, so in Knowledge too, being I
hope (as Zacharias was) better instructed by the blessed Spirit Gabriel, which
stands in the Presence of God, and so comes from him to bring as glad-tydings
to me as it did to Zacharias, to strike me for my Infidelity, Dumb; and not
able to speak until the time be accomplished, or fulfilled in their Seasons,
verse. 19, 20. And some People ^^^ted for the man Zacharias, and marvelled; but
when he came out he could not speak to them.

Now you, my dearly Beloved, with whom I now travail in this New Birth, to
apply this to my self, and you for your (...), you are (...) Spou^e, both (...)
and in (...) nay, and also as we then thought, (...) fore God, walking in all
the (...) Ordinances of the Lord blameless: but find it has pleased the
Almighty to send to me his blessed Spirit, to (...) not duty my but your
Infidelity also, that we have not been so Righteous as we should have been, as
to have had Consciences* always void of Offense both toward God and Man;
neither have we walked in the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless: And since God Almighty ha^ as he did to Zacharias) been pleased to
send his blessed Spirit to discover our Errors, (which I must confess were like
to the Jews altogether through Ignorance, and so I hope pardonable) and to show
those glad Tidings, viz. what the real Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
are, that we may walk in them and be blameless.

And since for my Infidelity, the All-wise God suffered me to be struck Dumb,
till the accomplished Time and Season, which I hope and find is now; for you
are not ignorant that those People, before mentioned, which both you and I had,
(being then joined to) had, (and I hope still have) a tenderness for; they I
say, for my Infidelity, by God's permission struck me Dumb: So that both in
Penstlvania and here, I being Anathamatized, or Excommunicated by them, became
as it were to them Dumb, and Speechless; at which you and some others which
waited upon me there, marvelled, as those did at Zacharias, verse. 21, 22, 23.
thinking and truly supposing that I (as he) had seen a Vision, or Spirit, which
made me, as it did him (depart from them) to his, and mine own House; So that
it is no Mystery neither to them nor you, that I was obliged to Teach and
Instruct privately in Holes and in Corners, as in this little Hall, etc. But
thanks be to God, being by the blessed Spirit better instructed in
Righteousness in general, and in all the Commands and Ordinances of the Lord,
to be without spot or blame; the Time being accomplished, and my Tongue loosed,
to speak of the Righteousness toward Man as well as God, and to walk not as
you and I have formerly, not only Ignorantly, but Obstinately, and Maliciously
in (...) in all) of the Commandments and Ordinances (...) Lord Blameless.

And now having by the aforesaid Spirit, had a Call to the true Church, which I
find has a Righteousness to Men as well as God, and walks in and keeps not only
some, but all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, I must
humbly and heartily take leave of this private Place herein Errors have been
both (as I must sincerely confess ignorantly, and wilfully broached and taught;
but I neither shall, nor will take leave of you my dearly Beloved, for whom I
have been as it were in Bonds, and travailed, and do now travail that both you
and I resorting, and fleeing to the true Church as a Sanctuary, may with old
Zacharias, verse. 68. to the 80th. Bless the Lord God which has visited and
redeemed us his People, by raising up an Horn of Salvation for us, that we
should be saved from our Enemies, and from the Hand of all that hate us, to
serve him for the future without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before Him
all the Days of our Lives; for having given a better knowledge of Salvation
unto us his People, by the Remission of our Sins, through the tender Mercy of
our God, whereby the Dayspring from on High has visited us, to give Light to
them (that is others of our Friends that are left behind) that now (as we once
did) sit in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, and to guide both their and
our Feet into the Way of Peace.

Thus having explained the Text, by declaring and comparing Old Zacharias's
Condition with mine own, I come now from the Words so read: First, To declare
what the True Church is; which may easily be discovered by the Infallible Marks
following. Secondly, What that Righteousness is, which makes, and will make any
blameless. And, Thirdly, What the Commandments of God were and are. And Lastly,
What Ordinances the Lord has appointed in his Church, that all true Christians
may walk in, and so observe and keep them, so as to be blameless; and then
shall make some Inferences, and Applications from, and of what I have said,
etc. -- True, since amidst the great diversity and contrariety of Opinions,
which at present are in the Christian Church, each entitu^ing it self to the
true Faith, which as St. (...) seem a matter of extreme (...) is (...) true
Faith of the Gospel: Yet I (...) and can (...) that the difficulty does not
ar^e so much (...) the (...) of the thing, as it does from Men and Women's (...)
Interests and Affections, in disputing about the Faith:

Therefore abstracting from these, I shall now first, by God's assistance,
endeavor to set before you the chief (...)racters of a True Gospel Faith, by
which you may judge what the True Church is, and where it is to be (...): Now a
Gospel Faith is an Ancient Primitive Faith for Truth you know was from the
beginning; yea, diverse of the Doctrines with which our Savior enlightened
those that came to (...) were from the Moral Law, before his Personal
Appearance: for as he well said, Abraham saw his Day, (that it) his great
Truths and Ways: For our Blessed Lord was the Author and Finisher of our Faith,
in him it begun, and was consumated in his Personal Teachings and Instructions
of his immediate Disciples and Apostles, who by the unerring guide, viz. The
Spirit left to us what they had received from him. True, natural Truths are
more and more discovered by Time; for many go too and fro, so that Science is
increased: But the Divine Truths are most perfect in their Fountain, and
Original, they indeed may, and do contract Impurities in their Streams, and
remote Derivations. So that the way to discover the Corruptions, is to stand
upon the old Ways, and see how it was in the Original or Beginning, whether
that Righteousness which is taught, is to Man as well as to God: For a good
Conscience must and should be always void of Offense toward both; and whether
their walking is, and has been in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord or no? if it has but been only in some, and not in all, verily it cannot,
nay, must not be accounted blameless. So by this first and true Character of a
true Church, and Faith, two very dangerous Extremes are condemned; as first,
that of the now Roman Church, whose Doctrines and Usages, which are truly
denied by that Church to which I am now joined; these following are in
comparison, Novelties and Innovations, viz. their Image Worship, Innovations of
Saints, Half Communion, Prayer in an unknown Tongue^ (...) Infalliability, and
Universality, with (...) etc. which whatsoever they pretend to: I can assure
you, many of the Learned Divines of the Church to which I adhere, have proved
that all the before mentioned, were generally unknown in the First, and purest
Times and so must be contrary to a Gospel Faith and True Church. The Second on
the other Extreme is, that Faith of the most of the New Sects is to be
Condemned, because of its Novelty, and Innovation: For where was Presbytery,
Independency, Anabaptism and Quakerism of Old? True, I must confess that th^^e
were some such like Heresies swiming in the Brains of some Ignorant, but
Conceited Men and Women then; yet never as we Read were they in any general
Practice any where: For the Eldest we Read of, were not above Three Hundred
Years ago; and some have sprung up even in this last Century or Age; which to
my Sorrow and Shame, I must confess my self to have been of: and to have grown
and sprung up even from Mine, and others sickle Fancys, and vain Imaginations:
And God knows how soon, now even amongst such, and so many Confusions, other
new yet unheard of Sects, and Heresies may arise, and all to the further
dividing of the true Church by Law Established, and the scandal of Christian
Faith and Religion, etc.

True, all These like the Pharisees, may profess a great many Truths of the
Gospel Faith, yet for all that, (as their's had) may have too much Leaven to
spoil the whole Lump: But as the true Faith was of Old, ever from the beginning:
So Secondly, it was, and is to be both Pure, and Peaceable; for St. James 3.
17. Assures us, that Wisdom or Truth, which is from above, is first Pure, than
Peaceable, Gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits;
without Partiality and without Hypocrisy: teaching and producing Purity,
Holiness, and Righteousness in Life and Heart: For the business of it both was,
and is to conform us unto Christ, and to make us Holy as he was; and that in
all manner of our Conversations, as 1 Pet. 2. 15, 16. And not only Holy, but
Peaceable also; for Christ was the Prince of Peace, and his Gospel the Gospel
of Peace, and not of Confusion, as is manifested, 1 Cor. 24. from the 33. to
the end. For God is not the Author of Confusion, but of (...) As in all
Churches of the Saints, let your Women keep Silen^^ in the Churches, for it is
not permitted them to Speak: but these are Commanded to be under Obedience, as
also says the Law, etc. By which second Character of a true Church, there are
likewire these two aforesaid dangerous Extremes, Condemned and Confuted: The
first of which, viz. Popery, which apparently teaches not only direct
Impieties, and Immoralities, by the consequences of its Doctrines; but also
endeavors to Destroy both, Ecclesiastical and Civil Peace. For First, by their
Idollatries, and Invocation of Saints and Angels; which by the Prophets and
Apostles, is termed Spiritual Fornication and Whoredom, by Dishonouring God's
Majesty, and Affronting his Glory: These then must undoubtedly be accounted
great Impieties; and likewise their Doctrines and Practices of Deposing and
Murdering Princes, by absolving People from their Allegiance, and dispencing
with their Perjuries and Rebellions: all which are verily high Immortalities,
and clear contrary to the Spirit, and design of the Holy Jesus, which came to
redeem unto himself a Peculiar People, zealous of good Works: Nay, besides
these, they even strike at the Root and main Design of Christianity, by these
following Doctrines, which renders Repentance, and Change of Life unnecessary.
For as they think, so are apt to believe, that the Favor of God, and Eternal
Salvation, may be had upon easier Terms; namely, Crosses, Pilgrimages, Ave
Marias, Whipings, etc. Fastings often, with a bare Confession and Absolution:
They (I say) do not only think, but also really believe, that these will do
their Business; or if these will not, but to Pugatory they must go: Yet these
suppose, and verily believe, that if they can but procure Money enough to leave
for such a number of Masses and Dirgies; then they shall be secured of being
Prayed out thence: So that the greatest design of the Gospel, which is real
inward Holiness, is Destroyed by them; for they never so much as think of a
Necessity of Cutting off right Hands, and plucking out Eyes, that is of
Subduing, and rescinding an inordinate Appetites and Affections, which are the
great di^^^culties of Religion; These they account hard Sayings, and cannot
endure either to hear of or practice them: Nay, more^^er as for their
Unpeaceable Tempers, and Behaviors, both in Spiritual and Temporal, concerns
that is Manifested, not only from our own, but Foreign Histories. And the other
dangerous Extreme is, there are many Sects which Forsooth pretend (as I once
did to my Shame be it spoken) to Purity and Spirituality: Saying, That God sees
no Sin in his Saints or Elect, they being without Sin, a Precious and Choice
People; yea, affirming, That God loves not for the sake of Holiness and Virtue,
but freely (i. e.) for no reason, but mere unaccountable Will: And if it be so,
then it is in vain for any to amend their Lives, or to live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly, in order to their acceptance with God: though they are
contrary in all manner of Conversation; (as may be inferred from their
Doctrine) yet these have been taught, and so fondly think that by being God's
Chosen, or Beloved, they shall be saved, which abominable and absurd Doctrine,
has not only the Malignity of the worst of Popery, but of Heathenism too; for
it makes good Works unnecessary, etc. True, they have a Faith indeed, but it is
very Airy, which is only a receiving, trusting, and relying upon Christ by, and
in which they do well, being parts of true Faith: But even this the Devils
have, and practice, which as St. James 2. 19. 26. tells us, is Dead, and
Insignificant alone, to the purpose of Justification, and Acceptance with God.

Nay, Further you know, that the imputed Righteousness of Christ, is a great
Truth, rightly understood: But some Sects abuse it to this false Notion, that
all the Righteousness which Christ wrought, is formerly and properly theirs, as
if they themselves had done it. So they fondly think that by Christ's Holiness,
they can, and are made Holy and Righteous, though they have none of their own:
All which is apparently contrary to that in St. John 3. 9. Liltle Children let
no Man deceive you: He that does Righteousness, is Righteous. So these which I
have mentioned, that have such Solifidian and Antinomian Notions, by placing
(as I did once) their Religion in the Fancy, as the Papists do theirs, in some
External Services; do both effectually take away the necessity of a real
Reformation, and true Goodness. Nay, I might add a great many more such as
their (...) Infirmities; by which they are apt to excuse themsel^^^ in their
Spiritual Sins, and their Decrying Moraiity, as a dull, low, Graceless Thing;
crying up the Immoral practices of Schism and Disobedience, which they
indulge, and defend themselves in. True, I must confess that there are many
misled, abused Persons, of peaceable and quiet Spirits among these Sectaries:
So that we as Christians are to pray, and endeavor that such may be regained.
And in all Humble submission to my Goverours, If the Grand Council the next
Sessions, thinks fit to abate some lesser things in Consideration of such,
verily it would (in my weak Judgment in all Christian Countries) be esteemed
Charity and Kindness, which I am confident no true Christian either would, or
could dislike: But alas, I am not insensible that those which are of the right
Sectarian Stamp and Temper, will (as I formerly did) never rest or settle any
where, nor be satisfied with any Concession: God Almighty indeed may change
their Minds by his Power: But I am afraid nothing less can. So that all, both
you, and I, and others of our Church can, and must do, is only to pray to God
for the Conversion of such. For we have found, and I have some Reason to think
may now find again, as it is feared by woeful Experience, that nothing less than
the whole Wills of some, and an entire Subjection to their Fancies, have or
will content them: for if such were granted all, as they were formerly, we
cannot be assured that these would please long; only this we know, that
formerly they did not; nay, as St. Jude in his Epistle, ver. 12. says, such a
Whimsicall and Discontented People, are as Clouds without Water, carried about
with every Wind: For it is certain, that let the Wind be where it will to Day,
none can say from what Point it will blow to Morrow; just thus, as such a
People acted by their private Spirit, (as God knows I was once) which is, as
observed as little, certain as the Wind; for (as I have found by woeful
Experience) the Opinions it suggests, are numerous, and all accounted Divine
and Sacred, viz. Gospel Truths, Gospel-Ways, which forsooth, must not be parted
with: No, in no wise: Yea, all Laws and Constitutions of Government must be
thwarted, and overthrown rather: (...), and all must be Sacrificed to the (...)
the Imaginations of such. Oh! what Blessed Do^^^ and Days can we expect thence?
What Peace and Temper have sprung from such Principles, the Histories of
Germany, England, and Scotland, make us remember for caution only: So I
heartily wish, that no such People in this Age, did or would not remember them
so well, as to put them in Practice, which if they do, we have no refuge but to
use that daily Petition, and say, Father not ours, but thy Will be done in
Earth, as it is in Heaven. Which brings me to the Third and Last particular
Mark or Sign, to know a true Church by, and that is, that all which it
commands, is both Reasonable and Certain, which the Wiseman alludes to Prove.
20. 27. That the Understanding of Man, is the Candle of the Lord, the Light of
Reason is his Light; with that the true Light has enlightened every one that
comes into the World: And now one Light should not be contrary to the other;
there is, I must confess, a difference in degree, but no opposition of Nature,
so Faith and Reason accord: Yea, Faith is an act of Reason, for it is the
highest Reason to believe in God, and the belief of our Reason, is an act of
Faith, viz. Faith in the Truth and goodness of God, which gives no Man
faculties to delude or deceive him: If so be he does but rightly Exercise and
Employ them; yea, by Faith, Reason is further enlightened, and by the use of
Reason, Faith is applied, etc.

So true Religion, and Reason sweetly agree: For nothing can be Religious that
is unreasonable, which made the great Apostle call the Christian Religion a
Reasonable Service; Yea, so certain is the true Faith, that those which had it
from the Holy Spirit of God, Signed it with their Blood, these speaking as they
were inspired: and that they were really so, was no fond Imagination, or bold
Presumption: But a Truth assured by these mighty Miracles they were enabled to
perform. These are God's Seal, and a grand Confirmation of a Commiisson from
him, and to that proof of their Doctrines both Christ, and his Apostles
continually Appealed. Here was, and is then the firm reasonable Foundation of
the Christian certainty: the Truths we are to believe, were confirmed by
Miracles, than which there can be no greater Evidence by which last Character
these two before cited dangerous Extremes, are Despised and Condemned: As
First, that of Popery, which imposes on the Minds of Men as Articles of
Religion, things that are both Extreme Unreasonable, Absurd, and Uncertain,
viz. These namely, the Worshipping of invisible Beings by Images of Wood,
Stone, or some Metal, etc. but more especially that Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which is full of Contradictions: Since the asserting that
the same Body may be in a Thousand places at once; and that it may be divided
into Parts, though not into wholes These and a numerous other Absurdities to the
Reason of Mankind, are contained in that senseless Mystery of
Transubstantiation, to defend which their Doctors have been, and are forced to
deny Reason, and say that the same thing may, and can be, and not be, etc.

But Beloved, if neither Reason, nor so much as our Senses may be believed;
Pray what assurance can we have of any thing? But Oh! What assurance had (...):
to strengthen his staggering Faith about our Savior's Resurrection? This only,
and that particularly from his Lord, viz. Stretch out thine hand and thrust it
into my side, and be not faithless, but believing. Nay, further, the now Roman
Church destroys the Ground of Certainty, by an innumerable Company of Lying
Wonders; which you may Read of in their Legends, which the Priests do
impudently obtrude upon the belief of the silly and ignorant People only for
proof, and confirmation of their Religion. But on the other Hand, the Sects and
Sepratists being in as dangerous an Extreme concerning Faith, etc. For I found,
and have now just Reason to acknowledge, that the greatest part of my Religion,
when among them, was made up of senseless and absurd Notions, (which I am now
ashamed of) they being (as we were wont) set forth in unintelligible
fantastical Phrases; by (as 2 Pet 3. 16. says) wresting of Scriptures to our
own Destruction: though I indeed then, (as well as they) accounted it, the
heights of Spirituality and Mystery, upon which we valued and boasted our
selves, as the only Knowing and Spiritual People: When as Thanks be to God, it
is known now to me, and all discerning Persons that there was, and is nothing
in such pretended Heights and Spiritualities, but only vain Imagination and
Dreaming; which are dangerous Deceits. For as the Light of Reason and Sense
dispels the vain Images of Dreams: So these admitted, would and will cure all
Fantastical Impostures and Delusions, for which cause they, as well as I,
formerly declared against nothing so vehemently as Reason, under the notion of
Carnal, and so an Enemy to the Spirit; and the things of it. True, I must needs
confess now, that there is a Carnal Reason which is Enmity to Truth and
Goodness: But that (as I am rightly informed) is not the Reason of our Minds,
but our (...), Passions, and corrupt Interests; which is not Reason truly and
properly so called; no more than an Ape can be called a Man: And for want of
knowing, and distinguishing the things which so differ. Verily, Enthusiasticks
rail violently against all Reason, as the grand Adversary of the Truths and
Mysterys of the Gospel. Nay, further resolving as I did formerly, all assurance
either into, or upon a bare belief of the Testimony of a private Spirit: For as
mine was, so their Ground and Belief of the Scriptures both was, and is this
Testimony; and consequently whatsoever is received from hence, bottoms there.
The Papists, as it is confessed, believe the Scriptures on the Testimony of their
Church, but that Sect of which I was with others, believe them on the Testimony
of their Spirit: That is in Sober Sadness, by the Suggestions, and Resolutions
of their own, viz. they (like silly Women led Captive) believe because they
will believe, finding themselve inclined to it: So upon the same Reason as has
been observed; when the Imagination, and Humor (as mine did) alters, they then
may, and will cease to believe; or as I do now believe the contrary: I shall
not appeal only to my own Experience, but to that in others also. For have not
some vastly multiplied Articles of Faith, by making all their private Opinions
sacred, calling them Gospel, and saving Truths; whereas at the best they were
but uncertainties: For being senseless Imaginations, they are usually false, by
which they expose the whole Body of Christian Principles to Suspicion, and so
weaken the Faith of some, and destroy that of others. So now having given you
the Characters of a true Church; Namely First, that its Articles of Faith and
Doctrine are ancient, viz. as St. Jude says, That which was once delivered to
the Saints. Secondly, That it is Pure, and Peaceable: And Thirdly, That those
things it commands, are both reasonable and certain: And since for all the fine
and gay Pretenses, I cannot find such a Faith in these two dangerous Extremes,
which I have fairly and impartially Examined: I will by God's assistance
Examine, and see whether that Church, into which I am now entered, being by Law
Established, has those Marks and Characters of a true Faith, which I have
before described: And First, I am well assured, and so dare boldly assert, that
the Church Established without fondness, or over-weaning, does profess, and
teach the ancient Primitive, and Apostolic Faith, having admitted no new
things that are contrary to it: For it was reformed according to the
Scriptures, and the Apostolic Rules, and Ways: I say according to the
Scriptures, as they were interpreted by the first General Councils and Fathers;
those I mean next to the Apostles, whom we ought to believe; for they then
assuredly understood what was the Apostles Doctrines, and Ways; nay, the Church
is truly and rightly called Protestant, (...) against the Roman and Sectarian
Innovations; so according (...) Character must be true. -- Secondly, It teaches
us Righteousness in general, namely our duty to God, our Neighbors, and our
Selves, in the just Latitude and extent of them: For it has no Shifts, and
Evasions of Repentance and Reformation; it allows no hopes of Salvation but
upon Gospel terms: It teaches no Practice that is either Impious, or Immoral,
nor indulgeth any by its Doctrine; perhaps some Rotten Members may wink, and
connive at such: For the Church it self tells us that whosoever is Evil, must
know it, by being Judged and Condemned: Nay, further, the Church leaves no
hopes of Salvation, but what is grounded on effectual Repentance, and
Reformation; nor imposes any Articles of belief, as necessary to Salvation,
but the ancient Creed, and no terms of Communion; but reasonable Orders and
Decencies, as are free from all appearance of Idolatry and Superstition, or any
thing else that i^ unlawful; and as to the concerns of civil Peace, the Church
with Christ and his Apostles has taught all active, Cheerful and Conscientious
Obedience, both to God, the King, and also Subordinate Rulers in all lawful
things, and a quiet Submission to the Penalties of not Obeying, when the things
required, are plainly or certainly so, to its former Praise, Renown, and
Happiness, be it spoken. So Lastly, the Church now Established, teaches no
Opinions that needs such a desperate Course to defend them: For all its
Articles are reasonable, and may be proved, or defended by Reason against all
Athe^sts or Infidels, etc. She secures also the certainty of her Faith, by
resolving it into the Scriptures, the true Seat of Infallibility; and the
belief of the Scriptures (on the other hand) into the Testimony of the Spirit
of God, which confirmed it by Miracles. So that by these Three Characters, of a
True and Gospel Faith, the Church to which I am now joined, does not only
profess, but practice it: True, the best Church and Religion may be discredited
by its Professors, and that the Established Religion as such, is false, can
never be wrested out of the Mouths of those of the Church of Rome, and others,
which seek and take occasions to Blaspheme it; till such time as the composing
our Differences, shall take away that occasion which they have so unhappily
given; and we take the Apostles advice, to the Epistle of Phil. 1.29. 28. to
stand fast in one Spirit, with one Mind, striving together for the Faith of the
Gospel, and in nothing terrified by our Adversaries; which to them is an
evident token of Perdition, but to us of Salvation, and that of God. I know its
possible (some may not only think, but say) that they may maintain Charity,
notwithstanding they break Communion with an Established Church: But Beloved,
give me leave to tell, nay, to assure you that that is next to impossible to be
done; for when Men's Differences are about Matters of Religion, then as I know
by Experience, Passion is apt to slide under that fair pretext, and lay claim
to Conscience it self; so that it becomes a piece of Zeal to be Uncharitable:
But give me leave to premise, that it is not sufficient for any Man or Woman's
Repose, to say that they are acted by Conscience, which is no other than ones
present Persuasion. Conscience it self then must needs lie at the Mercy of
every thing that has Power to persuade it: and hence oftentimes it comes to
pass that whilst Conscience acts such it self, (as I, and I do not doubt but
many of you have observed) is acted by Passions, and Weaknesses, and then what
has, must, or will become of the Regularity of what some have (...). I am fully
persuaded, that every Christian detests the (...) of being sawyed in Matters of
Religion; either by Interest or P^^vis^ness, or Pride, or Appetites, or
Aversions, or something that is and has been either avowedly Evil, or
Shamefully Weak.

But now I shallnot rashly charge any with being swaied with such, though I have
great Reason to suspect that all these beforementioned, have found ways to
pass into some, nay, I may say, into too many Men and Women's Consciences, and
there act as securely as behind a Curtain; yea, even at that time when such
were and are ready to detest them in their naked Appearances: To confirm which
Truth, I will appeal not only to mine own, but some others undeniable
Experiences, themselves being Judges; Nay, have none of you here ever heard of,
nor known any who out of Wanto^ness of Wit, and Affectation of Singularity,
have made a perfect new Model of Christian Religion, by making a God without
Eternity, a Savior without Satisfaction, and an Hell without Torments; these
forsooth, did first admite their Scheme, and then believed it, and so became
Masters of a Sect; and thus their Vanity passed into Conscience. Others there
have been, and are of a Moroser Temper and Complexion, which falling as it were
into dislike with that Sweetness Christianity obliges to, and those Sacraments
and Ordinances which are the Ties of Union, and that Gospel that so incesantly
presses it: These (as I know by former Experience, being one of them) verily
have believed that the very Gospel-Institutions are but Types and Shadows; and
that every Man and Woman has a surer Word of Prophecy within Themselves, and
that God must be served without all possitive Commandments or Ordinances, etc.
These you (as well as I) know have sprung into a numerous Sect; and thus
Completion and Humor have passed, and does pass into Conscience. Others there
are which you cannot but have heard of, whose Covetousness has first inclined
them to Teach, and then the Success of their Doctrine has tempted them to
believe that the Merits of Humane Piety may be transferred from Person to
Person, and that the Fruits of Repentance may be purchased at a Price: So
having let their Minds grow Gross and Carnal, and then finding themselves
either too much at Loss in their Devotions, to a Pure and Invisible Being, have
introduced sensible Objects of Worship, and humane Mediators, to whom they
might address both with more Boldness and Carelessness: And thus both Avarice
and Beastiality have passed and do pass into Conscience.

Others there are, and have been, which being fond of some Opinions, and having
no other Foundation to build upon, have (by their Dreams and vain Imaginations)
made them Canonical; and being of a temper more Zealous, and Fierce, and having
persuaded themselves that all is Sacred that they do for the Advancement of
their own Opinions; and so have allowed and practiced Persecutions, Murders,
and Outrages; And thought (as Saul, which afterward was named Paul) that in so
doing, they did God good Service. Thus Fondness and Cruelty have Passed into
Conscience. -- Others there are, and have been, which being uneasy in their
Worldly Circumstances, and then reflecting upon that Mysterious Intimation that
Christ should some time Reign alone upon Earth, have (as they were willing)
believed that that Time was near Accomplished, and thereupon have cried down
all Worldly Government as Antichristian, hoping thereby to set up King Jesus,
and themselves together; And thus Discontent, has passed into Conscience. --
But to be brief. Others there have been, and also are, which have been (...)
devoted to an Aversion to the Church established, (as I was) even (...) their
Youth, being warned to avoid it, and not to have any particular Communion with
it; on the Peril of their Souls, being told (as I was) that it was
Antichristian, Popish, Socinian, or Pelagian; being made to believe that it is
Monstrous, without ever being suffered to Examine or Understand it; And being
thus bred under Masters better skilled in Affirming than Proving, have been
also taught, that the most commendable Faith is that which swallows All Things
without any Examination; and that the more Reason one hears against ones Self,
the more Meritorious is and will be ones obstinacy. And thus not only
Curiosity, but Prejudice also, and Cruelty have passed into Conscience.

Now what can or shall I say more, if both Men and Women's Appetites, Passions,
Follies, Prejudices, Fondnesses, Aversions, Wishes and Dreams, both may and
have passed into Conscience, and prescribed and governed there, as by these you
may understand; and some, I doubt not, here may by undeniable Experience know;
Nay, it has been (by many as well as my self) observed that the Matters which
these of the Reformed Church differ about, are very small; and the Animosities
both have been and are generally the higher, and greater: For to our Shame be
it spoken, the smaller the Distance, or Difference, the wider the Breach;
insomuch that most can live more Friendly with an Infidel, that differs in the
object of Worship, than with another Christian that differs only in the Form:
The Reason whereof, (as I conjecture, and judge) must be this; That when the
Opinions of others are at a great distance from our own, then we look upon them
as a simple Persuasion; but when they come near to ours, we look upon such as a
kind of Affront, presuming that where the Distance is so little, it is not so
much the Matter of Controversy, as the Malice of the Party that keeps up the
Difference: So that is a Prejudice which naturally inflames Men and Women to
Revenge, and breeds as we find by woeful Experience, even a Canker in Religion,
which insensibly eats up the Spirit of it, which caused the Princely Prophet to
say, Psalm. 99. 9. The Zeal of thine House has eaten me -- But waving all this,
to proceed to the Second Particular, namely, What that Righteousness is which
made, and will make any Blameless? Now give me leave to suppose, that that Man
or Woman which breaks Communion with a true Church which is by Law established,
though they maintain all other Acts of Charity as much as possible, as to bear no
Malice to any, to Censure none, to Pray for, and wish well to all; yet I can
and must assure you, that indeed is to be Righteous before God; but yet far
short of the Duty in keeping all the Commandments, since that Duty of Brotherly
Love, namely, that Love which one Christian owes to another, is not expressed;
For Brotherly love is not or at least cannot be shown but by Communicating in
Religious Offices, viz. Breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, as the Primitive
Fellowship of Christians is expressed in Holy Scripture; which Offices in all
Ages have been looked upon as the necessary Tests and Symbols of Christian Love
etc.

But alas! alas! Division both is, and has been (as I know by Experience) the
Mother of a great many Evils: For what an Harvest was, and is it (as I formerly
found) to wily Seducers? and what a Rock to unstable Minds; yea, what a Snare
to Itching Ears, and what anopportunity to Men and Women of either wanton or
peevish Fancies to sow the Ta^es of Confusion: And what a Provocation to God to
suffer, that they who cannot agree with one another, should sometimes or other
be suffered to be devoured one of another. -- But Lastly, Some, nay, many
pretend that their differing, or dissenting from a true and established Church,
is because they cannot Edify, as they think, under the Churches Teachers; and
that is the chief if not the only Reason, they do, or cannot communicate with
her; thinking it almost impossible to edify as much under her Teachers, as
they do under those that separate from her. And what the true Reason of
non-edifying is, I shall now inquire into; and that being now by me perceived,
and to you related, I am afraid will prove a very scandalous Reason; for I find
that its nothing but Prejudice that hinders their Edification: Prejudice I say,
which would hinder some from Edifying, even under the Labors of an Angel: I am
well assured that it hindered many from improving under the Labors of a God,
much more then under either some Angels or Men; for without all doubt our
blessed Lord was a most edifying Preacher, and yet its evident that a great
many of those that heard him were never the better, they were indeed such which
spread abroad III Characters, and entertained a mean opinion of him, calling
him the Carpenter's Son, a Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, with
which Prejudice they hindered not only themselves, but also others from edifying.

And to conclude this Second Particuiar of my Text, give me leave once more to
tell all such, which (as I once did) do dissent from the Church, in making such
slender, but gay, and plausible Pretenses, that if they, as I did once, think
or imagine that theirs is the right and true Way. To which I Answer, That that
is but bare Thought or Imagination, which they (as I once foolishly did) so
eagerly contend for; and that which they now have, and do contemn, are all
Possitive, and Divine Commands, and Ordinances; nay, were such certain, that
the Rules and Ways which they propose were in their judgment, better than those
of the established Church, etc. yet they may be as certain that Love and
Charity are better than these: And granting that Humane Laws are now
dispensable at pleasure; yet I hope that none dare, or will think that the Laws
of God (which require an Obedience not only to some Commandments and
Ordinances, but to all to be blameless) are and may be dispensed with by us.
True, all Opinions plead Scripture for what they say and do, and many pretend
to Reason, and the most to Antiquity: Ages I must confess alters Judgments, and
Affections changes the Thoughts and Imaginations, often shift the Scene, and
what some calls Reason, has proved oftentimes a chain of Phantasms; so that
often many are guided by Prejudices, and overruled by Authority; or formed as
I have shown by Education, and so suck in their Opinions carelessly, or by
accident, and are deeply settled before they have examined; yea, when they do
examine, its but by halves; For they seeing and know but few things, judge all
the rest by those they know and see; so that such do not either seek the Truth
at all, or are unable to manage a due and impartial search of it: Or when they
stumble upon it, they do not know; or when it is in their sight, they boggle,
and are afraid, and so runs away from it, or else begins to daub it with vile
Aspersions, whilst they catch only at Shadows, and grow fond of the Images of
their own Fancies, crying up those for Truth and Faith: Thus disturbing
Societies, and the Peace of Mankind, to gain Credit to their own fond Dreams
and Fancies, being confident of their Opinions, and even hating those which are
not of their Persuasion. Thus forsaking a certain Duty for some doubtful and
foolish Tenets. If these were but considered by all, Fondness toward Opinion
would be lessened, and Charity promoted, which is so necessary among all
Christians, which that it may come to pass, God grant for Christ's sake: AMEN.

FINIS.

