AN ENGLISH ANSWER TO THE Scotch Speech, Showing the Intollerableness of
TOLLERATION In Matters of RELIGION. AND Converting each Argument in that Speech
to its most Reasonable, Genuine and Proper Use; and each Paragraph into an
Argument against its Author.

By W. K. A Lover of Loyalty, Truth and Tranquillity; and one who Accounts it a
Dignity, as well as Duty, to be an Obedient Son of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for Edward Man, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the Swan near York-House in the Strand. 1668.

AN ENGLISH ANSWER TO THE SCOTCH SPEECH.
SUrely, Sir, I should much offend you, should I not conclude you of the same
Mind with the Author of this your Reprinted Oration: For that were to deal
too plainly with you, and to declare you Guilty of what those of your Gang are
too much attainted, viz. The Watermanspractice, of Rowing one way, and looking
another. But there was sure some extraordinary impulse active in your Orator;
(For all things are Miraculous that happen to your Party) and we now are bound
to believe him a Prophet, since your very thoughts and words were by way of
Anticipation, or Praediction delivered to King James the Fifth of Scotland a
hundred years since. I shall therefore let the Author sleep with his Fathers,
and make no reflections upon the departed; for, in that juncture of Affairs,
and considering the temper of that Nation, the Advice might then be Prudent and
Politic. But because, if Pythagoras's Metemsycosis be true, you are possessed
with his Scottish Genius; give me leave to animadvert a little upon it as your
Bratt, and none of his. I cannot conclude you any great Politician, or
deserving the title of a Mr. of Reason, and consequently unfit to document a
Prince, because you forget to distinguish, between Nation and Nation; Party and
Party; nay, the very same Party, as they may lie under different circumstances,
viz. between Presbyterified-Separatists painting their Tenets with Plausible
Pretenses, and the Varnish of Sanctity; washing their Opinions in Milk and
Butter: and the same Schismatics, as displaying their Sentiments with greatest
confidence, sounding them forth with Trumpet and Drum; and involving a Kingdom
(the Genuine consequent of their Tolleration) in War, and Blood. To deal
ingeniously with you, I must beg your pardon; if I take you for one of a
Linsewoolsy-temper; a Party per pale Puritan, and Papist. For I pretend not to
Divine the Authors meaning (though it may be the Author and Printer are both
the same;) For this Style was not in those days, or in that Nation current and
intelligable, with reference to the Affairs then on Foot: but yours, in
Publishing it at this present juncto; And to me it is plain, that when you
talk of two Religions, you then plead for the Papist; and when of Separatists,
you are the Non-conformists-Champion. And, it is not amiss that you make the
discovery, for Experience as well as Lysimachus Nicanor gives us to understand,
that there is no (...) between them: And we may justly fear that Popery will
not be long banished, if a Tolleration be granted. That I presume is the thing
you all aim at, let your Pamphlets be never so little to the purpose, and your
Practice a clear Confutation of the Proposition: But the evil of this has
been sufficiently evinced by a more Learned Pen; and my design now is to Answer
a Fool according to his Folly, least he be wise in his own conceit: Therefore
not daring to direct my Lines to the Supreme, I shall Level them at Your Self,
and only desire you to peruse the several Periods of your Speech a little
converted into other Sense, and leave the Readers to Judge which stands to most
reason.

Amongst the many Curses that God in these last days has inflicted upon this
our Native Land, this is not the least; that he has been pleased permissively
to open the Bottomless Pit, and has fulfilled St. John's Revelation, Chap. the
9th. in suffering many Locusts to cover this our Earth; who, having the Faces
of Men, and the Pretensions of Saints, yet have Stings in their Tails, and
have hurt this our Land many times five Months, viz. That brood of Sectaries,
who have once darkened the Sun of Regal Majesty, and now endeavor again the
second time by their Infectious breath to Smoke it into an Eclipse. And amongst
the many Blessings the Subjects of this Kingdom have enjoyed under the Gracious
Government of our Dear and Dread Sovereign, this is not the least conducing to
the Weal of this Nation. That the Honorable House of Commons, have had a
Gracious Liberty, and the Religious boldness to open their Minds, and Declare
their Opinions, viz. That Schismatical Persons are not fit objects of Favor;
and that it does not consist with the Grandeur of Royal Majesty to bend to
them, who will not bend to it; and who do not only confidently bend, but
impudently break all its Sanctions.

And if ever there was a time thus strictly to determine, it is this: and the
insolency of the Factious does importunately require it. For, in matters of
Advice and Consultation, we cannot always follow what is most Reasonable, nor
what Christian Condescension in some respects may require; but what Necessity
drives us unto, and what is most convenient for the present time, and what may
be fairly accomplished and effected. For though we grant that which we need
not, viz. That in a Spirit of meekness the Errors of the Weak are to be
tolerated in the Re-printers sense; Yet it being most apparent, that they, who
pretend to be so, are wilful, not weak: And since, not only Reason and
Scripture (...)
, but dear-bought Experience teaches us, that that Tolleration no whit availes
to the prevention of Dissentions; but that sufferance enhances the Insolence of
the Party: So that after a grant of 19 Petitions they will be so impudent as to
Rebel, Should they be denied the 20th? And since it is apparent, that to
enfringe an Established Law for the pleasure of a Few, would be a Sovereign way
to make Laws cheap, Authority contemptible, and Sectaries proud, who swell too
much already. It cannot be denied, but that that Moderation and meekness, that
forbearance and condescension, which might be exercised toward some particular
Persons, cannot without apparent danger be granted generally to the Party; and
that the very Safety of the STATE denies such a Comprehension.

The Estate of the Kingdom is much troubled with diverse Opinions concerning
Religion: and it is to be wished that the only true Religion were in the hearts
of every Subject: But since diversity of Opinions of Religion, and Heresies,
are the very punishment of God Almighty upon Men for their horrible Vices,
Roaring Sins, and hypocritical Delusions: And when Men forsake his fear, and
true obedience, God abandoneth them to their own Opinions and Fantasies in
Religion, and gives them over to believe lies; Out of which arise
Partialities, Factions, Divisions, Strife, Intestine Discords, which burst
forth into Civil War, and in short time bring Kings and Kingdoms to their
last Periods, Therefore, that matters may not arise to such a height of
insolency, and that the Seditious Spirit of 40 and 48, which did then imbrue
the Land in Blood, may not again be encouraged by Connivance and Indulgence,
without dissembling my thoughts, I cannot but averr; That the preservation of
the Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, Inviolable and Entire, and a due care to
quicken and Execute them; will be the best way to preserve the Peace, and
promote the Unity of this Land and Nation.

I hold it the desire of none but Persons Jesuitted, to Wish for the
Free-Exercise of two Religions: for, under the pretense and shadow of them, the
common Peace of the Subject will be torn in pieces. And certainly your
Magisteriall Doctor his Interrogation is altogether destitute of wisdom and
truth: For (though like a simple sophister you seem to deny it) Wisdom may
devise a Penalty for Separatists (whose Principles do not lead them directly to
Rebellion) that is neither Death nor Banishment (for these two are not
immediate opposites, and therefore the Proposition is pitiful and fallacious)
there being a Medium between them, viz, a Pecuniary Mulct, or lighter Corporal
Punishments. But it is the Trick of these Scriblers, like their Father the
Devil, Fortiter Calumniari, and to Exasperate the People, by telling them what
Cruelties they must expect, and what Torments are Decreed; hoping thereby to
excite them to Rebellion, under the Specious Pretense of Liberty, and
Self-preservation. But though I must freely say, as to the Promoters of a
Religion differing in Fundamentalls from the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
introducing another Supreme Head of the Church, that those two Punishments are
most fit for them, and deserved by them; yet as to those who only differ in
Circumstance and Ceremonies from the Church of England; there is another way
not as yet thought on by our addle-headed Reprinter; viz. to let them be
tolerated as to living, conversing, and enjoying liberty amongst us; but let
them be fined for the neglect of Divine Service, and their verbose Teachers
discountenanced and silenced; and this I take to be a way different far from
that which is here proposed. But these men love to scare the people into
sedition, and to make them believe that death is threatened, and many evils
invented which were never thought of by any but themselves. And whereas this
opinion of the conveniences of inflicting penalties for Nonconformity to
ceremonies, may seem to interfere with that rule of Quod tibi sieri non vis,
etc. It will easily be rejoyned, though that Axiom always is of force in
commutative justice, yet I presume it is not so in that we call distributive,
which comprehends the affairs of Superiors with Inferiors: because inferiors
are not competent judges in the case, till the tables be turned and themselves
supposed the power offended, and then they have determined the case to our
hands; even then when their authority was altogether unlawful, and no other
then a notorious usurpation and divellish Tyranny.

So soon as a Prince begins upon the insolency and impudence of some obstinate
dissenters to comply with the Traitors, and condescend to their Petitions: He
gives them an encouragement the more to plague and pester him with Petitions,
Declarations, Remonstrances, etc. And shall find (which I pray God avert from
this Nation) that they will never leave inching and asking, till they have
justled, and pusht him out of his Throne. And here again we have the
Presbyterian knack of lying: for as soon as the Prince denies to them who have
deserved death, an interest in his peculiar favor and kindness; they presently
exclaim that he spoils, banishes, kills, and burns his people for matters
abstract from sense and altogether Spiritual; when as in truth and reality he
only frowns on them, and checks them for disobedient contumacy to his Laws and
Edicts, and their clancular endeavor to set Church and State into uproar and
combustion, rather than submit to what they acknowledge indifferent.

It is a very great and malicious error in you (Master reprinter) to affirm
the discountenancing of Regecides, or at least the ringleaders to that
barbarous inhumanity, a persecuting of them for an opinion of Piety, and for
matters of Faith: And unless you take faith in a very loose sense you cannot
here be excused from being the Papists advocate, (who are latitudinarians in
Faith in a contrary sense to them that are so in conformity: for whilst those
will do something, these will believe all things) whose cause (I dare say) was
never promoted by suffering themselves, but causing all dissenters from it to
suffer: The compliance of their doctrine with men's carnal interests being a
cogent argument to the Libertine to embrace it; and therefore your argument
here being very insignificant deserves no further answer. But if by matters of
faith, you mean ceremonies of Religion, and the persuasions of men about things
indifferent, you then broach a Lie for the interest of the Presbyter, for you
never yet knew any condemned to death for any such dissent, nor any number
gained to the factious party by the obstinate sufferings of a vainglorious
Pyrgopollinices. But it is the frequent practice of these seditious scriblers
to amuse men with brags of their Proselytes, and boasts of their number; hoping
thereby to affright their Superiors into a compliance with their Petitions.
Now how it can consist with the prudence of a Parliament to be Hectored and
Hufft into a yielding to the factious, whose very natures and notions strike at
Supremacy, I do not understand.

It would surely be no great error of State to endeavor the transplanting of
turbulent and implacable Spirits. For though I question not, but that the men
you plead for, are inveterate enemies to their native Country, yet there is
certainly some probable hopes that these artists of sedition, might do us a
courtesy in making uproares abroad as they have done at home. Neither is this
(Good Sir) an extravagant fancy: for your Beloved Sir H. Vane that Baronet of
Babel; had in some few months almost set the whole Plantation of Concistorian
New England into as bad a combustion as you did this of Old. But however,
suppose we should fail of our hopes in this: yet sure it is far better (if
their enmity be implacable) to have our enemies abroad then to have them at
home, a Swelling in the Arm, or an exterior Boil, is nothing so dangerous, as
an impostume or an ulcer near the Heart, or in the Kidneys.

I cannot but think (Sir) you have taken up Arms, and profess open hostility to
sound reason: In that you tell us here in a settled Kingdom, where the
interests of the Church are intricately interwoven with those of the State,
that Religion is not to be preached by arms, that is in truth (if you would a
little lay aside your Tragical Language) that Schismatics are not by penalties
to be restrained, and bring in the first Primitive days to avouch it. As if
there were no difference between a Church establishing, and one established:
and that because they were deprived of the Magistrates countenance, and
consequently could not proceed in that Method; that therefore it is unlawful
for Christian Kings to punish with the sword temporal, those who violate their
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, surely this is no judicious arguing. And again
(as if there were no difference to be made between Religion it self, and the
adjuncts thereof) to argue that because the doctrine of the Gospel was not
imposed by force on the infidels; that therefore obedience to an acknowledged
legal Authority, ought not to be enforced upon Christian Professors, though
the things to be submitted to are matters of order and decency, is so poor a
shift that it deserves not a line more to confute it: We shall readily grant
you, that you never knew any arms taken up by True Protestants (For I must tell
you I account not the Separatists so) for the matter of Religion, for when the
Episcopal party went of late into the Field, it was to defend their Sovereign,
and also themselves: But these detesters of Wars (because their horns are
short) they were the men that made the abuse of Religion, and fear of
Superstition; their pretense to invade the King and his Subjects. And we now (I
hope) shall not need to enterprise that difficulty you speak of, and put our
selves in arms against Sectaries, as such. But if these men (as it is natural
to them) prove as great traitors in deeds as they are already in words, I hope
the enterprise will not be thought unlawful; for sure he is neither a good
Englishman, nor a good Christian, who will not endeavor their suppression.
Little need is there of arms to force men to be Hypocrites, when hypocrisy is
so ready to force men into arms; And I cannot in charity judge him any other
then a hypocrite, who under pretense of Religion arms his tongue with
reproaches: and whose fingers itch at a sword, and all this against his
undoubted Sovereign. I must agree with you herein, that fire and iron cannot
work upon men's souls: but yet let me tell you, they have been found more
effectual then love and pity; for these men you are concerned for, will break
sooner then bend, and are not so ingenious as to be moved with mercy. And
therefore (good Sir) whilst we love, and in our excellent Litany desire their
conversion, and pray for their persons, give us leave to withstand and oppose
their obstinate errors.

The Will must be acknowledged to be free from necessitation, and coaction, but
yet not so free but that it may be attracted by motives, and perswasives; by
rational arguments, and judicious reasonings into a compliance with what before
it could not submit to; and it is every man's duty to endeavor to have his
understanding so rightly informed, that his will which follows the dictates and
representations of that higher faculty may be complyant and sequacious to its
dictates. But now if in stead of this, men suffer their wills to usurp the
thrones of their understanding, and are resolved to believe only what they list
(and the trite Proverb tells us it is an easy matter thus to believe) and love
to make to themselves a creed and gospel out of their own notions, and to frame
it according to their own fancies, interests and passions, who can pity these
men, if we endeavor to reclaim the stubbornness of their wills by enacting
penalties for their wilfulness. I wish heartily it were not too true, that
there are some amongst us who are so addicted to their own fancies, that they
resolve to give a Supremacy to their Wills, and to have and obey no other
Caesar; and that tell us this is the God that is to be obeyed rather then man.
Sure then, though the power of the Prince be especially over the bodies of men;
yet because the body has some influence upon the Soul, and the Soul also acts
in many things by the body: and especially because it ordinarily appears, that
money is the life of these men's lives, and there is nothing comes in
competition with it, but the vogue of the people, and a great reputation; It
may not be unreasonable to punish them in their muck and money, for the
maliciousness of their minds. True it is, these men are members of the body
Politic: but such as a Sore-leg is to the body natural, which if it festers,
rankles, gangrens, Ense recidendum ne pars sincera trahatur: I mean not this in
the strict and literal sense: for I love not Draco^s laws that are writ in
blood; but my meaning is, an old Sore is not to be excused from sharp
corrosives; because the part aggrieved is a member of the body, but the
smarting costick may well be used in hope of a Cure.

A nobler way and a gentler connivance has been used with these men, then they
ever deserved; Penal laws take no cognizance of their clancular Preachments,
provided there be not above five besides the family: And our Gracious Sovereign
has for this twelve Months last past, very much born with their tumultuous
Conventicles; But what is the effect of all this Lenity, but an ungrateful
impudency and open railery against King and Parliament; Though the Oxford Act
was never yet executed, yet are these Unthankful persons so little senseable of
the Kings Indulgence to them; that they fear not to assert that they do not
apprehend it any product of Lenity, but rather the effect of a miraculous
Providence, which has stopped and barred the mouth of the Lion. Thus they fear
not to speak evil of dignities; and spread evil reports of the Lord's Anointed.
But can Tolleration be thought the way to Union, as you seem to intimate? or is
poison to be antidoted by keeping it in the Stomach? Surely, Sir, both
Propositions are equally probable. Since therefore Lenity will not avail to
cure them, Severity must be endured by them, and administered to them, for who
can help what will away?

It is false, irrational, and absurd to affirm, that diversity of Religions is
not destructive to Society, and a bar to the civil Conversation of men. Sure,
Sir, you are a great stranger in Israel, if you know not what Tigers, a mere
difference in opinion, has rendered some Oliverians to the Loyal party: And as
great a stranger are you to the Tempers of men, and the Wiles of Satan, if you
have not observed, that such a diversity is the Author of feuds, and bitter
animosities; and that Two Religions like Caesar and Pompey will be always at
Daggers drawing for the Supremacy; the one not enduring any Superior, the
other hating the thoughts of an equal. For every man being so far his own
Parasite, as to flatter himself into a belief that the truth is on his side;
will take all occasions to assert, and promote it; and to malign them who seem
to oppose it. And then nothing will be so common as to cast reproaches upon the
highest Authority that shall dissent from them, and to aver such Tolleration
a silent concession of the goodness of their cause; for such impudent
conclusions are not seldom extorted from gracious premises.

And why, I pray, may not our almost infinite, and most pragmatical sects be as
kind and good natured as the Moncks are, who content themselves with, and
submit themselves to the Orders and Rules of their Holy Father the Pope,
acknowledging and embracing him as Supreme, though imposing Novelties as
Articles of Faith, and have therefore good reason to yield only unto him a
passive, but no active obedience: I am sure our dissenters of the Classical
Order, have much more reason to acquiess in the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of
our Church, then they of theirs: because our Holy Mother the Church has
declared to her children in her Rubric of Ceremonies, that they are
indifferent in themselves, and are only imposed for the sake of order and
decency; and makes nothing an Article of faith which God has not. So that here
lies the difference between these two parties, they, I mean the various orders
in the Romish Church, are lulled into a repose by the drowsy rockings of a
blind obedience, and our Separatists here would hurry us into confusion, by
their impudent stickling for a perverse disobedience; they sin by easy
submission, but these sin more by the Witchcraft of Rebellion. But since you
know, whose property it is to be questionist, and I apprehend this Paragraph a
weak and inconsiderable one, I shall only say that therefore these Separatists
and Papists cannot be suffered; because we have found by an experience, that
has been the price of Royal blood, that Lenity and Kindness will not reduce
these men to the right Government: that they cannot forbear to practice against
the politic Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom; and therefore it is not fit
they be tolerated in the State.

The Murders, Slaughters, Battles, Massacres, which not long since arose, and
were promoted amongst us, were the unhappy consequents of putting power into
the hands of these cruel Separatists, and a too great condescension unto them.
Opportunity not only makes a thief, but also discovers the dispositions of
men; And if we are not wilfully blind (which is the worst obscurity) we cannot
but see they have given us a sufficient Comment upon their Natures, how
inclined they are to flesh themselves with blood and slaughter, to ravage and
roar like Famished Lions, though they thereby sacrifice their Souls to the
infernal powers. Sure then this should be a cogent argument to clip their
Claws, because an unjust and imprudent Tolleration would open a gate to all
this impiety. For who sees not, that they are so far from repentance, that they
are traversing over again their old steps, and want nothing but a Rump
Parliament to set them a gog. Good reason then has this our Prudent Parliament
to look to themselves, their Laws, and the Kingdom; and provide manacles for
these Orlando Furiosoes.

In seeking Liberty of Religion these men seek to believe any thing that may
whimsically come, or, by a cunning Jesuit, be subtly insinuated into their
brains. And under the pretense of Religion, and the exercising of it, according
to the first Christians institution, they will neither serve God, nor obey the
Laws under which they are born.

That Maxim so often repeated amongst the Churchmen of Rome, has not (in
their sense) been ever executed upon the Separatists of England; At least not
upon them as Separatists, and Dissenters from us in Religion, but as they have
been guilty of sedition and treason, which is the Lacquey attendant upon the
zealous Separatist. And this is certain that where Heretics are countenanced,
and the seditious encouraged, there neither the power of the Prince shall be
preserved, nor yet the benefit of the Common people long maintained. The next
way to bring in infidelity, is to suffer men to believe what they list, for by
that means they will at last believe nothing at all.

Christian Kings are obliged to advance the glory of God, and the Salvation of
their Subjects, by taking care that the Word and Sacraments be orthodoxly
preached, and duly administrated to them. And though it is plain, that you here
squint at the revenue of the Church; as your great eyesore, yet give me leave
to tell you that double honor, i. e. extraordinary maintenance as well as
countenance is to be given to them, who by his Majesty are called to watch over
the Souls of his Subjects. It is questionless the Magistrates duty to uphold
and encourage most singularly the Bishops, that take care that the Word be
preached without sophistication and the higgling Knavery of whining Oratory and
extemporary nonsense: That see that the people be instructed in their duty
both to God and the King, which though never so often joined together in
Scripture, shall be sure to be separated either directly, or implicitly by
these Hectors for Schism. Now this you call governing the Kingdom by the
interests of Priests, a shrewd sign that your desire is to have a nation of
Atheists. I heartily wish that rule you seem to harp on: viz. Quicquid propter
Deum fit, aequaliter fit, were duly observed by this pharisaical generation;
for then I am sure whilst they religiously plead for the observation of the
Sabbath, they would not wickedly forget the fifth Commandment.

Now then since this Vice cannot be Tolerated but by the ruin of the State;
and since there is a greater obligation, and necessity of Law to punish
Heretics, and obstinately seditious Separatists, than Fornicators, and other
such scandalous Livers; because they are more immediately destructive of civil
Society, and the peace of a Nation than these are (though it is true, For these
things the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.) It cannot be
thought that they are persons to be indulged, being so neet of Kind to the
Vipor. For how has the beams of favor hardened their dirty dispositions,
emboldening them to spit their poison even at the King himself, and to talk
treason with a familiar confidence; which that it may not be brought into act,
it concerns the Magistrate not to be hufft out of their Severity.

These Men (I know) would willingly be thought to be of the same nature and
condition of which we are: They pretend to Worship the same God as we do, but
forget he has said, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of the People. And
whereas Michael the Archangel brought not a Railing Accusation against the
Disputing Devil, these men study nothing but Slanders and Sarcasms against the
Fathers of the Church. And in truth, notwithstanding all the Gayety of their
Pretenses, the Differences between them and us, will be found so vast, that
nothing but their Conformity, or their Suppression can secure our Tranquillity.
I know none that desires to have them Prosecuted with Fire and Sword, that
Smells Rank of the Schismatical Humor, who have from their Success endeavored
to persuade us, That God was in their bitter Divisions and Alenation of
Affections; in their Raging Flames of Mutiny and Sedition; in the Tempests, and
Turbulent Whirlwind of a Spirit of Contradiction; and not in the Gentle
Breathings after Peace and Concord: It being no less then Sequestration to
Teach the People Allegiance. This is the Sport their Fingers now Itch at; But
we would fain persuade them to Love and Amity, by Chalking out unto them the
good Old-Way: we would give them Light, but they shut their eyes; we endeavor
to cut off the Scales, and they cry out we Kill them. In Musical Instruments
if a String jarr, and be out of Tune, and will not by any Arts and gentle means
be veered about to a Concord, but snaps and flies in the very face of the
Musician, it is broke off, thrown aside, and a new one put in its room. Let not
us therefore be so cruel to our selves, as to dote on those Serpents, who have
already stung us almost to death, and of whose dolorous wounds we are not as
yet recovered.

Let these Men therefore be guided by reason, and rest satisfied in the Decrees
of the Council of the Nation: For, as they have been sufficiently proved
Erroneous, so they have too apparently proved themselves Seditious and
Treacherous. That the Opinions they Maintain are contrary to the Principles and
Practice of the Ancient Church, is clear as the day: only to instance in that
which the time of the Year minds me of. They deny it a duty to Celebrate the
Festival of Easter, which never but one Light-headed-Aerius asserted before
them: otherwise this their Tenet would have been Condemned by a Lawful Council;
but what need that, since Saint Aust. tells us, that the Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension of Christ, and the Coming of the Holy Ghost, Toto terrarum orb
universaria solennitate celebrantur. And you shall find that the four first
Councils did not dispute the Matter, but the Manner, viz. The true Time of its
Observation: Let their Worship of God be compared with that of the First Age,
you shall find a difference too great to be Indulged.

You do well (Sir) to Compare your Devotoes to the Refractory Jews, and had I
a mind to exceed a sheet of Paper, I could show you a large Analogy between
them: But I shall only tell you, that if Rome had been so Havockt and Injured
by the Circumcision there; as we have, by them of the Concision here, they
would have again verifyed that of the Psalmist, and have burnt up all the
Synagogues of God in their Land. But these Men are worse Incendiaries then the
cruel Jews: for though they have had Instructions from a free and Lawful
Counsil; yet they abandon all thoughts of Reunion and Amity, and think it a
disparagment to their Names, to forsake their Errors.

That which some of them believe, viz. The Doctrine of Enthusiasts,
Anabaptists, etc. is false and evil, and that in many Grand-Articles of our
Christian Faith: The Faith of some others, though right as to the main, in
respect of Doctrine; yet is so inveterately bent against the Churches
Discipline, that their ignorant Zeal inevitably excites them to Confront both
Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority; and to reduce Church Matters to their
Penitential-stool, and Imperious Consistory, And if it be no offense to judge
of the Tree by its fruits, we may say, without any violence to Christian
Charity, that they are in this respect defective in good, and have espoused and
obtained an habit of evil: They are not therefore Condemned before they are
Judged, nor yet Judged before they are heard; for the sound of Trumpets with
which they Alarumed People to Battle, and their Cursings of the People after
the similitude of Meroz, because they would not Fight against the Lords
Anointed, are sufficient Proclamations of their Opinions to the World. And we
have all the reason in the World to Conclude, That it is their Passion and
Perverseness; their Pride and Peevishness; and not their Religion that troubles
the State.

Postscript.
THink not (Gentle Reader) that I live to rake in Ranckled-Soares, it is not my
Inclination, but their presumption that has produced these Lines, which I
hope, considering that they follow the prescriptions of another Man's Fancy, may
be excused from the imputation of severe Railery: Since I have but laid the
Bratt at the Right Door, and given them their own in their own Language. And I
cannot but hope these few Lines may also serve to enervate the Mis-applied
Arguments contained in a Letter To a Member of the House of Commons for the
Promotion of Liberty of Conscience. Because neither the Israelites, nor the
Primitive-Christians ever Experimented (as we have done) those Tolerated by
them, so destructive to their Policy, as these men have been to ours: If they
had, there would have been provisions made for their Suppression and
Extirpation. And though the Epistler passes it over as a thing not worth
noting; yet to sober men, it will be of moment to think, that the Total
destruction of the Jewish Nation was the immediate consequent of their numerous
Sects.

FINIS.

