Prince Johan, Christian Duke of Lignitz and Brieg in Silesia, had a Discourse
unto the Ministers of the Gospel of that Principality, in a Public Assembly,
in the Year 1627. Wherein he showed them,
THat the Lord had, by several National-plagues, manifested his Wrath against
them, and that by reason of their Iniquities, being so heinous and universal,
it had now proceeded so far, that in all appearance there scarce would be found
among them Ten Persons truly Godly and Religious. That the People commonly did
busy themselves with a kind of Worship, consisting only in hearing Sermons,
receiving Sacraments, making a General Confession of Sins, professing a
Willingness and Hope to be saved through the Merits of CHRIST, and promising of
Repentance or Amendment of Life: But that they, at the Utmost, did only keep
themselves from External Gross Transgressions, and rehearsed only Forms of
Prayer, Morning and Evening, also before and after Meat; and that they
imagined, after that manner, to attain to Salvation, regarding nothing further,
but wholly minding their Worldly Affairs. That the People did not well
understand the Ten Commands, nor the LORD's Prayer, nor Man's Misery; nor what
Difference there is betwixt Sin Indwelling only, and Sin having Dominion,
betwixt a Living and a Dead Faith, betwixt the Letter and the Spirit; nor what
the Love of GOD is, the Yoke of CHRIST, Regeneration, Self-denial, the Warfare
betwixt the Flesh and Spirit; and what Brokeness of Heart is; and how we should
work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling. That all this did in a great
measure proceed from the Ministers, who did not so acquit themselves in their
Charges as that any were Converted; That they, viz. the Ministers did place All
in hearing Sermons and receiving Sacraments; That they did not seriously
consider how the People must be prepared for the LORD's Supper; That they
reckoned to have well acquit themselves when they have only Preached twice a
Week, having in the mean time neglected the Principal Works, which is to speak
to the People in Particular, and at their several Dwelling-Houses, and to
search and try them, teach, admonish and reprove them; and That they did not
set before themselves the right Scope in their undertaking the Ministerial
Charge, and in their executing of it; That not one of Ten made the Building up
of CHRIST's Kingdom his Principal End; That in their Meetings they had no right
Scope and Aim, such as the Discoursing of what occurs in Visiting of
Congregations; How Hearers of the Gospel do acquit themselves in Life and
Conversation, and how Matters go as to Scandals and Offenses That they labored
not to know how Young and Old understood, applied to themselves, and reduced
into Practice, the Doctrine of the Catechism; That they did not themselves lead
an Examplary Life, nor had their Lives suited to their Doctrine; Yea, That they
continued careless and secure, and would not so much as once consider and
learn, what were incumbent for them to do for bringing Matters to a better
Pass, while yet Experience did teach, that it cannot be effectuated by such
general and superficial Work. And that therefore; He did now propose to the
Ministers, this Question to be more maturely Considered and Pondered, How
Means, apposite and sure, and in the present Juncture of time and State of the
Church, practicable, might yet be fallen upon whereby the prevailing Carnal
Security may be effectually driven away, Lip-service laid aside, and Religion
in Reality and Truth, truly acceptable unto GOD, planted among us, and
transmitted to Posterity?

The same Prince thereafter did emit a Public Edict amongst his Subjects;
Requiring every one, both Ministers and People, and also the Magistrates to
contribute their Endeavors for Reformation.

This above-written Account was Translated first out of the High Dutch into the
Netherland Tongue, and Printed at Groningen 1676, and is now, out of the
Low Dutch, turned into English.


