Apocalyptical MYSTERIES, Touching the Two WITNESSES, the Seven VIALS, and the
Two KINGDOMS, to wit, of CHRIST, and of ANTICHRIST, EXPOUNDED.

Wherein is contained some things necessary for the Saints in this present
GENERATION to know. And therein is also showed, what the ISRAEL of God ought to
do in this DAY.

By H. K. a Servant of Jesus Christ.

Isa. 26.20, 21. Come my people, enter thou into thy Chamber, and shut thy
doors about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation be overpast. For behold, the Lord comes out of his place to punish
the Inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: The earth also shall disclose
her blood, and shall no more cover her stain.

London. Printed in Year, 1667.

To all the Saints, that in every place call upon the Name of the LORD Jesus
Christ.
My Brethren,
THey that would serve God in their Generation, according to his Will, ought to
inquire diligently into the particular Truths of the Age they live in, which
are Recorded in his Holy WORD. The days wherein we live, being not only the
latter Times of the first Apostasy, prophesied of by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.1,
2, 3. but the last days of those perilous Times mentioned by him, 2 Timothy 3.1,
5. I conceive, that the last part of God's revealed Will, to wit, the Book of
the Revelation, has in it those Truths, which more peculiarly belonged unto
this Age wherein we live; which consideration has made me willing (as my
occasions and daily Employment would permit) to be searching them out. And
though I cannot say that I have in all things found the Truth, which
principally, and above others, may be called the Truth of this Age, and of our
Generation; Yet being encouraged by that Blessing, promised Rev. 1.3. I have
crowded my self into the number of those that run to and fro to find it: And
have by searching the Prophesies of this Book of the Revelation, found three
Mysteries, wherein are some things that seem to relate unto this Age and
Generation wherein we live, viz. That of the two Witnesses, of the seven Vials,
and of the two Kingdoms, to wit, of Christ, and of Antichrist. Which I have
made the Subject of this little Treatise, in the reading whereof, I doubt not
but you will find some Truths that are necessary for the Saints in this Age and
present Generation to know, and also some duties which the ISRAEL of God ought
to do in this DAY and Age wherein we live.

Dear Brethren, How ever others may censure me for presumption, in offering my
Opinion in those things, that are in their judgment too high and deep Mysteries
for me to meddle with; Yet you that are Saints, know how to bear those
infirmities and weaknesses of your unworthy Brother, which happily you may
discern in reading this Treatise; And notwithstanding them all, may receive any
glimmerings of light that is held forth to you in the Exposition of these
Prophesies; that so you and I, who have our Fathers Name written in our
Foreheads, may go hand in hand (like loving Brethren) about our Fathers WORK,
following our LORD the Lamb wheresoever he goes. The Divisions, Contentions,
and Separations that to this Day remains among the Professors of this Age,
causes me to think, That God has not done all his WORK upon Mount Sion; There
are some sufferings yet behind, which will purge away that dross, by the Spirit
of Judgment, and by the Spirit of Burning: And this is one Reason among others,
which makes me think, the two Witnesses are not yet slain; And though many of
Gods Servants have suffered for the Testimony which they held, yet there
remains a Remnant of their fellow Servants and Brethren which shall be killed
as they were, and this must be fulfilled: For, as there was such a Dispensation
under the seven Seals, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. before God would avenge their Blood;
so there shall be such a Dispensation under the seven Trumpets, before the
seven Vials of Gods last Plagues be poured out, Rev. 11.7, 18. And when I
consider the Congregations of Saints, and Churches of several persuasions, in
this Age, how unlike they are to the Churches of God recorded in the Scripture,
with respect unto Ministry, Gifts, and Discipline or Government, besides what
is amiss in the Worship of God; It makes me think, That the Temple of the
Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven is not opened, out of which Temple John
saw the seven Angels come, who had the seven golden Vials of the seven last
Plagues of God, Rev. 15.1, 5, 6. And if so, then the seven Vials are not yet
any of them poured out upon Mystical Babylon; for those seven golden Vials were
given them after they were come out of the Temple, Rev. 15.5, 6, 7. and they
had not a command to pour out any of the seven Vials till after that, Rev.
16.1, 2, 3.

Lastly, The late Apostasy of some, who have fallen in with the corrupt
self-seeking interests of this sinful and superstitious Generation; and the
Zeal of others, who have separated themselves from their Brethren, judging them
to be defiled with the sins of the times, and therefore dare not have and hold
Communion with them, though they hope they are Saints, and the dear Chilaren of
God, has given me occasion to publish my Testimony at this time for the
Kingdom of Christ, and against the Kingdom of Antichrist, wherein I have said
some things that may, by the blessing of God, tend unto the recovery of some
backsliders, and to the rectisying of the Judgments of my zealous Brethren, and
to the reducing of those Saints unto repentance, who have been defiled with any
sins of this Age or Generation, not of wilfulness, but through weakness, and
that either for want of light, or through the strength of some temptation; who
being overtaken with a fault, should be restored in the spirit of meekness,
Gal. 6.1, 2.

Which blessings of God shall please to effect, by these my poor endeavors,
and labor of love, as I know he will not forget it, so I pray for you, and beg
your prayers for me, that neither I nor you may forget to give him the glory.

This done, I remain your Brother in the best Bonds, H. K.

Apocalyptical MYSTERIES, The First Part, Touching the two WITNESSES.
Rev. 11.3, 14. And I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall
prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.
The second Woe is past, and behold, the third Woe comes quickly.


IT is not my intent to expound every verse, and interpret each particular
thing therein contained, but to offer my Opinion briefly touching some things
which I conceive are of more general concernment, and may be of more special
use unto the Saints at this DAY.

The Particulars which I have thought most necessary to treat of touching this
Subject, are principally these.

1. Who are the two Witnesses, and what is their Testimony?

2. What is their Power, and the time of their Prophesying?

3. Who the Beast is, and how he kills them?

4. What is the street of the great City, in which their dead bodies lie?

5. What Time is to be understood by the three days and an half?

6. How they shall be raised again, and what are the Effects thereof?

As touching the first, viz. Who are the two VVitnesses, and what is their
Testimony?

The two VVitnesses, verse. 3. are described Metaphorically by two Olive Trees,
and two Candlesticks, verse. 4.

These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks standing before the
God of the Earth.

By which Description it appears, that the two Witnesses are not any two
individual Persons, as Moses and Elias, nor is thereby meant any two particular
Testimonies, as the Old and New Testament, or two distinct Callings, as
Magistracy and Ministry; for none of these Interpretations will agree with this
Description of the two Witnesses, as will plainly appear in the Exposition of
this fourth verse.

By the two Olive Trees are mystically signified the Lords Ministers and
Prophets, who are here called Sons of Oil, which is an Hebraism, and a
Metaphorical Expression borrowed from Zech. 4.11, 14. These are the two
Anointed Ones that stand by the LORD of the whole Earth. Such were the Priests
and Prophets of the LORD, who were Anointed, Exodus 28.41. and 1 Kings 19.16.
Yea, and all the Saints who are a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. have an Unction
from the Holy One, 1 John 2.20, 27. but especially the Lord's Ministers and
Prophets, who being anointed with the Spirit above their fellow-Brethren the
Saints, do empty the golden Oil out of themselves into the seven Lamps of the
golden Candlesticks.

By the two Candlesticks, are figured forth the visible true constituted
Churches of Jesus Christ, as plainly appears by his own interpretation, Chap.
1.20. And the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches. As one Candlestick in
the Prophets Vision usystically signified that National Church of God, which
was but One, Zach. 4.2. So two Candlesticks in the Apostles Vision
Metaphorically represents those Congregational Churches of Jesus Christ,
which are many.

Nor is my distinguishing between the Lords Ministers, and Prophets, and his
Churches unwarrantable; for they are distinguished in other Scriptures, Acts
15.4.22, 23. The Apostles and Elders with the whole Church, Acts 20.17, 18.
also Phil. 1.1. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. and 1 Cor. 12.28. And God has set some in the
Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers.

The Testimony which these two Witnesses bear, whilst they prophecy in
Sackcloath, is not that general Testimony which the Ministers and Churches of
God in all Ages of the Gospel have born against Sin, Satan, and the World of
ungodly men; though that may turn unto them for a Testimony, but it is a
Generation Confession of those Truths which do properly belong unto that Age
wherein they live, and unto which they are called, as was John the Baptist,
John 1.19, 20, 23. the Apostles, Acts 1.8. and 4.18, 19. 20. Paul, Acts 18.5.
and 23.11. Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.12. And the Martyrs of Jesus Christ, Rev. 6.9. in
their DAY.

So that this Testimony is that confession of Truth, which the Churches of God,
and the Ministers and Prophets of the Lord have made, and the Witness, which
they have born in their own Generation for Christ, his Magistracy, Ministry,
Churches, Ordinances, Worship, and Government, or Discipline, etc. and against
Antichrist, or the Beast, his Magistracy, Ministry, Churches, Ordinances,
Worship, and Government, or Discipline, etc.

Hereby the Saints in this present Generation, may understand three things,
which are necessary for them to know, and to do, viz.

1. The Churches, Ministers, and Prophets of the LORD are to bear their
Testimony, not only against the Power, Throne, and great Authority which the
Dragon ( who is the Devil, Chap. 20.2.) gave unto the Beast, Chap. 13.2. but
also against all the Kings of the Earth, who have received their power at the
same time with the Beast, and give their power and strength unto the Beast,
Chap. 17.12, 13. to wit, those ten Kings of the fourth Monarchy, who received a
Political and Ecclesiastica^ Power one hour ( or at the same time) with the
Beast, and have given their moral power and natural strength unto the Beast;
and principally against the Politic and Ecclesiastic power of the eighth
Beast, who is also one of the seven Kings who goes into perdition.

2. The Churches, Ministers, and Prophets of the LORD, are to bear their
Testimony, not only against the most gross Idolaters of the great WHORE,
Mystery Babylon, and her Sorcerers, but also against the superstitious
Abominations of all other Harlots, to wit, false Churches, and false
Worshippers, who are her Daughters, Chap. 17.5. Yea, though they be
well-favoured Harlots, Nahum 3.4. called the Cities of the Nations, ( that is
to say, National Churches) who shall fall in the utter destruction of great
Babylon, when she comes in remembrance before God, Chap. 16.19.

3. The Churches, Ministers, and Prophets of the LORD, are to beat their
Testimony unto the Kingdom of Jesus Christ here on Earth, not only as he is
King of Saints, Chap. 15.3. and King of Zion, Psalm. 149.1, 2. but also as he is
King of Nations, Jer. 10.7. For this confession of the Kingdom of our LORD
Jesus Christ, is properly the Truth of this present Age and Generation; the
glad tidings whereof, is to be preached in all the WORLD for a Witness unto all
Nations, and then shall the END of the WORLD come, Mat. 24.14. And I may say in
the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 10.11. This is written for our Admonition, upon whom
the Ends of the World are come.

As touching the second, viz. What is the Power of these two VVitnesses, and
the time of their Prophesying?

The Power, which the Lord has given unto his two VVitnesses, is not a
Magisterial Authority or Dominion, but a Prophetical Power, to wit, the Power
of the WORD, not the Power of the Sword; which is another Reason, why I cannot
be of their Opinion, who say, That these two VVitnesses, are the Magistracy and
Ministry of Christ.

This Prophetical Power, is declared by several Acts, (such as were done by the
Prophets of the LORD of old) verse. 5, 6. to wit. first Power over Fire, as
Eliah had, 2 Kings 1.10. and Jer. 5.14. Behold I will make my words in thy
mouth Fire.

Secondly, Power over Waters, both the Waters that are above the Firmament,
verse 6. These have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their Prophecy. And such a prophetical Power Elijah or Elias had, 1 Kings
17.1. There shall be no dew nor rain, but according to my Word; which the
Prophet effected by earnest prayer, Jam. 5.17. And also over the Waters which
are under the Firmament, to turn them into Blood, verse 6. As Moses the LORD'S
Prophet did, Exodus 7.19, 20, 21.

Thirdly, Power to smite the Earth with all Plagues; which Plagues are to be
understood Metaphorically of Spiritual Judgments: For although the Prophetical
Power of Moses and Elijah, and other Prophets, brought material Plagues, and
temporal Judgments upon Egypt, and other Countries, and upon the Inhabitants of
the world, yet the Plagues and Judgments here mystically described are, if not
only, yet principally of a Spiritual kind, such as the Lord: Prophets of old
also had Power to do, Isa. 6.9, 10. and Mat. 13.13, 14, 15.

The Time of their Prophesying is 1260, days, verse 3. The same number of
1260. the WOMAN (that is to say, the Church of God) is fed in the Wilderness,
chap. 12.6. to wit, by those Ministers and Prophets, who are the Witnesses of
Christ, as aforesaid. Which 1260. days, counting 30. days for a month, make
forty two months, which is the time that the holy City ( viz. the Church of
God) shall be trodden underfoot by the Gentiles, verse. 2. that is to say, by the
Papists and Popish Idolaters, who for their Spiritual Idolatry in the Worship
of God, are called Gentiles, as the great City, Mystical Babylon, Spiritually
is called Sodom and Egypt, verse. 8. And the number of forty two months is the
time that was given unto the Beast ( viz. Antichrist, that Man of Sin, and Son
of Perdition, to wit, the Antichristian Politic and Ecclesiastic Power and
Dominion) to continue, and to prevail, Chap. 13.5, 7. Hereby it does plainly
appear, that as the time of the Gentiles who tread the holy City underfoot,
chap. 11.2. and the time of the Beast, that does make war with the Saints, and
Witnesses of the LORD, and overcome them, and kill them, chap. 13.5, 7. and
11.7. are one and the same time of forty two months; so the time of the WOMAN,
who is fed in the Wilderness chap. 12.6. and the time of the two Witnesses
prophesying in Sackcloath, chap. 11.3. are one and the same time of 1260.
days. And it hereby also appears that all these four are contemporary, all
beginning and ending together; and besides that which is noted touching these
four, and their time in the Scripture of Truth, both the Antiquity of
Ecclesiastical History, and the late Expositors of this Book of the Revelation,
do give a Testimony unto the same, affirming, that when the Beast began to
exercise his Tyrannical Power, and Antichristian Dominion over the Saints, then
the Holy City began to be trodden under foot, then the Woman fled into the
Wilderness, and then the two Witnesses began to Prophecy in Sackcloath.

Which time of the exercise of the Beasts Antichristian Politic and
Ecclesiastic Power coercively was ( say they) about the Year of our Lord, 407,
409, 410. or thereabouts. As may be seen in Symsons History of the Church, lib.
4. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. cap. 3. Helvicus in Council. Taurinatens. cap. 7. The
Council of Toled^ in Spain, Anno Dom. 400. as says Helvicus. Magdeb. Cent. 5.
cap. 10.

It is not my work at present to determine either the beginning or ending of
this time, but only to give the Interpretation of these 1260, days, which
contain the time of the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloath.

The 1260. days are not to be understood literally of so many natural days,
for that is but three years and an half, which is intended by the three days
and an half, verse. 9. when the dead bodies of the slain Witnesses lie unburied,
called a Time, and Times, and half a Time, chap. 12.14. and Dan. 7.21, 25.

But we must understand those 1260. days prophetically, that is to say, each
day for a year, according unto those Scriptures, Numb. 14.34. and Ezekiel. 4.5, 6.

So that, The whole time of the two Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloath, is
1260. years. So long the holy City is to be trodden under foot; so long the
Woman is to be in the Wilderness; and so long the Beast's Power is to
continue; for the times of all these four do begin and end together, and are
but one time, to wit, 1260. years.

As touching the third Particular, viz. Who the Beast is, and how he kills the
VVitnesses.

The great Monarchs and Monarchies of this WORLD, have been figured forth by
wild Beasts; God showed his Prophet Daniel the four Kingdoms by a Vision of
four Beasts, Dan. 7.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. The first like a Lion, the second like to a
Bear, the third like a Leopard; the fourth Beast, to wit, the Roman Kingdom,
was so dreadful, that he had no Name, so monstrous, that he had no resemblance
unto any one Beast, but is described by such things as does manifes^ him to be
a Monster, to wit, partly a Man, by his two Iron Legs, by his Feet, and te^
Toes, part of Iron, and part of Clay, Dan. 2.33. which is expounded of the
fourth Kingdom, verse. 40, 41, 42, 43. and partly a Beast, by his great Iron
teeth, by his te^ Horns, and a little Horn that came up among them, Dan. 7.7,
8. which is also expounded of the fourth Monarchy, verse 24, 25* or Roman
Kingdom.

And our LORD Jesus Christ gave the like Description of the fourth Monarchy, or
Roman Kingdom, unto his Servant John, under the similitude of a Beast, namely,
(...) great red Dragon, Revel. 12.3. Which Beast was terrible and monstrous, (
as that which Daniel saw) all spotted like a Leopard, his feet like a Bear, and
his mouth a^ the mouth of a Lion, chap. 13.3. with seven Heads and ten Horns,
chap. 17.3. ascending out of the bottomless Pit, and goes into Perdition, v.
8. And this is the Beast which shall kill the VVitnesses, chap. 11.7.

The Beast in this Prophecy is sometimes mentioned alone, without any
distinction, and then we are thereby to understand the whole complex Body of
the Roman Antichristian Politic and Ecclesiastic State and Government, as
chap. 14.9, 11. And in other places of this Book the Beast is mentioned with
some other, as if he were two, as the Beast that rose out of the Sea, and the
Beast that rose out of the Earth, chap. 13.1, 11. Beast and Woman, chap. 17.3.
the Beast and the false Prophet, chap. 19.20. And thereby we are to understand
a ^wo-fold Power mixed and exercised together, that is to say, by the Beast is
meant ^he Political, and by the Woman, the Ecclesiastical Power of the Roman
Government.

So then by the Beast, that kills the VVitnesses, verse. 7. we are to understand
the ^oman-Antichristian-Politick-and-Eccle^astick-State and Government
exercised ^ercively over men's Consciences in any ^lace or Case whatsoever.

This Beast, that shall kill the two VVitnesses, is more distinctly ( though
more My^ically) described, Rev. 17.8, 11. by ^^ee particular things. First, By
his past, ^esent, and future State; The Beast that WAS, and IS NOT, and yet IS.
Secondly, By his twofold number; even he is the EIGHT, and is of the SEVEN.
Thirdly, By his RISE and RUIN; He shall ascend out of the bottomless PIT, and
go into PERDITION,

The Beast that WAS, Chap. 17.11. that is to say, the fourth Monarchy, or Roman
Kingdom, and the Political Government thereof WAS a Kingdom which God set up,
and a Power which God ordained, Dan. 2.40.7.7, 23. and Romans 13.1, 7.

The Beast that WAS, and IS NOT, th^^ is to say, the fourth Monarchy, or Roman
Kingdom in its mixed State of Politick-and, Ecclesiastic Government, coercively
exercised over the Consciences of men in an^ Place or Case whatsoever, IS NOT
God^^ ORDINANCE; For the Dragon (which is the Devil, Chap. 20.2.) gave this
Bea^^ his Power, and his Seat, and great Authority, chap. 13.2.

The Beast that WAS, and IS NOT, an^ yet is, chap. 17.8. that is to say, the
fourth Monarchy, or Roman Kingdom, which w^^ a Power ordained of God, with
respect unto its mere Political Government, but I^ NOT God's Ordinance in its
mixed State (...) Politick-and-Ecclesiastick Power and Government; Yet IS a
Power, and has a Throne, chap. 13.2. Yea, and exercises great Authority over
the Bodies and Consciences of Men coercively; and causes both small and great,
rich and poor, free and bond, to receive his Mark in their right hand, or in
their foreheads; and causes that as many as would not worship the Image of the
Beast, should be killed, chap. 13.15, 16, 17.

And the Beast that WAS and IS NOT, even he IS the EIGHTH, chap. 17.11. that is
to say, the eighth Head of the Beast, and IS of the SEVEN, which Mystery of
Iniquity, that we may with more clearness understand; the Angel told John, that
the Beast that carries the Woman, had seven Heads, chap. 17.7. which he says
are seven Kings, verse 10. that is to say, seven kinds of political Governors,
and forms of Government in the fourth Kingdom, whereof FIVE are fallen, or were
past and gone before John's time, namely, 1. Kings, 2. Consuls, 3. Decim-vers,
4. Tribunes, and 5. Dictators: ONE is, to wit, Emperors, who being the sixth
head of the Beast, rused and exercised their Dominion over the whose Roman
Kingdom in the days of our Savior and his Apostles; the OTHER is not yet
come, to wit, the seventh Head of the Beast, that is to say, the seventh King,
or kind of Government was not yet in being, when John writ this book of the
Revelation; which seventh Head is Popes, for they succeeded the Emperors in the
Kingdom and Government of the Roman Empire (as all Historians testify) and
have ruled and reigned as Kings.

And this Beast is the EIGHTH, viz. the eighth Head, with respect of his
Ecclesiastical Power, mixed with his Political-Authority; And is of the SEVEN,
that is to say, he is one of the seven, to wit, the seventh Head or King, with
respect of his Political-Power-and-Authority. And this mixed Politick-and-
Ecclesiastic Power, is signified by his two Horns, chap. 13.11, 12.

And shall ascend out of the bottomless PIT, chap. 17.8. etc chap. 11.7. The
Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit, viz. the Hellish Apostasy of
the latter times, foretold by the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. which is
contemporary with the opening o^ the bottomless Pit, chap. 9.1. So is the
falling away ( or Apostasy) with the revealing of the man of Sin, this son of
Perdition, 2 These. 2.3. this King is the Ange^ of the bottomless Pit, chapter
9.11.

And go into Perdition, chap. 17.8. and verse 11. goes into PERDITION.

The man of Sin, Antichrist, is called the SON of PERDITION, 2 These. 2.3. and
it is twice affirmed, chap. 17.8, 11. that he goes and shall go into
PERDITION, because the thing is certain: And the meaning is, that the BEAST of
the eighth Head, that is to say, the
Roman-Antichristian-Pollitick-and-Ecclesiastick-Power, Dominion, and
Government, together with the Antichristian- POWERS, Potentates, Kings, and
Governors, who exercise that Antichristian-power and dominion coercively over
the Bodies, Estates, and Consciences of men, shall be utterly destroyed; which
utter Destruction and PERDITION will be fully effected and completed by
pouring out of the seven VIALS of the last Plagues, for in them is filled up
the wrath of God, chap. 15.1. and 16.1, 10, 19. and 18.2, 8. and 19.19, 20, 21.
and 14.9, 10, 11, 12. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud
Voice, If any man shall worship the BEAST and his IMAGE, and receive his MARK
in his Forehead, or in his Hand; the same shall drink of the Wine of the WRATH
of God, which is poured out without MIXTVRE, into the CVP of his Indignation.

If it be enquired how the BEAST does kill the Witnesses? I answer,

The BEAST shall 1. make WAR against them; 2. He shall OVERCOME them; and 3. He
shall KILL them, verse. 7.

The Beast cannot overcome them as Witnesses, (for so they Overcome him, and
the Dragon also, chap. 12.11. And they overcame him by the Blood of the Lamb,
and by the Word of their Testimony) but as Warriors, chap. 13.7. And it was
given to him to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them. This WAR is a
more open and visible Opposition between the Witnesses and the BEAST, then
formerly, though the two Witnesses had opposed the Beast, and born their
Testimony against his mixed Antichristian Power, and Idolatrous Worship, from
the beginning of the 1260. days of their Sackcloath-condition, which they did
more privately; And though the Beast had persecuted the two Witnesses for the
Testimony which they bare against him, from the beginning of the 42. months of
his Power; Yet now at last, and toward the end of their 1260. days, the two
Witnesses bear a more manifest Testimony, and make a more open and Visible
Opposition y against both the Tyrannical Power, and Idolatrous Worship of the
Beast: and therefore the Beast now at last, and toward the end of his 42.
months, begins to rage, and makes a greater and more cruel Opposition, both
against the Churches and Prophets of the LORD, who are the two Witnesses, and
all the Saints; by exercising his Power more tyrannically against them; which
is the WAR here mentioned, verse. 7. as that was, chap. 13.7. In the time of
Charles the fifth, in Germany, France, Scotland, etc. and in Queen Mary's days
in England, etc.

In this WAR the Beast overcomes the Witnesses, verse. 7. as in that he overcame
the Saints, chap. 13.7. Some of the Witnesses are overcome by fear, and others
by flattery; some by his alurements and preferments, others by his threats and
confinements are overcome for a time; so far as to cease from bearing their
Testimony against him so openly and vigorously as they did before; In which
respect the Beast is here said to overcome them.

But this will not appease the rage, and great wrath of the Beast, for he
perceives that the Testimony which the Witnesses bear in their more private
Retirement, and Conventicles, (as they are called) or Meetings, will like a
Moth waste, and secretly consume his Power and Dominion, and at last (if let
alone and suffered to enjoy any liberty to meet together to worship) his Power
and Dominion will be utterly destroyed, as is Prophesied, Dan. 7.26. And
therefore the Beast will take Council together with his chief Priests to KILL
the Witnesses of the LORD, (as the high Priest, the chief Priests and Elders
did to put our Savior to death, John 11.47, to 53.) And KILL them, verse. 7.
The killing of the two Witnesses does not signify a Corporal death only, nor
principally, for such a killing does not agree with this Prophecy; but it is
rather a Metaphorical Expression, which signifies a twofold Death, partly
Civil, whereby the Witnesses shall be deprived of their civil Liberties, and
the Exercise of their Religion; their Estates confiscated, their Persons
confined, Imprisoned, Banished; and some of their Lives, or all their
livelihood taken away by the tyrannical Power of the Beast; and partly, yea
principally Spiritual, whereby the Witnesses shall be deprived of that Zeal,
Vigor, and Courage, which with all boldness they had formerly manifested, in
bearing their Testimouy openly for Christ, his Kingdom, his Church, his
Worship, and his Government; against the Antichristian Beast, his Kingdom,
Church, Worship, and Government.

The darkness and blackness of the DAY of the Witnesses death, will principally
consist in their being deprived of that Spirit of Life that sometimes they had
received from God, and had formerly exercised in bearing their Testimony: which
Spirit of Life the Witnesses lose by cooling in their Spiritual affections unto
Christ, and by their sinning against the LORD; for usually when Ministers or
Members of Churches fall from their first Love, they fall in with the Apostasy
of the time; and so lose that life and courage which they formerly had, and
manifested with great boldness for Christ against Antichrist.

This Spiritual kind of death is most agreeable unto their Resurrection, that
is effected by that Spirit of Life from God, which verse. 11. after three days
and an half shall enter into them. Now such as is the Resurrection of the
Witnesses, such is their death: But their Resurrection is Spiritual, (for verse.
11. the Spirit of Life from God entered into them) therefore their death is
Spiritual, viz, A depravation of that Spirit of Life, that is to say, the loss
of that courage, boldness, zeal, vigor, and life, which they formerly had, and
manifested in their Testimony for Christ against the Beast.

This kind of death is also most agreeable unto the Witnesses lying dead after
they were killed, in respect both of the place, which is Spiritually called
Sodom and Egypt, ver. 8. and of the time when they lay unburied, which is
Prophetically said to be three days and an half, verse. 9.

Touching the fourth Particular, viz. What is the Street of the great City in
which their dead Bodies lie.

The Answer unto this Particular is Mysteriously given in the 8, and 9. verses
of this Chapter, And their dead Bodies shall lie in the street of the great
City, etc.

The great City is that mentioned, chap. 17.8. Which reigns over the Kings of
the Earth, to wit, the WOMAN that sits upon a Scarlet-colored BEAST, chap.
17.3. which is the great WHORE, chap. 17.1. whose Name is Mystery BABYLON, the
Mother of HARLOTS, chap. 17.5. viz. the whole Antichristian Kingdom of the
Beast, all Mystical Babylon.

The Street of the great City is some noted Street, (as a Market-Street) or
some eminent Street, (as Cheap Side) or some open Street or place (as
Smithfield) within or without the great City, under the Dominion and Government
thereof.

By this Street we are to understand some ^minent Part of Mystical Babylon, and
Kingdom of the Beast, viz. some of the ten Kingdoms which appertain unto the
Dominion of the Beast, and not his whole Kingdom, ^or the whole City: It is not
said in the Streets of the great City, but in the Street, to wit, the most
eminent Kingdom for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, even that Nation where the
Witnesses have most eminently born their Testimony against Antichrist.

The place being spoken of by way of eminency, must be understood either in
relation ^o the Witnesses, or in respect unto the Beast that kills them, or to
both: Now take either of these, or both together, and it signifies not the
whole Witnesses, nor the whole Kingdom of Babylon, but a part thereof. Not the
whole Kingdom of Babylon, because upon the rising and ascending of the
Witnesses, there is but a part of the Kingdom of Babylon falls, And the tenth
part of the City fell, verse. 13. which is that part here meant by this Street.

Nor all the VVitnesses of Christ in all the WORLD, no nor in all the Kingdoms
of Babylon, because there are some Witnesses remain alive when these two are
killed, who shall call upon them to come up to them, when the Spirit of Life
from the Lord does again enter into them, and cause them to stand upon their
feet, verse. 12* And they heard a great Voice from Heaven saying unto them, Come
up hither. Which Voice from Heaven, is the call of those Angels, who have the
seven last Plagues and come out of the Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony in Heaven when i^ is opened, to come up to Mount Zion to them, where
they and other Saints stan^ with the Lamb, and to see the Judgment of the
great WHORE, which will appe^ by comparing, chap. 11.12, 19.14.1, 5^ 15.1, 2,
5, 6.17.1. And the Temple o^ God was opened in Heaven, and there were voices,
chap. 11.19. And the seven Angels came out of the Temple -- in Heaven chap.
16.6. And one of the seven Angels which had the seven Vials, said, Come up
hither, and I will show thee the judgment of the great Whore, etc.

As touching the fifth Particular, viz. What time is to be understood by the
three days and an half, verse. 9.

The knowledge of the time when the Witnesses shall be killed and rise again,
is very desirable unto the Saints in this GENERATION; many godly and learned
Men have labored studiously in searching out this time, and have communicated
their understanding about this Matter; whose labors have been profitable unto
the Lords people, and unto me also; who having read their Opinions about the
ending time of the Witnesses Sackcloath-condition, and of the troubles of the
Lords People, I have been much comforted by several precious Observations which
they have made touching this matter: But not being fully satisfied with their
Determination of the period of that ending time, I have also addicted my self
to search the holy Scriptures touching such Prophetical Numbers as seem to
contain the ending time; And I shall take liberty to give my Opinion also, and
the grounds thereof, viz.

1. The three days and an half, are three years and an half; each day for a
year, according to the prophetical Account of Mystical days, Numb. 14.34. and
Ezekiel. 4.5, 6.

2. The three days and an half, are those three years and an half which do
immediately succeed the killing or death of the Witnesses; for after they are
killed, their dead Bodies are seen three days and an half, chap. 11.9. and
they do immediately preceed their Resurrection; for after three days and an
half, the Spirit of Life from God does enter into the Witnesses, and they stand
upon their feet, chap. 11.11. So then, The three years and an half are the time
of the interval between the Death and the Resurrection of the two Witnesses.

3. The three days (or years) and an half, is the ending-time of the Witnesses
1260. days, (or years) and of the Beasts 42. months ( or 1260. years.) For the
clear demonstration of this third Particular, let i^ be considered;

First, That the time when the Beast kills the Witnesses, is toward the end of
the 1260. days or years of their Prophesying, chap. 11.7. When they are about
to finish their Testimony; and therefore the Witnesses are killed before the
time of their 1260^ days or years be ended, to wit, three days or years and
an half before.

Secondly, The killing of the Witnesses, and the rejoicing over their dead
bodies, are the last Acts of the Beast's Tyrannical Power, and of the Whores
Triumphing Joy; and therefore must be near the ending-time of the Beast's 42.
months, and also of the 42. months, wherein the Gentiles (who are the
Idolatrous worshippers of the Beast) tread the holy City (that is, the Church
of God) under their feet.

That the killing of the Witnesses is the last Act of the Beast's
tyrannical-Power, appears plainly; for as soon as the Witnesses rise, Babylon
begins to fall, chap. 11.11, 13. And they stood upon their feet; and the same
hour -- the tenth part of the City fell.

That the rejoicing over their dead Bodies is the last Act of the Whores
triumphing-Joy, appears plainly; for as soon as her Joy and Rejoicing is over,
the day and hour of her Judgment came, chap. 17.7, 8, 10. For she says in her
heart, I sit as a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow; therefore
shall her Plagues come in one day, etc.

The things that the Saints in this GENERATION ought to know touching the time
of the Witnesses lying dead; Are,

1. That the time of the END, or the ending-time of the Witnesses prophesying
in Sackcloth; of the Beast's tyrannical POWER; of the holy City, her being
trodden under foot of the Gentiles, and of the Woman's being in her
Wilderness-condition, is near at hand; for the finishing Testimony is begun, to
wit, the Gospel of the Kingdom of our LORD Jesus Christ, which is a certain
forerunner of the ending-time of this WORLD, Mat. 24.14. Rev. 11.7. And when
they were about to finish this Testimony; That is, when they began to preach
the Gospel (or glad tidings) of the Kingdom; the Beast killed them, which is
the last Act of his tyrannical POWER.

2. That although the ending-time be near, yet the period thereof will not be
certainly known until the last three years and an half be begun, and well night
expired, Dan. 12.4, 9. and Hab. 2.3. The Vision is yet for an appointed time,
at the END it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because
it will surely come.

3. That when the ending-time is come and begun, before it be expired, there
shall such remarkable and wonderful things come to pass (as are foretold in the
Scriptures) whereby the wise shall understand, and certainly know that it is
the time of the END, viz.

First, Then will be such tribulation, and such a time of trouble as never was
before, Dan. 12.1. Mat. 24.21, 22.

Secondly, Then will be such an Apostasy among Professors, Ministers, Prophets,
and Churches, as never was before, 2 Timothy 3.1. -- 5. and 2 These. 2.3.

Thirdly, Then will begin a very glorious Reformation in the Worship of God, by
the Spirit of Life from God, which Spirit of Life entering into the slain
Witnesses, will set them upon their feet, that is to say, will cause them again
to stand up for Christ and his Kingdom, and against Antichrist and his Kingdom:
And then will the Temple of God ( that is to say, the Church and Worship of
God) be opened in Heaven, chap. 11.11. and 10.11. and 11.19. Which (...) the
times of the restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the Mouth of
all his ^oly Prophets since the WORLD began, Acts ^.21.

Touching the last Particular, viz. How be Witnesses shall be raised again, and
what ^re the effects thereof.

The Answer unto this Particular, is My^ically held forth in the 11, 12, 13,
and ^4. verses of this Chapter.

First, As to the time; After three days ^^d an half, verse. 11. by which we
are to ^^derstand three years and an half, (as have before proved) that is to
say, at or before the end of that time; for as it was said of our LOKD and
Savior, Mark 8.3^ After three days he should rise again, which he did on the
third day, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. S^ it is likewise said of his Witnesses, after three
days and an half, the Spirit of Life from God entered into them, and they stood
upon their feet, according to what was foretold by one of the Lords Prophets,
Hos. 6.2* After two days he will revive us, in the thir^ day he will raise us
up, and we shall live in h^ sight.

The means of the Witnesses Resurrection, is the Spirit of Life from the Lord
which entered into them, verse. 11. viz. that Spirit Life, Power, Courage, Zeal,
and Boldne^^ which the two Witnesses formerly had received from God, and had
exercised in bearin^ their Testimony for the Kingdom of Christ etc. and against
the Kingdom of Antichrist etc. but had lost by falling from their f^^ love, and
by falling in with the lest Apostcy; which Spirit of Life from God is again
given unto them.

And they stood upon their feet, verse. 1^ that is to say, The Witnesses were
raised, (...) vived, and strengthened by the Spirit of Li^ from God; for as the
loss and departure^ that Spirit of Life and courage to bear the^ Testimony with
boldness, was their death; so the Spirit of Life from God entering into them,
and renewing their Courage, reviveing their Zeal, and increasing their Boldness
in bearing their Testimony, is their Resurrection, and that which causes them
to stand upon their feet: which effect of the Spirit of Life from God, was
typed out by the dry Bones of the House of Israel, Ezekiel. 37.5, 10, 14. O my
People, -- I will put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live.

The LORD knows his Servants, his Witnesses are not able either to do much, or
to say much for Christ and his Kingdom, etc. nor against Antichrist and his
Kingdom, etc. unless they be spirited thereunto; and therefore when God had any
eminent work or service to do, he did not only raise up Instruments to do it,
but spirited them accordingly. Thus the Spirit of the LORD came upon Othniel,
Judge. 3.9, 10. and upon Gideon, Judge. 6.34. and upon Jephthah, Judge. 11.29. and
upon Sampson, Judge. 14.6, 19. and 15.14. and upon David, 1 Samuel 16.13. And so
it will do upon the Lords Witnesses, Rev. 11.11. And great fear came upon them
(Enemies) that saw them.

Secondly, The effect of the Witnesses Resurrection, or standing upon their
feet, either concerned themselves, verse. 12. or their Enemies, verse. 13.

Verse 12. And they heard a great Voice from Heaven saying unto them.

The Witnesses being raised and spirited for the WORK of the LORD, are now
called thereunto, which call is by a great Voice from Heaven; that is out of
the Temple of God opened in Heaven, chap. 11.19. to wit, the Church of God on
Earth, whose Spiritual Glory is described, chap. 12.1. by a Woman clothed with
the Sun, etc.

This Voice, is the Voice of the Remnan^ of the Woman's Seed, who kept the
Commandments of God, ( viz. Christ's Gospel Institutions, Acts 1.2.) and have
the Testimony of Jesus, ( viz. a Spirit of Prophecy amongst them, chap.
19.10.) even then, and all that time of the three years and an half, when the
Witnesses are killed, and their dead Bodies lie in the Street of the great City.

Which Remnant of the Woman's Seed, do call upon the raised Witnesses, saying
unto them, Come up hither, verse. 12. that is to say, Come and join with us, and
worship God with us; Come and help us to carry on the Work of the LORD, his
Kingdom, etc. and to pull down the Kingdom, etc. of the Beast, which call or
invitation of the Remnant, the Witnesses did straightway answer as follows.

And they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, wers. 12. This signifies a glorious
change in the state of the VVitnesses, attending their Resurrection, which they
now attended by their Testimony, called a Cloud, in which respect those eminent
Believers, Heb. 11. Chapter, are called a Cloud of VVitnesses, Heb. 12.11. And
the VVitnesses swift ascension, or going up unto those that called them, is
fitly resembled unto a bright Cloud, as the Conversion of the Gentiles, and
their coming into the Jews after their glorious Conversion, Isa. 60.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 8. Who are these that flee as a Cloud, etc.

And the same hour was there a great Earthquake, Verse. 13. By this Earthquake
we are to understand great Commotions, overturnings, and downfals in the
Kingdoms of Antichrist, as chap. 6.12. and Mat. 24.7. which great Change is
said to happen the same hour with the Witnesses Ascension, that is to say, at
the same time when the VVitnesses rise, the Papists fall.

And the tenth part of the City fell, Verse 13. By the City, here is meant the
whole Roman Antichristian Kingdom of the Beast as verse. 8. and chap. 17.18. And
by the tenth part of the City, we are to understand one of the ten Kingdoms of
Mystical Babylon, for the whole City consisting of ten Kingdoms, chap. 12.3.
and 13.1. and 17.12. the tenth part of the City must be understood of some ONE
of the ten Kingdoms, to wit, that Kingdom where the VVitnesse^ lay slain,
called the STREET of the great City, verse. 8. And the Retaliation which
follows, seems to favor this Interpretation, And in the Earthquake were
slain of men seven thousand, verse. 13. viz. seven thousand men of Name; which
fall of so many eminent Persons of the Antichristian Party, will become a means
of Conversion unto many others of that Party, verse. 13. And the Remnant were
afrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven.

Verse 14. The second VVOE is past, and behold the third VVOE comes quickly.

By the second WOE we are to understand all the Troubles, Plagues, and
Judgments of the sixth Trumpet, recorded from chap. 9.13. unto chap. 11.14.
which are now past and ended. And the third VVOE comes quickly, to wit, upon
the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, which is the third WOE- trumpet which is
to be sounded by the seventh Angel, chap. 8.13. which seventh Trumpet brings in
the Dispensation of the seven Vials of the last Plagues of God upon Babylon,
which is fitly called the third (or last) WOE.

Touching which third WOE, or Vials of the last Plagues of God upon Babylon, I
have something to offer in the second Part of this little Treatise, which I
judge meet for the Saints in this Generation to know; And therefore I shall
pray that God will open the Scriptures unto you, (that shall read it) and open
your understanding, that you may know the Truth, and what you ought to do in
this day of your Generation. Amen.

Apocalyptical MYSTERIES.

The Second Part, Touching the Seven VIALS.

Revel. 16. Chapter.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1667.

Apocalyptical MYSTERIES. The Second Part, Touching the Seven VIALS.
Revel. 16. Chapter.
THis Chapter contains the Angels Commission, to execute the wrath of God
upon the Beast, and their execution thereof gradually, by pouring out one Vial
after another, until all the seven Vials of the seven last Plagues be poured
out upon Babylon, unto whom is given the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of
the wrath of God, verse. 19. of which Cup every one that worshippeth the Beast
and his Image, and receives his Mark in his Forehead, or in his hand, shall
drink, Chap. 14.8, 9, 10, 11.

The Angels Commission is in the first verse of this Chapter, And I heard a
great Voice out of the Temple, saying, Go your ways, and pour out the Vials of
the wrath of God upon the Earth.

In this Commission observe Christ's Command for the execution of the wrath of
God upon Babylon; wherein you have, first, The Divine Authority of it, A great
Voice out of the Temple; Secondly, The Persons to whom the Command was given,
Saying to the seven Angels, Go now. Thirdly, The work which they were commanded
to do, Pour out the Vials of the wrath of God upon the Earth.

This great Voice was the Voice of the LORD, Isa. 66.6. A Voice from the
Temple, the Voice of the LORD, that rendereth recompense to his Enemies. It is
called a great Voice; not only to show us that it is the Lord's Voice, but his
Voice out of Zion, which is his Temple, as was prophesied Joel 3.16. The LORD
also shall roar o^^ of Zion, and utter his Voice from Jerusalem and the Heavens
and the Earth shall shake Yea, to declare that the great day of the LORD is
near, it is near, and hastened greatly, Zeph. 1.14, 15. which dispensation of
the day of wrath, the Prophet calls, The Voice of the Day of the LORD, Zeph.
1.14, 15. And such is that Voice which is uttered out of the Temple of Heaven,
from the Throne, saying, It is done, verse. 17. of this Chapter; upon the
pouring out of the seventh Vial.

The Temple in this first verse, is called, The Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony in Heaven, chap. 15.5. and the Temple of God opened in Heaven, chap.
11.19. And in the 17. verse of this Chapter, the Temple of Heaven. Not that we
are to understand it to be in Heaven, in respect of place, for John saw no such
Temple in the holy and Heavenly City, chap. 21.22. But by the Temple of Heaven,
or in Heaven, is meant the Heavenly State of the Church of God on Earth,
restored to its Apostalical institutions, and Primitive purity, called, the
Temple of the Living God, 2 Cor. 6.16. It is called the Temple of the
Tabernacle, to note, that the Church of God on Earth at this time of the
pouring out of the seven Vials, is not so glorious, nor so fixed, as the Temple
was in Solomon's time, but rather does resemble the Tabernacle of the
Congregation of the LORD, which had been in the Wilderness, and was come into
the promised Land; in which Tabernacle of the Congregation of Israel, there was
a signal Testimony of the presence of God, Number. 9.15, 16. where was also the
Ark of his Covenant, and wherein was the Service of God performed, and all his
holy Sacrifices offered, 1 Chronicles. 16.17, 37, 40. And so when this Temple of the
Tabernacle was opened, Rev. 11.19. There was see^ in his Temple the Ark of his
Covenant; and those who had washed their Robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb, that did serve him day and night in his Temple, chap. 7.14,
15.

The seven Angels which had command to pour out the Vials of the wrath of God,
are them same seven who had the seven last Plagues, chap. 15.1. the same seven
Angels came out of the Temple, verse. 6. and the same seven Angels had given
unto them seven golden Vials full of the wrath of God, verse. 7.

Seven is a Prophetical Number, signifying both variety of Instruments, and
perfection of the Judgments of God in this Prophecy, as the seven Trumpets,
chap. 8.1, 6, 3. Some denouncing, and others executing these last Plagues.

These Angels are clothed with pure and white Linen, and girded with golden
Girdles, chap. 15.6. Their Clothing declares some of them to be the Priests of
God, for so were the Priests of the Temple clothed, Levit. 6.10. and 16.4. 1 Samuel 2.18. And this was the Lords Institution, Exodus 39.27, 28, 29. Their being
girded with golden Girdles, shows that others of them are the Magistrates of
the LORD, into whose hand God will commit the Government of the Kingdom of
Christ, Isa. 22.21, 22, 23. The Ministers of the Churches are called Angels,
chap. 1.20. The Angels of the seven Churches. And Kings also are compared unto
Angels, 1 Samuel 29.9. and 2 Samuel 14.7. As an Angel of God, so is my Lord the
King. The whole Description testifies these Angels to be Kings and Priests unto
God, whom Christ has made such, Rev. 5.9, 10. who was so clothed and girded
himself, chap. 1.13. And in the midst of the seven Can^lesticks, was one like
unto the Son of Man, ^loathed with a Garment down to the foot, and ^irt about
the Paps with a golden Girdle; A Description of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
^riest and King in his Church.

Objection. But how can the pouring out (...) the Vials of the Plagues of
Almighty God, full of his great wrath, be applied unto the Ministers of the
Gospel, who an to preach the most precious sweet sou^ saving Truths of Jesus
Christ, especial considering that by these Vials and Plague^ are meant the
real and external Judgment and Plagues which God will have execute^ by those
Angels upon the Whore, as appears chap. 18.8. Therefore shall her Plagues co^^
in one day, Death, Famine, etc.

Answer. The Ministers of the Gospe^ may be said to pour out the Vials of God
great wrath, even his real and materi^ Plagues, and most righteous Judgments up
on the great City Babylon; as the Prophet of old are said to root out, and pull
dow^ and to destroy, and to throw down, Jer. (...) 10, 16. and to take the
Wine-Cup of the Lords fury at his hand, and to make a^ Nations ( to whom God
sends them) to drin^ of it, Jer. 25.15, 16, 17, -- 28. A^ this they did by
pronouncing those Judgments of God against them, which the Lo^^ commanded
them, Jer. 1.16. Even (...) the Ministers of the Gospel pour out the Vials of
the wrath of God, and real Plague^ upon Mystical Babylon, by pronounci^ those
last Plagues of the wrath of God against her.

3. These Angels come out of the Temple, chap. 15.6. after it was opened. This
does declare them to be the raised Witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ; for the
Temple was not opened ( in the Vision unto John) un^il the slain Witnesses were
risen, and had ^scended the Throne, chap. 11.7, 11, 15, 17, 19. So their coming
out of the Tem^le signifies their Saint-ship, and that these Angels are fellow
Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, built upon the ^oundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Je^us Christ himself being the chief Corner
Stone, in whom all the Building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy
Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.19, -- 22.

And who are more fit to declare the ^engeance of the Lord, even the vengeance
^f his Temple, Jer. 50.28. then the Mi^isters of God in Zion? Or who are more
^eet to execute the Righteous Judgments ^f God upon Babylon, then those
Magistrates unto whose hand the LORD will commit ^he Government of Christ's
Kingdom here ^n Earth, called, The People of the Saints ^f the most High, Dan.
7.27. whom the LORD of Hosts will make his Battle Ax, and Weapons of War, and
with whom he ^ill break in pieces the Nations, and de^^oy Kingdoms, and render
unto Babylon all the evil that she has done in Zion, Jer. 51.20, 24.

Lest it might be dubious how the Saint or true Worshippers in the Churches,
Ministers or Magistrates, should execute the fierceness of Gods wrath upon
Babylon, an^ upon the Kingdom of the Beast, consider the some of the Angels
which came out of the Temple, may be also the holy Angels of God who are said
to be about the Throne in the Temple, chap. 5.11. worshipping God wit^ the four
living Creatures, and twenty for Elders, chap. 7.11. and who are said to a^^
company the Saints, that were cloathe^ with white Robes, and Palms in the^
hands, chap. 7.9, 10, -- 15. ( an Emble^ of the victory they had gotten over
the Be^^ and his Image, chap. 15.2.) For the ho^ Angels of God are present in
the Asse^blies of the Saints, 1 Cor. 11.10. 1 Pe^ 1.12. 1 Timothy 5.21. And they
are se^ forth to minister for them; and therefore may be said also to come out
of the Temple ( as well as the Saints) to execute the righteous Judgments of
God upon Babylon, chap. 18.1, 2. And Christ also, w^^ is the Angel of the
Covenant.

By the Earth, here we are to understan^ the earthly State of Babylon, as it is
contr^ distinguished from the Heavenly State of Zion, which is the true Church
of God, Rev. 9.1. I saw a Star fall from Heaven to the Earth; which was the
visible Apostasy of the Clergy from the Heavenly State of the True Church of
God, for soundness of Doctrine, purity of Worship, and power of Discipline, to
an earthly State of a false Church, with respect unto corrupt Doctrine,
superstitious Worship, and tyrannical Discipline, after the Inventions and
precepts of Men.

And as the Earth, Genesis 1.2. is a genetal ^earm, which comprehended the Land,
the Seas, the Firmament, with the Sun, Moon, and Stars; the Air, and all Men,
Beasts, Fowls of the Air, and every creeping thing that God created and made
out of that Mass or Chaos. So by the Earth here is comprehended the Earth, Sea,
Sun, Seat, and all other things of the Beasts devising, men^ioned in this
Chapter; and also those In^abiters of the Earth, which are the Objects of the
three dreadful WOES menti^ned, chap. 8.13. whereof the third Woe ^ontains the
7. Vials of the last Plagues of God to be poured forth upon those Inhabi^ers of
the Earth, who are the worshippers and admirers of the Beast, chap. 13. 8. 17.
8. and 14. 9, 10, 11.

The Saints having gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and
over his Mark, and over the number of his Name; the Temple of the Tabernacle of
the Testimony in Heaven being opened; the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline of
the Church of God in some measure restore^ to their primitive Purity; the seven
Angels, who have the seven last Plagues, being come out of the Temple, and
having received seven golden Vials full of the wrath of God, with commission
and express command to execute the fierceness of the Wrath and Plagues of God,
poured out their Vials upon the earthly State of the Beast, and Mystical
Babylon, and upon all the Inhabiters of that Earth, to wit, the worshippe^ and
admirers of the Beast; as has bee^ before declared and proved in the
Exposition of the first verse.

And the first (Angel) went and pour our his Vial upon the Earth. verse. 2. of
the Beasts Kingdom.

The Earth in Scripture is often taken for an Earthly-State-Apostacy in any
Nation or Kingdom, upheld by men of corru^ Minds, and earthly Interests, Genesis
6.11, 12, 13. Zeph. 3.8 This Earthly-Stat^ Apostasy is prophesied of, and
foretold (...) ^he Apostle to be in the last days, 2 Timothy ^.1, -- 5. and is
most likely to be the Subject of the last Plagues which are to be poured out of
the seven Vials upon the Earth, verse. 1. This Earth of the Beasts Kingdom, is
that Earth, whose Inhabitants rejoiced over the Witnesses and Warriors of the
LORD, when they were slain by the Beast, and their dead Bodies were not
suffered to be put in Graves, chap. 11.10. against whom that third WOE is
pronounced, chap. 8.13. and upon whom this first Vial is to be poured out. As
the dry Land is called the Earth, Genesis 1.10. so by the Earth in this second
verse, we are to understand some thing in the Beasts Kingdom that bears a fit
and full resemblance unto the dry Land.

1. For Foundations. 2. For all manner of Flood. 3. For fullness of Riches,
Psalm. 104.5, 14.
And therefore by this Metaphorical Earth, we are to understand, the
Foundation, Doctrines, and Principles of all false Religions, as the Doctrine
of Justification by Works, the Doctrine of Popish Supremacy, the Doctrine of
Purgatory, Mass, worshipping of Images, Crosses, Crucifixes, Altars, etc. the
Doctrine of the worship of God according to the Commandments and Inventions of
men; the Doctrine of Magistratical and Ministerial Power coercively to be
exercised over the Consciences of men, in the Matters of God, his Worship and
Government, both Political, and Ecclesiastical, etc. which like the dry Land,
(called Earth) First, Does seem to stand so firm, that they shall not be
removed for ever. And secondly, Out of those Earthly Doctrines is produced all
manner of Food for them that make their belly their God, as the Abbots and
Priests do. Also thirdly, Out of those Earthly Doctrines is produced abundance
of riches, all their Temples, Cathedrals, Abbeys, Friaries, Nunneries, Churches
and Chapels, have been founded and built upon this Earth, which they that are
the Inhabiters of this Earth, thought should never be removed, chap. 18.7. For
she says in ber heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no
sorrow. Yea, the Popes themselves, and their Cardinals, Archbishops, Prelates,
Priests, and all the Clergy, (have been founded, fed, and enriched by these
earthly Doctrines) who are the Inhabiters of this Earth, upon which this first
Vial shall be poured out, and against whom the third Woe is pronounced, chap.
8.13. and upon whom the sad effects of this first Vial will inevitably fall,
viz. a noysom and grievous sore which fell upon the men which had the Mark of
the Beast, and upon them which worshipped his Image; which bears some allusion
unto one of the noisome and grievous Plagues of Egypt, Exodus 9.10, 11. This
Sore being noisome, causes both Lovers and Friends unto Babylon to stand afar
off for fear of her Torment, chap. 18.10, 15, 17. And it being a grievous Sore,
causes much pain and torment unto the worshippers of the Beast and his Image,
chap. 14.8, 9, 10, 11. [which are the properties of such Sores, Psalm. 38.11.
and 77.2.]

The second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea of the Beasts Kingdom, verse
3. that is to say, upon the Ecclesiastic Constitutions, Forms, Ordinances,
Masses, Traditions, Will-worships, and all other Popish Superstitions, and
Inventions of Mystical Babylon, that great Whore, and Mother of Harlots, ( viz.
both ill-favored and well-favoured Harlots) the Catholic and National
Churches of Rome, Spain, France, etc. which Idolatrous Worship, (like the Sea,
when it is troubled, Isa. 57.20.) is full of mire and dirt. As the gathering
together of the Waters is called Seas, Genesis 1.10. so the gathering together of
the general Councils, National Synods, Diocesan Visitations, Courts, etc. are
called Seas, as the Sea of Rome, the Popes Sea, the Cardinals Sea, Canterburies
Sea, Yorks Sea, etc. In which Sea of Mystical Babylon, the Kings of the Earth,
the Merchants of the Earth, Masters of Ships, and as many as Trade by Sea do
trafick for the States and Souls of men, etc. chap. 18.9, 11. The effects of
this Vial is blood and death unto the Idolatrous and Superstitious worshippers.
Behold, the righteous Judgments of God, and his just Retaliation unto the
Scarlet and Bloody Whore, and false Prophet, the Sea of Rome, and all other
Mystical Seas of the Romish and Babylonish Churches in any Nation, whose Sea,
by the pouring out of this second Vial, shall become like the blood of a dead
Man, and every living Soul died in this Sea.

And this Plague also may have some Allusion unto that Plague of Egypt, Exodus
7.20, 21. whose Waters was turned into blood, and the Fish that was therein
died. So bloody and so deadly is the Idolatrous-worship of the Sea of Rome, and
of all other Nations that worship the Beast or his Image, who shall utterly be
destroyed, as appears, chap. 14.9, 10, 11.

The third Angel poured out his Vial upon the Rivers and Fountains of Waters in
the Beasts Kingdom, verse. 4.

These Mystical Rivers and Fountains of Waters, bear some Allusion unto those
material Rivers and Fountains which Solomon says, run into the Sea, Eccles.
1.7. As the Fountains or Spring-heads run into the Rivers, and the Rivers run
into the Sea; so the Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Nobles of the Roman
Antichristian Politic and Ecclesiastic Government and Kingdom, give their
power and strength unto the Beast, chap. 17.12, 13. And to his Councels,
Synods, Courts, etc. which is the River into which these Fountains run, and so
into the Sea of Rome, Canterbury, etc. The great Monarchs of this World, and
Kings of the Earth, are said in Scripture to be the Head of their Rivers, Ezekiel.
29.3, 4. and 32.2, 6. I will also water with thy blood the Land wherein thou
swimest, etc. Again, as the Fountains do signify Kings, etc. so by the Rivers
into which their streams do continually run and are filled, and influenced by
them, is meant the Antichristian Hierarchy, Popish Clergy, and all the false
Prophets, Teachers, and Priests, and upon all that are in holy Orders, (as they
speak) who preach the Doctrine of the Beast, and worship his Image; such as
these are called Wells, (though without any living and refreshing Water) 2 Pet.
2.1, 17. And they are here fitly resembled unto Rivers of Waters in the Beasts
Kingdom. This Antichristian Monarchy, Hierarchy, Popish Clergy, Priests and
Prelates, (like the Rivers and Fountains in and about a great City, Isa. 18.27.
Ezekiel. 32.2.) though they spoil the Land, and waste the City, and foul the
Waters, [for as a Fountain casts out her filthy Waters, so do these corrupt
Fountains cast out their wickedness, Jer. 6.7.] yet that great City, Mystical
Babylon, is made very great, ( and like the Assyrian of old, Ezekiel. 31.3, 4, 5.)
her height is exalted, and she is enriched, because of the multitude of these
Waters and Fountains of hers, whose Nurseries and Seminaries, like the deep,
with her Rivers running round about their Plants, send out their little Rivers
unto all the Trees of the field, and into the deep Sea.

The effect of this Vial is their own blood, which God in his righteous
Judgments gives those Monarchs, Kings, Prelates, Priests, and all the Popish
Church and Clergymen to drink, as a just Retaliation of the blood of the
faithful Saints, and Sackcloath Witnesses, which this Scarlet Beast and bloody
Whore of Rome has shed, by persecuting and killing them, chap. 13.^7. and
11.7.17.4, 5, 6. and 18.20, 24. For which Judgments the LORD is acknowledged by
all his Saints, and holy Angels in Heaven and on Earth, to be Righteous; and
his Judgments also are acknowledged by them to be true and Righteous, verse 5,
6, 7.

The fourth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sun of the Beasts Kingdom, verse.
8.

That is to say, Upon the Emperor of Germany, the King of Spain, etc. with
respect to the Temporal and Political part of the Beast's Kingdom, and upon the
Pope of Rome, the Popish Cardinals, and Archbishops, etc. with respect to the
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical part of the Beast's Kingdom; those Antichristian
Emperors, Kings, Popes, and Prelates, (like the Sun in the Firmament of Heaven,
Genesis 1.16, 17, 18.) are most eminent and chief Lights, and have the most
eminent Grandeur, Rule and Dominion in the Firmament or Fabric (...) the
Beast's Politic and Ecclesiastic Government and Kingdom; and are fitly
resembled by the Sun, and other Lights (...) Heaven, Isa. 13.9, 10, 11.

The effect of this Vial, is the scorching of men with great heat, verse. 9. By
the power that was given unto this Angel so t^ do, verse. 8. The men that are
scorched with fire, and with great heat, verse. 8, 9. are those men of the
Beast's Kingdom, who worship the Beast and his Image, chap. 14.8, 9, 10, 11.
who are tormented with Fi^^ and Brimstone, which causes them to blas^ pheme
the Name of God, who has power over these Plagues; And they repented n^ to
give him glory, verse. 9. The Fire an^ Heat, are the burning Heat and devouring
Fire of the fierceness of God's great wrat^ poured out of this Vial upon the
Sun, which causes those dreadful Effects, Rev. 18.8^ And she shall be utterly
burnt with Fire; for strong is the Lord that judges her.

And the fifth Angel poured out his Vi^ upon the Seat of the Beast, verse. 10.

Who this fifth Angel is, the Exposition of the first verse gives us to
understand viz. Some of those Magistrates into whos^ hand God will commit the
Government of the Kingdom of Christ, ( as was proved before) And some of those
Ministers of his Churches, who shall come out of the Temple, even such of his
Saints as our Lord Jesus Christ has redeemed and made Kings and Priests unto
God, who shall reign on Earth, assisted by Christ, the Angel of the Covenant,
and his Heavenly Angels, to execute the righteous Judgments of God, ( as was
also proved before) by pouring out of the Vials of the wrath of God.

This Vial is one of those seven golden Vials which was given unto the seven
Angels, which were full of the wrath of God, and contained the last Plagues,
which are to be poured out upon Mystical Babylon, to her utter destruction, as
has been proved, before, and chap. 16. verse. 19. and all them that worship the
Beast and his Image, chap. 14.8, 9, 10, 11. These Vials are called the Cup of
Gods Indignation, and the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

The Beast is the Object of the Wrath of God, even of the fierceness of his
great Wrath, upon whom the LORD will pour out all his Plagues first and last,
and Babylon shall drink the Cup of his Indignation, chap. 14.10. and the
nineteenth verse of this Chapter.

Beast in this Prophecy of the Revelation, is sometimes named without any
distinction; and then by Beast we are to understand the whole Complex Body of
the Antichristian Politic and Ecclesiastic State of the Roman Kingdom,
Church, and Government, as chap. 11.7, 13.18, 14.9, 11. and sometimes the Beast
is named with distinction, chap. 13.11, 12. as if there were two Beasts, both
which is but one Beast distinguished by his twofold, Power, and Dominion, to
wit, Political and Ecclesiastical, as does appear, verse. 1. and 4. So chap.
17.3. the Beast and the Woman, that is to say, the Political Government, and
the Ecclesiastic State; likewise chap. 16.13. and 19.20. the Beast, and the
false Prophet; also the Beast and his Image, chap. 13.14. By the Beast we are
to understand the Roman Antichristian Political State Power and Dominion. By
the Woman, wh^ is the Whore, the Image of the Beast, and the false Prophet, (in
diverse respects) w^ are to understand the Roman Antichristian Ecclesiastic
State, Church, Worship, an^ Government. The Reason of this distinction is the
twofold Authority and Jurisdiction which the Beast exercises in the World,
and in the Church; and therefore the Beast is said to rise from two places, to
wit, out of the Sea, Chap. 13.1. and out of the Earth, verse. 11. and to have
two Horns like the Lamb, chap. 13.11. that is to say, a twofold Power,
Political and Ecclesiastical, both which was given unto the Beast by the
Dragon, chap. 13.2. And the Dragon gave him his Power, and his Throne, and
great Authority. Which Dragon is called the old Serpent, the Devil, and Satan,
chap. 12.9. and 20.2. And he laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which
is the Devil, and Satan.

By the Beast then in this verse, is meant the Roman Antichristian Politic and
Ecclesiastic State, Kingdom, Rule, Power, Dominion, Worship, and Government,
^wit, the whole Complex Body of Anti^hrist, who has his Power, Throne, and
^eat Authority given unto him by the De^il, and does by virtue thereof exercise
^oth a Political and Ecclesiastical Government. And this Roman Politic and
Ec^esiastick State, is that Antichrist who de^eth the Father and the Son, 1
John 2.^. and that Man of Sin, and Son of ^rdition, 2 These. 2.3, 4, 9, 10. Who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, even that Beast that ascended out of the bottomless Pit, and goes
into Perdition, chap. 17.8, 11. As the Beast is the Object of the wrath of God,
so the Seat of the Beast is the Subject upon which this fifth Vial of his wrath
is poured out.

And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Seat of the Beast, verse. 10.

By the Seat of the Beast we are to understand the Place, even the principal
place where the Beast does exercise his Power and great Authority; which is
Rome, and also all other great Cities where the Beast has his Residence, his
Throne, his Courts, and exercises his Grandeur and great Authority. The City
of Rome is the seve^ Mountains on which the Woman, that is, Mystical Babylon,
sits, chap. 17.5, 9. And the Seat of the Beast being distinct from his Power
and Authority, as it is, chap. 13.2. it must be interpreted of the place (...)
the Beast's Residence, where his Throne (...) placed, and his Power and great
Authori^^ is principally exercised.

The effects of this fifth Vial are four.

First, A great Eclipse of the Beast's fo^mer Greatness, Grandeur, and Glor^
And his Kingdom was full of darkness; that is to say, The Beasts Kingdom and
Dominion both in the Political and Ecclesiastical part thereof was totally
eclipsed, darkened, and clouded.

The second effect of this Vial will be the extremity of Rage that the
worshippers of the Beast will fall into; And they gnawed their Tongues for pain.

The third effect of this Vial, will be their blasphemy against God; And they
blasphemed God because of their pain and sores.

The fourth effect will be, an impenitent frame of hardness of heart; And they
repented not of their deeds.

So that although the Beast and some of his worshippers live, after his Kingdom
and Dominion, both Political and Ecclesiastical be destroyed, yet they repent
not of their Idolatries, which causes God to proceed in his Judgments, and to
pour out the 6th and 7th Vials upon them.

And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River Euphrates, verse.
12.

The Object of the wrath of God poured out of this Vial, is the River Euphrates.

There was a River that ran through Mesopotamia unto old Babylon, which by way
of Eminency, above all other Rivers, is called the great River, the River
Euphrates, Genesis 15.18. Deuteronomy. 1.7. Josh. 1.4. unto which this may bear some
allusion; because what that natural River was to Material Babylon, this
Metaphorical River is to Mystical Babylon. The principal benefits of a great
River are two, viz. Revenue, Isa. 23.3. The Harvest of the River is her
Revenue; and Strength, Isa. 8.7. The Waters of the River strong and many, even
the King of Assyria and all his glory.

By the great River Euphrates, here we are to understand that which is the
Harvest of Babylons Revenue, and the Puissance of her strength at this juncture
of time, when the Throne of the Beast, by the pouring out of the fifth Vial,
was broken, and in a measure destroyed. That the day of Gods great wrath will
be upon the Merchandise of Babylon, viz. her Merchandise of Gold and Silver,
precious Stones and Pearls, Purple and Scarlet, Wine and Oil, Corn and Cattle,
Slaves and Souls of Men, is manifest, chap. 18.10, 11, 12, -- 17. For in one
hour so great Riches is come to naught. And by that Judgment of God upon
Babylon, her great Revenue ( which is one Stream of the great River) is dried
up.

But the strength of Mystical Babylon figured forth by this great River
Euphrates, (in this 12. verse) is the great Turk, and his numerous and mighty
People; who will be at this juncture of time aiding and assisting the Beast,
and Mystical Babylon, against Christ and his Zion; for which Cause God will
pour out this Vial of his wrath upon both Turk and Pope, and upon all the
People and Multitudes, who are the Waters of this great River, chap. 17.15. And
the Reason why I rather incline to this Opinion, (than the former) is, because
all Expositors do interpret the great River Euphrates, chap. 9.14. to be the
Turks. Now considering that this great River is mentioned but in those two
places of this Book of the Revelation.

First, Under the sixth Trumpet, chap. 9.14.

And secondly, Under the sixth Vial, chap. 16.12.

I conceive it is most probable that one sort or Nation of People is intended
in both places, to wit, the Turks, who then did, and now do inhabit about that
great River Euphrates; and as the loosing of the four Angels which were bound
in that great River, chap. 9.14. signified the Turks breaking in and
overrunning the Nations, as a Plague ( following Antichrist) upon the
Christian WORLD: So the drying up of the Water of this same great River, chap.
16.12. signifies the wasting and destroying of the Turks Dominion, Power, and
People, as a Plague upon them for standing in the way of the LORD and his
People, and aiding, assisting, and helping his and his peoples Enemies, whom
God has purposed to destroy utterly; That the way of the Kings of the EAST
might be prepared, verse. 12.

By the Kings of the East, we are to understand the Jews, who are called Kings,
because of the Kingly Dignity which God will put upon them in that day, Mich.
4.8. The Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of Jerusalem, Isa. 62.1, 2, 3. Thou
shall be a Crown of Glory in the Hand of the Lord, and a Rayal Diadem in the
Hand of thy God.

And the Kings of the East, because they shall come from the East Countries, at
least some of them, Isa. 43.5. I will bring thy Seed from the East, etc.

The way that is to be prepared for the Jews, is twofold.

First, For their Conversion.

And secondly, For their return unto their own Land, by taking the
stumbling block out of their way, Isa. 57.14.

The Papists are a very great Stumbling Block unto the Conversion of the Jews;
and the Turks are a great impediment unto their return unto their own Land,
unto which God has promised to bring them, Ezekiel. 37.21, 22, 25. and to that
end God will have both these stumbling blocks removed out of the way of his
Ancient People the Jews.

That which follows in the 13, 14, 15, 16 verses of this Chapter, is not any
proper effect of this Vial, nor any part thereof, but rather an interval of
time betwixt the sixth and seventh Vials, wherein some remarkable things are to
be transacted in order to the pouring forth of the seventh Vial, and therefore
contain a praeparatory Vision thereunto.

In which Vision John saw three Ambassadors or Agents sent from the Dragon, the
Beast, and the false Prophet, to the Kings of the Earth.

The Dragon is that old Serpent called Satan, which is the Devil, chap. 20.2.
The Beast is the civil State or political Powers, which Beast rose out of the
Sea, chap. 13.1. The false Prophet is the Ecclesiastical State, which is the
Beast that rose out of the Earth, chap. 13.11. He is here called the false
Prophet, because now he is unmasked, and his Vizard plucked off, to wit, his
pretended likeness unto the Lamb, chap. 13.11. And now he is discovered to be
that Deceiver and false Prophet which was to come.

The three unclean Spirits like Frogs, verse. 13. are their Ambassadors or
Agents, called Spirits, for their subtilty and activity, and pretending to be
spiritual men, and employed principally about Religious and Spiritual Affairs,
( like Ahabs false Prophets, 1 King. 22.21, 22. who deceived the Kings of
Israel and Judah, in persuading them to go up to Ramoth Gilead to Battle) and
therefore are said to be Spirits of Devils, verse. 14. working Miracles: as the
Devil raised up false Christ's, and false Apostles; so he does false Prophets,
purposely to deceive the Kings of the Earth, and the Inhabitants of the Earth,
that they may not receive the true Christ, believe the true Apostles, nor
regard the Testimony of the true Prophets of the Lord.

Before John sets down the success of this their Negotiation, he writes a word
of warning, as it were a Parenthesis, verse. 15.

Behold I come as a Thief, etc. that is to say, suddenly and unexpectedly, as
Mat. 24.43, 44. and 2 Pet. 3.10.

Blessed is he that watches for my coming, and keeps his Garments white and
clean, and fast girded unto him; lest he walk naked, and they see his shame, 1 Timothy 5.22. Jam. 1.27.

The succss of their Negotiation follows, verse. 16. And he gathered them
together into a place, called in the Hebrew Tongue, Armageddon. He gathered
them together, that is to say, the Dragon, which is the Devil, by his Frogs,
those unclean spirits, gathered them together, viz. the Kings of the Earth.

By Armageddon we are to understand the name of a place, which the Jews shall
give after they have gotten some considerable victory over the Turks, and
therefore called it Armageddon, the place of destruction of an Army; which
happily may have an ^llusion unto that great destruction of the Ca^aanites at
the Waters of Megiddo, Judge. ^.19. when Sisera the chief Captain of Jabin, with
all his Hosts, fell by the hand of Deborah, and Barack, where was made ^uch a
total destruction, that it is said, Judge. ^.16. And the Host of Sisera fell
upon the ^dge of the Sword, and there was not a man ^eft.

And such an universal destruction will be the effect of this Battle at
Armageddon, chap. 19.20, 21.

And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the Air, etc. verse. 17.

The Object of this Vial is the Air, which notes the universality of the
Subjects upon whom the wrath of God is poured out of this seventh Vial. The Air
fills all places, no Subject can be more general then the Air.

By the Air, here we are to understand all Nations, Kingdoms, and People; all
Places, Persons, and Things, that oppose the Kingdom, Worship, and Government
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Sion, Isa. 60.12.

The Earth, Sea, Rivers, Sun, and Seat of the Beast's Kingdom is destroyed by
the former Vials; And by this seventh Vial shall be destroyed all things
whatsoever remains of Satan's Kingdom; Who is called, Ephesians. 2.2. The Prince of
the power of the Air.

The other six Vials were poured out upon their particular Objects, but this
sevent^ Vial is poured out into its Subject; which notes the spreading and
dilating of it se^ into every part of Satan's and the Beast'^ Kingdom, for the
utter destruction o^ every thing therein that remained.

So then the wrath of God poured out of this Vial, will diffuse and spread over,

First, The whole Kingdom of Antichrist, or the Beast.

Secondly, The remaining Dominion and Kingdom of the Turks.

And thirdly, The whole Kingdom of the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the
Devil.

And when all these Enemies against Christ and his Kingdom shall be destroyed
by the pouring out of this seventh Vial, then comes a great Voice out of the
Temple of Heaven, ( to wit, the Visible Church of God on Earth, restored unto
her primitive Purity, and made glorious, Isa. 60.7, 12, 13, 14.) saying, It is
DONE, chap. 10.6, 7. viz.

The Mystery of God is finished, as he has declared to his Servants the
Prophets. This Voice is Christ 's, chap. 21.5, 6. He that sat upon the Throne,
said unto me, It is DONE. This Voice is said to come from the Throne in the
Temple of Heaven, in this 17. verse; that is to say, It came from Christ, who
sat upon the Throne, chap. 21.5, 6. and implies now Christ's Kingdom shall be
set up, and he himself shall sit upon the Throne, chap. 3.21. and all his
Saints with him.

And there were Voices, and Thundrings, and Lightnings; and there was a great
Earthquake, etc. verse. 18.

The like to this was the effect of the Witnesses rising, chap. 11.13. upon
which Commotions the tenth part of the City fell; so here by this great
Earthquake, the great City is divided into three parts, verse. 19. Fractions,
or Divisions, note the utter ruin of the
Roman-Antichristian-Politick-and-Ecclesiastick-State, Power, Dominion, and
Kingdom of the Beast; For a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.

And the Cities of the Nations fell, verse 19. literally, such Nations as come
to help the Beast, and the Turk against the Lord and his People. Mystically by
the Cities of the Nations, we may understand National Churches. The great Whore
is called the great City; so the Harlots, who are her Daughters, chap. 17.5.
are here called the Cities of the Nations. If the Catholic Church of Rome be
the great City, then the National Romish Churches, may also be called the
Cities of the Nations; which shall fall in the Day of the Lords controversy
with all Nations, Hag. 2.22. and Jer. 25.30, 31, 32, 33.

And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, verse. 19.

By great Babylon here is primarily meant, Constantinople, the royal City of
the great Turk.

And Secondarily, All his Principalities, Domininions, and Kingdom, prophesied
of, Isa. 14.4, 5, 24, 25, 32.

Neither am I alone in this my Opinion, for Mr. Brightman and others are of the
same Jugement. And my Reasons are,

1. Because the great City, and great Babylon are contradistinguished one from
the other in this 19 verse, and therefore cannot the same.

2. Because great Babylon is said here to come in remembrance before the LORD,
which cannot literally be applied to the City of Rome; for that was the Seat of
the Beast, upon which the fifth Vial was poured out; nor can it be mystically
applied unto the whole Kingdom of the Beast, for that had come in remembrance
before the Lord, in pouring out the former five Vials.

3. Because the Turk has been, is, and will be as great an Enemy against the
Jews ( especially in their return to their own Land) as the Pope has been, is,
and will be against the Gentile Saints; And whereas both Turk and Pope,
together with the Kings and Nations of the Earth, being now at last all
combined together, with all their Forces against the LORD and his Saints, both
Jews and Gentiles, they shall all drink of the Wine of the fierceness of Gods
wrath, which shall be poured out of this seventh Vial without mixture of Mercy;
chap. 19.19, 20, 21.

Every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found, verse. 20.

By Islands and Mountains, here we may understand,

1. Places of hiding, and of security, Ezekiel. 39.6. Isa. 2.19, 21. and Hag. 2.6,
7, 22. But there will be no security not hiding, for every Island fled away,
and the Mountains were not found, so that their ruin will be inevitable
without any refuge or shelter.

2. By Islands we may understand such things as are separated from a common,
unto some sacred use, as Islands are separated from the main Land by Waters
that go round about them. Such are all Popish Consecrated and Dedicated things,
viz. Bishoprics, Deanaries, Cathedrals, Churches, Chapples, Priories,
Nunneries, Church Lands, and Revenues; all these, and all of these kinds shall
be sequestered and taken away from their Sacred, or rather Superstitions and
Idolatrous uses, and restored unto a common and civil use, as before any such
Consecration, Dedication, Assignation, or Separation.

3. By Mountains, we may understand, the great Powers and Dominions of the
Earth, the Monarchs and Monarchies of this WORLD, Zech. 4.7. Isa. 40.4. Jer.
51.25. These shall not be found; for they shall be broken and destroyed
utterly, and they shall be made like the Chaff of the Summer Threshing-Floors,
which the Wind carries away; Dan. 2.35. And no place was found for them.

And there fell upon men a great Hail out of Heaven, etc. Verse 21.

The Hail from Heaven signifies some more immediate Judgments and Plagues of
God. Here may be some Allusion to the destruction of the Canaanites by great
Hailstones from Heaven, Josh. 10.11. Or else this is that great Storm of Gods
immediate Judgments threatened Prophetically against Gog in the Land of Magog,
Ezekiel. 38.2, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23. And I will plead against him with an
overflowing rain, and great Hailstones, fire and brimstone, etc.

And men blasphemed God, etc. Verse 21.

This is the Effect of Gods most just and righteous Judgments upon all his
unplacable Enemies, they Blasphemed God. This was the Effect of the Plagues
poured out of the Fifth Vial, Verse 9, 11. which was the Beasts former practice,
Chap. 13.6. The Beast was a Blasphemer from the Beginning, and so continues
unto his End; He lives and dies in his Blasphemies against God, and perishes
for ever.

Now as touching the Time, when these Seven Vials shall be poured out, though I
have a very honorable esteem of those Godly and Learned Expositors of this Book
of the Revelation, who are of opinion, that three or four of these Seven Vials
are poured out already; Yet notwithstanding all that they have said, I confess
I am not of their mind, out do rather think, That none of those seven Vials are
yet poured out.

The Scripture-Grounds that I have to offer for my Opinion in this Point are
these, Viz. 1. Because, the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven
is not opened, out of which Temple the seven Angels come forth with their seven
golden Vials, Chap. 15.5, 6, 7. Which Temple I have proved before, to be the
Heavenly State of the Church of God on Earth, restored in some Measure unto its
Apostolical Constitutions, and primitive Purity: which, when so, was called the
the Temple of the Living God, 2 Cor. 6.16.

Let Christians consider, that none of the Seven Vials are to be poured out
until the Temple be opened, that is to say, until the Church of God on Earth be
restored in some measure unto its Apostolical Constitutions, and primitive
Purity, which is not yet done, and therefore no Vial is yet poured out. 2.
Because, Christ's Sackcloch Witnesses and Warriers must be slain, and raised,
and the Seventh Trumpet sounded, before the Temple be opened, or any of the
Seven Vials be poured out, Chap. 11.7, 11, 14, 15, 19.

But these things are not yet done, and therefore none of the Seven Vials are
yet poured out. Let Christians consider, Are the Witnesses slain, before their
Testimony be finished? Verse 7. says, When they shall have finished their
Testimony, the Beast, that ascends out of the Bottomless Pit, shall make war
against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them: And if these Witnesses
and Warriers be slain, Are they Risen and ascended up to Heaven? (that is, to
an Heavenly State and Dignity) and have their Enemies been enlightened to behold
them? as is prophesied they shall, Verse 11, 12. Again, Has the Seventh Angel
sounded his Seventh Trumpet? as is prophesied Verse 15. which Angel must Sound
his Seventh Trumpet before this Wrath come, Verse 18. I offer these three
Reasons to the serious Consideration of Christians, why the Seventh Angel has
not Sounded his Seventh Trumpet, Viz. 1. The Mystery of God is not finished,
which must be done when the Seventh Angel begins to Sound his Trumpet, Chap.
10.6, 7. 2. The Second Woe is not Past until the Witnesses and Warriers be
raised and ascended, which must be done before the Seventh Angel Sound his
Trumpet, Chap. 11.11, 12, 14, 15. 3. Upon the Sounding of the Seventh Trumpet,
The Kingdoms of this World do become the Kingdom of Christ and of his Anointed,
Chap. 11.15. But this is not accomplished, which argues that the Seventh Angel
has not Sounded his Seventh Trumpet, which Seventh Trumpet must usher in the
Seven Vials, as the Seventh Seal did the Seven Trumpets, Chap. 8.1, 2, 6.
whereby it is manifest that the Temple is not opened, nor any of the Seven
Vials poured out.

And Thirdly, Because, Those Seven Vials contain the Seven last Plagues (Chap.
15.1. for in them is filled up the Wrath of God) which are Contemporary with
the Victory, which the Saints shall get over the Beast, and over his Image, and
over his Mark, and over the Number of his Name, Chap. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. Standing
upon a Sea of Glass mingled with Fire, and singing that Triumphant Song of the
Lamb, Verses 3, 4. Which Victory the Saints have not yet Gotten, neither can
they sing that Triumphant Song, and therefore none of the Seven Vials are yet
poured out. Let Christians consider, 1. That the Seven last Plagues will
utterly Ruin and Destroy Antichrist, Root and Branch, and that suddenly, Chap.
18.2, 8, 10, 17, 19. 2. That the Seven last Plagues contain that last Judgment
of the great Whore (called Mystery Babylon) which does precede the Marriage of
the Lamb, Chap. 17.1. and 19.1, 2, 3, 7. 3. That the Seven last Plagues are the
effects of the last War of the Beast and False Prophet, and the Kings of the
Earth against the Lamb, our LORD Jesus Christ, and his Armies in Heaven,
namely, his Saints who are Called, and Chosen, and Faithful, Who having
Overcome and gotten the Victory over these Enemies of God, of Christ, and of
his People, They pour out those Vials of the last Plagues of God Almighty upon
them, chap. 17.13, 14. chap. 16.14. chap. 19.19, 20. and chap. 18.6, 7, 8. All
which Argues that the Seven Vials of Gods last Plagues are not yet poured out.
4. Because the First Angel has not yet poured forth his Vial; And If the First
Angel has not poured forth his Vial, then the Second, Third, nor any of the
Seven Angels have not poured forth any of their Vials. But that the First Angel
has not poured out his Vial [besides what has been said for the proof of my
Opinion, the Reasons and Scripture-Grounds given for the same in general] I do
humbly offer these following Arguments to prove. Viz. Though I Reverence those
Godly and Learned Men, and Bless the Lord for their worthy Labors in the
Expositions of the Book of the Revelation; Yet I cannot, (for the Reasons
before given) consent with them who affirm that Waldo, Wickliff, Husse, Luther,
etc. are meant by the First Angel, that poured out the first Vial: nor can I be
of their Opinion, who say by this Angel is meant, the Sweden Wars, nor the Long
Parliament; nor any other Persons or Plagues, which have befallen the
Antichristian Roman Political and Ecclesiastical State unto this Time: Because
I see not the Effects of this First Vial accomplished upon the Earthly, Carnal,
and Worldly Interest of the grand Apostates of these Last Times. Which thing
causes me to continue in my Opinion, both in general touching all the Seven
(...) and in particular touching the First Vial, (...) I shall be convinced by
Scripture Light, and sound Reason grounded thereon; Viz. That the First Angel
has not poured out his Vial.

1. Argument for the proof thereof is from chap. 18.21. Thus with violence
shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

I have already declared, that the Vials of the Last Plagues do contain that
last Judgment of the great Whore (called Mystery Babylon) mentioned Chap. 18.
And all Expositors of this Prophecy of the Revelation do affirm the same:
which being so, This Comparison chap. 18.21. holds especially in these two
things; viz.

First; as a great Millstone cast into the Sea does not sometimes sink, and
another while swim; now falling down, and then rising again; Thus, or so When
any of the Seven Angels pour out any of their Vials upon any part of the Roman
Antichristian State of the Beast's Political and Ecclesiastical Kingdom, that
Part upon which the Vial is poured forth shall fall, perish, and rise no more;
no nor be found no more at all, chap. 18.11, 14, 21.

Secondly, As a great Millstone cast into the Sea falls and sinks down
irrecoverably unto the Bottom; Thus, or so when the First Angel has poured out
his Vial upon the Earth, the Second upon the Sea, the Third upon the Rivers,
the Fourth upon the Sun, and the Fifth upon the Seat of the Beasts Kingdom,
Babylon (like a Millstone) sinks to the Bottom; that is to say, The utter
destruction of the Great Whore Mystery Babylon is suddenly effected by the
pouring out of the Vials of the Last Plagues of the fierceness of the Wrath of
God upon her, chap. 18.8, 10, 17, 19. for in one Hour she is made desolate. But
we see not such Effects of any Plagues of God yet upon Babylon, and therefore
conclude, that the Seven Last Plagues or Vials are not any of them poured
forth, no not the First of them.

2. Argument, that proves the First Vial is not yet poured out is, Because That
noisome and grievous Sore (which is the Effect of the First Vial) is not yet
fallen upon the Men, which had the Mark of the Beast, and upon them that did
worship his Image, chap. 16.2. For,

1. That noisome Sore will cause both all the Lovers and Friends of Babylon for
ever to stand aloof, yea, after off from her, and from them that the Sore is
on, to wit, Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Jesuits, Friars, Monks, etc.
And upon them that worshipped his Image; namely, all the Papists,
Crucifix-adorers, Image-worshipers, Cross-creepers, Altar-bowers, etc. chap.
18.10, 15, 17.

2. That grievous Sore will cause such exquisite Torment, and pain unto the Men
that had the Mark of the Beast, and upon them which worshipped his Image, That
the Smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever and ever, chap. 14.9, 10, 11.
and when the Kings of the Earth, the Merchants of the Earth, and the
Shipmasters, Sailors, and all the Company of Ships, and as many as Trade by
Sea, shall see the Smoke of her Burning, and the Torment of her Worshippers,
they will stand afar off and Cry, Alas, alas! for in One Hour she is made
Desolate, chap. 18.18, 19.

But there is no such notsom and grievous Sore fallen upon the Men, that had
the Mark of the Beast, nor upon them that Worshipped his Image. The Popes,
Cardinals, Prelates, Priests, etc. nor the Papists, who worship Images,
Crucifixes, Crosses, Altars, etc. have not been so tormented by any plagues of
God, that the Smoke of their Torment has Arcended for ever and ever; Nor have
the Kings of the Earth, the Merchants of the Earth, nor they that Trade by Sea
so seen the smoke of he^ Burning, as to stand afar off for fear of he^ Torment,
Concluding and Confessing that in one hour she is made Desolate; Read chapter 18.9,
10, 15, 17, 18, 19. And therefore I again conclude, (being the more confirmed
in my Opinion, by these Arguments) That the First Angel has not yet poured out
his Vial: And if the First Vial be not yet poured out, then none of the Seven
Vials of the Last Plagues are as yet poured out.

And until these Seven Vials of the Last Plagues of God be all poured our, The
Kingdom of the Antichrist will not be totally and finally Destroyed; nor will
all the Kingdoms of this WORLD become the Kingdom of the LORD, and of his
Saints: Th^^^gh there will be some considerable Beginnings of the Destruction
of the Kingdom of Antichrist, and of the Establishing of the Kingdom of our
LORD Jesus Christ before the last Vial be poured out.

Touching which Two Kingdoms, viz. of Antichrist, and of Christ, I have
something to offer in the Third Part of this little Treatise, which I judge
meet for the Saints in this GENERATION to know: Into the right understanding
whereof, the LORD guide my heart and yours by his Holy Spirit and Word to his
Glory, that we may know what we ought to do in this DAY of our GENERATION.
Amen, and Amen.

Apocalyptical MYSTERIES.

The Third Part. Touching the Kingdom of Antichrist, and the KINGDOM of
CHRIST.

Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this WORLD are become the KINGDOM of our LORD and
of his CHRIST, and HE shall REIGN for ever and ever.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1667.

Apocalyptical MYSTERIES. The Third Part. Touching the Kingdom of Antichrist,
and the KINGDOM of CHRIST.
Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this WORLD are become the KINGDOM of our LORD and
of his CHRIST, and he shall REIGN for ever and ever.


THe Seventh Angel mentioned in this verse is the Angel of the third WOE,
denounced against the Inhabiters of he EARTH, chap. 8.13.9, 12. and 11.14.
which third WOE contains all those righteous Judgments of God that are to be
executed upon Mystical BABYLON by pouring out of the Seven VIALS of the Last
PLAGUES of Almighty God upon the KINGDOM of the BEAST, Whereupon the Kingdoms
of this WORLD become the KINGDOM of CHRIST and and of his SAINTS for ever and
ever.

By the Kingdoms of this WORLD, we may understand, 1. Universally, All the
Kingdoms of the World, that are upon the face of the Earth: 2 Kings 19.15. Jer.
25.26. to wit, All Rule, Dominion, Power, and Government in all Nations, and
Kingdoms of the WORLD. 2. Generally, All the Kingdoms of the DOMINION of
Nebuchadnezzar King of BABYLON, Jer 34.1. and Dan. 2.37, 38. also of Cyrus King
of Persia, Ezra 1.2. and Dan. 2.39. likewise of Alexande^ the Great, King of
Grecia, Dan. 8.8, 9, 10, 21, 22. and Dan. 11.3. and 2.39. and lastly of the
Caesar's, the Kings of the Romans, which is the fourth Kingdom o^ Monarchy of
this WORLD, Dan. 2.40, 41, 42. Dan. 7.23, 24, 25. 3. Specially. All the
Nations, Languages, Kingdoms, and People that are under the DOMINION, Rule,
Power, Government and Kingdom of ANTICHRIST, the Man of SIN, and Son of
PERDITION, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4. to wit, the BEAST of the EIGHT Head, with two
HORNS, Who ascended out of the Bottomless PIT, and shall go into PERDITION,
chap. 17.8, 11. together with All the Dominions, Rule, Authority, Power, and
Government of all the ten Kings, who received their Power one hour (that is, at
the same Time) with the BEAST, and have given their Power and Strength unto the
BEAST, chap. 17.12, 13. These are the Kingdoms of this WORLD; which shall
become the KINGDOM of our LORD, and of his CHRIST.

That which does Concern the Saints in this GENERATION to know, touching the
Kingdoms of this WORLD, is, 1. How they became the Kingdoms of ANTICHRIST; and
2. How they shall become the Kingdom of CHRIST.

To that End, let the Saints Consider,

First, The Kingdoms of this WORLD, to wit, the Assyrio -- Chaldean Monarchy,
the Medio -- Persian Monarchy, the Grecian -- Monarchy, and the Roman --
Monarchy had their Dominions and Kingdoms given them by the God of Heaven, Jer.
34.1. Dan. 2.37, 38, 39, 40. Ezra 1.2. Who have by the Succession of Divine
Providence had and exercised their Dominion, Power, and Authority over all
Nations, People, and Languages under their Government; Under whose Yoke and
Dominion God for the sins of his people Israel put them also and their Kings,
Deuteronomy. 28.15, 25. Jer. 27.6, 7, 8, 11, 12. Ezekiel. 17.12, 13, 14. Dan. 2.37, 38,
39, 40. Ezra 1.2. Romans 13.1-7.

Secondly, The Fourth Kingdom or Monarchy, which is the Roman-Monarchy, or
Kingdom of the Caesar's in the days of our Savior and his Apostles, was God's
ORDINANCE of Magistracy, and those higher POWERS unto which all the Saints, and
every Soul who lived under the Roman Government, ought to be Subject for
Conscience sake, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

The Apostle Paul would not have exhorted Titus to put the Saints in mind to
obey Magistrates, (as he did, Tit. 3.1.) if there had been no Magistrates then
in Being: or if they had been Usurpers, and not God's Ordinance.

Why did the Apostle Peter, writing to the Saints (scattered through Pontus,
Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and Bythinia) exhort them, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. To submit
themselves unto every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the
King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, etc.
verse 15. for so is the will of God, etc. if the Caesar's, Kings, and Governors
then in Being, were not Lawful Powers, had no lawful Authority, nor were the
ORDINANCE of God, as well as they were the Ordinance of Man?

Let it be also well and seriously Considered, first, That Christ and his
Disciples called the then Roman Powers, Magistrates, Luke 12.11, 58. and Acts
16.19, 20, 21, 22. Secondly, That the Apostle exhorted the Saints to pray for
Kings (in their Church Assemblies) and for all that then were in Authority, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Thirdly, That our Savior and his Apostles did submit themselves
unto the Roman-Caesats, Kings, and Governors then in Power, paid them Tribute
or Custom, Matthew. 17.24, 25, 26. and commanded the Saints so to do, and to
continue in so doing, Romans 13.5, 6, 7.

Thirdly, The Roman-Power, and Political-Government of the Caesar's, Kings, and
Governors of the fourth Monarchy or Kingdoms of this WORLD; became
Antichristian, and the Kingdom of Antichrist, when the Beast received his
Power, his Seat and great Authority from the Dragon, Rev. 13.2. that old
Serpent, which is the Devil, chap. 20.2. and exercised that Power, both
Tyrannically over the Estates and Persons of Men, and Coercively over the
Consciences of Men and Women, Causing all both small and great, rich and poor,
free and bond to subject themselves unto the Beast and his Image, and to
receive his Mark, Name, and Number, and to Worship the Beast, or else they must
neither buy nor sell, but be Killed, Rev. 13.16, 17.

This POWER of Antichrist, which the Devil gave him, was signified unto John by
a BEAST with two HORNS like a Lamb, Rev. 13.11. Horns do signify Power and
Authority in the Prophesies of Scripture, Zech. 1.18, 19, 20, 21. Hab. 3.4. and
Dan. 8.20, 24, 25. and two Horns, imply a twofold Power and Authority, to wit,
Political and Ecclesiastical; these two Horns are said to be like the Lamb,
because the Beast pretends to have both his Political, and Ecclesiastical POWER
and great Authority from Christ, and to exercise both for Christ; whereas
indeed HE had his Throne, his Power and great Authority from the Dragon, the
Devil and Satan, chap. 23.2. and does exercise it against Christ and his
Saints, chap. 11.7. and 13.15, 16, 17.

This Politic and Ecclesiastic POWER is the same POWER, that the ten Kings of
the Roman-Kingdom received also ONE HOUR with the Beast, that is to say, at the
same Time, when the Beast received his Antichristian POWER from the DRAGON,
chap. 17.12. Which mixed Political and Ecclesiastical Power the ten Kings or
Kingdoms do exercise for the BEAST against CHRIST and his Saints, chap. 17.13,
14. and chap. 19.19, 20, 21. unto their own Destruction.

Now as soon as this Antichristian Beast with his ten Horns was risen out of the
SEA, to wit, the troubles, tumults, confusions, and divisions of the
Roman-Empire, when by the WARS of the Barbarians the Roman-Empire was
dissipated into ten Kingdoms; At which Time also this same Beast with his two
Horns, is said to Rise out of the EARTH, that is to say, out of the Apostasy of
an earthly-minded CLERGY; who departed from the FAITH, as was before Prophesied,
1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. should come to pass in the latter Days. I say, from that
Time, the Roman-Monarchy, and Political Government of the fourth Kingdom ceased
(though not to be a Kingdom, and to have a Power, a Throne, and great
Authority, yet) to be a lawful POWER, and an ORDINANCE of God: And therefore
ought not to be obeyed, nor submitted unto by any of the Saints of God, neither
in any Civil or Ecclesiastical Commands; for that is to WORSHIP the BEAST, or
his IMAGE.

Let the Saints consider, 1. That those, who shall Reign with Christ, have not
WORSHIPPED the Beast, chap. 20.4.2. As it was dangerous to WORSHIP the Beast a
little after his Rise, chap. 8.7, 13. so it will be damnable to WORSHIP the
Beast a little before his fall, chap. 14.8-12.3. Those that shall stand with
the Lamb upon Mount Sion, with his Fathers Name in their Foreheads, and learn
to Sing that New SONG before the Throne, chap. 14.1, 3. are such Saints as have
gotten the Victory over the Beast, and over his Image, etc. chap. 15.2, 3.

So then I conclude from what has been said, upon Scripture-Grounds, touching
the Kingdoms of This WORLD becoming the Kingdom of ANTICHRIST,

That the Saints in this GENERATION ought not to Obey, nor to submit themselves
unto the Roman- Antichristian-Politick and Ecclesiastick-POWER, Rule,
Authority, Dominion, and Government of the BEAST, nor of the ten Kings or
Kingdoms, who have given their POWER and Strength unto the Beast.

The second thing which I judge necessary for the Saints in this GENERATION to
know, is, How the Kingdoms of this WORLD shall become the KINGDOM of CHRIST.

God showed unto his Prophet Daniel in his VISIONS of the Night, how the
Kingdoms of the WORLD should become the KINGDOM of Christ, Dan. 2.34.35, 44,
45. Dan. 7.13, 14, 18, 22, 26, 27. Viz.

First, The Kingdoms of the WORLD shall be broken in pieces by a STONE cut out
of the MOUNTAIN without hands, Dan. 2.34, 35, Which STONE is Christ, Plal.
118.22. Matthew: 21.42. and 1 Pet. 2.4, 6. and also the Churches of Saints, his
Jerusalem, called a Burthensom Stone, Zech. 12.3.

The Kingdoms of this WORLD shall be broken in pieces; first, by falling upon
the Stone, viz. Christ and his People, Luke 20.17, 18. Whosoever shall fall
upon that STONE shall be broken, Zech. 12.3. In that DAY I will make Jerusalem
a burthensom STONE; All that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces.
Secondly, The Kingdoms of this WORLD shall be broken in pieces by the STONE, to
wit, Christ and his Peoples falling upon them, Matthew. 21.44. But on whomsoever
this STONE shall fall, it will grind them to Powder: and Jer. 51, 19, 20-24.
Thou art my Battle-AXE, and Weapons of WAR; for with thee will I break in
pieces the Nations, and with thee will I destroy Kingdoms.

The Mystery of the STONE smiting the Fourth Kingdom upon his FEET of Iron and
Clay, and breaking them in Pieces, was expounded unto the Prophet, Dan. 7.17,
18. But the Saints of the Most High shall take the KINGDOM, and possess the
Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever, Dan. 7.24, 25, 26. But the Judgment
shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion, to consume and to destroy it
unto the End: read Isa. 60.12.

Secondly, The Kingdoms of this WORLD, being broken in pieces by the STONE
falling upon them, The STONE will become a great MOUNTAIN, and fill the Whole
EARTH, Dan. 2.35. that is to say, Christ and his Saints shall have the DOMINION
in all the EARTH, Dan. 7.11, 12, 13, 14. And I beheld till the BEAST was slain,
and his BODY destroyed, etc. As concerning the REST of the Beasts, they had
their DOMINION taken away, etc. Behold ONE like the SON of Man, etc. And there
was given him DOMINION and Glory, and a KINGDOM, that all People, Nations, and
Languages should serve him, etc. Also Dan. 7.26, 27. But the Judgment shall
sit, and they shall take away his DOMINION, etc. And the KINGDOM and Dominion,
and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the
People of the Saints of the Most High, etc.

As the WAY for the KINGDOM of Christ and his Saints to be set up, is made by
the Breaking in pieces the Kingdoms of this WORLD, Isa. 60.12. For the Nation
and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, yea, those Nations shall be
utterly wasted: So the Kingdom of Christ and his Saints shall be enlarged and
established: 1. By the Conversion of Sinners, both Jews and Gentiles unto
Christ, Isa. 60.3, 5, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15. and Isa. 66.8. and Romans 11.25, 26, 27.
2. By the Pouring out the SPIRIT upon all Flesh, Joel 2.28. Isa. 44.3, 4, 5. 3.
By the UNION of all the Saints, Zeph. 3.9. and Zech. 14.9. The LORD shall be
KING over all the EARTH, in that DAY there shall be ONE Lord, and his Nome ONE.
And 4. By the RESTITUTION of all things, Acts 3.20, 21. and Isa. 1.26. I will
Restore thy Judges as at the first, Isa. 60.17. and Isa. 49.6. It is a light
thing that thou should be my Servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to
RESTORE the preserved of Israel, etc. And then the Whole CREATION shall be
delivered from the BONDAGE of Corruption, and Restored into the Glorious
LIBERTY of the Children of God, Romans 8.19, 21, 23.

That which the Saints of God in this GENERATION are to know, touching the
KINGDOM of Christ, are these things following, Viz.

1. That the KINGDOM of our LORD Jesus is not of this WORLD, Joh. 18.36. Nor is
it of a Worldly Constitution; but it is a spiritual and heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18. and will be a glorious State, Isa. 60.1, 2, 15, 19, 21, 22. of a NEW
Heaven, and of a NEW Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. which is
the State of the Holy City, the NEW Jerusalem, that comes down from God out of
Heaven, Rev. 21.1, 2. Then shall they call Jerusalem the THRONE of the LORD,
Jer. 3.13, 17. which NEW Jerusalem God will make a PRAISE in the EARTH, Isa.
62.2, 3, 7. An eternal Excellency, and the joy of many Generations, Isa. 60.14,
15.

2. This KINGDOM of Christ is the THRONE of his Father David, Isa. 9.7. and
Luke 1.32, 33. which Throne Solomon his Son (who was a Type of Christ) sat
upon, when he reigned over all the Kingdoms that God gave to him, 1 Kings 4.21.
Upon whose THRONE our LORD Jesus Christ shall sit, and Reign over all the
Kingdoms of the WORLD, Who is the only POTENTATE, the KING of Kings, and LORD
of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.14. who shall be KING of all the EARTH, Zech. 9.14. with
whom the Saints shall Reign on EARTH, and shall Rule and Govern the Nations,
(not by the Laws of Men, but) by the Laws of God; Which are true Laws, right
Judgments, and good Statutes, Nehemiah 10.13, 14. For Christ our LOKD, and
Judah his People is our Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. and Psalm. 101.8. The Kingdom
shall come to the Daughter of Jerusalem, and the first DOMINION to the Daughter
of Sion. Mich. 4.7, 8. And out of Sion shall go forth the Law, Mich. 4.1, 2,
3-7.

Thirdly, This KINGDOM of our LORD will begin before the Kingdoms of this WORLD
End, Dan. 2.44. In the Days of these Kings (to wit, the ten Kings of the
Fourth Monarchy and Kingdom of the Beast) shall the God of Heaven set up a
KINGDOM; which is the Kingdom of Christ, Dan. 7.13, 14. Then will our LORD
Jesus Christ take unto him his great POWER and Reign, Rev. 11.15, 17, 18. At
which the Nations will be angry, and the Heathen will Rage, The Kings of the
EARTH will set themselves, and the Rulers of this WORLD will take Counsel
together against the LORD, and against his Christ; Yet God will set his KING
upon his Holy HILL of Sion, and will give him the Heathen for his Inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the EARTH for his Possession. Psalm. 2.1-8. And the
LORD shall REIGN over them in MOUNT-Sion, from henceforth even for ever, Mich.
4.7, 8.

Fourthly, Though the KINGDOM of Christ shall begin before the Kingdoms of this
WORLD End; And though all the Kingdoms of this WORLD shall become the KINGDOM
of our LORD Jesus Christ; Yet the great Glory and Perfection of Christ's Kingdom
shall be in the WORLD to COME. Then shall ALL things be put in SUBJECTION under
the Feet of Christ, Hebr. 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Which World to COME is contradistinguished from the WORLD that NOW IS, Mat.
12.32. Called this WORLD, in distinction from that WORLD, Luke 20.34, 35, 36.
The Apostle also speaks of the DOMINION of this WORLD, Ephesians. 1.21. and of the
POWER of the WORLD to COME.

The WORLD to COME is not that eternal State of God's Kingdom of GLORY in
Heaven; but it is the glorious and spiritual State of the KINGDOM of Christ on
EARTH, Heb. 2.5. That same WORLD, even THAT, that is to COME; to wit, The
inhabited WORLD to Come, wherein the PEOPLE of God shall build Houses, and
inhabit them, according to Gods Promise, in that day, when he will Create New
Heavens, and a new Earth, Isa. 65.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25. and Amos 19.11, 14.
And shall build up the Tabernacle of David, etc.

Fifthly, The Dominion and Government of the KINGDOM of Christ on EARTH shall
be given to the Saints, Dan. 7.27. and be Managed by them according to the Laws
of Christ; and to that End the Saints, ( who shall Reign with Christ on Earth)
shall be rarely Qualified, and fitted for that Kingdom, Work, and Kingly
Government: for, 1. They shall be all Righteous, Isa. 60.21. They shall do no
Iniquity, Zeph. 3.13. They shall be without Fault before the THRONE of God,
Rev. 14.5. 2. The Saints shall be SPIRITED for Government, Isa. 28.5, 6.
Constituted Government, Rev. 5.9, 10. and strengthened for Governing, Zech.
12.5, 8. and Isa. 45.24, 25. 3dly, and Lastly, The Saints shall be clothed
with Humility, so that they shall Cast down their Crowns at the Feet of Christ,
their KING, Rev. 4.10, 11. Exalting HIM alone, chapter 5.9, 10. And they shall be
Endued with Courage, Clad with Zeal, and Girded with Strength and Truth, that
they may bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of IRON, and Execute upon
them the JUDGMENT written, Luke 19.27. This HONOR have all his SAINTS, Psalm.
149.1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9. which was Prophesied of Jer. 51.19-24. Thou art my
Battle-Axe and Weapon of WAR, for with thee will I break in pieces the Nations,
and with thee will I destroy Kingdoms, and with thee will I break in pieces
Captains and RULERS, etc. Also Zech. 12.5, 6. In that DAY will I make the
GOVERNORS of Judah like a Hearth of Fire among the Wood, and like a Torch of
Fire in a Sheaf, and they shall devour all the PEOPLE (the Enemies of Christ)
round about.

Sixthly, The Gospel of this KINGDOM of Christ shall be preached in all the
WORLD for a WITNESS to all NATIONS, Mat. 24.14. And therefore the Kingdom of
Christ cannot be set up in any Nation until the GOSPEL of the Kingdom be first
preached in that Nation; And then that NATION, Kingdom, or PEOPLE, which do
believe the GOSPEL of the Kingdom preached unto them, and are made WILLING (in
the DAY of God's POWER, Psalm. 110.3.) to Admit the Saints to RULE and GOVERN
that Nation according to the LAWS of our LORD and KING Jesus, shall become the
Kingdom of Christ: But that Nation, Kingdom and People, which will not receive
the TESTIMONY of the Kingdom of Christ, but reject the WITNESS of the Gospel,
and Kill the WITNESSES of Christ, shall be utterly Wasted, and Destroyed, Isa.
60.12. And our LORD Jesus Christ will put down all RULE, all AUTHORITY, and all
POWER, that are his Enemies, and will not Submit unto his DOMINION, 1 Cor.
15.24, 25. and Luke 19.27.

Seventhly, WHEN this Kingdom of (...) LORD is Established on EARTH, wi^^ POWER
and great GLORY, and all th^^ Kingdoms of this WORLD are become the KINGDOM of
Christ; The Thousand Years of the Reign of Christ and his Saints being Expired
and Ended, Then Will Christ come again, and all the Saints with HIM, Zeph.
14.5. and 1 These. 4.15, 16, 17, 18. then will be the General RESURRECTION, and
the Last JUDGMENT, 1 Cor. 15.22, 23. and Rev. 20.4, 12, 13, 14. Which being
past, Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom unto God the Father, that GOD may be
ALL in ALL, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 28.

FINIS.

