A LETTER FROM One in the Country, to a Member of Parliament, entreating this
Session, may take to their Consideration, the Lamentable Condition of the Poor.
SIR,
However unconcerned the most of Men may be, in what relates to the Good of a
Society; Or that it may be nothing the Duty of some to Notice what is not
within their private Station, yet this General and extremely to be Lamented
Inconveniency, from the Grievous Condition of the Poor, and the Unequal and
little provident way of Supplying them, is a Calamity so little Tolerable, as
the almost alike Impulse, that forced the Speechless Son to speak for diverting
an Imminent hazard to his Father, may put every one as they are able to Cry for
Help in this Affair, and makes me by this Line, in some Measure, to endeavor
the laying before you your Duty as a Member of this ensuing Parliament.

The way of Supplying the Poor of this Nation, and there being necessitat to
beg through the Country, has so many Palpable Inconveniences attending it, as
makes Obvious how equally Hurtful it is to Our Religious and Civil Interest;
That way of Living giving occasion of what, to the Scandal Religion, is the
greatest Nursery of Sin and Wickedness; and surely there is Apparent Necessity
of appointing such Methods in this Affair, as may tend to the Competent Supply
of the truly Poor, Unable to do for their own Subsistence, and utterly Banish
and put away that wicked Custom of Begging by Sorners and Healthy Persons of
both Sexes, who generally as Beasts live Promiscuously, without respect to
Laws, either Dirine or Humane. I am sensible the Difficulties in finding what
may Effectuat this, so Great a Reformation, are near to being Unsuperable; yet
the Laudable Practice of some other Nations, may persuade of its being
attainable, and that we are unequal in Riches, to such as does so provide for
their Poor, is to me no Argument against, but for its being done, since
Uncontravertedly the Nation would save by so doing, and almost the half of what
is now given, would competently Supply the truly Indigent, and to our
Unexpressable Advantage, the many Vagrant and Idle Persons now in the Country,
might be for their own and the Nations good, put to labor in some
Manufactories fitted for them. And as it is Undubtedly our Nations Interest, we
have a Foreign Plantation, which may not only to our Profit, take of the Native
Product of our Country, but may be for Receiving, and competently Intertaining
a great many People which may be spared there from; So this Method, to the
Unconeivable Advantage of such a Project, and to the Nations Good beyond
Expression, would tend to the Furnishing of Persons much fitted therefore. And
as indeed the Advantages from such a regular method will be both Great and
Numerous; So if there were no other then the Credit and Advantage the Nation,
to both our Religious and Cilvil Interest will have by Taking and Keeping a
very Great Number of Youths of both Sexes from this Miserable Custom of
Begging, which brings them to such a Habit of living Idly, as renders them not
only absolutely Useless in, but a Plague to their Country. It might of it self
be sufficient to induce to what will overcome the Difficulties in this, so
desirable a Work. I have indeed such a Sense of the Frailty in Man disabling
to the Rightly doing what is Good, as makes me see the Unreasonableness of that
Popish Tenet anent Merit; Yet can I with Confidence say, who does
Conscienciously concern themselves in this so plainly from the Word of GOD, the
Duty of Mankind will not only to their Eternal Advantage, gain what in
Comparison is only desirable, but they may thereby in things Temporal, draw
down upon, and Rivet a Blessing to themselves and their Posterity.

I shall not Undervalue what this Session of Parliament has the Prospect of
doing for the Good of the Nation; and I Cheerfully wish they succeed in their
Endeavors, yet I do say, all under their Condition comes not near to what may
Undoubtedly be the Nations Interest from so desirable an Act, which will
Eternize the Memory of this Session, as it will be to the Unconceivable
Reputation and Honor of His Majesty's Commissioner; Yea after Ages, speaking
of the Reign of Our present Sovereign will not do it under the Denomination of
King William the 2. d. but King William in whose Reign the Act effectually
regulating the Poor, was made and duly Execute.

Surely if my Pen were able to express what my Heart conceives of the
Calamitous Condition of the Poor, and the Advantages that will occur from their
being sutably relieved, I think I could give Arguments moving the hardest of
hearts in the most unconcerned of Mankind, to endeavor it: But I know ye may
justly say, the Difficulty lies not in enforcing what is so obvious to the
least thinking of Persons, but in proposing the Remedy.

I am sensible it were Arrogance almost altogether unjustifiable, my pretending
to direct in so great a Matter, and where there are so great and knowing
Persons, who upon sedate Consideration will see unto the Means for
accomplishing this so desirable and undoubtedly excelling a Reformation; Yet I
do hereby presume to say, that no Act that can be conceived, relating to this
Affair, will take effect, unless the Execution thereof be otherways directed
than has been hitherto. And I truly conceive, would it please the Parliament,
to name some considerable number of the most Conscientious Nobility, Gentry and
Burgesses, especially in or near about Edinburgh, Glasgow, or other Places of
greatest Resort within the Kingdom, who by a Law might be Erected into a
Society or Company, having Power to establish their Rules for Management, into
whose hands the Execution of the Law for Regulating the Poor might be
Committed, there may be a Competent Number of such Condescended upon, as will
cheerfully from Conscience underly the Trouble: I shall again say, it were
Impertinent in me to propose what is necessar to come under Consideration in a
Method of this Kind; but surely as the Burrows now appointed to put up houses
for receiving Vagrant Persons, are unable to the doing thereof, so much less do
they know how profitably to provide for and employ them in Work. And as there
must be Rules laid down to know what Super-numerary Poor are in Parishes
throughout the Kingdom, beyond their Power to mantain, and how and where these
are to be mantain'd; so at Edinburgh, and other fit Places, there would be
Manufactories for receiving Young ones and others, not knowing how, or
unwilling to employ themselves in some Work suitable to their Capacity. I
freely grant you, the View of the Difficulties occurring is indeed great, yet
undoubtedly they are superable, and the Advantages accrescing from the Work
done, will unconceivably overballance them. Indeed there could be no Thought of
any reasonable Acting in this Affair, without putting into the Trust of the
Society so Erected, a Competent Stock enabling to the Mantainance of the
super-numerary Poor, that Parishes are not able to mantain, and setting up at
Edinburgh, and some other Places, Manufactories for putting to Work Young Ones
and others, that may otherwise want the Occasion, or be unwilling to Employ
themselves: And I verily think a Stock of near Twenty Thousand Pound Sterling
employed by the Public for that Use, would be Money so profitably disposed of,
as never had the Country Occasion more cheerfully to give; And I conceive the
Society might be so Constitute, as there would be more than probable Grounds it
would not fail by Mismanagement. The Money may be so soon needful, as will at
least require a Months Cess yearly whilst it were completed. I shall readily
grant, that what the Parliament may at this time see otherways needful, will
render any thought of further imposing upon the Country grievous; but surely
upon Consideration, any Imposition to this Effect can never be considered a
Burden; for it is but putting the Country to give in a Regular Method what they
otherways must, and does give to a greater quantity and less profitably.

Sir, I acknowledge this Represented may be by many considered, but an
impracticable Notion, and what will have but the Effect of other Endeavors
hitherto made, in Regulating what relates to the Poor; and it shall be well
satisfieing to me if it shall only put you and others of the Members of
Parliament, to think upon what may be practicable. In my Converse through the
Country, I find some of considerable Interest partly unconcerned in the Poor,
and without Bowels of Compassion toward them, and willing to proceed in any
Method easeful to themselves, albeit having the Prospect of a direful Calamity
to the Generality of the of the Poor throughout the Kingdom; Others do not
Comprehend how, albeit they be willing in their Stations suteably to Act in
this Affair: And surely, if there be from the Word of GOD a Tie upon Christians
to a positive Duty, it is to that of Charity; and is it possible for your great
Meeting more truly to evince the Sense of their Obligation thereto, than by
doing what is not only so much the Nation's Civil Interest, but will be
Charitable to a very high Degree. I do remember to have read a Sermon upon that
Subject, Preached by Dr. Barrow upon a Hospital day, before the Mayor of
London, which if perused by you and your Fellow-Commissioners would persuade,
that than Charity to the Poor, there is no Duty more peremptorly commanded; But
that Sermon being long and now so much out of Print, as it may not come to your
hand, it is like you may if you call at Mrs. Ogston or John Mackie their Shops,
have a kind of Abridgement thereof, but in two or three Sheets as may satisfy;
Ye cannot to greater Advantage for your Country or your Self employ the utmost
of your Endeavors, than in doing for the Good of the Poor, what After-Ages may
Rejoice in; And that GOD may put into your hearts suteably to endeavor it, and
Bless the samen with Success, is, and shall be the hearts Desire of

SIR, Your Affectionat and humble Servant.
10 May 1700. P. S. I am so satisfied of that Method appointing each Paroch to
mantain their own Poor, as I wish it were put in Execution; but surely, its
being duly done needs much to be enquired into, and it were a Calamity very
Intolerable, if by its not being General, and every One, Great and Mean put to
their Duty therein; the Poor in some Places should be hindered to Beg, yet be in
a straightened and starving Condition, where-from will arise no small part of the
Work of the Society burdened to see to the Execution of these Laws. And as it
might not be Improper, to give some General Directions to the Paroches, as to
the Method of their Acting; So if it be worth your Perusal, I send you
underwritten what was intended to be the Rule for proceeding in this Affair by
a Paroch Neighboring to your self.

These within the Paroch of (...) in Obedience to the Acts for regular
Mantenance of the Poor, and as being fully sensible of the many and Great
Inconveniences from Begging, both to the Receivers and Givers of Charity do
resolve.

1. To make an exact List of all such within the Paroch, as cannot of
themselves Subsist.

2. As being Conscious of the positive and plain Command of GOD, that the Poor
have Liberal and Comfortable Mantenance, they will allot to these, as can
noways contribute to their own Subsistence, One Peck of Oat-Meal Weekly, and
One Shilling Scots each Day in Money,.

3. These Needy and Impotent Persons being reduced out of the List, they will
allow to the Remander such a Proportion of Meal or Money, as with what they
shall be able to gain by their own Labor, may be the Mean of their comfortable
Subsistence.

4. Where Parents are Burdened with Children beyond their Ability to Mantain,
they are to be Ranked in two sorts, and either considered as Children of
Parents, who albeit Indigent, are Sober and Willing to endeavor their
Christian Education, or that they are Children of Profane and Careless
Parents, whose example may, yea does draw their Children to almost every evil,
and in the first case does resolve answerable to the number and need of such
Children, to give to the Parents what may enable them to their Childrens
mantainance; and encourage their endeavors in their suitable Education: And in
the Second, do resolve to take from Profane and Careless Parents, such
Children as they are not able to mantain, and dispose of them in Familys, where
they may by Precept and Example have the Means of Knowledge, and a Christian
Education; They are at School or otherways, to be taught at least to Read the
Word of GOD, and, as according to their Ability and their Learning to Read will
allow, they are to be Serviceable in any Employment within their power, so the
Parish is to give to the Master of that Family in which they are, so much, as
their giving the Young One ^ither Meat, Clothes or Learning, shall not be their
Burden.

5. Such as are without Parents and indigent, are to be disposed of as the
Children of the Profane and careless, and it is hoped every honest Man will be
sensible of their having Credit, yea even Advantage in their Educating a poor
one, who is in a special manner owned of God, so as with confidence may be
expected the repayment of what is rightly done to them.

6. This division being made, and a true Computation of what the whole will
amount to, there is to be chosen six or more honest Men within the Parish, who
are to Stent all the inhabitants, Masters of Familys and others according to
their Ability, their income and way of living, in a Monthly Contribution; And
as it is hoped every one but pretending to Conscience, will be ashamed to
refuse obedience to so laudable and Christian a practice: So it were desirable
that Authority were applied to, that, by some public Act they would Authorize
such Stent Masters, as the Stent Rolls duly Subscribed, might at least be
ground of a Claim for obtaining the Sentence of a Judge for the due and ready
payment thereof.

7. Because the circumstances even of the givers of Charity may alter, the
Stent Roll by new Stent-Masters is to be renewed every Year, and if the Number
and Circumstances of the Poor do vary, so as more yea even less may be
required, the Roll is likeways in either of these Cases, to be altered, when
ever they do occur.



SIR,
IT is like it may be thought this weekly allowance may be too large, but were
I to Vote in this Affair, I would not be so persuaded, for a poor Man or Woman
having their health, yet unable to do any thing for their own Subsistence,
could not well be maintained with Less, and if their Inclination to meat,
through sickness, age or any accedent, should be lessned, they will need to as
great an Expense under these circumstances to be supplied. And when it shall
please God to bring Victual to the usual Price, this allowance for the Poor
will extend to no great Matter. It may be reasoned the convenience of
appointing what the Parliament intends for this use its being uplifted by Pole,
since otherways many enabled to the giving in Charity may be missed, but what
is appointed by Pole, or any other Method, then what is the usual way of
uplifting in this Kingdom, coming so little to Answer what is expected
therefrom; I conceive the usual way will uncontravertedly be most effectual,
and the Mannagers in giving their Directions to the Paroches, as to their
Stenting, may so order it, as they have a Particular respect to Servants and
all others, as they may be able to give, and especially such as by the usual
way of paying public burdens are exempted therefrom.


