Mr. Kelletts CASE WITH THE SOCIETY OF Clements-Inn.
KELLETT supposing the Principal and Ancients of Clements-Inn had good Title to
the Inn, did in July 1673, Contract with them for ground to build thereon for a
Term of forty years at the Rent of 12 l. per Annum: After Kellett had expended
near 2000 l. in building, the Earl of Clare claimed Title to the whole Inn, and
sent to Kellett to come to him before he went beyond the Seas and comply with
his Lordship, or else he would stop up his Lights: Kellet acquainted the
Principal and Ancients therewith, desiring some of them to go with him to the
Earl, but they refusing to go, Kellett did not; thereupon the Earl reserved
power in Mr. Marklands Lease to come into the ground adjoining to Kelletts
building to stop up his Lights.

When the Earl was beyond the Seas he sent several Letters to his Steward to
stop up Kelletts Lights, if he would not comply: That a building being begun to
stop up Kelletts Lights, he made known the same to the Principal and Ancients,
desiring them to prevent it, but they refused, saying they were not concerned
till after Forty years.

Thereupon Kellett at his own charge moved in Chancery for a Writ of Nuisance,
which was granted; but the Earl moving against it, and the Society not
assisting Kellett, the Lord Chancellor declared that it was not Clements-Inn
building but Kelletts, and wondered how he durst build without the consent of
the Inner Temple.

Then Kellett Petitioned the Benchers of the Inner Temple, setting forth his
Contract, and what the Lord Chancellor had said, praying them to defend him
from the Earl, and Clements-Inn, and he would perform his Contract and pay Rent
to them: That some of the Benchers advised Kellett to give a Copy of his
Petition to the Principal and Ancients, wishing them to come to the Benchers
before the Petition was preferred, which Kellett accordingly did, but the
Ancients refused to go, saying that the Benchers had nothing to do with them in
matters of Title but only relating to the Government of the Society.

Thereupon Kellett preferred his Petition to the Benchers, who debated the
matter at the Table, whether they should make an Order for the Principal and
Ancients to attend them, in regard they had sent word to the Benchers that they
had nothing to do with them as to Title, therefore they directed their Chief
Butler to go to the Principal and Ancients and desire them with Kellett to
attend Sir John Trevor then Treasurer at his Chamber with some Benchers, and
the Principal and Ancients with Killett attending accordingly, the Benchers did
not pretend Title to Clements-Inn, but wished Kellett to comply with the
Principal and Ancients, which Kellett never refused so as he might have a good
Title or be defended from the Earl of Clare.

Then Kellett acquainted Mr. Justice Twisden with his Case, and he and several
others satisfied Kellett that the Title to Clements-Ins was in the Earl, and
unless he complied with the Earl he could not be safe; and this was the motive
that induced Kellett to comply with the Earl, although it has been falsely
reported, that Kellett was the first promoter of the Earls Title to be rid of
his hard bargain, and to avoid his Contract; but the contrary is notorious, for
Kellett opposed the Earl to his uttermost, and never entertained thoughts of a
compliance until he was deserted by the Principal and Ancients, they refusing
either to defend or give him any assistance, and being thus exposed he thought
it behoov'd him to consult his own security in the best way he could, being in
no wise able to withstand the proceedings of the Earl, who had caused some of
Kelletts Lights to be stopped up, and threaned to stop up more: And so far was
Kellett from endeavoring to avoid his Contract, that before the Earl pretended
Title, Kellett tendered to the Principal and Ancients a draught of Articles,
such as they usually made, but they refused to Execute the same, upon pretense
Kellett had taken more ground then was agreed on, although the same was done by
the Consents of some of the Ancients, and is in truth a benefit to the Society,
but a prejudice to Kellett.

That Kellett suffering under so great extremity repaired to the honorable Mr.
Peirpoint and others the Earls Trustees, (the Earl being then beyond the Seas)
and agreed with them for a Lease of all Clements-Inn for a 100 years at the
Rent of 20 l. per Annum, but as soon as this Agreement was known, and that the
Earl had ordered Kellett his assistance as his Tennant, the Principal and
Ancients ordered, that unless Kellett would desist from further proceeding with
the Earl and comply with them, that Kellett should be expelled the Society and
Padlocks set upon his Chamber door, which was accordingly done, and Kellett
breaking off the Padlock was upon the complaint of the Principal and Ancients
summoned before the then Lord Chief Justice Hales, and Kellett offered by Rule
of Court, to submit the matter to his Lordships Award, but his Lordship
refusing to undertake the same, advised Kellett to comply with the Principal
and Ancients, which he was willing to do, so as he might be defended from the
Earl, although he was like to be a great looser by the Building.

In answer whereunto, it was pretended by Mr. Edward Garrard one of the
Ancients, that Kellett would be gainer; for that the building was worth above
2100 l. and Kellett for quietness sake offered to take less by 300 l. which
offer his Lordship advised the Principal and Ancients to accept, and pay the
money, but they pretending they had no money, his Lordship being unsatisfied
with that excuse said, had no person in Clements-Inn money to buy a good
Bargain? advising them to close with Kellets offer and let him hear no more of
it, but they refused to comply and his Lordship died.

The matter thus resting undetermined, Kellett upon the Earls return into
England went to a Bencher of the Inner Temple to advise about his Lease, who
told Kellett, that he could not be of Counsel against Clements-Inn because they
had some dependence upon the Inner Temple; whereupon Kellett desiring him to
advise such a Lease as they would accept, he advised Kellett rather to buy the
inheritance, than take a Lease, for that he was confident the Inner Temple
would accept of the Inheritance.

Thereupon Kellett with much difficulty prevailed with the Earl to sell his
Inheritance, upon Kelletts promise that if he parted with it, it should be to
the Inner Temple: For that the Society of Clements-Inn had much affronted the
Earl in refusing to pay Rent, pulling down his Arms and denying his Lordships
Tenants liberty to go through the Inn in the day time, which is reserved in
Kelletts Conveyance from six in the morning till nine at Night, except Sundays
in Church time.

After Kellett had purchased the Inheritance, he repaired to Mr. Powel then
Treasurer of the Inner Temple, and offered the same to that Society gratis, so
as they would make a Lease to him of such part thereof as should not disturb or
prejudice any man's person or interest there, and yet leave Clements-Inn a
Revenue of 100 l. per Annum.

Mr. Powel liked Kelletts proposition, and said, that though they had not money
they would give him something for it; thereupon Kellett proposed that he and
his two Sons should be admitted of the Inner Temple and have Chambers for their
three lives, with which Mr. Powel seemed well pleased, but afterward refused
to proceed therein, which disappointment proved very prejudicial to Kellett,
for had not he relied upon their acceptance of the Inheritance, he had taken a
Lease, and so had been entitled to the favor and protection of the Earl as
his Tennant.

Kellett finding his expectation frustrated, and that Clements-Inn would not
condescend to any reasonable terms, brought and Ejectment to try his title,
and moved the Court of Kings Bench for a plea or Judgment, and then the Court
conceived the matter fit to be composed, and in order thereto Kellett gave
Copies of his Case to all the Judges, but Clements Inn persisting in their
unreasonableness, Kellett moved the Court again, and then Mr. Justice Wild told
the Society in open Court that they would neither go to Church nor stay at
home; for if they had a title, Kellett should submit to them, and if they had
no title, they might have one upon reasonable terms, and so ordered Judgment
unless they pleaded.

After a plea given and the Cause ready for Trial, the Principal and Ancient
and others as a Society in February, 1679, exhibited their Bill in Chancery,
and then got an Injunction to stay proceedings at Law, and then the Lord
Chancellor referred the matter to the Lord Chief Justice Pemberton, being then
but a puisny Judge, to compose the difference if he could, who being attended
by both parties, and although Kellett did, as he apprehends, fully satisfy his
Lordship of his undoubted title to all Clements-Inn, yet he could not prevail
with his Lordship to allow him what his building is worth and what he paid to
the Earl of Clare, and so nothing was done therein.

The Cause in Chancery being ready for hearing in Michaelmas Term 1680 the
Principal and Ancients by motion put it off, and exhibited another Bill against
Kellett and Rogers, to whom Kellett had Mortgaged his two Buildings, and Rogers
exhibited another Bill against Kellett and the Principal and Ancients: And
these causes coming to be heard on the 15th. of November 1681, the Lord
Chancellor without hearing any proofs in the Causes, and without Kellett or his
Councils consent, ordered that Kellett should convey his Inheritance of
Clements-Inn, to the Society, or to whom they should appoint; They paying
Kellett what he paid to the Earl with interest, and making Kellett a Lease of
the new building for sixty years at the Rent of 20 s. per annum, and whereas
Kellett had a term of nine years to come in a building called Dobbs his
building, the Society should make it up twenty one years, that Kellett should
pay Rogers's Mortgage money with interest by Christmas 1682 or Rogers to hold
absolute, and on payment to reconvey to Kellett.

The Society refused to enter up the Order for some time, because Kellett would
not Consent, thereupon Kellett by his Petition to the Lord Chancellor showed
for reasons why he could not consent, for that the Society had agreed with
Rogers to pay the Mortgage money with interest, well knowing that none out of
Clements-Inn, would buy Kelletts building, and he not able to raise the
Mortgage money otherwise, and so the Society would hold it absolute. He
therefore prays his Lordship to rehear the Causes or dissolve the injunction,
unless the Society would purchase the new building according to the particular
of the Rent to his Petition annexed, and make him such satisfaction for his
damages as his Lordship should think fit, that so he might discharge the
Mortgage; but nothing was done therein. But the Society about the 25th. of
February last procured Mr. Devenish the Register to enter up the Order to be by
Kellett and his Councels consent, whereas there was no consent given, nor any
mentioned in the Minutes, as by Affidavit appears.

Now the Society would have the world believe that the Decree is very
advantageous for Kellett; and that nothing in reason will satisfy him, but in
that particular he refers himself to the Judgment of every impartial Reader of
this his Case.

For Kellett will make it manifestly appear, that since the finishing of his
Building, for want of a title to enable him to dispose thereof, and by reason
of the Societies unjust vexation for eight years, he has been damnified 200 l.
per annum, toward satisfaction whereof and other his demands there is decreed
no more than these particulars, viz.

1. Kellett must convey his Inheritance at the Rate he paid for it with
interest, but no allowance made him for his expenses and damages.

2. Kellett is to have twenty years added in the new building more than the
forty years, and twelve years added in Dobbs's Building to make it up twenty
one years, which makes a great cry but little wool, for it will not answer his
charges in Chancery, which are considerable.

3. Kellett is to have his Rent of 12 l. per annum abated to 20 s. per annum,
and the Society take away a shop worth 10 l. per annum, so there is very little
abated.

4. Kellett must Convey his Inheritance under hand and Seal to the Society, and
they will grant Leases to Kellett by way of Articles under their hands only,
upon which Articles Kellett can neither sue for his Rents, nor for breach of
Articles on their parts, or dispose of the same, whereas Builders in other
houses have Leases under hands and Seals, and may dispose of the same subject
to their Covenants.

If Kellett may have but half his damages, he will readily Convey his
Inheritance at the Rate he paid for it with interest and perform his Contract
to a tittle, without expecting his terms to be enlarged or his Rent and Arrears
abated.

The Society pretended they have not money to pay Kellett, whereas there are as
many Buildings out of Lease as they may raise almost 1500 l. by disposing of
them if the title was settled, and for want of a title few Principals have made
accounts, but kept the Revenues of the house in their hands.

The reasons why Kellett puts this in print, is because he has been much
misrepresented and aspersed in this affair, as if he intended to dissolve the
Society, which was never in his thoughts, neither does he desire to make any
further advantage by any procedure of his, than to reinburse him his expenses
and damages, and prevent his ruin, which he hopes that the Lord Chancellor
being fully satisfied of the truth herein related, will in no wise suffer the
Society to ruin Kellett and his Family, which will be no advantage to them, or
prejudice if Kellett be relieved, but compel the Society to do what his
Lordship shall think most expedient according to Equity and Justice for the
settling a final determination of all differences.

FINIS.
Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey, 1682.


