His Imperial Majesty's Letter to the Pope; wherein is offered, his Reasons why
he cannot accept of any Offers of Peace with France.
Translated from the Original.

Most Holy Father,
WHat deep and sorrowful Impressions the great Calamities and Miseries of the
present War, which all Christendom groans under, have made on your Mind, as
also the great and special Care your Holiness takes to reconcile the
exasperated Minds of all Christian Princes, in order to the promoting of an
universal Peace, has been given us to understand at large by your Holiness
Letter, from the 8th of the last Month. And truly the great and increasing
Mischiefs, attending a War that has been raised under so frivolous pretenses,
moves no less ours, than your Holiness Fatherly Heart. Yet since We did not
take up Arms till We were forced to it by an unavoidable Necessity, We have
this Consolation left us, that (calling God and our Conscience to Witness) we
are wholly free from the Cause of it: Besides your Holiness, by a long and
solid experience, is so well acquainted with the remotest Inclinations of our
Heart, that you will easily conceive, that We can suffer nothing with more
Uneasiness and Impatience, than to see the effects of a Natural Tendency to
Peace and Quietness, obstructed by the ambitious and envious Endeavors of
France.

As yet no Obligations, Promises, no not the most Sacred Oaths could prevail
with that Crown to keep it from the breaking of the most Solemn Treaties as
soon as they were made, for to pass over all the rest, the Christian World
knows it; and future Ages will relate it with astonishment, that the most
Christian King has caused himself to be seduced so far, as to obstruct the
Glorious Course of Our Victorious Arms over the Infidels; and when we were
relying on his Friendship, but so lately renewed, and consequently not at all
standing on Our Guards, to Invade Us upon a sudden the second time with his
Hostile Arms, putting all to the Fire and Sword, before he had acquainted Us
with his having the cause for it, and indeed, all Divine and Humane Laws are
Violated, rather than France should let slip any occasion of enlarging her
Frontiers, or to hinder Us from the securing of Ours, and to deprive Us and
Christendom of all Means to end the War with the Turks with Success and
Advantage.

Thus have We been obliged by the Most Sacred Ty of Our high Office, by reason
of that most Ignominious League between the most Christian King, and the Sworn
Enemy of the Christian Name, to Unite Our selves with Our Friends and
Confederates against France, to the Defense of Us and Our People; which Union
and Confederacy is of so high a Nature, that we can do nothing toward the
Conclusion of a Peace, without their Advice and Counsel. But since We are
wholly convinced that their Inclinations are no less tending than ours to such
a Peace, by which all Christendom, according to the Wesphalian and Pyrenean
Treaty (since violated by France) may be restored to its former Quietness and
Tranquillity, all will be reduced to this point, that your Holiness will be
pleased to employ to the outmost, your Fatherly Care to prevail with the French
King as the sole Author of this War, to restore both the abovementioned
Treaties, which he himself has broke.

In Case your Holiness can obtain from him these so just Demands, there shall
be wanting nothing on our side to render effectual this so Holy Design of your
Holiness, tending to the good of Christendom, and your proffered Fatherly
Service for the promoting of a General Reconciliation, so acceptable to Us, and
so much wished for by all the rest of our Confederates. This We have thought
fit to reply to your Holiness's Letter, according to our Zeal for your Person,
Praying God Almighty long to preserve your Holiness to the benefit of Us and
the Church.

Vienna, Jan. 30. 169^.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, 1692.


