A LETTER from a Gentleman TO AN East India Merchant.
SIR,
I Am very sensible how much its your Concern, that the Coalition so much
discoursed of between the Contending Parties in the East India Trade should
take effect, and therefore cannot blame your solicitous Enquiry what Progress
is made therein, and what probability there appears of its being accomplished.

Now in Answer thereto, all that I can learn is, That a very honest Gentleman
has applied himself to the Directors or Committees of both Companies, and
shown the Advantages which they will reap from an Union, and the certain Ruin
which will attend their Stock, by carrying on that Trade in a separate
Interest; but neither his Arguments or Experience will, it seems, prevail with
either of them, to make one step toward it.

There Is no doubt but various Constructions are made of their Conduct in this
affair, though I can by no means agree with your Notion, That the present Ruling
Directors of both Companies, have for their own private Ends and Advantage,
banished all thoughts of an Accommodation, and endeavored to render the thing
impracticable.

I cannot entertain so mean an Opinion of Gentlemen, that have been chosen into
such considerable Trusts, by the Suffrages of the Generality of those
Corporations, whose Interest may be thought a sufficient Direction to their
Nomination of such as are of the best Reputation for Probity, Diligence and
Ability.

It seems more likely to me, that the Resentments which yet remain with the
Members of the old Company, against the unwarrantable Methods contrived by some
Gentlemen to forward the late Act of Parliament for settling that Trade, and
the hopes they have of some Relief in the approaching Session of Parliament, on
one side; and on the other side, the mean Opinion which some Leading Directors
of the New Company have entertained of the affairs of the old Company; and that
the Forts, Factories, Revenues and Privileges, which they value themselves so
much upon, are of little benefit toward the carrying on the Trade; are the
Reasons that hitherto no Overtures have been made toward an Union, which in
the Judgment of either Party would tend so greatly to the Benefit of the
Proprietors, in the joint Stock of both Companies.

To Remove these Prejudices will be a difficult Task, however I will take the
Liberty, to show how unreasonably they are grounded, and the ill Consequences
which attend them.

The Legislative Authority having Reassumed their Right of prescribing the
Rules, Manner and Method for the future carrying on the Trade to the
East Indies; and your old Company having Subscribed thereto, does seem to imply
a Consent, and therefore Renders all Complaints that may be made in Parliament
fruitless, if not frivolous.

And should any Attempts be hereafter made to lessen or take away the Benefits,
Privileges or Advantages of those that were the Subscribers to the Two
Millions for the Service of the Government, in might indeed be justly
complained of as a breach of that Faith and Credit that ought to be kept
sacredly inviolable, when warranted by the Sanction of an Act of Parliament.

Moreover, If it be considered how highly serviceable the Money raised this way
has been to the Government and whole Kingdom, it ought to quiet the Minds of
those, whose Interest have suffered thereby; especially if they will remember
that they were the first Promoters of a Loan to the Government, upon Condition
of having themselves Established by Act of Parliament, and by that means to
have Monopolized the whole Trade to the East Indies, to their own joint Stock.

I must confess, There is some Compassion owing to the new Adventurers in your
old Company, who advanced that great Sum of 744000 l as an addition to the
Stock of that Society, upon the Encouragements were given them by his Majesty's
new Charter; since which time, by reason of the severest Losses by the War,
great Taxes at home, and an Imbroil on their affairs abroad (by reason of the
Pyracies committed on the Subjects of the Mogul) have been so far from reaping
any Advantage thereby, that their said Stock is, without any dividend, reduced
to one half of its original Value.

The sense of these Losses and Disappointments, and the uneasiness they were
under to see, that when a happy end was put to the War, they had yet worse
Enemies (I mean the Interlopers) to contend with, who by Corrupting their
Factors, and interfereing at their Markets abroad and at home, were like to
render their future Trade unprofitable: And this ill prospect, without doubt
induced them to seek that Remedy that has proved so fatal to them.

It was very obvious, in what miserable Circumstances the late Act for settling
this Trade left the old Company, after the three Years expired, with respect to
their affairs in India, if by their Subscription for the Raising 315000 l part
of the Two Millions, they had not Purchased Freedom of Passing to their Forts
and Factories, and of Trading so far as that Sum will extend yearly to the East
Indies.

But although it is true, that this Subscription has given them, it may be a full
half of that Trade; or at least the liberty of sending out half the Stock that
is necessary, or that can be well employed therein; yet if they will reflect
upon the mischiefs, which a few Interlopers have done them heretofore, who went
out with small Stocks and great difficulty, it will certainly give them but a
Melancholy Prospect of the Benefit they can reap thereby, when they are to
contend with a Corporation, that cannot want Protection abroad or Countenance
at home, and it moreover Entitled to 5 per Cent. upon the gross amount of all
their Returns.

Now on the other side, I can appeal to no better Judge than your self, who are
no stranger to this Trade, to consider the Judgment and Conduct of those
Gentlemen, who slight those Advantageous Forts, Revenues, Factories and
Privileges, which have been Raised, Settled, and Purchased by so much Time,
Care, and Cost; and which are the only Bulwork left to secure that beneficial
Trade to this Nation.

Let them Examine the Policy of the Dutch, the Emulation of the French and
Danes, the former Practice of the Portugueze, and they will find, that all
t^ese, in order to Carry on, Improve, and Secure this Trade, have made it their
first Care to possess themselves of good Settlements.

I do not intend by mentioning the Necessity there is of Forts, Factories, and
the Advantages of the Revenues and Privileges enjoyed by the old Company, to
Raise their Value; but to show, that by the help of these they may be able to
carry on their Trade to equal advantage, of what any other Society can ever
pretend to do.

Though nothing appears more easily demonstrable, than that this Trade thus
divided and carried in a separate Interest must end in the Ruin of the
Traders, to prove which, many Instances and Arguments might be set down, as
well as the Experience of past times, which would be but labor lost, since it
seems to be Universally consented to by the adventurers in both the joint
Stocks.

It Is not past the Memory of the present Age, that the several Chambers of the
Dutch East India Company, were a Divided and Separate Interest in their Trade
and Settlements in the East Indies; and that there was the same Emulation and
Contention between them (that is like to be between your old and new Company;)
but the Experience of the Disadvantages they had thereby, soon brought them to
a Temper of Union; and from thence has sprung the Strength, Credit and Riches,
which that Noble Society does now possess both at Home and in the East Indies.

And if nothing but Experience with instruct those angry Gentlemen of either
Side, I doubt they will too late find, that to complete the Sacrifice of their
Resentments, they have thrown in their own Fortunes for the Fuel.

But I am told, that the Gentlemen of the new Company are in hopes, that the
Divisions or Inability of the old Company, will in time force them to
relinquish the Trade; and that the Embassy intended to the Mogul, will so
Imbarras their Affairs, that they will be forced to leave some of those
Advantageous Settlements which they are now Possessed of.

Now there seems to be an evident Proof of the Ability, as well as good Will of
the old Company, to push on their Trade, to as large an extent as they have
done in former times: But putting the worst Case, that they should not find
means before the Three Years expire, to be Reincorporated; nor in the mean time
to vest Stock and Trade, in the same manner, and it may be to more advantage
than have been done by their Courts of Committees, what should hinder the
disposal of their Forts and Revenues to the best Purchasers, and dividing to
the Adventurers their proportion in the 315000 l Subscribed, with the Benefits
and Advantages attending it; who by Licensing thereof to such as are versed in
the Mystery of that Trade, might set up Interlopers upon the new Company, by
the Privilege of an Act of Parliament.

It will be worth the Consideration of the Members of the new Company, what
will be the Consequences hereof; and if those Gentlemen were in good earnest,
who when they Subscribed to Trade in a Joint Stock, said they had swallowed a
bitter Pill, it may instruct their Brethren to provide in time Lenatives, for
that churlish Purge that was prepared for them, though justly Crammed down the
Throats of the Founders.

Now Sir, I will presume, with entire submission to your Consideration and
better Judgment, to set down my thoughts in what manner this hoped for Union
between these two great Bodies may be best accomplished.

1. That the General Courts of both Corporations declare their Disposition to
Treat upon that Subject. 2. That the said General Courts give Power to such
Number as they think fit, to Treat upon the Preliminaries necessary thereto. 3.
That upon Report made, by those Authorized, to the General Courts, of their
having agreed the Preliminaries, they may have full Power and Authority given
them to Agree.
1. The Value of the Stock that shall be brought in for Trade. 2. The
Proportion which each Company shall share therein. 3. The value of the old
Companies dead Stock, consisting of Islands, Forts, Castles, Factories,
Revenues, Privileges, etc. 4. The Time when, the Profit or Loss, arising by
the Revenues, or incurring by the charge of the Forts, Factories, etc. shall be
carried to the account of the General joint stock of the said Companies to be
united. 5. In what time and Proportion of the Sum agreed on to be Raised for
Trade shall be brought in, and what allowances to be made in case of failure.
These and some other necessary points being agreed and ratified by the General
Courts of the said Companies, it will remain, that at the Request of the said
General Courts, a Bill may be brought into the Honorable House of Commons, to
Confirm and render effectual the Union thereby intended; which once happily
accomplished, will in my poor Opinion, tend to the Honor and Advantage of this
Kingdom, the security of that important Trade, and the benefit of all that are
concerned therein, and that it may have this happy Issue, is the hearty desire
of,

Yours, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.

I Have forgot in the foregoing to observe to your, That in Case the intended
Embassy to the Mogul should have the desired Effect, of those who have Pressed
so hard for it, upon the Persons or Estates of the old Company, it will be
thought very unlike to that Impartial Care and Justice which his present
Majesty (whom God preserve) has hitherto Administered to all his Good People of
this Kingdom.



LONDON: Printed, and Sold by John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. School.


