Columbia University in the City of New York

THE SELIGMAN LIBRARY OF ECONOMICS PURCHASED BY THE UNIVERSITY 1929

A LETTER From a Merchant in SCOTLAND, To his Correspondent in London. Relating
to the Duty upon SCOTCH-LINNEN.
SIR
I Have your Letter of the Instant, wherein you give me an Account, That the
Parliament of England have Voted to lay an Additional Duty of 1 d. per Ell, on
Scotch Linen, in order to raise Money to Supply the Deficiency of some Funds.

Also you are pleased to Inform me, That as an Act of kindness to me, and the
rest of your Friends here, you have used all your Interest, and engaged all
your Friends against the said Bill, for which we suppose you expect our Thanks.

We think our selves obliged to thank you for your Intention, but are very
sorry your Good Will should fall under the Unhappiness of a mistake; and
therefore before we explain our selves, we desire you by all means to desist
any farther Solicitation of that Affair, unless you will be so kind as to
engage all your Interests and Friends on the other hand, if it be possible, to
get the Bill to Pass.

Possibly you may think this something strange; but in order to convince your
Judgment, that your Friendship may join with your Discretion in the Matter, I
take the liberty to open your Eyes a little, and show you what is and what is
not the true Interest of our Trade in Scotland.

First, you are to understand, Scotland does not gain of England, but England
gains of Scotland, by the General Trade of both Nations. I prove this by this
Rule of Trade; That in Trade, that Nation Gains most which Exports most Goods
of its own Growth, and receives back most Money. Now it is allowed that we
receive from England about 60000 l. per Annum in Goods more than we Export to
them; the Remainder of which we remit by Bills, which is Money; and
consequently England Gains of Scotland 60000 1. per Annum, by the Trade.

The reason of this is the want of those Manufactures in Scotland which we have
from England, and which we cannot be without, nor be well supplied with
elsewhere.

We who have a true Notion of the English Trade, and the great disadvantages we
are under in our Trading thither, have often Essayed to supply our selves with
those useful Goods, sometimes from Ireland, sometimes from Holland; but finding
that either way it still enriched the persons who supplied us, and exhausted
our Country of ready Money; and withal, in hopes of reaping the advantage of
so beneficial a Trade, at last we began to enquire, why we might not make those
Goods at home, which we buy so much to our disadvantage from ab^^ad.

On this Enquiry, we found we had Wool enough of our own, which, with the help
of Spanish Wool, would enable us to make Broad-Cloths, and Stuffs, and what
other things of that nature we might want; we found we have hands enough of our
own Poor to Manufacture it, and to Spin, Weave, Knit, etc. And in short, we
have with a Joint Stock Erected a Company for the carrying on this profitable
useful design, and we have met with such success in it hitherto, as that we
doubt not in a short time, not only to supply our own Nation, but Foreign parts
also, and to let the World see that Scotland is an industrious Nation, and have
only hitherto wanted due encouragement to make proof of it.

Now in order to encourage our Design for the advantage of our Native Country,
I know nothing in the World could have contributed more to us, than some
discouragement on the vast Exportation of Linen. The Linen Manufacture in
Scotland, is that which our Poor are so versed in, and so used to, that we find
it difficult to bring them off from it; nay, though we give them better Wages
than they can Earn in the other. Our Work seems new to them, and they think
they are not so secure of constant Employ; but now if the English Parliament
will lay a Duty on Scotch Linen, by which the Quantity sold may be diminished,
the Poor will come under some necessity to work for us, and we shall soon have
our Manufactures flourish.

Besides, If we can but bring our Works to any Maturity against our next
Parliament, we are in great hopes to get a general prohibition of all English
Woollen Manufactures; to which, the Duty imposed upon our Linnens in England
will be a very great Argument; and if these Two Points are gained, we believe
you will grant that our Company will be in a very good condition.

As to the Goods we make, we have already very good Broad-Cloths and Serges
made here; and we do not doubt in a very short time to purchase our Spanish
Wool and Dyers Stuff abroad with our own Goods.

By this short History of the Undertaking in Scotland, you will easily see that
it is far from being our interest to oppose the laying a Duty on Scotch Linen
in England.

We are informed the Parliament are considering of Methods also to prevent the
Improvement of the Woollen Manufacture in Ireland, and that one way they are
pleased to think of, is to encourage the Linen Manufacture there. It is, no
question, a very proper way, and if it can be brought to pass, will certainly
answer the End; and it seemed strange to us at first sight, that the Parliament
should not apprehend the very same thing in Scotland, but attempt to discourage
our Linen Trade, which is the only present hindrance of our falling into the
Woollen, at as large a rate as ever Ireland can pretend to.

If ever we in Scotland bring our Woollen Manufacture to such a head as we hope
to do, we do not question but we may have a Hamborough as well as an East India
Company, with Privileges as great as other Companies enjoy; and indeed I
cannot see why the English should envy us the Improvement of Trade, and the
Growth of our own Country, since they themselves received the first
Instructions in all their Manufactures from their Neighbors the Flemings.

And yet, I acknowledge, we ought not to think that the English do envy us at
all, or that they will at all resent our Setting up the Woollen Manufacture for
that. If we had been to ask of your Nation, what they would do for us, to
encourage and help us forward in the Infancy of our Undertaking, we could have
desired no greater Favor than they have done us in discouraging our Linen
Work.

The Making of Linen in Scotland seems to have been introduced rather by a
Necessity than a Profit; the Wages to the Poor is very small, the Profit to the
Merchant much less, and the Advantage to the Nation none at all. But if we can
come to some degree of Improvement in the Woollen Trade, we may in time be as
Rich, and as Populous as England; for so many thousands of our People would
never have gone abroad, if some useful and profitable Manufacture had been
settled at home.

This we are upon, and this we hope to accomplish; and since so happy a
Juncture offers it self to remove the only Obstacle, viz. the Linen Trade, we
beg of you by no means to hinder it.

It is needless, I suppose, to use any Arguments here to convince you that a
Duty on Scots Cloth in England will lessen the making of it; but you may take a
little to demonstrate the General.

1. We have no Vent for our Linen but into England and Ireland, our own
Expense excepted; now the Market in England is secured by our selling Cheaper
than the Germany Linen, for our Scots Cloth is rather inferior to the Germany
Linen in its quality, and if it be but at the same price, the Germany Linen
sells before it; but we under-sell them 1 d. per Ell, and that secures the
Trade. Now this Duty which is just a Penny an Ell, brings them to an Equality,
and so the Germans will have all the Trade: I appeal to the Drapers and
Merchants at London for the truth of this.

But it may be Objected, That we may abate 1 d. per Ell in the Price; to that I
answer, With all my heart; for then either the Maker would put none out, or the
Merchant would buy none, and that would do our business as well.

At present the utmost profit can be made is not above a Halfpenny per Ell, and
if the Merchant must abate 1 d. he must lose a halfpenny, and then he would not
deal in it; if the Poor must abate it in their Price, they Work for so little
already, that they would leave it, and all run to us for Woollen Work: Either
way will answer our end, for it will be a full stop to our Sale of Cloth to
England, and that would cause our People to want Work, and so they may by
degrees be brought to the Woollen Manufacture.

As to our Vent in Ireland, the Parliament resolving to Encourage the Making of
Linen in that Kingdom, will lessen our Exportation thither also; and so in
time we may come to make no more Linen than we use our selves.

If you ask, What advantage this will be to us, since we only sink one
Manufacture to raise another? I answer,

1. 'Twill save us 70000 l per Ann. which we really lose in the Balance of our
Trade to England, and which England now actually gets of us in Trade, by
Exporting so much more value in Manufactures to us than it Imports from us; and
though to so Rich a Nation as England it is not much, it is very considerable to
us.

2. 'Twill employ a multitude more hands than the Linen does, and so much more
advantage, and will be a means to keep our People at Home.

3. In time we may, as is before noted, be able to vie with the English
themselves, and have a Vent abroad, which will increase our Shipping, enrich
our Merchants, and improve the whole Kingdom.

These and many other advantages will be the effect of it, and therefore we all
earnestly desire you to make no Opposition to the Bill, but hope your Answer to
this will bring us Word, that it is past into an Act which, we pray, may never
be Repealed.


