AN INFORMATION, CONCERNING The Present STATE OF THE JEWISH NATION IN EVROPE
and JVDEA.

WHEREIN The footsteps of Providence preparing a way for their Conversion to
CHRIST, and for their Deliverance from Captivity, are discovered.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles near the
West end of Paul's. 1658.

To the Christian Reader.
TRue-hearted Christian (for we desire not that this information should come
into the hands of any, but of such as thou art) we find it expedient to
advertise thee of two things before thou enter upon the perusal of this
discourse.

First, thou art entreated to take notice that this discourse is peculiarly
intended for such as are sober-minded, and are acquainted with the Prophecies
which concern the Jewish Nation.

Secondly, that since the printing of this discourse, before it was published,
some more distinct Informations have been sent unto us; and because they tend
to clear and express more fully some matters, which happily would be doubtfully
received; therefore we have made an Appendix of them for greater satisfaction;
and have given them as they were sent hither in the Authors own words.

Farewell in the Lord Jesus, and pray for the Salvation of Israel that it may
come out of Sion shortly; and give the Lord no rest till he establish and till
he make Jerusalem a praise in all the earth. Amen.

An Information, CONCERNING The present State of the Jewish Nation in Europe
and Judea. Wherein the footsteps of Providence preparing a way for their
Conversion to Christ, and for their deliverance from Captivity, are discovered.
SUch as do believe the Promises, that God will be merciful unto the house of
Israel, because he still loves them for the Fathers sake, Rom 11.38 29, 30, 31.
and that his Gifts and Calling to them being without Ripentance he will bestow
mercy upon them through the Mercy whish is showed to us Gentiles; and such who
also hope when that Mercy shall be showed unto them, whereby all Israel shall
be saved, Ibid, 12.1^.
that then their fullness and reception into Grace shall become to all the world
abundant riches, yea as life from the dead: I say such as believe and hope for
these things, ought to consider seriously what God is now doing toward the
effecting of this great work, that is, what preparations are made at this time
toward it: and what the way is by which he will bring them and us together, as
one flock in one sheepfold, under Christ Jesus, that we and they by him may
glorify God together. This consideration is necessary to fit us for the work
of our Generation, that in our places we may become subservient to his
Counsel, and partake of the Comforts which from thence will redound unto his
people; for such as mourn for Jerusalem, and expect that she shall be made the
glory of the whole earth, shall suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her
Consolation, and shall milk out, Isa. 66.10, 11.
and be delighted with the abundance of her Glory.

To this effect we ought to observe these following Informations concerning
their present State, whereby it is evident that God does begin to appear for
them by extraordinary Providence, partly in driving them by great afflictions
to look up unto him, partly in moving them to consider the cause of those
Afflictions to be the sin of their FOREFATHERS, in neglecting the day of their
salvation; partly in moving both Christians and Turks to have compassion upon
them, and by this means opening a door of hope unto them to find relief; and to
us an occasion to impart through love unto them the mysteries of the Gospel:
for this design is upon the heart of many of Gods servants, both here and
elsewhere, who entertain some acquaintance with them, and endeavor to ratify
their Love unto them by works of Mercy, to make way for better Communication in
due time, whereof the following Informations will give some account; that such
as are willing to concur with others in Prayers for them, toward God, and in
the effects of Charity, to gain them through kindness, to have an open ear in
due time for us, may not be wanting to the opportunities which God does offer
to help the advancement of his Counsel, which will be a happiness to all those
who are made willing to cooperate therein; and which for their own comfort
they are hereby entreated to do.

First, Then it is to be observed that as the distress of Nations does increase
in the world, so the affliction and misery of the Jews; They being scatered
among these Nations: must also needs be increased; for they having no
possessions which they are permitted or willing to own as their inheritance
among the Nations, and not being able to return to the Inheritance which they
expect as a Nation in the Land of Canaan, Genesis 13.15.15.18.19, 20, 21, 26, 4.
Deuteronomy 1.8, 34, 1.2, 3, 4. Dan. 12.1.
there the land being theirs by Gods Promise, their Affliction and Calamity
must needs be by so much greater then that of other Nations, by how much they
are more unsettled then they: For when the Nations with whom they live, are so
unsettled, that they can neither abide among them, nor retire to any other
abode, this must needs be to them that time of trouble whereof Daniel speaks,
which is said to be such as never was since there was a Nation, even to this
same time; and because it is promised, that when their trouble shall come to
this height, that then Michael the great Prince shall stand up for them:
therefore we must conceive, that the time of their deliverance does draw near:
and the greater the distress and trouble of the Nations will be, the nearer
will be their deliverance at hand: For Christ tells us, That Jerusalem must be
trodden down of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Now
the times of the Gentiles are to be fulfilled, when after the signs in the Sun,
Moon and Stars, Luke 21.25, 26.
whereof many have been already, there shall be such distress of Nations with
such perplexity, as the sea and for the looking after those things which are
coming upon the earth, because the powers of heaven shall be shaken. Which
things we conceive are now actually begun; and when they end, the times of the
Gentiles will be fulfilled, and then the Shulamite will return. This distress
of the Nations is now begun in Europe, but is expected to end in Asia and in
Africa, and shall be sulfilled when the Prophecy of Isaiah shall come to pass,
mentioned, Isa. 19.23, 24, 25. to the end. Can. 6. the end. 13.
When Israel shall be the third with Egypt and Assyria, that is, in Africa and
Asia, even a blessing in the midst of the Land, whom the Lord of hoasts shall
bless, saying, blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands,
and Israel mine Inheritance. Seeing then it appears this will be the issue of
the troubles now begun, and seeing our Savior does promise that for the Elects
sake the days of tribulation shall be shortened; Mat. 24.22.
therefore we may conceive that it will not be long before they shall be
restored, and with them the Nations be quieted; for this cause taking more
particular notice of their present condition, to observe how Providence does
sit them for their deliverance, and prepare a way to bring to pass, we shall
consider, first, in what state they are now at Jerusalem, where their
deliverance will be wrought, 1.
and first begun, according to that of Mica 4 8. O Tower of the flock, the
strong hold of the daughter of Sion, unto thee shall it come, even the first
dominion; the Kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem. 2.
Secondly, How the way is a preparing to bring their deliverance to pass.

Concerning the first, viz. Their Distress.
THE State of the Jews at Jerusalem of late was such, that they could not live
and subsist there, without some yearly supply and contribution from their
Brethren abroad, because the place does yield them little or no trading,
whereby to maintain themselves; but their love to the place does oblige them to
remain there, although with great poverty and want; And their Brethren abroad
among the Nations, have been willing to uphold them there at Jerusalem, that
the place should not be left destitute of some considerable number of their
Nation, to keep as it were possession, or at least a footing in it, and to show
their hopes, till a full restitution come; Therefore the Jews of Poland, of
Lithuania, of Prussia and Russia, where great multitudes of that Nation were
seated, were wont in former time to send to the German Jews, dwelling at
Jerusalem, yearly about 30000 imperial Dollars; which will amount, if we
mistake not, to 6563 pounds sterling, or thereabouts yearly; by which means
they subsisted in some tolerable manner, and paid to the grand Signior of their
taxes; but since the desolation, brought by war upon Poland, and the other
parts, whence that supply was sent unto them, they have been in great extremity
of want; insomuch, that in the year one thousand six hundred to death, and the
taxes laid upon them by the Turks, being rigorously exacted, they were haled
into prison, their Synagogues were shut up, their Rabbi's and Elders beaten and
cruelly used. So that to find relief, because none came from Poland, Lithuania,
and other parts of Europe, by the late war, and none could be had in those
parts form their own, by reason of the general Pressures, which the Turks
without Mercy laid upon them all, they send two of their chief Rabbi's to their
Brethren in Europe, to acquaint them with their state, and to desire some help
from them. The chief of the Rabbi's was called Nathan Saphira, son to the high
Lord, Ruben David Tavel, a man of great learning, and skill in their Cabala,
and of a very pious, holy and humble disposition, who coming with his
companion from Jerusalem upon this errand, and finding at Amsterdam little
relief from the Portugal Jews, became accidentally acquainted with some of our
Christian friends, who pitied their Condition, and were of their own accord
moved to procure some relief unto them among their other Christian friends; and
the whole sum which they then received from the Dutch Jews in Europe, amounted
to six thousand Ryx-dollars, which we conceive to be about one thousand three
hundred thirteen pounds, five shillings; and the Contributions which the
Christians in Holland gave them, amounted to three hundred ninety Ducats, which
if we mistake not, is one hundred seventy five pounds ten shillings. With this
money they went away; and it availed them only to discharge the Interests of
their capital debts, and to make some presents to their great ones, that
further time might be granted unto them, and the three hundred ninety Ducats
relieved some of their private wants. This relief was made over unto them in
the year one thousand six hundred fifty six; and having received it, they have
written a letter of Acknowledgment end Thanks, dated at Jerusalem the 22 of
April, 1657. wherein the Continuance of their lamentable condition is
represented to be this: that for the payment of the capital debt, which in two
years space they have bound themselves over unto the Bassa, who rules over
Jerusalem, and engaged their Lives, Court, School, Wives and Children to him,
and in the mean time they hunger and thirst, and go from house to house for a
bit of bread, unto their Italian and Portugal Brethren that dwell at Jerusalem,
who are in little better case then these German Jews, because the Italians and
Portugals from abroad, help them with something; nor durst they go to any other
to beg, besides their own Nation, or their Proselytes; which was a great
aggravation of their distress, when their own either cannot, or will not assist
them, as in the case of Rabbi Nathan Saphira it fell out; for the Portugal
Jews at Amsterdam, not so assisting him, because they alleged that the
Portugal and Spanish Jews at Jerusalem, at Hebron and Zephit and other places
in Judaea, did depend upon them, and were supplied by them; yet nevertheless,
having heard, that the Christians had assisted Rabbi Nathan and his Companion
with a Contribution, and suspecting that they had made their application to
crave that assistance from the Christians, they were intending to have
disgraced him in their Synagogues, till they were otherwise informed, and
having understood that the supply came not by any application of the Rabbi to
the Christians; but by the free offering of the Christians to help him without
his craving of it, which could not be taken ill, if the Rabbi only received
what was freely offered, they did acquiesce: this is to be noted to show the
greatness of their strait; when by the Principles of their Religion, they were
bound up from seeking any relief, but only from their own people, although no
relief could be had by any of them; so that they were obliged rather to starve,
then to crave help from strangers, either Christians, Mahumetans, or Heathens,
when they were in want, although now of late they of Jerusalem have desired
relief of such as pity them, although they be Christians. This was a hard
case, and therefore required the greater Compassion; but yet the more hard,
because so few were inclined to have compassion upon them. From all which it is
to be concluded, that as their Case is more hard then ordinary, so their
deliverance must come by a way which is extraordinary: for all other Nations,
when they are distressed by any enemy, they have some Neighbor people to fly
to as friends, but these have none at all; therefore they must look up to God
alone for their deliverance.

Concerning the second, viz. The preparing of a way for their Deliverance.
BY their deliverance we understand, first, The enlightening of their mind, to
acknowledge the true Messiah, Jesus Christ. Secondly, Their freedom from the
distress wherein they are by being kept out of the Land of their Inheritance.
And when ever God shall remove, either their Ignorance, or their Captivity,
their whole deliverance both spiritual and bodily will be wrought; because the
one will follow upon the other. Now we find some clear preparations begun to be
set a foot for both these parts of their Deliverance.

First, Toward their bodily deliverance from their Captivity and Dispersion. We
conceive that the distress of Nations, which is coming upon the whole face of
the earth, is a manifest preparation; and that two ways: partly by driving them
out from among the Nations, where they cannot abide any longer, and forcing
them to draw closer together for their mutual relief: partly by awakening in
them more earnest desires and thoughts of the Promise, that they shall return
unto their own Inheritance: by which means, as soon as they shall perceive the
waters of the great River Euphrates dried up, Rev. 16.12. Esa. 19.18, etc.
they will be moved to resolve upon a march unto their own land from all
quarters, and in Egypt and Assyria is expected will be their Rendevouz in two
bodies; as it is said in Can. 6.13. You will see in the Shulamite at her return
the company of two Armies. The distress then of the Nations driving them to
these two places, is a preparative for their return.

Another preparation of the way for their return, is that God does still appear
for them in the Extremity of their miseries, when they can find no help from
men; and that in this great Calamity, wherein they now are, there is yet a door
of hope left open unto them; whereby Providence does support them in it, that
they should not utterly perish; whence we must gather, that although God will
have them to be cast down; yet he will not suffer them to be destroyed; and
although he will have them perplexed, yet he will not suffer them to despair,
of which things there are clear Instances to be given, lately fallen out, which
ought to be observed.

Jerusalem, and the land about it, so that they were all in great extremity,
both Jews and Turks, and like to perish; the Turks having for a season humbled
themselves, and prayed unto God after their manner for rain; and receiving no
answer from heaven, they did conceive that God was angry with them, because the
Jews were suffered to live among them; therefore in great rage with drawn
swords they went to the Jews, and threatened them, that if within three days
they did not obtain Rain from heaven, they should all be put to death.
Whereupon the Jews having appointed a solemn fast, and the third day being
allassembled at a place which they call the Sepulcher of Zachary, they prayed
till noon, and after noon the clouds gathered, and with thunder they poured
such a flood of rain, that all the Cisterns were filled and did run over: by
which means they were saved from death, and it was made manifest that the Lord
did own them, and accepted of their prayers, when none but he could help them.

Secondly, Another instance is in this their present Calamity; for when in the
year one thousane six hundred fifty five, they were in such want, that four
hundred of their widows dyed by famine: and that they could expect no relief
from any of their own Nations in Judea; and having sent into Europe to those of
their Nation, these also supplied them no more but for the interest of their
debt: so that all help from men seemed to fail them; it pleased God so to order
it, that without any application of theirs unto Christians, some pious and
charitable souls, were moved of their own accord to reflect upon their
condition, and without their knowledge to make a considerable Collection for
them, which did amount to some ease of their distress; although not to a total
relief: and since that time God has also moved the new Turkish Basha to show
some kindness unto them; for after his arrival at Jerusalem he satisfied all
their Creditors with his own goods and wares, and made an agreement with the
Jews, favorably using them; that in stead of fifteen thousand Ryx-dollars, they
should pay him only seven thousand, and that on two years term without any
interest. Yet with this hard Condition, that if the agreement was not then
performed, they must all become his slaves, and that he should do with them
what he would: So that it is apparent, that although the Lord suffers them to
come to great, and (in all humane appearance) invincible straits, yet he does
not suffer them to be swallowed up by the same, but shows still some issue;
so that there is a door of hope yet open for them to escape; which in the
language of Providence does signify thus much, That the Lord does not utterly
cast them off, but has still Mercy in store for them, till they be fitted for
a full deliverance: for all these trials in the way of Providence and Mercy,
tend to nothing else but to bring them to a sense of their sins, that they may
be cleansed from the same by repentance, and brought to the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, to receive by faith the pardon thereof for his sake; whereunto we
Christians should set our selves to become instrumental toward them; for now
being thus humbled, and finding our love and compassion not shut up against
them in their misery, their ear may be open to us to hearken without prejudice
unto the Truth of our Faith and Hope.

BUT besides all these Tokens of Favor, whereof we have particular Assurance,
which we look upon as manifest preparatives for their restitution, there is one
thing more to be mentioned, whereunto we may give so much credit as is due to a
vulgar rumor, and that is this. That whereas the land of Canaan heretofore was
exceeding barren, and more unfruitful then any of the other neighbor
Countries; it is now reported to be become within the space of five or six
years exceeding fruitful, yielding ten times the increase of that which
formerly it did yield: and if this report be true which we cannot certainly
affirm, but only give it as a report, come from some of the Inhabitants: then
we may make this certain conjecture upon it, that God is not only fitting them
to return unto their own Land by the forenamed Trials, but he is fitting also
their land to receive them: for even as for the sins of a people God turns the
fruitful land into barrenness, Psalm. 107.34. So when he is reconciled unto a
people, he does promise that he will cause the Heavens and the earth, and the
fruits of the ground to answer the desires of his people, Hos. 2.21, 22. And if
now this begins to fall out in the land of Canaan after so long a Barrenness,
we may truly conceive, that he is fitting it for more Inhabitants then formerly
it could entertain; and that he is about to make good the Prophecy of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32.43. Rejoice ye Nations with his Perple, for he will avenge the blood
of his servants, and will render vengeance to his Adversaries, and will be
merciful to his land and to his people: and that as he brought not Adam into
the world, till all the creatures were fitted for his entertainment; so he will
not bring his people into their land, till it be fitted to give them a
livelihood, when they shall return unto it.

These Acts of Providence toward them in respect of their whole Nation, Mic.
4.8. Romans 11.8.
and more especially in respect of Jerusalem, which is the Tower of the flock,
and the strong hold of the daughter of Sion, we look upon as preparatives only
at a distance to give a general prospect a far off, concerning Gods purpose to
show that they are not utterly cast away out of his Remembrance; but that
having still a design to do them good, for their Fathers sake, he will fit them
thereby for a further deliverance from their ignorance and spiritual Captivity;
concerning the removal of which, we find also some remarkable preparatives
wrought among them: because it is apparent by some passages of the converse of
some of our friends with their chief Rabbi Nathan Saphira, that the sense which
their more understanding Rabbi's have of the Messiah, is not so far distant
from the Principles of Christianity as we ordinarily have imagined, and that
the frame of their Spirits, at this time is made more susceptible of the Truth
of the Gospel, then at any time heretofore. And to make out this we shall
insert some Extracts out of a friends letter to J.D. dated in April one
thousand six hundred fifty seven, whereby the sincertiy of Rabbi Nathan, and
his understanding in holy Mysteries will be evidenced. Mr. P. Serrarius then
writes thus.

WHen on a certain time we were speaking together concerning the Messiah, and I
was alleging the History of the Patriarck Joseph, how he was sold by his
brethren, and the rest of that History, till he was manifested unto them, when
as they imagine nothing less then that he was alive, one of the Jews at
Amsterdam who stood by, said instantly, I know what you mean, as if you would
make us believe, that your Christ were yet alive. But Rabbi Nathan reproving
his rashness, said to him, Do not say so, Let come whoever will come, our
prayers and wishes are to this effect simply, That God would be pleased to
reveal him. Whereunto when we had replied, Except Christ reveal himself, we
desire not that you should believe us: but if he as another Joseph, who is long
ago supposed to be dead, should again show himself alive unto you; surely you
would no less then your Forefathers, believe your own eyes: they both gave
their assent hereunto. Then it was asked of Nathan, what he understood by the
place of Isaiah 53.4, 5. He has born our griefs and carried our sorrows, and
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisment of our Peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed, etc.
The Question was of whom the prophet did speak there; He answered plainly, That
he spoke of the Messiah; and when we did wonder at the Answer, and had replied,
that commonly that place of Scripture was otherwise understood by the Jews: He
said, That by the Cabala it was most evident, that the place could not be
understood of any other; and to prove this, he did allege the words of the
foregoing Chapter, 52.13. (...) Behold ny servant shall deal prudently, he
shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very high, (...); in which word he said,
That the undoubted tokens of this Mystery was contained; for by the letter
(...) was meant Moses, by (...) Adam, and by (...) David: These Caba^stical
Notions, though to ^s they are no ^round of ^nterpretation of Scripture; yet if
to ^^em they ^ring forth ^ue Gospel ^onclusions, w^e have no ^ause to except
against their using of them.
and that of this servant of God three things were foretold and declared,
which have all the same meaning and might have been expressed by one word of
exaltation, if the holy Ghost had not had a respect to these three members of
the Comparison; namely, That this servant of God was to be exalted above Moses,
extolled above Adam, and made higher then David.

Above Moses, because he will give a Law, which shall be exalted above the Law
of Moses.

Above Adam, because he shall be Head of a Creation which shall be extolled
above that which was in Adam.

Above David, because he shall be a King higher and mightier then David.

And of none can these things be said, but only of the Messiah; whence he did
conclude, that the following words of chapter 52. and 53. must be understood only
of the Messiah. When then we inquired how he would interpret the foregoing
words of the 53. chap. concering the Messiah: He answered that the Spirit of
the Messiah had a being before Adam; and as soon as Adam fell under the
Condemnation of Death and curse, he was moved with a most inward Compassion,
and coming down from Heaven, he took the whole weight of that condemnation,
which neither Adam nor the whole generation of mankind could have born upon
himself, which he still bears; that unto miserable mankind time and space may
be given to repent and be reconciled with God, that if he make good use thereof
he may be freed from Condemnation, and be admitted again to Gods favor: but if
not, it will come to pass, that the Messiah will withdraw his shoulders from
under that Burden, and leave to every impenitent and obstinate sinner his own
burden to bear it for himself; and in the mean time, whiles this time of
Repentance and Reconciliation lasts, he it is who since the fall of Adam has
born our sicknesses, and carried our sorrows, who for our transgressions and
iniquities was bruised, and upon whom the chastisment of our Peace was laid;
which if the Spirit of the Messiah had not been pleased to do, the sicknesses
and pains of our sins had long ago consumed us; our transgressions and
iniquities would have bruised us, and no hope of Peace or Salvation would ever
have appeared unto us.

WHen I heard these things, my bowels were inwardly stired within me, and it
seemed to me, that I did not hear a Jew, but a Christian, and a Christian of no
mean understanding, who did relish the things of the Spirit, and was admitted
to the inward mysteries of our Religion. Another time when we were together at
a meeting with somn friends privately, where we use to read some parcel of the
Scripture, he came unexpected among us, and we thought good to read Christ's
Sermon upon the Mount, in Matthew 5.6, 7. And while we did read the Dutch
translation, we gave him the Hebrew translation of Munster to look into,
telling him that this was the Law of our Christ, that he should read it, and
then let us know what he did judge thereof: this he did, and when he had read
all, with a great deal of ingenuity, he made an acknowledgment that therein the
ground and fountain of all Wisdom was contained, and that whosoever should keep
those Commandments would be more just then he, or hi^ people, and he took
notice of some things which he the^ (...) were taken out of the most pure and
ancient Rabbis; and when at that meeting we had, not without Tears, and much
devour Contrition of mind, made prayers for the Jews as well as for our selves,
that God would blot out our sins and theirs, and remember his Mercy, and
restore the holy Spirit which they had lost, etc. These things seemed very much
to move him, and he made no doubt to affirm openly, that if there were but ten
men at Jerusalem, who should thus with out heart pray for the coming of the
Messiah, that without all doubt he would suddenly come; And being asked, how he
did understand the place of Malachy 3.1. Behold I will send my Messenger, and
he shall prepare the way for me, and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come
to his Temple, etc. He said by the Messenger Elias was meant, and by the Lord
was meant the Messiah, who should come and show himself to be seen at the
Temple, not of ours, that is, of man's building, but in his own Temple, which he
has built in the heavens, and which he will let down from Heaven to the earth:
and when I asked him, Whether the Jews alone were to be admitted into that
Temple? He answered No; but that his Temple was ordained for all the people of
the Gentiles, who ever shall fear God in sincerity. And once when we were
speaking of the Promises made unto Abraham; Genesis 15.19, 20.
He observed that God promised to cast out ten Nations out of the land of
Canaan for his sake, and would give their possessions to his Posterity, but
that since the days of Joshua, no more but seven Nations have been cast out,
viz. The Hittites, the Perizzites, the Rephaims, the Amorites, the Canaanites,
the Gergasites and the Jebusites: the theee first, viz. The Kenites, the
Kenesites and the Kedmonites are reserved for the times of the Messiah; which
he would have to answer the ten Sephiroth, whereof the seven last are called by
the Cabalists simply, (...) that is, Palaces; but the three first taken
together as one are called (...) that is, the Temple of the Holy of Holies.

Whence I by my self drew this clear Argument for the Reign of Christ on earth.
If the Promise made to Abraham concerning the Land of Canaan it not yet
fulfilled, then it must be fulfilled: But it is evident that it is not yet
fulfilled. First; these three former Nations were never yet subdued. Secondly.
Because the three Nations yet to be subdued will constitute the Temple which
shall be called the holy of holies, whereas the subduing of the seven which
Joshuah conquered, did only constitute some Palaces or courts, which might be
polluted and indeed were polluted, overthrown and trodden under soot.

When at a time he did sup with us, and saw us praying with our hands joined
and lifted up unto Heaven; he asked us why we did pray with that gesture: It
was answered, that it was of old the custom so to pray, derived from Moses, who
in the mount prayed against Amaleck with his hands lifted up unto heaven;
whereunto the Rabbi said, No doubt whosoever can lift up pure hands with Moses
unto heaven, he will be heard of God as Moses was; but it is to be understood,
that then both hands are purely lifted up unto heaven, and the ten fingers
erected on high, when one directly is settled toward God, with the whole
strength of his soul, and has a good conscience toward Gods ten Commandments,
and that the purity and sincerity of the whole man does require, that every one
should be inwardly so composed, as his body is outwardly constitued; therefore
seeing they of his Nation were not conscious to themselves of such a frame of
spirit, they durst not lift up both their hands unto heaven, but they keep them
in their bosom, taking hold of the left hand by the right, because the right
hand does signify Mercy, and the left Gods Justice; and by that gesture they
petition: that God by his Mercy would restrain his Justice, that it may not
break out upon them miserable sinners to consume them, but would first prepare
and form them unto all that is good. I could relate many other things of this
kind, which show a truly devout and humble mind: one thing I shall yet add;
When it was asked of him, Whether he was not afraid of his life, chiefly he
being a Jew, a people above all other Nations hated of all, through which he
was to go? he did answer, If I look upon my self, I see my self altogether
unworthy of any mercy at Gods hands, or that he should admit of my prayers; ^e
speaks here ^e a legal ^^w, Romans 10, 2, 3.
but that which gives me some Confidence of life, are the calamities and
extreme Straits of the poor at Jerusalem, and the merits of the Forefathers,
and their Faith in God. I believe that their prayers will be of weight toward
the Father of the needy. Here you may see in a Spirit of Humility Faith, and in
faith an humble and self denying Spirit. What do you think? Is it to be
believed that Christ is far distant from a soul thus constituted? or that any
such thing can be formed without Christ in a man? for my own part, I confess I
think I see Christ in his Spirit; and I cannot but love him, and those that are
like him, of which he says many are at Jerusalem: for I esteem them the true
brethren of him, that is, our Christ, and their Joseph, etc.

Thus far Peter Serearius.
FRom whence we may gather this Conclusion, that it is apparent, the Lord by
humbling their Spirits, and moving them to look up unto him for the
accomplishment of his Promises, and letting them see, that the Mysteries of
divine Wisdom, and the way of Righteousness are revealed more clearly to us by
Jesus of Nazareth in the Gospel, then ever they were to them by their Rabbi's,
and that there is no inconsistency, but rather a Consonancy with the Promise,
that Jesus shall be revealed to them as Joseph was once to his Brethren, and by
bringing the chief of them to be acquainted with such Christians as freely love
them for Christ's sake, and willingly help them in their straits, and give them
cause to consider the Truth of the Gospel without prejudice; I say from all
these Circumstances we may gather this Conclusion, that the Lord does prepare a
way for them to be converted unto Christianity; which is yet more evident by
some other Circumstances, wherewith some of us are acquainted. Namely, that
some of those afflicted Jews at Jerusalem begin now to confess, That their
Forefathers did wickedly in putting Jesus of Nazareth to death, and that he
was a just man, and that the Spirit of the Messiah was in him, and that for
putting him and others to death, they ought to repent, seeing they cannot
attribute this great wrath which is gone forth against them to any other cause
so remarkable as to this sin.
Now if these Confessions begin to be made among some of the chief of them, as
some of us know that they are; it is a clear token, that God is preparing and
fitting them for Mercy by the acknowledgement of their sin, and repentance for
putting Christ to death: and if once their hearts begin to be moved with
remorse for this sin, no doubt they will obtain pardon. We are also certainly
informed that the New Testament in Hebrew of the translation of Munster, being
far different from the Hebrew phrase, which is used in Scripture, is taken
along to be brought to Judea,
that it may be put in Scripture phrase, and so sent back again to Amsterdam to
be printed; and if once they begin to read the new Testament; as a true History
in their own Hebrew Dialect, there can be no greater preparation for their
conversion then this will be; and we know that God is now setting this very
thing a foot among them. Whence we may conclude that he is fitting them for
Mercy by the means of their approaching to the knowledge of Jesus Christ; and
nothing will approach them so effectually to that knowledge, next unto the
Spirit of Grace and Supplication to be poured out upon them, as first, The
Communication of the New Testament in their Tongue by some of their own Rabbi's
unto them. 2. as the Unity of Christians holding forth unto them with one
consent the main substance of Christianity, which brings Salvation unto all.
And 3. as the opening unto them the Bowels of our Charity in these
opportunities of their distress and perplexty, that they may find some relief
by these three means: All which God is now setting a work toward them: the work
may be carried on with success, till the Lord come into his Temple. In
expectation whereof, all whose hearts are touched with compassion to them in
their bleeding condition, and have longing desires for their deliverance, are
exhorted to testify the same by their prayers, and by the opening of their
heart and hand liberally toward them. And how blessed shall they be that shall
have a hand in helping to make Jerusalem a Glory in the whole Earth!

Psalm. 122.6. PRay for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
thee.

Psalm. 41.1, 2. Blessed is he that considers the poor; the Lord will deliver
him in the time of trouble; the Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and
he shall be blessed upon the Earth, and thou will not deliver him unto the will
of his Enemies.

2 Cor. 8.9. You know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be
rich.

2 Cor. 9.6, 7. He which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: and he which
sows bountifully shall reap bountifully: Every man as be purposes in his
heart, not grudingly, or of necessity: for God loves a cheerful Giver.


FINIS.
An Appendix to the foregoing Information received from Beyond-Seas since it
was Printed; to be added in the former pages, that are there showed in the
Margen.
THE state of the Jews at Jerusalem has been many hundred years of late such,
To page 4. l. 17.
as that they ever lived of the supply and Contributions from their brethren
abroad: because the place does yield but little occasion for them to maintain
themselves: and besides those that betake themselves thither, are either Old
men or Women, only to do penitency and lay down their bones near the Sepulchers
of their forefathers: or of younger men that for respect to the holiness of
the place (as supposing God to be nearer there, and that all prayers must needs
ascend that way into heaven) come thither, there to ply devotion and penitency
for the sins of themselves and the whole Nation: and therefore cannot attend
any trading, but all their time is taken up with praying, reading and hearing
Sermons; as also with fastings and watchings and the like penitential
Exercises: which intent and endeavors their Brethren abroad amongst the
Nations well knowing, and with all desiring to keep (as it were) possession, or
at least a footing in Jerusalem, and to show their holiness till a full
restitution come, have been ever willing to uphold them in it: and to that
purpose, wherever any Synagogues of Jews are, on every Sabbath Day a Collection
is made for the poor at Jerusalem; and what so is gathered, they are to send
thither every year. Therefore the Jews of Poland, etc.

By the Turks (and especially their debts made for want of supply amongst the
Citizens) being rigorously exacted, Page 5. l. 6.
they were haled into prison, etc.

An Instance hereof is this, Pa. 8. l. 14.
that in the year 5399. from the Creation, which is now nineteen years ago,
there was a great drought in Jerusalem, which had put all Inhabitants to
prayers, the Necessity being extreme: but the worst of all was this, that an
apostated Jew going out to the Turks, persuaded unto the then Bassa, the Lord
Mahomet Bassa, that the sole cause that the heaven were shut up, were the Jews
by reason of their disobedience unto God; whereupon an Edict was put forth,
commanding all Jews, great and small, young and old, to be cast out of the Town
presently. Whereupon some eight of their Eldest were sent up to the said Bassa:
which Eldest with great Expenses bestowed partly on the Bassa, and partly on
his Consellours, had much to do, to crave only three days delay: If perhaps
within that time the Lord should accept of their prayers and penitency: If not,
and that the Lord gave no Rain, he might do with him what he pleased. This
being so stated, it was proclaimed throughout the City, that if within three
days no rain came, all the Jews should be expelled, and their goods made prize
to the Turks: and whosoever should be found remaining, was to be killed. Hence
arose a doleful lamentation amongst the Jews: a continual fasting for those
three nights and days was put upon all, except Babes and Women with Child or
in Childbed, who were bound only to one day and night: So they prayed and
humbled themselves all that while with great Cries and Weepings, so that the
voice of it was heard throughout the City; and on the Evening on the second
day, they seeing no likelihood their prayers should be heard, and judging
their sins to be too great, they took a Resolution, like to Saul, rather to
kill one another, one Brother the other, the Father his Children, the Husband
his Wife, etc. then to suffer themselves to be polluted by the merciless Turks.
Yet one thing they would first request of the Bassa. viz. That they might all
go out to the Sepulcher of the Prophet Zachary, which was out of the Town, and
whither they could not come without his consent. So one R. Emanuel Alba-chry
was sent unto him, who hearing of their desperate Resolutions pittyed them and
said, Go ye and make your prayers there, if perhaps God might hear you and save
you from being killed. So on the morning of the third day early, all went forth
and laid themselves down at the Sepulcher of Zachary, and there wept bitterly.
One R. Asaria made a very pathetical Sermon, and caused all the people to weep,
and so did R. Meyer likewise. And at Length arose one R. Samuel, who put the
people in mind of the sins of their forefathers, and against this Prophet, at
whose Tomb they now were prostrated, how they arose against him, and stoned him
most cruelly: how (said he,) shall we here obtain mercy at his feet, seeing
oury Fathers had no mercy on him? At which words the people wept bitterly, and
struck their hands together, 2 Chren. 21.24. Mat. 23.35 with Zach. 1.1.
and poured out tears as water, and lift up their voices, men and women, young
and old: and the Lord remembered These are the words of R. Samuel Ben Seth, as
the next page show
his surety: and he made this R. Samuel to think on the words of the Prophet
Elijah on the Mount Carmel, when he said to his man go up and see, etc. and
therefore commanded the people to Go seven times round about the Sepulcher, at
the first Circuition he ordained Psalm 24. and certain prayers to be
pronounced; at the second he assigned Psalm 48. and other prayers, and so at
each of the seven Circuits some peculiar Psalm and prayer till the Vespertime
came. And then the people going forth saw a little Cloud on the West side of
Heaven as large as the palm of a hand. That very day it had been very hot, even
as it had been Mid Summer, so that no man could have believed any rain could
have fallen that day; which made that the Turks had already gathered up stones,
wherewith they thought to have stone the Jews at their return into the City:
But such was Gods providence that even that day before Sunsetting the said
Cloud grew thick, and a wind began to blow, and then came Thundering, and
Lightning, and such a blessed shown of Rain, that in two or three hours all the
Cisterns were brim-full; so that for the Rains sake the Jews were forced to
remain that whole Night in Holes and Concavities of the Sepulcher. And when on
the next morning the Women went first of all toward Jerusalem, the Turkish
Women met them by the way, and Congratulated them, that God had heard their
prayers; and so likewise many of the Chief Turks met with the men, and brought
them some presents of fruits and Confitures; and the Bassa bestowed a suite of
apparel on every one of their Rabbis.

This is an extract drawn out of an Authentic Copy, written by the said R.
Samuel, and signed by all the Elders of the High Dutch Synagoge at Jerusalem,
1657. April. 22. An other Instance of the same kind we could add of the year
(as we count) 1651. and another yet since while Rab. Nathan was here; but this
before mentioned being most Considerable and most Authentical, and exactly pend,
whereas the others are but received by word of mouth, we shall here desist.
This being sufficient to manifest unto us, that however despised this people is
by men, yet that the Lord does yet own them and accept of their payers, when
none but he can help, when ever with a penitent and contrite heart they repent
of their sins and call for mercy, as we have seen here at the Sepulcher of the
Prophet Zachary. Would to God they agreed once to go out highways to the
Sepulcher of Christ, which is as much certain there as that of Zachary; and who
knows to what purpose; and that there they recalled to mind also how their
Forefathers dealt with Jesus. ^ac. 12.10.
O what a mourning would follow! and what a shour of soul quickening Rain! what
Congratulation of all creatures, what a joy in Heaven and earth!


