A LETTER Sent from Colonel GILBERT KER, Lieutenant Col. HACKET, and
Lieutenant Col. STRACHAN, to the Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of
Scotland, May 9. 1649.
My Lords,
GOd has delivered your enemies into your hands, the praise and honor be
rendered unto himself, and now praise will very well become the upright in
heart: To enlarge the particular circumstances of the action, it will not be
very needful; every particular has been managed by a providence which is not
admirable by any one thing but in the whole, so little of man or nothing, but
wholly and all of God, yet we think it necessary to acquaint you with the way
how the Lord brought it about: Upon Sunday at night we received some
Intelligence at Innernesse, that the enemy was advanced down from Strath-Spey
to Balvenie; And that they had a resolution, and that suddenly to make a march,
and as our Intelligence from a careful hand, being the Governor of the Booge,
did inform, it was probable suddenly to dispatch us, at this time neither we,
nor any that kept correspondence with us, heard any news from the Lieutenant
General, and this made us think our selves in some probable danger, being in
a very narrow place if they should have entered Rosse upon us, not having above
150 horse; after consideration of our condition, we conceived that the Lord
called for some thing from us in this dark time, the enemies making themselves
strong, and getting up their Levies in several places without any resistance,
made us resolve to march the same night, being Sunday at night, and where ever
we met, if the river was rydable to engage with them; that night we advanced
toward Caldell, and refreshed a little in the morning, we had Intelligence of
the enemies being at Elgin, and then concluded from that we must meet with them
necessarily upon the march: In that place, having (in that weak manner we were
able) sought the Lord in this matter, with freedom we resolved in the Lords
strength to advance to Forres, there our former Intelligence was contradicted,
we expected a considerable number of the Gentry of Mucray, which much or rather
altogether failed us, yet notwithstanding, we conceived it necessary to advance
that night, and if they had not crossed Spey to engage with them at
Balvenie-land, though we met with some more difficulty that way; this being
concluded, we came on Monday at night near Rothes, where we refreshed three or
four hours, and there we could not be certainly informed if that the water was
rydable or not, only we heard that Middleton had tried it, and it was
impossible for him, yet being there, we resolved in the Lords strength to go
on, and marching from that place early, we advanvanced toward the Foords, and
trying one Foord, it was not to be ridden, but another above was, yet with
great hazard, for it was very strong and deep, and most that passed, swimmed,
and one was lost; Lieutenant Collonell Strachan who commanded the fore-partie
consisting of about 50 horse, being through, marched on, and quickly advanced
up, passing by some quarters without notice, he marched up to a Body of their
Foot, and most faithfully charged them, and brake them, and dissipated them;
many then fled to the Hills, then the Allarm was universal, some drew to the
Castle of Balvenie which was pursued still by the Lieutenant Colonel, another
Body, under the Command of the Lord Rae, drew to some bushes of wood, and being
drawn in there, had no out-gate though a strong ground for them, we then drew
a party to the other side of the Hill that they might not pass: By this time,
coming to some discourse, my Lord Rae sent up, and we, after some debate,
proffered them their lives, and only their lives: But after more consideration,
we consulted upon these Articles of Capitulation here enclosed: We have with us
at this time near upon 800. and there are betwixt 60. and 80. killed, and not
one of us; We conceive there are two or three hundred fled, if not more; And
have directed letters to the Lord of Grant (who indeed deserves to be
cherished) to intercept them: Now, my Lords, we have no more to say, craving
pardon for our tediousness, only this we dare say, that God speaks this
language to Scotland this day by his dispensations, that if they will have a
tender eye to his Kingdom, you shall not be troubled much with any fear for
your own: We earnestly desire your Commands, what course shall be taken with
the people that we have, (ever providing our Capitulation be kept) for the
security of the Kingdom, and because we are to conduct them to their own
Country, we desire that the public Commands may be sent to Lieutenant General
Lesley with all expedition, for we are resolved to keep them together until we
hear from your Lordship, or from the Leiutenant General, which we humbly and
earnestly desire may be with all expedition. We will not venture to trouble
your Lorship any further, humbly taking our leaves, we remain

From Tanachie in Enie, May 9. 1649. Your Lordships most humble Servants,
GILBERT KER. TO. HACKET. ARCH. STRACHEN.


MAY the 9. 1649.
Articles agreed on betwixt Colonel Gilbert Ker, Lieutenant Colonel Hacket,
Lieutenant Colonel Strachan, and the Lord Rae, Colline Mackenie, and Donald
Macpherson, and their followers.
1. IT is agreed, that the Lord Rae and all his followers shall have their
lives.

2. That only the Tennents and Commons shall have liberty to go home, they
leaving their Arms undefaced, and not imbezelled or conveyed away.

3. That all Irishes shall be at the disposal of Colonel Ker.

4. That all Ammunition whatsoever, and Horses useful for service shall be
delivered to Colonel Ker.

5. That the Lord Rae, Colline Mackenie, and Donald Macphersone, do hereby
oblige themselves under the hazard of loosing their lives and estates, that the
common Soldiers and Tenants which are to be dismissed, shall never hereafter
rise in Arms to trouble the Peace of the Kingdom, or against the Estates.

GILBERT KER. TO. HACKET. ARCH. STRACHAN. JO. REAY. COLINE MACKENIE DONALD
MACPHERSON.


The names of the Gentlemen and Officers that are to be kept.
The Lord Rae and his Uncle. Captain Robert Mackcay. Duncan Mackcay. John
Mackcay. Donald Mackcay. Charles Macklaine. John Macallaster. Tonnit Mackenie
Calace. The Officers belonging to Pluscarden. Mackenie of Reed-Castle. Colline
Mackenie. Rorie Mackenie. Murdoch Mackenie. Hector Mackenie. Kenmeth Mackenie.
John Dumbar.
Badenoch-men.
Donald Macpherson. Tho. Macpherson.

FINIS.

