A LETTER From an Officer belonging to the Ordnance, on Board the Fleet lying
in the Bay before the Isle of Man; Giving an Account of the Duke of Schomberg's
Arrival, and Landing of the Forces under his Command at Carrickfergus in
Ireland.
Licensed August the 19th 1689. J. F.

From the Isle of Man, August 15th.

YEsterday seventh night we arrived at the Camp that was formed near High-lake,
in order to be Transported for Ireland; and last Saturday we Slipped our Stores
and Provisions that we brought with us; As also two hundred and fifty draught
Horses belonging to our Train of Artillery, after which we went on Board our
selves.

On Monday morning very early the Duke of Schomberg our General, with
Lieutenant General Solms, set Sail, having Embarked two days before, the Wind
being fair at East, with four Frigates, and about 70 or 80 Sail of other Ships,
on Board which there were about 12000 Land Soldiers for the Irish Expedition,
having given Orders, That the Vessels on which the Artillery, Provisions and
Victual were Shipped, should make what haste they could after them under the
Convoy of three Frigates that were left to accompany us, and join him in this
Bay.

About Eight a Clock that Morning, which was some hours after the General had
been under Sail, we set Sail, and the Wind continuing fair, came on Tuesday
Morning to an Anchor in this place, being about 44. Sail in all. It was no
small Surprisal to us, that after we had safely, and with what haste we could
come to the place of Rendevouz, to find no Tidings of our General, nor meet
with any Orders from him, there being no body left to direct us what we should
do, or what Course we should steer; however we were resolved to stay until we
heard from his Grace, which we had the good luck to do this Morning, by the
Antelope Frigate, who Sailed out of High-Lake with the General, and brought us
Orders from his Excellency, to Sail with all possible speed from hence, and to
come and join him in the Lough of Carrickfergus, where the Captain said he had
left him Landing the Forces in the Country on Antrim side. The Captain tells
us, that the General having a fair Wind, did not think it needful to put in and
come to an Anchor in this place, being resolved to make the best of it, and
proceed on his way: And further tells us, that the Town of Carrickfergus was
not all burnt down, but only some Fort or Castle that was on a Rock that was
blown up, that Major General Macarty was certainly wounded and taken Prisoner
by the Inniskilling Men, who had given a very great Defeat to the Irish Army,
as they were endeavoring to retire from the North after the Relief of
Londonderry, and that it was credibly reported in those parts, that there was
hardly a Body of 500 Irish together in all the North Counties of that Kingdom.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year 1689.


