A LETTER TO THE LORD FLEETWOOD, FROM AN OFFICER IN THE ARMY.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone. Church, 1659.

A LETTER TO THE LORD FLEETWOOD, FROM An OFFICER in the Army.
My Lord,
I Am given to understand, that the Committee of Officers, to whom the late
Paper was recommitted from the Genesis Council, have added several things beyond
their Instructions, as namely, That no Officer be laid aside but by a
Court Martial, nor any Commissionated by Parliament, but what shall be approved
by the Committee of Nomination. My Lord, I know this is a pleasing Bait to such
as put a higher value on their Commissions, than on their duty to the
Parliament, whence they derived them; It seems strange to me, that this Army,
who could subject themselves and Commissions to the lusts of the late single
person, to be laid aside at the pleasure of him, who was but a Servant as
themselves, must now impose and limit the Supreme Authority of the Nation: I
never expect that injustice from a Parliament, which I have seen practiced by
Court-martials, Witness the Casheering and cruel Imprisonment of some
faithful Officers, only for mentioning the intolerable Pride and Luxury of
the late Court; the persons that were Judges, I heard some of them confess,
that they were acted through a spirit of fear against their own light; I say
again, I never heard of any such thing done by Parliament. My Lord, I hope we
are all sensible, that the Parliament have not often used their power in this
case, and from thence comes a great part of our Miseries; for, had they timely
clipped the wings of their old General, doubtless the Nation had never known
the Miseries and Confusions that since have come upon it; Nay, we our selves
should never have had temptations to those Apostacies, that defiled our
Consciences before GOD, and our Reputation to the World. My Lord, we are either
Servants or Masters; If Masters, let us tell the Parliament, that we only
called them there to take the Odium of raising Money upon the People to
maintain us, and let them know what terms they must have; If we be Servants
raised and maintained by them, let us not offer that to them which we would
abhor our own servants should offer to us. My Lord, your Lordship has many
domestic servants, and, I persuade my self, a sober family, and I think while
they carry themselves well, it were harshnesse in your Lordship to turn any
away to take another in the room; But, my Lord, if any one servant should come
and say, I challenge it as my right to continue, unless dismissed by my fellow
servants, though I know your Lordship of a mild temper, yet certainly you would
think that servant unworthy to continue in Wallingford house. As to what is
proposed touching the Committee of Nomination, I have not heard above two or
three Officers in all the Army that have been Commissionated by the Parliament,
but what have been approved by that Committee, and by them the Army has been
molded. I fear, my Lord, the indigent families of many poor Officers,
discharged by that Committee, have a loud cry, as having had such measure as
never was met by Parliaments, some Regiments ten, some fourteen, some twenty
Officers laid aside, that had served, many of them eighteen years, and never
any Crime laid to their charge, only to prefer Friends and Relations, many of
which never drew Sword in this Service: Let the world judge whether it be fit
to impose such Steersmen on a Parliament; not that I desire to detract from the
worth of those worthy Gentlemen of that Committee, I think it less injury to
say they acted upon Misinformation, than to lay such an Imputation on the
Parliament for what was done in their late Vote. My Lord, I have thus far
spoken as to the matter in the Proposal, I shall now crave liberty to offer my
thoughts as to the end: My Lord, to my understanding, the design of this
Proposal is to create an Interest in the Army distinct to that of Parliament
and Nation, and this (say, some) is our best Security against the Spirit of the
Nation, which may possibly be introduced in Parliaments. My Lord, I find many
of your Officers, especially those of the late Northern Brigade, very much
decry the Constitutions of Corporations, as Emblems of Monarchy: It seems to me
Incongruous, that the same men should strive to bring the Army into a
Corporation: My Lord, were it possible to form an Army of Saints in reality,
such as would undoubtedly abide steadfast, and could this Army support it self
either by its own property and interest, or by extraordinary food from heaven,
I should not deny them a Charter, as the most renowned Incorporated Body upon
the face of the earth. But, my Lord, seeing this Army consists of men subject to
infirmity, that this Army was raised by Authority of this Parliament, called
forth to assert and defend the Birthright and Liberty of the meanest man in the
Nation as well as their own, and that this Army has been paid and maintained
out of the purses of the People, and cannot in future stand but by the same
means, seeing there remains in this Army but a handful of those men that bore
the burden and hear of the War, many being retired to private Callings that
have equally Merited with our selves; that considering the Distemper now on the
Spirit of the Nation, has much of it arisen from the unstable Spirit of the
Army, that set up what they pull down, and pull down what they set up; and now,
if I mistake not, seem to assert an Interest of its own independent to that of
the Nation, in all which the world will judge self at the bottom; Let us now
think it our duty to settle on such a Basis as every man's Interest may be
involved with our own, and all men see their own property and right maintained:
Certainly he that does righteously shall have praise with men; and the laudable
practice of this Army, tending to subjection to that Authority, under which God
has so much blessed us, shall allay the fury of the Spirit of the Nation, when
they shall see Righteousness and Truth exalted in the midst of us, and every
man able to say, That his Interest is imbarqued in this Bottom; the contrary
hereof will turn every man's hand against us, and ours against every man: Let us
not think that if we go out of the way of the Lord, that our Numbers, our
Horses, our Armies, our Successes, our courage or skill can save us; We have
seen with our eyes, men of greater might than our selves, blasted by
inconsiderable means. My Lord, the most Righteous Government must most
necessarily be upheld by the Sword; But the Lord deliver this Nation from a
Sword-government. For my own part, I was never an enemy to a single Person,
because such, but because he usurped power, being neither called thereto by
God, nor man; and if twenty or thirty, nay, a whole Army should usurp the like
Authority, I should be a like minded toward them; for it is not the Number that
makes the difference betwixt Tyrants and lawful Magistrates. I have thought
good to offer this to your Lordship, to the end, if your Lordship find any
thing of reason from hence against the offering of that Proposal, your Lordship
would stifle it in the birth, that such a thing may never go forth to the
world, to the shame of an Army that so lately declared their sorrow for their
former backslidings. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant.


