A LETTER Written to a Christian Friend, and one of the Parliament Men.
PROPOSING The groundlesness of the Plea for TYTHS, impropriat TYTHS, or TYTH as
a Revenue due to the Magistrate.

Psalm 119. verse 128. Therefore I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all
things to be right, and I hate every false way.

FOR THOU SHALL LABOR
PEAC PLENTY



LONDON, Printed the sixth day of the Tenth Month, in the year of our Lord 1653.

Christian Reader,
THere are Reasons not expressed, why this Letter was printed: and did you know
what muzing thoughts (in the solitary night) I had, and what prayers and sighs
went from my heart, desiring God to speak me silent; because being no party
that pay or receive Tyth: and how I have objected, that I am no man of power in
the Nation, and that I mind things too high for me, and am unprofitable to
Church or State, and a Vessel but for mean use, and that needs must I err,
being no Master Builder: Yet considering again, the Great Potter of the Earth
has made me for some End, I dare not but move as I am moveed: the dumb Ass was
not to be smitten when not faulty. Thus praying you, that what you find rude
and weak in these ensuing Lines, that charge on me as mine, but what you find
of Truth and Justice there, that is my God's, and thy God's, to whom I commit
thee and all the Flock of Christ. And that you may read without prejudice, I
shall conceal my Name, not fearing who can blot it if written in the Lamb's
Book of Life.

Honorable Sir,
THe Salutacion of him that is unworthy greets you, and presuming on your
unfeigned love to the Lord Jesus Christ, and all his Saints, I do write these;
and that you should not want encouragement in this Work of the Lord now called
to, I shall tell you, the prayers and breathings of the hearts of Gods Saints
are, that you may do worthily, and much for Gods honor; and first be as zealous
for the Sons honor as the Son was for his Fathers. See you not the pollutions
of the Land? how base and wicked men make merchandise of the Word of the Lord,
and preach in the Name of the Lord, when the Lord never sent them! that know
nothing of the operation of the Spirit by which the Word should be published!
these dumb Souls, I hope you will find somewhat like the Rods of small Coards
to drive them out, for they have no part nor fellowship in this business, well
you may call them your Servants and Hierlings, but Christ owns them not, they
never came in by the Door, wherefore their work, and your care, and wages for
them, shall be all set down for nothing in the last Account; why hear you not
the bleatings of of the flocks, that cry, Take away these Wolves, that rob us
at your pleasure!

You tell us dear Friend, the Knot of Tyth you cannot undo, now the Lord God
and Father of Jesus be with you, and teach you to work in your work: I presume
you are not left to serve alone, for the Father of Spirits is with you. Sir, I
believe the foolish things of this World shall stand and confound the wise, and
I do here presume you will suffer a Fool gladly, because you are wise. Indeed I
cannot believe Tyths are now to be practiced, for it was the Jews Law, proper
to them only, because no where commanded but in the Ceremonial Law, and there
was for diverse uses, whereof God provides for himself a Sacrifice, the first
born: the Levites had no other Portion nor Inheritance amongst their Brethren
but Tyths; the Priests were to have some certain Flesh, the first fruits, and
for Purification; also the Poor, the Strangers, Widows, and fatherless, were
fed of the Tyths, and these with other Ceremonial worship were Types and
Shadows of glorious things to come, and to be fulfilled by our great High
Priest Christ Jesus, and therefore it is clear, Hebr. 7.12. the Priesthood being
changed, there is a necessity of changing that Law, it was not Moral; God never
commanded Abraham to give the Tenth, nor Melchisedeck did not demand it, but
the Text says, He gave the Tenth; amongst the Israelites when they prospered
by the Sword, they shared the Spoil to those which remained at home, as well as
to those that went to war. Now we find it cast out of the New Testament, and
disused among the Chrstian Churches in the Primitive time, and of a truth it
will and must follow, they were brought in by Antichrist, or some tyrannical
Prince for him, and was diverted from Monks and Friars to Bishops and Deans,
and then to the National Ministry, and now some would have it for a
Gospel Ministry; but shall that which was for the most part, yea I may say
altogether raised by the Pope the Antichrist, and imposed and confirmed by
Popish Laws, Councils, and Parliaments, and was an Innovation of Antichrist for
his worship, and is this day one of the Crutches he leans on in England:
shall this poor Inheritance crept out of Babel, be divided amongst them all?
Must all share of it? No, let every one have his right, let the Antichristian
Magistrate, Minister, and Worshipers take what pertains to them; and the
Christian Magistrate, Minister, and Worshipers, take what pertains to them: we
are not of the entailed Heirs of Antichrist, we drink not all of one Rock, we
have sworn and covenanted with and before the high God to resist in our Places
all Popery and Popish Innovations, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline. Now
some say they were of free Gift, but prove that: perhaps some were, but most
was imposed, and that was to an idolatrous use, and therefore it was ill done
to give, and worse to force it from men, for who required it at their hands?
also it is an unjust Maintenance, there is no Calling pays like the Farmer,
although there are rich moneyed men, great Merchants and Tradesmen in the Land
far-way abler, yet pay little or nothing; also some Land pays nothing at ^ll,
and other Lands which pay Tenths, which many times amounts to three parts of
the Rents, are cozened, and pay the Tenth of all their stock every year, not
laying by his Seed every year, which he paid the Tenth of the year before; the
Law gave but the Tenth of the Increase; also you have the Tenth of the Sheep,
and the Tenth of the Wool of the nine that remained; therefore this will bear
the name of a cruel cursed Law: by this means they bear dominion over us, and
the Yoke is heavier upon that Calling than all others, contrary to the Apostles
Rule, 2 Cor. 8.13. neither is it that others should be eased, and you grieved;
how like Jews do we look, with our Oblations, Tyths, and Offerings! Are we in
carnal Jerusalem still, or coming toward Mount Sion that new Jerusalem? Surely
we are on our way, then stand by you Tithes, you are not of Christ. Men fear,
and care, and conclude no Ministry, nor worship of God can be maintained
without them. We never read nor find any of these used in Christ's and his
Apostles times, and yet Gods worship purely maintained, and therefore carnal
fears, and it being Jewish, Popish, and unjust, undenyably I shall beg, that as
you gave it not its birth, so let it have neither breath nor being.

But you will say, It is unjust, Impropriators should lose their Purchase.
Indeed it is a very proper name, and suits their Title well, it is fitly so
called, and were his Holiness the Pope now keeping house here in England, he
would soon curse all such Children, as have committed such Sacriledg, as thus
to rob his Church. It is unjust for any man to pay any, therefore unjust for
him to force to pay or receive any* it was never raised at the first to put in
his Purse, he does nothing at all for it, therefore no shadow of truth in it
why he should enjoy it; it was first unjustly raised, then diverted from the
use given, and still is unjustly paid, and never will be just till it go back
to the Landlord, who is the true Owner thereof, for he bought the Land, and if
any Commodity be found in the Land, and Purchase, more than the Seller and
Purchaser were aware of, whose is it but the Purchasers? as in all other
Contracts and Bargains we take them at all adventures, sometimes they prove
better, sometimes worse than expected.

Again it will be said, then you will wrong, and perhaps undo many, who have
bought such Impropriat Tithes, and paid largely for them. Indeed we fear many
are wronged, but who has deceived them? Not you, the Keepers of our Libertyes,
and Ministers of Justice: your duty is to defend the good and clear Title, and
not else: neither has the Seller, for the Title was well known to be what it
is, a Badg of Tyranny, for so Samuel persuades Israel, ^ Sam. 8. to avoid that
tyranny, and have no King, [for he will have the Tyth of all, and it shall be
for a Judgment, ye shall cry out in that day because of your King. In Henry the
third's time there was granted to him two shillings out of every Plough-land,
and in another Kings Reign there was granted the Eights of every City and
Borough, and Twelfths out of the Country; and is any grieved, because this
being established by a Law, is laid aside? Whether did King Henry the sixth
alienate Tyth, or take it away by Law or not? We affirm Kings at their
Coronation are sworn to govern according to Law; why were not Monopolyes and
Ship Money willingly received under our late King? No, we cried out he was a
Tyrant, ruling by a Prerogative Power. Was not King Henry's Act the same? he
was in a rage, and had a lust to do what he did, and ever since Custom and the
gain thereof has caused that unlawful Act to stand in force, and therefore
why should not all the Patentee-men be satisfied? King Charles had as much Law
on his side as King Henry; it is the duty of a Subject of a Nation to know the
Laws thereof, that they may be sure to have Law on their sides, for want of the
knowledge hereof many have lost thousands of Pounds, and for redress have thrown
hundreds after, and what recompense should these men have? Surely none, unless
they can summon their Deceivers to keep a Court of Conscience. And for
Impropriators, I am not against their having some satisfaction, it is but
Equity and Justice, they should have some recompense, but not from them which
have not hurt them, unless they will; I wish they may find good merciful men:
and if it were a forced Salary at the first, it being unequal for proportion
with other men's Estates, and unjust, because ye received the Tenth of the
Increase, and the Tenth of the Stock, as was made appear, and because it was
gathered to uphold a Popish worship, it ought to fall with the worship: again,
grant it were a free Gift at the first, and suppose all to be in the Donors
power to bestow, (which I do question, how he could give any other than his
own, viz: the Tenth of his Land,) yet being taken away from the use for which
it was given, and converted to no such end, but sold away for gain, and imployd
to particular men's benefit; this implies the Donor had no Power, yea, was not
capable of a Gift, if he were capable to give a Gift, and such a Gift, then
that Gift was lawful, and then who had power to sell such a Gift, and divert it
from that use? but if the Magistrate say, the use was unlawful, then I say the
Gift was an unlawful Gift, and the Boons return from whence it came. Indeed it
is unavoidable, some late Purchasers will be Losers by it, unless the Charity
of the men of the place, or the Seller, or the State, will as an Act of their
Grace and Mercy give some Gratuity to such as have little else, which they are
to acknowledge to be a free Gift if they receive any thing, but some have kept
it long, and bought it for a small matter, and have so employed it, that when
they give it back again; it will not ow them a Penny: also this sort of men or
the greatest number of them will be Gainers in their other Land more than this
comes to if Tyths fall, and indeed they must and will fall ere long, and I
persuade my self if the Parliament will not honor themselves so far as to throw
them down, the People will dishonor themselves so much as to pay them with
great unwillingness. We are declared to be a free Nation, and the Magistrate
professing to take off all burdensome Yoaks, whereof Samuel the Prophet calls
this one in the place before named; and these are they that eat the fat and
best fruit, in many places, they have the chief Tyth, and perhaps the Minister
has left him some Tyth Eggs, and the rest of all the small Tyth, not enough to
maintain many of them in a mean sort.

And for encouragement to all Impropriators, consider I pray you what Amaziah
did, 2 Chronicles: 25. he made but a bad Bargain to lose his money, and have nothing
for it, because willing to take counsel of the Lord; so do ye, restore back
again, openly, rather than wrong thy self and neighbor by a Law; I would have
them consider what that Traitor Judas did, read you never, after he was
convicted of sin, taking unlawful wages for unlawful work, says he, Take the
thirty Pieces of Silver again: But it is affirmed by some the national
Ministers have an equitable and unquestionable right to Tyths as any man has
to his Freehold, (but I think they are deceived) see Fox Acts and Monuments,
Volume 1. page 604, 632, 669. and he that robs them in Tyths and Offerings may
as well take away any man's Freehold. I take it a man holds his Freehold
either by Purchase or Gift, or is Heir by descent, but they cannot claim Tyths
as that they bought them, nor yet of Gift, ( Antichrist was no such Benefactor
to raise them, and give it to any other than the Brats of his own breed) and a
strange thing it is, how it should come to them by descent, for sure they are
not all of one stock; but happily the Magistrate having long accustomed himself
with old Idolaters and Tyrants, and living with them, might observe their
manners, and at last divide the Prey as well as others before, as it is said of
the two sons of Josias, Ezekiel. 19. being nourished among the Lions whelps they
became as Lion:.

Indeed I may say, though there be much Rubbish of the Romish Kirk cast out,
yet all the High places are not quite taken away, and though Tyths have been
confirmed by Popish Parliaments, and the Kirk (so called) who have been Lords
Paramount in England, for many years, and so would not let their glory fall:
also by others who have shared the Spoil with them, whose Interest has been as
sweet to them as their Perogative: I say, what if these have kept up the old
Custom, yet this lets not, but a Christian Magistrate may and ought to take
down all the high Places that remain. O foolish Generation, why count ye it an
hard thing to cast out Tyths! have you any thing to say more why this should
not cease, but only your Covetousness and Custom? I presume you will not in
other Cases plead, that Custom gives a clear Right and Intrest, for then those
that have accustomed themselves to steal, may plead Custom to be a Law for
them; and he that has received a gift, may plead it is a duty for the Donor
to give another gift: indeed you make such a Smoke with your Arguments, as
have put out and blinded the eyes of many, and made many look as it were
a-squint. The Prophets are bid to cry aloud against the Abominacions of the
Times, Iam no Prophet, nor prophets Son, yet I am bold to persuade you to do
what you can to cast out Baal, and all the Idols thereof, and Cursed is he that
does the work of the Lord negligently.

If any shall maintain Tyths to be a lost Inheritance, and would make use of
Number. 5.8. for a recovery, and to be dedicated to the Ministry for the Service
of the Lord: Ishall answer, this instance is improper; first because the Text
speaks of a wrong done, a sin or trespass against any man, for that is implied;
some man must be wronged, but who is wronged here, or what Minister of Christ
can challenge Tyth to be his, and if none be wronged, none ought to be offended
if taken away, and then there is no Sin or Trespass committed: but if you say
they are the Magistrates, then what need you strain so far to bring a lost Law,
to make it a lost Inheritance? for the Law was Ceremonial in every branch of
it: first there is required Restitucion with the Principal, a recompense of the
Trespass, and a fifth Part added; now what Law of God that is Moral requires
any other then Restitucion, according to the nature of the offense, sometimes
bare Restitucion, sometimes fourfold, sometimes seven, but Restitucion of
principal Damage, and a fifth Part added is Ceremonial, if not why do not all
Offenders add the fifth Part. Secondly to be paid to the use of the Priests for
the Service of the Lord, but now there is no such Subject or Object, the
Preist-hood is fallen, and we look for one to come. Thirdly, Restitucion was
not, nor could not be made without the Ram for Atonement, for the Text says,
besides the Ram for Atonement: I know it was practiced by the mother Church of
Rome, when any man dyed Intestat, the Pope possessed himself of all the Estate.

Tithes are not so Civ^ll as some men account; they were set apart from common
uses, and conferred upon the Church, because the Tenth was counted holy; and
whether it was done by the Pope or some towardly Son of his, and their
ingenious Council, yet it was their vain Supersticion to divert this holy
Tenth to the Church, because now no express Stipend or constant Salary is
allotted since the Jews Law for the Service of the Lord, and to keep up
worship, what God required in one Generation he required not in another for
worship: how differently was God well pleased in the several Ages of the
world! in Abels time before the Flood, and Abraham's time, it was different from
Moses and Solomon's time, and that different from the Apostles and Primitive
time; the first Fruits of Sheep that would serve in one Age, was not enough in
another Age, with the Tenth and Redemption of the firstborn, and daily
Sacrifice, but abundance must be added for the Tabernacle, and Temple work, in
its time, and for the Church in the New Testament, you know all these chargable
Sacrifices were too little: Christ tells the young man he must sell all:
Zaccheus gave half of his goods, and Scripture says, many that had Lands and
Possessions, couned the Price of them, and laid it at the Apostles Feet,
because of the need: we proporcion our Contribucion by our Civ^ll Law,
according to the estate and condition of the Object, and we should lay out
toward the Worship of God, that that Worship might be maintained in honor, by
all that count it their honor to have a right worship; and this is to be
observed, every one to minister according to what a man has, keeping this in
your Eye, the flourishing state of the Church, and those that minister there:
sometimes the condition of the Church may be such, that the hundredth part of a
man's Estate laid out in Gods Cause and Worship, may be an acceptable Sacrifice,
and again at other times 3 parts of 4 will not be sufficient; from whence you
may conclude, that Tyths, Tenths, or a certain Stipend, enjoined every man
toward the Service or Worship of the Lord, is not the way of Christ, and if
you would not count me proud, I would challenge you for an Instance from the
Sciptures, where the Magistrate was to use his Coercive Power, for the Worship
of God; but the Prophets did acconut them accursed if they observed not all the
Commands of God to do them: Yet are Christian Magistrates an unspeakable
Blessing in a Land, and the age past would have found it so, could the Flock of
Christ but have escaped with their Lives out of the hands of those Wolves; we
enjoy more; they are a Refuge to keep off the Storms, they cast out and abhor
Idolatry, and false worship, and are Tender of all that fear our God, yea the
Church may say, behold the Magistrate is one with us, he hands along with her;
therefore my prayer is, that as he has companied with her in the wilderness,
and has lent her his help in an untrodden way, amongst vast and terrible
Enemies, that he will travel with her till they both come to their Rest, and
certain it is, there is a Rest for the People of God, and then I dare say, I
know who will pay them for all: the truth is, Antichrist put into England to
advance his Throne and worship, and to that end must have this maintenance; now
we renounce Antichrist, and his way, and resolve, that Jesus Christ being upon
his Throne, shall rule us in his way: then Judge the case, while we lived under
Antichrist^^n Magistrates, we could expect no other Laws, but such as ^e^^ad,
therefore must suffer his manners; and whether be forced ^y h^s ^^w, or became
a Lying-Spirit, to seduce for Pollitick ends, and so raised his maintenance, by
threatening damnacion to the ignorant world, if they dedicated not their holy
Tenths to such a use: yet must this stand as the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, faster than all other Laws that has been found, not according to
the word of God, and so repealed by the Reformers of these Times: Statutes of
Princes were no excuse to Israel, to follow, but they were reproved for
observing them, Micah 6.16. Methinks I hear some of the Conscientious Ministers
say, I wish the first fruits were down, that is a little too supersticious; and
I dare say, if they knew how to signify so much to you without weakening the
whole Foundation, you should quickly hear of some humble Peticioners: but if I
might be the Judge, I should condemn none, if they pass by all such kind of
Devocion: some counted it a great Loss when Monopolizers and their patents were
cast out, but the Voice of them that rejoiced, was greater than the Cry of
those that mourned: why halt ye between God and Baal; let us choose him that is
God, and follow him: does any particular man lose a Just and Lawful
Inheritance, if taken away? why then I Oppress no man if I withhold my Tything,
and then what command of God is broken?

If Tithes fall, the Nation in general will gain it, the Landlord and Tenant will
share it, and of these two sorts the whole Land almost consists; and these are
they, with the Soldiery, that under God have redeemed the Nation from
Antichrists yoke, for who goes to warfare on his own cost? Moneys and
Treasures are accounted the sinews of War, by it they have redeemed our
Government and Laws, and if there come any right of gayn thereby, let them share
in it: But I wonder some of our enemies have gone but an equal share with us
that have born the brunt, and heat of the day! This Act of Oblivion has bin
like Agags sparing many of the fat cattle; me thinks Subsidies on some men
would do well, Christ and Peter in Math. 17. conclude from whom the Princes of
the Earth take Tribute or Pole Money. But to our Question, Every family,
person, subject, high or low, must lay out for the worship of God, as God
commands; but if we give away our Tithes, which is the Commonwealths and
Nations in general, hereby, and then the Commonwealth especially, the poor
Landlords and poor Tenants, will be the more disabled, and out of capacity to
lay out for the worship of God, which he requires of them. You will say, the
Magistrate should dispose of it. I say, God requires every man that he discharge
his duty in the worship of God: and I say, how can many people do any thing
when the Magistrate has robbed us of so much of our substance? I will appeal to
Christians, if they have faith enough to believe, in every age that the
Magistrate will employ the Commonwealths substance always to the glory of God, his
worship, and the relief of the Saints; perhaps this Magistrate may, but happily
the next may be as another Pharaoh, that knew not Joseph, that will not know the
afflictions of Joseph: and shall we now put our necks under their feet, and
desire them to boar us thorough the Ear for ever! No, if this be a Christian
Magistracy, let them take of us what the state and condition of affairs calls
for, and what God requires of them. If this be not a time, under a Christian
Magistrate, to proclaym Liberty from Antichrist, when then! The Jews had a Law,
if a man sold his Inheritance, and were not able to redeem it, By Scripture
account Seven is a number of perfection.
he should stay but until the year of Jubilee, the fiftieth year, and then it
should return to the same Family again for nothing: we have had a generation
that have taken away our substance, good and pleasant things, for 7 hundred
years together, and we redeemed it again with our Blood and Treasure; and shall
not we keep our Iubile yet! then be ye boared thorough till the End of all
things.

But to pursu all your benighted Questions; Suppose Tithes were given, the
tenth of a man's Land to the Popish Priest, and all the holy Order created
Officers by a Papal power,, Antichrist being Supreme in that Throne: I say,
admit they were given to their Use, and the Use of the poor, as Writers make it
appear they were. Now the poor have been dis-inherited wrongfully, for our
Savior says, the poor ye have always with you, but that Order of Officers
(created as aforesaid) ought to have no room nor standing in the Church, as
subjects fit to receive the same: And as it is with an Annuity, payable out of
a man's Land, it is payable no longer than such persons to whom it was given,
live to receive it; the Land may be often sold, and the Annuity paid still,
but at last it falls into some of their hands for want of heyrs: I say, the
Officers aforesaid are, and ought to be cast out, and no other by the Laws of
the Land can challenge Tyth, but such as have bin sealed with the Mark of the
Beast, aforesaid: So that to me it appears, if the State charge this Land with
the paying of Tyth, it must be by a new Impost: It is not the wages the Gospel
Ministers can challenge, it may be insufficient, or too much for Gospelers to
offer in Faith. And as for the poor, the Laws of the Land have provided that
they be maintained according to their need: And as for a Stock to maintayn
Wars, and Negotiations with other Nations, as a Treasury for the Magistrate,
for State Affairs; this should be raised according to occasion: therefore if
Tyth still remain payable, and the use be ceased, then the little finger of our
Magistrate will be heavier than our fathers loins, our fathers bore the wooden
yoke, and we the iron.

And now I beseech you (dear friend) in the bowels of the Lord Jesus, mistake
me not, as if by this I would overthrow the Ministry, a thing my soul abhors,
but my prayers are that God would purify the House of Levi, and that all the
Prophets of the Lord may be holy. Oh, shall I deny that which is of God! God
forbid: I know the Ministry to be an Ordinance of God, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. and
I hope I shall never live to deny the least Ordinance of God; I had rather pass
to the Grave and there rest in silence, than to have my Name stand among that
proud Generation: I know it was the fruit of Christ's Intercession, to store the
Church with gifts for the edifying of the body of Christ, that is, the Church:
and the faithful Ministers of the Gospel have a precious lusty and comeliness
in my ey, especially those that love the work for their Masters sake, I mean
the conversion of souls; I say their employment is the most honorable, they
serve the Lord Christ: They that convert souls to God shall shine as the
Stars in the Firmament: they are fathers in the Church; and it may serve to
humble men, that God has appointed this way, to teach men by men. And my
prayer to God is, that he would send out? more faithful Laborers, for the
harvest is great. Also Maintenance for them is as clear an Ordinance as the
other; I could instance in many Scriptures, Gal. 6.6. and the best of outward
things befits the best Calling, and not nigardly porcions; for they must use
Hospitality, and so be Ensamples for their flock, and for a Christian Nation so
professing to be; it is not our glory but our shame to let them live beggarly,
and in disgrace; as we flourish, they should be partakers: he that gives freely
and of a cheerful mind, he offers the acceptable Sacrifice to God, and none
is accepted for Sacrifice but such. Our Savior says, the time shall come,
that he that worshipeth, shall worship in spirit and in truth: but you will say,
who shall take care for the worship of God, Ministers, and Maintenance, in the
mean time? That I suppose is your work to be studying how to be nursing fathers
to the Church, and to see that those that preach and publish the Gospel under
your Dominion, may have du encouragement and supply; I think none will deny but
that they should participate with us in our good and pleasant temporal things,
and I judge it better by gift than force: in the Old Testament they gave all
things as they had them for building the Temple and Sacrifice: the Apostle tells
Ananias, was it not in thy power? Acts 5.4. The portion God appointed the
Levites as it was typical, so to encourage them in the work, so that being
about the work of the Lord, they might not be hindered: and the mayntenance
Ministers should receive besides as duty from the Donor, it should be for
encouragement to him whose work is enough for the whole body and mind: is it
any encouragement to a servant to continu his service, that must su for his
wages after earned by painful sweatings and hard labor? is it any encouragment
to the Merchant and Tradesman, after they have made use of their utmost skill
in buying, and waited to take the best season for Wind and Tide to bring home
their Goods, and after all must impose them on such as will never pay till
haled to Prison, this speaks the Commodityes to have no worth in them; so for
the Ministers of Christ to have their Wages by force, and to be a man of strife
when his Message is Peace, and precious work, it is I say for him to force, and
become a Ruff-man: Can he do this and be encouraged in his work? the Word says
alluding to them, The Labourer is worthy of his hier; so that the Gospel is of
some worth; and O that the Gospel might dissolve hard hearts more; many times
it proves but souer Food to eat the Bread of him that has an evil eye, yet
many have their teeth fet on edg.

I wish these faults were amended, the covetousness of the Ministers less, and
the Charity of the People more. I know no Rule in the Word of God, that the
Magistrate should study wholly to deliver the Minister from living somewhat by
Faith: now how far a Christian Magistrate may force worship, and for worship in
every Punctilio I will not dispute, but this I know, Gospel Principles bears,
that every man do what he do in Faith: and this I know is according to the Law
of Nations, if the Magistrate command any thing against my conscience, I ought
to obey or suffer; I will not undertake to say what the Magistrate may not do
as a Magistrate, but I conceive this he may do without oppressing any, give to
the Ministers the Glebe Land in all places, also all those Lands wrested out of
the Bishops hands, for whatsoever we won by conquering our late Enemy, and not
sold in the three Nations, is in your power to give or sell, and much more:
were I a Statesman (pardon the supposal) I should bend my mind to find out to
serve the Church, and bring my glory to her; and if there were fewer fixed
Ministers in most parts of the Downs, and those places and Parishes where there
are few Inhabitants joined, and an itinerat, godly, and able Ministry to
journey from place to place, it may probably awake the deaf and dead sinners
more; and O that they might hear the voice of the Son of God and live; but if
they will not hear nor receive them, to turn away. But Sir, want I Bowels or
Expressions, the dearest Lord knows I speak the truth in Christ, I ly not,
for it pierces my heart as sharp arrows, to think that Gods Laborers (for so
they are called) should toil all the day of their Pilgrimage, praying, and
woing men in Christ's stead that they would be reconciled to God, and while they
are telling them the good tidings of the Gospel, and counselling and pointing
out to the foolish world Jesus Christ, which is the true Bread come down from
Heaven, and for all this men have no bowels moved, to count them worthy of
common Bread; my heart pityes all hard hearts, and all hearts bound up, whom
their own ey does not pity. Let them know, Mercy is but Mercy in its time, and
then Justice seals what Mercy leaves: O you precious hearts! consider your
labor shall not be lost in the Lord; Can you spend and be spent for the Lord
Christ? Remember who says it, I will never leave you, nor forsake you: Do not
think you serve an hard Master: Can you believe the Children of the Earth will
honor you with what is theirs? Christ says, The world loves its own, and if ye
were not the Children of the Light, the world would not hate you; I know no
Rule they have to match the world so well as this, ye stand by Faith in the
greatest Peace and Prosperity that can be, you are at uncertaintyes with the
world, how long you shall stand, or when you shall fall; Remember Christ's
Kingdom is not of this world, therefore possess all you have or would have by
Faith, and it is not long but he that shall come will come, and bring his
reward with him; but woe to those whose Gold and Silver is cankered through
ignoble employment, for the Rust of it shall witness against them. Dives has
his place. I have nothing more with you for the present, for I know not how you
can bear this: In the mean time you may be sure, I honor your Authority, your
Counsel, your Person, and so commit you to the Eternal God, and still remain

Your Honors in all humble and du observance.

FINIS

