THE LIFE OF Titus Oats From his CRADLE To his first PILLORING For Infamous
PERJURY; With a True Account of his Birth and Parentage; Impartially set forth
for the satisfaction of all Persons.
Entered according to Order.

TItus Oats, the Infamous Subject of the Discourse of this Age, (whose
detestable Memory, together with the Villainy of those that abbetted him, and
folly of those that believed will be the Execration of Future Ages) was born at
Okam in the County of Rutland, of mean Parentage: His Father was one Samuel
Oats born at Norwich, and brought up there in Weaving Norwich Stuff, the chief
Manifacture of that Town; in the time of Civil Broyls, he stepped from the Loom
into the Pulpit, where he retailed Sedition and Nonsense to the Baptists, being
accounted among them a Famous Preacher, and a well Gifted Brother; he was not
content to give those of his Tribe common Washing, but souced and douced them
so that he drowned a Holy Sister in the dipping, for the which he narrowly
escaped Hanging afterward: when the King came in, he wheeled about with the
Times, and got a Benefice at Hastings which he lost for his Misdemeanors and
suspicion of Perjury against Old Mr. Parker, and came here to London, and dyed
at the Half Moon in King Street some two years ago, living there several years
under vehement suspicion of Adultery; I should not here rake into his Ashes,
but to show that Titus Oats (as the Proverb says) Was the bad Egg of an ill
Crow, and that he was fitted by his depraved Education for the Villainies he has
since Committed.

Titus Oats, till he was five years of age was much troubled with
Convulsionfits, and small hopes of Life; but afterward growing stronger, was
brought up by his Father from Okam to London, where in that time he was so
Famous for Lying amongst his Companions, that severals did presage his future
Villainies, and that one time or another, if he was not taken off by the hand of
Justice, he would put whole Kingdoms in Convulsions. He went for some time to
Westminster School, but profited little in Learning, his Genius being wholly
bent to baseness and Villainy: Afterward when his Father had procured by his
seeming Conformity a Benefice at Hastings, he took his hopeful Sprig, Titus
down with him, and Baptized him at the Age of 12 years, having some principal
People of the Town for Godfathers and Godmothers, after he had continued some
few years with his Father at Hastings; he was sent to the University of
Cambridge where he was equally remarkable for his dullness and debauchery, he
giving there a most remarkable Instance of his Roguery. He bought a Gown of a
poor Tailor, and when he was Dun'd for the Money, he swore before his Tutor
that he would take the Sacrament upon it that he had paid him; being asked by
his Tutor how he came by so much Money, since all Money past through his hands,
he said it was privately sent him by his Mother by a Carrier, and Named him; the
Carrier afterward being called, he neither knew Oats, nor any thing of the
Matter. Oats was now but a fresh man as to his standing in the University, but
a Master of Arts in Lying and Swearing: After he had staid some small time in
the University, being Notorious for all sorts of Debaucheries; he was called
home by his Father to be his ^itar at Hastings, his Father by this means
preventing his being expelled the University, he having neither Wit nor
Learning, presently became the Scandal of the Pulpit, insomuch that the
Fisher-Women pulled him out of the Pulpit, during his abode at Hastings, he was
always quarrelling, and by Lies and False Suggestions, setting Neighbors by
the Ears, and afterward Notoriously forswore himself in the Case of Mr. Parker
Junior, which is related by people worthy of all Credit, as follows.

There happened to be a Quarrel between Young Mr. Parker and this Famoso; upon
which Oats was heard to say, that he would have the Lives of some of that
Family in a short time, the Father Old Samuel Oats swore Treason against Mr.
Parker Senior, and so made him be sent for up to London in the Interim. Titus
swore a detestable Crime against Young Parker, said to be committed in the
Church-Paroch: Mr. Parker Senior quickly got quit, because the thing was found
to be but mere malice, but it went harder with Parker Junior, for it came to
the dangerous Event of a Trial: but at the Trial, Mr. Parker Junior proved by
several Witnesses, that he was at another place at that day, and that Masons
and other Workmen working about the Church, it was impossible to commit such an
offense without being Discovered by them; upon which Mr. Parker Junior at last
was quit, and Oats was presently clapped up in the Goal in his place, for
speaking scandalous things of Mr. Parker; there he continued a considerable
time, but at last got a Certiorary to be removed to Dover one of the Cinque
Ports (he pretending he could have no Justice there, because the Parkers were
the chief Magistrates of the Town) there after some time he got out, and it is
generally reported that he broke the Prison, and so got to London; when he was
at London he found himself at a great loss, and so betook himself to his old
Trade of Lying and Swearing.

He pretended he had made a Discovery of a Church, of which his Grace Henry
late DUKE of Norfolk, he said was Lawful Patron, and so he made Friends to his
Grace, who promised him the Benefice in case he could make an Effectual
Discovery, and in the Interim he gave him for some months, the Title of one of
his Honorary Chaplains, but that project failing, he then began to pretend
scruples in points of Religion, and that he was not well satisfied with the
Church of Englands Doctrine, and she as little with his Practice and Example.
After he had Discoursed some Members of the Roman Communion, he was as he
pretended all on Fire to be joined to it and resolved to become a new man, and
so at last he was admitted; then nothing would serve his turn, but he would
needs become an Apostle, and reduce all as he said to the Ancient Faith; those
whom he transacted this Affair with being wholly ignorant of his former
flagitious Life, were prevailed with, by his seeming Zeal to give him
Commendations for the English Seminary at Vallodolid in Spain, by the Name of
Titus Ambrosius; There he had not been long, but he gave many evident Proofs of
his Incorrigible Nature and Blockishness; so being a constant Quarreller, and
Combatant with the Servants and found altogether unfit to proceed any farther,
after some two Months time he was dismissed that College, and took Ship at
Bilboe, and so came for England, never coming near Salamanca, of which Famous
University he pretended to be a Doctor.

After he came into England he began to be very troublesome to his Romish
Acquaintance, still pretending great Zeal, and that he miscarried at Vallodolid
only because he did not understand the Humor of the Spainards, who were
superiors of that College; and so at last he prevailed with them to give him a
second Recommendation to St. Omers, hoping he should give them better
satisfaction in a Seminary of all English; and there he was received by the
Name of Sampson, a Name that something squared to his Achievements; for he
killed as many men almost as Sampson, and that by the same Instrument, the
Jawbone of an Ass, (and after set Fire on the Foxes Tails:) He came thither
about December 1677. having been but the Summer, before at Vallodolid; he had
not been long there, but he began to be as remarkable as he had been at
Vallodolid: The Boys for his folly and stupidness flocking about him as small
Birds do about an Owl, so that he was judged by all very unfit to go on to
higher Studies, not being able to speak two words of true Latin, as is evident
by what was proved lately in Court against him, and by his own essaying to read
the Year of our Lord, out of figures into Latin words; and besides he was very
proud and disobedient, slighting the Discipline of the House, and perpetually
murmuring and speaking ill of the Royal Family; so that at last they resolved
to dismiss him, having received his Character from Vallodolid; accordingly he
was turned out about the middle of June 1678.

There is one thing very remarkable happened the Night before his Dismission,
which is as follows.

There is by Relation a private Oratory in the Seminary where the Students do
their private Devotions; there being there an Altar and a Crucifix, one of the
Superiors of the House coming late to do his Devotion, observed that Mr.
Sampson was got upon the Altar, and his hand upon the hand of the Crucifix; he
asked him what he was doing, he replied he was taking leave of Jesus Christ; at
his Dismission he said to several of the Students, he would be revenged of the
Jesuits to the full, for denying him Entrance into their Order, and for turning
him out of the College, both which it seems he has in great part performed.
After he came over into England again, he went sculking up and down the Town
among the Romanists, and was very troublesome, being perpetually begging
something for a poor Student and a converted Minister, who had voluntarily left
a great Benefice, for to Embrace the Catholic Faith, which moved the Charity
of several; to those that he thought were no great Friends of the Jesuits; he
made great complaints, and threatened them sore; he told some of the Jesuits
(who afterward by the Virtue of his Oath were Executed,) that if they would
not by such a time furnish him with such a sum of Money, they should all repent
it; they knowing their own Conscience, looking on him as a mere Vagabond and
Scoundrel, took no notice of what he said, knowing his Majesty's Clemency, and
never suspecting that he would take such a Diabolical Course as swearing of
Treason, but only inform of them as being Priests: Oats in the mean time was
Caballing with Dr. Tongue and the Earl of Shaftsbury.

It Is generally supposed that Tongue drew up his Narrative: Oats being among
the Jesuits as you have heard for sometime could furnish them with Names of
several; but they drew up the Method of the pretended Treason, and altered it
afterward according as they found the pulse of the Nation beat. About the
middle of August they thought all things were ready for a sham Discovery, and
so was the Brat Midwifed into the World, which after by the inveterate Malice
of some, and the Folly and Madness of others; grew in a short time into that
great Giant that like another Goliath defied the Armies of the living Lord.

After the sitting of the Parliament which was in October following, Titus came
into that Credit, that at the Intercession of the House of Commons; he had Ten
Pounds a Week allowed him and a Guard, which Pension was continued till after
the Oxford Parliament, where at the Trial of Stephen College, Oats set up for
an Evidence against the King, and at his return was forbid the Court; then he
went and herded himself among the Factious Party of the City, where he
Caballed, but was never trusted in the great Design; because as Coll. Rumsey
said, he was too great a Rogue; however they maintained him very well, but his
credit sunk lower and lower, every day; and was quite ruined upon the Discovery
of the Phanatick Plot: The Summer following he was clapped up into the
King's Bench, upon an Action of Scandalum Magnatum against our present King,
where he has behaved himself very insolently, and talked very basely of the
Royal Family, which by the Discovery of his pretended Plot, he pretended to
have a great kindness for; this Term, Upon the 9th of May, and also upon the
10th he was found out to be a great Imposter, and to have falsely Perjured
himself by above threescore Evidences, many of them Protestants; for which he
is now to suffer several Penalties, Notoriously known to the World.

London Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-bridge, 1685.
Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most
Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.


