By Major General Lambert, Commander in Chief these Northern Parts.

Whereas the Committee of the Militia of the County of York did formerly give
directions for calling the Inhabitants of the Weapontake of Claro to labor in
the sleighting of the Castle of Knaresbrough, according to the several Orders
of Parliament in that behalf; and being now informed that diverse of the said
Inhabitants do neglect to send in men to assist in that Work, and such
Laborers as are sent from any Town, do for the most part neglect the Service,
coming late, going away early, and standing idle whilst they stay, so as the
Castle is at present in danger to be surprised if any Enemy should attempt it;
And in regard the said Committee does not Act as formerly, it is therefore
Ordered, that every Pettie-Constable within the said Weapontake do upon the
eight day of lanuary instant, send a certain number of able Laborers with
Spades, Shovels, Pick-Axes, Hacks, Mattocks or Gavelocks proportioning their
numbers, according the Book of Rates, that is to say, one Labourer for every
penny charged on the Constablerie in the said Book of Rates, each Labourer to
work from half hour after seven a Clock in the Morning, and to continue until
half hour after four a Clock in the Afternoon, resting only for one hour at
Dinner time.

And to the end the said Work way be effectually performed, every Constable is
to levy weekly so much money as will pay each Labourer his Wages after eight
pence per diem, and bring the same to Knaresbrough, and there Pay it to the
Hands of John Roundell and Robert Hill, who are therewith to pay each Labourer
his Wages proportionably, according to the hours he shall labor at the said
Work; and deduct out of his said Wages for so many hours as he shall neglect.
And each Labourer, with the respective Constable of the Town that sends them,
are to appear (when they come to work) in the Towlebooth of Knaresbrough, where
Mr. Richard Ellis is to Register their appearance, and also Register what sum
of Money each Constable shall deliver to the said John Roundell or Robert Hill
for payment of their Wages, and is likewise to Register what Wages is paid to
every several Labourer, that no abuse be done to the Country.

And for such Towns as have not sent their proportion of Laborers for the last
fourteen days, according to the former Warrants, the Governor of Knaresbrough
Castle is hereby Ordered (upon notice given him by Mr. Stockdale, Mr. Rodes and
Mr. Barroby) to send a Party of Soldiers to Quarter upon the Constablerie,
until they send in money after the Rate of eight pence per diem for each
Labourer, charged on them for the time so neglected, and pay the same to the
said John Roundell and Robert Hill, and Register the same with the said Mr.
Ellis. And the said Governor is further Ordered to do the like also in cases
where any Towns shall make the like defaults for the time ensuing. And all the
said moneys so to be sent in and paid for former defaults, and all other moneys
to be sent in for Hyering of Laborers for the time to come from such Towns as
send money and no Laborers, are to be issued and disposed of for the Wages of
Workmen, according as shall be appointed by the said Mr. Stockdale, Mr. Rodes,
and Mr. Barroby, to whom the Care and Charge of this Service is commended, and
Power given them to appoint Overseers for the Work, and give Directions
therein upon all occasions, as they shall see expedient. Given at Towlerton
under my Hand and Seal the fourth day of lanuary, Anno Dom. 1648.

J. LAMBERT.


