THE Lord Bishop of Londonderry's CASE:
With some Reasons humbly offered to the Consideration of the Lords in England,
to induce their Lordships not to take cognizance of an Appeal lately brought
before them by the Society and Assistants of London for Vlster in Ireland,
against an Order of the House of Lords in Ireland, made the last Sessions of
Parliament there.

THOUGH the Title upon the Merits is not now to be debated before the Lords,
yet it is necessary to show the Fact on which this Appeal has been brought, for
on that arises the Question about the Jurisdiction.

The Predecessors of the Bishop in right of the Church were seized of the Lands
in Question ever since any Settlement of the Church in Ireland, and so long
since as the 11th of June, 1638. Dr. Bramhall, the then Bishop, by Virtue of
Acts of Parliament of Ireland, 10th and 11th Car. 1. granted them in Lease to
the Corporation of Londonderry, at 50 l. yearly Rent for sixty Years, from the
14th of July, 1634. which Lease ended the 14th of July, 1694. and saving the
Twelve years Troubles of Cromwell's Time, the Rent, and even the last Quarters
Rent was constantly and duly paid by them; and they by their Council, Mr.
Cairnes, and others, applied for a new Lease; but the Bishop not agreeing to
such undervalue and unreasonable Terms as they proposed, there was thereupon an
Attempt to disseize the Bishop of his Freehold, by means of the said Mr.
Cairnes, also Agent for the said Society, and of one Harvey, Chamberlain of the
said Corporation, and of the Under-tenants, who lived on the Premises; and they
pretended to set up a Title in the Society, and agreed to take a Lease from
them at 90 l. 10 s. per Annum; and partly by force in some places, and by
practices with the Under-Tenants, who pretended to attorn in other places, they
endeavored to get the Possession.

The Bishop, to save the Church from being stripped of its Patrimony by such
Contrivances and Frauds as were in this Case, where all the Confederates by
several sorts of Rewards for their Practices had made themselves Parties, and
interested therein, and there being no Remedy to regain the Possession upon the
Statutes of forcible Entry, by reason it was within the Liberties of
Londonderry, where no Justices of the Peace have any Power but themselves, who
were interested or concerned therein: According to the common Usage in that
Kingdom, brought a Bill in Chancery, there to be by Injunction quieted in his
Possession, and had the Common Affidavit of his Possession; and the Cause
coming to be heard on the 11th of June, 1697. both the Chief Justices being
called by the Lord Chancellor for his Assistants, declared, That the Bishop
ought to be restored and quieted in his Possession. But the Lord Chancellor
declared, That though the Society had no right to the Possession, yet he could
not grant any Injunction to quiet the Bishop's Possession, till it were tried
by a Jury, whether the Bishop, or his Predecessors, were ever in actual
Possession, so as to have a Right to the Possession at the Expiration of the
Lease* conceiving the Justice of the Case to be, that if the Bishop were ever
in actual Possession, he ought to be adjudged so at the Expiration of the
Lease; yet he would not order an Injunction.

And on a second hearing of the 30th of June, his Lorship was pleased to
decree, That if the Lord Bishop of Londonderry, or any of his Predecessors,
ever were in the actual Possession, or in such Possession by the Receipt of the
Rents during the Lease, that does by Construction of Law give the Lord Bishop a
Right to the actual Possession upon the Expiration of the Lease, that then he
ought to be quieted in his Possession by Injunction of this Court; but if the
Lord Bishop, or any of his Predecessors never were in any such Possession, then
this Court cannot grant an Injunction, therefore a Trial at Law shall be
directed upon an Issue proper. From which Decree the Bishop appealed to the
Lords there, who taking the Possession of the Bishops Tenants to be the
Possession of the Bishop, as the Chief Justices had done, and the Lords having
a just Indignation against the undue Practices and Treacheries which they saw
proved in this Case, they did thereupon alter that Decree, and ordered the
Bishop's Possession to be quieted, which is no more than has been constantly
till now in such Cases done there by the Court of Chancery, and can be no wrong
to the Society; for if they have any Right, they may bring their Action, and
try it at Law as soon as they please. But instead of that, they have brought
this Appeal against the Order of the Lords in Ireland; and thereupon your
Lordships seeing it primae impressionis; and that such an Appeal had never been
before attempted from the Lords in Ireland, were pleased not to read the
Petition of Appeal, but to direct Presidents to be sent from thence, touching
the Method of Appealing from the Chancery there. And on these Presidents, and
what others are to be offered here, and the reasons of this Case; It is humby
hoped that your Lorships will not take cognizance of this new sort of Appeal.

Co. 1. Inst. 81. Dyer, 376.
I. It must in the first place be allowed, that no Court whatsoever has any
Right of Jurisdiction, but either by Usage and Prescription, or by Grant; and
neither of these can be pretended in this Case; for from the beginning to this
time, there never before was any Appeal brought from the Lords of Ireland to
the Lords of England; and it must be granted to be a strong Argument, That as
my Lord Cook says, what never has been done, ought not to be done, nor can be
done.

II. In the next place it is to be considered, That the Lords in Ireland have
for many Ages exercised such Jurisdiction there, as the Lords in England have
done here, and Claim such Rights from the Constitution of that Kingdom, by the
Concessions and Grants of the Kings of England, and from Usage and
Prescription; and that it has been allowed them in England; and never till now
any Appeal was brought against any one of their Judgments, Decrees, or Orders
whatsoever.

To show what Authority England has allowed to the Parliament of Ireland, see
the Records following.

Ex Rot. Pat. de Anno 30 Reg. Regis Henrici 3. M. 1.
Quia pro communi utilitate Terrae Hiberniae and unitate Terrarum Regis Rex
vult and de communi Concilio Regis provisum est quod omnes leges and
Consuetudinis quae in Regno Angliae tenentur, in Hibernia teneantur and eadem
terrae eisdem legibus subjaceat, and per easdem regatur, sicut Dominus Johannes
Rex cum ultimo esset in Hibernia statuit and fieri mandavit. Quia etiam quod
Rex vult quod omnia brevia de Communi jure quae currunt in Angli^ similiter
current in Hibernia sub novo sigillo Regis. Mandatum est Archiepiscopis, etc.
Quod propace and tranquilitate ejusdem terrae per easdem leges eos Regi and
deduci permittant and eos in omnibus sequantur. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud
Wudstock 19. die Septembris.

Pryn's Anim. 286. 29. Ed. 3.
King Edward the IIId. in the 29th Year of his Reign, by Advice of his Council
made an Ordinance, Reciting, That whereas many of the Kingdom of Ireland, by
reason of their great labor, charge, and expense in coming for England to be
redressed, and to seek for Justice, have been reduced to great misery and want,
and wholly ruined; which the said King and Council taking into Consideration,
for the quiet and good Government of the people of Ireland Ordained; that in
all Cases whatsoever, Errors in Judgment, in Records and Process, in the Courts
of Ireland, shall be corrected and amended in Parliament in Ireland.

Co. 4 Inst. 12. Seldom 's Titles of Honor, part 2. cap. 5. sect. 26.
The Modus tenendi Parliamentum Was Exemplified and sent over by H. the IId. the
same in words with that in England, and in the end of it it is said that things
in Ireland may be examined and corrected in pleno Parliamento and non alibi;
and my Lord Cook mentions the words of the old Record, Terra Hiberniae intra se
habet Parliamentum and omnes and omnimodas curias prout in Anglia, and idem
Parliamentum, facit leges, and mutat leges and illi de eadem terra non
obligantur per Statut in Anglia quia hii non habent milites Parliamenti; and my
Lord Cook mentions another old Roll of Parliament, Rot. Pat. 10. Ed. 2. Co. 4.
Inst. 350.
De Parliamentis tenendis singulis Annis in Hibernia, which was likewise the
old Law of England; but till the Dissolution of the Parliament there in 1665.
this Law by frefrequent Parliaments were more duly observed there, than in
England.

St Hib. 10. H. 7. cap. 22.
And there they have from time to time made their own Laws; and in the Tenth H.
7th by one Act made all the Statutes of England of force there, which includes
as well the Statutes relating to the Rights of Parliament, as other Statutes:
And since that time they have by particular Acts there Re-enacted such
subsequent Acts of England as they thought good for them.

And if the Lords should take Cognizance of such Appeals, the same
inconveniences and vexations would attend the poor People there, which induced
the Parliament to take away the High Commission Court here, for that it brought
People from the remote parts of the Kingdom before them, whereas they might
with less trouble and expense have had Justice in their Courts at home. It
likewise agrees with the Reasons of the Two Ancient Statute of England
mentioned by my Lord Cook in the Third of R. Second, Co. 4. Inst. 356. Rot.
Pat. 3 R 2. nu. 42.
That Persons having Estates in Ireland should reside there, else half of their
Estates to go to maintain the Forts against the Irish: And it was the great
mischief of Ancient times in England, that People were carried out of the
Kingdom by Appeal to Rome, and poor People not able to follow them, thereby
utterly undone; and should the Lords of England at this day inquire into,
Mischiefs and Inconveniences if your Lordships hear this Appeal.
and unsettle things done by the Lords there, besides the endless trouble to
their Lordships, the vexations and expense to the People, it would be of
infinite mischief and disturbance to most of the Titles and Families who are
now there in peace, and acquiesce on what has been done there; and if your
Lordships take Cognizane of this, you may by the same reason take Cognizance of
all other Things, Orders, and Proceedings whatsoever there.

The Exercise of the Jurisdiction of the Parliament in Ireland, both of Ancient
and later times appears to be as in England, by their taking Cognizance of
Impeachments, Writs of Error, and Appeals: Some instances whereof are hereunto
annexed, though many of the Records and Journals of the Parliament of that
Kingdom, have been by the many Troubles and Rebellions there, burnt and
destroyed; yet it does appear, That the Lords there have from time to time
exerted their Jurisdiction as aforesaid, and all their Orders and Judgments
have till now stood firm; and that they have as near as they could from time to
time in their Rules and Methods of Justice and Proceedings, followed the
Presidents that Your Lordships, and Your Noble Ancestors made here.

England, from the King's Bench in Ireland. And it is so; but then that has had
a constant allowed usage to warrant it; and it does not follow, because a Writ
of Error lies to the King's Bench here, that therefore Appeals would lie from
the Chancery there, to the Chancery here, which might be as reasonable to be
done, but never was attempted.

Ireland, and passed sub Silentio without any opposition in that respect.

Poining's Law in the Tenth of H. Seventh; St. 10. H. ^. cap. 4.
but that is nothing at all to this purpose, for it concerns only the
appointing a new Method and Form of passing of Acts of Parliament there, that
they must be transmitted and approved at the Council Board in England, but that
alters nothing of their judicial power or capacity so long established and
enjoyed by them.

Ireland would be independent of England; and which is very undeserved if any
body consider how unanimous and zealous the Protestants of Ireland have very
lately, and on all occasions appeared for the English Interest there, to the
loss of their Lives and all they had, and how little able they are to support
themselves, without the Assistance and Protection of England: And the weakness
of the Objections appears yet the more; for the same Argument may be made
against their having any Parliament to sit in Ireland; for if they be allowed
to have right to a Parliament, they must also be allowed the right of
Parliaments, which they have hitherto exercised and enjoyed.

For which Reasons it is humbly hoped Your Lordships will not take any further
Cognizance of the said Appeal.

James Sloane. Fra. Annesley.


An Abstract of some of the Presidents in Ireland, which were certified from
thence by the Lords Justices, and Council there, to Your Lordships.
8 H 6. M. 70. Prynn's Animad. 313, 314.
THE Prior of Lanthony removed by Writ of Error a Judgment in the King's Bench in
Ireland, to the Parliament of Ireland, which was affirmed there: Afterward the
Prior removed the Record into the King's Bench in England; but the Chief Justice
and the rest of the Judges being of Opinion that they could not reverse a
Judgment given in the Parliament of Ireland, or take conusance of any matters
in their Parliament there, the Prior petitioned the Parliament of England,
setting forth the said Proceedings, and prayed Redress; but the Parliament here
did not think it conusable before them, and therefore no Answer was ever given
thereto, or any Proceedings thereon.

Nota,
The Judges of the King's Bench in England were then of Opinion, That the
Parliament of Ireland had a good Judicature.

Rot. Hib. 26. H. 6. cap 34.
In a Case between Chambers and the Barons of the Exchequer, the Parliament
there reversed a Judgment given in the Exchequer.

Rot. Parl. Hib. 27. H. 6. cap 16.
In a Case between the Baron of Galtrim and the Earl of Shrewsbury, on a
Petition to Parliament, it was ordered that a Stop should be put to the taking
out of Executions on a Scire facias issued on a Recognizance in Chancery.

Rot Parl. Hib. 27. H 6. cap. 25.
Parliament ordered on Petition, That the Petitioner be quieted in the
Possession of the Treasurership of Limerick, pursuant to a Decree of Chancery;
he having been dispossessed by virtue of the King's Letters and Privy Seal out
of England.

Nota,
This Record shows that the Parliament intermeddled in matters which concerned
the Chancery, and also the King, in which he acquiesced.

Rot Parl. Hib. 7. Ed 4 c 47.
Anne, the Wife of Sir William Wells, Knight, and Richard his Son, Executors
of the said Sir William, and Matthew Philips; Judgment given by the Lords in
this Cause.

25 July, 1634.
It was in Parliament declared, That an Adjournment of the House of Lords was
necessary, it being a Court of Law, the highest in the Kingdom, that sends
Writs of Error to the King's Bench.

20 Nov. 1634.
The Lords of Ireland order that the Officers of their House should receive
their Fees in Irish Money; but in Cases of Bills, or Suits commenced in the
House between Party and Party, the Clerk shall receive the same in English
Money, as in England.

27 Feb. 16^0.
An Impeachment brought up from the Commons to the Lords, by Audley Mervin
against Sir Richard Bolton, Lord Chancellor, and others.

24 May, 1641.
Declaration and Protestation of the Lords and Commons of Ireland, That the
Court of Parliament in Ireland is the Supreme Court of Judicature, to hear and
determine all Civil and Criminal Causes whatsoever, as in England.

20 May, 1661.
Petition of Nicholas Darcy to the Lords in Ireland, That the Lord Chief Justice
should Seal a Writ of Error, and give Copies of Records to the Petitioner and
heard Council.

15 June, 1661.
By the House of Lords of Ireland, Ordered, That the Church be immediately
restored to all their Possessions.

5 July, 1661.
Ordered, That the Lord Chancellor do Seal a Writ of Error in the Case of the
Lord Clancarty's Outlawry, returnable in this House.

27 July, 1661.
Lord Viscount Ranelagh's Petition and Appeal from the High Court of Chancery to
be relieved against a Decree made there, Anno 1658, at the Suit of Dame
Catherine Bingham, and John Paulet, Gent. Upon hearing of the said Cause the
said Decree was Reversed.

2 June, 1662.
Ordered by the Lords House, that the Bishop of Derry be put in Possession of
Termonderry near Londonderry, the said Bishop having been in Possession
thereof in 1641.

Nota, This was part of the Land which is now in Dispute.

24 June, 1662.
The Cause between Theophilus Lea, and William Leslie, concerning matter of
Title, not coming hither by way of Appeal from any other Court, Ordered, That
the Cause be therefore dismissed from the House to the Common Law.

20 Dec. 1662.
Kean o Hora and Uxor, against Robert Parkes, Esquire Defendant, Parks obtained a
Judgment in the King's Bench against the Plaintiff, which Judgment was removed
by Writ of Error into the House of Lords, upon which a Scire Facias issued to
the said Parkes, and the return thereupon made, and a day appointed for Arguing
the Errors.

9 Feb. 1662.
Ordered by the Lords, That some of the Judges prepare a Draught for the House,
that no cause or matter in difference between Party and Party, which may be
determined in any of his Majesty's ordinary Courts of Justice or Equity, shall
be admitted to receive Hearing before the House, except in case of Appeal; Writ
of Error, or Matter of Privilege.

19 Mar. 1662.
Petition and Appeal of Lord Viscount Ely of Loftus, against a Judgment obtained
against his Father Lord Chancellor Loftus at Council Board, before the then
Lord Lieutenant and others, and several other Proceedings in the Courts of Law
there had upon the said Judgment, and several Orders of the House thereupon.

29 Octo. 1695.
Appeal of the Earl of Mead, and Cecilia, Countess of Mead, his Lady, against
the Lord Ward, from a Decree made in the Chancery of the County-Palatine of
Tipperary, by which certain Lands were Decreed to the Lord Ward, the Decree
Reversed, and the Possession of the said Lands restored to the said Earl.

29 Octo. 1695.
Appeal of Samuel Maynard against an Order conceived in the Chancery Court of
the County Palatine of Tipperary, directing an issue at Law, on hearing, the
said Appeal was dismissed.


