THE King of France's Letter TO THE Earl of Tyrconnel, Found in a Ship Laden
with Arms for Ireland.
MY LORD,
AS we are fully Informed of the deplorable Misfortunes of our Royal Brother,
(His Majesty of Great Britain) and of His Intentions to Honor Our Court with
His Presence, till we can Accommodate His Return to His Ungrateful Country and
Kingdom, suitable to His Grandeur and Merit; so we thought it convenient to
send You the most proper Instructions We, and Our Council, could Suggest,
whereby we might render your endeavors as Serviceable and Material as may be
for your Royal Master's Interest. The Kingdom of Ireland seems, at present, to
be your Master's last Stake, and therefore must be managed wisely; Nor shall
you want Opportunity of making the most of your Game, since we are steadfastly
resolved to give the Army in England such powerful Diversion, that we doubt not
to render them wholly incapable of turning their Arms toward You: In the mean
time, we advise you to make all the Levies you can; and by no means admit any
Heretical Villains into the least Command, Civil or Military: We have sent you
Arms for Thirty Thousand; which, with what your self can supply, will Accouter
a Formidable Body of Men, and fully sufficient for the entire Reduction of that
Kingdom. We shall also take care to furnish you with Money; and, in the mean
time, we advise you to seize, without distinction, all the Heretics Goods and
Estates, which will serve for a present Advance: We will also supply you with
some Expert Commanders, and all necessary Engines of War; and for the supply of
Ammunition, we are Informed of your care, in your speedy setting up Mills for
the making of Powder, etc. We likewise advise you to keep strong and diligent
Guards in all your Seaports and Coasts; to set up Beacons in convenient places
throughout the Kingdom, whereby the Country may be ready at the least Alarm:
And as we doubt not of the Assistance of God in so Just a Cause, so we may,
with all human probability, conclude of the speedy Re-establishment of Our
Royal Brother in his Throne and Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for T. P. 1688.


