SCRIPTURE-RULES to be observed in Buying and Selling.
BY Mr. CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Late MINISTER at Lawrence-Jewry, LONDON.
Rules concerning Buying Commodities.
1. IF you would not transgress Scripture rules in buying; then first take heed
that you do not discommend those Commodities that are very good, which you are
about to buy, that so you may bring down the price of the Commodity, and get it
for less than it is worth: There is a known place of Scripture for this, in
Prove. 20.14. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer; but when he is gone
his way, then he boasts. People in Solomon's time they were so wicked, that
when they came to the market to buy any thing, the buyer he would discommend
the Commodity, and say, It was naught, though it were very good and saleable;
but when the seller was gone, then he would boast of what a good penny worth he
had bought, and the like.

2. Do not make vows and protestations, that you will give no more for a
Commodity, than what you have first offered, when afterward you will give
more. This is a very commoun thing with Tradesmen: You shall have a man come
to a shop, and cheapen a Commodity, and the buyer he will say, He will not give
a farthing more, and the seller will say, He will not take a farthing less, and
yet both the buyer (...) ^^ller takes (...). Now, this is no other than a
palpable and downright lie.

3. Do not give counterfeit, money for those Commodities you buy; this you have
an example of in Abraham, when he was to buy the field in Machpelah of Ephron
the Hittite, for a burying Place, in Genesis 23.16. says Abraham, I will give
thee four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchand; And
therefore you transgress Scripture rules, if you know you have brass money, or
counterfeit gold about you, and yet pay it away for commodities, you sin in
doing so, though you your self took it for Commodities.

4. Do not give for a commodity less than in your conscience you think it is
worth; It is an open oppression in buying, when you seek to bring a Commodity
under its due value and worth. Abraham when he was to buy the Cave in Machpelah
of Ephron, says he, I will give thee the worth of it in money: And so David
when he was to buy the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite, 2. Sam. 24.24.
says he I will buy it of thee at the full value of it.

5. Do not long defer the paying for those Commodities which you have bought,
when thou have by the where with all to pay it: there is an excellent place for
this in Prove. 3, 27, 28. withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it
is in the power of thy hand to do it: say not unto thy neighbor, Go and come
again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by thee, This text is
referred to works of mercy, but it has relation to buying and selling, and
trading in the world: If you owe a man money for a Commodity, you ought to pay
him, and not to let him come day after day for it: and go without it, when you
have it by you, 2 Kings. 4.7. it is the badge of a wicked man in Scripture, not
to pay his debts, in Psalm. 37.21. The wicked borrows and pays not again.

6. Do not engross a Commodity, that is, do not buy all of a Commodity into
your own hands alone, that by that means you may sell the Commodity at your own
price; this is a mere oppression, destructive to a Commonwealth, and to all
trading; the Scripture condemns this in Prove. 11.26. it is spoken there of
Corn-mungers; says the Text. He that witholdeth corn, the people shall curse
him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells it. In Solomon's
time there were Corn-mongers that when corn was cheap, would go and buy all the
corn in the country, and would keep it up, and sell none till corn was very
dear; now, says the Text, He that does thus, the people shall curse him for
it; but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells it. Now, it is no
sin in itself to engross a Commodity, thereby to sell it the cheaper, but for
a man to engross a Commodity, merely thereby to advance the price of it; this
is such an oppression, that the people shall curse him for it.

7. Do not in your buying a commodity take any advantage of the mistake or
oversight of the seller; as suppose you should come to a shop and buy so many
yards of cloth, or the like, and he should give thee more than is thy due, or
take less money of thee than is his due, you should take no advantage of him in
such a case, but restore it again: for, if you take any thing more from him
than you bought of him, it is theft; or if you give any less for the Commodity
than you bargand for, it is theft: there is an excellent place for this in Genesis
43.12. Jacob when there was a famine in the land, he sent his sons down into
Egypt to buy corn, and Joseph he knowing his brethren, filled their sacks with
corn, and put the money which they brought for the corn, in the mouth of their
sacks again; and when they came home and found their money in the mouth of
their sacks, they told their father Jacob of it; then says he to them, Go back
again and take double money in your hand, and the money that was brought again
in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hands, for per adventure it
was an oversight: here was a conscienciousness in Jacob.

8. Do not buy any Commodities on the Lords Day; it is true, upon urgent
occasions to maintain life either in man or beast, this is lawful; but to buy
any thing, that you may well be without till monday, in this case you sin, if
you buy any thing on the Lords Day; Neh. 10.31. And Nehemiah entered into ane
oath, and the people with him, that if any of the people of the land brought
wares, or any victuals to sell on the Sabbath day, that they would not buy it
of them; and as the law did not give them leave to break the Jewish Sabbath, so
neither does the Gospel give us leave to break the Christian Sabbath; and
therefore I cannot see but that it is a sin, for men to buy either wine, or
beer, or pepper, or mustard, or any other trivial things (which they may well
be without) on the Sabbath Day.

9, Do not in buying a commodity, work upon the necessity of a poor man, that
has need of money: this is a great sin in Tradesmen; they know that a poor
man wants money, and he must sell off his ware, or else he cannot buy bread for
his family, and therefore they will work upon his necessity, and will not buy
the Commodity of him, unless he will sell it cheaper then he can afford it; now
this is a great oppression, in the 25. of Levit 14 If thou buyest any thing of
thy neighbor, or sellest any thing to thy neighbor, thou must not use
oppression. There is an oppression in buying as well as in selling, it is a
great oppression for rich men to work upon the necessity of a poor man, to make
him sell cheaper then he can afford, or else to buy nothing at all of him.

10. Do not buy those things which are not fit to be bought and sold: as first,
Do not buy stolen goods, they are not fit to be bought; if thou know that
the goods that are to be bought are stolen goods, they are not to be bought,
but to be restored; as the receiver is as bad as the theif, so the buyer is as
bad as the theif: Secondly, Do not buy monuments of Idolatry, for they are not
fit to be bought, as Crosses, Beads, and Images, and Crucifixes, and the like.
Thridly, Do not buy Men for slaves, this the Lord reproves in Amos. 2.6 They
sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes; and so in
Deuteronomy. 27. Thou shall not steall thy brother and make merchandise of him: We
should therefore take heed lest we split our souls upon any of these rocks, and
let us labor that among all our buyings, we buy that which Christ bids us buy*
in Esaias 55.1. Ho every one that thristeth, come you unto the waters, and he
that has no money, come buy, and eat, yea come buy wine and milk without
money, and without price.

Rules Concerning Selling Commodities.
1. IF you would not transgress Scripture rules in selling Commodities; then in
the first place do not multiply words in selling; the Scripture affords many
examples for this, as in Genesis 23.15. Abraham, as I told you before, when he was
to buy the cave of Machpelah, of Ephron, he told him that it was worth four
hundred shekels of silver, and Abraham presently gave him so much current money
with the merchant: And so God Himself takes upon Him to be a seller, in Zech.
11.12. if you think good, says God, Give me my price; if not, forbear;
multiplicity of words is needless; In a multitude of words (says Solomon)
there is sin: Men should not lavish and frolic in a shop.

2. Do not commend and over-praise a commodity, when you know in your
conscience. that there is a fault in it! this is a vicious carriage in the
seller, when he shall use abundance of fine words to set out a Commodity when
it is not good. As the buyer should not discommend a Commodity when it is good;
so should not the seller over-praise and commend a Commodity, when it is naught.

3. Do not sell thy Commodities by false weights nor by false measures; do not
keep a deceitful balance, or a deceitful measure; this is condemned in Amos.
8.5. They make the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and falsify the
^^^^ances by deceit: and so in the 20. of Prove. 10. Diverse weights, and diverse
measures, both of them are alike an abomination unto the Lord. Now, this is
spoken, not that the weights and measures in themselves are ane abomination to
the Lord, but only those men that do use, and keep, and sell by those weights
and measures; and therefore the Lord gave a special law for this, to all that
did follow trades in Israel, in Deuteronomy. 25.14, 15. says God there, Thou shall
not have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a small, that is, a great
measure to buy by and a small one to sell by; Thou shall not have in thy bag
diverse weights, a great and a small, but thou shall have a perfect and a just
weight, and a perfect and a just measure shall thou have, that thy days may be
long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee; and so in Micah. 6.10. Is
there yet, says God, the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked,
and the scant measure, which is an abomination unto the Lord.

4. You are to make conscience in selling a Commodity, not only that you do not
speak falsely, but also that you do not speak in an equivocating manner: It is
an observation that Luther has upon these words, Let no man defraud his
Brother, says he, there are many Shopkeepers, that will not lie, but they
will equivocat, very much: you shall have a Tradsman, to sell off a Commodity
he will get a partner with him, and he shall offer him so much for a Commodity,
and then he will tell the next man that comes for that Commodity, that there
was one offered him so much for it but even now; and then they will say
likewise, it cost me so much, when it may be they had other things with it of a
greater value and price, and it may be they had a great deal of time given them
to pay for it, Whereas the buyer pays ready money; and many other equivocating
words they use, which is as bad as lying.

5. In selling a Commodity, do not work upon the ignorance or simplicity of the
man that comes to buy the Commodity; but if you discern him to be unskilful,
rather use him the better, than the worse; in Zepha. 1.9. says God there, In
the same day also will I punish all those young men, that leap on the
threshold, which fill their masters houses with violence and deceit? and so in
1 These. 4.6. Let no man (saves the Apostle) go beyond or defraud his brother in
any matter, for the Lord is the avenger of all such; and so in 2 Pet. 2, 3. And
through covetousness shall they with fained words make merchandise of you,
whose judgment lingereth not. When men shall work upon the ignorance of the
buyer, and so advance the price of the Commodity; this is a great sin.

6. Do not imbase a Commodity from its primitive worth and goodness, and yet
sell it at the full price, as if it were good, thereby to get the more by it:
this the Scripture condemns in Amos. 8.6. They sell the refuse of the wheat;
the Corn-mongers, in those times they would pick out the best of their wheat,
and yet sell the worst at the full price of the best: now, this the Lord
condemns; and so in Esaias, 1.22. They mingle wine with water, and dross with
silver: the Scripture condemns this, to imbase a Commodity from its primitive
goodness, and yet to sell it at the full value of the best.

7. Be not among the first that shall raise the price of a Commodity; this I
hinted to you before, in Prove. 11.26. He that witholdeth corn the people shall
curse him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells it.

8. Be not so eager in selling of your Commodities, that you cannot content
yourselves to sell on the six days of the week, but you must sell on the
Sabbath Day likewise; be not like those in Amos. 8.5. saying, When will the new
moon be over, that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath be over, that we may set
forth wheat? and so in Neh. 13.15. In those days, says the Prophet saw I in
Judah, some treading wine-presses on the Sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and
lading Asses, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on
the Sabbath and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold
victuales. Now, this is against your common selling-houses, and shops of mean
trades, that sell by retail, that make nothing of selling small trifling things
on the Sabbath Day but this is a great sin.

9. When you are found out to be deceitful in your dealing, do not justify
your deceit; many men, if you come to them, and tell them, that they sell
dearer then their neighbors, they will tell you, that they do not; or if you
tell them that the Commodity is not good which you bought of them, they will
say, it is as good as they can afford for the price, and the like; this is
condemned in Ephraim, in Hos. 12.7, 8. Ephraim is a Merchant, the balances of
deceit are in his hand, he loves to oppress, and yet he says, I am become
rich, and I have found me out substance, and in all my labors they shall find
no iniquity in me, that is sin; you should not justify your deceit.

10. Do not sell those things that are not saleable; as first, do not sell
spiritual things, for they are not saleable, as in Act. 8.20. Simon Magus when
he would have bought the gift of the holy Ghost with money Peter says to him,
Thy money perish with thee, because thou thoughtest that the gift of God might
be purchased with money. Secondly, do not sell monumentes of Idolatry; as
Crosses, and Beads, and Images and Crucifixes, and conjuring Books, and the
like; they are not fit to be sold, as in Act. 19.19. many also of them that
used curious arts, brought their books together, and burned them before all men
and they counted the price of them and found it to be 50000. pieces of silver;
this is spoken here of conjuring Books; and notwithstanding they were of so
great a value, they would not sell them, but burned them. Thirdly, Do not sell
thy self as Ahab did, to work wickedness; for you are not your own, but Gods;
and therefore you must glorify God in your bodies, and in your souls which are
Gods. Fourthly, You must not sell stolen goods. Fifthly, You must not sell
those things that are for no other use, but for to commit sin in the using of
them; as for to sell stuff to paint harlots faces, is a sin, because it is for
no other use but to commit sin in the using of it.

FINIS.

