THE French Kings New DECLARATION
Translated from the ORIGINAL at Paris.

[Being his Public MANIFESTO, in Vindication of Himself, and the late King
James, from being any ways Aiding, Assisting or Privy to the late intended
ASSASSINATION of King WILLIAM.]

WHereas by Our Advice from England, We have received Information of an
Intended Assassination designed upon the Person of the Prince of Orange; and,
That the false and scandalous Suggestions of Our Enemies have industriously
endeavored to insinuate, That Our Self, and Our Dearest Brother James, King of
Great Britain, have been Aiders and Abettors to the said Assassination, at
which We are the less surprised as being but highly sensible, that the Luster
of the Great is but too often shaded by Slander and Detraction from the Mouths
of Malice and Envy.

Nevertheless, to dispel that Empty Cloud, We think Our Selves obliged, in
Right to Our Traduced and Injured Honor, to Publish this following Declaration.

And, that the Guarrantee of Our Royal Word, Our present Only Vindication, may
carry its just Weight, and obviate all that Spite or Obstinancy may, or shall
object, against that Vnquestion'd Authority; We think fit, First, to
Remonstrate, what constant Veneration We have ever Paid to Our Vows and
Protestations; such as Our Public Oaths against Infringing the EDICT of NANTS;
and Our no less Public Sacrament at the High-Altar against all INVASION of
FLANDERS: As Our constant well-known Tenderness therefore for the Peace of
Christendom abroad, and the Conservation of the Rights, Religion, and Liberties
of Our Protestant Subjects at Home, both so Sworn, and so Performed, stand the
ever Living Monuments of Our Inviolable FAITH: So We have no Reason to fear
that the Misdoubts of our Foes, or the Jealousies of Europe, with any shadow of
Justice, should dipute the Honor and Integrity of Our present Royal Word on
this humbler Occasion; when, in a more Important Cause, under those Higher
forementioned Obligations of Oaths and Sacraments We have so Gloriously
Signalized Our Unshaken Veracity.

Directly and Indirectly, We therefore Declare,

WE are those utter Strangers to this Murtherous Design, (as indeed Bloodshed
has always been Our greatest Detestation) That,

First, to right Our Unhappy Brother of England, whom it more nearly touches
(Our Greatness and Reputation being above the reach of Calumny) that it is
altogether so impossible for Him, even in a Wish or Thought, to assent to so
Barbarous an Assassination; that on the contrary, he dares, (in so vile a
Condescension) no more violate His Royal Honor, than He durst His Royal Faith.

Even the very Breach of a Coronation Oath is not His greater Abhorrence:
Insomuch that He Publicly Declares, He equally Shrinks at This, as He has
always Trembled at That.

And, for the further clearing Both Our Royal Names, from that hideous
Imputation; It is not only inconsistent both with the Characters and
Professions of the Great Lewis and James the Just; but even contrary to our
very Natures; It Is Baseness and Cowardice dare only stoop to a Shameful Act,
when true Bravery and true Courage even start at the Horror of It. Can WE
whose Whole Lives have been one Scene of Glory, Nursed up to hardy Virtue, Bred
in Camps, that have Faced Death and Dangers in their nearest and hottest Front,
Marched always Foremost in the Boldest Van of Honeur; Led Our own Battles,
Fought Our own Fields, and only, with Our own Personal Valor, Planted all our
Groves of Laurels: Can WE consent! WE to this vile Stroke? No; it is a Work, a
Task, a Villainy for Slaves and Vagrants: And if it is possible a King can stoop
so Low, it is only the Crown'd-Head with the Poor Spirited Soul, the Mars ad
opus Veneris, that hears his own Martial Thunder only at the Safe Distance of a
Danaes Arms; Tyrants who break through all Laws; Perjurers that break through
all Oaths and Sacraments; NEROE'S that only Sing to Groans and Conslagrations;
These are the Hands and Hearts for such an Undertaking.

Nay, for a yet more particular Vindication of Our Injured Brother of England,
He declares himself so far (even in his common Principles of Humanity) from
Aiding, Abetting, or Arming a Cutthroat, an Assassinate, a Massacrer, or any
such Wolf or Blood-Hound, that His whole Four Years Reign has amply Confuted
that Malicious Aspersion; witness his Generous Hibernian Reformation, under His
ever Sacred Representative TYRCONNEL, the truest Image of the Britannick
Majesty; who instead of continuing the Sword, the Power, and Trust, in
dangerous Unconfiding Hands, He conferred the Gentler Reins of Sway to those
Tenderer Native Favorites, those ever celebrated Sons of Mercy, Children of
Peace, that truly Venomless Race, so Canonized for Saints, in his Great Fathers
Reign: That this single Testimony alone must confront all the Snarls of
Defamation, and every Hissing Snake against Him; and too notoriously testify,
That neither a Poinyard, a Stiletto, a Butcher, or a Ruffian, yet ever were, or
ever shall be his Encouragement or Protection; Insomuch, that to sum up his
whole Compurgation, He Avows, from his Heart, and desires the World to Believe
Him, That any thing that touches his Honor is a Point so Nice, that he would
handle it with the very same Tenderness as he would a College, a Bishop, a
Charter, or any thing yet Dearest and Nearest to him.

But if the Infidel World either obstinately will not, or poorly dare not
believe our own Royal Protestations, That Treachery and Baseness are Our vilest
Scorn, WE call the very Powers above, for Our great Attestators, Our St.
Coleman, and St. Granville, the Immortal Witnesses of Our never Dying Renown.

Having thus amply asserted and evinced Our whole Royal Integrity, and Combated
and Conquered the whole Rancour of Malice it self; nevertheless WE acknowledge
We had designed and purposed an Invasion of England; and that in no less Cause
than Our Brothers Restoration; and for that, and that Only Great End We had
firmly Resolved the Attacquing of the Prince of Orange in his Winter Camp.

And here, We farther Declare,

In all the Measures and Movements, taken and made, in and toward that Design,
WE were so far from any Clandestine or Unprincely Steps or Advances, that on
the contrary WE purposed nothing less than all the Fair Hostility of an Open
and Generous Enemy; so Fair, that from Nostrodamus his Propheticks, and some
other Gallick Prognostics of Our Success, WE had already Before Hand Blazoned
Our whole Triumph and Glory in Medals of Gold, having resolved to give that
Ecce magnus Ahsalon the very same Honorable Personal Treatment, as WE have
already done in Effigy.

And here, to silence another too popular Jealousy,

We likewise firmly Declare,

That the said Invasion of England was so far from any Private or Sinister
Ambition of Our Own, But only Our Free and Voluntary Service of Our Exiled
Brother, His Britannick Majesty, that on the contrary to take off all Umbrage
of any such Suspicion, the very Forces WE lent Him, were wholly composed of
Our own Native Veteranes, Our ever Tried ever Faithful, and ever Sworn
Domestics and Vassals; by this, and all other Repeated Demonstrations,
desiring to Manifest that WE had no other than this Generous Design, viz. That
as our Sister Britannia had so long worn Our Lisses in Her Scutcheon, we could
not, but in Common Civility and Gratitude, return Her the Honor of wearing Her
Lions in Ours.

And here WE cannot but with Sighs reflect, what Inexpressible Blessings, has
England lost, by the Defeat of this Glorious Expedition; when that ever Truly
Indulgent Father of his Country, their Pious James, that Swayed with that
Righteous, that Mercyful, and that Moderate Administration, under the
Restriction of a Limited Scepter, the Shackles of LAW; to what tenderer,
softer, and serener Reign of Goodness and Mercy, had Our Sword restored Him,
when Reseated on His Throne, under those Unbounded, all Halcyon, all Gentle
Despoticks of CONQUEST.

Nor, in Justice to Our Dear Brother, can WE less than Remonstrate what
Thankful Acknowledgments, and what Ample Retributions and Rewards His
Protestant Subjects, upon their Return to their Duty and Allegiance, should
have Received from His Royal Munifence, especially those that signalized their
Loyal Affections in any Assistance or Service toward his Restoration.

For Ingratitude, that unkingly, nay unmanly Shame, was ever the natural
Loathing and Aversion to the very Name of the STUARTS: witness the whole Long
Reign of His, and Our late dear Brother, the Second ever Illustrious CHARLES:
For Instance, To those very ROYALISTS, His Friends, His Champions, and
Restorers, what Titles, what Honors, what Preferments, at his Recall to Empire,
(like a kind Jupiter in Showrs of Gold) what generous, nay what unspeakable
Returns of Gratitude did He heap and pour upon them, as the Fair Reward both
of their whole exhausted Patrimonies and exhausted Veins: A Record in his
Chronicles, that must keep his Memory Fragrant even to latest Posterity.

And in the very same Current and Channel of Glory, what equal Returns did the
no less Grateful James make to his ever Faithful Church of England, the only
Hands and Hearts that stood in the Gap of his EXCLUSION, and stemmed the whole
Torrent against him. And consequently what yet, if Possible, more Grateful
Returns, even to a Profuseness of Royal Smiles, must they have expected from
this second Redoubled Merit. His Gratitude should undoubtedly have so eminently
shined, as not only to have Crowned his Living, but even his Dying Friends;
when not a Protestant Life laid down, or one Vein let out, in so glorious a
Cause but should have been Rewarded even with a Mausoleum, no less then the
Sepulcher and Monument of a Cannon, and a Dumferling.

For indeed not only his dear Friends, but his equally dear Country, have in a
manner been the Spouse, and Wife of his Bosom, whom (as Chastity and Fidelity
have been always Famed his fairest Twin Virtues) he has ever Loved and Cherisht
with that Jnviolate Conjugal Affection, even to an Vxorious Fondness.

And Lastly.

To sum the Sincerity both of Our own and Our Dear Brothers Protestations,
together with all the Great Truths containd in this Public Manifesto, We need
but add this Single Memoire to his ever Shining Royal Virtues; viz. That as
it is so eminently known to all Mankind, that Our Brother of England has
constantly imbibed his whole Rudiments of Glory, from Our Fountain of Honor,
and made it the whole Study of his Life to Pattern from Our Example: So; it is
not to be doubted, but his Late Seven Years Abode with Us, has rather improved
then impaired those Generous and Genuine Principles, and by an opener View and
fairer Light, only taught him to copy yet nearer his Great Original.

Dated from Our Court at Versailes, April the First, 1696.
LONDON: Printed for T. Vray, Bookseller in the Strand, 1696.


