The French King's NEW DECLARATION, In Favor of the Troopers, Dragoons and
Soldiers, that having Deserted His Majesty's Forces before the First of January
last, shall come and List themselves again, and serve for Six years
Successively.
The French King being extremely alarmed at the great and continual Desertion
of his Troops; and though the extreme Poverty of his Country does force many to
be Soldiers, yet fearing want of Men, since like Rats they abandon the falling
House, he has published the following Declaration, for the inviting them to
return.

HIS Majesty being well informed that the Amnesty which he had granted by his
Ordonnances of the Twenty eighth of January, and of the Ninth of April last, to
the Troopers, Dragoons and Soldiers, which having Deserted his Troops before
the First day of the said Month of January, should return and List themselves
therein again, has occasioned a vast Number to return into his Service; and
promising himself, that by Proroguing still the Time, which he had granted for
the receiving the Benefit of enjoying the said Amnesty or Pardon, such as are
in far distant Countries, and that have not been able to repair into the
Kingdom within the time Prescribed, might avail themselves thereof and return
into his Service. His Majesty has Prorogued, and does Prorogue, until the end
of the present Year, the Term he had granted by His Ordonnance of the Ninth of
April last, to the Troopers, Dragoons, and Soldiers that Deserted his Troops
before the First day of the said Month of January last, for the Listing
themselves thereunder again. For which purpose it is His Majesty's Will and
Pleasure, that such of the said Troopers, Dragoons, and Soldiers, who having
Deserted his Troops, as well French as Foreigners, before the said First day
of the Month of January last, shall come and List themselves again before the
First of January next, in the manner Prescribed by the said Ordonnance of the
said Twenty eighth day of January last, and shall then serve for Six years
successively, shall enjoy the Pardon and Amnesty granted in the said
Ordonnances; and as fully and to all Intents as if they had returned into his
Troops by the Terms mentioned by the same. His Majesty Willing and Requiring,
That in all other Respects, the said Ordonnances of the Twenty eighth of
January and Ninth of April last, be executed according to their Form and
Tenor. His Majesty Wills and Commands the Governors, and his Lieutenant
Generals in his Provinces and Armies, Intendants and Commissaries appointed in
the same; Particular Governors of His Cities and Places; Bailiffs, Seneschals,
Provosts, Judges, and their Lieutenants; as also to the Colonel of His Light
Cavalry, Colonel-General of His Dragoons, Colonels Maitres de Camp of His
Troops, as well of Cavalry and Dragoons, as of French Infantry and Foreigners,
and to the Commissaries of War, appointed for the Conduct and Policy of His
Troops, and at the Residence of his Places, to be assisting each within his
District to the Observation of the present Ordonnance, which His Majesty will
have Published at the Head of the Bodies and Companies of the said Troops, and
affixed upon the Frontiers, and in all such Places as occasion shall require,
that so none may pretend Cause of Ignorance.

Given at Versailles the 3d Day of August, 1689. Signed LOWIS and Lower, LE
TELLIER.

LICENSED, August 27. 1689. J. F.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey. 1689.


