The Most Christian Kings Edict or Proclamation, Concerning Scottish, English,
and Irish Ships that shall be met at Sea by his said Majesty's Ships, or By
Privateers Acting by His Commission, Translated out of the French, and
Published by Authority.
By the King.
HIS Majesty being informed of diverse Complaints made by the Scottish, English,
and Irish, that the Vessels belonging to them are stopped in their Voyages, and
brought into the Ports of this Kingdom under diverse pretenses, by his Majesty's
Ships, or those of his Subjects acting as Privateers against his Enemies; and
that although they do obtain the Release of their said Ships, yet nevertheless
their Commerce is thereby extremely retarded, by reason of the long stay of
their Ships in Port, before they have their Orders of Release: His Majesty
being willing to provide against the same, and likewise to evidence upon all
occasions the particular consideration He has for the Subjects of the King of
Great Britain, has prohibited and forbidden, and does straightly prohibit and
forbid all His Officers Commanding His Ships of War, and all Captains of Ships
and Vessels of His Subjects acting as Privateers, that they do not Stop or
Detain any Scottish, English and Irish Vessels met by them at Sea, which shall
be furnished with Pas-ports signed by the King of Great Britain, or by the
Commissioners of the Admiralty at London, and with Pass-ports or Sea-Briefs
signed by the Majors and other Chief Magistrates, or the Commissioners of the
Customs of the Maritime Towns of Scotland, England, and Ireland. And His
Majesty does require, that when the said Ships of War or Privateers shall meet
at Sea any the Ships of the foresaid Nations, they send their Boat on board
them to demand the said Pass-ports; Which when they have seen, they are to
leave them at liberty to continue their course, without giving them any
molestation or hindrance: And all this under pain of being punished according
to the rigor of the Laws. And His Majesty does require and command the Count
of Vermandois Admiral of France, the Vice admirals, Lieutenants General,
Intendants, Commanders of Squadrons, Commissaries General, and Captains of His
Ships at Sea, that they see this present Order put in execution. And His
Majesty does enjoin the Officers of the Admiralty to cause the same to be read,
published, and affixed in all places requisite, to the end no one may pretend
ignorance.

Given at St. Germain en Lay, the 16th day of November, 1676. Signed, LOUIS.

And Countersigned, COLBE^T.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty: Anno DOM. 1676.


