February 15. 1654. Orders set down by the Court of Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the City of LONDON, Concerning the Rates of Carriages with Carrs Within this
City and Liberties thereof, to continue until further Order be taken in that
behalf.
WHereas daily complaint is made by Merchants and other Citizens, of the
excessive Rates demanded and received by Carmen, above what is reasonable and
has been limited and appointed for Carriages within this City and Liberties:
Now upon due consideration had as well of former times as of the present,
wherein the prices of some commodities of necessary and principal use to the
Carmen are risen, and consequently require some increase of the Rates
heretofore set for their labor and carriage; It is therefore ordered by this
Court, That all Carmen trading or working with Carres in the City of London and
Liberties thereof, shall and may demand and take for every carriage or load of
the commodities under mentioned, the Rates hereafter following, and shall not
exceed the same upon pain to be strictly punished and proceeded against for
every offense to the contrary; That is to say,

1. FIrst, from any the Wharfs between the Tower and London Bridge, to
Tower-street, Gracechurchstreet, Fanchurchstreet, Bishopsgatestreet within,
Cornhill, and places of like distance up the hill with xviij C weight, not
exceeding xxiij C weight.

In which may be included,

Two punchions of Prunes, two bales of Macher, twenty barrels of Figs, two fats
of Fustians, five ordinary sacks of Cotton-woolls of Smyrna, and three
extraordinary; as bags of Cyprus wool, butts of Currants, great butts of Oils,
three chests of Sugars, eight bags of Allums, one last of Flax, one last of
Hemp, and and other goods of the like kind and weights, for every Load -- xx d.

And for Seacols the Load -- xij d

2. Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To

Broadstreet, Lothbury, Old-jury, Bassishaw, Colemanstreet, Ironmongerlane, St.
Laurence-lane, Milkstreet, Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Woodstreet, Fridaystreet,
Breadstreet, and places of like distance, for the like weight of xviij C not
exceeding xxiij C

For the goods aforesaid, and others of the like kind for every Load -- xxij d

(...) 5. Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To

Broadstreet, Lothbury, Old-jury, Bassishaw, Colemanstreet, Ironmonger lane,
St. Laurence lane, Milkstreet, Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Woodstreet,
Fridaystreet, Breadstreet, and places of the like distance, for any of the said
goods of the same quantity and weight, for every load -- xx d

6. Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To

Towerstreet, Gracechurchstreet, Fanchurch-street, Bishopsgatestreet within,
Cornhill, and other places of like distance up the hill with viij C weight, not
exceeding xiiij C weight;

In which may be included,

All butts and pipes of Wine, packs of Canvas, two hogsheads, or three terces,
a fat of Fustians, and all other goods of the like bulk and weight, for every
load -- xvj d

And from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To

Broadstreet, Lothbury, Old-jury, Bassishaw, Colemanstreet, Ironmonger lane,
St. Laurence lane, Milkstreet, Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Woodstreet,
Fridaystreet, Breadstreet, and other places of like distance, for any other
goods of like load and weight, for every load -- xviij d

(...)
