Whitehall, October 18. 1697. Last Night came in Two Mails from Holland.
Published by Authority.

Venice. October 4. N. S.

YEsterday arrived here a Vessel from Smirna, and brought the News of another
Sea Engagement between the Venetians and the Turks, not far from Andros, which
concluded very much to the advantage of the former; Several of the Enemies
Ships are said to be sunk or taken; and 7 of their great Ships called Sul^anes
being much shattered, run for shelter into a small Port. where they were
blocked up by the Venetians with hopes to destroy them; and the Captain-Bassa
Moz zomorto, with the rest of the Turkish Fleet, was retired to N^grepont; On
our side only one Man of War called the St. Sebastian was lost, which happened
to take fire and blow up; This being related with so many particulars, seems to
deserve a great deal of credit; But the Senate have yet received no Account of
this Action. It Is said, that neither the Venetian nor Auxiliary Galleys were in
this Battle, and that the latter are arrived at Corson in their return home.

Cracow. Oct. 2. The Diet continue their meeting here, and have declared, that
they will stand by, and assist the King to the utmost of their Power; They have
de^i^ed to see the Original Instrument of the Pacta-Conventa, signed by the
King, but were answered, that the same was lodged among the Records at Warsaw.
Yesterday the King disposed of two vacant Bishoprics, and several Abbeys, as
also of 4 Governments of Provinces, with some other Offices and Employments. So
soon as the Diet is ended the King intends to go to the Army near Lemberg, to
receive from them an Oath of Fidelity, and after that will repair to Warsaw; In
the mean time he has sent part of his Forces toward Prussia, to observe the
Primate's Party; It Is said the Saxon Troops now in rbe Emperor's Service, as
well as others from Germany, are ordered to march to the Frontiers of Silesi^,
that they may be at hand in case there should be need of them.

Dantzicke, Oct. 12. The Prince of Conti has been twice ashore here, and stayed
several hours, but in the evening went a board again; He has been likewise
several times at the Monastery of Oliva, not far from hence, where diverse
Gentlemen of Poland have attended him, but one of them, not thinking himself
well enough received, went away in great discontent with 40 Horse; Which the
Prince was much concerned at. By the last Letters from Warsaw, the Primate
would stay at his House at Lowitz till the meeting of the Gentlemen, which he
had appointed to be on the 10th Instant; upon the success whereof all the hopes
of his Party seem now to depend. The Crown General has writ to the Primate, to
let him know, that he was empowered by the King, to enter into Conference with
him, in order to accommodate Matters; To which the Primate answered, it was now
too late. This City continues to raise Men, intending to make up their Garrison
to 4000. It Is said, that Du Bart's Squadron begins to be sickly: Some of the
Great Men advise the Prince of Conti to go to Lithuania.

Vienna. Oct. 9. The last Letters from the Imperial Army in Hungary are dated
the first of this month at Sentoua; They were marching toward the Danube in
order to pass that River at V^r^smorton; after which the Forces would separate,
and go to Quarters; General Rabutin with the Troops under his command, had left
the Army, and were marching back to Transylvania; and some Regiments were sent
to Upper-Hungary; Prince Eugene had received Advice, that the Sultan, after the
late Battle, stayed several days at Belgrade to get together a sufficient
number of Forces to convoy him in his Journey, being informed, that the
Rascians, and Heydukes were abroad in considerable Bodies, and had p^tted
themselves in his way, but this tear being removed, he went on toward
Adrianople; and the Grand Vi^^er having made the necessary provision to the
security of T^meswaer would follow him in few days.

Francfort, Oct. 13. On the 9th the Cestation of Arm was published in the
German Army; and the Troops o^ both sides are since that separated and gone to
Quarters.

Paru, Oct. 13. The Ratifications of the Peace are daily expected, and
preparations are making to proclaim it h^re, so soon as they arrive from
Holland. The Marshall Villeroy is returned from Flanders. The Disc^urs^
continues of a great Reform to be made among the French Forces; and in the mean
time the King to case the People has resolved to suppress the Capitation. The
Sieur de Co^t logon sailed from Br^st the 9th Instant with 7 Men of War which
are going to Toulon to be laid up there. The Marquis de Nesinond arrived at
B^^st the same day with his Squadron from Newfoundland. without having made any
advantage by his Voyage; He was before St. (...), but did not think fit to
attempt any thing; The English have taken 9 French Merchan men on the Bank of
Newfoundland. The Duke of Burgundy continues disposed. It Is said here, that the
Prince of (...) has 2 strong Party in Lithuania.

Brussels, Oct. 20. We are every day expecting the return of the Courier with
the Spanish Ratification from Madrid; In the mean time the French are preparing
to evacuate the Places which they are to give up by the Treaty. All the English
Forces that were in the Camp of Cockelberg are marched to Flanders. The French
Troops lie cantoned in the Villages near the Frontiers, but are expecting
Orders to march to France, where great part of them will be disbanded. The
Places which the French are to give up by the Peace, are; Giron, Roses, Beluer,
B^rc^ona, and all other Places in Catalonia taken since the Trea^y of Nimeguen,
to be restored in the Condition they now are in; Luxemburg with the Province
and Principality of Chimay, as they are at present, as also Chan^^^or Mo^^ and
Acth, with their Dependencies, Courtray, and all other Places taken during this
War; The Reunion since the Peace of Nimeguen to be annulled; Dinant to be
restored to the Bishop of Liege in the Condition it was taken. Commisoners are
to be appointed on both sides to regulate Matters about the Reunions, and if
they cannot agree, the same are to be referred to the Decision of the
States General of the United-Provinces.

L^o, Oct. 21. His Majesty returned hither on the 17 (...) from Dieren,
accompanied by the Elector of Bavaria and Prince Vandemont. The Count de
Bergyck, Chief Intendant of the Spanish Low Countries, arrived here the same
day to adjust Matters for the March of the Brandenburg Troops out of the
Netherlands; Monsieur Dankelman and Monsieur Dressed, the two Brandenburg
Ministers, are here on the same occasion. On the 20th the Count de Fr^sc, who
commands His Majesty's Forces on the Rhine, returned thither with His Majesty's
Directions for reforming those Troops. The contrary Winds having kept the Earl
of Portland on this side the Water, his Lordship came hither this afternoon to
wait on His Majesty and intends to return to morrow to the Hague. The Elector
of Bavaria goes hence to morrow morning. The Yachts and Men or War are sent
for, to attend His Majesty in His return to England.

Hague, Oct. 23. N. S. On the 17th Instant His Majesty's Ratification of the
Peace, under the Great Seal of England, was Exchanged with the French
Ratification, (...) the Presence of the Mediator; The French Instrument was
sent to His Majesty at Leo; and the English was dispatched by an Express to
Versa^lles; in order to the Proclaming o^ the Peace on both sides, His
Majesty's Ambassadors have agreed with those of France, that the ^erm for
ceasing Hostilities at Sea shall commence ^om the ^ay of Signing the Treaty, to
wit. the Tenth of September, Old St^e. The French Ambassadors expect general
Pasleports from their Court, for such English Ships, as may have occasion of
them for long Voyages; and with these His Majesty's Ambassadors will Exchange
English Passeports for a like number of French Ships. All Matters are now
Adjusted between the Imperial and French Ambassadors, except that Point only
which concerns the Pretention the Duchess of Orleans has to part of the
Succession of the Elector Palatin, Charles Lewis her Father, which will, it is
believed, be like wise settled in a day or two. The Earl of Manchester arrived
here on Wednesday last, on his Embassy to Venice. The Weather has been very
Tempe^tuous, and we hear of several Ships lost on this Coast. The Peace was
Proclaimed here yesterday with the usual Solemnity. Fireworks and other
Demonstrations of Joy are preparing against His Majesty's arrival here.

Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy, 1697.


