An Exact Narrative and Description of the Wonder full and Stupendous
Fireworks in Honor of Their Majesty's Coronations, and for the High
Entertainment of Their Majesty's, the Nobility, and City of London; made on the
Thames, and performed to the Admiration and Amazement of the Spectators, on
April the 24, 1685.
NEver was any thing with greater Expectation attended, and with more wonder
and Applause performed, then were those Miraculous and highest strains of Art,
the Coronation-Fire-works: It was pre-supposed indeed and concluded by the
most, that nothing mean, indifferent, and easy would be exhibited on so
Glorious an occasion, and before so Royal an Assembly. But it was done beyond
all Thought, and it was scarce possible for the Fancy of any man that had not
before seen of the kind, to form an Idaea of a thing at once so Dreadful and
Delightful, or to believe that the Art of man could attain to so extraordinary
a height and pitch of Perfection as was expressed in them; the wearisomness
that the Fatigue of those Glorious Prossessions and stately Ceremonies of the
Coronations had bred in their Majesty's, caused them to be deferred till the
next Evening, which were designed with (as it were) the exactest Act of
Magnificence to have closed the Grandeur of that Great day. Never seemed
Daylight so tedious, or Night so slow, as that for there were them that from
Two took places, and sat in expectation of what was not to be Acted till almost
Ten. But between five and six London seemed to have dis-embogued and emptied
its Inhabitants into the Boats and on the Shoars of Thames, the prospect of
Frost Fair reviving in those endless multitudes that crowded and covered it.
The Tide was out, which hapened well for the Rabble, of whom many else would
have been drowned by Accidental slips and press of the People, which now were
only Dirtyed: Squibs, Roskets, Serpents, and what else of Fireworks the Boys
and Rabble could reach to, were the Divertisement and Dread of the People, till
the long wished hour arrived. At length between Nine and Ten their Majesty's,
with a Numerous Train of Nobility, came into the Galleries of Whitehall, just
against which, about the middle of Thames, lay the Principalest part of the
Fireworks, and straight in a line beyond, near the further Shore, lay the
other smallest part of them; the Figure and manner of them as they stood before
they were Fired, was thus, two large and long Lighters were joined together,
and made steady and firm with Planks and Anchors upon them, at about ten yards
distance from each other, on them were erected two Pyramidical Pillars covered
on the sides next Whitehall with bright Latten 'Plates, filled all and stuffed
with Fireworks; between these two Pyramids, near their tops, was placed a
Figure of the Sun, of bright and well polished Brass, next below which hung a
great Cross, and beneath that a Crown, all stufft with Fireworks. A little
wide of which, and something before the Pyramids, were placed the Statues of
the two Giants of Guild Hall, in lively Colors and Proportions facing
Whitehall, the backs of which were all filled with Firey-Materials, as well as
the Hallows and vacant spaces of the Lighters. This was the manner and Figure
of the Principalest part of the Fireworks, which lay in the middle of Thames
before they were Fired. The other smaller part of them near the further Shore,
was only one Lighter, in which stood five Beacons as it were; these were scarce
known or regarded before they were Fired. No sooner was their Majesty's come
into the Galleries of Whitehall, but loud Acclamations of Joy proclaimed their
Arrival, which Rolling and Re-Ecchoing from both Shoars, almost from
London Bridge to Lambeth, helped to give an estimate of that wonderful
Multitude and Confluence of People to the Ear, which Night and Darkness had
refused to the Eye. Scarce were the redoubled Shouts of Joy ended, and a
general Silence through the Earnestness of Expectation and Intentiveness of
what was presently to succeed made; but from the prinpalest part of the
Fireworks in the midst of the Thames, with a Horrid Impetuosity and Noise,
above being able to be paralleled by the beating of a Prodigious Wind on a
Thick Grove of Trees, or by Cataracts and Falls of mighty Waters: (...)
^^upendious Torrent of Fire, consisting of many hundred Globulous forms of
Fie^^ matter, to the wonderful Astonishment and Dread of the Spectators, broke
Perpendicularly upward, and rose to so astonishing a height, that by reason of
the convexity of the Horison, like a Summers Sun growing to Noon, though they
rose perpendicularly upward, they seemed to over-hang and threaten all. Lord
have Mercy upon us, was then the cry of all that had not seen of the kind; even
the stoutest men knew not what to think of so dreadful a Deluge of Fire; but
their Surprise was increased when with the noise of Voleys of Muskets Shot
those new Meteors broke into a shower of ten thosands of Stars, and with a
Brightness that returned the Day, seemed to be falling on all their Heads; but
by an exact proportion and most Critical and Judicious weighing of the Strength
and Duration of the Matter by those Master Artists that made them, when to the
highest pitch they had raised the General fear they were extinct. It was really
a wonderful effort of Art, and seemed to equal those Natural Prodigies of Etna
and Vesuvius, with the Happy additional Cheapness of bating of their ruins and
desolation. Art it seems so regulating and wisely husbanding the Materials, as
to yield a better Pennyworth of Wonder in affording it without such dear
Devastations as those of Nature are usually accompanied with. This first Scene
of Wonder was followed by diverse Issues and Salleys of the same and different
matter; and from the first break of the Deluge, till the end of the Sport,
which lasted near an hour, the two Giants, the Crown, the Cross and the Sun,
grew all in a light Flame in the Figures described, and burnt without abatement
of matter, which was no mean masterpiece of Art, till the whole Scene was
finished. From the other part of the Fireworks also, where stood five Beacons,
burning with the same continuance of Flame and Matter; were shot out of
Grenades mighty Balls of Fire, which mounting up into the Air a Prodigious
height, with the noise of a great Gun, breaking into a thousand smaller Balls
of Fire, which flying cross one another, and breaking again with the Reports as
it were of many Muskets, filled all the Air with noise and flame. The
Grenades threw up also Balls of Fire of another kind, which breaking with the
noise of a Cannon, at first divided it self into so amazingly bright Bodies of
Fire that they gave a Light for a Minuits space over the Thames, and even over
all London and parts adjoining, as bright as the Noon-days Sun does, these
sorts were reiterated several times, to the wonder and content, but not Satiety
of the Beholders, the Rabble being not to be satisfied with so rare a sight.
When as the last and concluding piece of Art from the principal parts of the
Fireworks into the Thames, between them and Whitehall slope ways gave whole
Broadsides of Fireworks of so particularly strange a Nature, as contrary to
the nature of Fire, without extinction or abatement of Flame, burnt in the
Water they fell into, leaped up and down in it, and by intermingling their
Flames with the Water, and frequently crossing themselves by the Hissing,
Convulsions and flying of the Water, hating its enemies presence, and to be
out-brav'd by what it used to conquor; it yielded one of the strangest and
pleasantest Antic Scenes that man's Heart could cover, or his Eyes enjoy. There
was this remarkable property in the Fireworks, that were the principal part,
and lay in the midst of the Thames; that where as the other were shot out of
Grenades, these rose to so stupendous a height, and performed all by their
own innate Virtue and Strength, which argued an exactness of Art in their
composition. The Master Artists that made them were two High-German Operators,
to whom His Majesty allows three Hundred Pounds per Annum, P^nsion to encourage
their Art: To whom also the Evening was kind, in being v^^^ Calm, and seemed to
reward their Art with a seasonable opportunity of performance; which was done
indeed with such Excellence, that they rose to so Prodigious a pitch as to be
seen, and broak with such loud noise as to be heard, and shined with so bright
a Luster as to give Day in and through all the Streets of London.

Written by R. Lowman.
Printed by N. Thompton at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden near
Charing Cross. 1685


