THE MODERATE PRESBYTERIAN.
London, the third of April, 1662. SIR,
THe time is now quiet for the matter of News from this place, only that you
may know that I am not unmindfull of my duty to you, I have sent to you the
Copy of an eminent Presbyterian's Answer, made to a Queree, proposed to him by
another more rigid Presbyterian; whether or not the re-ordaining of such
Presbyterian Divines here, as were afterward to be consecrated Bishops, be not
scandalous to the Presbyterian reformed Churches abroad, and a direct
disclaiming of communion with them? You will find the Answer mild enough;
which take as follows,

SIR,
IT is well known to all those, especially Divines of the Reformed Church, with
whom I have had the happiness to converse, both at home and abroad, that in my
private opinion I was never too rigid in matter of Ecclesiastical Government,
either for Episcopacy or Presbyterianisme: For as having spent the greatest
part of my years in Foreign Countries under the latter, it seemed smoother to
me; so the continual practice of the former in the Christian Church, from the
very foundation of it in the Apostles time, made it always seem venerable to
me, and to draw somewhat nearer even to the word of God. Yet durst I never
presume in my own mind, that either the one or the other was absolutely Jure
Divino, but I ever thought that with a good conscience I might live under
either of them. One thing I know well, that the word of God forbid does all
confusion in the Church, and commende^h Ecclesiastical Government in general:
But to determine this or that kind of Government in particular, I think there
is a latitude left to the Supreme Magistrate; so that admitting neither
Episcopacy nor Presbyterianisme, in themselves simply considered to be Jure
Divino; Yet, either of them being established Jure Humano, or by the Authority
of the Civil Magistrate, must be recived by me and submitted unto, as being, in
that case, Jure Divino: Seeing that Jue Divinum, in the word of God, tyeth all
Subjects to render active obedience to Jus Humanum and lawful Authority, in
these things, whereby the esteem of Religion and fundamentals of Faith are not
shaken; and such may Episcopacy and Presbyterianisme be conceived to be: And
whosoever resufeth to submit to either of them, being established by Authority,
must be, not only a Rebel to the Supreme Power upon earth, but to God himself
also. Now to answer your long question in few words, let me entreat you to
distinguish betwixt a Minister of the Gospel simpliciter quatalis, and a
Minister of the Gospel in potentia proxima, to be a Bishop: Albeit Presbyterian
Ordination may make a qualified person a lawful Minister of the Gospel; yet,
in my weak judgment, to put him in potentia proxima to be a Bishop, Episcopal
Ordination, if not necessary ad esse, yet requisita ad decorum and ad been
esse. Hence may be inferred, that by the re-ordaining of, or conferring
Episcopal Ordination upon Presbyterian Divines, to put them in a capacity to be
Bishops, as no scandal is justly given by the English Bishops to the
Presbyterian Churches in Foreign Countries, so I am confident (as being
thoroughly acquainted with the opinion in that point, of many of the most
learned and eminent amongst them) that no occasion of scandal will be taken by
them at the same; far less that they will think that the Church of England
(which they ever held, and still do hold as it was constituted in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, King James and King Charles the first, all of blessed memory,
to have been a glorious Orthodox Church) does thereby intend to disclaim
communion with them; their Maxims and Principles both of Divinity and Policy
(for they never esteemed bad Policy to be consistent with good Divinity) being
more consonant to these of the Church of England, constitued as said is, then
to those, according to which the Presbyterians in these Kingdoms have walked
these three and twenty years bygone. But I forbear now to enter upon this
point; their new Doctrine and the woeful effects that have followed thereupon,
do sufficiently evidence the truth of it to the world.



