A SERMON Preached on SUNDAY The XXVI. of July, 1685. Being the Day Appointed
for Solemn Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for His Majesty's late Victory over
the REBELS.

Preached at Wakefield, By Obadiah Lee, M. A. and Vicar there.

Printed for, and Sold by Elizabeth Richardson Bookseller in Wakefield,
MDCLXXXV.

A SERMON.
2 Samuel 18.28. The latter part of the verse. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which
has delivered up the men that lift up their hand against my Lord the King.

The whole verse runs thus.

And Ahimaaz called, and said, unto the King, all is well, and he fell down to
the Earth upon his face before the King, and said, blessed be the Lord thy God,
which has delivered up the Men that lift up their hand against my Lord the
King.


THis day being set apart not only as a weekly Sabbath, Commemorating these
Spiritual mercies which we receive by the Victorious, and Triumphant
Resurrection of the Lord of Life and Glory, over our spiritual Enemies, Sin,
Death and Hell: but also by His Majesty's Royal Proclamation, as a day of
special Thanksgiving to God, for his happy Victory over his and our Enemies;
whom no former pardon could engage, nor acts of grace mollify to a due
discharge of their duty: I thought this History, this particular part of it now
read to you, would not be unsuitable to the occasion, and accordingly made
choice of it. The Wise man tells us Eccl. 1.9. There is no new thing under the
Sun, and ver. 10. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new?
It has been of old time which was before us. Accordingly we have Absalom and
Achitophel after some revolution of Ages once more upon the stage, in these
last and therefore worst of times; pursuing the same methods of destruction
under the same pretenses; and though Isreal's politic Achitophel did long since
wisely dispose of himself to the Halter, to save the Hangman a labor, and
their Rebellious Absalom was caught up between earth and heaven, as unworthy of
either; the senseless Oak becoming a just avenger on him, whom its likely the
doting fathers indulgence would have spared; yet severest instances of heavens
wrath will not discourage those Ambitious spirits, who have a glistering Crown,
and an advanced Throne in their prospect.

But blessed be God our Achitophels projects failing, he dies of the sullens in
a Foreign Nation, and our Absaloms Rebellious rout is defeated and himself
become a prey to Justice; good news this and who fitter to have the first
Tidings of it then Isreal's King. Loyal and courageous Ahimaaz offers himself to
Joab the General to be the first messenger of such happy Tidings, and we have
him delivering his message to the King, in the words of my Text, blessed be the
Lord thy God, which has delivered up the men that lift up their hand against
my Lord the King.

Thus you see my text is the first Tidings brought to King David, of the total
defeat of the Forces of Rebellious Absalom; delivered in the pious strain of
Thanksgiving and Praises to King David's God, blessed be the Lord thy God, etc.
That I may the more clearly proceed in the handling of the text, it will be not
unuseful, to give you an account of the occasion, in order whereunto we must
know that Absalom the main subject of the story, was blessed with that high
Prerogative of being the King of Israel's Son; one whom God had endowed with
the most exquisite accomplishments of nature; of goodly personage and
surprising beauty and comeliness: the more remarkable, because natures
workmanship in none so exactly delineated in Scripture as this of Absalom, as
if God had in him given an exemplar of perfect beauty, chap. 14.25. We read
that in all Israel there was none so much to be praised as Absalom for his
beauty, from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head, there was no
blemish in him. And no wonder that so goodly a presence, a person endowed with
such advantages attracts the eyes and affections of all beholders. No sooner
does he appear in Isreal's famous Metropolis, but all the news and discourse was
of the beauty and perfection of the young Absalom.

For the endowments of his soul, he knew how to resent an injury; hide his
resentment with shows of kindness, and take the surest and most opportune
revenge. Witness his behavior toward his brother Amnon for the Rape of the
beautiful Thamar, so that he was a person of most profound dissimulation. And
as he was thus cunningly Revengeful, so of an haughty Ambitious spirit; as he
was the Son of a King, so ambitious to be one, for no sooner had he obtained
the King his Fathers pardon for his Brothers Murder, and regained His Majesty's
favor; but he appears in the splendour and state of heir apparent to Isreal's
crown. Beauty and greatness made him proud; and great spirits will not rest
contented with moderate prosperity; and therefore because outward Pomp and
unwonted shows of Magnificence affect the light minds of the vulgar, Absalom to
the height of his birth, and the incomparable comeliness of his person, adds
the unusual state of a more than Princely Equipage, chap. 15.1. He prepares him
Chariots, and Horsemen, and fifty men to run before him. And now his Chariots
rattle, and his pampered Horses praunce it proudly through Jerusalems streets,
with his fifty Footmen in goodly Liveries, running before their glistering
Master; the City rings of the glory of their Prince, and are ready to adore
these continual triumphs of peace; and though excess and novelty of expensive
bravery in public persons give just cause to suspect either vanity or a Plot,
yet true hearted David misdoubts no such matter; construes all as meant to the
honor of a Fathers Court or the expressions of joy and thankfulness for a late
reconcilement. This gives advantage. First to flatter, and thereby gain the
mobile to his designs, he rises early, stands in the gate, and with prodigious
humility in mascarade, he courts the Communalty; seems to pity the want of a
free course of justice; in which was he (good Man) concerned, none should have
cause to complain. See says he thy matters are good, but alas none is deputed
of the King to hear thee. Knowing that no music is more sweet to the Ears of
the unstable multitude, than to hear well of themselves, ill of their
Governors. And now every one speaks of his praise; crying out, oh brave Prince
Absalom! the World has not so complete a Prince as Absalom. Thus are the
unwary, unthinking subjects hearts stolen by the close Traitor from their lawful
Sovereign; but certainly as no natural face has so clear a white and red as the
painted, so such over fair shows are a just argument of unsoundness.

However having by these Arts scrued himself into the affections of the people,
the next advance must be a Cloak of Religion to perfect the treachery of an
ungracious Son, that carries Peace in his Name, War in his Heart; and therefore
because the more deformed any action is, the fairer vizor must be put upon it:
Absalom forsooth must go to Hebron there to pay his Vows to the most High,
which he uttered when he was in trouble. How glad is the good Old King at the
News hereof, that he has a Son so goodly, and withal so pious; whom he
dismisses laden with a Fathers blessing, but what trust is there in flesh and
blood, when David is not safe from his own Loins?

Armed Troops willingly offer themselves to make up the train of this darling
Prince, and now he wants nothing but the Oracle of his age, politic Achitophel
to form the design, him he gains; who advises him first to ascend his Fathers
Bed to prevent a future reconcilement, and then to pursue his flying Fathers
person; yet David is not so deserted of God or Man, but gathers an Army of
Loyal Subjects, though far inferior to that of Rebellious Absalom, which Army
he first Musters and then dismisses, while himself retires to Mehanaim to see
the event of this fatal battle. Well the battle is joined, and the Lord of
Hosts with whom it is all one to save with many or with few, takes part with
justice, and lets rebellious Israel feel what it is to bear Arms for a
Traiterous Usurper, the news of which we have in the Text. Thus I have given
you as short account as I could of the occasion of the text, it was rebellious
Isreal's defeat, and usurping Absaloms death that gave Life to these words.

I was going to draw the parallel suitable to this days joy, but I suppose none
that have heard the History can be to seek to draw the parallel. Had not we
also an Absalom, our late Kings Son (though Illegitimate) one endowed with
perfection of Body and Mind, only with Absalom wanting Grace and Loyalty? Was
he not as high in the King his Fathers favor as ever Absalom was in David's?
yet Royal favors work nothing upon a disloyal Heart, for though he was as
great and high as Riches and Honor could make him, or a Subject in his
circumstances could expect: yet filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos, he
searches his Fathers Register, and finding him not old enough yet to dye, he
seeks by an untimely death to cut off his too indulgent Father, and kind Uncle,
that he also might usurp the Throne. And did not he use the same methods, and
tread in the same paths that Absalom did of old? having rendered himself
conspicuous by a more than common Valor and Conduct in foreign Wars, he
advances in honor and esteem, and by his Princely train, especially into the
West, which it seems he designed for a more bloody Stage; and prodigious
flattery in self-disregarding familiarity, with those of meaner quality he
gained their affections and stole their hearts.

And now all men's mouths are filled with the praises of this young Prince, he
is become at once the darling both of King and Subject. Munmouth's Health is
drunk his Praises sung in every place; but amidst the praises of the admiring
vulgar black thoughts possess the disloyal heart. Neither does he want an
Achitophel, the man with three Names, that once betrayed the Grandfather, and
therefore the more likely to betray the Father too. This cunning man fills the
young head with aspiring projects, and by his policy forms a Plot, for the
destruction of the King, the then Duke of York, our present Sovereign; and
ruin of the Government; but through Gods special Providence this Plot was
discovered, and he who expected to be Proclaimed King was proclaimed a Traitor;
but the close Traitor quickly improves into an open Rebel, he therefore no
sooner hears of the death of the King, but he provides himself with Arms and
Ammunition, and had his spies with Absalom in several parts of these nations,
to sound the affections of the people, and make way for his ready reception,
and though his as well as Absalom's Achitophel was dead, yet he pursues the
design, invades two nations at once by himself and accomplices, and under the
stale pretense of extirpating Popery and Tyranny, he breaks out into open
Rebellion, and pushes on to the issue of a Battle.

And though the Loyal Party was as far inferior to the Rebels in number, as
those of David were to those of Absalom, yet God who is the only giver of
Victory, by these few defeats the more numerous Rebels. And we also had a
valiant Ahimaaz, Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe Great Grandson to the famous (...)
Tobias Matthews Arch Bishop of YORK.
our own Country man, and he also of Sacerdotal Race, to bring Englands King
Tidings how the Lord had avenged him of his Enemies. Thus you see the parallel
holds in all the particulars, and now I hope we may say all is well, and how
can we better express our praises to God for this wonderful mercy than in the
words of the Text, blessed be the Lord our God, which has delivered up the men
that lift up their hand against our Lord the King.

In the Text are three things Observable.

(1.) There were men that lift up their hand against the King. The best of
Kings have Enemies.

(2.) These men thus lifting up their hand against the King are delivered up,
viz. to death and destruction. Ruin is the ordinary consequence of Rebellion.

(3.) The God of Israel blessed for thus delivering up the men that lift up
their hand against the King of Israel. Blessed be the Lord thy God, etc.

1. There were men that lift up their hand against the King. This is supposed,
for if there had been none such there had been no blessing of God for
delivering them up. The best of Kings are not secure from the worst of Enemies,
such as dare to lift up their hands against them. Moses was a Wise, a Learned,
and a Pious Prince; one set up immediately by God, and proved his immediate
call to the Government by most stupendous Miracles, and yet this Moses is
conspired against as an Usurper and a Tyrant: one that took too much upon him,
and set himself above the Congregation of the Lord, and tho these found a
judgment worthy of God, the Earth no longer able to bear those sinful burdens
of it opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, so that they went quick into
Hell; yet Rebellion perished not with these Rebels. David was one of Gods own
choosing, a Man after Gods own heart, one that had often hazarded his Life for
the defense of Israel his People, yet we have this David complaining, Psalm
3.1. Lord how are they increased that trouble me, many are they that rise up
against me; an expression the more remarkable because penned upon his flight
from Absalom, he had foreign Enemies, Ishbosheth, Hanun, Hadadezer, the state
of the Philistines: he had homebred Rebels, those that lift up their hand
against him, though their natural Prince; Absalom, Achitophel, Amasa here,
Sheba, Adonijah, and Joab afterward.

think there should be none that should dare to lift up their hand against the
Lords Anointed; but what will not men attempt for Rule and Domination; but men
first cast of the fear of God before they attempt to put Kings in Fear; and
where men have no regard to God and Religion, what will they not adventure
upon, though it be to their own destruction? and therefore having the example
of so many pious, good and wise Kings Rebelled against, and that under the fair
disguise of Piety, Religion and Liberty it may make us the less wonder that
such there should be in our days.

Job 34.18. We should not be ready to hearken to the cunning insinuations of
Rebels, but if we have but so much as thought evil against the King, the Wise
man advises us to lay our hand upon our mouth, in token of shame and abhorrenbe
of our selves for it, Proverbs 30. 32. Thus much of the first thing in the
Text, there were men that lift up their hand against the King. The best of
Kings have their Enemies, which I have been the briefer upon, because it is
only supposed and employed in the Text.

Secondly, These men thus lifting up their hand against the King are delivered
up to death, and destruction; Ruin is the ordinary consequence of Rebellion.
Those that seek to destory the King, shall find destruction to themselves,
their mischief shall fall down upon there own heads, and their violent dealing
shall come down upon their own pate, Psalm 7.16. The Wise man who himself also
was a King tells us, Proverbs 17.11. An evil man only seeks Rebellion, and
therefore a cruel Messenger shall be sent against him. Cartwright understands
this messenger by a Synecdoche, pro omni infortunio seu plaga quacunque, for
all kind of misfortune, or any sort of Plague, or such a cruel messenger shall
be sent against him as shall prove inexorable, as shall inflict the utmost
severity upon him. Thus as one of the Critics upon the place observes, the
Rebel, dum quaerit malum alienum justo dei judicio consequitur malum proprium,
while he seeks another bane he finds his own. Yea whosoever breaks the hedge
of Government, some Serpent or other shall bite him, Eccles. 10. 18. They who
are impatient of rule over them have ruin very near them.

Need I prove this by Examples? it has been the observation of some, that the
ruin of no sort of sinners has been so sudden, so unavoidable as the Rebels.
We read of none in Scripture who opposed Authority but have been punished
eminently in this Life, nor hardly do we read of a Seditious person who was not
taken away by a violent death. The first example of Rebellion was also a sad
example of Gods great judgment upon them; that they who had given future ages
a pattern for the Sin, should give them also an example of suffering. Korah and
his Accomplices were the first that rose up to oppose Authority; and they who
by their sin had provoked heaven and disturbed earth, heaven and earth conspire
together for their ruin. The Earth opening her mouth to swallow into her
bowels the Ringleaders of the Rebellion as unworthy to live upon the face of
it, so that as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 55.15. An horrible death
seized upon them, and they went quick into Hell, when such wickedness was in
their dwellings, and among them. And immediately Heaven it self appears in
flames of fire to act a second part in that avenging Tragedy, on the rest of
the two hundred and fifty Accomplices, who were ready to cry up the Rebels as the
good people of the Lord, so that though they had escaped the astonishing
Chasma, yet vengeance suffered not to live. Thus God by his immediate, and
astonishing judgments on the first Authors of Rebellion recorded in the Annals
of Scripture does show to all succeeding Ages how displeasing this sin is. So
that let pretenses be never so popular, and seemingly Religious, the persons
concerned never so great and famous, yet God is no respecter of persons in the
execution of his judgments. This present Story where my Text is gives another
dreadful instance of the truth of this Doctrine, but this I need but name now,
because I have enlarged upon it before in the introduction to my discourse.

And had Zimri Peace that slew his Master? no, certainly Baasha conspires
against his Master Nadab, and slew him. Zimri by a retaliation of Treason
conspires against his Lord and Master Elah the Son of Baasha, and slew him; but
so little Peace had Zimri after his Conspiracy that within seven days, a short
reign, he is Besieged by Omri, and all Israel; and since it would be no better
he in a desperate fury kindles his own funeral Pile, casts himself into the
flames of his own kindling, burns the Kings Palace over his head, and thus puts
an end to his Treason and Life.

And that Monster Phocas who slew his Lord and Master Mauritius how lamentable
was his Life? How dreadful and detestable his death? During his short reign he
was so transcendent for Vice, and Wickedness, that he was called the calamity
of the Roman Empire. His actions were ever unprosperous, who ever he engaged
against he was overcome, and by the loss of many Provinces he so weakened the
Empire, that it never recovered its former strength and splendour, and in the
end he became so hateful to all men, that his own Son-in-law with others
conspired against him, and brought him to Heraclius the Emperor of the East,
by whose Command his Head, Feet, and secret Members were cut off, and the stump
of his Body given to the Soldiers to be burnt with Fire.

Maximus who slew the good Emperor Gratian, was himself betrayed by the same
Soldiers whom he had stirred up against his Prince, and in whom he reposed his
trust, who seized on him, deprived him of his Habiliments and Ornaments of
Empire, presented him bound like a slave to Theodosius and before his face tore
him to pieces.

Another sad Example this days occasion does present us with, a Person who
might have lived the happiest of Subjects, the honor of the Nation, by
Rebellion become a prey to deserved Justice, and a Ruin to all his
Confederates.

Rebellion is a sin against God himself, though intended chiefly for the ruin
of his Vicegerents. We cannot lift up a hand against the Lords anointed, but we
lift it up against the Lord that made him so, we cannot Rebel against
Authority, but we Rebel against God. I do not speak this of my self, Scripture
it self speaks as much, Numbers 16. Korah and his Accomplices rose up against
Moses and Aaron, but we find in the 11th. verse of that chapter, that God takes
it as done to himself, it was against God that they set themselves; so in Moses
his speech to Korah, For which cause thou, and all thy company are gathered
together against the Lord. So in the recital of this History, Numbers 26. 9.
This is that Dathan, and Abiram which were famous in the Congregation, who
strove against Moses and Aaron in the company of Korah, when they strove
against the Lord; mind it, it was against Moses and Aaron that they strove, and
yet withal it was against God himself, and then no wonder that such find a
judgment worthy of God.

It is against the whole Community, Rebellion is universally destructive, and
the more universally influential to evil, the greater the Sin, and the greater
must needs be the punishment. Rebels are hosts humani generis, Enemies to
mankind. St. Paul tells us not only that Rulers come from God, but they are set
up for our good, they are the Ministers of God to thee for good: whosoever thou
art, whether High or Low, Rich or Poor, they are ordained of God for all our
good, even all mankind; without whom the World would be like a Wild Forest,
wherein the weaker Beasts become a prey to the stronger, and men in it like the
Fishes of the Sea, it is the Prophet Habakkuks similitude, Habakkuk 1.14. the
greater devouring the less, without these mankind could not continue, they
therefore that are Enemies to these must needs be Enemies to mankind.

If then we would eschew ruin let us fly Rebellion, if we would not fare ill,
let us do well, carry our selves peaceably, and quietly in those places wherein
Providence has set us, for who is he that will harm you if you be followers of
that which is good, 1 Pet. 3.13.

Thirdly, The third thing in the Text is the Praise and Thanksgiving; Blessed
be the Lord thy God, that has delivered up the men that lift up their hand
against my Lord the King. This is the main of the Text, where we have three
things Observable.

First, This Valiant Ahimaaz does not ascribe the Victory to their own valor,
and conduct to their Arms or Armies but to him who styles himself the Lord of
Hosts, it is by him that these Enemies of the King, those that lift up their
hand against him were delivered up to ruin and destruction. And should teach
us to do the same in the like case, it is God that puts Valor and Courage into
Soldiers, that gives Wisdom and Conduct to Officers; that gives Victory and
success to Armies. And then what better use can we make of this days
Celebrated mercy, than a Deo gratias, Blessed be God that he has delivered up
the men, that lift up their hand against our Lord the King. Mercies vouchsafed,
especially delivering mercies, Victory over Enemies should be received with
Thanksgiving and Praise to God who is mighty in Battle.

The Second thing observable, Ahimaaz in this Doxology calls God King David's
God; certainly he is the God of the whole Creation, the God of the Spirits of
all flesh, especially the God of Israel, a people in Covenant with him, whom he
had then chosen for his peculiar inheritance. And yet he is in a peculiar
manner the Kings God; not only by special Ordination as he that set him up at
first, but by special preservation as he that kept him there where he at first
set him up, viz. on the Throne of Israel, and thus though God be the God of
all, yet he is in a peculiar manner wonderful among the Kings of the Earth.

To this God Ahimaaz ascribes the glory of the Victory and gives the Praise.

The Third thing observable, and herein he is a fit example for us to follow.
Bless God for this mercy this day Celebrated, which we shall see we have the
greater cause to do, if we consider what might have been the effects of this
Rebellion had it succeeded.

It is true they pretended to rise up against Popery, and for the Liberty and
Privilege of the people oppressed by Tyranny: and its very likely they would
have made good their promise in their own sense, for Rebels promises are
always equivocal; the Popery they declared against would have proved
Episcopacy, the effect of it the subversion of the Church of England, for that
we know is Rebels Popery, had the success been answerable to their desire we
should have had no Bishop, but Bishop Ferguson with his Lay Elders. And they
would its like have secured the peoples Liberties and Properties, but it would
have been in their own hands, where it would have been no easy thing to have
got them out again.

And as for the King that they would have set over them, he would have dwindled
into a Duke of Venice, where all might have been transacted according to the
dictates of the infallible Senate.

These Hoghen Moghens would its like have preferred their King to the new
nothing of a Stat-holder while they themselves had ruled the roast, for cut but
once the line of Royal Succession and none can be King but by the long Sword,
or the peoples bounty. And they are like to Reign as Kings indeed, who are
beholden to the people that they are so. The Bill of Exclusion would have made
Kingly Government precarious, would have brought in Arbitrary Government
indeed, much worse than that which our Malcontents have wrongfully complained
of, and then have we not great cause to bless God for this days mercy.

One thing I would mind you of, and then shall put an end to my discourse. Let
us have a care while we bless God we do not dishonor him; let us not bless him
as if he was some Heathenish Bacchus, pleased with full Cups, and honored with
intemperance; which we should be the more careful in because it is the Lords
day, which certainly upon no occasion should be profaned; and therefore let us
be careful to be Religious while we have a grateful sense of this days mercy.
We cannot its true Praise God too much, but we may easily drink too much, and
drunkenness is but a bad conclusion of a Lords Days Sacrifice. I shall end
where I did begin, blessed be the Lord our God, that has delivered up the men
that lift up their hand against our Lord the King. To which God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost be given for this, and all other his mercies all Honor,
Glory, Praise and Thanksgiving now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

