THE WONDERS Of the World: OR, Choice Observations and Passages, concerning the
beginning, continuation, and endings, of Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

With an exact division of the several Ages of the World, and the most
remarkable passages and memorable accidents that have come to pass therein:
Also diverse weighty grounds and reasons both from Scripture and natural
experience, why men lived longer in former Ages then at this present. With the
seven several ages of men.

The opinions of diverse great Emperors and Kings touching the person of
Christ, and the life of mankind; with the strange events that have befaln
several of them: Also a discovery of diverse creatures bred in the Sea, and
other obscure places of the World, retaining the similitude and likeness of men
and women.

Together with the miserable death that befell Pontius Pilate, after that he had
condemned our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST; The place of his birth and burial,
and how he appears once every year in the said place, in the shape and likeness
of a Judge.

A Work very profitable and necessary for all.

Written originally in Spanish, translated into French, and now made English,
by that pious and learned Gentleman JOSHUA BAILDON.

Imprimatur, John Downam.

London Printed for John Andrews, at the white Lion in the Old Baily. 1656.

The WONDERS Of the WORLD, Discovering Many secret Rarities, that have been
hidden since the Creation.
CHAP. I.
Why men lived longer in former ages, than now in these days.

ALL those that are studious in Divine Writ may read, that in the time of the
first age and before that for sin a general Deluge came over the earth, man's
life then was longer than it is at this present. It is certain that Adam lived
nine hundred and thirty years, Seth nine hundred and twelve, Cain nine hundred
and ten. And descending from the one unto the other, the shortest of their
lives was seven hundred years; and in these times we see few attain to
fourscore or ninety years, and if some one pass that, it is rare and
mavelous, so that we come not to the tenth of the age of former men.

The learned, either Divines or Philosophers, who have discoursed thereupon,
seeing that nature that brings us forth now, is the same that it was in times
past, and that those first men lived so long by nature, and not miracle, became
astonished thereat, and have curiously searched out the causes and reasons, as
Marcus Varro, and an infinite number of others, who have found these things so
difficult in natures appearance, that they have thought the years in ancient
times not to be the same with ours in these modern times: which opinion and
belief, is a great and vain error, as will be made appear in this following
Chapter. The truth is, when I see the works of others, and descend to that
which agrees with my opinion, that the principal reason why men live not so
long now a days as formerly, is that the Ancients had not in their times the
causes that engender now in us those diseases, whereby comes so soon old age
and death. Then we must consider, that the first Parents of all humane linnage,
Adam and Eve, were created by the immediate hand of God, without any other
means or help; and therefore it is presumed that he created them of a most
excellent complexion, perfect Sympathy and proportion of humors, which caused
them to live in health so long and many years.

By means whereof the children that proceed from Parents so full of health,
must needs resemble their Progenitors, in the same good and healthful
complexion, as men descended of excellent matter, even till the change of ages,
(the property whereof is to change and impair all things) all humane kind began
to grow weaker, and the days of men to grow shorter. Now in those times there
was one thing that made much toward their long life, which in these times is
very hurtful and contrary to us, which was their great temperance in drink,
both in quality and quantity, and the small variety of meats; for they had
not of so many sorts as now we have, nor with so many inventions of cooking. We
do nor find that before the Deluge, men knew what it was to eat flesh: besides,
some hold it for certain, that the fruits and herbs were of far greater virtue
and substance without comparison than now they are: because then they proceeded
out of new earth, and not as it is at this day, weak, weary, and as it were
fallow: for the Deluge was the cause of taking away its fat, leaving it more
infertile with a salt savor, less perfect by the inundation of the Sea, which
floted for many weeks over it. All these reasons are, and every one of them
sufficient (however there are more if they were all put together) to prove that
this is no strange thing but natural, that men lived longer then, than in
these times. Moreover, it is to be noted, (and we hold it for certain) that
Adam knew all the virtues of Herbs, Plants, and precious Stones, and his
children learned from him more than any man could learn since. This was in part
for health, and the support of life, and to cure diseases, if peradventure any
should happen, by using such remedies as were simple and perfect, and leaving
out venomous compositions, used in these present times; the which instead of
purging and cleansing, weaken and kill those that take them: and which is more
in those former times, the life and health of man was more supported and
helped, by the course of the heavens, and influence of the Stars, more
benevolent in those times, than they are now; because they had not passed so
many aspects, conjunctions, eclipses, and other celestial impressions, from
whence are proceeded these alterations, variations and changes upon the earth:
and amongst the elements, principal occasions of life and health in those
former times, and on the contrary infirmities and death in these. But above all
that that we have said and founded upon natural reason, I maintain that the
cause of the long life of men in those days, proceeded from the providence of
God, who would have their lives such, and that the occasions aforesaid might
help one the other, to the end, that only of two might be bred many, that the
earth might be filled and human kind multiplied. So we see that men not living
so long after the Deluge as before God suffered them to go into the ark, and so
saved more men and women then he did create at the first to the end that the
world might be replenished more easily. St. Augustine speaking of these things,
says. That our Forefathers had the advantage of us, not only in health and
long life, but also in stature of body, as it is evident in many Sepulchers,
and bones which have been found under great Mountains; so that one may verily
believe they were the bones of men living before the Deluge. The same St.
Augustine affirms, that being in Vtica a Town in Africa, he did see the bones
of a humane body, which had the Jaws as great and as heavy as of an hundred men
of our age. And nevertheless although our life be so short, yet ought we not
to complain, because applying it in evil, and to the contempt and neglect of
God, the Lord is merciful unto us in shortening it, for we shall cease to be
wicked any more: and yet if we will serve him, we have time enough to do so,
for as much as the goodness of God is so great, that he takes for payment the
good desires, and the will.

CHAP. II.
That the opinion of those which think the years in times past, to have been
shorter then these in our times is false. Which was the first Town in the
World. And that the Ancients had more children than are named in the holy
Scripture.

BEcause it has seemed to some, that the age of nine hundred years of men in
former times was impossible, though they could not comprehend nor admit of the
natural reasons thereof, which are alleged in the former Chapter. And not
daring to deny such number of years, so clearly manifested by holy writ, (they
say) that the years in those times, were shorter than the years now in our
days. So that the long life which they enjoyed in those days beyond us now, was
not so great as is cried up. Some amongst them would make us believe, that one
of our years now, equals ten of theirs in times past. Many of them say, that
every Moon makes a year, and have called them Lunary years. Some others of our
opinion, That three of our months makes one of their years. And by this means
four of their years equalled but one of ours. Because in this sort the
Caldeans, and the Arcadians divided their years, as Lactantius recites in his
second book of Divine Institutions, And Marcus Varro a learned Roman in many
things (except in this) was of opinion, that the Lunary years, took their
number from the conjunction of one Moon to the other, which consists of 29 days
and odd hours. In like manner Pliny holds for a fable the long life of the
Ancients or first of men, and says, that those of Arcadia counted their years,
as we have before recited, of three of our months.

There is even yet amongst us Christians, Eliconiense, 1 Book of Antiquities.
a book of the Age of the World, whereof Elicontensis is Author, where it
seems that he is of this opinion. Nevertheless, it is most clear, That the
years that were quoted in the holy Scripture, were such as these that we have
now in these times: Which Josephus maintains and proves; and so Lactantius
Firmian: but much better, and more distinctly St. Augustine, whose Reasons and
Authority will confute all the false opinions which have smelt or savoured of
the contrary.

As for the first, which is, That every Moon made then a year, to take it from
one Conjunction to another, it is a manifest error; because, we know very well,
that such a space of time contains not full thirty days, so that in that case,
an hundred years now, would amount to more than twelve hundred years then; from
whence would grow (against the opinion of all the World) that men should live
longer now than they did then, forasmuch as there was not then found a man,
which lived twelve hundred years; which arises not to one of our Ages. And
nevertheless, we may find some that have lived an hundred, and an hundred and
twelve years, which would be more than thirteen hundred years, to reckon the
years by the Moons. Is it not also a folly in them, which affirm, that ten of
those years in times past, countervailed but one of ours at present; for if
their affirmation were true, men in those days, would have had strength to
beget children at seven, eight, and ten years, which is against all natural
Philosophy,

That it is so, Genesis, That Seth, the son of Adam, begat Enos at the age of
an hundred and five years: If therefore ten years then, had made but one of our
years now, it must needs follow, that men in those former ages, begat children
at ten years and an half old, of these present times. Cain also begetting
children at seventy years, would by that reckoning, have been a Father at seven
years of our age. And nevertheless, we should find much less, if one of our
years now, made twelve then, as some of them affirm. Their false opinions shall
be made yet more clear by this ensuing deduction. If their year were but the
tenth or twelth part of ours now, it would follow, that the year had not twelve
months, or the month but three days,

As for that other opinion of those that say, The years of old times, made the
fourth part of a year of our times now, and that the year consisted of three
months; the same Scripture likewise declares that to be false; forasmuch as in
the same place it says, That the Ark of Noah floated upon the waters, and that
the seven and twentieth day of the seventh month, it rested, because the
waters were abated, and it rested it self upon the mountains of Ararat. A
little after he says, that the waters decreased daily, even till the tenth
month, and that the first day of the month, the tops of the mountains began
to appear. By this it appears, their opinion is error, that say, the year
consisted but of three months, seeing it names the seventh and the tenth. We
may see then, that the ancient years had twelve months, in that it names the
tenth month, and does not say the last: And as ill may one say, the month to
have but three days; for the text carries it expressly, the seven and twentieth
day of the month: Yet less may one say the day to have but two or three
hours; because the same text says, that it rained, and the windows of Heaven
were opened by the space of forty days and forty nights: so that it is clear,
that the days were natural, of four and twenty hours, and the months, and
the years as long as now, or little less: I say it, because they kept
reckoning of the course of the Heavens as we do; so that the same order has
been always kept among the Learned, as well Hebrews as Egyptians, amongst whom
Moses was brought up a Historiographer, and Author of those holy Books, in
which are writ the Chronicles of those long lives. And now, if we would yield
to the opinion of many, which hold, that the Hebrews reckoned the months by
the Moons, and that the year was twelve Lunarie months, and that every month
contained twenty nine days, and fourteen hours, a few more, or a few less, and
that the year was shorter by twelve days, than that which we reckon by the
course of the Sun, which is three hundred sixty five days, and six hours; yet
this difference shall not make us doubtful, or uncertain of the lives of our
ancient Fathers; for this is but a small matter in nine hundred or a thousand
years, to fail twenty or thirty, the Lunarie month not accomplishing thirty
days. By this authority then we are certain, that the nine hundred and
thirty years that Adam lived, and the nine hundred years of others, were the
same, as the hundred and seventie five of Abraham, and the seventie, or eighty
that men live now in these days; he that shall believe otherwise is in an
error. There is likewise another consideration to be noted, alleged by St.
Augustine to this purpose, which is, Put the case, that the Scripture makes not
mention, that Adam and his had other children before those which are there
named; yet it is to be believed, that before and after, they had many, in
condition, at younger years than the Scripture makes mention they could have
children; and to make thereof a more ample proof, when it is said, that Cain
had built a Town, Jos. 1 lib. de Antiq.
(the first that was in the World) whereof Josephus speaks, saying, That it had
Towers, and that it was walled round, and that he named it after his sons name,
Henoc, which was newly born unto him: It is very unlikely, that there was then
in the World, but three or four men only, (yet the Scripture makes no mention
of any more) because to build such a Town, would require the help of a great
number of men, albeit the text names but the principal and chief that built it,
as appears when is said, That their sons and their daughters begat others,
which are not named. We see the holy Evangelists have done the like in their
Evangelical History; for St. Matthew treating of the lineage of Christ,
according to the flesh, begins at Abraham, and willing to reckon even unto
David, says, [ Abraham begat Isaac] using no words of Ishmael; a little after,
[ Isaac begat Iacob] speaking nothing of Esau, although he were the firstborn,
because having an intention to come by degrees even to David, which was not of
the Line of Ishmael, he reckons neither Ishmael nor Esau. Afterward [ Jacob
begat Judas and his brethren,] and yet Judas was not the eldest. In such manner
treating of the generation, he reckons those by the which he might descend to
David. A sufficient proof to incite the contrary part to believe that Moses did
the like in his history; and that our first Parents, had other children then
those which are named and declared in the holy Scripture.

CHAP. III.
That the sign of the Cross was in estimation before our Savior Christ was
crucified.

LOng time before our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ suffered upon the
Cross, the sign of the Cross was in esteem, as a Prognostic sign and fatal;
especially by the Egyptians and Arabians. The Egyptians engraved it upon the
breast of their Idol Serapis which they adored for their God. But better to
declare how this figure came in such veneration. You must understand that the
ancient Arabes, most skillful in the knowledge of the heavens and the force of
the Stars, made for diverse causes, Images and Figures graven in Stone, Metals,
Rings and other things; observing thereby certain points, and certain days:
amongst which signs, this of the cross was by them most esteemed, attributing
thereunto more virtue and efficacy than any of the others; and esteemed
reverently of it, in their houses, and other private places. Now let us set a
part the respect that we may have of it. In that thereupon was made our
Redemption, as Facinus writes, and let us consider this figure of the Cross by
it self, in contemplation of Geometry, it will be found an excellent and
perfect figure, because it conteins equal length and breadth. It is composed of
two straight lines equal, the joining whereof, taken at the Center (to the
extremest of each end) makes a perfect round, it conteins in it four straight
corners, and therefore in it are the greatest effects of the Stars; because
they have the greatest force and virtue, then when they are in their
extremest, and corners of the East, West North, and South, and so seated, form
(by the splendour that they give) the figure of a cross, all which things are
considerable: Besides, it is not amiss to note the reasons why the Egyptians
esteemed it amongst their other notes and figures, and what they signified by
it. But I will speak first of some of the Figures, and Hieroglifiques of Egypt,
and their significations. Before the Egyptians had letters, they writ their
conceptions by Figures, Characters, and Ciphers of diverse things, as Trees,
Birds, and Beasts, or by some of their particular members, in which they were
so cunning and accustomed, that they quickly learned to know what every thing
signified, by the great experience which they had made, which the children
learned from their Parents, and one from another by succession. Cornelius
Tacitus, Strabo Diodorus, and Pliny, in many places gives reasons hereof.

First, by the Figure of a vulture, they understood nature, because say they of
this sort of bird is found no Male, as Amian Marcellin writes. Lib. 4^
By the Sparrow-hawk or Falcon, they signified any thing that was done with
great diligence, because of the readiness and swiftness of these Birds. The
Honey Be, signified a King; because a King ought to have sweetness and a
sting. By the Serpent Basilisk holding his tale in his mouth, they understood
the revolution of the year; because it ends where it began. The head of a Wolf
showed the Time past; because this beast has no remembrance. The head of a
Lion, the time present; because of his strength and power. The head of a Dog
licking and made sharp to signify the time future; for always we cherish him
and use him kindly in hope. The Ox signified the earth; because of the great
pains this beast takes. Justice was signified in the Stork, because it is said
this bird susteins and nourishes the old ones in their age, in acknowledgment
to have been bred and brought up by them in the nest. They demonstrated Envy by
an Eel; because it accompanies not with other fish. The bountiful man was
declared by the right hand open, and on the contrary, the covetuous man by the
left hand shut. The Crocodile, which is a very noisome beast, signified the
malicious man. The eye open did denote a man observing justice. By the Ear,
they understood memory. To show a man of great memory, they painted a Hare
having his ears open; and so discoursing of all things, they practiced these
Figures, as though they had been to them written letters. Now let us return to
our purpose of the Cross. It is strange that amongst so many signs and
figures, this was the most evident and known figure or character, yea even to
be placed upon the breast of their God, to signify the hope of the hour which
was to come: and as it were to prognosticate the everlasting salvation, which
thereby succeeds unto us: so says Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastical history,
Marcellus and others. Here you see how the cross was in esteem amongst that
Nation. But on the contrary, amongst the Jews, Romans, and other people, the
death upon the Cross was reputed ignominious. And the Emperor Constantine was
the first, that forbad any person condemned to death should be crucified, for
the honor he bare to the holy Cross. But ordained the contrary, that it
should be honored and reverenced of all; because God had showed him a Cross
in the air, with promise of victory, so that under this sign and hope of the
promise, he fought with his enemy Maxentius, a Persecutor of the Christians,
and overcame him, as is recited by Eusebius. So the Emperor Theodosius (though
it be not observed to this day) ordained that the sign of the Cross should not
be engraven in stone or in metal, to be placed afterward in any place where it
might be broken or defaced, because such substances are apt to break, and he
would perpetuate them unto us.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the excellency of keeping Counsel, and how it ought to be kept, with some
good examples to that purpose.

ONe of the principal things which makes a man known to be wise, is that he
can keep counsel, and be secret in that which has been declared unto him by
another, and to keep his own proper affairs silent. Those that shall read
ancient Histories, will find infinite good enterprises to have failed of their
desired end either in peace or in war, for want of keeping counsel, and
thereupon have followed an infinite number of mischiefs. But among all examples
we will consider one notable above all the rest, as proceeding from God, who so
well keeps his own counsel, that he lets not any one know, (whatsoever he be)
what shall happen to morrow. Nor those of times past could ever know what
should happen at this hour. So in truth we may see that God himself has loved
secrecy. For albeit he should declare, or has declared some things, yet is it
not possible for any to make him alter his will, For this cause understanding
men have always loved to do their business secretly. We read that Cato Censor,
would often say to his friends, that he always repented of three things, if at
any time he should happen to do any of them. The first, if he should declare
asecret to any one, especially to a woman. The second, to have traveled by Sea
when he might have gone by Land. And the third, if he should spend one day idly
without performing some virtuous act,. The two last deserves to be noted, but
the first serves to our purpose. Alexander had received from his mother a
letter of some importance, and after he had read it in the presence of
Hephestion, he closed up his mouth with his Seal-Ring, wherewith he was wont to
seal his most secret letters, whereby he showed, that he to whom one reveals
his secrets should have his mouth sealed up. When King Lisymachus bid the Poet
Philipides ask what he would and it should be granted, the Poet answered him,
the greatest good you can do me, is that you communicate not to me any of your
secrets. Antonius Sebellicus writes a notable example to this purpose. In the
time of Pope Eugenius says he, The Senate of Venice had a Captain named
Cremignol, by whose treason and means the whole army wasdiscomfited. By means
whereof the Senators assemble to determine what should be done in this case.
Some advised that he should be sent for and apprehended, and receive justice;
others were of the contrary opinion. At the last it was concluded that there
should be no notice taken of his fault, waiting for a better opportunity: all
agreeing nevertheless that he should suffer death for his fault. This
conclusion and occasion was deferred for eight months, with such secrecy, that
there was no speech of it during all that time, which was a mavelous thing
seeing there were so many Senators, whereof there was many of them great
friends to Cremignol, and many of them poor, which had received from him many
gifts and much riches, yet gave him no advertisement. Nevertheless this thing
was kept secret among them, till those eight months were past. Then it was
ordained that he should come for Venice, where the Senate received him with
great welcomming and loving embracings. And the next morning he was
apprehended, and condemned to be beheaded, which was done accordingly. This may
serve for an example to all our Modern Senators, Judges, and Counselors, that
it may not happen to them as it has done to some, which have by and by
discovered those secrets which they ought to have concealed; to the shame of
whom I will tell you a pleasant discourse of Aulus Gaelius in his Attique
nights, and by Macrobius in his Saturnals, which is thus.

The Senators of Rome, when they entered into the Senate House, had a custom to
bring every one of them along with them, one of their children so soon as he
could go, and the children of the noblemen had this privilege, even to the age
of seventeen years, that being accustomed to see the good orders that their
fathers kept there, afterward coming at age to govern they might be the better
instructed in public affairs: these children nevertheless, were so well
instructed and taught, that they kept precisely the secrets that were there
treated of. It happened one day amongst the Senate was put a matter to treat on
of great consequence, so that they stayed longer in the house that day than
they were accustomed, and yet were forced to defer the determination of this
matter till the next day forbidding, to speak any thig of it in the mean time
in any sort.

Now amongst the children that were brought thither that day, there was one
young child, son to the Senator Papyrius, who was of one of the most
illustrious and famousest family in Rome. At the child's return home, the Mother
would know of him, what business that was, that was treated of there that day,
that kept them there so late: to whom the child answered, It was a thing that
he might not declare, and that he was forbidden to speak any thing of it. The
Mother hearing this answer (as it is the custom of women) was much more
desirous to know it than before, so that at first by fair means and promises,
she assayed to draw it from him, and at last by threatenings and beating would
constrain him, which to avoid the child devised a pretty shift, and told her,
that which was in debate and would be determined the next day was, that it
seemed good to diverse of the Senators as well for the public good, as for the
increase of people, that every man should have two wives, and that there were
some that were of the contrary opinion, maintaining that every woman ought
rather to have two husbands, and that the next day it would be resolved on.
Which when the mother heard she believed, and was mightily moved thereat, which
caused her to advertise the rest of the Roman Dames, that they might provide to
hinder, that men should not have two wives, but rather women might have two
husbands. Hereupon the day following, a great number of the Matrons of Rome,
came to the door of the Senate, praying and requesting the Senators effectually
not to make so unjust a law, as that one man might marry two wives, and that it
would be better to make the contrary. The Senators which knew nothing were
abashed in such sort, that entering one after another into the Senate house,
enquired of one another, from whence proceeded that dishonest incivillity of
their wives, but no one of them could give a reason.

At the last little Papyrius put them out of their pain, declaring in full
council what had happened to him with his mother, and for fear that she put him
into, he was constrained to use this deceit toward her. This being heard by
the Senators they greatly commended the constancy of this little child,
Nevertheless, they ordered that they should bring their children no more to
the Senate, only this Papyrius who was admitted to enter.

Certainly the old men in these times, may take example by this discreet youth,
and consider, that if a private secret ought to be kept, much more a public,
and especially among people of age and judgment. Brutus Caessius, and all
those that conspired the death of Caesar, because they saw it expedient for the
profit and the liberty of their Country, fully determined it, but would not let
Cicero know of it, one of their great friends, and one that desired more than
any in Rome the abolition of that Tyranny, not for any distrust they had in
him, but because he was not reputed a good counsel keeper, a secret worthy
admiration seeing there were so many conspirators, and nevertheless they
concealed it so long from him their singular friend.

Fulvius declares a great secret to his wife, which had been communicated to
him by the Emperor Octavian, which being discovered by the wife, and came to
the ears of the Prince, the Senator was sharply reprehended for his lightness
by his Lord, whereby growing in despair, determined to kill himself; wherefore
upbraiding his wife of the wrong which she had done him, she answered him, he
had no reason to be angry with her, seeing that during so long time as they had
lived together, he could not take notice of her light temper, or having known
it, would abuse it in trusting her with such a secret. Wherefore though her
husband was the cause of her fault, yet she determined to suffer first, and
indeed presently killed her self, and so did her husband after her.

We read in the life of Nero that when his death was plotted in Rome, (a thing
very necessary to the Romans, because of his strange cruelties) he which had
the charge to give him the blow, meeting by chance one who was led prisoner, by
the Ordinance of the Tyrant, and considering with himself that the perverse
nature of the Emperor was such, that whosoever he caused to be apprehended
never escaped death, and therefore this poor prisoner (which shed tears in
abundance) could not escape it, came to him, and not considering of what
importance it was to him to keep counsel, said unto him, I pray God keep thee
till to morrow, for if thou escape this day, I assnre thee Nero cannot put thee
to death. Which the prisoner understanding, suspected the cause to be as indeed
it was, and so found out the means to save his life, by declaring it to Nero,
bidding him have a care of himself. Who sent presently to apprehend him that
comforted the prisoner, and by extreme torments made him to confess the Plot,
and so he lost his life, and their design was lost. Pliny reports the quite
contrary of Anaxarchus, for being taken for such a like thing, he bit off his
tongue with his teeth; because he would not declare a secret, and spit it in
the Tyrants face. The Athenians caused the Statue of a Lion made in brass, to
be set up in the honor of a woman whose name was Lion, in memory of her
constancy, in keeping secret a conspiracy, and this Statue had no tongue to
denote secrecy. The servants and slaves of Planeus are also much commended, in
that there was not torments sufficient to make them confess to the enemies of
their Master (who sought to kill him) in what place he was hid. The servant of
Cato having seen his Master commit some fault, was put to great torment to make
him speak, and yet they could never make him bear such testimony against his
Master. Quintus Curtius recounts, that the Persians held it inviolable to
punish grievously (and more than for any other offense) he that revealed any
secret; for confirmation whereof, he says, that King Darius being overcome by
Alexander, and not knowing whither to fly, hid himself: but there was no
torture that could be inflicted upon them that knew it, nor any hope of
recompense could make them reveal it to any person. And says, that the Persian
held an opinion, that none ought to be trusted with any thing of consequence,
that cannot keep a secret. Secrecy then is necessary in all matters,
principally in War, which the valiant Captains of old observed very well.
Philip son to Antigonus, successor to Alexander, asked his father (in the
presence of some) when the army should move, to whom the King replied in anger,
Art thou so deaf that thou fear thou shall not hear the Trumpets with the
rest; willing to make him understand thereby that he had made a fault in asking
that question, which must not be answered in the presence of witnesses. There
was one Mettellus a Tribune of Cicily, in the army a Roman Captain came to him
and asked him what he had determined concerning the war; to whom Mettellus
answered, if I thought my shirt knew, I would take it of and burn it presently.
Horace amongst the laws of festivals, wills that every one keep secret the
things that are there done and spoken. To this purpose the Athenians had a
custom, when they met at a feast, the ancientest in the company, showed all
the rest the door at which they came in, bidding them take heed, that by any
means not a word of any thing that should be there done or spoken, should go
out beyond that door. The first thing that Pythagorus taught his Scholars was
to be silent, wherefore he kept them a certain time without speaking, to the
end that he might teach them to keep counsel, and not to speak but in fit time,
which showed that the virtue of secrecy was the rarest.

When Aristotle was demanded what seemed to him the most difficult thing of
all, he answered, to keep silence. To this purpose St. Ambrose in his offices,
puts among the principal fundamentals of virtue, the patience of silence. The
Romans amongst other of the vanities of their Gods, had one a Deesse of
silence, named Angeron, which they painted with her finger in her mouth, in
sign of silence. And says Pliny, they sacrificed to her the 21 of December,
whereof Varro, Solinus, and Macrobius make mention. The God of silence was
likewise adored by the Egyptians, and they pourtraied it with the finger in the
mouth. Catullus and Ovid have also written the same thing; whereby one may know
in what reverence they had secrecy, seeing they adored it for a God. Solomon
says, that a King ought not to drink wine; for no other reason, but that where
there is drunkenness, there can be no secrets kept, in his opinion; he being
unworthy to reign that could not keep his own secrets. And faith further, he
which discovers a secret is a Traitor, and he that keeps it is a faithful
friend,

CHAP. V.
How commendable it is to speak little.

TO speak little, and in that little to be succinct and short is a great
virtue, and very commendable for all men to know. Solomon says, that much
speech cannot be without much in, and he tht refrains his tongue is wise. And
again he that keeps his tongue guards his soul. And on the contrary, he that
speaks inconsiderately, gives himself a prey to many mischiefs, one might bring
here the testimony of many learned men. But the text in the holy Evangelists
shall serve us, where it is said that we are bound to give an account for every
idle word. The Lacedaemonians amongst all the Nation of the Greeks, delighted
most to speak short in such sort, that if any were succinct in his speech, one
would say presently he spoke Laconian. Philip the father of Alexander demanded
to pass through their Country with his army, and in what manner they would have
him pass a friend or an enemy. To whom they answered briefly and without many
words, neither the one, nor the other.

Artaxerxes King of Asia, threatened likewise that he would come and sack and
pillage them, to which threatenings they answered, come and do what you will. My
thinks they could not in many words have answered more gravely, The Ambassadors
of the Samians made a long speech in their consistory, so that the Auditors
being wearied with such a long discourse, gave them this answer, We have forgot
the first part of your propositions, and for the rest we cannot understand it.
Again, the other Ambassadors of the Abderits, for that they affected too much
the exposition of their Embassage, and desiring their dispatch for a return,
was answered by Agis King of the Lacedomonians, Tell the Abderits we have heard
you all along, and as long as you would speak. A man once speaking to
Aristotle, held him with such a long prolix discourse, that himself finding his
own fault, concluded with an excuse that he would pardon him, that he had used
so many words to so wise a Philosopher, Aristotle answered him very mildly,
Brother, you need not ask me pardon, for I was thinking of another matter,
wherein Aristotle paid him, and answered in few words to purpose. We have
another example of the Thieves that robbed and killed the Poet Livie, for as
they were pillaging of him in the highways far from any company, and where
none could espy them. He saw a flight of Cranes in the air, to whom he cried
aloud, O Cranes you shall be witnesses of what these men do now unto me. After
his death it was a long time before any could be known or suspected of the
murder, till a time that there was a solemn meeting in the Country, at which
were these two murderers, where they heard a great company of Cranes make a
noise in the ait; whereat one of them said to his companion, in a jeering
manner (not thinking any else had heard him) hark, hark, yonder are the
witnesses of the death of Livie. But by chanee one that was by overheard them,
and could not tell what it meant, but suspected some evil, which made him
advertise the Judge and the Governors what he had heard. To make short, my two
gallants were taken, and confessed the truth, and were executed according to
justice proceeding from their too much talk without heed taking. For this
reason ought to a man take heed what he would speak before he let a word escape
from him, and to consider before whom and in what time and place to speak.
Hecates the Greek Orator was reprooved, for that being at a feast he spoke
never a word, which Archimides understanding answered for him. Do not you know,
that those which know when to speak well, know as well when to be silent; I
might allege infinite examples in diverse histories, in several times, of the
dangers ignominies and death it self, which has happened to men by their too
much babbling. Therefore a man ought well to consider before he opens his mouth,
whether that which he intends to speak, may not turn to his prejudice. The
great Cato called the Censorian, was from his infancy, naturally slow of
speech, whereof being reprehended by many who conceited that he affected too
much extreme taciturnity, made them this answer, I am not displeased that I am
reproved for holding my peace, seeing none has occasion to reprove me for my
course of life; for then (and not before) I shall break silence, and shall then
know to speak what I cannot keep in. Isocrates in his book to Dominicus writes,
that there are two times set for to speak, one when the business is necessary,
the other when a man speaks of what he knows. Plutarch compares him that speaks
of what he knows not, to an empty vessel, which sounds more than one that is
full. The Philosopher Zeno shows us that nature has given us two ears, and
only one tongue for this cause, that we may hear much and speak little. Horace
counsels us to shun those that ask many questions, because they are occasion of
much babbling. Suetonus reports, and diverse others confirm it, that the
principal reason that moved Octavian so much to favor Mecenas was, because of
his Taciturnity and little speech. Cicero affirms, that Cato the Orator would
never put any oration of his in writing, saying that if he should speak any
thing he might repent of, he would not have his hand brought as a reproach
against him, which he could not deny. And lest in reprehending too much speech
I should run into the same error, I will hold my peace with the Philosopher
concluding, that I have repented me many times for speaking, but never for
holding my peace.

CHAP. VI.
Of the strange opinion of the Egyptians touching the life of Man, judging it
by the proportion of the Heart.

WHat I shall say of this will seem novelty to some, and fabulous to others;
because it is a difficult thing to prove, neither do I intend to oblige my self
to make it good, nevertheless me thinks the authority of those that have writ
hereof is true or very likely, Pliny and Varro speaking of the time of man's
life, affirm, that the learned Egyptians knew by experience, that man according
to the order of nature, could not live above a hundred years, and if any one
happen to live longer, it is by some particular influence and force of the
stars, and a thing mavelous in nature. Of this they took their ground from
the heart of man, in which by an Anotomy they have found experimentally
mavelous secrets. For they say at the age of one year, the heart of man
weighs two of their draghms, at the age of two year four, and so many years as
he lives so many two draghms the heart increases, so that attaining to fifty
years, the heart weighs a hundred draghms. And from that time afterward it
diminishes its weight every year two draghms, as before it did increase. So
that in a hundred years the heart annihilates it self, and the body dies, if by
some other accident it be not advanced sooner, for there are so many accidental
causes which may and commonly cause death, that there are few men arrive half
the way to make this experience. If this thing seem strange to some of us, yet
the Egyptians hold it for certain according to diverse Authors, and some, as
Lewis Caelius, alleging Diescorides to have spoken much of this amongst other
notable things, as also Peter Crinit in his book of honest discipline, and
Cornelius Agrippa. I site all these Authors because it is a thing hard to be
believed. Let every one then give what credit to it, seems good to himself. And
now we are treating of the heart of man, and of so many excellencies that are
in it, we will not speak of one alone, we must understand according to
Aristo^le, that man only has the heart placed on the left side, and that all
other creatures have it in the midst of the breast, which he affirms in the
first book of the nature of beasts. Also, this is the common opinion of all
natural Philosophers, That the first part which is formed in man, is the
heart, as the root of all the members in a humane body, fountain of all
natural heat, and the last member that dies in man, and looses its motion. It
is so noble and delicate a member, that it cannot be touched, but it is present
death. Pliny recites an other wonder which happens some times, saying that men
have been fonnd to have the heart hairy, and he that has it so is very valiant
and strong of disposition, which was experimented in Aristomines, who killed
with his own hand in battle three hundred Lacedaemonians, who afterward having
escaped many dangers, by his great valor at last died, and being opened his
heart was found hairy. Suetonus in the life of Caligula and Pliny, also says,
that if a man die of poison his heart cannot burn although you throw it in the
fire; which was verified by the heart of Germanicus father of Caligula. So it
fares with them that die of the disease called the Cardiague, or griping at
the heart. And we must know that among the pellicles of the heart, is the seat
of laughter, and to this purpose the ancient Historians write, that the
Roman-Gladiators, having by any blow the caul or pellicles of the heart struck,
died laughing. But even as laughter and joy proceeds from the heart, so
melancholy proceeds from thence, and likewise good and evil thoughts. Speech
is procreated there, and diverse are of opinion that it is the principal seat
and residence of the soul, which seems to be confirmed by Christ himself, when
he says, that wicked and evil thoughts proceed from the heart. And that which
enters in at the mouth soils not for those are indifferent things. So venerable Bede in his Commentaries upon Saint Mark, says, The chiefest place of the soul
is not in the Brain, as Plato maintains: but in the hearr as our Savior Christ
says.

CHAP. VII.
Of two Women; the one of which, in the habit of a man was made Pope, the
other, Empress.

I Believe many have heard of a woman Pope: But because, peradventure, all know
not by what means, and that it was one of the strangest things that could
happen amongst men, I will here speak of it, as it is extracted out of very
true Histories. She was born in England, and in her youth grew acquainted with
a learned man, of whom perceiving her self to be beloved, and she loved him no
less, took the habit of a man, and named her self John; and forsaking her
Country, went along to dwell with him in the Town of Athens, where then
flourished the Schools with all manner of Learning, and there lived some time;
where by her industry she attained to so much Learning, that afterward
retiring her self to Rome, she read publicly in the Schools, in the habit of a
Doctor: By which readings, and public disputes, she so gained the opinion of
the Auditors, that she was reputed one of the most Learned men of all her
time; and obtained such favor and authority among all, that in the vacancie of
the Apostolic Chair, by the death of Leo the fourteenth of that name, in the
year of our Lord Eight hundred fifty two, being taken for a man, she was chosen
Great Bishop of Rome, and Universal Pope in the Church of God; and kept that
Chair two years and thirty odd days. But being in this estate, (as happens
always to such ill enterprises) not having care of the preservation of her
Chastity, had the company of one of her Favorite Serviteurs, in whom she
trusted most, in so much, that Madam the Pope proved with Child. Nevertheless,
she hid her great belly with such care, that none but her Minion could know any
thing of it. Howsoever, God would not suffer such wickedness to last long, nor
go unpunished; for as she went along, according to the common solemnity, to
visit Saint Iean de Lateran, her time of bearing being come, she had public
correction for her secret sin; for coming near to a certain place which is
between the Church of Saint Clement, and the Theater (improperly called
Colliseus,) she was delivered (with great pain) of a humane creature, which
died incontinently with the Mother, so both of them together (without any Pomp,
or mourning) were put into the ground and buried: And for that cause, the
common opinion is, that all the Sovereign Bishops that have been ever since,
come short of that place; and when they come near it, turn down another street,
in detestation of so horrible an offense. And when they choose a Pope, they set
him upon a thing like a Close-stool, pierced through, that they may secretly
know, whether him that the choose be a male. Many Authors write of this, but I
find not one that assures it: Platinus only writes of the Election of Popes
ever since, as is before recited. Of all the Authors, there is Martin and
Platin in the Life of Popes and Sabollicus and St. Anthony in their Histories,
that write of it. I find written more, that in that street, upon the ground,
there is an Image of stone, that represents the Birth of a Child, and the Death
of that impudent and brazen faced woman. Whence we must know, (though that did
come to pass as is before recited,) during the time this woman held the world
in abuse, the Church was not maimed in Faith; because in it could not be
wanting the Head, Christ, from whom proceeds the influence of all Grace, and
the utmost effects of the Sacraments, by means of which Head, the Sacraments
have not been wanting to them that received them holily, and by a lively faith;
for Christ supplied this want in them by his Grace. And put the case that this
woman, nor no other could be capable to receive or give any one only Character
of Orders, nor absolve any person, and that therefore they that have been made
Ministers by her hands, must be ordained a new: yet it is so, that Christ
supplying that default in them by his grace, as we have said, there is no
further need to do it over again; the truth is, she was for her wisdom to be
admired in that she could for so many years, cover her estate, and live after
that close manner.

But that which made Theodosia, Empress of Constanninople, is not less to be
admired; because the wit the one used to counterfeit her self a man, the other
used to make known to all that she was a woman; for in the vacancy of the
Empire by the death of her brother Zoe, and of her husband Constantine, then
made a Monk, she knew so well how to behave her self in the carrying through of
affairs, she became Empress, and for the same was feared and obeyed. For
without the help either of father, or brother, or husband, she governed the
Empire excellently in peace and prosperity, for the space of two years, and no
more, because she lived no longer; and died to the grief of all her subjects in
the time of Pope Leo the ninth, in the year of grace, one thousand and fifty.

CHAP. VIII.
Why man goes upright: why he weighs more fasting than when he has eaten,
and the cause why he weighteth more dead than alive, with other pretty
discourses.

THe contemplative matters, concerning the composition of man are infinite.
Lactantius Firmian writes a book of them apart. And so have other learned men.
In truth there is one thing amongst many others that deserves particular
consideration to be known, that is, why God has made all other creatures
(except man, who is born the chief) whose eyes for the most part look downwards
toward the earth, and not only reasonable creatures, but also vegitables, as
we see of Trees who have their head and foundation in the earth, and their
boughs and branches above; as for man, he has created him only with his eyes
toward heaven, his face upwards, and his body straight up. And although by all
reason, for these things it were sufficient to allege the will of God, yet it
seems this was done by a Mystery, and therefore worthy of contemplation; so in
truth our disposing or making, manifestly shows us, that we were not born for
the earth, but we were created to contemplate high and heavenly things, which
are not communicated to other creatures, not being capable of them, and there
is none but man only that is worthy of them; God has created all beasts with
their head downward, to show that man only reigns over them. One of these
reasons is eloquently noted by Lactantius, saying, that God having determined
to make man for heaven, and other creatures for earth, he made man straight and
upright and disposed to heavenly contemplation, that he might admire the
effects, and have in reverence the place of his original and his native
Country, making all other creatures low and bowing toward the earth; because
they have no participation in heaven. Aristotle that had no light of faith
says, That man only amongst all creatures goes up-right, in respect that his
substance, and his parts are Celestial and not Terrestial. And the Office of
the spirits is knowledge and understanding, in which man could not well know
how to exercise, if his body were great and weighty; because the charge of his
body would make his understanding dull.

Learned St. Thomas, who forgot not to discuss, and to examine any thing,
leaves not this question undetermined, for in the exposition of youth and age
he says, that for two causes man was formed upright toward heaven, The one
that he might be the most perfect of all creatures, and he which participates
and comes nearest to the quality of heaven. The other because in the proportion
of his body, he is more hot then any other creature, and that the nature of
heat is to advance upward; other creatures keep the mean as less participating
of the heavenly quality, and having less of this heat which raises up. For
this cause they are not of the same work and disposition as man. It seems in
this St. Thomas would follow the opinion of the Platonists, maintaining that
the heat and the spirit of man (in which be abounds more than any other
creature, considering the proportion of his body) is the cause that man goes
upright and straight as he does; because by the force and vigor of the spirits
and the blood, he lifts himself upright, being helped by the composition and
harmony of the Elements, whereof man is composed, with such equality and
weight, that he may lift up himself. Now something is in it seeing that by that
part of the soul, and this of the body men are put forward to the love and
contemplation of heaven, they ought then to consider and think of high,
spiritual and good things, and on the contrary to despise and shun low, base,
and earthly things. And yet nevertheless, we leave our selves so to be
overcome with the cares of this life, and earthly considerations, that most of
our time we lift up our eyes to heaven, but our spirits and thoughts are on the
earth.

As for the propriety of the spirit of man, whereof we have spoken, Pliny
alleges one thing more, which though it be not of such importance as the rest,
yet it may give a taste of satisfaction to him that knows it not, or would not
have thought so much, though experience manifests it daily. He says, that a
man when he is dead, weighs more than when he was alive, and that it is so in
all kind of creatures, and that he that has eaten his breakfast weighs less
than when he was fasting. Erasmus in one of his Problemes says as much, and
other things of note, giving the same reasons that Pliny does, which are
founded in the essence of thespirits and the air which does lighten them as we
said before. So likewise a man that is fasting weighs more than a man that has
eaten something, although one would think he should weigh less; forasmuch as he
that has eaten a meal, has so much the greater charge and weight. And
nevertheless it is so, and we need not marvel at it, for eating and drinking
augments the spirits and chears him, which makes him grow and increase in
natural heat. From hence it comes, that when one man assays to lift up another;
if he will that is lifted up, he can make himself heavier by forcing forth his
breath with in him, which if he should keep in he would weigh lighter, also one
that runs breaths but little that he may run the more swift; because the air
being a very light Element, desires to lift it self up high, where its place is
naturally: as we see, a piece of skin of chejucel, or a bladder, unblown thrown
into the water, it sinks presently; but blow it up with air and it swims above
the water. In the same place Pliny says, That a body dead in the water, when
it comes to float, if it be a man his face will be upwards toward heaven, if
it be a woman, she will rise with her face downwards, which provident nature
has so ordained, to cover the shameful parts of a woman. There is yet an
other natural reason for it. And that is, that women weigh heavier in the
foreparts because of their breasts. And men in their back-parts because of
their shoulders.

CHAP. IX.
That death is to be judged good or evil, according to the condition one dies
in, with examples of the death of diverse.

IT is common to all, once to die, but to know when, or how, or what manner of
death, is revealed to none, but all consists in being found in a good or evil
estate. That death may not be termed unfortunate, unless that which finds not
a man in that condition which he ought to be. It often hides it self, and keeps
in houses and places where we least suspect. And for this cause, we ought not
to live one day without consideration of it. To this purpose, examples are
infinite, and I will bring some here, worthy note considering the effects are
so strange, though such happen daily. Aullus Gelius writes, and after him
Valerius, that there is in Italy a Town called Croton in Calabria, in which
lived one called Milo, that was so strong and fit for any thing he undertook,
that at all games, feasts, and public wrestlings, never could be found his
like, and for the most part carried away the victory, in such sort, that he was
accounted the strongest and most valiant that could be found in his time. This
Milo traveling over a Mountain, and withdrawing himself out of the common rode
for refreshment, saw amongst other Trees, an Oak having two great branches,
which some had begun to cleave by great force with wedges, and left them
behind, not able to perform it, which he being very desirous to accomplish, put
both his hands into the cleft, and drew till he had opened them a little more,
so that the wedges fell to the ground: but whether because (it may be) his
strength failed him, or that (it may be) he thought the branches were not of so
great force, he let go a little, whereby the Tree closed on such a sudden, that
both his hands were fast taken therein, so that he could not escape out, and
none passing by to help him, he died there in great pain, and of famine, one of
the most miserable and unhappiest deaths that could be imagined; for he was
made a prey to the most salvage beasts, and so his own strength killed him. If
the death of Milo was so strange, this of Echilus the Poet is no less strange;
for he one day walking out of a Town in Sicilie, where he dwelt, to take a
little warmth of the Sun, because it was then cold weather, and he being old
and bald-headed, whose head shone again with whiteness, seated himself in a
high place where the Sun beat, and having his head bare, an Eagle by chance
flew over him in the Air, having in his tallons a Tortoise, and seeing the
white head of Echilus, took it for a stone, and so let it fall a great height
thereupon, so to break it, that afterward he might get the flesh of the
Tortoise to eat it; which broke his skull, whereof he died presently. A
wonderful thing, seeing that he sat so high, in an open place, where one
would have thought it impossible for any thing to fall upon his head.

Baptista Fulgosa, in a near book that he has written of Examples, recites the
unfortunatee death of a King of Navarre, named CHARLES: this King was old, and
very ill, and troubled with a great pain in all his Nerves; for which pain, by
the counsel of all the learned Physicians, there could be found no Remedy but
one, which was to wrap him in a linen cloth steeped in Aquavitae, and sow him
in it round on every side, and he which sowed him in, having nothing by him to
cut off the thread, took a candle lighted that was next him, the flame whereof
took hold of the Aqua-vitae so suddenly, that before the King could be unsowed
again, or have any help he was burned in the flame, and so he was cured of the
pain he had in his Nerves, and likewise of all his other diseases. The death of
Philemon was very pleasant, for seeing an Ass come near to a table where on
there was figs, and fell to eating them, fell into so great a laughter that the
end of his laugh accompanied the end of his life. And it is reported that
Philiston the Commique Poet died laughing. And so we find many men that have
died of joy, of which number was Dennis the Tyrant of Cicilie, Diagoras, and
that Roman Dame, who seeing her son return home, who was thought to be slain in
the battle, died presently. That death of the Shepherd Cratis, whether it be
so or no, is likewise very strange, for being asleep on a Mountain amongst his
Goats, a Buck-Goat killed him, for jealousy he had of one of the She-Goats,
with whom Cratis abhominably perverted the order of nature. Lewis Celius and
Volateran recites this story, alleging for it some Greek authors. I leave
diverse other sorts of deaths as that of Pope Bonniface, who died mad being
famished in prison. Of Richard the second of England. Of the Archbishop of
Magunce, who was killed and eaten up by a multitude of Rats. Of Decius the
Emperor, of whom Familius Victor writes, that though victorious, he was found
dead swimming in a Lake. In this sort in our time died Lewis King of Hungary.
And Sforza (father to that gallant Captain Duke Francis Sforza) drowned himself
thinking to save one of his Pages. Andrew King of Provance died by the hand of
his wife, assisted by some other women who strangled him and hanged him up. The
Emperor Tiberius was also poisoned by his wife Agripina. So Kings, Princes, and
great Lords, are subject to unfortunate and unhappy deaths as well as poor men,
although sometimes they are advised thereof yet in vain.

CHAP. X.
How many Popes has been since Saint Peter, and how the Popes came to change
their names, also by whom they used to have been chosen.

ONe of the most excellent histories, and that Christians ought well to know,
is the lives of the Sovereign Bishops, successors of Saint Peter, and Vicars
of Jesus Christ. These are those which have been Bishops of Rome since the
first Vicar of God, Saint Peter placed the chair there, the Mark for his
Successors, in which place it has always been even to this day. And put the
case that sometimes some of the Sovereign Bishops have been absent from that
Chair and the Town, yet Rome ceased not to be the Bishopric, and principal
seat of the absent Bishop, for St. Peter placed it there first of all where it
has been ever since. But to return to our purpose, there has been in Rome two
hundred twenty and one Bishops, or universal Popes, as I can gather even to
this day, in which Julius the third governed; amongst which there has been
many Martyrs, most excellent Saints and learned Doctors; yet nevertheless it
is not without great admiration, and a consicieration of great mystery, that
none of them governed so long time as St. Peter did there. For it has pleased
God, as he excelled all the rest in sanctity, so in the possession of that
dignity, he passed them all, for he lived in it five and twenty years after the
death of our Savior Christ, the first leven whereof he lived at Antioch, and
the other eighteen at Rome, where he placed the Chair. And some are of opinion
that none of his successors, for the time to come, shall attain to that he
did, no more than those that are past already. There is also another thing that
I take notice of in reading the lives of the Popes, that is, that since Saint
Peter to this very time I find not one that in changing of his name, has
called himself Peter, nor that had that name before his change. So that it
seems, that God would put that name Peter for a foundation in the Church, and
no where else.

The saying of the Translatour. I know not in what place the Author has taken
out this last opinion, for there is to be found seven (at the least) which
before were named Peter. As Innocent the fifth, John the two and twentieth,
Celestine the fitfh, Clement the fixed, Gregory the elevench, Boriniface the
ninth, And Alexander the fifth, leaving out one Antipope.

Yet it it is good to know from whence came the first changing their name. Know
that Pope Gregory the fourth being dead in the year eight hundred forty two,
they chose for the Sovereign Bishop of Rome, a Roman, of Noble Blood,
illustrious, and of good breeding, who was called Hoge-face; and because this
name seemed to him dirty, and ill agreeing with such a dignity, and remembering
that our Savior changed the name of Saint Peter, would also change his, and
named himself Sergius, which was his fathers name. From thence came the custom
observed to this day, that he which is chosen Pope, may tak eat his pleasure
what name pleases him best: And although they have changed their names, they
keep still this custom, to take the name of some of their predecessors. Of
these things, are the Authors, Platinus, Matthew Palmer, Eusebins and others,
now we must understand according to what is found in histories, that even to
the time of Constantine the great, (which gave so much Goods and Privileges to
the Church of Rome) because the Sovereign Bishops had been all Martyred, there
was no canvasing or suite who should have it, for none desired it, but
contrary, either by force or request, they were constrained to accept the
charge, and so even till that time they were chosen to that dignity, only by
the Priests which were in the Roman Church.

But since the Emperors were Christians, and likewise many of the Citizens of
Rome, they were chosen by the Clergy, with the voice and consent of the people.
That done, they sent to the Emperor, which then kept at Constantinople, to
desire a confirmation; and it seems this was to please them, or because they
would have it so. Sometimes this confirmation was done by the Governor which
they had at Rome, called Hyparcus, who had the authority of the Emperor, now
was this confirmation by the Emperor or the Sovereign Bishops sure and firm,
but whether for the Tyranny and permission of the Church, that after the death
of Benet the first, Pelagius the second was chosen. But because at that time
Rome was besieged by the Lombards, from whence are descended the Lombards, and
also that there fell such an abundance of rain, that the Rivers were all
overflown, in such sort, that (as Platinus says) there was an infinite number
of persons drowned and perished, so that it was thought for certain it was a
general Deluge. This Pelagius was the first that governed the Bishopric
without making the Emperor acquainted; yet nevertheless he feared that Maurice
the Emperor of Constantinople would be angry at it, therefore sent his
Ambassadors to excuse it, and gave the reasons we have before recited.
Afterward, some years having past that this custom was continued without
discontinuance, and Benet the second coming to be created Sovereign Bishop, the
Emperor Constantine the fourth of that name, being advertized of his singular
holiness and great learning, had respect of his authority, and sent this Pope
a Charter or letter Patent, by which he renounced for himself and his
successors, upon all reasons or pretenses whatsoever, the confirmation of the
Papal election, that from thence forward so soon as the Clergy or the people
of Rome, should have chosen a Sovereign Bishop, he should be held for the Vicar
of God, without other confirmation or amplification.

This was observed for some time: but afterward, the Church of Rome coming to
be afflicted, and its inheritance to be molested by the Lombards, that reigned
in that Country; and being seconded by Charles Martel, in the time of Gregory
the third; and by Pepin his son, in the time of Stephen the second; and at some
other times, having some little help from the Emperors of Constantinople.
Lastly, Pope Leo the third of that name, after great discord and controver^ies,
considering the great succor and help that he had from Charlemain King of
France, he made and named him Emperor, and repassed the seat of the Empire to
the Western parts, where it has remained to this day. By means whereof, we may
know, that either by special Privilege, or by Usurpation of the Successors of
Charlemain to the Empire, they began to set up again the confirmation of the
Pope, confirming him by the Emperors, and approving the Election that is made
of the Sovereign Bishops, who acknowledged them for Emperors, having recourse
to them in their necessities and affairs, Afterward by succession of time, and
in the year Eight hundred and seventeen, Pasquel the first was chosen by the
death of Stephen the fourth, and obeyed, without waiting for confirmation of
the Emperor Lowes, son to Charles the great; wherefore he sent his Ambassadors
to excuse it, and say, that he was constrained by the people not to stay for
his confirmation; the Emperor Jews accepted this excuse, and nevertheless sent
them word, that he would that the ancient customs should be retained and kept.
A long time after, during which the malice of men increased, there were diverse
scandals and disorders found in the Elections, which to remedy, Pope Nicholas
the second of that name, in the year One thousand seventy nine, being in
public Council, made a Decree, which begins, In nomini Domini, in the three
and twentieth distinction, by which he gives the authority of choice only to
Bishops, Priests and Cardinals; following which Ordinance, even to this day, is
made a worthy and Canonical Election, without seeking or waiting for the
Imperial confirmation: for this Privilege proceeds not so much from reason, as
from the grace and permission of the Church and Pope, to which all Emperors
and Kings submit and humble themselves, as their Superior, and Head over all,
Vicar and Lieutenant of Christ, the toleration and permission whereof ceasing,
the use likewise cease to Kings and Emperors.

CHAP. XI.
Of Men that are bred in the Sea, and some other things of note.

IT is one marvelous thing, and that which draws men into a deep contemplation
of the works of God, the great diversity of Fishes in the Sea, and likewise of
the Beasts of the Earth: Pliny Albertus Magnus, Aristotle, and diverse other
Philosophers treat much of them. I know very well, that a reasonable man is
found no where, but upon the earth, and men inhabit not in the water;
Nevertheless I have read, there are fishes in the sea that have the shape of a
man, amongst which there are male and female; and the female has the very form
of a woman, and are called Nereides, and the male Tritons; whereof I will not
recite many things, in reckoning up a great number of men of light and small
authority, which I have heard report to this purpose things strange and
variable: Yet nevertheless, I will say that which has been written by men of
authority, grave, and worthy of credit. Amongst the which Plenie says, That in
the time of the Emperor Tiberius, the inhabitants of Lisbon, a Town in
Portugal, (then famous, and is yet,) sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, to
certify him, that they had seen one of these Tritons retire and hide himself,
sometimes in a Cave near the Sea, and that there he made Music with the shell
of a fish; and says yet further, that Octavius Augustus was certified, that
they had seen upon the coast of France, diverse Nereides or Mer-maids, but
indeed they were dead upon the sea-shote. And so has Nero, that amongst many
fishes that the sea had cast up upon the sands, there were found Nereides and
other sorts of sea-beasts, of the likeness of many beasts that are upon the
earth. Elian writes as much; and besides what the Ancients write of these
things, and money other such like, modern writers declare also marvelous things;
and amongst others, Theodore Gaze, a man very learned in diverse Sciences, and
lived in our times, of whom some have writ, and in especial, Alexander of
Alexandria, who says, that Theodore Gaze being in Greece upon the seacoast, he
saw after a great tempest, the sea had cast up upon the sands a great number of
fishes, amongst which was one Nereide, or fish with a perfect humane face, and
a very fair woman even to the girdle, and the rest downwards was the shape of a
fish, ending in the tail sharp like an Eel, just like that which we see
painted, which we call a Mer-maid, and that this Siren was upon the sands,
showing by her gesture, that she was in great pain and sorrow. Alexander says
further, that this Theodore Gaze caught it, and as well as he could, put it
into the water, where it was no sooner entered, but it began to swim neatly,
slinking it self out of sight on a sudden, and was never after seen. Georgius
Trapozensus, a man of no less learning and authority, affirms likewise, passing
by the seashore, to have seen a fish raise it self above water, and all that
was seen from the middle upwards was the shape of a very beautiful woman,
whereat he stood no less affrighted then amazed with wonder, and so hid
himself, to discover the shape; till she perceived that she was espied, by
means whereof she put her self into the water, and was never after seen. All
this is wonderful, and yet who would not believe such men, being seconded with
what I shall yet say. Alexander of Alexandria, says, that he was advertized
for a certain truth that in Epire, there is a fountain near the Sea to which
children went often to fetch water, and that near to that place came out a
Triton, and hid himself in a Cave, and there kept himself close, till he saw a
young maid alone, whom he would take away and carry with him into the sea,
which he had done oftentimes, whereof the inhabitants being advertised, set
ambushes for him, so that he was taken, and brought before the Justice of the
place, where he was found in all his members agreeable to a man, wherefore they
assayed to keep him and gave him meat to eat but he would not touch a bit of
any thing that was offered him, and so he died as well of famine, as that he
was too many days in an Element that was strange to him, and altogether
contrary to his own proper nature. This History is also recounted by Peter
Gellie a Modern Author in his book, that he has written of beasts, and says,
that while he lived at Marsellus, heard an old Fisherman report, that his
father had told him for truth, that he had seen a Tryton or Mer-man such a one
as we have spoken of, which was presented to King Renus.

A thing therefore so approved, and by so many Authors, and that all the world
holds for a certain, ought not to be reputed a lie, but held for a truth.

CHAP. XII.
Of the division of the ages of the World, and the notable things that happened
in them. And also of the beginning of Kingdoms.

ALthough every one takes pleasure to speak of the ages of the world, and of
things that have happened in the one, and what has been seen in the other, yet
there are many that know not how this division is made, nor how many years is
given to every of them. The Age of the life of the world even unto this day, is
divided by the greatest part of Authors, in six parts or Ages, Though some
would persuade us there are seven, which is the division which the Hebrews
make: But as for me I will follow the opinion of Eusebius, and the common
opinion of all the Historians, that name but six. Afterward upon the division
of these ages, there is yet so great confusion and difference amongst them,
that none can resolvedly assure himself. It seems principally the Authors
divided itinto two parts. The one whereof follows the computation of the
seventy two interpreters, that Translated the old Testament out of the Hebrew
tongue into Greek; The others follow the Hebrew and common text of the Bible.
Of all which I will recite their opinions.

The first Age of the World is reckoned, from the beginning that God created it
to the universal Deluge, which was the infancy of the World, which Age lasted
a long time. And it is to be believed, that during that time, there happened
amongst men many things of note, although we have neither history nor any
memory thereof. But that which the holy Scripture says, That after God had
created Adam and Eve, and before them all other things, and that he had given
him Sovereignty over all Creatures of the earth, and fishes in the Sea. Adam
begat two children, Cain and Abel, which brought forth to the world many other
children, whereof grew a great people. Moses writes afterward, that Cain built
a Town in the East, which he called Hen^c, according to his sons name. In this
time Lainech having buried his wife Bigamus, was the first that ever had two
wives, of one of which he had a Son, named Tubal, which invented Music of
voices, Viols and Organs, and wind instruments. Caein invented the Art of
forging Iron and Iron works, and engraving during this time the people were, as
diverse Authors write, of a mavelous greatness, and strength, and spiteful,
and puissant beyond humane power. And finally, for the sin of man came a
general Deluge over all the earth, by the which all humane lineage was
destroyed (except Noah) and those that were preserved with him in the Ark.

And this Age lasted according to the Hebrews 1656 years, to which agrees Filo,
Beda, and St. Ierom, and the common text of the Bible. According to the seventy
two interpreters, Eusebius, and other Historians, it lasted 2242 years. St.
Augustine says, 2272. And Alfonsus King of Spain, 2882 years.

The second Age began in Noah, after he was come out of the Ark; and lasted to
the birth of Abraham; which lasted, according to the interpreters, Eusebius,
Isoaorus, and the greatest part of the Chronicles, 942 years. But the Hebrews
say much less, and make it but 292 years, of the same opinion are Filo, and
Josephus. St. Augustine makes it 1072 years.

We have likewise remaining very little of certainty of things happening in
these times, neither is there any particular history to be found of them, but
only of some things in general, touching the beginning of Kingdoms, and
inhabiters of Provinces.

Noah came out of the Ark and planted vines, and what happened to him, every
one knows; he begat children, and they also begat more, in such sort, that the
world began to be peopled. Came the second son of Noah, begat Chus, from whence
descended the Ethiopians; he also begat Misraim, from whom came the Egyptians;
and Canaan, from whence came the Canaanites. The other son named Iaphet, begat
Gomer and Magog, from whom are descended other people, too long to recite. In
this time the Tower of Babel was built; and so came the confusion of languages,
by means whereof happened (according to Josephus in his second book of
Antiquities) that men separated themselves into diverse Provinces, and Isles to
live there.

During this Age, Tubal, the son of Iaphet, came to inhabit Spain, which he
erected into a Kingdom, and there began to reign, some say he was called Subal
or Tubal, son of Faleth, Nephew to Eber. The reign of the Scythians began also
in this time in the North parts, and have always pretended their reign to
precede all others for antiquity, as Trogius, Pompeius, and Justin recites; so
that betwixt them and the Egyptians, for this, grew a great controversy. In
this time was found out by Came, the Magick-Art and Incantations, who was also
named Zorcastes. Toward the end of this age, and a little before the birth of
Abraham, (according to Eusebius and Beda) the most puissant reign of the
Assyrians began to raise it self, having for their first King, Belus, which
some say to be Jupiter. And the second Ninus, in whose time Abraham was born,
the which Ninus conquered a great number of Towns and Provinces. There was yet
in Egypt an other kind of Kingdom named Danastia, whose first King was called
Veyor or Vezor (according to Eusebius) who likewise toward the end of this age
settled the reign of the Scythians, in Peleponensis, now called Moors, whereof
Agesilaus was the first King. In this very time began Idolatry and Gentilism.
And this is all that we can confusedly gather of this second Age, in the end
whereof, the renowned City of Nineve was built of an admirable greatness, for
according to histories it was three days journey in circuit.

Presently after began the third Age, Abraham, continuing even to David, and
lasted without contrariety of Authors, 942 years, to which only Isiodore ads
two, which Age we may well call the youth of the World, because all things in
it increased greatly. In the beginning whereof Semyramis wife of Ninus, began
her memorable acts, who feigned her self to be young Ninus her son, and having
changed her feminine habit reigned a long time, and conquered by arms many
Provinces. She re-edified and compassed about with Walls the famous City of
Babylon, in this very time was the Peregrination of Abraham by the commandment
of God: and the victory which he had over four Kings to save Lot whom they led
away prisoner. In this time we place the beginning of the Amazonians, and
likewise in Egypt flourished the Kings called Pharoes. Also Sodom and Gomorrah
was destroyed in these days. In the time of Isaac, began the Reign of the
Argives in Thessaly. And in the time of his children Jacob and Esau, began to
reign the Kings of Cestus, the first whereof was named Acre.

A little after, Joseph was sold into Egypt, as the History recites. And
likewise how his Father and his Brethren and their children went into Egypt,
where the people of Israel which were descended of them, lived four hundred and
thirty years (according to Beda) and St. Augustine in his Book of the City of
God. During this time, Hercules of Lybia went into Spain, where he reigned, and
after him, Iuer, Brigius, Traga, Beto, Gerien, and others, whereof Berosus, and
others make mention, in this time the City of Scivil was built, which will give
place to none in the world for Antiquity, as we may gather out of Berosus and
others. It was first named Ispalis of Ispale, the son or Nephew of Hercules,
which reigned in it, and whom as it is said founded it. Although Isiodorus
says it was named Ispalis, because it was built in a Morish place, and they
were fain to strike it full of piles: but be it how it will since it has been
called Spain, as Trogius, Pompeius, Justin, and other Authors do certify. It
is true that Julius Caesar since named it Scivil, and greatly enobled it, and
made it a Collonie, and the Romans dwelt in it, nevertheles, it was greatly
enobled before. But to return to our first purpose, in succession of time Moses
was born, under whose conduct the Hebrews came out of Egypt. In this time also
was Job the just. Then afterward came the Deluge of Thessalie, and many
Kingdoms began to increase in diverse Provinces. In Ethiopia first reigned
Ethiop; In Sicily, Siculus; In Boecia, Boecim, And so the Countries received
their names of their Princes. Then flourished the Town of Troy, and Iaeson made
a conquest of the Golden Fleece, from whence proceeded the history of Medea.
The Amazons were then in their force. And the beginning of the reign of the
Latins in Italy. In this very age Paris ravished Helena, which was the cause
of the war and destruction of Troy, and of the coming of Aeneas into Italy, and
of diverse other things which will not admit of brevity.

Then failed the third Age, which gave way to the fourth. And began at the
reign of David the 2 K. of the Hebrews, which fourth age dured even to the
Transmigration and Perigrination of the Jews in Babylon, and lasted four
hundred four-score and five years. Beda says 474 years. This age may be called
the youth of the world, during which happened an infinite many things, whereof
histories are full, in it was the original of the victories of good King David,
he conquered the Philistines, he avenged himself of the Amonites, for the
injury which they did to his Ambastadours, and killed the Captain of the
Assyrians. After him succeeded in the Kingdom the wise King Solomon, who built
the rich Temple in Jerusalem, he dead, the Kingdom was divided, Jeroboam
succeeded to ten families, and Roboam his son to two.

After the Empire of the Assyrians, which had lasted more than twelve hundred
years, it was ruined by the death of Sardanaepalus, who was Lord thereof, and
the most puissant King in the world, who was killed by Arbact. And then the
Empire fell to the Medes. In ths very Age began the reigns of the most puissant
Kings of Macedoma. And the Greeks began to count their years by Olimpiades,
which were feasts that they made from five years to five years, with certain
prizes for them that deserved best. Also was that puissant City of Carthage
built by Dido. And a little while after Rome by Romulus and his brother Remus
where the Kings began to reign. The great Town of Bizance was also built in
this time, which is since called Constantinople Again there happened great wars,
and mutation of Signiories in many parts of the world, whereof histories are
full. And principally, toward the end of this age, Nabucadonozor, King of the
Medes and of Babylon, fell upon Jerusalem, which he destroyed and the Temple
also. Then led the people of Judea prisoners along with them: and from that it
is called the Transmigration in Babylon.

At which began the fifth Age of the world,

During this time, there was puissant Kings, and great Republics in the world,
such as it is mavelous to read, and contemplate of the great things that
happened in this Age; The Changes; The ruin of Estates; The ordering of great
Armies: In brief, it is better to be silent than to abreviate them. Almost at
the beginning of this Age began the Monarchy of the Persians, whose Kingdoms
were then the greatest, by means of the victories of that great Cyrus, which
reigned thirty years, during which time he conquered and discomfited the rich
King Cresus of Lydia. Then was discomfited himself, and put to death by Tomoris
Queen of the Scythians.

Seventy years of this Age being accomplished. The Hebrews came out of their
Captivity. And the Temple that had been destroyed was re-edified by Solomon at
Jerusalem.

In Europe the Romans chased their Kings and were governed by Consuls of which
L. I. Brut, was the first, and the L. Collatine.

In Greece flourished Arms, and letters, which brought forth many excellent
Philosophers and Captains.

Xerxes came thither with an innumerable army, but he was constrained to retire
with great loss and disgrace.

Then came to flourish in Macedonia King Philip, who subdued all Greece, the
Mother of learning and of arms, and which in this time brought forth
Demosthenes, Thomistocles, Epaminondas, Agifilaus, Teno, Plato, Aristotle, and
others the like. After the death of Philip, his son Alexander went out of
Greece, and entered Asia, which he conquered, destroying the Empire of Persia.
And by the Victories which he gained against King Darius, he lived the remainer
of his life Monarch of all the world. But he dead, the Captains divided among
themselves, the Signiories and Lordships; which being so mingled bred a
discord, which raised wars through all Asia, and a great part of Europe.

In like manner the power of the Romans and Carthagenians increased beyond
measure; for all of them strove to command the whole world, and to attribute to
themselves the Empire. These two forces fought diverse times against one
another, so that each of these two Towns, brought forth Captains excellent
skillful in arms. Carthage, put forward Asdrubal, Hano, Hanibal. Rome, Fabius,
Scipio, Marcellus, Emillus, and others. Finally, after a great quantity of
bloodshed, Rome became victorious, and Carthage desolate, destroyed, and all
Africa tributary. This Victory obtained, the Romans, proud, and envious of the
Greeks prosperity, found out an occasion of war with them, in which Greece was
taken and made Tributary.

Not contented with this. Their covetousness made them pass into Asia, where
they overcame Antiochus, and then Mithridates, making themselves Lords of Asia
the less, as also of Syria, and Palestina, and Egypt, and all the coast on
this side of France, Spain, England, and the greatest part of Germany. Of all
which Conquests, the chief Ministers were, Sylla, Marius, Lucullus, Pompeius,
Caesar, and many others: it happened that their envious ambition, swelled their
hearts, whereof bred civil wars amongst them, that every one would be a
Commander one over another: but at the last, the Empire fell to Caesar, whom
after many fortunes had happened unto him, his Nephew, or adopted son Octavian
succeeded, who after having overcome all his enemies, he rested peaceably in
such sort, that seeing himself in peace and concord with all the Kings and
Commonwealths in the world, he made them lock up the doors of his God Janus,
which were never shut in time of war. Then the accomplishment of time being
come, the Fifth age of the World ended, And our Savior and Redeemer Jesus
Christ was born, very God and very Man, in the year of the Creation of the
World, according to the Hebrews, Three thousand nine hundred fifty and two
years. And according to the seventy Interpretours, Eusebius and the greatest
part of Historians. Five thousand a hundred ninety nine years. According to
Orozine, five thousand twenty years. According to Isiodorus, one less. And
according to Alfonsus, six thousand nine hundred eighty four; which is much
more then any of the rest.

At this birth of our Lord begins the sixth age, which has lasted to this
hour, and shall last even to the end of the world. And during the which, a
great party of men, are governed by one man, only the Emperor of the Romans.
These Emperors have maintained themselves in prosperity for some time, from
one succession to another: but aftewards came the Goths and other Nations, and
then Mahomet, who have given so many traversings to this Empire, that it is
much deminished, in such sort, that in many quarters of it there are particular
Kingdoms and Signiories taken out. By which discords and coldness of faith,
the enemies of the Church of Christ has found means to molest the faithful
Christians, casting many of them out of their Teretories and Provinces.

These computations of the times of the ages which I have recited, are taken
out of the Authors alleged, St. Augustine, Isiodorus, Beda, Eusebius, Filo,
Orasine, singular Historians. And for Modern Pierre d' Aliaque, and above all
John Driodon in his Ecclesiastics. The Poets gives the world four ages and no
more. The first of Gold; The second of Silver; The third of Brass; And the
fourth of Iron: showing thereby, that the malice of men beginning to increase,
the excellency of metals decreased, to which they compared the world. As Ovid
speaks in his first book of Metamorphosis.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the distinction of the age of man, according to the Doctrine of the
Astrologers.

BY the common division of Astrologers, Arabes, Caldeans, Greeks, and Latins,
and particularly Procleus a Greek Author, Ptolomeus, and Aliben Rasellus, the
life of man is divided into seven ages, upon every of which has dominion and
reigns, one of the seven Planets.

The first Age is named the infancy, continuing the time of 4 years, in which
domineers the nearest Planet to the earth, which is the moon. Because the
qualities of infancy, compels us to say that the influence of that Planet, is
of all others agreeable to that Age, in which the body is moist, delicate,
tender, weak, and moveable, and in all things like to the moon, for a small thing
alters it. Its members for a little small thing is weakened, and the members are
perceived to grow in a small time even to ones eye. These things happened in
general to all, because of the moon, that governs then. Nevertheless, more to
one than to another, and not equally, for as much as the other particular
qualities, which hold nothing of the Moon, takes effect as the child is brought
into the world, according to the state and disposition of the other Planets.

The second Age lasts ten years, Pueritia, Childhood; wherein ends infancy,
and begins youth. In this age reigns another Planet called Mercury, placed in
the second Heaven, this is a Celestial body easy to change being good, with
the good, and naught in the aspect with the naught. Lasting this time, then
nature composeth it self to the quality of this Planet; for then young children
begin to show some principle of their spirit, be it in reading, writing, or
music, and are then tractable, and docile, yet light in their purposes,
inconstant and changeable.

The third Age is eight years more, Adolescentia, youthful age; and continues
from fourteen to two and twenty, during which raigns the third Planet called
Venus; for man then begins to prompt by nature, able and strong to engender,
being inclined to love, and Ladies addicted to sports, voluptuous banquets, and
worldly pleasures, and this we must search into whether nature provokes the man
to do this. For we must believe that man keeps still his own free will, either
to take or leave these inclinations or influences, and understand that neither
the force of the Planets, nor the power of the Stars, can but nible at such
liberty, although they incline the sensative appetite, and the members and
organs of a humane body.

The fourth age pursues it self till a man has accomplished forty two years,
Iuventus, youth; the course of which lasts nineteen years, and has for its
Governor and Master, the Sun which is in the fourth heaven, called by the most
ancient Astrologers, The Fountain of Light; The principal eye of the universe;
King of Planets; And Heart of all the World. And like to it this Age, is the
Prince of all the rest. And the flower of the life. During which the senses,
and the powers of the body and the spirits, maintain and hold their full force.
And then being a man of full understanding and courage, is made to know and
choose the best things. He desires to purchase wealth, and to get himself a good
name, always inclining to do well, briefly in all things, generally he
evidently shows that the sun raigns over him.

The fifth Age is called Viril, manly, Mars, which in it self is naught,
dangerous and hot, inclining men to covetousness, and making them chollerick,
sickly, temperate in eating and drinking, and constant in their actions.

Then joining twelve to fifty six, Jupiter is the great Governor, which is a
noble Planet, betokening Equity, Religion, Piety, Temperance and Chastity,
provoking men to put an end to all labor, and hazard, and to seek rest. Men in
this Age do all holy works, Love, Temperance, and Charity, seeking after credit
accompanied with commendation, are honest and scaring shame and disgrace.

The seventh and last Age, Saturn commands-over it as the most flow and highest
Planet, and environs all the others abovesaid. His complexion is cold, dry, and
melancholy, angry, and envious. By which means he draws these old people to a
solitariness, choler, pensiveness, despite, and anger. He weakens their
memory and their strength, and loads them with anguish, sorrow, languishing
sickness, deep thoughts, and with a great desire to undertake secret and
hidden things, and which is more, they would be superiors and masters above all
and be obeyed. And if we ever find any that goes beyond this age (at which in
these days we may wonder) he will return and grow again to be as in his
infancy, and will have one touch again of the moon for his Planet, which was
the Governor (as is said before) of his first years. By reason whereof people
do the same to them as you see them do to little children, following their
humors and inclinations. I allege, that this division was the invention of
the Astrologers, but let every one believe what he please.

Now we will come to the division of the Philosophers, Physicians, and Poets,
which are of diverse opinions. And because in this discourse there are some
things of note, I will treat of some of them to exercise ingenious wits.

The great Philosopher Pythagoras, let a man's life be as long as may be, makes
but four divisions of it. Comparing it to the four quarters of the year,
saying, that infancy is the spring time, in which all things are in their
flower, begins to grow and increase. Youth he compares to Summer, for the heat
and force which men have in that age. The Viril, or man's age, is to Autumn;
because in this time men have experience, are ripe, apt for good Counsel, and
certain knowledge in all things. And he represents old age to winter, a time
without fruit, troublesome, displeasing, and has not the happiness of any
fruit, but what has been gathered in former times.

Varro a learned man amongst the Romans divided the life of man into five
parts, attributing to every one of them the space of fifteen years. The first
fifteen he calls Puerility belonging to childishness. The second he calls
Adolescentia, youth; that is to say growing, because in that time men grow. The
other fifteen reaches to forty five years, and calls it Iuventus, which comes
of the Latin word Juvare. To signify a time of help, because in this age men
serve in actions of war, and Commonwealth affairs. And this Age is the stable
and confirmed time of the life. From forty five to sixty, he calls that the
ripe age of man; because in Latin such men are called (Seniores) that is in
respect of others behind them. Because in this time men decline, and grow into
old age which accomplisheth the rest of the life after the sixty years. Thus
have you Varroes division of the life of man.

The Philosopher Hypochras divides it into seven Ages. The first and second,
each of them seven years, which makes fourteen; The third, of fourteen years,
reaches to twenty eight; The other two, each of them seven years; and reach to
forty two; The sixth, of fourteen years, and reach to fifty six; And the rest of
the life he attributes to the seventh Age. The Philosopher Solon, puts these
seven parts into ten, dividing the third, the sixth, and the seventh in the
midst, so that every one of the ten parts, lasts seven years, There is the
description made by the Philosophers. But Isiodore has distinguished them into
six Ages. The two first agreeing with Hypocras, making every one of them seven,
and naming the first, infancy; the second, puerility; from fourteen to twenty
eight, he calls Adolescentia, or the growing age; from twenty eight to forty,
he calls youth, which is the fourth in order; the fifth, he calls the
declining age, and which begins old age, he makes of twenty years, and are in
all sixty. The rest of the life he attributes to old age, calling it the sixth
age.

Horace that excellent Poet, divides also the age of man; but it is in four
parts only; so does Pythagoras, Namely, puerilty, youth, and the viril age,
and old age, the which is elegantly described in his Poetick-Art, with the
qualities and conditions of men in every age.

And nevertheless, according to the Rule of the natural Philosophers. The
life of man ought to be divided but in to three ages; The first, the growing
age; The second, that which a man continues all in one estate; The third, of
the declining time, Because according to Aristotle, All things that are
engendered have augmentation, a reteining of the essence, and a diminution: so
they give to man three ages. The Arabian Physicians have been of the same
opinion. Yet nevertheless Avicen, a learned man, distinguishes our life into
four ages or principal parts. The first which lasts thirty years, he names
Adolescen^ia youth; because in this time all things goes forward in growing.
The second, from thirty to forty five, and he names it the time of standing at
a stay, or the time of beauty; because in this time man is in perfection. From
thence forward and even to sixty, he calls the time of secret declination, and
the way to old age; and all the time that a man lives afterward, he calls
clear, and open old age. Yet we must note, that although he make this his
principal division, he divides the first of these four which is the thirty
years, and makes them into three parts, so that we may say he confirms those
which divide them into six. Now after al (considering these variable opinions)
I do not know which to take to for the most true, nor indeed, can there be any
certain rule given, in respect of the diverse complexions and dispositions of
men, as also the innabiting in diverse Countries and Provinces, and feeding upon
good or naughty meats, by means whereof men arrive sooner or later at old age.
For this cause says Gallen, we ought not to give a limited time to ages,
which being well considered, will make, that all these discordances of several
Authors not to seem so strange, seeing that every one of them have a diverse
consideration thereupon. As had Servius Tullius King of Rome, who according to
Aulus Gelius had regard to nothing but the common good, when he divided the
people of Rome into five estates. And separated the life of man into three
parts, naming the first age to seventeen, Puerity; and then to forty six, he
declared them men able and fit for war, and made them be listed in writing; And
after forty six he named them men ripe and fit for Counsel. This division
contraries not the others; because it is universal and incloses in it self the
lesser and more particular, and seems to conform it self to the common
divisions, which divide the ages into youth ripe age, and old age. The Viril
from the time we are born to the end of youth, which continues to 45 years, a
little more or less. So says Virgil, Viredisque juventus; which is to say,
green youth. The ripe age even to sixty years, which Servius names wise, and
fit for Council, and the rest decrepit old age. The which three parts may be
divided into less and by that means confirms the truth, which seems to be
amongst the Authors.

CHAP. XIIII.
What a dangerous thing it is to murmr against Princes, with a Commendation
of their clemency.

THere is a very ancient saying, and prized amongst the old Proverbs. That
Kings have large hands, and very long ears, inferring thereby, that Kings and
mighty men, can take vengeance a far off, upon those that have offended against
them, and also that they understand all things that are said against them in
secret: For there are so many people insinuate themselves into the love of
those that command, that nothing can be hid from them. For this cause wise men
Counsel, that no man speak any thing against the King, though in secret,
forasmuch as in this case, the walls hear, and speak; and Plutarch says, that
the birds carry the words through the air. So then we see that for speaking
truth, and freely, men fall into danger. What shall we judge then of him that
murmurs against great ones? The examples that we may bring to this purpose are
infinite. Amongst which, we may read in the Greek and Latin Histories, That
Antigonus one of the Captains and successors to Alexander the great, his Army
being in the field, and he being a bed in his Pavillion one night, heard some
of his Soldiers without, that murmured against him, not thinking that he heard
them, and indeed he made no show, saving in changing his voice (as if it had
been some other) said unto them, to hold such a discourse, you should draw
yourselves further from the Kings Tent, least he should hear you. Another time
this Antigonus causing his Army to march one night through a muddy and a dirty
place, his soldiers finding themselves weary, went murmuring and began to
speak much evil of him, thinking that he had been a great way behind, and had
not heard them; yet being hard by them, he understood many of their injurious
words, and discontents, without being known; because it was night, afterward
relieving with all his power, a party of those very men that had spoken evil
of him, spoke unto them (changing his voice) saying, Speak against the King
what you please, for leading of you into this mirie place: but yet you ought to
give me thanks, and love me, that I have brought you out of it again.

The patience of Pyrrus, King of the Epyrotes, was no less: For when he made
war against the Romans in Italy, he and his people being lodged in the Town of
Taraenta, there was some of his young soldiers, after they had supped
together, began to speak evil of him at the Table, whereof being advertised,
and warning them before him, asked them if it were true that they had spoken
such words? to which one of them answered boldly, yes; Sir, we have spoken all
that you charge us with, and assure your self, if the wine had held out at
table and had not failed us, we should have spoken much more, willing to show
thereby, in excuse of themselves, that the wine induced them to speak evil of
him. Whereat Pyrrus was never a whit angry, but fell into laughter, sending
them away without any reproof or punishment.

The Emperor Tyberius, although he were a great Tyrant, amongst other things,
has left us to this purpose, notable examples. For knowing that one had made
an infamous Libell against him, and that many of his people murmured at his
cruelties, being persuaded by some to do Justice upon them; answered
magnanimously, That Tongues ought to be free in the Town. And being incited
again by some of the Senate, to seek out for him that was the inventer of the
Libell. Would not. Saying, he was not so out of business as to trouble himself
with that.

The great mercy of Dennis the Tyrant of Sicily (although he were extreme
cruel) was mavelous kind toward an old woman; for being advertised, that
this old woman prayed devoutly to the Gods for his health, and prosperity, sent
out to seek for her to be brought before him, and asked her for what cause she
prayed so heartily for him, seeing that all the rest of his people universally
desired rather his death.

To whom the old woman made answer, Know Sir, that when I was young, we had
over us a most cruel Tyrant; wherefore I prayed devoutly to God for his death,
and my prayer was heard. After him succeeded another, which Tyrannized over
this Kingdom more than the former, and I likewise desired his death, so that
by incessant prayers and request to the Gods, desired that as they had heard me
for the first, so they would for this, which came to pass, and he died. In
whose place now you are come, far worse than the two former. And because that
after you, I fear another may come worse than all the three, I pray the Gods
continually, that they would maintain you in long life. This free and bold
answer of the old woman displeased him never a whit, but let her go cheerfully
and freely. When Plato Prince of Philosophers (who lived a long time with this
Tyrant Dennis) asked him leave to return to Athens, and had obtained it. Dennis
asked him, what he would say of him, in the Accademie amongst the Philosophers
at Athens. To which Plato, with great boldness and freedom answered, Those
which are at Athens, are not so idle, as to have leisure to speak of you or of
your doings. Dennis understood well that he reproved him of his evil life; and
yet nevertheless, bore it patiently. I remember two other old women, which
with no less freedom spoke to their Kings, which was taken patiently. One was
of Macedonia, to King Demetrius, son of Antigonus before named, and the other a
Roman to the Emperor Adrian. To whom both made a like answer, when demanding
justice to be done them: It was answered by Demetrius and Adrian, that they
could not understand them. To whom they answered, that if they could not
understand them, they should then leave the Empire; and yet neither of them
both were angry at their answer, but heard them and did them true justice.

Philip King of Macedon, taking farewell of the Ambassadors of Athens, and
making them fair offers as it is the customs in such cases, asked them if they
would have him do any thing else for them, to whom, one of them, named
Democritus, knowing well that Philip extremely hated the Athenians, and could
not conceal his mind, answered; We would have you hang your self by the neck.
At which answer all the rest of his companions were much troubled. And those
also that were there present, for fear least the King should do them some
evil; but according to his Clemency (or it may be he dissembled) made no other
show, but turning toward the other Ambassadors said, you may tell the
Athenians, That he that can bear such words, is much more modest then the wise
Athenians, which have not had the discretion to hold their peace.

Demorates went to see this King Philip, at a time when he was angry with his
wife, and his son Alexander. And amongst other discourse, Philip asked of their
peace and union amongst the Towns in Greece. And Demorate knowing well that the
King delighted to hear of discord between those Commonwealths, answered him
indeed too freely, considering whom he spoke to, Truly King, because you are at
discord in your own house, you enquire after the discention of our Towns: But
if you were at peace with your own, it would be more commendable than to
enquire of the adversities of others. And nevertheless, the King was not
angry, but seeing that he was justly taxed, sought peace with his wife and his
son.

And if we would have examples of Christians, That of Pope Sextus the fourth,
who was of the order of St. Francis, will fit well to this purpose. Being come
to be Pope, one of his Religious Brothers very ancient, went to visit him in
his Cordelier habit. To whom the Pope showed his rich Jewels and Rings, saying,
Brother, I cannot now say as St. Peter said, Gold nor Silver have I none. It is
true answered the Friar plainly; No more can you say as he said to the
impotent and sick of the Palsy, Rise, and walk: giving to understand thereby,
That the Popes were already more studious to become rich, than to become
Saints. And the Pope which knew his brother speak reason, took it patiently.

There happened almost the same to an Archbishop of Colline, by a Country
laboring man. For one day as this poor man was at work in the field, the
Archbishop passed by somewhat near him, having a Train of Guard armed in the
German manner. And the Clown, at the passing by of the Archbishop fell into a
great laughter; which the Bishop perceiving, asked what moved him to laughter,
The Country man answered, I laugh at St Peter Prince of Prelates, which lived
and died in great poverty, to leave his successors rich. The Archbishop who
found himself touched, to justify himself answered, My friend, I go so well
attended because I am a Duke as well as a Bishop, which the poor labourer
hearing, he fell a laughing much more than before. And asking him again why he
laughed, He answered very boldly, I would my Lord you would tell me, if this
Duke you speak of should be in Hell, where do you think then would be the
Atch-Bishop? inferring thereby, that two professions could not be in one man;
for offending in one, he could not be justified in the other. To which answer
the Archbishop, ducking down his head, made no reply, but without any injury
or displeasure showed to the labourer, went his way ashamed.

To speak of Heathens, Artaxerxes King of Persia, knew that a Captain named
Alcides, whom he had brought up from his youth murmured sore against him, for
which he gave him no other chastisement but sent for him, and told him that he
might speak what he would of his King, because the King could as well speak and
do what he would with him. Philip the father of Alexander, having understood
that Nicanor spoke evil of him in public, was counseled by some to send for
him and punish him t^o which he answered, that Nicanor was not the worst man in
his Kingdom, and he would know if he wanted not something; because he held
himself tied to relieve him, when being advertized that Nicanor was in great
poverty, instead of punnishing him for the fault he had committed, sent him a
rich present; at which, he that had accused him said unto the King, that
Nicanor, went about the streets speaking graciously of him, to whom the King
answered. Now I see Simicus (for so the accuser was named) that it is in my
power to make men speak well, or ill of me.

This Philip was again counseled to banish out of his Kingdom an ill-tongued
fellow, and one that scandalized him very much. To which he answered, that he
would not have any such thing done; because he that would villifie him in his
own Country; he would not have him go to do the like in a strange Country,
giving to understand, that what he gained by clemency, and nobleness,
proceeded from wisdom and good Counsel. This Prince was in these things and
diverse others very excellent; He would say he was bound to give thanks to the
Governors and Princes of Athens; because by reason that they spoke continually
evil of him, and of his actions, to make them liars, he would every day grow
better and better, in the amendment and correcting of his Government. He would
never punish them that spoke evil of him, but rather take away the occasion.
Which rules being well observed by us, would yield us great profit, two ways:
The one to amend our lives: The other, that we should not have so many
Detractors. It is truly a great virtue not to be much troubled at any evil,
that we know is spoken against us in our absence. And it is a greater
temperance not to be moved, or grow sour at an injury that is offered to us in
our presence.

CHAP. XV.
Of diverse wonderful things.

ALthough the works of nature are wonderful, and an argument of the infinite
power of the Creator of all things, yet these that are ordinary and well
understood by learned and knowing men, cause not such wonder, as is the birth
and growth of Man, Beasts, and Plants, and the production of their fruits, and
all other like ordinary things. There are again others that are not so common,
which nevertheless do not so much astonish us with admiration of their nature,
although we wonder to see things which seem to repugn, the common order and
essence of themselves, as some are which are recited by the authority of great
and learned men. Pontanus a knowing man, and very famous for learning, says,
That he and others have seen in a high Mountain by the Sea near Naples, a great
piece of a stone or flint, which fell from thence by chance, to the which stone
grew a great tree so fast joined, that it seemed nature brought it forth, and
caused it to grow so together with the Stone, even as if it had been but one
body, though it were perfect wood; which seems proceeded no other ways than
the earth or the water mingled with the tree, which afterward came to be
converted into stone, and closed it in on all sides, and thus because it was
(perhaps) in a place little frequented by any body, was wonderful, and seemed
hard to comprehend. An other thing is recited by Alexander of Alexandria, as
much wonderful, which happened in Naples where he dwelt; which is, That an
Artificer being at work upon a Marble stone, for a certain building, and sawing
it in the middle there was found in it a Diamond of great value, ready polished
and trimmed by man's hand.

The same Alexander recites, that working upon an other marble stone, and
desiring to saw it in the middle, they found it very hard, so that they were
forced to break it with a Pick-ax, which the Masons use, and there they found
in the midst of it a great quantity of oil closed up, as though it had been
in a bottle or some other vessel, and that this oil was of a clear, fair, and
very good savor. Baptista Fulgosa in his first book of Collections, says.
That there has been seen, and certifies, that in a Mountain, a great way off
from any Sea, there was found, a hundred fathams deep in the earth, a ship
overwhelmed and consumed in the earth, but not so consumed, but that one might
perceive the shape of a ship; where was also found Anchors of Iron, and the
Mast, and the Sail-yard, though broken and consumed. And that which was most
wonderful is, that there was found the bones at the least of forty persons.
And these things were seen in the year 1460. Some that saw it, would not
believe but that it had there been covered with earth over ^ince the universal
Deluge (if before that time there were ships, and that men could fail) which
may well be, for a smuch as before the Flood, all Arts, almost, were found out.
Others were of opinion, that this might be some ship which had been cast away
in the Sea, and that through the inward concavity or hollownesse of the earth,
the water forced it even thither, whither since by the alteration of time, the
earth became dry, and so there it remained fixed. But let it be which way it
will, the chance was wonderful.

The same Author recites again, that a Stone being cut in the middle, there was
found in it a living worm which was unpossible to have any nourishmen tbut from
the stone.

Pope Martin the fifth, was presented with an other Stone that had a Serpent
enclosed in the midst of it, which seemed as if nature had created it
therein, and without any other nourishment it took its substance from the
virtue and propriety of the Stone.

CHAP. XVI.
That the Imagination is one of the principal interior powers, proved by true
examples, and notable Histories.

AS the outward Senses are five in number, as every one knows, that is to say
Hearing. Seeing and the rest, So there are five interior senses or powers in
man, and yet some reduce them into four; but the first is the common opinion,
namely the common sense. The Imagination (whereof we will only speak now.) The
Judgment The Fantasy, and the Memory. Of the Office and virtue of which
senses, we do not intend now to treat of, but we will speak of the sense of
Imagination, the property and office whereof is to retein and keep those Images
and Figures that the common sense receives, first from the exterior sense, and
then sends it to the Judgment; from whence afterward it comes to the Fancy,
and there locked up and coffered in the memory. And we may he Imagination alter
and move with the representation of things, although it have them not present,
which, the common sense cannot have unless they be present. In which is showed
the greatness and mavelous force of the Imagination. We see a man a sleep,
and his senses all at rest, and yet his Imagination cease not to work, and to
present things to him as if they were present, and the man awak. The
Imagination is able to move the passions and affections of the soul, and can
diversely provoke the body to change the accidents: Turn the spirits, the
uppermost, lowermost, and turn the inside outward, and likewise produce diverse
qualities to the members. Imagination can make a man sick or well. And so we
see that it has other effects also. When the Imagination conceives something
of pleasure, Joy casts the spirits out. And so of Fear, that draws them inward.
Joy inlargeth the heart, Sorrow pens it up. The Imagination of fear, begets
cold, and makes the heart to quake, puts heat to flight, and makes the tongue
and words to tremble. The pity, that is caused and put forward by the
Imagination to see an other suffer, makes many times him that sees to change
more than him that suffers, as we know many times, some standers by will swoon
to see another letbloud, and alter more at the dressing of a wound, or the
like, thau the Patient. A strong Imagination has power to change things, as
when we hear or see one eat any thing that is sharp or sower, we feel a kind of
sowernesse in our mouth, and seeing one cat sweet or savoury things, we seem to
taste a kind of sweetness in our mouth, and so of bitter things.

If we would have examples of strange Imaginations we may have many. St.
Augustine says, he knew a man that as often as he list, would sweat
abundantly, stirring by his imagination the expulsive virtue.

He makes mention of an other, which at the hearing of a song or any mournful
tune, or if a man should cry or weep, he would begin to imagine, and then faint
and fall away in such sort, that he would be without any manner of sense, that
even if you should burn him, he would not feel you; and yet if one had sung any
pleasant tune, he would come to himself again. Pliny reports almost the like
thing of one called Hermotim, who when he fell into Imagination, he changed in
such sort that his spirits were gone out of his body, and then coming again to
himself he would tell what he had seen.

Guillaum de Paris, says, he knew a man that only with seeing a Purgation,
and never tasted it, apprehending it by a strong Imagination, had as many
stools as he that took it.

It is so with them which dream, for suppose it is the Imagination that causes
it, yet if in the dream they are burned they will feel pain although there be
no fire to burn. Strong Imagination can with such force move the kinds of
things, that she imprints in them the Figure of things imagined, and then
sets them to work in the blood, and this is of such force, that it even
extends it self to the members of a third person, as we see in women with
child, which by means of a strong imagination, that she has of the thing she
desires to eat (which is called longing) many times the print or figure of the
thing is found upon the child; And sometimes she dies. So often times it
happens with him that is bitten with a mad dog, by the Imagination that he has
of the dog, there will be seen in his urine, the shape of a dog. To this
purpose it is written of one King Cypus, who having with great attention behold
a combat betwixt two bulls one day fell a sleep, having the imagination of this
combat in his mind, and when he ^^kened he found two little horns like bulls
horns, growing upon his head; if this bet true, it must needs proceed from
hence, that the vegitative virtue, being helped, and forced by the imagination,
it carried the proper humors of engendring horns into the head, and so brought
them forth.

As we have said before, the imaginative virtue has such power and force over
the bodies of the third person, that Damascene recites, That in the confines of
Pisce, in a place called S. Peter's, a woman was brought to bed of a savage
she-child, having the skin in the form and likeness of that of a Camel, which
happened by reason, that at the conception of that child, she was contemplating
upon the image of S. John Baptist, that she had in her chamber: So that as we
have said of children, the Imagination has such power, that it can make the
children resemble those persons that the parents do imagine and think of.
Avicen also is of opinion, that the imagination may be so strong, that it may
make a man suddenly be deprived of the use of his limbs, and cast him to the
ground, tormenting him as if he were mad. And he says more, that the
Enchantment which it brings by the eyes, pierces or strikes through one person
to another, by the imagination of him that causes the charm. So S. Thomas
speaking after Avicon, asks, which soonest kills a body, the melancholy
imagination, or the delectable imagination, by the violence of the one or the
other? Joy expels and forces out the spirits, and leaves a man without life;
the other binds them in so strong, that thereby grows a violent suffocation. We
saw in Sivile James Osorius, who was taken by the Catholic King by the strong
imagination of the fear which he conceived, became old, and white haired, only
in one night, being the day before strong and young. Again we see, that
imagination many times makes men become fools: and at such times so ill and
crazie, that its effects and power is wonderful.

CHAP. XVII.
What Countryman Pilate was. How he died. And of the Lake called the Lake of
Pilate, and of its property. And also of the Den of Dalmatia.

PIlate, the most wicked and unjust Judge that ever was, or ever shall be, was,
according to common opinion, born at Lions in France: yet some of that Nation
will not have any such thing, but say, this name Pontius comes from a house in
Italy, and of Pontius Ireneas, Captian of the Samnites, which vanquished the
Romans. Be it how it will, this Pilate (either for respect to his person, or to
his parentage) came to be of great note in Rome; and being known to Tiberius,
successor to Octavius, according to Josephus and Eusebius, was sent by him in
the twelfth year of his Empire, to govern Jerusalem, and styled him with the
dignity of Proctor of the Empire. So then Pilate governed the holy City, and
all the Province of Judea, which is called Palestina. And he held this
Officeren years; in the seventh of which, and the eighteenth of the Emperor
Tiberius, according to Eusebius and Beda, he gave sentence of death upon the
Savior and Redeemer of all mankind, our Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man: at
which time came to pass those things which are written by the holy
Evangelists, of his Death and Passion; whose Resurrection was so public in
Jerusalem, although they sought by all means to hide it; that Pilate thought
(although he were wicked) that such Resurrection and Miracles were not of
humane power, but of God. For this cause (as Eusebius and Tertullian recites)
he advertised the Emperor Tyberius, for it was the custom of Consuls and
Pro-consuls, to advertise the Emperor or the Senate what things happened in
their Provinces.

This news marvellously amazed the Emperor, which made him refer it to the
Senate, to sit ill Council, to know if it might seem good that this Prophet
should be worshipped for a God, which he did; because they could not without
the authority of the Senate, worship any new God in Rome, without the slighting
of their other Gods. But as the divinity of Christ has no need to confirm it
self, by the approbation of men only, God suffered that the Senators would do
nothing in it. On the contrary (as these Authors say) they were displeased
that Pilate had not writ to them as well as to Tyberius, yet for all this,
Tyberius forbad the further persecution of Christians, After these things
Pilate coming to live in Rome, and confirmed by the Devil for his loyal
servant, did never after do any thing in his Office, but unjust and unlawful
acts. Whereof being accused before Cajus Caligula, Successor to Tyberius. And
also to have profaned the Temple, by putting in Statues and Images, and to have
robbed the common Treasury and other grievous crimes, was banished to the town
of Lions; some say to Vienna in Dauphenie, and because this place was assigned
for his banishment some say that this was the place of his birth, he was so
handled, that he killed himself with his own hands, which was by divine
permission, that he might die by the hand of the most wickeddest man in the
world, Eusebius says, that he killed himself eight years after the death of
our Savior, of which this accused Pilate made no profit to himself, forasmuch
as he died in despair. For the goodness of God is so great, that although he
had condemned his son to death, yet if he had repented him of his sin, him whom
he had condemned to die, would have given him eternal life. And now we speak
of Pilate, I remember of a Lake so called; this Lake is in Suisse, near a Town
called Lucerna, in a Plain environed with very high Mountains, from the highest
of which (as some say) he casts himself into the water. And the common report
is, that every year he shows himself there in his Judges habit, but whosoever
it be that by chance happens to see him, either man or woman dies, within the
year. Over and beyond this, I will bring upon the stage to witness it, Ioachin
Vadian, a learned man, who expounded Pomponius Mela; he writes also an other
notable thing of this Lake, very true and wonderful: he says, it has such a
property, that if any one cast a stone into it, or a piece of wood, or any
other thing, this Lake swells and grows into such a boisterous Tempest, that it
runs beyond its bounds in great fury, in such sort that sometimes it drowns a
great part of the Country, from whence proceeds great loss and damage, as well
to trees and Plants as to beasts: and nevertheless if these things are not
cast in expressly it swells not at all. And this Ioachin says further, that
there are Edicts that forbids upon pain of life, for any one to cast any thing
into this Lake; and that diverse that have transgressed this edict have been
executed; whether this proceeds of a natural cause or by a miracle I know not,
howsoever some waters have great and wonderful properties, part whereof there
may be reasons given for, and for others none.

Pliny recites a thing like to this, and says, that in Dalmacia, there is a
very deep Pit or Den, into which if one cast a stone, or any other heavy thing,
there arises such a boistrous and furions air out of it, that it breeds a
dangerous tempest to the neighbors thereabout. It may very well be (but I am
not certain of it) that Pilates body was cast into it, and that Devil by divine
permission, because of his ignominy, executes such effects in that place.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of a strange thing that happened to one of the sons of Cresus King of Lydia,
and to the child of another King, amongst which there in a discourse. That is
to say, whether speech be a thing natural to man, and whether man only has
speech.

HErodotus writes a wonderful thing that happened to a son of Cresus King of
Lydia, and so it is reported by Aulus Gelius. This Cresus was a rich King, and
he which Cyrus destroyed, as many Historians have it. Whilst this King lived
prosperously in his Kingdom, he had by one of his wives lawfully born, a brave
manchild, healthful, and well accomplished in all his members and senses,
which came to a convenient age, that he might have formed his voice to speak:
nevertheless, by some unknown string or hinderance of the tongue, he spoke
not, nor a long time after, although he were already grown, and fit for any
enterprise. By means whereof he was reputed dumb, although he heard and
understood, which is contrary to the order of nature, for never any was known
to be dumb that was not deaf. Now it came to pass that Crosus was vanquished,
and the town wherein he was, was taken by the enemy, so that the soldiers went
up even to the Palace, in which was this dumb child hidden with his father in
a corner, and being found by a soldier which knew them not, the soldier drew
near unto Cresus, and drew his sword to kill him, the child being affrighted at
such a spectacle, wrought such a strong passion in him which made him speak
aloud, the extreme working that the Sovereignty of the soul has over the body!
immediately the corporal organs obeyed to the strong determination of the will,
in such sort, that breaking the strings that tied the tongue, he pronounced,
and spoke with a high voice, saying, O kill him not, behold, it is King Cr^sus
my father. Which being understood by the Soldier, he drew back his blow and
killed him nor, who for that time escaped death: and from that time forward,
the child spoke, as if he could have spoken all his life time before, which is
a wonderful thing; and yet I know no natural reason that can be sufficiently
given for it. Aristotle says, that all men are commonly born deaf and dumb,
because they are not brought forth into the world with the disposition of these
two senses, nor in such perfection that there is any need of them; and that
afterward in growing, it disposes it self and begins first to hear; and after
a certain time that it can hear, it begins to speak. Pliny says also, that he
that is born and remains deaf, he must of necessity be dumb; for it is certain,
if the deaf could hear he would learn to speak, and that it is unpossible to
teach him that cannot hear. And Aristotle says also, that it may happen that a
child may pronounce some words before the ordinary time; yet nevertheless, he
shall loose that kind of speech, when the time comes that is granted to
children to speak, and then they shall speak. To this purpose Pliny recounts
of the child of Cresus, of whom we have spoken before, and says, that at five
months old he pronounced certain words, which were reputed the prognostication
of his fathers ruin, and it seems that prognostication took effect, for he was
never heard to speak after till that time happened that we have spoken of before.
I remember an other thing that happened in the like case, recited by Alben
Regel in his Judiciary, where he speaks, as an eyewitness, that a King in
whose Court he lived, had a child, that at four and twenty hours after his
birth began to speak perfectly and stir his hands, at which all that were by,
wondering, understood that it said plainly. I am unhappily born, seeing that I
must pronounce that the King my father must loose his Scepter, and that his
Kingdom must be destroyed. At the end of which words he also ended his life.
This was a fearful thing, and yet me thinks this was an advertisement sent
from God, which wrought marvellously in nature. The Astrologers say, that he
that is born under Mercury, ascendant East, shall speak sooner then any other
that speaks according to the ordinary course of nature.

I remember yet an other thing answerable to this that we have said, which is.
That some are of opinion. That speech is not a thing natural to man, but
gained and learned, as other Arts and sciences. Others say, in that we speak
naturally, it is not a thing proper and peculiar to man only. The first that
are of opinion that speech is not a natural thing strive to prove it, saying it
must be of force, that that which meets naturally in one kind, must be
agreeable to all of that kind, even as we see barking to all dogs, lowing to
bulls, and so in like case to all other kind of Beasts, and yet nevertheless,
we see in men one speaks in one manner, another in another, in such sort that
naturally they understand not one another, whereby it seems that speech comes
rather by art then nature. Again according to Pliny, there are a sort of
people to be found that speak not, but their speech is rather a kind of lowing
or bellowing, then words, which would not happen if all spoke by the gift of
nature, for if it were so, all would speak in one self same manner, as for the
opinion of others which say, that speech is not particularly proper to man,
they ground themselves upon that which Luctantius Firmian faith, that we have
some parts in us which seem proper only to man, and nevertheless we find them
in other creatures, as the diversity of voice in birds, by whose chanting, we
discern one from another, and yet we see they hold secret intelligence one with
another, in such manner as you would think they were all but of one kind of
language, yet they take their argument from this, that we see diverse birds
speak as Parots, Magpies, and the like. But the truth of this thing is, (albeit
their opinion had some appearance of truth) that speech has been given by God
to Man, not that he gains it by Art, and that it is proper and peculiar to him
only, and not to any other creature. True it is, that other creatures have
voice, yet they have not speech. And such is the opinion of Quintillia^ and
likewise of Aristotle. So we have a good answer to the contrary reasons. As to
the first argument we may answers That a thing may be natural universally. But
in particular it may execute at pleasure; it is naturally ill done, and that
man deserves punishment, which kills another, or robs him of his goods; yet
nevertheless to punish him rather one way than another, proceeds from the
pleasure of the Judge: Therefore, although men speak diverse languages, yet we
must not say that speech comes not to them by nature, and by so much the
argument is stronger, that such diversity and confusion of languages, have been
for the punishment of pride upon them which builded the Tower of Babel. For as
we have said, there was but one language in the world, and that was natural.
And as for the Troglodites which scarce speak at all, they say the reason is,
because their language is barbarous and imperfect, and savours nothing of
humanity; nevertheless this was a language by which they understood one
another. And as it is said again, that there are some birds that speak, as
Parots, as Lewis Celie recites, one of Cardinal Askanius, which in his presence
pronounced word after word all the Creed in Latin and missed not a syllable.
One may answer, that this is not speech; for they know not what they say; but
it is a certain custom, in teaching them for many days together, to frame
such a voice. And then, true speech before it be pronounced is conceived in the
heart, of which birds are defective, and also to that argument which says, we
know creatures by the diversity of their voice, and that they understand and
call one to another amongst themselves; yet it is not to be said, that such a
voice is a form of speech; for as Aristotle says, the voice loses it self:
so may we without forming any word or speech, signify or give to understand
joy, or anger, and all other universal passions, as we see by the voice which
we make in laughing, and pleasure; and by the sighs and cries that are made, by
those that mourn. And for brute beasts, which have a difference either in their
note or in their voice, one may know when they are displeased or pleasant, by
moving of themselves, or by high flying, where they make some other sign
according to the occasion; even so words and speech, by which we show
particularly what is profitable, what is necessary, what hurtful, malice,
Justice, injustice, honesty, and goodness. And by which, more, one may tell of
things past, and provide for the future by reasons and words which declares it,
and produce other profitable things by speech which is only given unto man,
and he has it of his proper nature.

CHAP. XIX.
Of diverse customs that the ancients held at marriages.

MArriage is contracted with the consent only of the man and woman. But to the
end that this consent be better authorized, and remain inviolable, it is
requisite to declare it in words and outward signs; because God only knows and
understands the heart. From hence it comes, that men have instituted diverse
ceremonies and solemn words. As for those of the Christians, they are well
enough known, and therefore there is no need that I should speak of them.
Wherefore I will treat only of some customs, which barbarous nations and the
Romans were wont to use at their marriages, the diversity wherefore may yield a
little pleasure. The ancient Romans perhaps, according to Cicero, married two
manner of ways, so had they two sorts of wives, according to the diverse
Ceremonies of their marriage. The one was more common, and called her self the
Matron, the other called her self the mother of the family; these it seems
married almost as the Christians do now. For the husband asked the wife, if she
would be mother and dame of his family, and she answered, Yes: she in the like
case, asked the husband, if he would be father of her family, and he answered,
he would. Then they took one another and clapped hands, and this form of marriage
was held for the most excellent: so this wife has in the house and family of
her husband such a place, as if she were the daughter of the house; because she
is now placed in the number of the proper lineage, and as a daughter, comes to
succeed in the heritage of her husband. Boecius speaks of it amply, writing
upon the 2 of the Tropicks of Cicero.

The other Ceremony was common and by ordinary words, and did not take
themselves for mothers of the family, but they were called Matrons. The Romans
had further this custom, that bringing the Bride to the husbands house, she
sets her down at the door, and will not enter till such time as she be drawn in
by force, to let them know by that she is constrained by force into that place,
where she must loose her virginity. Then when they give the wife into the power
of the husband, they make her sit down in her mothers lap, from whence the
husband must take her by force, and the Bride holds fast about the mother and
embraces her hard; and this is done in memory, that anciently the daughters of
the Sabins had been taken by force by the Romans: by means of which force it
succeeded well to an encreasement of that people, yet before it came to this,
the Bride must touch fire and water, which was done as Plutarch and Luctantius
says, to signify the generation by these two elements, because these are the
two principal generative causes of all things. Others say, it was to
demonstrate to the woman the sincerity and loyalty of heart, which she ought to
keep, because water washes and makes clean all filthiness, and by fire are
purged evil mixtures and refines metals. They hold it for an ill presage to
marriages that are solemnized in the month of May, because of some
superstitious vanities that they have amongst them. These things Ovid
certifies, and Plutarch. They had a further custom that when the Bride entered
in at the door of the house of the Bridegroom. He pronounced with a high voice
Caja Cecilia, and she Cajo Cecilio. And this was because that in the time of
Tarquin Prisque, King of the Romans, he had a very chaste wife, sober, wise, and
endued with many virtues, named Caje Cecilie before she came to Rome, she was
called Tanaquile. Therefore the husband pronounces these words to put his wife
in mind to imitate her. They carry also a distaff furnished with Flax, and a
spindle before the Bride going to the Bridegrooms house, to put her in mind
that she must exercise good housewifery. Of these things Pliny speaks. These
Romans had yet another custom: That when a men married a widow, the wedding
was kept upon a Festival or Holy day. But if a Maid, they were kept upon a
working day. Of this, Macrobius and Plutarch are the Authors: And Plutarch
says, that the celebration of the wedding upon the Feast days was expressly,
because then all the people be taken up with recreations and pleasures, then
the wedding of the widows was less taken notice of. And on the contrary, they
celebrated the Maids wedding upon working days, that they might be seen of
all: But Macrobius says, that the Maids were not married upon the Feast days,
because (as we have said) they made it a ceremony to take her by force from her
mothers lap, which could not be done upon a Festival day. I forbear to speak of
other ceremonies and solemnities of the Romans, to come to those of the
Babylonians: Whose manner of marrying their daughters was, that upon one
certain day in the year they brought their daughters to a public place in the
Town, and the fairest of them were married, not for any portion was given with
her, but to him that would give most money to have her, and the same course they
took with them that were less fair, to less fair, and from degree to degree
till they come to the most ugiest of all, which afterward are married with
money to him that will take least, which portion proceeds out of the money given
by those that took the fairest at a high price; and by this means the foul one
are as well married as the fair ones, without giving any money.

Marc^s Amonius S^belicus says, that this was the custom amongst the ancient
Venetians, but you must always understand that those which were indifferent
beautiful or fair, gave no portion, nor those that took them not. The ancient
French to the end their daughters might not complain of marrying against their
mind, had a custom, the day that they would marry their daughter, to invite a
number of young men but all of such quality as might seem fitting for her
estate; at which feast they suffered their daughter to choose a husband amongst
those that were invited, and to show a sign who she most liked, she presents
him water to wash his hands.

In a Town in Africa called Leptine, there was a custom, that the first day
that the wife entered into the house of her husband, she sends to borrow an
earthen pot of her mother in law who makes answer that she will not lend it
her: which is done that she accustom her self from the first day to endure,
and bear with her mother in law, and with that churlish answer, learn to endure
when she gives a true one.

The Arabes, of Arabia the happy, had anciently a custom, that the married wife
was common to all the kindred of the husband: And as Strabo says, when any of
them went to her, he left at the entry of the door a little wand, that if any
other should come, he might know the place was taken up, and that he must not
enter, for they had that respect one to another; and he was punished with
death, which entered in to a woman if he were not of kindred. Now it happened
that a very fair and beautiful woman, was for that cause often visited by the
kindred of her husband, by means of which importunity and frequent visitation,
she set at her door a little wand, to the end that whosoever should come,
should think that there were another before him; and by this deceit, for many
days, no man entered, till one day all the kindred and the husband were
together in one place, one of them resolved to leave the rest and visit her;
and finding the wand at the door, and knowing that he had left all the rest of
the kindred together, thought that some adulterer had been with her, wherefore
he went presently to advertise the rest, and especially the husband; who being
come thither, found her all alone, and confessed the cause why she had done so:
which when they considered, and found that her intention was grounded upon
virtue, to the end to shun the dishonest conversation of so great a number of
kindred of her husbands, and also to live in greater temperance and chastity,
which was contrary to the brutish use and custom of the Country, and having in
their opinion just reason for what she did, she was rather praised and
commended then blamed.

CHAP. XX.
How necessary water is to the life of man. Of the excellency of that element.
How to know that which is good.

IT seems there is nothing more necessary for the life of man than water;
because if at any time bread be wanting, a man may be nourished by Flesh and
other Viands, and if fire fail, there are so many things found good to eat raw,
that he may be sustained, for a time, without fire; but without water neither
man nor beast can live; there is neither herb nor any other kind of Plant that
can bring forth seed or fruit without it; all things have need of water and of
moisture. This is so true that Thales and H^siod, have thought that water was
the beginning of all things, and the ancientest of all elements: and again the
most powerful; for as Plinio says, and likewise Isiodorus, water ruins and
dissolves Mountains, reigns over the earth, extinguisheth fire, and converting
it self into vapors, surpasses the Region of the air, whence afterward it
descends to engender and bring forth all things upon the earth. So God esteemed
of water, that having concluded to regenerate man again By Baptism, that he
would it should be by the means of that element. And that when he divided the
waters; at the beginning of the world, he had them in such esteem as the text
says, that he set them apart, and placed the waters above the firmament,
without comprehending that which compasses the earth.

The greatest punishment which the Romans give to those that were condemned,
was that they prohibited them water and fire, putting water before fire for its
dignity. Seeing then that water is so necessary for man's life, we ought with
diligence and care, to find out that which is the best. For which purpose I
will note some properties of water, alleged by Aristotle Pliny and
Di^scorides, and others, speaking of the election of waters.

The first instruction is, That if a man travel into strange Countries, and
would know if the waters there are good for his use, either there, or to
transport them some where else according to his occasion, let him observe and
consider the neighboring Rivers or Fountains, and of what life and disposition
the people inhabiting thereabouts are; if they be healthful, strong and well
colored in their faces, without sore eyes, or legs, such bear witness of the
goodness of their water, if contrary then it is naught. But if the water be
new found out, so that this experience is wanting, there are other proofs.

You must take a clean brass Basin very well polished, and cast into it
certain drops of the water, whereof you would make the experience, and after
the water is dried, if the Basin have no spots where the drops were, it is a
sign that the water is good.

It is also a good proof to boil the water in the same Basin, and then let it
cool and settle, and after it is poured out softly, if there remain no gravel
nor slime in the bottom, it is a sign the water is good. And of two sorts of
water, that which is least gravelly or slimy is the best.

If in this vessel or any other you boil pease, beans, or any other pulse that
makes pottage, that is the best water that boils them soonest. You must also
consider, when you would make a certain experiment of waters, from what place
they take their head, or original, whether it be sandy, neat, and clear, or
muddy, thick, and foul, or whether there grow any rushes or any other
unwholesome or naughty herbs. But for more safety and sure remedy, if you will
drink of an unknown water, or which is not reputed good, let it be boiled a
little over a gentle fire, and let it cool again. Pliny says, that the
Emperor Nero boiled his water so, and cooled it again in snow, and magnified
himself that he had found out such an invention. The reason why boiled water is
more wholesome than others is because the water that we drink is not simple in
its proper nature, but is mingled with earth and air; but by the fire the
windiness is exhaled into vapor, the earthy parts by the nature of the fire,
(which does refine and separate the diverse natures) descends to the bottom and
there rests. By this means water that is boiled becomes less windy than raw
water; because the windy quality that it had at the first is evaporated, it is
also more subtle and light, being purified from the earthy parts, and so much
more easy to be kept and preserved, so that it cool again, and competently
kept without much altering.

And by this we may know, that Well-water is not so good as others; because it
participates more of the earth, and is not purified by the heat of the Sun; and
therefore is more easy to corrupt; yet the more water is drawn out of a Well,
the less hurtful it is, because the continual moving, hinders the accustomed
corruption that fastens to waters enclosed and have no course, and then nature
sends new and fresh water according to the measure that has been drawn out.
For this reason the waters of Lakes and standing Pools is the worst of all;
because for want of running, they corrupt and breed evil things, and many
times infect the air, which breeds diseases to those that live near them. We
must again consider, that those waters which have their course toward the
South, are not so good as those which run toward the North; because in the
South parts the air is more mingled with vapors, and moisture, which spoils
the water and endamages it. And in the North parts, the air is more subtle and
less moist, whereby it swells not, nor is made so heavy.

For this cause the water that is most clear, most light, most subtle, and
most purified is the best, because, as we have said before, it is less mingled
with other elements, and again, being set over the fire it heats sooner then
other water. So it is a singular trial between two sorts of water, to see
which will be first hot in the same quantity, by the same fire, and the same
space of time.

And also to see which will be the foonest cold, for those are two arguments of
the penetrable and subtle substance: and forasmuch as the mingling of the
earth among the water, argues the weight of it, it is good to choose the
lightest, which may be done by this experiment.

Take two pieces of linen cloth, both of the same weight, and put one piece
in one of the waters, and the other in the other water, and let them so remain
till they be thoroughly wet, then take them out and spread them in the air,
where the Sun comes not, and when they are dry weigh them again and that piece
that weighs most shows that water to be the heaviest.

Others weigh them in two neat glass viols, both of a weight, Aristotle and
Pliny say, that the greatest cause that diversifies the quality of waters is,
from the substance of the earth, from Stones, Trees, Mineral, and Metals by
which Fountains and Rivers pass, and this makes the one hot, the other cold;
one sweet, the other brackish. Wherefore it is a certain rule, that that water
which has neither smach nor smell, is known to be the best.

All those that have writ of water maintain, that, that which pasteth through
the Mines of gold is the best. And that those Rivers are the most excellent in
the world, whose fine sands engender and preserve gold.

And now that we have spoken of Fountain and River, it is fit we should speak
something of rain water, which is praised by some, and censured by others.
Vitruvis, Collumellus, and some other Physicians, give great praise of rain
water, when it falis clear and neat; because say they, it is light, and not
blended, for so much as it proceeds of vapor, which by its subtilty is mounted
into the Region of the air, and it is to be believed, that the weighty and
earthy part remains upon the earth. And although some say, that water that
falls from the clouds corrupts presently, as we see in standing pools which
ingenders much impurity, yet we must not say it is the fault of the water, but
that it is received in some place where either mud, or some other pollution is:
and again by the means of that filth it carries along with it as it falls upon
the ground when it rains abundantly. Wherefore the cause of its sudden
corruption proceeds from that it is subtle and delicate, and by the heat of
the Sun, and moisture of the water, with the mixture of much filthiness. Yet
if this water so subtle, purged, and clear, were received falling from the
tops of houses that were clean, or at least when it falls from the clouds
through the air, before it touch any thing, and if it were so received in clean
vessels, it would be better than others, and would keep longer time. There are
some of the contrary opinion, as Pliny, who says it is so unwholesome that one
ought not to drink it; because the vapors from whence it issues, proceeds from
many causes and places, whence it receives much different qualities, as well
bad as good. And showing yet further reasons, he answers those which we have
before alleged, and says that the trial is not sufficient, to say therefore
it is good, because it is lighter, for being drawn out of the region of the
air, for such an evaporation is drawn on high by a secret violence of the Sun,
and by the same reason that is also vapor whereof the stony hardness of hail
is formed in the air, which water is pernicious, and likewise that of snow, he
says further: that besides this defect, this rain water is made unwholesome by
the vapor and heat of the earth, than when it Rains. And for an argument of
its impurity, we cannot but see how soon it will corrupt, whereof is made a
true experience at Sea, where rainwater cannot be preserved. For this cause we
find fault with Wells and Cisterns.

Upon all these opinions every one may give his own as he thinks good, as for
me, I approve less of rainwater then other, although it be more necessary,
and that Pliny who finds fault with it says, That Fishes grow fat in Pools,
Lakes and Rivers, and that when it rains they grow better, and that they have
need of rainwater. Theophrastas says, that Garden herbs and all others,
water them never so much, they grow not so well as with rainwater,

CHAP. XXI.
Of diverse Lakes and Fountains, whose waters have great proprieties.

IN this Chapter (the first that we will speak of) shall be the Lake of Judea,
called Asfaltide, which since has been named Mare Mcriunm, The Dead-sea. Of
this water is reported wonderful things, by Pliny, ^o^umel and Diodoras.

First, They say there is not any fish breeds in it, nor any other living
thing, and that no living thing sinks into it. So that if a man be cast in, or
any other creature, they can not swim in it, nor move. Pliny and Aristotle
reports so much, to give a reason of this and of its effect, they say, The
water of this Lake is gross, very salt, and thick. Cornelius Tacitus adds to
it this property, That for any great wind whatsoever it stirs not, nor makes
any waves at all. The same Authors, and also Solon in his P^lihistor says,
that at certain times there conglutinates in this Lake, a certain kind of thick
substance, or slime, which is a very strong Cyment, or glue, more strong than
any other which is called Bitumen, and Asfalta. We read also of other Lakes
that bring forth the like kind of Cyment.

As one in Babylon, with which Cyment, Semeramis caused the stones of the great
and renowned Walls of Babylon to be joined. Into this Lake of Judea falls the
River Jordan, whose water is excellent, but falling thereinto, this excellent
water looses its great virtue, by the unaptnesse of this Lake. It is said that
Domitian sent to make experience of this Lake, and it was found as is aforesaid.

Pliny writes of another in Italy, named Avernus near the Sea, in the Gulf of
Bagas. And that Lake has this property that no bird flies over it, that drops
not dead into the water. The Poet Lucretius gives a natural reason for it,
saying, that for the thickness of Trees that are there, and because of the
great shade, there comes forth such a gross and infected vapor, that it
stifles the birds. And he says further, that this proceeds from the Mines of
Sulphire that are there.

Theophrastus and Pliny, reports of another Fountain, called Licos in Judea,
and an other in Ethiopia, whose water have a like efficacy, and are of the
property of oil; because, being put in Lamps, they will burn.

Pomponius Mela, and Solon, writing of Ethiopia, say, That there is a Lake
there, whose water is very sweet and clear yet if any one bath himself in it,
he comes out as greasy, as if he had come out of a bath made of oil. The same
Vituvius reports, and says further, that in Cicilie there is a River, and near
to Carthage a Fountain, that have these properties also.

Solon, Theophrastus, and Isio^^rus; speaking of two Fountains, the one whereof
if a woman should drink of it, she would become barren. And on the contrary, if
a barren woman should drink of the other, it would make her become fruitful.
They write also of another in Arcadia, which whosoever drinks of dies
immediately.

Aristotle in his natural questions speaks of one in Thrace, that has the
like effect, and another in Sarmatie. Likewise, Heroditus says in his fourth
Muse, and Pliny and Solon affirms it, That the River Hippenis, which is great,
its water is very sweet and good; yet nevertheless, there is a little Fountain
which comes into it, and the bitterness of that Fountain is so great, that it
makes all the rest of the River so bitter, that it is not possible to drink a
drop of it.

The same Authors, and also Isiodorus writes of two other Fountains which are
in Boecia, the one of which make one totally loose the memory, the other
strengthens it, and makes those thar drink of it remember what the had
forgotten; and of one that qualifies the prickings of the Flesh, and another
that provokes them.

There is one in Cicily called Aretuse, of which (besides, as one writes, it
has an infinite abundance of Fish) they write on mavelous things that is,
that within this Spring there has been many times found many notable things,
which have been cast into the River Alfice, which is in Achaye a Country in
Greece. For this cause they all maintain that the water of this rivet goes
through the bowels of the earth to this Fountain under the sea, which is
between. C^cilie and Achaye. The Authors that treat of it are such great
persons, and so worthy of credit, that it makes me bold to recite them. Seneca
astirms it, Pline and Pomponius Mela, Strabo, and Servius upon the tenth
Eglogue of Virg^l.

Sol^n and Isiodore reports of a Fountain upon which if he put his hand, whom
we would have to swear and take an oath, if he affirm by it a thing contrary to
truth, the eyes of the perjured dry up and grows blind. And Plinio says the
like of a River which burns the hands of the perjured, who had sworn by it,
by laying his hands upon the water of it.

Philostrat^s in his second book of the life of Apollo Tianc says, That there
is a River, that if he that had washed his hands and feet in it, had perjured
and sworn false, he would have been incontinent turned to a Leaper, D^odorus
says as much of an other River.

And if it seems to any one that these things are hard to be believed, he must
know that Isto^orus was a holy and a learned man, and has written of them, and
followed in many places the Authors here alleged and speaks of many others. As
of the Fountain of Jacob in Idumea saying, that four times a year it changes
its color. And of a Lake that is amongst the Troglodites which three times a
day, and three times a night changes its sweet taste into bitter, and the
bitterness into sweet again.

And also of a Brook in Judea, which every Sabbath day was dry, which is
affirmed by Pliny. Writing again of another Fountain which is in the Country
of the Garamonts the which in the day time is sweet, and so cold, that it is
impossible for any one to drink of it. And in the night so hot, that whosoever
puts his hand into it would be burned, and was called the Fountain of the Sun.
Of this Fountain has written for truth, Arian Diodoras, and Quintus Curstus,
Lucrecia the Poet gives the reason of it.

It is a wonderful thing of the Fountain of Elusine, which is very clear, and
still, yet if any one sound any instrument very near it, it will fall a boiling
that the water will leap above the brinks, as though it rejoiced at the sound
of the Music. This is certified by Aristotle in his book of the wonders of
nature by Solon, and the old Poet Ennius.

Vitruvius speaks also of a River named Chimere, which water is very sweet,
nevertheless, parting it self into two streams, the one is sweet the other is
bitter; wherefore it is supposed that it draws that bitterness from the
earth by which it passes, and therefore that seems no wonder. Albeit it be not
easy to believe the diverse qualities of other waters, whereof we have spoken
before, let us not wonder any more when we shall know the reasons.

The same Authors make mention yet of another River named Silar, which turns to
stone, whatsoever branch or twig is thrown into it.

In Illirica there is a Fountain of sweet water, which burns any thing that is
put into it. There is another in Epire, in which if you put a burning Torch it
puts it out, and if you put it in unlighted, it will light it, and always at
midday it is dry, then when the day darkneth it begins to increase again, that
at midnight it will be so full that it runs over.

In Persia, they say there is a Fountain, which makes their teeth fall out that
drinks of it.

In Arcadia, there are certain Fountains, which run from some hills, which water
is so cold, that there is no vessel, neither gold nor silver, nor any other
metal could hold it; for as far as they fill it it breaks in pieces, nor can
be held in any other vessel, but such as are made of the hoof of a Mule. We
will scarce believe that amongst Rivers (although very great) there are some
that run into the earth, and then rise again, a good way off: if we would have
examples, even Vadian in Spain. Tigris does so likewise in Armenia, and Licus
in Asia.

There are also Fountains of sweet water, which entering into the Sea, keep
above the salt water. Of which number there is one in Sicilie, and an Isle
named Enarie, upon the coast of Naples.

We know well that in Egypt it rains not: but that naturally the River Nilus
overflows, and waters all the ground, leaving it moist, and fit to bring forth
fruit.

There are two Rivers in Beocia; In the one of which, all sheep that are dipped,
it makes their fleeces black, the other makes them white. In Arabia there is
another Fountain, that makes all beasts that drink of it, vermilion red: of all
which waters that have these properties, Aristotle speaks copiously.

The River Lyncestis has this quality, that it makes any that drinks of it
drunk, as if it were wine. In the Island Cea, according to Pliny, there is a
fountain, which he that drinks of, becomes sottish. There is a Lake in Thrace,
which if any one drink of, or if they but bathe in it they die incontinent.

There is also a River in Pontus, which brings forth a kind of Stones that
burn; and when there is the least wind, they light, and the more they are in
the water the more they burn. They also write of diverse waters which heal
diseases, whereof there is one in Italy, called Zize, which heals sore eyes.
Another in Achaia, which if a woman great with child drink of, she shall have a
good delivery. Diverse others also that heal other infirmities. As the Stone,
the Leprosy, and the Tertian Ague, and the Quartan Ague whereof Therphrastus
Pliny and Vitruvius, speaks. There is another River in Mesapotomia, that sends
forth a sweet odor.

Baptista Fulgosa says, in his collections, That in our time there was a
Fountain in England, in which if you cast in a piece of wood, in the space of a
year it would become Stone, Himself testifies, that which Albertus Magnus
speaks of, which is, That there is a Fountain in high-Germany, and Albertus
says, that with his own hands he put a piece of wood into that water, which
became perfect stone, and that part that touched not the water remained wood as
before, The same Fulgosa, reports another property of a Fountain which is very
strange, for if a man walk about it, viewing of it, and looking into it,
without speaking any word, he shall find it clear and quiet; but if he speak
never so little when he is near, or going away from it, the water will be
roubled and begin to bubble, he himself witnesses to have seen i^, and to have
tried the experience himself, for looking into the Fountain intentivery without
speaking, he saw it fair and clear. But when he spoke the water was troubled
and moved with such force, as though one had been stirring in it with
something. In France there is one (as he writes) that is extreme cold yet many
times there is flames of fire seen to come out of it. Pliny says that diverse
make a conscience to join faith to these things. But they may be well
persuaded, that the great effects of nature show themselves more evidently in
that element of water then in any other. Though the wonders are so many yet
ought we not to think any one of them impossible, and especially those that are
cerufied by such Authors as I have alleged here.

Again we are sufficiently certified by the testimony of those that have seen
in our time, in an Island in the Canaries called For, in a place well inhabited
with people which serve there selves with no other water but what they draw out
of a Trough or Cistern, into which distills and drains abundantly the juice of a
Tree, which is in the middle of this Island, at the foot of which Tree nor any
place near it; there is neither Fountain nor Prock, and nevertheless, this
Tree is always so moist, that from its leaves, branches, and boughs, the water
drops necessantly, and runs into this trough or cistern in so great abundance,
that night and day they receive enough to serve for their necessi^ies
throughout the Island, which we should hardly believe if it were but only put
to writing. Therefore none ought to think strange that which we have before
recited; for this element of water is so powerful, and so necessary that its
forces and qualities are neverstrange.

As for the Sea, it is said, it is more hot in winter than in Summer, and more
salt in Autumn than at any other time. And it is a thing of great wonder, that
casting oil into the Sea, appeaseth the rage and fury thereof. Again, we know
for certain, that it never snows in the places near about the Sea, that are far
from firm land. Of all these things many give diverse reasons, the greatest part
of which is attributed to the propriety and quality of the earth, and Mines
whence Fountains spring, and Rivers runs through.

That it is true, it is proved by that which we see daily, that Vines and other
fruits of the earth, are better in one place than in another, because in one
place they are sweet, and in another sharp and sower, the one good and
profitable, the other damageable and hurtful. The air it self is corrupted and
becomes pestilential by passing through a naughty Country. What marvel is it
then, if water which washes and penetrates the earth, stones, metals, herbs,
roots, and trees, take their good or evil qualities, be they as strange as may
be, especially being assisted by the force of the Planets and the Stars.

CHAP. XXII.
Of many things which happened at the Birth and Death of our Savior: recited
by many Historians: besides that which is recorded by the Evangelists.

ALthough the things certified by the Evangelists, to be manifested by great
wonder, at the Birth and Death of our Savior, are most certain and worthy of
all belief, yet me thinks it convenient to make some mention of other
wonderful things, that were seen by other persons that have writ them.

Paul Horatius and Eutropius, Secretaries to Octavian, and likewise Eusebius,
say, That at the time that Jesus Christ was born, it happened in Rome, that in a
public Inn, was discovered and broke forth a Fountain of pure oil, which for
the space of a whole day incessantly issued out in great abundance; and it
seemed that such a sudden spring of oil would signify the coming of Christ.
That is to say, anointed, by which all Christians are so. And the public Inn
in which all are indisterently received and lodged, signifies our Mother Church
the great Hostlery of Christians, from whence should issue and proceed
incessantly all good people. Eutropius adds further. That in Rome, and adjacent
places, at high noon, in a clear and fair day was seen a circle about the Sun,
as shining and resplendant as the Sun, which showed as much brightness or more
than the Sun. Paul Horatius, writes also, that at the same time the Senate and
people of Rome, offered to Octavus Augustus the title of Lord, which he refused
and would not accept of, Prognosticating (unknowing) that a greater Lord than
he was upon the earth, to whom that title belonged. Commestor in his
scholastic history affirms, That the same day, the Temple in Rome, dedicated
by the Romans to the Goddess Paix, fell to the earth ruined. And he says,
that from the time it was built by the Romans, they addressed to the Oracle of
Apollo, to know how long time it should endure? Who made them answer, even till
a Virgin should bring forth a child, which they judged impossible, and by that
means their Temple should last eternally, nevertheless, at the Virgins bearing
a child (the King of heaven) it fell to the earth.

Luoas de Tuy, in his Chronicle of Spain, writes, that he has found in ancient
histories of the Country (having conferred and computed the time) that the same
night in which our Savior was born, there appeared in Spain at the hour of
midnight, a cloud which gave so great light, that it seemed as midday.

I remember also that I have read in St. Ierom. That when the Virgin fled with
her son into Egypt, all the Idols and Images of the Gods which were there,
tombled to the ground from above their Altars. And that the Oracles which hese
Gods (or to say better these Devils) gave them ceased, and never after gave
them any answers.

This miracle alleged by Saint Jerome, seems to be approved by the excellent
Plutarch, although he were a Pagan. Who not believing any thing of these
things, nor knowing wherefore they were come to pass, has writ a particular
Treatise of the defects of Oracles; for already in his time, which was a little
after the death of Christ, men perceived that such Oracles were wanting. And in
that Trea^^s;e could allege no other reason, but that there were some Demons
dead. But he said it as a man without faith, because he did not understand that
the spirits were immortal. Nevertheless this thing was wonderful, and truly
worthy of great consideration to see so apparently that the Devil should
demonstrate himself incontinently beaten down and discomfited, and that after
the death of our Savior he remained so vanqu^shed, that never since he could
give an answer. And that the Gentiles without understanding the cause, had
knowledge of this defect, by means whereof Plutarch writ this Treatise, in
which are these words (whereof Eusebius makes mention, writing to Theodoras as
a thing of note) I remember, says he, to have heard say, upon the death of the
Demons, to Emilius the Orator, a prudent and an humble man. That his father
coming one time by Sea toward Italy, and coasting by night an Island not
inhabited, named Paraxis, as all in the ship were silent and at rest, they
heard a great and fearful voice which came from that Island. The which voice
called Ataman who was the Pilot of the ship an Egyptian born. And although this
voice was heard once or twice by Ataman and others, yet had they not the
hardiness to answer till the third time, he answered. Who is there, who is it
that calls me what would you have: Then the voice spoke more high and loud and
said to him Ataman, I will that when you pass by near the Gulf called Laguna,
you remember to cry aloud and m^ke them understand, that the great God Pan is
dead. At which all that were in the ship were in great fear, and consulted all
that the Pilot of the ship should not mind it, nor speak a word of it, nor stay
in that Gulf, at least if they could pass beyond it but go forward on their
voyage: but coming to the place where the voice had designed them, the ship
arrested, and the sea was calm without wind; so that they could not sail: by
means whereof, they all concluded that Ataman should do his Embassage, and so
he placed himself in the Poop of the ship, and cried as loud as he could,
saying, I do make you know that the great Pan is dead. But as soon as he had
spoke these words, they heard so many voices cry, and complain, that all the
air resounded again, and this complaint lasted for a space of time, so that
those in the ship being astonished, and having a prosperous wind followed on
their course, and being arrived at Rome, told of this adventure, and what
happened. Which being come to the ears of the Emperor, Tyberius would be truly
informed, and found that it was truth; wherefore it is evident, that through
all parts the Devils complained at the birth of our Savior, because it was
their destruction. For by the supputation of time, we shall find that these
things happened at the time that he suffered for us, or a little before then,
when he chased and banished them from the world. It is to be supposed that this
great Pan (as to the restriction of great Pan God of the Shepherds) which they
said was dead, was some great Master Devil, which then lost his Empire and
power as the others had.

Besides these things Josephus writes in those very days, there was heard in
the Temple of Jerusalem, a voice (though there was no living creature in the
Temple) which said, let us abandon and go out of this Country speedily, which
was to say, they perceived the persecution that they were to suffer, and that
it drew near by the death of him who was the giver of life. In the Gospel of
the Nazarites it is found, that the day of the passion, that gate of the Temple
fell, which was of a sumptuous and perpetual structure. Behold how we find
these wonderful things which happened in that time, though the Evangelists
makes no mention of them, as things unnecessary.

We must needs know that this great Eclipse of the Sun, which lasted three
hours, whilst Christ was on the Cross, was not natural, as that which we see
sometimes by the conjunction of the Sun and the Moon, the Moon being interposed
between the Sun and the earth. And nevertheless, the Eclipse which happened
then at the passion was in opposition the Moon being then at full, and distant
from the Sun a hundred and eighty degrees in the other Hemisphere, inferior to
the Town of Jerusalem, to show that it was true beyond that which Authors write.

The Text of holy Scripture proves it, for it is certain that they never
offered up the Lamb in sacrifice, but upon the fourteenth day of the Moon.
Which Lamb was eaten by Jesus Christ and his disciples, the day before his
death. As it was commanded in Exodus the twelfth Chapter, and Leviticus the
three and twentieth. The next day was the feast of unlevened bread. Christ the
immaculate Lamb was crucified, the Moon of necessity being at full, and opposite
to the Sun, which could not possibly make an Eclipse, neither could any of the
other Planets do it, therefore it was miraculous and contrary to the order of
nature, and only in the power of God who deprived the Sun of its light for
that space of time. By means whereof St. Denn is the Areopagite, being that day
in Athens, and seeing the Sun so darkened, and also knowing as a man learned in
Astrology and the course of the heavens, that such an Eclipse must needs be
contrary to the rule of nature, spoke with a loud voice, saying, Either the
world would end, or the God of nature suffer. For this cause says one, that
the Sages of Athens, being astonished hereat, caused an Alter incontinently to be
built to the unknown God, since which time, St. Paul arriving there, declared
unto them who was the unknown God, which was Christ our Redeemer God and Man,
which then had suffered, by means whereof he converted many to the faith.

Some have been in doubt to know of this Eclipse and darkness of the Sun, were
universal through all the world, and grounded their argument upon that which
the Evangelists says over all the earth, which is to say, by a manner of
speaking, all the Country round about. And Origin was of this opinion. But
what? We see that in Greece, even at Athens, this tenebrosity was seen, which
makes me believe that this Eclipse was universal, over all our Hemisphere, and
over all where the Sun might be seen. I say so, because over all the other
Hemesphere, where it was then night, it could not be seen, the sight of the Sun
for that time being not there, for it cannot illuminate at one instant but one
half of the earth, because of the shadow it makes:

Nevertheless we ought to know, that the Moon being then at full, and having no
light but what she has from the splendour of the Sun, and again being in the
Hemesphere, which is under us, she came to be violently eclipsed and darkenned,
by the only cause; and for default of the light of the Sun, and so the
darkness was universal over all the world, because the Moon and the Stars can
give no light unless they receive it first from the Sun.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of many passages, quoted by diverse Authors, wh^h have made mention of Christ.

I Have diverse times heard many learned and curious men, which would ask a
reason why, and whence it proceeds, that the Gentiles and Ethnicks, have made
so little mention in their writings, of the life of Jesus Christ, and of his
miracles, which were in so great a number, and so publicly manifested even by
his Disciples; seeing that these Ethnicks have not failed to make mention in
their books of other things particularly happening in their times, and yet not of
so great importance.

To which I answer, First, that it is against truth to say, that the profane
Historiographers, have not spoken of them: For there is an infinite; whereof I
will bring some examples for those that have no great knowledge in ancient
histories.

My second reason is, that we must consider upon this, that saving faith and
the law of grace given by Christ, begun by him and his Apostles to be published
through all the world, was accepted by some which determined to live and die in
it.

Others obstinate in their vices and sins, did not only refuse it, but
persecute it.

There was again others that kept the middle, for although this seemed good
unto them, yet for fear of Tyrants and persecutors, and other worldly
considerations, which made this holy profession disesteemed, they would neither
embrace it, nor accept it.

The world being thus divided in three opinions: those which confessed Christ,
did notable and mavelous things, whereof many bear witness of their truth:
of which number are St. Dennis, Tertullian, Lactantius, Firmian, Eusebins, and
many others too long to recite.

The other wicked sort which persecuted it as a strange thing, and utterly
disagreeing to their law, did eagerly pursue totally to ruin it, and to hide
the miracles, life, and doctrine of Christ. For this cause they speak not of
them, or those among them which did speak any thing of them, was but to make
them contemned, and to cloud them, as did the wicked Porfice, Julian, Vincent,
Celsus, African, Lucian, and others, such divellish men. Against whom Ciprian,
Origin, St. Augustine, and others, have written learnedly.

The other, which either for fear or worldly considerations, refused to be
Christians, or to love and to know the truth, for the same reasons; abandoned
to speak of it; and if some of them have touched any thing, it has been with
jests and lies, and that succinctly enough. And nevertheless, even as when one
would hide the truth, under the vail of some colorable truth It often happens,
by a certain hidden propriety in the truth, that he which would hide it
disguiseth it, and palliates it, in such sort, that by his own drift or
discourse, he discovers his lies, and the truth is discovered openly and
manifestly. So it happened in this sort to these two kind of people. For although
they strove to put to an end, and destroy the miracles and doctrine of Christ,
yet every time they spoke of them, they spoke something by which they
discovered their malice, and the sincerity of that doctrine.

I could speak of many things that the Sibils have said and written; but
because that which they spoke proceeded not from their own proper judgment,
but from the spirit of prophecy, and as God had communicated it to them,
although they were Heathens, I will leave them to come to other authorities.

The first and most evident testimony, though it be the most common, is that of
our greatest enemies, in the number of which is Josephus, by lineage and nation
a Jew, and also by his life and profession. He says these words. [In these
very times lived Jesus, a very wise man, if it be lawful to call him man,
because in truth he does mavelous things, and was master, and Tutor to them
that loved him and sought the truth. The Jews and Gentiles assembled unto him
and followed him in great troops. And he was the Christ. And although he were
afterward accused by the principals of our faith, and crucified, yet was he
not cast off by them which had followed him before. And three days after his
death he appeared alive unto them, according as the Prophets inspired by God,
had foretold and prophesied of him. And yet in our time the doctrine and the
name of Christians, continues all the world over.] These are the words of
Josephus, who writ of the destruction of Jerusalem, as an eyewitness, which
happened forty years after the death of Christ.

Pilate likewise, that gave the sentence of death against him, nevertheless
bears witness of his great miracles: sending word of them by letters to the
Emperor Tyberius, so that the Senate was put to sit in Council to advise,
whether they should receive Jesus Christ for a God? and although they did not
assent unto it, Tyberius forbad any further persecuting the Christians.

As for the Earthquake and the darkness of the Sun, during the time that
Christ suffered upon the Cross, we have also Ethnicks for witnesses. Flegon
the Greek Historiographer born in Asia, of whom Suydas makes special mention.
That in the fourth year of the two hundred and tenth Olympiade, which will meet
being well accounted, with the eighteenth year of the Emperor Tiberius, which
was then when our Savior suffered. There was an eclipse of the Sun, the
greatest that ever was seen or found in any History: and that it endured from
the sixth to the ninth hour. And that during this eclipse, the Earthquake was
so great in Asia, and Bithinia, that there were an infinite number of houses
fell to the ground. It seems besides, Flegon, who lived in those times, and
writ this, that Pliny vented and writ the same thing. For he says, that in
the time of the Emperor Tyberius, the Earthquake was greater than ever was
any before it: and says, thereby was thrown to the earth and ruined twelve
Towns in Asia, besides an infinite of other buildings. So that the
Historiographers who were Gentiles, (although they knew not the cause) forbear
not to write of the miracles of Christ. The other miracle of the vail of the
Temple which rent in sunder Josephus recites it also.

Of the cruel death of the innocent children, which Herod caused to die,
mention is made of it by another. Jew, named Filon a writer of great authority:
In his abridgement of time; where he says, that Herod caused many children to
be put to death; and among them his own son: because that he had heard that
Christ a King, promised to the Hebrews, was born: and this Author was in the
times of the other Herod, called the Tetrark, as he himself says.

This History is again more amply recited by Macrob^us, an Ethnic
Historioagrapher, who recites some pleasant and witty speeches of the Emperor
Octavian, (in whose time our Savior lived,) saying that the Emperor having
heard of the cruelty of Herod toward his son, and the other innocents, said it
was better in Herod's house to be his hog than his child; because the Jews
killed no swine: which witty conceit is alleged also by Dion, in the life of
the same Emperor. So that there are many miracles, whereof the Jews and the
Gentiles (not thinking of it) be or witness to have been done by Christ,
besides those that the Christians make mention of. What should we say any more,
of that the ancient Emperors have tasted of our belief, and of that which they
have done against the Christians?

The first Vicar of God St. Peter, and likewise St. Paul, died by the
commandment of Nero the Emperor, thirty six years after the death of our
Savior, and then was the great persecution of the Church, of which the
Gentiles have not omitted to make mention. And particularly, Suetonus,
Tranquillus, and Corneli^s Tacitus, who lived in those times, and of great
authority.

Suetonus, in the life of Nero, speaking of some of his decrees and ordinances,
says, that he tormented and afflicted with great punishment, a sort of people
which called themselves Christians, and followed a certain belief and new
Religion, and Cernelius Tacitus. treatingon the acts of the same Nero, says,
that he persecuted and punished with terrible torments, a sort of people which
the vulgar called Christians. And that the Author of this name, was Christ of
Jerusalem, whom Pilate the Governor of Judea, had caused to be crucified, and
by the means of his death his doctrine began to be extolled. But now let us see
what some other Gentiles write that are not of less authority.

Pliny in some of his elegant Epistles, writes to the Emperor Trajan, whose
Proconful he was in Asia, to know how he would that he should punish the
Christians, which were accused and brought before him: that he might give his
Lord a good account of what he found against them. Amongst other things he
writes, that these Christians rose at certain hours in the night, and assembled
themselves together to sing hymns and praises to Jesus Christ, whom they
worshipped for God. And being assembled into a Congregation they made vows to
do no evil or hurt to any; but promised not to steal, not to be adulterers, not
to break their promises or vows, not to deny what has been lent or given them
to keep. And this Pliny says further, that they eat altogether, without
possessing any thing in proper.

By this we may know what was then the exercise of Christians, and for what the
world hated them and persecuted them. These things were written by a Heathen
and an Idolater sixty years after the Passion of our Savior.

To which letters the Emperor made answer, that seeing they were not accused
for any excess or other misdeeds, that he should not trouble himself to punish
them, or make any inquisition against them. Yet nevertheless, if they were
accused and brought before him, that he should find out a means to make them
forsake their Religion; but if they would not leave it, yet he should do
nothing to them.

Before this, it is true that this Emperor Traian, being a Heathen, and
deceived by accusers, had persecuted the Christians. To which Empire afterward
succeeded Adrian his Nephew, of whom Aelius Lampridius, a Heathen
Historiagrapher, and an Idolater writes, that he began to honor the
Christians, suffering them to live in their belief, and he himself worshipped
Christ with the others, and built Temples; but afterward he changed his copy,
and became hateful, odious, and cruel toward the Christians, being deceived
and abused by the Masters and their false ceremonies, and by the Bishops of
those false Gods; telling him, that if he favored the Christians, all the
world would be converted to their belief; and they should loose the religion of
their Gods. This is certified by Peter Criniff. It is found in the life of
Saturninus, that to this Empeaour Adrian, there was a letter sent by Severinus
the Consul, where he writes, that there was in Egypt diverse Christians, amongst
which some called themselves Bishops, and that none of them were idle, but that
all of them did work, and employed themselves in some action, and that there
was not amongst them, even those that were blind and lame, that did not live by
the labor of their hands, and that they all worshipped one God, which was also
worshipped by the Jews.

We also read in the History of these times, that this Emperor beginning to
persecute the Christians, by the persuasion of their chief Bishops, there was
one of his Ambassadors called Serene Eramy, an Ethnic like himself, which writ
a letter unto him, in which he said in his opinion, it was cruelty to oppress
the Christians, being accused for no other thing than observing their Religion,
seeing that he found them not charged with any other crime or trespass. By
means of which letter. The Emperor Adrian, forbade Minus Fondan Proconful in
Asia, to condemn any Christian if he were not convicted of any other crime,
than that of Christian Religion.

CHAP. XXIIII.
What opinions the ancient Emperors have had of the person of Christ, by the
Testimony which Ethnic Historiagraphers, give of them.

TO this Emperor Adrian, of whom we have spoken in the last Chapter, succeeded
Antoninus Debonair, who although he had that name, was perverse and wicked, he
favored ill the belief of Christ, and persecuted the Christians. But his
Successor, Marcus Aurelius, was more moderate to them; for instead of
persecuting them, he led them along with him in his army; by whose prayers he
was delivered from the danger wherein he was for want of water, which his
enemies had cut from him, because he sent them water, and to his enemies
Thunderbolts and Thunder. Of these things are made mention in one of his
leters, and Julius Capitoline also speaks of it, although he does not attribute
it all to the Christians, These happened about the forty and five years after the
Passion of our Savior. The fifteenth or twentieth year following, Severus
being chosen Emperor, Elius Spartine an Ethnic like himself (writ that he
should make a law) by which he should forbid upon pain of great punishment that
none should turn Christian nor Jew. After which Severus, Antoninus Heliogabolus
was Emperor, who as Lampridius recites, that writ his life, caused a Temple to
be built in Rome, dedicated to his God only, to which he would have the
Christians resort to perform their sacrifices, which the Christians would not
do. After this Heliogabolus, succeeded the Emperor Alexander Severus, in the
year of our Savior one hundred ninety two; and was in great doubt, whether or
no he should become a Christian. Also we find by the history that is written of
him, that he had a good opinion of that belief, and that he much esteemed of
the Christians, and gave them places, and plots for buildings, in Rome, to make
their Temples and places for prayer. He kept the picture of our Savior in his
closset. This is written by Elius Lampridius, besides what the Christians
write. And he says further, that diverse Victuallers and Pastry-Cooks, went to
the Emperor with a complaint against the Christians, that they had taken away
their harbors and their houses, to make places for their superstitious
hypocrisy, and that they observed a Religion contrary to that of the Romans.
To which complaint the Emperor made answer, that he had rather God should be
worshipped in those places, than to employ them in the affairs of their
vocations.

This Severus being dead, Maximinian succeeded him, an enemy and persecutor of
the Christians; but he lived not long, and died an ill death.

Since whom and two others more, which lived but a short while, the Empire fell
into the hands of Philip, who was baptized as some say, and was the first that
received the Christians, Eusebius affirms it; yet the Heathen
Historiographers, write nothing of it.

Every day God enlightened more and more the hearts of men, and a great number
were converted to the Christian faith in spite of Decius and Dioclesian and
others such like, and even till they being weary of persecuting them, they
connived at them, and suffered them for a time, as appears clearly by a letter
of Maximinian the Emperor, a companion to Dioclesian, which was two hundred
years after our Redemption. Which letter says as follows,

Caesar Maximinian invincible great Bishop of Germany, Egypt, Thebes, Sarmacia,
Persia, Armenia, and victorious over the Medes, and for his victories named
nineteen times Emperor, and eight times Consul, and father of his Country. At
the beginning of our Empire. Amongst other things which we determined to do for
the public good, we do ordain, that the order which was kept in all things,
strengthened by our ancient Laws, be conserved and kept. And for the same
reason we command, that those men which call themselves Christians, and have
forsaken our ancient Religion, be pressed, constrained, and forced to forsake
the new Religion which they have taken up; and that they observe our ancient
Religion, established by our predecessors. But being it is come to our
knowledge, notwithstanding this commandment, and rigor used against them to
make them observe it, they have not left to follow their own wills; and are so
firm, and constant to their purposes, that there is neither force nor
punishment so grievous which can make them draw back from their Religion, or
make them observe ours; but will rather expose themselves to grievous torments,
and death it self; and that they are still at this day in the same constancy,
and will not reverence or worship any of the gods in Rome; our often remembering
of our accustomed clemency and pity, determined to be used toward the
Christians, for that cause we do from hence-forward permit and suffer, that all
persons may make and call themselves Christians, have places for their
meetings, and build themselves Temples, where they may pray and sacrifice:
Which license and leave we grant unto them, upon condition they shall not do
any thing contrary to our Commonwealth and Religion: and that in other things
they shall observe our Laws and Constitutions; and that in acknowledgement of
this permission, they shall be bound to pray to their God for our life, and
health, and also for the estate of the Commonwealth of Rome, that the Town
being prosperous and entire, they themselves may live of their labor in rest
and safety. O truly unfortunate Emperor! if thou should force the
Christians to leave and renounce their Faith as wicked, how would thou have
them pray for thee, and force them to have remembrance of thee in their
prayers. At the least this Letter will serve us, in that thou thy self do
testify of the Constancy, Virtue, and Spirit, that the Martyrs, and holy
Christians had, in suffering patiently, for a long space of time, the torment,
and punishments, that were inflicted upon them for the love of Christ.

Now sometime after Maximinian, there came to succeed in the Empire
Constantine, which was surnamed The great, son of that good Dame Hellen, which
found the true cross, which was about two hundred and ninety years after the
Redemption of Mankind. He was a good Christian, and did so many good deeds for
the honor of God, and the holy Church and the Ministers thereof, that it would
be long to recite them. He suffered all indifferently to become Christians, for
whom he built sumptuous Temples, and those which had been formerly dedicated to
Idols, he dedicated to the service of Christ, and his members. Since which
time, although the Church of God has suffered scandals and persecutions, as
those of Julian the Apostata; and others, yet always, and in many places of
the world, Christ has been publicly worshipped and from thence forward, all
histories are full of the acts of the Saints: and the greatest part of the
subsequent Emperors, have been faithful Catholics, as Theodosius, Justinian
and others. I could bring many authorities of Ethnic Historiographers, that
have written of Christ, but I would help my self with this small number only,
because they are famous and of great authority.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Amity and Enmity, which by a secret property, are in many things.

THe ancient Philosopher Heraclitus, and diverse others since him, have been of
opinion, that all things are occasioned by concord and disconcord, and that by
peace and enmity which is in all things, comes the generation and corruption of
them, of which Philosophy I will not now treat of, as well because the Subject
would be difficult for me, as that the reader would receive little pleasure.
Howsoever we will speak of the love and enmity which is between many things,
that none knows truly from whence the cause proceeds, which in truth is a
thing very wonderful, as that which is between the dog and the cat, between
oil and glue, between the stag and the adder, and such like, whereof we will
speak that naturally hate one another, and yet this enmity proceeds not from
the elements, for the contrariety and enmity which are between things of which
they are composed, is most clear; as we see, that water is an enemy to fire,
because the fire is hot and dry, and the water cold and moist, in such sort
that these elements are totally contraries. The water and the earth are friends
in as much as they are both cold, but they are contrary in this, that the water
is moist, and the earth dry. Betwixt the fire and the earth there is some
conformity, because of the dryness of them both, and difference by the heat of
the fire, and the cold of the earth. So betwixt the elements there is a
contrariety, and yet in part of them there is some conformity. All things then
being composed of the elements, it must of necessity follow, that amongst them
must be these contradictions and conformities which the elements have, whereof
they are composed. Wherefore that thing in which the elemenrary quality most
governs, takes the name from that quality, and that do we call hot or cold
moist or dry, some in a more high degree than others, according as the thing
is qualified, with one of these first four qualities. And so it comes to pass
that one thing is contrary to another causing diverse effects, which
contradiction is most manifest, and we know it so sure, that now we will come
to give the reasons.

But of this other enmity which proceeds not from the elements, but from a
secret or hidden propriety or superior influence, requires a deep
contemplation to search out from whence the cause proceeds.

The dog and the cat (as we have said before) would do one another mischief,
and yet we know not wherefore, we see also other things that agree and love one
another, and yet this love is not derived from the elements whereof they are
composed.

The Ass desires and loves an herb called Sagapena or Giant Fennel, which is
venomous to other beasts of the nature of horses. The Fox is a friend to the
Adder which is an enemy to all other beasts.

This is not of the least consideration, that it is amongst men as among
beasts, seeing that, not kowing wherefore, nor how one man that sees another
at the first sight, that never saw or knew one another before, will contemn and
loath him, and another will be agreeable and pleasing unto him, and sometimes
so soon as he shall see one he knows not, he will bear him affection and
reverence him, although he be below him. Others will be despised, although they
be great persons, yea Lords. There are others to be found, that seem as though
they were born to be Tutors and instructers to other, as you may see two men,
whereof the one will suffer himself to be led and governed by the other, and in
this many times the Lord by his servant, in such sort, as it seems he were
naturally subject unto him, and we can give no reason for it.

In like case we see such subjection and enmity amongst beasts, as between the
Eagle and the Swan, between the Raven and the Kite, and many times we see that
the Kite snatches the prey out of the Ravens claws. There is also enmity
between the Kite and the Owl, the Eagle and the Goose, so that if one mingle
the feathers of the Eagle with Goose feathers, the Eagles will consume them all.

The Stag persecutes the Adder, for with a strong respiration of his breath,
which he makes at the mouth of the Adders hole he draws him out of his hole and
eats him. That it is true that there is such an enmity between them, you may
prove it by burning some of the Stags hair, for all the Adders will fly from the
smoke of it. There is also great enmity betwixt the Raven, the Ass, and the
Bull, because the Raven attempts always with his beak to strike out their
eyes. The greatest enemies to the Wolf, are the Fox, the Ass, and the Bull.

There is also a natural quarrel betwixt the Vulture and the Eel, The Lion is
afraid and shuns the house Cock, also the fire, and the noise of a Wagon. The
Hienna is an enemy to the Panther. The Scorpion has a deadly hatred to the
Tarantola, whose biting or sting cannot be healed (as it is said) but by
music, and there is so much enmity between these two beasts, that he that is
stricken with the Scorpion is healed with the oil wherein Terantolaes have been
steeped and suffocated. The Elephant which is one of the strongest beasts,
fears and shuns a Snake or an Adder, and also a Sheep, and is amazed at the
gtunting of a hog. There is a kind of Faulcon which Aristotle calls Tico,
that has a great war and debate always against the Fox, and as often as he
can, beats and persecutes him. Elian writes that there is a great enmity
between the Raven, and a kind of Falcon called Pelagre, and between the Raven
and the Turtle-Dove. There is also a deadly hatred between the Owl and the
Stork, the Patridge and the Tortis. The Pelican persecutes the Quail, above
all other birds. And the Horse is afraid more of a Camel then of any other
beast. There is also great discord and enmity amongst fishes. The Dolphin is an
enemy to the Whale. The Cougar is naturally an enemy to the Lampry.

The Adder if he sees a man clothed, he will hurt him if he can, and has the
boldness to venture at him, but if he see him naked he flies from him. The
Rats and the Snakes, or Adders, are great enemies, and when they cover their
eggs in winter, and that they go not out, the Rats persecute them and make war
against them, and the Snake which by instinct of nature knows it, makes
provision for the Rats to feed on, that so they may be busied and leave them.
The Rat is so afraid of Beech-mast, that if you should put never so little into
the curds that make cheese the Rat will never eat of it.

A Sheep does so naturally hate a Wolf, that if one make a drum with the skin
of a Wolf, the Sheep will fly from the sound of it, as if it were from a
living Wolf. There are some also that say, if you should make Lute or
Viol-strings of the guts of a Wolf, and of a Sheep, and string the instruments
therewith, you should never make them agree nor make good harmony. The Monky
shuns the Tortise and Craw-fish.

The Rat, by a secret property is so contrary to the Scorpion, that the biting
of a Scorpion is healed by putting upon it a Rat. The Snake and the viper fears
naturally the Crab, which has such force over these kind of creatures, that if
a Hog be bitten by a Viper, he is healed by eating a Crab-fish. And which is
more strange, when the sun is in the sign of Cancer, those serpents suffer
pain. The Scorpion fish and Crocodile, are continually at war, and kill one
another. The Panther fears the Once and in such sort, that he will let it kill
him without resistance; and if the skin of a Panther, be hung near the skin of
an Once, that of the Panther will shed all the hair and consume. The enmity is
so much, betwixt the Crow and the Owl, that Aristotle says, they will rob one
another of their eggs. The Wasp makes war ordinarily against the Spider. The
Kite and the Fox, also hate one another. There is a sort of birds of prey, very
little ones, which Pl^nte calls Esalous, that wish so much mischief to the Crow,
that they search ou^ their nests and break their eggs. The Swine, hate
naturally the Weezle. The Wolf and the Lion hate so mortally, that the blood of
the one and the other will not mingle together. The Mole is so horribly afraid
of the Ant, tha she shuns the Tree where they are. The Spider has war with the
Snake, and Pliny says will kill it, when the Spider sees the Snake sleep
under the Tree where she is, she lets her self down by a thread that she makes,
and then gets into the head of the Snake, where she bites, and so fastens her
self, that she will not forsake him till she has killed him with her venom.

There is also amongst other inanimate things, a natural contradiction, and
enmity. For oil is an enemy to glue, oil is an enemy to water, so is lime; but
the oil and the lime agree together and join naturally.

The Olive has a natural property against the luxurious and fleshly given, so
that if an unchaste woman plant them they die, and take no root.

Coleworts will not thrive if they be planted near Marjoram. Salt water becomes
sweet, if it be mingled with meal flower, so that in two hours after it may be
drunk.

We might bring so many examples of these natural enmities, which are between
things animate and inanimate, that it might be brought to a great length, and
likewise of things that love one another. As the Pehens love the company of the
Pigeons. The Turtle the Popengay. The Blackbird, the Feldisare or the Thrush.
Aristotle says, that there is so much love betwixt a kind of Sparrow and a
Crocodile, that this great beast opens his mouth, that this little bird may see
to cure and cleanse his reeth and his gumms with his beak, and that these birds
are nourished thereby: it is said also that there is great amity between the
Fox and the Raven, betwixt the Crow and the Turkey-hen, and likewise betwixt
the Lark, and the bird called the Jone. The Fox agrees-well enough with the
Snake; and the Sheep are not in danger among them. The Sea-Mole is so beloved
of the Whale, that Pliny says, it goes swimming before the Whale to warn him
of ditches and holes.

Thus you see the mavelous works of nature, disposed by order and the will of
God, by the influence of the Stars and Planets. The Authors are Pliny,
Aristotle, Albertus Magnus, Elian, and diverse others ancient and Modern
Authors, that have written of the nature of beasts, and other things.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of some properties of the Viper, and how the flesh of it may be safely eaten.

THe Viper is a kind of a serpent well enough known to many, and although it be
but little, yet it is venomous enough, for with a little prick it will kill a
man. But as the Lord has made nothing in vain without some profit, so this
beast with all his venom, serves man to cure some diseases, and for Medicine,
principally for the pain in the throat, it is good by a secret property by
carrying about one the head of a Viper, so that alive it kills, and dead it
heals. The Theriacle is proper against venom, and in making that Composition
there goes some of this beast (for else it is not perfect) that it may have
the greater efficacy, and therefore it is called Theriacle, because Thirion in
Greek, signifies a Viper or a venomous beast. It is true, that some give
another Etimologie and reason of that name. But before we speak of the profits
that come by the Viper, let us hear what Pliny, Isiodorus, and Elian say of it.

They say that when the beast engendereth, the Male puts his head in the mouth
of the Female, whereby she receives such pleasure that with her sharp teeth,
she wrings and cuts off his head, so she remains widdow-like and bagged with
young, which comes to be eggs, which are formed in the body; of which eggs comes
Vipers in a convenient time, by casting every day one, to twenty, and because
they are so many, those which remain behind, cannot stay the time of their
delivery, but break the belly of their mother, so that by her death they are
born and live.

If it be so it is a wonderful thing, for it seems the child revengeth the
death of the Father. With this opinion of Pliny, diverse others agree, yet
there are many that contradict it, and deny that the Viper dies in her
bringing forth her young ones; in which opinion. I rest my self, because the
other does not seem natural, neither have I ever seen the experience, nor know
not any one that say they have seen it. Philostratus in the life of Apollo
Trijan brings in Apollo, who recites to have seen a Viper, that after she had
brought forth her young ones, licked them, and was well. One may gather as much
out of the words of Aristotle, which says. The Viper only amongst other
Serpents, makes her young ones; for first she forms them in her body of eggs, as
fishes spawn, then having formed them they remain three days wrapped up in a
tender th^^ skin, which in due time breaks and sets the little ones at liberty:
because of which Apuleus in his apology, calls them Oviperes, and not Vipers;
that is bred of eggs. And many times it comes to pass, that this tender skin,
breaking in the belly of the Viper, they come forth every day one, even to the
number of above twenty, these are the words of Aristotle.

In another place, in the third book of beasts, he says, speaking of the
bringing forth of Serpents. The Viper before she brings forth little ones,
forms the eggs within her. And I think from thence proceeds this opinion, who
say that the little ones eat themselves out of the belly of the Viper. For it
has seemed to them which maintain it, that when Aristotle spoke of this first
coming forth, they would have it, that they brake, and gnawed the belly of the
Viper.

Now leaving this discourse, I say the Viper, as venomous as she is, gives
succor and help to man. Diascorides says, that the flesh of a Viper sodden or
dressed, may be eaten safely, and that it is very medicinable for the Nerves
and for the fight.

And to dress him to eat, you must cut off the head and the tail, then the skin
being taken off and well prepared, boil him in oil and wine with good store of
Aniseeds. He says also that of this flesh is made a kind of salt or powder,
which gives a good appetite, and is prepared in this manner,

Take a new earthen pot, and put the flesh of the Viper in it dressed as
before, then put in salt and figs stamped with a competent quantity of Honey,
and the pot being well covered, set it to bake a long time in an oven, till it
may be beaten and brought to a powder. And whosoever afterward would use it
with other meats, will find it very profitable and savoury.

Paul Egenetta says, that the flesh of the Viper is singular good for Lepers
and Lazers, and for that purpose esteems much of the salt forespoken of. Pliny
says there is a certain nation in the Indies, that eat Vipers. Diascorides
says also, that those that use to eat of the flesh of Vipers, live long and in
health.

Against the biting of this beast there are many remedies. But Theophrastus
names one, saying, that to him which is bit with a Viper, melody and music
help much. Galen says, that the beast eats not all the time of winter, and
that she keeps her self (as dead) hid in the earth, and then if you find her,
touch her, or handle her, she bites not, and when Summer comes she recovers her
force again. So much Pliny reports of Lisards Snakes, and all other sorts of
creeping Serpents. Aristotle says, they keep themselves so hidden in the earth
three or four months without eating any thing. Elian says, that the Vipers
which breed in the Province of Arabia, although they bite, their teeth are not
venomous; because they eat Baum, and lie under the shade of it. And Aristotle
says, they are very desirous to drink wine, and that many people take them by
putting vessels of wine in places where they haunt, and so they make themselves
drunk, then they take them sleeping. There are other things to be said of the
quality and property of the Viper, which I leave for brevities sake.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the admirable property of a little beast, whose biting is cured by the
sound of music, and also of some ather infirmities that are cured by the same
means.

THat which is said in the former Chapter, by the authority of Theophrastus,
that the biting of the Viper may be cured with the sound of music, will make
that which we shall speak now, more credible. Alexander of Alexandria, and
Piere Gilie a modern Author, affirm and say that in Poville, a country in
Italy, ther^ is a kind of Spider which those of that country call Tatantola,
and some Phalange, which in the beginning of Summer are so venomous that
whosoever is bitten of them, if he have not help presently he looses his senses
and dies, and if any escape death, they are senseless, and totally not
themselves. For which evil, experience has a remedy, which is music, that
which these Authors say, is as a testimony of their own experience, as
eyewitnesses, who say, that as soon as any one is bitten, they send presently
for one that can play upon the Vian or Flute, or some other instrument, which
play and sing diverse lessons, which being heard by him that is stricken by the
venomous Spider, he begins to dance and stir as if all his life time he had
been accustomed to dancing, in which sury and force of dancing he continues
till the venom be dissipated and wasted. And this Alexander says that he has
seen, that one that has been wounded with this beast, has continued so long
in dancing, till the Musicians have been all weary and ceased, and the poor
dancer fall to the ground as dead, having lost his strength, but as soon as
they began to play again, he saw the poor sick man, raise himself anew, and
begin to dance with as much force as before, even until the wound was entirely
cured.

He says yet further, that if it happen that one that had not been well cured
by Music, a short time after hearing instruments of Music, began to stir
their feet and were forced to dance, even till they were cured, which truly is
wonderful in nature.

A sclepiades writes, that singing and a soft sound of music is a great help
to those that are Frantic. We read also that Esmineas the Thebean, has cured
diverse diseases and maladies by a sweet soft noise of Flutes. Theophrastus and
Aulus Gelius say, that music appeaseth the pain of the Sciatica and the Gout.

Again, we find in the holy Scripture that David with music cast out the evil
spirit out of Saul. Such is the great effect that proceeds from the cause of
the great amity that the nature of man bears to music. And if we well
consider, we shall not find it strange, that diverse infirmities are cured by the
means of music, forasmuch as we see that there are some beasts that kill
laughing others weeping, and others sleeping. As Plutarch writes to Cleopatre.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of a strange medicine; wherewith Faustina was cured of dishonest love. And of
diverse other remedies against that passion.

THat the affection and prison of the mind, which is ordinarily called Love, is
a strong passion and of great effect in the soul; let us ask of such men, which
by experience have known it, and of such of whom examples are notorious, namely
of very excellent personages, that have suffered their wills to have been
transported even so far, that some of them have died. Jules Capitolin, amongst
other examples, recites that which happened to Faustina daughter to Antoninns,
and wife to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who fell in love with a Master of
Fence or Gladiator, in such sort, that for the desire which she had of his
company, she was in danger of death she did so consume away. Which being
understood by Marcus Aurelius, he presently called together a great company of
Astrologians and Doctors, to have counsel and find remedy thereupon. At last
it was concluded, that the Fencer should be killed, and that they should
unknown to her, give Faustina of his blood to drink, and that after she had
drank it the Emperor her husband should lie with her. This remedy wrought
marvellously, for it put this affection so far from her, that she never
afterward thought of him. And the history says, of this Copulation, that the
Emperor had then with her, was begotten Antoninus Commodus; which became so
bloody and cruel, that he resembled more the Fencer, whose blood his mother had
drank at the conception of him, than Marcus Aurelius, whose son he was: which
Commodus was always found amongst the Gladiators, as Eutropius witnesses in
the life of the same Commodus.

The Greek and Arabic Physicians, place this disease of love, amongst the
grievous infirmities of the body of man, and thereupon prescribe diverse
remedies. Cadmus Milesien, as Suydas reports in his collections, writes a whole
book, treating of the particular remedies to hunt out this disease of Love,
Amongst other remedies which Physicians give for this discase, one is, That to
him that is passionate in Love, one should put into his hands great affairs,
importuning his credit, and his profit; that his Spirit being occupied in
diverse matters, it may draw away his imagination from that which troubles him:
and they say further, that they should suffer him to be merry and conversant
with other women.

Against this heat, Pliny says, it is good to take the dust upon which a mule
has tumbled, and cast it upon the Lover, and all to be powder him; or else of
the sweat of a chafed mule, as Cardanus affirms in his book of Subtilties.

The Physicians also teach how to know what person is loved of him that is sick
in Love; and it is by the same Rule that Eristratus, Phyfitian to King
Seleucus, knew the love that Antiochus bare to the Queen Stratonicus his Step
mother; for he being extreme sick, and would rather die than discover the cause
of his sickness, proceeding from love which he bare to his fathers wife. She
came into the chamber, just then when the Physician was feeling the Patients
pulse, which beat so strong when he saw the Queen come into the chamber, that
Eristratus knew that he was in love with her, and that was the cause of his
sickness: wherefore he found the way to make the King acquainted with it, by
such a means as would be too tedious to recite. Which being experimented by the
father, and seeing his son in danger, if he did not prevent it, thought it good
(though contrary to the intention of the son, which chose rather death than to
be healed by his fathers Ioss) to deprive himself of his Queen, and give her to
his sick son. And so indeed, the age, and the beauty of the Lady, and likewise
marriage, was more proper for the son than for the father. And by this means,
Antiochus lived well and gallantly many years with his wel-beloved Stratonicus.
The History is very neatly recited by Plutark in the life of Demetrius. And
thus you see why Physicians say, that you must feel the Pulse of those that are
in love, and repeat to them diverse names of persons, and if you name the right
the pulse will beat thick and strong and by that you shall know whom they love.
By diverse other signs one may know when any is in love, and with whom, which I
leave to speak of now.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the strange and furious love of a young At henian. And of the ridiculous
love of King Xerxes. And how beasts have many times loved men and women.

TO see men affectioned to women and women to men is a natural thing and to be
believed. But here blindness is come to that height, that that which I intend
to speak of, seems impossible and incredible. Historiographers write it for
truth that in the Town of Achens there was a young man, of an honest family,
competeutly rich and well known, who having curiously observed a Statue of
Marble, excellently wrought, and in a public place in Athens fell so in love
with it, that he could not keep himself from the place where it stood, but be
always embracing of it, and always when he was not with it, he was
discontented, and blubbered with tears.

This passion came to such an extremity, that he addressed himself to the
Senate at Athens, and offering them a good sum of money, beseeching them to do
him the favor that he might have it home with him. The Senate found that they
could not by their authority, suffer it to be taken away, nor to sell any
public Statue, so that his request was denied, which made him mavelous
sorrowful even at the heart. Then he went to the Statue, and put a Crown of
Gold upon it, and enriched it with garments, and Jewels of great price, then
adored it, and seriously beheld it, musing always upon it, and in this folly
persevered many days, that at last being forbidden these things by the Senate,
he killed himself with grief; this thing was truly wonderful. But if that be
true which is written upon Xerxes, and affirmed by so many Authors, indeed he
excelled in folly all the men in the world. They say he fell in love with a
Plain tree, a tree well known though a stranger in England, and that he loved
it, and cherished it, as if it had been a woman.

Seeing then these things happen to rational men, we may believe that which is
written of bruit beasts, which have loved certain men and women, especially
when we find it certified by great and famous writers. As Glaucus: that was so
loved of a sheep that it never forsook him. Every one holds that the Dolphin is
a lover of men. Elian writes in his book of beasts a case worthy to be read. He
says, that a Dolphin seeing upon the Seashore, where children were a playing,
one among the rest which he liked very well, he fell so in love with it, that
every time that the Dolphin see him, he came as near as he could to the edge of
the water to show himself. At the first the child being afraid, did shun it,
but afterward, by the Dolphins perseverance one day after another, and showing
signs of love to the child, the child was encouraged, and upon the kind usage
of the Dolphin, the child was emboldened to swim upon the water near unto the
fish even to go ride upon the back of it, and the fish would carry him for a
good space of time even to the bottom of the water, till the child made a sign
to rise again.

In this solace and sport they spent many days, during which the Dolphin came
every day to present himself to the brink of the Sea. But at one time, the
child being naked, swimming in the Sea, and getting upon the Dolphin willing to
hold fast, one of the sharp pricks in the Fin of the Dolphin run into his
belly, which wounded him so that the child died immediately in the water, which
the Dolphin perceiving and seeing the blood and the child dead upon his back,
he swam presently to the shore, and as though he would punish himself for this
fault, swimming in great fury he leaped out of the water, carrying with him as
well as he could the dead child, which he so much loved, and died upon the
shore with him.

This very thing is recited by Pliny, and others with examples of Dolphins
which have born love to men. And particularly he says, that in the time of the
Emperor Octavian, another Dolphin, in the same manner, took love to a child
upon the Seacoast near to Pusoll, and that every time this child called Simon
(they say this fish will run at that name) it came presently to the Sea brink,
and the child mounted upon the back of it, and the Child was carried into the
sea as little away as he would and brought back again safe He says also that
this child dying by accident of sickness, and the Dolphin coming diverse times
to the accustomed place, not finding the child there, died also. Pliny the
second, Nephew to the great Pliny, recites mavelous things of the Dolphin in
his ninth book of his Epistles, in an Epistle which begins thus,

Incidi in materiam veram, etc,

CHAP. XXX.
Why Snow being covered with straw, it preserves it in its coldness, and hot
water in its heat, seeing they are two contrary effects by one and the same
thing, with some other secrets.

TO men of wit, and lovers of the contemplation of the works of nature, there
shall not any thing present it self though never so slight, or of little worth,
but they will find something of note in it, which may yield them content when
they have found it out. We may find many men, that if we should ask them the
reason, and what is the cause that Snow being covered with straw is preserved a
long time in its cold nature of Snow without melting, they could not tell what
to say. To this Alexander Aphrodise, an excellent Parepatetick, answers; That
straw has no manifest or known quality, it is neither hot nor cold, so that
some have named it without any quality, for this cause, because it is so
singularly temperate, and delicate, even to such a degree, as we cannot say
whether it be hot or cold, and so easily converts it self unto the quality of
the thing whereunto it is adjoined; so that putting it upon snow, which is
cold, the straw pertakes of the cold quality of it, and by the means thereof
aids and maintains the coldness of the Snow, as a thing of one quality helped
by another, without heating it at all, because it has none; so the Snow being
accompanied with cold, and defended from heat, which the straw keeps from it,
preserves it self in the same being, a long time, and longer than if it were
not covered with straw.

By the same reason it works a contrary effect in warmwater, because being
covered with straw, the straw receives immediately, the quality of heat from
the water, and being so heat, it aids and keeps the water in its heat, and
defends and keeps away the air that would cool it.

By this reason we may understand and find out other dificulties and doubts,
which curious persons may put unto us like unto this.

We know well, that besides our natural and inward heat, that which causes
heat in us in Summer, is the air, which in that season is much more hot then at
any other times in the year, so the hotter the air is, the more we feel the
heat. If then it be so, now comes it that we find more coldness and
freshness, and less heat in giving our selves air in summer, by fanning and
moving it, when Aristotle says, motion causes greater heat; so that the air
by this agitation, ought to be hot it self, and heat us more than if it were
left quiet and unmoved.

The cause proceeds from this, that we have more heat in our bodies, then there
is in the air, as well naturally as what the air works in us. For the air
coming freshly, (I say freshly because it is more temperate then our selves) it
something tempers us, but being at rest about us, it heats it self by our heat
as we have said before of the straw, it preserves, nay augments this heat,
howbeit if it be agitated and often renewed, in coming upon us more temperate
than we are our selves, this temperature and difference which we find of less
heat, moderates that which we have from our selves. This is the answer that
Alexander and Aristotle gives to this question.

We must notwithstanding observe and note, That if the air be more hot than the
heat which we have from our selves, the agitation and fanning of that air will
not be so good, because we shall find greater heat by so doing.

So let us see now, to come again to hot water, If we put our hands into it, we
shall have much ado to keep them in, yet if we hold our hands still, we may
endure it better than if we stir them up and down; because the water which
surrounds the cold hand tempers a little that which is about it, but in
stirring it in the water, the water renews its heat, and begets every time new
force.

We may ask again, Why is it hotter in June and althrough July, the Sun being
then farther from us, than at the beginning of June, when we are in the
Solstice and longest days in the year, and beats more right upon us with his
rays. To which Aristotle answers in the second of his Meteors, that the heat of
the Sun is not the cause, nor do we feel it the more by being near to us, but
when it has the longer time to be over us; because in June and July, it has
had a longer time to draw near unto us, so in declining it causes a greater
heat, for it heats again in its descent the part and track of the air which it
had before heat by its rising.

CHAP. XXXI.
In what part of the Zodiac, the Sun, the Moon, and the rest of the Planets
were placed when they were made. And which was the beginning of years and times.

AS the Philosopher says, men are naturally curious to know, and again in this
case, such is their covetousness and greedy desire of human understanding, that
they content not themselves alone, with the things that they comprehend with
ease. But beyond that, they search and strive, with great presumption, to know
and understand impossible or very hard things, So it is nevertheless that this
toilsome desire, has not been totally in vain, because contemplation and
continual study has found out things which have seemed impossible and
supernatuall to come to the knowledge of men, as are the motions of the
Heavens, the course of the Planets and the Stars, with their power and
influence, and such like things. Amongst which is comprehended that which I
intend now to treat of, which is to know, At what time of the year, and upon
what day the world began. Or to speak better, When and at what season God
created the world, when began the time, and the year, or where was the Sun, or
where did God first place it, when it began its course, and likewise the Moon
and other Planets? Aristotle troubles himself little with these questions, no
more does a number of other Philosophers, who for want of the light of faith,
believe that the world was eternal and without beginning: yet those that have
not been ignorant of these things, but have believed this beginning of time,
are almost divided in two opinions.

Some amongst them say, that at the instant when the world was created, the Sun
was found in the first point of the sign of the Ram, which is in the summer
Equinoxial, about the eleventh day of the month of March.

Others say, that the world began, the Sun being in the first point of Libra,
which is the winter Equinoxial, commonly beginning the thirteenth or fourteenth
of September. Of this opinion were some Egyptians and Arabians, and likewise
some Greeks.

Those that follow that opinion allege one reason, but at the last. I will
show how feeble and weak it is. For (say they) then the principal fruits of the
earth were ripe and in season. And also that it was reason, that the earth
should present it self at the beginning perfect, and to this purpose allege
the authority in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 12.
where it is said, God made all things perfect and furnished.

There have been others which have said, that the beginning of time and years,
was the longest day of all the rest, which is then when the Sun enters in the
sign of Cancer, which is the eleventh or twelfth of June.

Julius Fermicus an ancient Author, and of great authority in Astrology says,
that at the beginning of the world the Sun was at fifteen degrees of the Lion,
which is the sign in which it has most Lordship, because it is called the
house of the Sun, and so he says in discoursing upon other of the Planets. But
the most reasonable of all these opinions. And the most agreeing to truth is,

That when time and the Heavens began to move, the Sun was in the first point
of Aries, the Ram, which is to us in March, which is almost the beginning of
Summer, which is affirmed (besides those reasons which we will give) by the
greatest part of Historiographers, as well Christians as Ethnicks, amongst
which are St. Jerome, St. Ambrose, St. Basil, and others, all which place the
beginning of the world, and of the year in the Equinoxiall of our summer, and
although there seems to be some difference amongst them. Because one will
have this beginning to be in March, and the other will have it in April, that
may be born with; for they both agree that it was in the Equinoxial which now
is in March. Nevertheless as we have said heretofore, the Equinoxiall is not
constant, for our Savior Christ, suffered the five and twentieth of March,
which was then the Equinoxiall, and now it is the eleventh; And therefore it
may be supposed that heretofore it was in April: for this cause some have put
April for the first month, and others March, and yet they would all say; that
when the Sun enters into the first point of Aries, that is the Equinoxiall: and
this opinion is founded upon the holy Scripture, namely out of the twelfth
Chapter of Exodus, where it is said that the Month Nisan, which is our March,
is the beginning of their year. Also Vincent says, that the Hebrews began
their year in March. because in that month is the Equinoxiall, where the world
began.

This opinion is likewise held of diverse Heathens, as Elpaco in his Treatise of
Astrology, where he says, that the Caldeans, who were very great Astrologers,
believed also, that the first day in which the world was created, the Sun
entered into the first point of the sign of Aries, which is also maintained by
the greatest part of Astrologers, as well Ancient as Modern. When therefore the
Sun joins himself there, that is the beginning of the year, and from thence
comes the beginning or first day. For it is very clear, that the first day of
the world was made the first day of the year, seeing that before, there was
neither time nor year; for this cause the sign of Aries is of all accounted the
first in the order of the twelve signs.

And as to judge of the revolution of years, and of things to come, it is
necessary to even the figures, by the beginning of the world, so is it easy to
prove, that God placed the Sun in the first point of this sign, at the
beginning of the world, and the creation thereof, which may be more easily
imagined, by that which we have proved in a former Chapter. That the Sun was in
the same point at the Creation then, when the great Sun, framed the
re-generation of the world, suffering death in humane flesh, which came to
pass, as we have said, in this Equinoxial of Summer, which is an Argument and
presupposal, that he placed it so then when he created it.

Again, it seems credible, that it has been so placed, because those that know
any thing in Astrology and the Spears, will see very well, that the Sun
entering the degree of this Sign, and performing his revolution in the space of
one whole day, there is no part of the world but sees it, and is illuminated
by his light, which is not performed in any other part of the Zodiac; because
in what other part soever it be, there is some part of the earth where it is
not seen: But being in this first point, as we have said, there is not any
place which is not enlightened in making his days course.

Now it was convenient and fit, that the first day that the Sun should run his
compass, he should begin in such a place, that with his beams he might visit
all the parts of the world: and that this should be rather in the Sign of
Aries, than Libra, appears by that which I have said, That the day of the
Passion of our Savior, the Sun was in the same place, and has also in that
Sign a particular force.

Holding then this opinion for the most certain, I say the reason alleged by
those that say, The beginning of the world was in the September Equinoxial, is
weak: Nor does it help them to say, that all fruits were then ripe, and in
season; because that is not an universal rule; for when fruit is ripe toward
the latitude of the North, it is not so in the South, but quite contrary. And
for this cause I will not help my self with their reasons, that say, the
Epuinoxial in March (which I approve of) is the beginning of the Spring time
and growth of flowers over all the earth, and that all things then increase;
for if to us it be the beginning of Spring time, it is Winter to them in the
Southern parts.

Let our reasons then suffice, and the authority of such great persons, and let
none be longer in doubt, seeing that the Roman year which is in use, begins
likewise the first day of January; for this came to pass by the superstitious
devotion which the Gentiles had to their God Ianus, and would have their year
begin with his name, as the Christians begin theirs at the birth of Jesus
Christ, although there the year begins not. So the Romans began the year in
March, as Varro and Macrobius writes, and diverse others.

So God showed his large bounty, and infinite goodness, in placing our first
Parents, Adam and Eve in the Northern parts of the earth, when he banished them
out of the Earthly Paradise; for the first season that they saw in the world,
was the Spring time, when they found the Earth green and flourishing, and the
Air sweet and temperate; and this was for a consolation to their misery and
nakedness, which they would not have found, had it not been Spring time.

Now this being sufficiently proved, let us know that there are other Planets;
and first the Moon, as one of the principals: which some say the first day that
it was created, God placed it in conjunction with the Sun. Others say that it
was in opposition, and that it was at full. Saint Augustiue recites both these
two opinions, upon Genesis the fifth Chapter. And faith, That those that
maintain, that it was in opposition, and at full, give for their reason, That
it was not convenient that at it is beginning God should create it defective in
any thing.

Others say the contrary, That it is rather to be believed, that it was created
in the first day of the Moon, than otherwise. But to make short, I say,
according to my opinion, That God when he created it, made it entirely full,
and in opposition to the Sun; and so it seems that this opinion is most
received.

Saint Augustine, in the place alleged, and Raban upon the eleventh chapter of
Exodus, say the same: and they agree with the holy Scripture, where it is said,
God made two Lights: one great to govern the day, the other less to govern the
night.

Now at the same instant that the Sun begins to show his light, he enlightens
half the world, so that in half the world it is day: but the other half cannot
have the light of the Sun, because of the shadow of the Earth.

Nevertheless it seems reasonable, that in the other half of the Earth where
it is night, the Moon do her office of giving light; because as they were both
created at one and the same instant, so do they both their office at one and
the same instant, and one rules the day, and the other the night, as the Text
says; for then was verified the words of the holy Scripture, And the world was
enlightened throughout.

And on the contrary, If the Moon had been in conjunction, that could not be
but fifteen days after, and there would have been three or four days past
before she could have given light to the Earth, although this had been but
little, as we see when she is four or five days old: Wherefore it is
convenient, that these two lights enlighten the Earth at one and the same time.

I say further, That if the Moon had been in opposition of the Sun, of
necessity she must be found one the other side, in the sign of Libra: which
being so, she works that day the same effect of the Sun, enlightening all the
world, in the measure that she makes her course that day, which she could not
do if she were in any other place, by means whereof this opinion seems to be
most likely. Although Tulius Firmicus would say, That the Moon when it was
created, had her first seat in the fifteenth Degree of the sign of Cancer,
where she loves best to be. Of which opinion is Macrobius, in his first book of
Scipio's Dream.

As for other Planets, It would be more difficult to avouch, and less
profitable to know; therefore I mean not to employ much time about them.
Howsoever Julius Firmicus in the second book before alleged, has the
boldness to name the places where every one of them were seated: saying,
Saturn was in Capricorn, Jupiter in the sign of Sagittarius, Mars in Scorpio,
Venus in Libra, Mercury in Virgo, which are the signs in which they have most
force; and so are they the signs denoted of these Planets.

Macrobius in the alleged book of Scipio's Dream, agrees with Firmicus, and
names the same signs. And so there are others which think, that at this instant
all the Planets are in conjunction with the Sun.

As for me, I am of opinion that God placed then the Planets in such distant
places one from the other, and especially from the Sun, that at that day every
one of them might enlighten the earth with their Beams, which could not be, if
they were in conjunction with the Sun; because his presence, in a certain
distance and proportion hinders, that their Rays and light cannot be seen upon
the earth. Nevertheless, having been created by the will of God, it is
sufficient (as St Augustine says) that they were made in a perfect estate by
the hand of God, whose works, of what sort soever, are perfect.

CHAP. XXXII.
Wherefore Sleep was given to man, and how too much Sleep is hurtful and naught.

SLeep was given naturally to man for his preservation, because there is no
work of nature which has not need of rest. Aristotle says, that every living
thing that has blood sleeps; and from thence he proves by reason and
experience also, that fishes do sleep.

Sleep is a repose, and rest of all the senses, and proceeds from vapors and
fumes, which by reason of meat, rise from the stomach to the Brain, by the
coldness of which, these hot vapors are tempered, and set to sleep the motion
and exterior senses.

Then the vital spirits retire to the heart, and all the members sleep and
rest from travel, even until the vital spirits (which is the instrument by
which the soul works, governs and commands the body) recover new force, and
that these vapors diminishing or ceasing, the man begins to awake, and then
the senses and the powers return anew, with a greater force to perform the
operation.

Of these occasions of Sleep, Aristotle treats largely in his book of sleep
and watching. And Plutarch recites diverse opinions of Philosophers. But
although this be rest and health to the body, yet it must be moderate, because
long sleep as Aristotle says, weakens the spirits both of body and mind, even
as the moderate use thereof gives them vigor and strength, for many things are
necessary, which nevertheless are hurtful, if they be taken in excess.

Eating is necessary and savoury, yet if it be past measure, It hurts and has
no taste. So moderate travel is healthful but if it be contrary it is hurtful.

Likewise sleep should not be used but upon necessity, for the repose, and
refreshing of the senses, the spirits, and the members.

Now too much sleep (besides that it make the senses and the members heavy and
sluggish, and infeebled by laziness) breeds so much humidity in the body,
that it makes it sick and diseased, and kills; for sleeping, all the
humidities in the body retires with the natural heat to the exterior parts
and makes no evacuation of its superfluities and moistures. So that immoderate
sleep is not only forbidden by Physicians and Philosophers, but reproved by
wise men. Aristotle says, while we sleep there is no difference betwixt a wise
man and a fool.

And in truth, although the wise man has no other reason to shorten his sleep,
but, not to make himself like to him that has no wit, yet he ought to abridge
it (although it sustain and keep life and health) considering that he which
sleeps is not alive, As Plutarch says, in his book of strife betwixt fire and
water. He that sleeps has no more strength nor knowledge while he sleeps, than
if he were dead. Pl^nie is of the same opinion, saying that we spend half of
our time in sleep, seeing that when we sleep, we neither know nor feel that we
live.

Ovid* and diverse other Poets and learned men call sleep the similitude of
death. And in the holy Scripture slep is compared to death. St. Paul says, [I
would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which sleep:] and
a little after. [God will bring along with him those that sleep by Jesus
Christ.]

Sleep is likewise the Image of negligence and slothfulness. The same Saint
Paul shows it saying, Brethren it is now time to awake out of Sleep. It
signifies also sin and guilt, as St Gregory says, That to sleep is to hold
and persevere in sin. If sleep had not been taken for sin, Saint Paul would not
have said so many times, Awake ye Just and fin no more.

Let that man then be ashamed that spends most part of his life in bed and
sleep; for he sins no less then he that sits all the day long at the table
to eat, seeing that these things ought to be used, for the sustentation of
life, and not for the the damage or hurt of it, and of the soul also.

So then sleep ought to be taken for the support of the body and not for
pleasure. And seeing we must employ it only to the health of the body, let us
now know in what manner a man ought to lay himself in his bed to sleep, that it
may be profitable unto him.

It is said that the best sleeping for a man in good order, and sound, is, to
lie, during his first sleep, upon his right side, and then the most part of the
night upon the left. And upon conclusion of your sleep, to turn a little upon
the right again.

The reason is, because the stomach of man is situated so, that the mouth of
it is a little more toward the right side then toward the left, and the
bottom of it hollow declining something toward the left side. So that a man
laying himself to sleep upon the right side an hour or two, the stomach spreads
it self, and lies upon the liver: and from thence proceeds two benefits. The
one is, that the stomach is set right, and being set right, the meat descends
more easily to the bottom.

The second is, That the moistness of the meat refreshes the Liver, and with
this refreshment the natural heat takes force in the stomach to begin to make
digestion. After these two good effects have taken their turn, it would be good
to turn upon the other side, because in so turning, the Liver comes to cover
the stomach, and to embrace it with its skirts, so that the meat is retained by
the Liver, and digestion perfected.

Nevertheless it is good, toward the conclusion of sleep to turn again upon
the right side, that the stomach may begin to be set straight again, and be
discharged of the Liver, and to expel the air, or superfluity of the
forepassed digestion.

This Rule is good and well known to him, whose Liver is temperate, and stomach
not could, and he who has these two members sound and temperate.

But for him that has the Liver too hot, and the stomach cold, as it happens
often times, it is not good to sleep upon the right side, for the stomach
falling upon the Liver, and compassing it on all sides; it inflames and heats
the Liver extremely; and the stomach being left uncovered, as uppermost, is
made more cold: besides, the great heat that is in the Liver, takes away and
draws to it self, that little heat which is in the stomach, from whence
proceeds an ill digestion and consequently an il habit and unhealthfulness.

Wherefore for him that shall have a cold stomach and a hot Liver, it will be
healthful for him to sleep always upon the left side, because the stomach
being on all sides covered with the Liver, it makes its digestion. And as for
the Liver being so uppermost it is uncovered, and disburthened, and by that
means is refreshed and not enflamed.

There are also some that sleep upon their belly, which helps and strengthens
digestion, because it gathers together, and reteins natural beat in the parts
about the stomach, and so is in better disposition to evacuate the
superfluities.

The contrary of which happens to them that sleep upon their back, with their
face uppermost; because the natural heat spreads abroad, and by that means
digestion is weakened, and the superfluities cannot be voided by the mouth nor
by the ordinary courses, but rests in the Breast and the Throat, which causes
many times, Stopping, Palsies, and other infirmities.

Understanding men again advise not to sleep, with the Lims stretched out in
bed, because it weakens disgestion. For according to the Philosopher, when the
virtues and the powers are united together the operation will be the better.
And then being so moderately heaped together, the fleshy part which covers the
stomach, joins better to it, and heats it, and strengthens it the more.

These Rules are necessary for those that are tender and weak. But for the
healthful and lusty, the best Rule is, for him to observe and keep the custom
that he has always used.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How it comes to pass that some live long, and other some but a short time.
And what complexions lives longest. Also, how that is to be understood where
it is said, the days of a man is numbered.

THe Apostle Saint Paul says, that all men are subject once to die, and in
that all men are alike: Nevertheless, there is difference in the terms of
life, for one lives longer and another a shorter time, and yet according to
Job the time of our life is measured, and it is not possible for man to pass
the bounds which God has set and determined for our life. Things standing so
as indeed they are, it will not be amiss to understand that which causes in
the life of man, why one lives longer than another; and what complexions makes
best for a long life: and lastly, how we shall understand that where it is
said, that our days are numbered and determined, and that it is not possible to
go beyond that, which are obscure and difficult points and understood but of
few people.

To understand therefore that which concerns the length of our life.

We must presuppose in the first place, that the life of man and the
maintenance of the humane body, consists in the accord and harmony of the four
elements or elementary qualities whereof it is composed. That is to say, hot,
cold, moist, and dry.

And expressly in the proportionable harmony of heat and moisture, which
Aristotle well demonstrates who makes only mention of the agreement of these
two qualities, for the continuance of man.

So we see by experience that man fails not so long as he has natural heat,
for this heat is the principal instrument that maintains the vegetative spirit.

And indeed the life of man consists in no other thing, than in maintaining the
Instruments and Organs of the Soul, amongst which natural heat holds by good
right the first rank. For this heat is so necessary for the maintenance of a
humane body, that it failing, the soul is constrained to forsake the body, and
put an end to the life of that man.

And because this natural heat holds of fire, which consumes of its own nature
all that it meets withal, it is convenient to oppose it, by an other contrary
quality, for the preservation of inferior bodies.

For this cause God placed the Radical or natural moisture with this natural
heat to nourish and maintain it, even as the fire is nourished and maintained
with oil.

And because this Radical moisture consumes and diminishes daily, to maintain
the same, all living creatures must drink and eat, that so by that means, the
moisture caused by that digestion may supply the default of nature.

But seeing that (as Aristotle says) the moisture caused of that digestion, is
never so perfect as the Radical and natural although it serve much to
maintain it, of necessity this Radical moisture diminishes daily (for the
accidental moisture caused by digestion, is never so perfect as the Radical
which is vanished) and by this means vanishing totally the natural heat is
lost, and the body finisheth its end; for if the Radical moisture caused of
this digestion, were as perfect as the natural moisture which is vanished, man
would live endlesly (as Divines say) who maintain, that the nature of the Tree
of life, which God placed in the earthly Paradise consisted principally in
this, that eating of its fruit, it restored the Radical moisture which would
have been lost and vanished. From thence it came that this Tree was prohibited
to Adam and Eve, after they were driven out of Paradise. But if our first
Parents had continued in their original righteousness, they and their
Posterity eating of the fruit of that Tree, would have lived eternally in
flourishing youth, without tasting corruption, or old age, until God had
glorified their bodies, without passing through the gate of death.

But seeing that humane Race lost this Prerogative by sin, which has brought
in death into the world, it is no marvel if this offense be stamped upon us.

Now to return to our discourse. I say the life lasts longer or shorter,
according as heat, and Radical moisture are concordant and proportionable. For
those in whom these qualities meet most tempered, and best proportioned live
longest. And not those in whom the said qualities most abound. From thence it
comes that we see, many small creatures, who have but little heat and moisture,
live longer than those that are greater, and abound more in the said qualities;
which happens as well to Trees as men.

So that we may say, long life consists in the temperature and just proportion
of heat and moisture, which failing, the company, that is to say, life, is
dissolved and lost. For when heat surpasses moisture, it consumes in a short
time the whole body, as we may see in chollerick men.

On the contrary, when by excessive moisture the heat is extinguished, as we
see in phlegmatic persons, the like happens.

By this nevertheless, we must not understand, that there ought to be as much
moisture as heat. But it is meet, that the proportion be observed; that is to
say, that the heat surpass the moisture proportionably.

For a thing active, has no great power to work upon an other, if it exceed
not the thing passive, which Aristotle covertly demonstrates, when he says,
that amongst the two qualities before spoken of, there ought to be some little
coldness mingled to moderate the heat of the Radical fire, that it may not
wholly consume the natural moisture. And that drought is also requisite, to
dry up the Radical moisture, that it may not quench the natural fire, as we
see it often happens to little children, who die of too much moisture. Yet
amongst these four qualities the hot and the moist are held for the principals,
as being vital complexions, and causing life.

As for the cold and the dry, although they serve greatly for the preservation
of life, yet nevertheless, we hold these two qualities to be the entrance to,
and beginning of death. For cold is an enemy to heat, in which principally
consists the point of life. And drought is opposite and contrary to moisture,
which nourishes nevertheless the natural heat.

So we may see in old folks, which become dry and cold, when they approach near
unto death; nay even in all dead bodies which ordinarily are dry and cold.

Man then, Heaven working this good temperature, ought to season his complexion
amongst these four qualities, in such sort, that he maintain the heat in the
first place, and after that the moisture making the cold and the dry to serve,
according to their function and quarter. Even so, those that find themselves
not thus proportionably temperate are naturally short lived.

See here then the causes of long and short life.

It rests now to speak of, which is the best complexion to show long life.

In the first place then, we must note, that of the four complexions in man, to
wit, choleric, sanguine, phlegmatic and melancholy, the sanguine is the best
to cause a man to live long.

For the blood is hot and moist, which qualities are proper to maintain life.
Also its moisture is not waterish, but airy, being hot and moist, and sorts
with the sanguine complexion.

And so this Sanguine Complexion participating something of the temperate heat,
and a sufficient moisture to nourish the heat, is the most proper of all the
complexions to conduce to long life.

As for the Choleric, that continues less, because the force and vivacity of
its fire and heat, cannot long endure with the drought

The Phlegmatic and waterish cannot be digested by the heat, because of it
excessive moisture, and so it easily corrupts, which in the end causes death.

The Melancholy, being earthy, shortens the life by its cold disposition and
dryness, which are contrary qualities to heat and moisture. Wherefore it is
not marvel if they shorten the life, where they abound in any body.

Nevertheless, if choler be mingled with phlegm, and that it do surmount
proportionably the phlegm, this complexion is abiding enough to yield long
life. Also when the blood surpasses melancholy in a good proportion, this
complexion is good; for the heat and moisture of the blood, tempers the cold,
and dryness of the melancholy.

And so there are compounded complexions, which are much better then the simple
Sanguine, to yield long life.

By that which is aforesaid, we may see that the life of man is limited, by the
virtue and power of his complexion, and by the proportion of the elementary
qaalities, in such fort, that the diversity of proportions cause a diversity of
terms or time to the life of man.

So it is said, that a man may live as long as his natural heat lasts, and
Radical moisture is maintained.

And whereas it is said, that the life of man is limited, beyond which it is
unpossible to pass. We must note, that although the complexion and natural
perfection of a man may bring him and support him, even to the last period, yet
nevertheless, of a thousand scarce one attains to that point.

For there are so many disasters which accidentally happen, either by some
disorder, that the most part die before nature fails them, be it, by Famine,
Plague, Poison, Gluttony, Whoredom, ill diet; or by diseases, caused by
infinite excess.

And so the true natural term of the life of man, is, when nature fails, so
that it is unpossible to pass that point of time.

And so we must understand that passage in Job, where it is said, Lord, thou
have established the bounds which it is unposible for him to go beyond.

By this passage we may clearly see, that man may shorten his life, but not
lengthen it. So that we see many of good complexion that might live a great
number of years, which nevertheless are short lived, by some exterior cause,
which hastens their days.

Yet this passage of Job may be otherwise understood, in regard of Gods
foreknowledge, who appoints to every one the term of hit life, be it by his
natural complexion, or by some other end, that he has assigned to the life of
man.

And because there is nothing hidden from the wisdom of God who knows all the
accidental causes, which may happen to man it is impossible for man to
lengthen his life, beyond what God has ordained, although the causes be
contingent.

And so one may say, there are two terms of a man's life. The one whereof
depends upon the Harmony, and proportion of the elementary qualities. The other
is according to the preordination, and foreknowledge of God.

Between which terms there is only this difference; that one may arrive even
at the first, though not go beyond it; But all come to the second. And although
by course of nature, one may pass the second, yet nevertheless, there is none
that ever passes it.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How great the mischief is, to desire a Revelation of things in the Life to
come.

EVen as God, who has creatted us, without us, will not save us without us; so
has he given us the ground of the means of our Salvation, which is faith with
hope of the riches which he has promised us in the life to come, by an ancient
decree, which is revealed unto us by his only son; which we cannot obtain,
without believing and hoping in him. But man's weakness (or to say rather) the
faith of man is so weak, that when it is preached unto him, the glory that God
has provided for him hereafter, he will say, he believes it.

But nevertheless he will say, it is a great matter of so many men that are
dead, there is not one returned to tell us the things of the other world.

The greatest sign of unbelief in the heart of man is (in my judgment) this
great desire to have revelations from the other world. For seeing that faith
consists in believing, and hoping for things that are not seen if they were
revealed unto us, there were no more faith, and so this singular means of our
Salvation were taken from us.

Again, I say further, That not only by this Revelation Faith would be
destroyed; but also it would be an occasion to make us run into great errors
against God, as we may easily judge by this argument.

Put the case, that our Father, Mother, or Brother, after death should return
into this world, and were clothed with the same flesh they had left behind
them, and that we should certainly believe they were the same, and that they
should be conversant, drink, and eat with us, as our Savior did with his
Apostles, that they might not be in doubt he was a Spirit, or a Shadow; and
that this our Brother, etc. should reveal unto us the things of the other
world, there were no doubt but we should hearken to him, and without all
question believe that whidh he says to be true.

Now this must be a man, because he has Soul and Body; and believing him, we
believe a man, which by nature a Liar.

So by this it would follow, that giving him credit, we should rather believe a
man, by nature a liar, than God, who is sovereign and passing truth, and cannot
lie, who has told us, and often repeated the reward which is prepared
hereafter for the good, and the punishment for the wicked.

There is none then but will confess, that this is a grievous sin, if we
should give credit to this Revelation so much desired by men, believing rather
the creature than the Creator.

Let not man then be any more desirous to know that which may turn to his
Damnation.: And that he consider that all that God gives, or all that God
denies us, is for our good, which he seeks more than our selves.

And if all men ought to order themselves thus, it belongs much more to
Christians; to whom our Savior shows, that we ought to believe that which is
revealed to us by him, in the Scriptures, spoken by him in the parable of the
Rich-man, You have Moses and the Prophets hear them.

Imprimatur,

John Downam.

FINIS.

