A TREATISE OF CONSUMPTIONS

LICENSED,

October 13. 1666. Roger L'Estrange,

A TREATISE OF CONSUMPTIONS.

The Second Edition.

Whereunto is Annexed, Useful Discoveries, and Practical Observations, in some
late Remarkable Cures of the SCURVY. Never before Printed.

By E. Maynwaringe, Dr. in Physic.

Cognitio Sequitur Curationes. LONDON, Printed by Anne Maxwell, and are to be
sold by Tho. Basset, at his Shop under St. Dunstans Church, in Fleet Street,
1668.

Preface.
HAving surveyed and seriously perused many Volumes of the most learned and
eminent Physicians ancient and modern; I find a great progress made in the Art
of Physic, being modelled and methodized into such order, as if nothing were
wanting to its perfection; and that the burden of this business has wholly
rested upon the shoulders of our Predecessors in this Faculty and Profession;
so that it may be thought (by superficial indagators) there is nothing new to
be inquired after; that the work is done to our hand, and we may sit down and
rest satisfied in the enjoyment of their labors; tha^ tracing their footsteps,
we ar^ sufficiently guided in the righ^ practice of Physic.

Though others are contented to acquiesce in traditional notions, and jog on in
the common road, as being most easy and beaten; and to look upon the inquiries
and determinations of our Ancestors, as a ne plus ultra to any disquisition or
sedulous indagation of their own: for my own part I am willing to step aside
sometimes into rough untrodden ways, to find out some secrets in Nature, not
confining my self within the Rules of Common Practice, nor thinking my self
bounded and restrained by the Canons of the Ancients, but guided by Reason and
true Experiments, the best and safest conduct that leads to truth.

But I would not be mistaken, as if I contemned the works of other men,
endeavoring to build upon their ruins; I have as great a regard to all the
Learned in this Faculty as any whatsoever; and am so far from blasting any one,
that I would rather smother then willingly blaze their errors: but where
necessity compells me (for truths sake) I am blameless when I name some: nor is
it to be looked upon as a defamation, men are but men, and we know but in part;
and if another can convince me of error, I shall thank him for his admonition,
and submit to his more prevalent and persuasive reasons: until then, I shall
adhere to, and defend the Assertions delivered in the following Discourse, as
most consonant with reason, and verified by my practice and observations.

London, At my House in Clerkenwell-Close.
A Table of the Heads, and chief matter treated on.
OF Consumptions in general; several Denominations and their Etymologies. page
1. Of Life. p. 3. Of vital and fundamental Principles, and their operations. p.
8. Of the material, sensitive and mortal Soul of man. p. 11. Of the vital
Spirit, or balsom of Life. p. 16. Of Fermentation, and fermenting Principles.
p. 25 A Survey of the vital and fundamental Principles, conjunctim. p. 36. Of
vital heat. p. 39. Of a Consumption Atrophy. p. 42. Of Scorbutic Consumptions.
p. 49. Of a Hectic Fever. p. 54. Of a Phthisick, and Consumption of the Lungs.
p. 77. Of a Spermatick Consumption and Gonorrhaea, or running of the reins. p.
98. Of Fluor albus, the whites. p. 104.
Tabidorum Narratio.
Of Consumptions in general; several Denominations and their Etymologies.
AT the entrance of our discourse upon this Subject, it will not be
unprofitable to examine the word Consumption; for that Diseases most commonly
have their denominations significant, intimating the nature of the Disease, or
something eminently appertaining thereto.

Consumption in its genuine signification, denotes a wasting or wearing away,
from Consumo to spend, wast, or lessen: but the Latin word most commonly used
by Physicians is Tabes from Tabeo, signifying also to consume or wast; and in
the latitude of this signification most diseases may be called Consumptions,
because they do prey upon the vital and fundamental principles, spend and wear
them; yea after the vigor and strength of our age is past, although we
continue without a manifest depravation of the functions belonging to vitality,
and in a state of health; yet the^ is a declension, spending, and decay of the
vital and fundamental principles, which do deficere, fall off from their
pristine integrity and vigor, though we are not sensible of it, but by space
of time: we cannot perceive daily they do decrescere but we find them
decrevisse; that they are wasted and decreased in their vigou^ and strength,
which this word Consumption does comprise.

But this is not the intent of our discourse, although the latitude of the word
will admit: yet it will be profitable and useful to consider the variety o^
Consumptions and Declensions of Nature, although in a state of health, for the
better illustration of those arising from morbific causes, which strictly and
more peculiarly intended are the subject matter of this work; and they are
distinguished by these several appellations: Atrophia, Febris Hectica,
Phthisis, Seminis excretio, called tabes dorsalis by Hippocrates.

The first signifies barely a defect or want of nutrition; the second a Hectic
Fever; the third a Ptissick, an exulceration or rottenness; the fourth an
involuntary emission of seed, or voluntary but immoderate.

Of Life.
FOR your better understanding the whole frame of this discourse, and to
facilitate your apprehension of what shall be delivered, (which otherwise might
seem obscure, and incongruous with the present design) I shall first lead you
to the foundation, that you may see what basis it has, and then your reason
will determine of the superstructure, and the conformity of its parts. This
work takes its rise from, or is bottomed upon the life, the vital and
fundamental principles, to which the whole discourse refers and depends upon:
and since our Subject to be handled and treated on, is a Consumption, a decay
and wasting of the vital principles; it is requisite in the first place you
should know what this life is, the vital and fundamental principles are, being
the basis of the discourse, which unknown, or not rightly and exactly
discovered, clouds all that shall deductively from thence be asserted and
delivered.

And first I shall recite some opinions of great Philosophers concerning life
what it is. Aristotle lib. de respir. says, that life is, (...) mansio animae
nutritivae cum calido: by which we understand only a conjunction of the
vegetative soul with the body: and like to this is Scaliger's Definition,
Exerc. 102. sect. 5. where he says the life to be (...), unionem animae cum
corpore, to whom Hollerius agrees, quid aliud vita est, quam animae and
corporis firma copulatio: Comm. 2. lib. 5. Coac. Hippocr. what is life (says
he) but the connection or coupling of soul and body.

But this opinion when it comes to be thoroughly examined will not hold; because
there is several gradations or degrees of life, whereby the Creatures are
differenced in their stations, the one more noble than the other, according to
the eminency and degree of their vitality: as the vegetative life of a Plant,
is below the sensitive life of animals; and this sensitive life of animals,
inferior and ignoble compared with the rational life of man: Now in respect of
conjunction they agree equally, that the vegetative soul of a Plant is as
really united to its. body, as the soul and body of man is coupled: here is no
gradation in connection to distinguish them; therefore Life is something else
that will admit of degrees: and here many arguments might be used to prove, and
some objections to be answered; but it was not my intention to engage so far in
polemical discourse and controversy, therefore I pass on.

Cardan and others determine, vitam esse (...) formae, life to be the operation
or action of the soul; and by how much the actions or operations in one
Creature are more noble than in another, by so much is the life of that
Creature more noble than his fellows: and although Greg. Horstius condemns this
opinion, and adheres to the Aristotelian, yet it is much more rational, and
less entangled with objection.

Helmont speaking of the life of Creatures in general, gives this definition;
vita est lumen and initium formale, quo res agit quod agere jussa est: Life is
a formal light, of a luminous nature; and he accounts the life and form of
every thing to be synonimous; natura recipit distinctiones specificas a lumine
formali: there is so many distinct lights in nature (says he) as there is
things: Formae quaedam nitent, ut in lapidibus and mineralibus; quaedam aucta
luce splendent, ut in plantis; aliae vero sunt etiam luminosae, ut in
animantatis: by which we understand their degrees in eminency of being.

And the same author in another place, creating of the life of man, says, vita
humana est lux formalis, life is a formal light: and if we admit of this
Definition, all vital operations or actions are emanations and streams issuing
from this formal light, so that lumen formale est causa and actus vitalis. Now
because forma est indemonstrabilis a priori; the essence of things is not
demonstrable in their causes; but are the ne plus ultra, the bounds and limits
of our reasoning and disquisition: I shall level the following discourse, that
you may take a view of this life a posteriori; since the Creator has veiled
the face of the Creature that we should not behold their essence, as being his
prerogative.

For these two latter definitions of life, although they differ, yet we may
receive information from both: the last appropriates the word life to the soul
or specific and individual form of every thing; and so vita, anima and forma,
are synonimous; the other to the operations that do emanare, proceed from that
form or soul; and in this aceeptation, vita is actus vitalis, (...) istius
formae: what this life is, as it is actus primus, forma and anima rei, I shall
discourse in due place following: and as vita is act us secundus, (...) formae,
action or operation, I think it necessary to explicate.

And here I might observe and lay open the variety and difference of life in
the several species of Creatures; yea those things that seem to be dead and
inanimate, are alive, do edere actiones, perform operations more or less
eminently, to testify and prove that there is life in them: and therefore
Minerals, as Stones and Metals, do live and can exert their power
proportionable to that life which is in them; though their life is not so
perspicuous and refulgent as those of a higher orb and degree in vitality; yet
their life is not so mean and contemptible as some may imagine, but their
operations are such as may and oftentimes do cause our admiration; vivunt
animalia and vegetabilia and mineralia, suo quaelibet vivendi mode.

But I must wave what collaterally falls into this discourse, and prosecute
directly the intention of this Treatise; and therefore setting aside the life
of other Creatures, I shall strictly examine the life of man, in its initiation
or plantation, gradations and exaltation, declension^ and period: and for the
better understan^ing of this life in its several degrees of vitality; how and
by what means the life of man is so fluxible and mutable, I shall bring into
consideration the principles of life, which is the subject of our discourse, in
the following s^ction.

Of vital and fundamental Principles, and their operations.
HAving undertaken to declare the life of man what it is, wherein the ratio
formalis does consist; which we have determined to be operation or action: and
since vital operation is not simple and univocal, but equivocal and various;
humane vitality being compounded of, or admiting different actions comprised
within its latitude: I shall therefore examine how it comes to pass, and from
whence these different actions do proceed, that the principles and foundation
of this life may be discovered.

The vital and fundamental principles, I call such as are principally and
fundamentally concerned in vital operations; and they are three, the sensitive
Soul, the Archaeus or vital Spirit, and the ferments: and these are the three
grand wheels upon which the life of man does move, by their distinct
causations, cooperating subordinately, and consenting in uniformity and
conformity with each other.

In natural actions of compound bodies, there is both agent and patient, part
moving and part moved: in humane vital actions there is, first, anima movens
efficienter; the Soul moving as an efficient principal cause: secondly, there
is also spiritus movens instrum^nt^liter; the vital spirit moving as agent or
instrument? Thirdly, there is fermenta partium, the ferments, which is the
peculiar and different Crasis of each part: the two former are active and more
general in causation: the latter passive special and distinct: determining the
other and specificating their efficiency, to produce various effects; to which
organization and different fabrication of parts suiting those purposes, does
contr^bute.

The proprieties of life result from these principles: hereby the Creatures are
distinguished one from the other, producing such and such distinct operations
answerable to the principles of their vitality: so that their peculiar distinct
beings and operations, arise from the peculiarity of their vital and
fundamental principles: and if these vital principles be the basis on which the
several degrees and orders of Creatures do stand, by which they are ranked and
placed in their proper stations, as their distinguishing characters; then we
must conclude that a right notion and conception of these, unfolds the
Creature, discovers its being by this light of their vitality; which unknown,
our knowledge is very dark and uncertain: and as life consists in and manifests
it self by operation; then by how much those operations are more noble,
vigorous, free, and operative, by so much is the life more excellent in that
Creature, ^am in essentia specifica quam in esse individuo: and as the life of
man is distributed into several faculties by fit organs; we may judge of the
integrity of that life, by the performance and execution of each function.

What these vital and f^ndamental principles are I shall distinctly examine
them apart, for a clearer discovery of their pecu^iar nature, as follows,

The material, sensitive, and mortal Soul of man.
MAN falling from that state of integrity in which he was created, lost his
honor and supreme privilege of being wholly governed by his rational and
immortal soul in all vital actions: but being degraded from that perfection,
the regiment of the body was delegated to a sensitive and mortal Soul (common
to the brutes) and made the immediate Rectrix and Governess of man in vital
actions.

By this means death entered into mankind, the immaterial and immortal principle
of life being supplanted; thereby forfeited Sovereignty and Jurisdiction, total
and uncontrolled power in man, did resign great part of the government, and was
thereby made subject to the over-rulings and contradictings, allurements and
seductions of a depraved and sensitive Soul, the substitute of that immortal
and first total Sovereign and Rectrix of our vitality.

This material, irrational soul having the Reins and Government of man, in
vital and animal actions; as the brutal soul of beasts governs those Creatures:
and being a material substance subject to mutability and decay, as other
sublunary bodies are; hence the life of man became frail and mortal, being the
result of corruptible pr^nciples; depending on them in mutual concurrence,
conspirat^on and vigor; but e contra subject to irregularity, discord, and
defection.

This sensitive or brutal Soul, is a principle of life, giving sense and
motion; distributed unto several faculties by the spirit of life, which is
animae instrumentum, conveyed through the body by fit organs for the execution
of diverse functions.

If you ask what is the Office of the rational soul, and to what purposes does
it serve, since the vital economy and government of the body is transferred
and committed to another power?

To give satisfaction herein, and to determine distinctly between the rational
and irrational soul, that their conjunct and disjunct operations, their
subordinations and dependances in vitality may more clearly be discerned, I
shall in these following Theses give solution to some nice questions than may
be started, and reduce the whole to our present de^ign.

First, That the rational Soul has de^ivered up the Power and Government of
the body in vital acti^ns, (that are merely animal) to a sensi^ive and inferior
power, immediately acting tanquam ejus vicario, for governing the vital
functions.

Secondly, That the rational Soul (post lapsum) being seated in the bosom of
the brutal, and united quasi in connubio to this vital principle, has
influence upon the sensitive by way of promotion, assistance, or direction,
usque in vitae periodum, through the whole term of life.

Thirdly, That the sensitive or brutal Soul, taking it^ ori^ination and
introduction into mankind from a defection, lapse, and depravation; remains
perverse, repugnant to reason, and refuses often to obey the dictates and
instructions of the rational Soul in vital actions and government of the body.

Est lex in membris Contradicens legibus mentis immortalis.

Scrip. Sac. Fourthly, That both rational and sensitive Soul do often concur,
consent, and cooperate unanimously for preservation of the body and integrity
of vital actions: the sensitive Soul obedientially and willingly receiving
concurrence, aid, a^ direction from the rational as suprea^ Moderatrix.

5ly That the sensitive and mortal So^ arising seminaliter and of material
production, has a temporary incremen^ state, and decrement, does senescere and
tabescere, as other perishable bodies subject to corruption.

6ly That the mortality and decay o^ man does not arise from any deficienc^ and
decay of the rational Soul, which is in sua natura of perpetual duration* but
from the fragility and corruptibility of his other principles, both active an^
passive; forcing the immortal Soul to a^ egress by ruin and inhabitableness of
her mansion.

7ly That the rational Soul though immortal, and a principle of perpetual
duration; yet being obnoxious to passions and disquietudes, thereby disordereth
the economy and regular execution of vital operations, by disturbing the
sensitive Soul in her several functions: and this, a necessitudine
combinationis and vinculi; being both connexed in the bond of vitality, are
both compatible and liable to each others injuries and discomposures.

8ly That the sensitive and mortal Soul in esse, and in execution of vital
operations, depending on material and organical parts, is wholly liable and
obnoxious to their deficiencies and decays: and therefore has her duration,
exaltations, and declensions, according to the disposition and durability of
the material and organical structure.

9ly That the sensitive Soul has distributed her faculties necessary for life,
by the several organs of the body; which vital faculties are distinct in duty
and office, though not in vitality; being the same stream, issuing ab unitate
animae ad organa diversa, and transmitted by the vital Spirit which is animae
minister.

10ly That sensitive and brutal Souls as they do excel one another in specie,
having peculiar endowments and properties distinguishing their kinds: so
likewise in individuis ejusdem speciei, they transcend or degenerate from one
another in some properties; and therefore the material and mortal Souls of men,
a principio are of longer or shorter duration, juxta exigentiam seminalium
dispositionum, being propagated per successivam sexuum copulam, according to
Helmont.

11ly That the sensitive Soul is supported and best upheld by the placid and
unanimous concurrence with the rationa^ Soul; by whose irradiations, pleasan^
estate, and amicable conspiration, the sensitive Soul is vigorated, cheared,
an^ enlivened: and therefore it is not a little prejudicial, but much
detrimental, an^ a shortning of man's life, the distractions* passionate
tumults, and indisposed sadness of the rational; which otherwise* as the Sun in
the Heavens gives a cheerful brightness and reviving luster through the world,
so the Soul by a bright an^ cheerful aspect through the microcosm o^ man.

The vital Spirit, or balsome of Life.
IT is rightly affirmed by a learned Philosopher, nullum est sensibile quod non
ab insensibili intus agatur spiritu: every corporeal thing manifesting it self
a sensible object, is acted by an insensible principle, that evades our senses:
the successive generation of all things in this sublunary world, e centris
tenebricosis sungunt, they arise out of darkness: that is, are produced and
brought forth by invisible principles and secret agents, the Authors of such
mutations; which being invested and clothed with sensible corporiety, act their
parts in diverse figures and operations; and as the sensible world is various,
so is the insensible answerable thereto: a principiis insensibilibus omnia
moventur; every thing has its insensible movent principle.

In the generation of man, the materia ex qua, the material passive and visible
principle, is seed; this active and invisible principle contained in this seed,
that disposes this matter and exerts a power of formation, per modum
instrumenti, to delineate and erect a fit mansion for the Soul to dwell in;
that fabricates and contrives fit organs for execution of her various
functions, is the innate spirit or vital spirit in the seed.

This is called vis pl^stica, vis formatrix, the formative power wherewith the
seed of man is impregnated, as a propagative and prolific principle for
successive generation, and this virtute verbi, from the Creators institution,
Crescite and multiplicamini.

The Archaeus seminalis, this vital spirit is not only an active principle in
generation, to delineate and fabricate the seed into various parts for several
offic^ and purposes, but also does contin^ balsamum vitae, being of a saline
and ba^samic nature, which preserves the bod^ from corruption.

This vital spirit is called by many v^tal heat, because in many animals the
spirit manifests its presence by sensib^ heat; and we may judge of this vit^
principle in what state and condition (...) is, by this concomitant heat, which
is ^ character and signature of life: yet he^ is not inseparable and necessary
to the vital principle in genere; but that it man act in vital operations as
vigorously with out this adjunct property, as we see i^ Fishes, which are of a
cold nature an^ void of all heat, yet are as vegete, lively, and brisk as any
animals of a wa^ nature: so that heat and cold does emerge from life, not life
from these accidents; are but Characteres vitae, distinguishing qualities
appertaining to severa^ species of Creatures, suitable to their several natures
and stations, for which the^ were created and destined.

What this vital Spirit in humane bodies is, and the properties thereto
belonging, I shall lay open distinctly i^ these following Theorems.

First, That this vital spirit, contained (...) the seed, is spiritus
architecionicus in ^eneratione; does delineate, fabricate, and form the seed
into diverse parts and ^gures, to construct and build a fit man^on for the soul
to dwell in, with neces^ry organs for the execution of her seve^l functions.

Secondly, That this spiritus formator, ^ontained in, and arising ex semine,
having ^s origination materialiter from the seed, ^ath its aptitude and
hability, or inep^itude to act, juxta seminum dispositionem; and therefore the
infoecundity, miscarri^ges, and errors in formation, is not to ^e imputed
always to this Sculptor or ^imner, qui generati imaginem habet; ^arrying the
idea of the foetus, impressed ^ generantibus: but inobedientiae materiae, ^o
the indisposition and intractibility of ^eminal matter, or external occasional
causes intervening and disturbing the workmanship.

Thirdly, That this seminal Agent which is Rector generationis, the Framer,
Director, and Delineator in the generation and fabrication of man, does also
perform and carry on all vital actions or functions in the body, during the
whole course and progress of man's life, and is vitae regiminis moderator.

4ly That the Archaeus this seminal S^rit for its own preservation and
additio^al supply in carrying on the work of ^tality (which by time increases
as t^ microcosme framing comes to perfect^ and growth) does therefore associ^
with, and assimilate to its self an influ^ed spirit, congenerous with its own
^ture, extracted from our aliment da^ brought in by natures appointment (...)
preserve the innate spirits in vigor a^ strength, preventing their exhaustio^*
which order is observed during the cou^ of life, at least during the regular
m^thod of nature, until she fall off and d^cline.

5ly That this vital spirit is planted ^sentialiter, in the whole body, Tanqu^
subjecto adequato, that no part can (...) without it, and live; but dispensed
(...) nature geometrice, not equally distrib^ted to all alike by arithmetical
propo^tion, but each part is furnished and e^dowed, pro dignitate ex officio,
suitab^ to its office and duty.

6ly That the vivacity, or livelines^* strength, and durability of our bodi^ is
more or less, according to the plent^ or want of this vital spirit, which (...)
principium movens in all the faculties, an^ ^ndimentum corporis, the balsomick
pre^erver of our bodies from putrefaction.

7ly That semen humanum, the sperma^ick extract, containing in it this soecund
^ital spirit, elaborated for generation, is ^ot excrementum (according to the
erro^eous opinion of the Ancients) but com^lementum, the perfection and
choicest ^xtract, impregnated, and richly endow^d with vital spirits, for
propagation of ^he species.

8ly That prodigality in emission of seed, ^vishly expending that elaborated
ex^act, containing the seminal balsamic ^irit, which is robur naturae and
custos cor^oris a corruptione, the strength of nature, and preserver from
putrefaction, ^ust needs enervate and weaken the fa^ulties by draining the
whole body, and ^mpoverishing the treasury of vital bal^mick spirits; upon
which our alimen^ary liquors of the body do degenerare in ^ejus, degenerate and
alter from their ^rimitive goodness, producing various ^hanges in the body, as
their several na^ures and properties are various in their ^ntegrities: Hence
several morbifick productions, bearing several denominations from the
deficiency of one vital principle.

9ly That this Vital Spirit, which ^ Robur and balsamum naturae, the stren^ of
our bodies, and balsom of our ^mentary liquors; yet being a mate^ corruptible
substance subject to mut^on, has its increment, state, and de^ment, as other
natural bodies in the common course of Nature; from when Consumptions and many
chronick l^guishing Diseases take their rise, from ^ declension or infirm
radication of ^ our innate robur, not to be restored (...) retarded by the
common Medicines ad^ted, a posteriori, to effects, the produc^ degenerate
matter, but by such as (...) applicable and accommodated to (...) vital
principle, being auxiliary and ^staurative, congenerous with its (...) nature.

10ly That the vital spirit contained ^ semine parentum, being an extract fr^
the whole body, elaborated to that p^fection gradually by several digesti^ and
contributions of diverse parts, a^ impressed with the Idea or image of (...) for
propagation, does also carry the ^ces and imperfections of those parts (...)
the proles, the following generation b^ing a draught from that copy, m^ bear a
proportion in the imperfection plus minus, more or less manifested, according
to the concurrence of intervening, accidental and external causes, aggravating
or correcting; as Astral Influx, Education, and Diaetetick Customs.

11ly That the Morbific Imperfections of Parents are not all transferred to the
Children, but such as are sigillated upon the innate Spirit of the Parents.

12ly That Morbi a parentibus traducti, hereditary Diseases, being transplanted
or inserted into the offspring, per ideam morbificam in parentum semine
sculptam, and connatural with us by our seminal principles, are latent until
the time of their maturity do appear successively, at certain times according
to other seminal proprieties; and therefore hereditary Consumptions, Gouts,
Scurvy, etc. do not appear in the infancy, though really existing, but approach
to the time of their manifestation and production sooner or later, according to
regular or irregular education, and external occasional causes, promoting or
retarding their germination and maturity.

13ly That calidum innatum (a substance) this Vital Spirit manifesting its
presence in some species of Creatures, per calorem (a quality) by sensible
heat, as in man, yet being a body of the fin^ rarefied substance, and
spiritalized ma^ter, does evade the senses, and is impe^ceptible immediate, by
the touch (...) sight.

14ly That calor naturalis, our natu^ heat being a consequent or concomita^
property arising, or resulting, from (...) vital principle, and varying per
grad^ by intension and remission; does she the condition of this vital princi^
whether in statu naturali, vel praeterna^rali; whether aestuating, irritated,
a^ disturbed, or placid and quiet in its o^dinary course.

15ly That this seminal spirit which ^ aura vitalis, being of a ^minous ae^rial
nature, having some analogy w^ celestial Bodies, does much consent a^
correspond, is fortified and depressed^ Astral Influences according to their
va^ous Aspects, benevolent, or malevole^ and therefore it is that at sometimes
a^ seasons we are variously disposed and ^fected, well and ill, pro diverso
sider^ influxu, clementia and inclementia coeli.

Concerning Fermentation and fermenting Principles.
THE Doctrine of Ferments being but of ^untor standing in the world, has
brought much light into the practice of Physic: the clear knowledge whereof
discovers new truths to those who happily labor to find the depth of this
mysterious operation in nature. And since there is such great fundamental
truths discovered, which were latent to the ancients, it is not strange, nor a
dishonor to them, if we deviate from their steps, and neglect their precepts,
being calculated for that height they lived in, not the meridian of this
brighter age, and clearer light of knowledge.

And here I cannot but admire the folly of many, though ingenious men, to dote
upon Antiquities so much, and bind up themselves so strictly to the Canons of
our Predecessors; as if nature were clearly and thoroughly unvailed to them,
that nothing remains for us to do, but to acquiesce in their labors, and to
learn the lesson they had pricked down to our hand. How unreasonable is it to
allege authority of the Ancients, and urge it as ^ convincing argument, when
the princ^ples of Physic to them were but in pa^ known, and principles then
assert^ which now are exploded? necessarily t^ superstructure upon them must
fall; (...) for what is deductive from a false supposition, must also be false:
but I wou^ not have any think hereby that I desp^ the labors of ancient Philo
ophers a^ famous Physicians of their times; I ha^ as great a veneration for
their works (...) any; but they were men and knew b^ in part: we see their
failings, and t^ generation to come will see ours; the^ is yet much work to do
in the unrav^ling of nature; great secrets yet to (...) discovered, that none
may take it ^dignly to be admonished of error, or i^sufficiency.

But to return to our purpose in han^ from whence we digressed: Now the you may
know the reason of handli^ Fermentation in this place; confider^ have laid the
foundation of this Tre^tise upon the vital and fundamental pri^ciples, on which
our discourse depend^ and to which is refers: in the prosecu^^ therefore of
this work, we are necesa^y led to co^m^ate Fermentatio^ being of great
concernment, and so great, that it is the parent of vital operations, from
whence the rest do issue, and are continually supplied for conservation.

By Fermentation are all the digestions performed; and from thence are the
several faculties of the body supported and maintained: by due fermentation are
the alimentary liquors of the body generated and preserved; and by defect
thereof are they impoverished, dispirited and a^ienated from their genuine
proprieties.

And althou^h our food received abound with much fixed salt, (which if so
remaining produce various diseases) yet by due fermentation, in the digestive
offices it is so elaborated, changed, and volatised; and being so prepared is
then fit for the extraction of spirits, to support and maintain our bodies in
vitality and a vigorous condition; as we see in our operation upon vegetables,
that the spirits are not drawn out but by the help of Fermentation, which does
unfetter them and free them from their bodies, in which they were incarcerated
and locked up; for by the help of fermentation mixed bodies are unravelled,
resolved, and a disunion of parts, made, that distinct^y they may be separated,
artificially, or by natural Chemistry, as it is performed daily in the body of
man, operating upon food received. The great mutations and changes in the body,
both perfective and corruptive, are fermentative and arise from hence: by
Fermentation diseases are generated, and by Fermentation are many cured: this
is the great wheel by which sublunary bodies are moved and change their
stations, graduated and degraded again: minerals into vegetables, vegetables
into animals; animals of one species into animals of another species: and that
this wheel may go round with a perpetual motion, animals return into
vegetables, and vegetables into minerals; so that nature is never at a stand or
idle, but always moving; sometimes upward tending to perfection, and producing
a more noble form; sometimes downward by corruptive alteration, unravelling her
own work she had curiously wrought and composed, and transposing it into
another, though meaner and baser form.

We may either consider Fermentation as it is actio vitalis, a vital operation
producing such effects, and cast an eye upon the products thereof, and see the
varie^y of production; or else we may look toward the principia fermentativa,
from whence this Fermentation does arise, and so have inspection chiefly into
the causes.

Famous Helment, who has merited much in the opinion of most ingenious men, I
mean those that are the truly knowing men in the study and right practice of
Physic; yet in his discourse of Ferments is very obscure and ambiguous, that
little satisfaction can be had from his writing on this subject; particularly a
Tract entitled, Imago Fermenti, etc. and elsewhere frequently mentioned in
other Tracts of his, discordantly; as those that trace him, I believe, will
consent with me in this: but I shall not spend time to point out the places,
and prosecute him, having deserved so well in some of his other works.

But to illustrate the Doctrine of Fermentation, Dr. Willis has learnedly
discoursed, and with him, I conceive, most of our modern Physicians agree.

For Fermentation and Ferments in their latitude is not necessary to discuss,
here we shall only consider the fermentative principles in Corpore humano, for
the purpose in hand to lay open, our design: Dr Willis, De Fermentatione,
says, the life of animals does arise from a fermenting principle in the ^ear^
(...) vite initia a spi^ in (...), v^. lut p^n^ (...) ^men. tescent^ du un^.
Diatrib. de Ferment. p. 24.


And in the page followin^: Praet^ h^ f^rment^ in ^rdis (...) e^titution, a quo
sanguinis r^ is and eff^r^ esc^ntis plurimum dependent, sunt and alia diversa
indolis passion in vi^ceribus recondita, quorum (...) and Chylu^ (qui est
sanguinis rudimentum) and s^iritus animalis, ejus quint: essentia, vi^
elaborantur; sunt etiam alia: quae sanguini perficiend^, in alios liquore^
transmutando, ipsu^noue a materia exerementitia liberando inserziunt.

Whereby you may understand there are diverse ferments in the body, for various
transmutations, elaborations, and depuration of alimentary matter.

What this worthy Author means by diverse Ferments, I shall not take upon me to
deliver his s^nse; but by way of enquiry let us examine the reason of the
diversity of Ferments, and what they are If every fermentative transmutation in
the body does arise from peculiar and distinct Ferments, then every part has a
peculiar Ferment implanted in it the part^ being different one from the other
(...), office and use; from thence a very numerous company of Ferments must be
allowed, which are so many vital principles, which to me implies some
difficulty in the admissi^n.

En^ non surt multiplicanda sine necessitate: to avoid this inconvenience, and
to clear this Doctrine in order to the present design, I shall deliver my
opinion, and determine the matter in these following Theses.

First, That the various Fermentations in several parts of the body, producing
distinct alterations in the alimentary matter fermented, are promoved and
differenced by the peculiar Crasis and different composition of the parts,
destinated for the offices of digestion.

Secondly, That the alimentary matter consisting of fermenting principles, and
having all the praevious dispositions necessary to fermentation; as cau^es
occasional, adjuvant^ and s^re qua n^n contributing, does cooperate in the
work of fermentation, and that (...) principi^s ^ntimis, of which it does
consul.

Thirdly, That the different Crasis and peculiar mixture of the parts of man's
body (^hus necessary for fermentation and vital operation upon the aliment
received) by time and the continual transition of various matter, does alter,
chang^ and obliterate.

4ly That the peculiar Crasis and temperature of the parts in juvenile person
of a sound and due composition, do vigorously show their different natures, by
causing several and various fermentations, answering their several
compositions, according to the institution of Nature, for elaboration of the
alimentary matter received, until it attains the due perfection.

5ly That the distributive justice of Nature (fabricating the parts and
structure of humane bodies) in her Geometrical proportions is various in
diversis, and disproportionate in eodem individuo* hence the different
propensions to diseases in several persons, and the constant inclination to
this or that, in the same; propter inequale robur partium.

6ly That the alienation and degeneration of the Crasis of parts by time,
begetting a new fermentation and transmutation of alimentary matter received,
does produce new and strange morbifick effects in the body: hence it is, (and
every person may observe) the alteration of their bodies apparently different
in seven years, or sooner pro vitae genere: and in the progress of man's life,
some diseases appear at one age, other infirmities at another, pro varia
fermentationum different^a; and so the whole course of a declining life
produces, either new diseases or aggravations of the old; or commutations for
others; or new complications; and this to be expected a naturae fragilitate,
after the manner and for the reasons aforesaid.

7ly That by reason of the continual action and re-action between the parts
recipient and the food recepted, the Crasis of the parts suffer an alteration,
and degeneration from their primigeneous temperature and harmony of principles.
So that by time, it is no wonder if our desires to this or that kind of food be
varied and changed; or that our digestions be much different in vigor and what
else attend, or are the products of the several digestions.

8ly That the residue of the chyliferous or alimentary matter remaining after
every digestion, is by such remansion so strongly altered and ali^ilated by the
ferment of that offic^, that it acts per modum assiste^ i^ with the natural
innate ferment of the part in the subsequent digestion of the same office.

9ly That certain meats carrying in them a stronger fermenting nature, are more
gratefully received by the stomach, and better digested then others of a
lighter nature, and seemingly of more easy digestion: and therefore it is that
some tender stomachs can better digest, and do covet salt Beef before Chicken,
^mb, etc.

10ly That as the vigorous inaltered Crasis of the parts (^eris paribus)
produce a good fermentation, and consequently good nutrition; (...) contra, the
debility, disproportion and variation of the ferments beget a corruptive and
morbifick fermentation, diverse pro varia eorum laes^ome and disproportione.

11ly That this declension and decay of the ferments (which is the natural and
due constitution of parts disordered) is hastened and procured sooner by
irregular injurious living, offering violence to Nature; does pervert the
principles of fabrication and government in the Microcosme, causing a ruinous
disorder, before a spontaneous falling off, and inevitable inability to
subsist, secundum leges Naturae.

12ly That the fo^d received having an aptitude for alterat^on and change,
^sisting of fermenting principles, is promoted and inclined to this or that
transmutation, pro varia partium compositione, according to the nature of the
part recipient, where this fermentation is wrought.

13ly That some peculiar food injuriously long accustomed to, depressing some
and exalting others of the fermenting principles, disposes to this or that
disease and infirmity: and therefore the diaetetick part of Physic is not to
be slighted and neglected, but carefully to be observed by all persons,
especially such as incline and have a manifest propension to some disease above
others.

14ly That the debility or digression of a fermenting principle (within the
possibility of restoration) is raised and advanced by medicament or aliment,
having that congenerous principle, eminenter in sua natura.

15ly That the concomitant and subsequent effects, attending the digestion, are
declarative to an acute Spagyrist or Chemical Physician, and do show the
intension and remission of the fermenting principles, whereby correctives
medicamental or alimental, or both, may duly and seasonal^y be appointed and
exhibited.

Obiter. 16ly That our diaetetick part of Physic, differencing the proprieties
and nature of food from the temperature of their qualities, is insufficient and
unprofitable; showing only the husk or shell, not their internal constituent
natures and principles, chiefly to be known, and that by a Chemical analysis.

17ly That the error of nature in the particular composition and frame of some
parts, ab initio, does necessarily dispose some persons to this or that
disease, never to be totally amended, but will admit of some correction and
palliation^ and therefore Patients sometimes wrongfully complain of their
Physicians, for that they have a continual propension to such or such diseases,
which is not in the power of man to eradicate, being so planted by nature in
the fabrication and first constitution of parts.

A Survey of the vital and fundamental Principles Conjunctim.
HAving traced through the vital principles apart, and viewed their distinct
beings and proprieties, we will make some result thereof, by applying it to our
present design, as the front of this work does import and promise; and having
surveyed them disjunctively in their offices and peculiar proprieties, we will
consider them in their coordinate and subordinate acts, in their mutual
compliance and assistance one to the other, in vital and animal actions, and
what relation they have to health and sickness.

These vital principles are ^he basis upon which the whole discourse of Physic
ought to move, and to which it does refer; for health is the integrity and
perfect state of the vital principles, performing the operations and functions
of the body duly: and sickness on the contrary is their deficiency,
depravation, and decay; so that health and sickness have their dependence here
as the approximate causes.

These principles are not equal in degree and power, but one is principal and
more noble than the other, which is instrumental and subordinate: man
considered as a mere animal, has his vitality, or performs his vital actions
from these three principles; the sensitive or brutal soul, the vital spirit,
and the ferments of the parts; these are joint agents in vitality, and
cooperate consentaneously have their defections, and roboration
sympath^tically: the one is not depressor but the other is languid: and when on
is exalted and elevated, the other i^ strengthened and fortified: if the Sou^
be sad, the spirits are dull, the ferment languid, and digestions weakly
performed: if the spirits be exhausted by immoderate fluxes, bleeding, Venus,
etc. the soul is sad, heavy, and drooping, the ferments not so acute and active
in their several offices of transmutation: if the ferments be alienated from
their genuine proprieties, by improper, irregular, and disproportionate food,
or otherwise; or spontaneously languishing through their innate disability to a
longer duration in their integrities; soon follows a defection, depauperation,
and drooping of spirits; since their generation and supply, depends upon a
vigorous and due fermentation in the grand elaboratories of transmutation.

Thus the vital principles in a due harmony concur and consent in all vital
operations; each being assistant and coadjuvant one to the other, and
participating in the ill or welfare of one another: but any one disordered or
depressed, disturbs the regular economy of the vital functions, tending to
ruin and decay of the whole frame of man body: this is the golden chain of
health, one link whereof being broken, en^rvates the strength of the whole man:
these are the springs that move in the performance of all the functions and
vital operations, whose vigor and harmonious consent, preserve the body in a
prosperous and flourishing state; but being weak and languid, man declines and
degenerates from his pristine vigor of vitality, when this trine conjunction
of cooperation and subserviency begins to be dissolved.

What is Health, but a due performance of all the Functions? What is Sickness,
but their disorder, irregularity, and deficiency? and both health and sickness
depend upon these fundamental principles, since all the functions are performed
approximately and immediately, duly or unduly, from their regularity or
depravation.

If so, as it is most true, here is the center of all our discourse concerning
health and sickness: here is the basis upon which health and sickness depend;
and here are we to aim and direct our endeavors for the preservation and
continuance of the one, and also for the remove of the other.

I have read voluminous, large Discourses, and tedious Tracts in Physic, b^
with much dissatisfaction, acquiring thereby a superficial and distracted
knowledge only: particularly a large Scheme (...) Schedule of diseases is drawn
out, methodized in that order, as some, nay the most, take for a complete
platform (am I was of that opinion) wherein every part of man's body has its
diseases assigned; and from hence an innumerable company of medicines are
mustered up, singly to oppose them: but upon due examination and scrutiny into
the whol^ matter, I was better informed, and taugh^ how to contract both
Diseases and Medicines into fewer Heads and Classes not relating to
temperaments and humors, nor the variety of parts of man^ body; but respecting
the vital Principle* from whence result both health and sickness; that so
applying to these, which are but few in number; their assistanc^ required, for
reduction and restoration* is not so perplexedly various as the gran^
Authorities our Predecessors would have it, and their disciples, the maintaine^
of it in this our age, who relish nothing but what savours of Antiquity; who
stoop and yield to an ipse dixit, being more prevalent with them than the
strength of reason. But to proceed, they that look only, or mainly at
temperaments, and the various sorts of degenerate humors, are such whose
knowledge gives them not admittance to view nature stripped naked, ripped up, and
her intrinsic parts, but externally to behold her invested in such a garb.

What are temperaments and humors, but a result and the effects of the vital
principles, changing into this or that state and condition; from whose various
gradations, mutations, compliance, and mutual assistance, variety of humors and
degenerate matter is producted; which for distinction sake you may call humors
and temperaments? but you must not content your self with the nominal knowledge
of these visible appearances, but make disquisitions into the invisible
procurers; why do you so much e^e and aim at effects, neglecting their causes,
applying Remedies only a posteriori, when you may and ought to do it radically,
and a priori, at the springs from whence they arise?

The result of this discourse I shall sum up in this corollary.

That the fragility and morbific^ state of man's life depends or arises a^ well
from the active, principles of vitality, declining, spending, and hastenin^ to
a period, ex nat^ae imbecillitate; (...) detrimento ab extra: as also from the
passive principles of man's composition constituting the Fabric and organic^
parts, being subject to dissolution, di^junction, and decay. If so, as it is
mo^ true, then Physicians need not so much insist upon, and mire themselves to
find out Diseases in the superfluous humo^ and excrements of man's body, which
(...) the producted matter, and requires only evacuation; but chiefly to eye
the principles of our vitality, which are the spri^ from whence Diseases take
their rise; r^quiring restoration, reduction to the integrities, roboration
and confirm^tion.

Of a Consumption Atrophy, Tabes Anglica.
THe word Atrophia is a Compound of a privative or rather diminutive and (...)
nutrit^ signifying non-nutrition or little nutrition* This is very frequent
with us in England, the s^re have given it a peculiar title, and call (...)
Tabes Anglica.

By an Atrophy you are to understand a leanness, diminution or decay of the
body from a f^ustrated nutrition.

Not a few there are, who enjoying their health, at least not complaining of
any manifest infi^mity, and eat their meat indifferent well: yet do not thrive
in their bodies, but pine away and grow lean, thin and weak: What secret causes
there ar^ to deprive the body of nutrition, we shall endeavor to detect and
discover, that a right course for Cure may be instituted.

A Consumption Atrophy is either universal, when the whole body languisheth, by
reason of some principal part that is ill affected; or particular, when some
part only decays, diminishes and becomes weak, from a particular defect of that
part.

To know the causes of an Atrophy, is first to know exactly the causes and
after what manner nutrition is performed, with the requisite Circumstances. The
Philosopher says, (...), Tria sunt requisit^ nutritionis, There are 3 things
requi^ to nutrition, Quod alit, quo alitur, ^ quod alitur; Quod alit is the
Soul; Q^ alitur is the food or alimentary matte^ Quod alitur i^ the body.

That which nourishes as the pri^ efficient cause, is the material and mo^
Soul, under which the subordinate c^ses, adjuvant and instrumental are inc^ded,
and do act.

This principal efficient cause being ^seminal production and corruptible, ^
subject to the deficiencies, inabilities a^ decays as other perishable bodies;
from whence I shall draw this Conclusion That Consumptive Atrophies someti^
take their rise from the labefaction, a^ infirm radication of this vital
principl^ that does senescere and tabescere, decline a^ waste, sooner or later,
pro seminalium ^positionum condition: and therefore w^ need not wonder, that
some persons (...) their juvenile years and prime of the age, whose bodies are
equally fabricat^ and organized with others, and laudabl^ preserved; yet
decline and termina^ their course sooner then the accustome^ time of Nature:
which if so, as it is tru^ and rational to affirm, then I must superadde these
two Assertions:

First, That the debility, infirmity and declension of the mortal soul, is
upheld and preserved, (...) ^xtra, by the fortitude and magnanimity of the
rational; and therefore it is, that a cheerful, placid and vigorous soul, does
bear up against many bodily infirmities, that a pusillanimous, dejected,
drooping mind does sink under, and unable to bear; and gives advantage to their
infirmities.

Secondly, That the mortal Soul this vital principle, being extended per parts
corporis, receiving its increment and decrement, and hability for operation,
according to organical disposition and Crasis, is maintained and preserved, a
sinistra, in power and well-being to act, by their integrity and aptitude for
their subservient duties.

The instrumental efficient cause is the Archaeus or vital Spirit, the Souls
grand Agent in all the faculties serving to nutrition; which being deficient,
weak and insufficiently supplied by an auxiliary influxed spirit, these
faculties are languidly or depravedly performed.

The next considerable about nutrition, is quo alitur: the nature of our food
wherewith this nutrition is maintained: our bodies being in a continual
tranpsiration, efflux, and emission, require^ constant reparation, to preserve
the b^dy rom decay and Consumption; a^ this is supplied by aliment or food
^ceived, to be assimilated and conver^ into the substance of the body: but
(...) this food be improper or unfit in its o^ nature, or the circumstances
attendi^ discordant and irregular, that this for obtains not its due end for
which it is ^ceived, then instead of a good nutriti^ there follows an Atrophy,
or Ca^roph^ although the digestive faculties be stro^ yet if the food be aliene
and di^cord^ to that body, carrying in its nature for noxious altering
property, perhaps no^ man in specia, but to this or that ind^duum, does act per
modum medicam^ is as medicine to change the body, (...) aliment to nourish.

Food may be unfit for the body the ways or in three respects; either in (...)
substance, the quantity, or quality: (...) substance I understand consistence,
w^ it is gross, hard, or tough; so that the ^paration of parts by fermentation
is i^perfect, and also a slower distributio^ in quantity food is injurious,
when (...) either too little, that the body decays i^ want; or too great, which
causes ^structions, crudities and depraved nutriment; the digestive faculties
not being able to elaborate it, but are oppressed and over-loaded; non enim
ingestis nutrimur, sed iis quae ingesta concequuntur, says Menjotius; we are
not to account of nutrition by the quantity and proportion of food received in,
but according to the digestions, whether good or bad: in quality food offends,
or is less nourishing, by exceeding not only in the first qualities, but in the
second also: as too salt, too sour, sweet, etc. therefore according to the
nature of our food and circumstances that attend it (caeteris paribus) is our
nutrition good or bad, more or less.

Some kind of Creatures there are that can live a long time without food, of
which the Poet speaks: Tota mihi dormitur hyems, and pinguior illo
Tempore sum, quo me nil nisi somnus alit.
Mart.

But to man seven days fasting, according to Hippocrates, is accounted mortal;
so that nutrition and life are Consorts, and have a mutual dependence upon each
other: that Atrophia is not merely privative, but imminutive; not an absolute
cessation from nutrition, but a diminu^on; and therefore the Philosopher said*
Nos tamdiu nutriri, quamdiu vivimus.

Quod alitur, is the body; and here (...) must take notice, that a body fit for
n^trition must have a due crasis and orga^zation, especially the principal
parts: t^ body as to the figuration and fabricati^ of parts, must be rightly
framed and ^ganized, each part being right in statio^ figure and magnitude;
ductures of Communication, for reception and emissi^ free and open; which if
otherwise, d^poseth the body to various diseases: an^ therefore those which are
gibbous, either back or breast, are most of them consumptive. The Spleen
sometimes increases beyond its due magnitude, and robs the rest of its fellows:
and therefore Hip^crates says, (...), Vbi lien floret, ^pus tabescit; L. de
loc. in hom.
When the spleen increases, the body diminishe^ Contumacious obstructions of
the Mes^tery, are sometimes the cause of an Atrophy: Worms do often defraud the
body of its nutriment and corrupt (...) and therefore such persons do not thri^
in their bodies, but pine away and become lean: other diseases there a^ which
may procure a Consumption Atrophy, whose causes are apparent: but there is an
Atrophy frequent in this our Region, and therefore called by some Tabes
Anglica, whose causes are more latent, and creeps on more slily; and few there
are that know how to check and oppose it, (witness their medicines and method
of Cure) because the rise of it is obscure and undiscovered.

This Consumption is a wearing and pining away, without manifest cause;
notwithstanding the body receives good food, but is not nourished, strengthened
and improved by it. Several conjectures there are concerning the causes of this
disease, but I shall not insist upon their opinions, being much beside the mark.

This Consumption ownes its origination and being from the Scurvy, and may well
be called Atrophia Scorbutica, the Scorbutic Consumption; and he that is well
acquainted with the subtlety of the Scurvy, will find it often palliated under
the appearance of a Consumption: Eugalenus who has observed the various
phenomenon and disguises of the Scurvy, takes special notice of this Atrophy
caused thereby. We will examine now how it com^ to pass that the Scurvy appears
in the shape of a Consumption, and how it is procured: And here I must inquire
into the state and condition of the blood, which is the objectum circa quod,
the matter of nutrition. Those of a h^ constitution, and whose blood is sharp
and thin, do not feed and grow fat, b^ are spare, slender and lean, according
to Hippocrates, (...) such are (...), prone to anger, and fierce in their
passion: the alimentary liquors of the body being thus attenuated and made
thin, are not so capable and fit for nutrition; because they have not ^
balsamic consistence, and are circulated with a swifter motion, are carried
away before there can be an adhesion and assimilation to the several parts.

When the blood degenerates from is true balsamic state and requisite
proprieties, the body is not nourished as it ought, but instead thereof an
Atrophy, little or no nutrition; or a Cacotrophy, a depraved and bad nutrition
is the consequent: when the nutritive faculty does reject or is weak and unable
to assimilate, it argues the alimentary matter to be very bad, or the faculty
to be much decayed and spent* and therefore a consumptive Atrophy, i^ worse
th^n a Cacotrophy or ill habit of body, where nutrition goes on and proceeds,
though depravedly and of bad matter.

In Scorbutic Consumptive Persons, I find a serosa colluvies, the blood to
abound with a filthy serous or watery liquor, which is altogether unfit to
nourish or be assimilated; for the blood in its due state has a homogeneous
balsamic consistence, by the fibrae wherewith it abounds and has its
concretion; but being deprived of these, there follows (...), a separation of
parts does ensue, and then the blood runs not entirely as before, but a
degenerate colliquated serum abounds, unfit for nourishing: and for this cause
many Scorbutic persons are consumptive; which Brunerus also observes:
Scorbutus frequentissime in atrophiam and tabem, quandoque in cachexiam
melanch^licam, interdum in dysenteriam des^nit: page 15.
The Scurvy, says he, most frequently terminates in a Consumption; sometimes
in a melancholic Cachexy or Dropsy; sometime in a Dysentery or Bloody Flux.
Horstius and Martinius also do not let pass this Atrophy without d^e
observation from whence it p^d^ S^us also takes notice of a Scorbutic
Consumption; where he says, Quibusdam crura Atrophia laborant, and ita
gracilia redduntur, ut vix ossibus haerere videantur: interdum and totum corpus
emaciatur, etc. Tract. de Scorb.
But Eugalenus relates particular cases of these Atrophies, which he frequently
met with in his practice. Lib. de Scorb.


I shall not here launch out in discourse of the Scurvy, having run through
that disease, and made some new discoveries in a particular Treatise of that
Protean sallacious disease, whither I refer you for further satisfaction: here
only I must inform you, that the Consumption Atrophy, which is so frequent with
us in England, is the offspring of the Scurvy, which not being discovered or
rightly observed in the process for Cure, has caused many to fail in their
expected success.

For the Cure of this Tabes Anglica, which is a Scorbutic Consumption,
Antiscorbutick choice Medicines are to be used, or you will find your endeavor
frustrate and insuccessful, as thousands in this Nation by sad experience have
found; who have languished and pined away, under a long and tedious use of
restaurative B^oths, Kitchin-distillations, Jellies, and such kind of Cookery,
when the radix of the disease has not been touched by medicine, nor rightly
understood: but aiming only at nutrition by great nourishers, not considering
the spring from whence the Atrophy does arise, you feed the disease rather then
eradicate it. Corpora impura quo plus nutrias, eo magis laedas. Aph. If the
Scorbutic feculency be not removed, and the vital principles established and
confirmed in the rectitude of their functions, by proper efficacious medicine;
then your high and daintiest feeding instead of nourishing, turns to the worst
and most degenerate matter.

Corruption optimi est pessima. For diaetetick customs and rules, or the most
legitimate use of the six non-naturals (so termed by Physicians) most requisite
for your condition, you may learn in my Treatise of the Scurvy, which are
general and applicable to the most Scorbutic cases; but if your condition be
extraordinary from great weakness, or complication of diverse symptoms, you
must declare it, for a particular satisfaction answering the peculiarity and
specialty of your case.

For medicine I have not prescribed any here, for the reasons delivered
^e^eafter.

Of a Hectic Fever.
IN the number of Consumptions a Hectic Fever justly deserves to be ranked: it
is called a Hectic (...) because it possesses the habit of the body. This
kind of Consumption sometimes acts its part alone; but always accompanies a
Phthisis or Consumption Phthisical: Much talk there is of this Consumption, but
few there are that rightly understand the nature of it.

A Hectic or habitual Fever, is an effervescency and inquietude of the
Archaeus membrorum or innate vital spirit in the solid parts, procured by some
offensive cause; whereby the rorid substance of the body is wasted, and
nutrition frustrated.

It is called a Fever Hectic or habitual, because it is more fixed and
radicated in the solid parts then other Fevers, that are seated in the humors;
and may well be called a Consumption, because it wastes the body and vital
spirit.

Sometimes it is the remains of a burning Fever, or other, a long Fever ill
cured: sometime it is procured by long passions of a troubled mind, continually
keeping the spirits in inquietude and disturbance. But of the causes hereafter.

There are 3 degrees or gradual progressions of a Hectic Fever
distinguishable, and to be known by certain signs or symptoms that discover
them.

The first degree or beginning of it is, quando humiditas aliment^ria tantum
effervescit; when the body is not emaciated and grown lean, nor strength
sensibly decayed; but there is a slow febrile heat manifested commonly in the
palms of the hands, and feet; chiefly after meat: this is easily cured, but not
so easily discerned, except by a skilful Physician.

The second degree is an augmentation and increase of the first; quando
^miditas alimentaria consumpta est, s^ (...) reparabilis; the body is lean,
thin and poor; the intemperature of heat greater and constant, apparently at
all times; with a quick sharp pulse; not so lively as before, but sluggish,
dull, and indisposed to action either of body or mind: this degree is easily
known, but not so easily cured; because a putrid Fever is joined with it.

The third degree is, when the body is consumed and wasted that no flesh
appears, but a dry wrinkled skin; the countenance changed, of a dead pale
color, and hollow eyes: this degree is called a Marasmus, or Hectica
Marasmodes, accounted incurable; but I have seen some recover out of this
deplorable condition, that have been my Patients.

Physicians have divided the causes of a Hectic Fever into external and
internal: External are all such as procure other Fevers, as vehement exercise,
inflaming drinks and hot meats, immoderate excretions, as Diarrhaeas and
Dysenteries, vehement passions of the mind, etc. Internal causes nominated are
burning Fevers, or long Fevers; inflammation or ulcer of a part; or a putrid
humor contained therein.

When a Hectic Fever or habitual febrile heat is induced or procured, without
any manifest cause, such as are before mentioned, you may conclude a latent
Scurvy; that the blood, that vital stream is defiled, alienated and changed
from its nutritious balsamic state; abounding with a saline, acid or acrid
serosity, does provoke the Archaeus membrorum to disturbance and anger; and
that calidum innatum which before was placid and amicable, does now
effervescere, kindle and consume the substance of the body, and destroy its own
work: as a Candle burns clear, quietly, and undisturbedly, so long as it is
maintained with a sulphurous unctuous fit matter; but if it happen that Water,
Vinegar, or such liquor comes to it, presently spatters, wastes, and is unquiet
until it be overcome.

In the enumeration of causes that generate a Hectic Fever, the Scurvy might
well stand in the front, and lead up, as its proper place, being more eminent
than the rest of its fellow^: Eugalenus, Horstius, and others allow the Scurvy
to procure Fevers, continual and intermitting, Quotidian, Tertian, Quartane,
Quintane, not excluding malignant and pestilential; and we may well put in
Hecticks, which it often procures, and will not be cured but by antiscorbutick
Medicines: and therefore it is, that many linger under this Fever so long,
because the spring from whence it arises and is maintained, is not found out:
But you may farther satisfy your self in my Treatise of the Scurvy, therefore
I forbear to enlarge my self here.

A Hectic Fever is constant, without accessions or paroxisms as other Fevers;
save only that an hour or two after meat the heat is greater, and the pulse
quicker, which is common to all that have this Hectic Fever.

The question may be asked, what is the reason that this preternatural heat
should continue so long and constantly, and how it is maintained, when other
Fevers last but for a time, and yet procured by the same causes? to which I
answer, A Hectic in the first degree is not of long continuance, nor difficult
to remove, except the procuring cause remains in force and power: a Hectic in
the second degree is of duration, and with difficulty removed, though the
procatarctick or procuring cause cease and be suspended; because it cannot make
this progress and arrive at this height before the constitution be much
altered; that is, the natural balsamic state of the alimentary liquors of the
body be much changed, and the Crasis of the parts alienated: the reduction of
which is a matter of time, and that by the prudence of an expert Physician: but
few there are that will have the patience to continue in such a due course as
this requires; or will be so observant of the Physicians precepts in the
diaetetick part, as also in the pharmaceutick, without which no good will be
done; and therefore it is that many linger under this disease a long time, and
some until their death: but a Hectic in the third degree is seldom or rarely
cured, (which most Physicians account incurable: the reason I judge to be
this;) because the fermenting distinguishing Crasis of the principal parts is
obliterated and rased out; so that there is no fermenting and vital
transmutations or previous digestions, to bring the aliment so near the nature
of the body, that it might be assimilated into the substance thereof; but only
receives a corruptive and depraved alteration, not a perfective progression for
nutrition; so that the body does daily pine and wast away, and str^ng^h decay,
until the little remainde^ o^ spirits be suffocated in a putrid carcass.

Before you enter upon the cure of a Hectic Fever, you must consider the rise
of it, what was the first procuring cause, and whether such procuring cause yet
has influence upon the disease; which if so, must first be removed: for if a
Hectic Fever be introduced by immoderate exercise, watching, or vehement
passions; these must first be suppressed and changed, or you labor in vain to
cure the Hectic caused thereby.

Consider and be sufficiently satisfied whether this Hectic Consumption be
primary, or has its dependence upon another disease seated in some part of the
body: for, if a Hectic takes its rise from another disease, as an
inflammation, or Ulcer in the Lungs or Kidneys, your endeavors will be
frustrate in curing the Hectic, which is symptomatical, until you have first
cured the other disease upon which it is founded, and from whence it is
supplied and fomented; so likewise if it arise from the Scurvey, you must set
about the cure of that disease.

Know certainly whether this Hectic Consumption you are about to cure, be
simple and solitary, or complicated with a putrid Fever: if simple, the
indications of cure are fewer, coindicating and concurring; but if complicated,
the indications are various, contraindicating and discordant; requiring great
judgment and circumspection in the intenti^ of cure, lest while you abate the
one, yo^ do not augment the other: this is not the work of every pretender to
Physic, bu^ one that is well graduated in knowledge* that is Doctor in Physic
nomine and (...) being expert in the diagnosticks of di^^ases, whereby their
simple state, an^ complications with others, are easily discerned and judged.

For the cure of Hectic Fevers, as also other Fevers, most Practisers have
recourse to Julips, Emulsions, and cooling drinks to allay and extinguish the
preternatural heat, as the chief intention and greatest assistance in cure; and
this because they are deluded in judgment concerning this febrile heat, taking
it to be some exotic strange heat introduced in the body; or arising
elementally from the predominancy of some fiery or sulphurous matter that must
be quenched, as fire with water: Hence preposterously the most go about to
reduce a preternatural heat, applying remedies a posteriori, to the producted
heat, laboring to quench that, not discerning a priori, whence it does arise,
and the occasional procuring causes; which being not understood and found out,
at least neglected in curation, they labor in vain, opposing qualities with
qualities, by a long and tedious contest, knowing not that natura est morborum
factrix and medicatrix, as Helmont speaks: and therefore he that will cure,
must cure radically and substantially, applying to the fundamental principles,
which are disorderd and irregular, and removing morbifick causes; not
qualitatively, superficially, and a posteriori, to the products: in
satisfaction therefore to this point, I shall lay down this conclusion.

That febrile distempered heat in man's body, ex Archaeo irato surgens, being
the aestuation of the Archaeus or vital spirit, manifesting its disturbance and
insurrection at some peccant matter, does require sedation and allay; not by
opposing the consequential heat with coolers chiefly, but by removing the
morbific cause, which is hostile and injurious to this vital principle,
provoking it (nisu expulsivo) to be in fury (ut ign^scere videatur), from
whence preternatural febrile heat does arise: which if so, as it is true and
rational, then the common course of curing Fevers by Juleps, Emulsions, and
other cooling Medicines aiming at an allay and suppression of this heat, is
erroneous; for if heat whether natural or preternatural does emanare, proceed
from this vital principle, as a distinguishing character of its state and
condition (as certainly it does,) then the application of a medicine to check
this, is a levelling at the vital principle, not at all aiming at the morbific
cause; and in so doing is violence offered to Nature, damping and suppressing
its fortitude and courage in resistance, instead of exterminating the hostile
and injurious matter, mir^ a or f^mes morbi, which is the cause of this
reluctance, perturbation and struggling of the Archaeus: and therefore this
intention only or chiefly by refrigeration is a retention of the Fever (which
is not nuda caloris tempestas, sed materia occasionalis) fixing the febrile
matter, that it is not so fit nor easily proscribed by transpiration or
otherwise, and protracts the disease. Yet I would not be mistaken herein, but
do allow such refreshing coolers as the Patients inclination does crave, and
finds benefit by; yet not to lay the stress of the Cure upon the contest of
heat and cold.

Having laid open briefly what a Hectic Fever is, the causes, and declarative
signs, both proper, gradual, and distinguishing from other Fevers; it will be
expected I should say something more of curation and preservation, for the
benefit of those that are hectically inclined, as also such as are macerated
and wasted thereby; so far as a general discourse will admit, allowing peculiar
cases, and proprieties of individual constitutions, some variation.

In chronick diseases the diaetetick part rightly observed, is of great
advantage; but in a Hectic Fever is specially to be regarded. A sweet, clear
air is of great advantage; it refreshes the vital spirits, promotes
transpiration of putrid vapors, and is very helpful in the Cure: therefore it
much concerns the Consumptive person, what place he lives in; and that he be
advised by a Physician in this particular. At hot seasons of the year, be not
abroad in the heat of the day, but then keep in cool places; parching heat is
very injurious, by drying the body and lassating the spirits, both which your
disease procures.

Use little, or no exercise; except at the beginning of your disease, or when
it is in the first degree, your strength will then allow it: but after the
spirits are fretted, tired and enfeebled by their constant agitation and
inquietude, motion or exercise provokes and aggravates: Motus omnis calefacit
corpora; quies vero refrigerat.
but refresh them with rest and ease, which will cool and abate their
aestuation and distempered motion.

Cherish sleep, although in the day time; that will humect and moisten the
body, and restore the lassated spirits: but lie not long in the morning, which
retains excrements beyond their due time for evacuation, and heats the body.

Watching and setting up late dries, and heats the body, by keeping the spirits
so long upon their duty; and is very injurious to Consumptive persons.

Avoid passions of the mind, which disturb and waste the spirits, exsiccate and
dry the body; but endeavor a placid quiet mind, which refreshes and pacifies
the spirits, and mitigates their febrile heat and aestuation: but cherish
mirth, and recreate your self abroad with pleasant company; and it will be of
great advantage to you in regaining your health and lost strength.

Bathing is good to cool and refresh the spirits that are grown hot and fiery;
to concenter them and give them rest, that are tired by their continual
aestuation; to restrain their efflux and emission, where transpiration is too
great: but this is to be understood of a cold Bath only, which does repel and
drive in.

Concerning drink take this Caution, That you load not your self with sma^l
Beer, Barley-water, and such slops, thinking thereby to quench your thirst and
cool your body; for thereby you overthrow your stomach which must carefully be
preserved, and abate nothing (...) your heat: but be moderate in drinking, yet
drink to satisfaction and refreshment^ let it be indifferent strong, and
sometimes a glass of Wine, which will not injure you in respect of heat, but
revive and cheer the drooping spirits, and give strength to the languishing
faculties: but it is the common opinion and practice of Physicians, severely in
Hecticks and most Fevers to forbid all strong drink and wine, as a great
aggravater of their disease, and not to be permitted. But this arises from
some of their false principles in Physic, and a wrong notion of Fevers, which
would take up too much room in this place to discuss: I shall therefore refer
that to another opportunity. I remember a story related by a learned Physician
in his own works, of a Nobleman that was long sick of a Fever, and strictly
forbidden wine by hi^ Physicians, though much desired by him; yet did forbear
in obedience to them, and observed all their rules; notwithstanding continued
lingering in his disease: It happened that a servant of this Lords being in drink,
^ame into the chamber; his Lord asked him what he had been drinking that made
him so drunk; he answered Claret Wine, such as he had in his Cellar; and withal
desired his Lord that he would drink but one draught, and it would recover him
he was sure, or let him be hanged if his Lordship was the worse for it. This
Lord being something cheered at the merry talk of his servant, commanded him to
give him a glass of wine; when he had drank that, was so well pleased and
refreshed with it, that he called for a second and drank it, and then a third;
after which his spirits were drowsy, and he lay down to sleep; that night he
slept very quietly, and the next day was very well, and his Fever gone: so he
dismissed his Physicians, and well rewarded his servant for his advice: And
concludes the story; Ecce quam noxia saepe est Medicis pertinax scholasticae
methodi custodia and probrosa; aegris autem damnosa!

For eating observe the inclination of your stomach; let no body impose upon
your natural appetite, artificial broths that are not acceptable nor desirable:
Quanto juc^ndius fue it quod quis com^dit, i^ tanto utique fit illi magis
nutriens.
but if your stomach delight in fine restaurative broths, it is good food and
proper for your condition, if prudently appointed: but some there are though
weak stomachs will better agree with a piece of mutton or beef, then the
lightest dis^ you can invent; and many being tied up from the meats they love,
by the prohibition of their Physician, have lost that little stomach they had,
and received much prejudice thereby; not remembering the Aphorism, Paulo pejor
sed suavior cibus and potus, meliori at ingrato praeferendus.

Here are many questions yet in this diaetetick part to be answered, but are
more proper to be resolved in peculiar cases of this or that person; and that
which may be allowed to one, may not to another: therefore I must forbear until
I receive a particular account of their condition.

Having done with the diaetetick part accommodated generally to this disease,
Pharmacy in the last place comes to be handled.

And here I must take notice of a great error and folly of our Physicians,
that prescribe nourishing Clysters to Consumptive and weak people; and for that
purpose do appoint the best restaurative broths they can invent to be given by
Clyster; thinking that way to nourish their Patients, when their weak stomachs
are not able to digest, nor longer able to endure the loathsome notions and
dyet-drinks: but how ridiculous this is, may common reason judge* It is
determined, and it is very true, that the first digestion of our food in the
stomach (...) the groundwork of the subsequent digestions; and an error in the
first is not corrected by the second: if then a deficiency or fault in the
first, be so great as not to be amended afterward, what then do you think of
no digestion at all? that must be much greater and produce worse effects: such
is your nourishing Clyster, that never had any digestive transmutation in the
stomach. What do you judge of a Lientery? you say that is a flux or looseness,
caused from indigested meat; when the stomach by default transmits to the
second digestive office, crude indigested meat; the parts that receive it
afterward do not close with it, nor embrace it as their nutrimental object,
and therefore do not set about to elaborate, digest and perfect it, but with
indignation reject it and throw it out: What can you expect then from this
Clyster-broth, that never had any digestion in the stomach, but a rejection by
all the parts; no fermenting praevious transmutation for nutrition, but a
corruptive alteration, from a forceable not a natural retention? Natura nihil
fecit frustra; Nature did not appoint the stomach so indifferently, as that we
might live without it, or receive any nourishment by our food, until it had
first passed that necessary, praeparatory and digestive office. Natura non agit
per saltum.

Besides, what do you think of a mes^ of dainty broth, mixed with man's
excrement? could you expect that Nature would be pleased with it, or satisfied
or nourished? Such is your restaurative Clyster, that so soon as it is
injected, mixeth and is defiled with your excrements; nay more, the
stercoraceous ferment of the lower guts, gives it a cadaverous transmutation,
and the smell of it is worse then common excrement, if it stay long in the body.

Nature will not be supplied with nourishment, but by the good old way of her
own institution and appointment; and therefore it were much better, you would
set about the improvement of medicines, advancing them to the greatest energy,
in the capacity of Nature, by sedulous repeated preparations and trials, with
your own inspection and labor; without which there is no true knowledge of
medicines, but deceitful traditional notions, that fail you, and delude your
Patients in the performance of Cures. Your pains herein (and it is you^ duty)
would largely be recompe^ced, with real satisfaction and judgment in Pharmacy,
much confidence and reliance on you from your Patients; greater and more
frequent success; fewer miscarriages and disasters: but one great obstacle to
this laudable work is, that intermedling with medicines, farther then a
prescription, is accounted (by fools only) below the title of a Doctor, and
that it looks something like a Quack or Mountebank to deal in medicines; this
is for Physicians only of the lower rank, but the grand Doctors scorn this
pedling way of practice: But let me tell you, if there be any such that think
it a derogation and lessening of them to inspect and undertake the care and
charge of preparing medicines, that Hippocrates, Libavius, Paracelsus,
Que^etan, Helmont, etc. the most renowned Physicians we read of, and to whom we
are all obliged for their Labors we now profit by, did not think the
preparation of medicines a work below them, but a duty incumbent on them, in
which they were sedulous: and he that through simple pride or laziness, has
not bestowed some time and pains to be well informed and acquainted with this
employment, I dare pronounce him a Physician of no value; for it is not notion
and talking, but good medicines that perform the Cure; without which your
Learning is deceit: and I must say, an expert skill in medicines (not by
book-reading, but) by ocular and manual preparation, is the most necessary part
of Physic to complete and dignifie a Physician; and that a Physician had
better be defective in any thing belonging to his Profession, then in this; for
he that is expert in medicines, though his other parts and reading be but mean,
shall outdo in Cures, the best disputant and best read man in this faculty
that practices but with ordinary medicines. A good medicine helps very much a
bad Physician, and finds out the disease (by its universality) when he cannot:
but a poor common medicine is not mended by the grave and learned discourse of
the Doctor; non verbis sed herbis. But let us inquire who is like a Quack; the
Physician that prepares his own Medicines, or he that prescribes only to the
Apothecary: A Quack is such a one that pretends a great knowledge in Physic,
but has little or none; such a knowledge have you (prescriber) in Medicines,
that never made any: And I am ashamed to speak it, many of the Drugs you
prescribe, you know not when you see them; but hope well, that the Medicine
will be made up secundum Artem.

He cannot truly be called a Doctor of Physic, that is scarce a Scholar in
Physic, for Medicines are not learned by reading, but by practice in making.
The ancient Latin Phrase may inform you something, Medicinam fecit, hoc vel
illo loco; he practiced Physic in such a place; he made Medicines, he did not
prescribe: nor is he fit to prescribe that cannot make; for I am very sure, his
knowledge is very small in Medicines: therefore the prescriber that has only a
traditional knowledge from Authors in his Library, must subscribe to the Maker,
for he is able to teach him, and correct him in his erroneous prescriptions:
Now whether deserves the pre-eminence, and who is more worthy to be esteemed in
our Profession, let common reason judge.

But this discourse falls in as a Parergy, therefore I wave it, and return to
my purpose.

For Medicines proper to be used against this Disease treated on, I have not
prescribed any here, and that for good reasons: First, that I might not be
injuriou^ to the professors of Physic, to whom only such secrets are to be
committed, and not to prostitute this noble Art to base illiterate practisers,
who are in no wise able to advance, but contrariwise to disgrace this
Profession, and abuse the sick.

2ly Good Medicines by unskilful, negligent, or covetous persons, not giving
Medicines their due preparation, in bestowing that cost, labor and time as
ought, defames a good Medicine, and brings a disrepute to the Author or
Inventor.

3ly The Diseased, though ingenious and industrious for hi^ health, is not
accomodated to prepare such a Medicine, requiring Furnaces. Glasses, and may
Utensils, whi^ wou^ (...) exce^d the cost of the M^e tha^ he may ^y it for,
without further hazard or trouble.

4ly It was not any intention and purpose to teach (...) the ^actice of
Physic, how to make Medicines to cure your selves or others, to undermine the
professors of this faculty; no, go to your Physicians for Medicines; as they
are an Order of men most necessary and useful, designed and educated for this
purpose; so let their practice be entire to themselves, as you would have your
own Trade^ and Arts to your selves: nor shall I encourage or inform any
pragmattick person, that would be prying into the arcana's of this Art, that is
not qualified and legally inducted: Procul hinc, procul este prophani, sacra
enim medicina res est.

Thus far I shall go, and be helpful to you in this, which is no small
satisfaction and advantage; to inform you of your Disease, what causes, and how
procured, what signs that discover it in being and gradual progress; in what
part chiefly seated; what danger you are in; how to order your self in your
daily and necessary custom, that you may not aggravate and heighten your
infirmities, by your imprudent government and inadvertency; but on the
contrary, by good rules and warnings, you may check your Disease, and keep it
under: this is sufficient and enough for you to know that is not a Physician;
nor is it against charity to conceal the rest^ as for M^dicines (for the
reasons aforesaid) apply your self to such an able Physician that is
industrious and expert in preparing choice Medicines, that makes it his great
design and daily labor to acquire noble efficacious Medicines; but if you be
unacquainted with such, or know not whom to apply to, upon a due information of
your Disease, I will supply you with such Medicines of my own preparation, as
your condition requires.

Of Consumptions Phthisical.
BY Consumptions Phthisical, I mean all such as have any internal part
ulcerated, or putrid and rotten: The word Phthisis as it is commonly used,
denotes an exulceration of the Lungs only; but may properly signify another
part so affected; as the Liver, Kidneys, Mesentery, etc. The Lungs being a soft
tender part is more easily invaded, and a breach made sooner then upon other
parts that are more solid and firm; and in this part we find Consumptions more
frequently radicated, and primarily ^t^d.

These Phthisical Con^p^ are generated, ei^ by some ac^ humor corroding the
part, having f^quent transition that way does by time fret and excoriate; or by
the apertion or ^pture of a vein; from whence extravasated blood does putrify
and corrupt the ^djacent parts: according to Hippocrates, A sanguinis sputo
puris sputum, a puris s^uto tabes: or thirdly, by a deficiency of transmutation
when the vital principles of the parts are debile, weak or alienated, does not
assimilate the nutriment brought thither for its supply and maintenance; but e
contra, does suffer it to degenerate, infest the part and putrify; from thence
a Phthisical Consumption of that part soon follows, and by degrees is
communicated to the whole body. The reason of it appears thus; after all the
praevious digestions and alterations of aliment received, in the public
offices which administer to the whole, there is also an ultimate and proper
digestion in every part, whereby it converts and assimilates into its own
nature and substance such a portion as is fit to nourish and maintain it: but
if this digestive innate faculty of transmutation and assimilation be
deficient, alienated or extinct, then that which is brought to the part to
nourish it is corrupted and vitiated; which if the robur and strength of the
part be not able to expulse and carry off, does then invade and corrupt that
part, with a tabifick and consumptive impression.

Though all the visecra be liable to this Tabes, yet I find Consumptions of the
Lungs most frequent, as being most obnoxious to external and internal injuries:
First, quia ce^rri^e ass^citar ab extrinseco irrite^t^, because the Lungs are
more subject to assaults ab extra; and chiefly from a bad air and tetrid
vapors that sometimes set such impressions, whereby the Crasis of the Lungs
are depraved and altered, so that the succus nutritious which should nourish
them, is perverted into an excrementitious foul matter, clogging and loading
the parts for respiration. Secondly, the Lungs are more apt to decay because of
their soft spongious nature, are more apt to imbibe and receive an exotic
ferment, more easily penetrated and eroded then other more solid resisting
parts; as also less able to retain their native goodness.

For this cause the Lungs are more frequently the foundation and part primarily
affected in Consumptive persons; yet all persons are not equally subject to
this Consumption, but some more inclined then others, ex viti^ (...) by an
innate bad Crasis and Cons^ion, a primo ortu centracta, radicated in the
seminal matter; which secret in^scernable deficiency cum tempere ma^s^it, does
by time appear and explicate it self as other seminal p^rietie: now this
natural pro^ensity is ^tarded or promoved, according to external occasions and
provocations, and shall manifest it self sooner or later according to your
regular diaetetick customs and accidents.

Having spoken something of the subject part, we will now consider the
antecedent and continent cause: and here we must take notice of the alimentary
liquors of the body, their degeneration, deviation and extravasation; from
whence many Consumptions do arise and are generated. Bodies of a sound and good
constitution, living laudably according to diaetetick rules prescribed, in the
right use of meat and drink, sleeping and watching, exercise and rest, passions
of mind, etc. do preserve the integrity of their natures, and ability of their
faculties much longer then those who by accident, or a careless irrational
course of living receive much detriment and decay in their bodies: the stomach
abused by meat and drink, alienating the digestive ferment of that part, leaves
its wonted integrity and performance of office; from thence a vitiated
digestion follows, which continuing is manifested by an ill savor in the
mouth, or unwonted taste, bitter, sour, foetid, etc. flatulency, eructation or
nauseousness: but the ill effects and their fi^m are not confined here, but are
transmitted i^to the mass of blood, producing a degeneration and change there
also; from whence Consumptions, and various infirmities arise in several parts:
sometimes it makes impression upon the Lungs, discharging its acrimony and
eroding saltness upon that part: sometimes upon another; not long confined
within its own ductures and cha^nels, but by apertion or erosion is
extravasated, and invades the parenchyma of the viscera, with a tabifick
impression.

The acid impurities that flow with the Blood, so long as they keep within
their rivulets, do not so much molest, nor are so easily detected; but being
separated and extravasated, whether per anastemosin, diapedesin, or per
anabrosin, the parts whitherto such matter takes its course, and by which it
passes, is made very sensible of a strange unwelcome guest; witness the
dolorous pains of the Gout, of the Teeth, venereous and scorbute pains in the
Head, Limbs, and habit of the Body; griping of the Guts, when Nature per
diacrisin, has separated that hostile matter, and brought it thither for
extermination; vellicating pains of the Back, counterfeiting the Stone, but
caused by an acrid serosity; violent coughing, and painful irritations of the
Lungs; punctures and pains in the Breast, the forerunners and warners of a
breach and Consumption there. These and many more such like pains in diverse
parts are caused from a degenerate acrid humor, extravasated and expulsed from
place to place, does chiefly invade and infest those parts, whose innate robur
and strength is too weak and unable to resist the assault, or by organical
disposition and aptitude is liable for the reception. In this deviation and
inconstant residence of morbifick humors, the Lungs is frequently infested;
sometimes with extravasated blood, which if not timely expectorated, does
putrify, and lays the foundation of a tabes; or a saline corroding serous
humor, which by excoriation invades the tender Lungs, and an Ulcer is planted
there.

If we make inquiry into the causes of Phthisical Consumptions, we shall find
a phthisis of the Lungs may be procured several ways, or from these causes:
First, Domestica indispositio, a bad Crasis of the part; that is, a tender
infirm constitution of the part apt to decay and corrupt and this is either
native, or hereditary, from the first constitution and fabrication of parts by
seminal matter; or adventitious, acquired by time, through a bad air, noxious
fumes, accidents, and evil living, disposing the Lungs to a vicious depraved
constitution. Secondly, by the accrimonious saltness of humors, fretting and
exulcerating them. Thirdly, by the apertion, rupture, or erosion of a Vein;
which extravasated blood lodging there, does putrify and corrupt the Lungs.
Fourthly, by an Imposthume in the adjacent parts breaking in upon the Lungs; as
by a Plurisie, Squinance, Inflammation of the Mediastinum or Diaphragma; and
therefore Hippocrates said, Empyema si 40 dierum spatio per sputum non
repurgetur, in tabem degenerat, quae mortem accersit. Aph. 15. Sect. 5.

Causes also external do promote and concur much to the generating of a
Phthisis in the Lungs; and here you must take notice of the air, by whose
intemperateness and impurity the Lungs contract an evil disposition and
alteration of its Crasis: and this we observe in some places, that the air does
procure and promote a Phthisical Consumption of the Lungs more frequently; and
that the air of another place is more preservative and curative: therefore the
Phthisical person is to consult the Physician what place is best for his abode,
whether it be for prevention or recovery: For this cause, great Cities being
much annoyed with unwholesome fumes and vapors, from Sinks, Privies, and
Chimnies, offensive nasty Trades, etc. made London abound with Phthisical
Consumptive persons more then half the Nation besides; and from Consumptive
Parents a numerous progeny of the same kind is propagated. Society also is to
be regarded; and you must not frequently converse with a Phthisical person,
whose unwholesome breath may infect the sound, by drawing in the putrid vapor
that the other breaths forth: but above all, a Phthisical Bedfellow is most
dangerous to infect a sound person, and chiefly to be avoided.

Certain seasons of the year, and constitution of the air, though in the same
place, are worse then other; as the Autumnal Quarter is the worst, and
Phthisical persons do most decline at this season, and are worse in moist foggy
weather, then in a dry clear open sky.

That you may not be surprised, but have some warning of this Disease, and
characters to know it by, I shall set down some signal tokens whereby you may
discover it afar off; and certain marks to know it by, when fixed and seated in
its proper place.

Consumptions in their first approaches tread very softly, that you are not so
sensible of their invasion; but having gained some footing, are more bold to
awake you, and appear in the breach and decay of your wonted health and
strength: a long time perhaps you carry this secret enemy in your bosom not
discernable but by the sagacious judgment of a very able Physician; but when
you find some unwonted alterations in your body, of which you cannot determine,
what or whether they tend, look out betimes, apply your self to the most
skilful of our Profession, that by his timely advice and prevalent Medicines,
you may obviate and stop the proceedings of a secret destroyer.

Obsta principiis, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas, invaluere moras.
The forerunners and warners of Consumptions are many, declaring a degeneration
and change of the constitution; as, bleeding at the nose often; signifying the
blood to have lost some of its balsamic consistence, being grown thin, sharp,
or hot, will not be confined within its rivulets, but opening its own ductures
gives vent and issue.

2ly Spitting of Blood imports the like, and is procured by the same causes.

3ly The Spittle which before was sweet or insipid, is become salt or sharp,
denotes the vital stream to be degenerate, from whence it proceeds; for as the
Blood answers the Chyle, so the Spittle answers the Blood, the one depending
upon the other.

4ly Frequent and often spitting, not provoked by any manifest cause.

5ly A constant Cough, provoked by a sharp rheumatick matter.

6ly The Spittle viscous, tough, or brought up in gobs.

7ly Short and weak breathing.

8ly The habit of the body not so plump, firm, and hard, fleshy; but unwonted
softness, flaccidity, and looseness of the flesh, upon the Arms, Thighs, or
Legs.

9ly The complexion not so good: that person which before was fresh and clear,
is become more pale, brown, or ill colored; may conclude the limpid vital
streams are defiled, impure, and muddied.

10ly The ^lse weak and slow; or weak, laboring and quick.

11ly Weariness, w^ness, and indisposition to as^n; the spirits not so lively
and brisk a^ before, but sluggish and dull, given to much sleep, the vigor and
strength of the body begins to abate, when the Blood, the treasury of vital
spirits begins to be alienated and changed from its wonted purity; such as the
Blood is, such are the spirits from thence extracted; the purer the blood is,
the more vegete and lively is that person: but when the blood is changed,
dispirited, flat, and sour, the man that before was active, merry and
lightsome, is now clouded, dull and indisposed to mirth or action.

12ly If the transpirations and breathing sweats of your body, which before
were not unsavory, are now of a stronger scent and unpleasant odor, argues the
humors of the body to be degenerate, soul, and putrid.

Some of these signs are sufficient to give notice of a Consumption
approaching, and the degenerate inclination of your body thereto; which being
timely looked after, and consulted, may more easily be prevented; Aegrius
ejicitur quam non admittitur hostis; but being neglected, proceeds and gains
strength, grows more incorrigible and dangerous; not to be reduced commonly,
but by an extraordinary prudent course of an expert Physician, and the best of
Medicines: the signs are these.

1. Pain in the Breast. 2. A sharp vehement Cough. 3. Spitting of purulent
matter. 4. A faetid cadaverous scent of the Breath, with difficult and short
breathing. 5. Fainty Sweats. 6. A continued Looseness. 7. A putrid Fever. 8.
Debility and weakness of all the faculties.
Some of which do properly belong to Consumptions of the Lungs, the rest are
common to Consumptions that arise from other parts.

Be careful in the observance of diaetetick Rules, as the judgment of your
Physician shall appoint you; concerning the air, meat and drink, sleeping,
exercise, evacuations, and passions of mind; and herein diaetetick observation
is of great concernment, for alteration and reduction of the Constitution to a
good state, which for the most part has degenerated by irregularities and
enormities in the same.

Now every Consumptive person is to be regulated in the fix non-naturals
rehearsed, peculiarly and properly, pro re nata, upon the relation and account
given of the Sick, which as the case requires will be different; and therefore
I shall be brief in my prescripts herein.

Generally a clear, sweet, dry air, in high and gravelly grounds is best;
especially when the Lungs decay by an over-moist, spongious, flaccid, and soft
disposition; but if of a hot dry withering condition; a moister air, and the
Valley is more agreeable: but if you be forced to live in a place injurious for
the air, that promotes your Disease, and consumptive inclination, you must
correct that by Art, and help your self with proper fumes and evaporations in
the house, as the case requires: but concerning the air, in relation to health
and sickness, read in my Tutela Sanitatis, where you may receive farther
satisfaction.

In the choice of meats, eat such as are of light digestion, good nutriment,
and grateful to your Stomach, not over salted, spiced, or dried; no said or
broiled meats, no Pie-crust, or bread crust. But for general rules in the
choice of meats and drinks, my Tutela Sanitatis is large, whither I refer you,
that I need not repeat here: from thence you may collect what is most agreeing
to your case, being here informed of the nature of your Disease, and how
procured. Tutela Sanitat. page 22, 23, etc.


Also in my hygyastick precautions to a choleric constitution, that precept
for the most part will agree with phthisical Consumptions: page 45.
Milk, when the body is cleansed, is proper food to nourish, and for at
temperating the heat and acrimony of the Blood; but the body being foul, and
when abstersion is more required, the whey of it is better; the coagulating and
unctuous parts being separated.

Jellies and restau^tive Broths-before the use of good Medicines, do but clog
the body, and increase the foulness; but after a due course of Medicines, are
profitable for such whose stomachs do agree with, and desire them: therefore
the practice of such are to be condemned, who presently upon the name of a
Consumption, f^ll to ^reat nourishers, high and plentiful feeding.

Be moderate in sleeping, and go to bed seasonably; the spirits are thereby
refreshed, and the acrimony of the blood allayed; but watching tires the
spirits, heats the body, and exasperates sharp humors.

In the beginning of your Disease, use gentle exercise; but when it is
confirmed, and strength much abated, take your ease, and forbear all violent
motion, which fires the spirits, and is very injurious.

Avoid all passions and disturbance of mind, the greatest enemy to a
consumptive person; but endeavor cheerfulness, tranquillity, and a sedate
spirit, a great preservative from a consumptive inclination, and a necessary
remedy in the cure: but concerning passions of the mind, and their several
effects upon the body, the forementioned Tutela Sanitatis will inform you;
that I forbear to enlarge here.

Concerning the smoking of Tobacco I must caution you, as a promoter of
Consumptions Tobacco of late years is become as common as eating and drinking;
and some there are who had rather refrain a meals-meat men the Pipe: but since
the use of it, Consumptions abound and are much more frequent then formerly. I
shall wave many circumstances concerning the custom of taking it, and only tell
you the nature and effects of it. Tobacco is of a virulent nature, as those
that first use it do find by the symptoms and effects, to be very like those
that have taken some venomous thing; as Giddiness, Vomiting, Fainting; but the
frequent use of it reconciles the great disgust that nature has against it: as
it is recorded by Historians, that Mithridates King of Pontus accustoming
himself to eat poison, could not be poisoned when he desired it: so Tobacco
though abhorred by Nature, yet Custom makes it so familiar, that the ill
effects of it do not appear presently; that nature is not so provoked, and
sensibly moved by it; which puts the cheat upon all, thinking it then friendly
and amicable, but by time does much alter the hate and condition of our Bodies.
The fume of it is Narcotick, seizing the spirits, and alienating their purity:
It is acrid and biting, ungrateful to the tender Lungs, drawing away the dulcid
moisture, and leaving the remainder more fretting and acrimonious. Many take it
to prevent Rheumes, but you may observe none so rheumatick and phlegmatic as
Tobacconists; and as it leaves a filthy taste in the mouth, so it sets a bad
impression upon all the parts it reaches; the Lungs and vital parts especially
receiving the prejudice.

Having made a progress thus far into Phthisical Consumptions, it remains I
should give you something remarkable in the therapeutick or curative part.

If the Disease be but approaching, and a propension thereto, correction and
altering the mass of Blood secures you from the danger; but if it be already
seated, and the Lungs ulcerated, more intentions of cure must be prosecuted, as
abstersion and consolidation.

To know whether your Disease increase or abate, during the cure and use of
means, observe your Spittle, which will vary as you grow better or worse; if
that which was soul become more pure, or consisting of several parts be equally
concocted; that was saltish, is dulcid or insipid; that was faetid and ill
savoured, is void of scent; that was with difficulty expectorated, is now
easily brought up: these are good signs, and promise recovery; but the
contrary are bad, and threaten death.

Those that are consumptive by an hereditary right, derived from their Parents;
are much worse, and with more difficulty preserved or cured, them those to whom
it is adventitious; because it the former it is implanted in their nature, and
seminally radicated, does grow (...) to its height, and increase with the
bodies; the other being promoted by some procatartick cause, may more easily
receive a check and stop by good advice.

Those that spit blood at some certain times only, if it flows plentifully, is
less dangerous then those who more constantly: void strings of blood; because
the former arises from an apertion of the Veins, the latter from an erosion
and exulceration; besides, the former may proceed only from plenitude; the
latter from great alienation and acrimony of the blood.

Gentle purgation, per epicrasin, by proper Purgers are necessary and
advantageous; but strong purgation, and virulent purgers (as Scammony,
Coloquintida, Senna, Agarick, etc.) are noxious, and do exasperate; therefore
great heed is to be taken in the choice and use of purging Medicines, else you
do more harm then good.

Sudorificks properly adapted and rationally used, are of excellent use against
Phthisical Consumptions, whether imminent or present; for precaution, by
depurating the blood from acrid serosities; for cure, by exsiccation also and
healing, and transpiration of putrid humors.

Dry Fumes, and moist evaporations rightly instituted pro re nata, as the case
requires humectation or exsiccation, and to supply the defects of an
incongruous and unwholesome air, are laudable artificial means, conducing to
preservation or cure.

In the performance of cure, if there be any urgent symptom, that first is to
be regarded, whether it be spitting and voiding of Blood, a defection of
Spirits, or vehemence of Cough; which being mitigated and relieved, you may
then proceed radically, beginning at the foundation, and r^moving fomenting
Canse^ (...) the part affected.

In comp^ (...), when contraindications (...) cure do meet, as often it falls
out in P^h^ (...), the ability and judgment o^ the Physician is then most
eminentl^ ^quired in the use and choice of Medicines by moderating
successively, or qualifying by commixture and allay, the thwarting intentions
of Cure.

The Galenick Medicines commended by several Authors are many.

Trallianus boasts of many phthisical persons he cured with the Boodstone,
some extol syrup of Ground Ivy, others syrup of Comfrey, and Conserve of Roses;
some again commend the decoction of Guaiacum, Syrup of St. John's Wortflowers,
and syrup of Tobacco: also the powder of Haly is practiced by some, which is
this; white Poppy-seed 10 drams, Starch, Gum Arabic, and Dragon, each 3 drams,
seeds of Purslane, Mallows, Marshmallows, Cucumbers, Gourds, Citruls, and
Quince, of each 7 drams, Ivory, Liquorice, each 3 drams; Penidies the weight of
all; and made into a Powder, of which is given 2 drams every morning, in syrup
of Jujubes, or pectoral decoction. But how insufficient these Medicines and
such like are, to cure a Consumption, those only can judge that rightly
understand what a Consumption is; and what a radical Medicine is, that is
adapted, and does apply to the vital and fundamental principles; that is
prevalent to resto^ their declensions, and reduce their irregularities to
rectitude and integrity of operation.

I have not set down here, the process of my own medicines, that I use in the
Cure of Phthisical Consumptive people, being above the reach of those that are
not Chemical Artists; and for the reasons given before, in the 74. and 75.
pages.

Of a Spermatick Consumption.
THis kind of Consumption may seem strange in regard of the denomination being
new; but it is very proper, and deserves this distinguishing title.

By a Spermarick Consumption you are to understand, a decay and wasting of the
body, from the expense and loss of sperm or seed; and this is either voluntary
by immoderate coition and copulation, man with woman; or by self provocation to
such an expense and emission: or else involuntary, a weeping and issuing
without consent, or external provocation and allurement.

First we will consider what this sperm or balsom of Nature is in both Sexes;
that knowing the worth of it, how gradually it is elaborated and brought to its
perfection, you may the better value it, be more sensible of the loss, and
rightly understand how the detriment and decay does consecute and follow upon
too large, and continued emission.

I shall not here spend time in leading you through all the digestions of man's
body that are praevious and preparatory to this ultimate elixerated matter,
having done that in another place: but it is sufficient you understand that
this spermatick succus being the last concocted and elaborated matter, is the
cream and quintessence of the rest; having been defaecated and depurated in
several offices of digestion; each of which does separate the faeculent and
inutile parts, transmitting the purer to receive the operation and perfection
of the subsequent digestion: and therefore this spermatick succus is defined
pars purissima, electissima and elabetatissima omnium partium animantium quae
conferunt ad nutritionem; the purest and most select matter, graduated and
refined by so many praevious digestions, which are as so many rectifications to
subtiliate, purify and spiritallize it. This spermatick digested matter,
though the last in order, yet it is prime in dignity; being the quintessence
and purest part extracted from the rest, and may fitly be called elixir hominis
or essential balsom. Now this elixerate choice matter which is elaborated and
treasured up in the spermatick vessels, not only for use of the individuum, but
also for propagation of the species, is not prodigally to be wasted, but
necessarily employed for the purposes appointed by Nature: but if it happen
from what cause soever to be expended more then nature does allow, and can well
dispense with, damage does arise to the whole body, enervation and consumption
upon the continuance, if not timely prevented and remedied.

The danger and prejudice from such immoderate evacuations appears thus: For
the (...), that it causes great weakness and debility of all the faculties,
every prodigal that has foolishly expended Natures Treasure, can seal to this
truth. The (...), why and how it comes to pass, that such decay is the
consequent of it, appears upon these following considerations.

First, From the commerce and consent between the Testicles, the Brain and
spinal Marrow: the emptying of the former causes an exhaustion, and a weakness
in the latter; by drawing away the animal Spirits, which is their strength and
vigor; and from this debility of the back, venereous wasting was called tabes
dorsalis, a Consumption of the Back.

Secondly, If you consider what this seed or spermatick substance is, the
quintissence and purest part of our alimentary liquors of the body; the most
refined and best rectified spirits, are extracted from the whole body, and
drawn in by the spermatick vessels to impregnate and endow this sperm or seed:
Now if it be so (as it is most true) that the seed or sperm is an extract of
the finest matter, and spirit of man's body; and that the emptying of the
spermatick Vessels puts them upon a new draining, and sucking of the body to
fill again, and re^lenish their emptiness (as the Stomach when it is empty,
desires to be filled again, and not lie idle): then of necessity it will
follow, that too large and frequent emissions of this seed do exhaust and
inervate the body, debilitate all the faculties, and bring a consumption upon
the whole.

Thirdly, The spirits are balsamic, and preserve the body from putrefaction;
their exhaustion therefore makes the body liable to corruption and decay: and
this is observable, that those who suffer such immoderate expense and loss, it
at changes their complexion from a fresh lively aspect, into a pale, brown,
and sad countenance.

Fourthly, From immederate expense of seed, and too frequent emissions, arises
infaecundity and sterility; and that by reason the seed stays not, nor
abides in the spermatick elaboratory its due time for digestion, elixiration,
and maturation; as also that the vis spermatopoietica, the spermatick ferment
or crasis of those parts are changed, altered, and become barren, their native
power being spent by too frequent emissions, and immoderate Flux; as Land is
become poor and barren by being over-tilled.

These truths being rightly considered, as it is rationally apparent, none
wilfully (I suppose being thus warned) will be guilty in this kind: but it
happens sometimes by inadvertency, natural debility or hazardous adventures
with strangers in copulation, that a detrimental and consumptive issuing and
dropping of Seed is procured upon man or woman, by straining beyond their
strength; an unwholesome Bedfellow, or a fluid indigested wateriness of the
seed from weakness and debility of the genital parts.

That which does proceed from impure copulation, and is virulent, manifested by
the color, greenish, yellowish, etc. must have a peculiar cure, opposing that
malignity and virulency wherewith the crasis of the spermatick vessels are
tainted and stained; afterward roboration and strengthening of the parts, to
confirm their native crasis and spermatick power restored again: but if
unadvisedly (as some ignorant practitioners commonly do) you stop the current
and issuing of the seed, before there be a through purification, then the
malignity is retained, and being stopped in the usual vent, regurgitates back,
and is scattered all over the body, producing dolorous and very bad effects:
and thus the common pretenders that boast of these Cures with speed and
infallibility, leave their Patients in a worse condition then when they
undertook them: and not only their method and intentions of Cure are irregular
and injurious, but also their Medicines dangerous, or ineffectual for want of
skill in pharmacy and Chemical Preparations, or a careless referring that
charge and management to others. For my own part I dare not give a Medicine,
but what I am an eyewitness to in the preparation, it being the great work and
charge of a Physician so to do.

But to return to my purpose; by too frequent copulation, immoderate straining,
or the like, weakening the parts for generation, a profluvium seminis or
Gonorrhoea, an issuing of seed may follow, which although your partner be
wholesome, may produce bad effects and become virulent; for although the flux
at first be mild and white, yet by continuance and neglect, does degenerate,
becomes sharp and ill colored, showing the pravity of its alienated nature:
from whence a Cachexy or ill habit of body, weakness, consumptive leanness, and
a much altered Countenance.

This stillicidium seminis, involuntary dropping and wasting of seed in men is
easily known; but in women often mistaken (and that by Physicians,) thinking it
to be fluor albus, the whites; thereupon fall to bleeding, and purging soundly,
with base virulent Catharticks, which exasperates and renders the disease more
deplorable, and far worse to be cured after such rude dealing.

But he that rightly understands the disease; that is filius artis in Chemical
Pharmacy (as Dr. George Thomson, a true Spagyrist that labors propriis manibus
for efficacious medicines) such I say, goes another way to work, by restoring
Nature with roborating extracts and balsamic elixerated spirits: with which
Nature closes and receives amicably; by whose assistance the debilitated parts
gain strength, concoct and retain what before passed away crude, watery and
thin.

This weakness is very frequent among the feminine sex; being more prone and
apt to this wasting infirmity then men, from the difference of organization and
fabrication of parts rendering them more liable; being the colder and moister
nature, and the retentive faculty weaker: Some conceal this infirmity out of
modesty; others neglect it as a trivial disease, that time will cure, not
considering the ill consequents that this produces; as great weakness of the
brain and marrow of the back; debility of all the members, and trembling of the
nerves, decay of the senses, and ^ains of (...) joints when they come into
year^ ^ri^y and barrenness in some; or if they bear children, they are feeble,
rickety, convulsive and diseased from their seminal principles; an ill habit of
body, and change of the Countenance, bringing them into age before their time;
a languishing and consumptive leanness, or a hydropick and unwholesome
corpulency.

These sad effects I have often observed to be procured by this secret wasting
disease in many persons; the particular cases and circumstances I shall not
recite for modesty sake, but caution all such as are threatened with it, to seek
for the best advice and efficacious means in time; and not cheat themselves (as
too frequently) with the usual notion of the whites, and the frivolous common
medicines that women tell to each other. The medicines I use in the Cure of
this infirmity both of men and women, as a restaurative essence, and roborating
extract, are not here divulged for the reasons aforesaid; which I think will
satisfy all that are reasonable, and for others it is no matter.

I have now discoursed the several sorts of Consumptions proposed to be treated
on in the front of this Book; and had not the late dreadful fire consumed my
house and interrupted these labors, I had enlarged this work in several parts
of it, and given you a fuller prospect into the matter: yet as it is, you may
see a discovery of some necessary truths, that have been latent; and the
foundation of these diseases that were undiscovered, are now laid bare and
obvious to common reason. Our Predecessors in the disquisition and search after
the causes of diseases, sought no farther then bad humors and dyscrasy of
temperaments; which indeed are but the effects and products of morbifick
causes: but you have here seen there is a farther progress to be made, and that
the foundations of diseases are seated in the vital and fundamental principles;
upon which foundation the structure of this work is laid, and to which all the
discourse refers: this is to demonstrate and lay open diseases radically and
fundamentally; and here is a Physicians scope and aim, that will rightly assist
nature, and effectually restore and help her, in the declensions, wastings and
alienations of her vital and fundamental principles: this is the way to core
radically and soundly; the other is but superficial and palliative.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books sold by Tho. Basset under S. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street.
A Treatise of the Scurvy: The second Impression Revised and Enlarged: By Dr.
Maynwaring. Octavo. 1666. Tutela Sanitatis, sive vita protracta: Being wholesome
Precautions in Diet and daily practical rules, for preservation of health and
prolongation of life: With a Discourse of Fontinels or Issues. By the same
Author. Solamen Aegrorum, sive Ternarius Medicamentorum Chymicorum, ad omnes
fere morbos curandum (Galenica Remedia (...) eludentes) foelicissime inventa
Remedia. Authore Everardo Maynwaringo, Philosoph. and Med. Spagyr. Doctore.
Nova medendi ratio: A short and easy Method of Curing; exemplified by a
Ternary of radical Medicines, universal in their respective Classes: viz.
Purgation, Transpiration, and Roboration. 1666. Loimotomia, or the Pest
Anatomized: By Dr. Thoeason. Sold by Nath. Crouch in Bishopsgate-street, near
Cornhill.
USEFUL DISCOVERIES, AND PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS, IN Some Late Remarkable Cures
of the SCURVY.

By E. Maynwaringe, Dr. in Physic.

Cognitio Sequitur Curationes. LONDON Printed by A. M for T. Basset under St.
Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1668.

To the Diseased.
IN vain it is to Discourse, and have the Nation of Diseases; unless also
efficacious Medicines be found out to answer their Indications for Cure: Which
to do is the most difficult and laborious part of Physic. And this we may
conclude from the often frustration and disappointment of Medicines in their
effects, after Learned Consultations and deliberate Determination of the
Disease, Causes, Part affected, etc. rightly stated.

Here is the great Check given to the Physicians Learning; and, until this
trial of the Medicine, he receives no repulse, but goes on smoothly with
Applause and boldly: but, finding his Medicine take little or no effect for the
purpose intended, is then at a stand a while: But, being loath to receive a
baffle from the Disease does prescribe another, and pe^haps another after that,
a fourth and a fifth, and sometimes many more if the Disease be contumacious
and stubborn: and this some will call a Methodical course of Physic. But I
shall not harp upon that string.

This Disappointment is too often observed in the practice of Physic, and this
arising only from ineffectual, languid erroneous Medicines, and how does this
come to pass? but that the care and burden of this work rests upon those that
are unable and unfit to manage it: or by trusting too much the credit of
Authors and their traditional Medicines, either Galenical or Chemical; relying
upon their authority, and the truth of their Writings, which have deluded and
frustrated the expectation of many. And this I have observed in practical
Authors and Pharmacopaeas of both Sects, Medicines collected and borrowed from
one another, and delivered thus f^m hand to hand, none knows who first invented
them; or whether any of them ever made or tried them, that highly extolls and
gives large encomiums of their virtues.

That many of these are Delusions either in the process, or the efficacy of the
Medicine, to my own cost and Labor, I have experimented, and must say with
Helmont that great Philosopher, Vexatio parit intellectum and therefore do
Caution othe^s, lest they suffer upon this R^ck: but he that will purchase to
himself excelling Medicines (being accomplished with l^teratu^e, with the
groundwork and Canons of the Art,) let him not tie him self up, or credit too
much this or that Author, but follow the dictates of his own reason, confirmed
and guided by collateral experiments; and herein a Physician daily exe cised
shall in time attain to great knowledge and sat sfaction in Medicine; and
purchase to himself If Medicaments of great worth and value: and this must be
every Physicians proper Labor and daily endeavors, that ^ationally intends
and rightly goes about to improve and advance the efficacy and power of
Medicines, that they may have their praise and fame in the World, and the
Physician much satisfaction and content in their wonderful Operation. It is
not, Sitting in his Study alone and poring upon Books, but his own manual
Operation and Inspection over his Servants, that gives the great stroke to the
business; the other does very litl^ without this, but both, must needs do well:
and I must say and that justly; he that practices Physic, with a bea^
speculative, traditional, and book-^eading knowledge of Medicines, is very unsk
lful in the true fundamental knowledge of Medicines; and is as unfit to
prescribe or appoint Medicines in hazardous or difficult cases, as he that by
only reading of Navigation, is unable to manage and conduct a Ship to
East-^ndia.

And this is reason to averr: for he knows not what a Medicine is, nor can he
give a good and certain account upon his own knowledge, of the Nature of any
Ingredient, but has all upon trust: This o^ that man says it; the conclusion
will not handsomely follow, Ergo, It is so. No wise man that can gain a certain
knowledge of his own, will bo row at hazard of another; considering the untruths
and Erorrs that are scatte^ed abroad in most Writings; that he which lives only
by borrowing thus, shall run himself out of credit and Reputation in his
Profession, if blind Fortune be not very much his friend.

It Is most certain and true, that the Ingredients of any Medicine are not known
by reading of them, but by their single and compound preparation, and
separation of their constituent parts: and thus by handling, and Chymically
dissecting their bodies, each part lies bare, and presents it self to your
understanding.

And farther; An Ingredient whether of the Animal, Vegetable, or the Mineral
Family, changes its Nature and Effect, according to the variation of its
Consorts, with whom it is joined: that it is not the same compounded with this,
as it is with that but works a different effect; because many times they act
upon each other, subduing and moderating each others peculiar Nature, that a
median nature does result: And therefore (...) and knowledge in the Physician is
required, about the choice and conjunction of Ingredients: that he be able to
look through their several Natures, to find out their similitude and
^epugnancy; their concord and disco^d: for hereby is known what properties will
be advanced, and what depressed: and this an able Chemical Physician can
discern, as having a perspective through knowledge, the other is but Exterior and
Partial: and as the composition of Ingredients may alter and change their
Natures; so likewise their various manner of Preparation singly, do change an
Ingredient, that it is made this or that, as a perite Artist pleases,
exalting, or prostrating and killing this or that quality, as his purpose
requires.

And here by the way, I must take notice of the traditional and unprofitable
account of Vegetables that our Herbals give; of which the Chemical Physician
takes little notice, and is a small assistance and guide to him in the Election
of Plants for his several Intentions. Being satisfied long since that
Medicament was the most weighty and considerable part of Physic, and that a
deficiency or error there, is a greater disadvantage and detriment to the
Patient, then in the determination of the Des^se; I di^eage^ly apply my self to
Medicin^ according to the ancient custom and general practice of the most
learned and famous Physicians in all places; who we^e industrious Artists,
diligent in ^reparing their own Medicines, until this later age) with as much
curiosity as my knowledge could possibly direct. At first I was de^rous to make
Experiments, and be fully informed in Galenic Medicines, being grounded upon
those Principles by my Ac^demic Education, and was tenacious enough of that
Doctrine, un^il a clearer prospect of truth did appear, gained by Observations
in practical Philosophy, a serious ratiocination and strict examination of
Principles and received Opinions: but being removed off that Basis, and
confirmed by Chemical Trials relating to Medicine; I deserted the Galenic
Medicines as inferior to what I discovered and was presented to my view, and
ever since have labored in Chemical Pharmacy, as being the most excellent way
of preparing Medicines.

Some Objections are made by the Learned, and by the Ignorant, again^ Chemical
Medicines; but to vindicate them from common slanders, and clearly to determine
the difference between these and other Medicines, will take up more room than
can be afforded in this place, and therefore must of necessity wave it,
expecting an Opportunity hereafter, to ventilate that Subject: Only, by the way
I must note that Chemistry suffers much, and is eclipsed in its reputation by
some illiterate pretenders and bold fellows, not qualified Philosophically, but
rudely intruding upon ^he Art, without a due preparation and legitimate
induction brings scandal upon the learned, deserving Professors, and def^mation
to the Art, by Usurping the Title of Doctors and Chimical Phisicians, that many
are deceived by them, which are not able to discern the difference between a
Doctor of Physic, and a crafty Empyric. But the ingenious Phylosophical
Artist, ought to be cherished and encouraged in his Operations and rational
Trials.

But t^ my purpose intended: in my Treatise of the Scurvy, having traced that
Disease from its I^fancy, and Gene^ation, to its full growth and strength, its
chief places of Residence, variety of appeara^ce and monstrous deformity; it
remai^s, I should now propose some eff^ctual means to check and sub^e the
prevailin power of this spreading Disease, that d^ily grows, and increases to
the ruin and decay of Nature; being poss^ss^d and sea^ed in the Vital
Principles, ^educing and Constraining them to enormity and defection from the
regularity in which they were planted by Nature. And having strictly surveied
the condition and nature of this Disease, with i^s variety of at^endants a d
additional strength, being ready to join with any Morbific cause, and be
transformed; I was unwilling to sit down here and rest with a contemplative
knowledge of this Disease, and leave the greatest part of the work undone; the
subduing and vanquishing of it by powerful Medicines: nor being willing ^o
commit the remaining part to the industry and care of others (for good reas on)
I have therefore labored to form Medicinal Instruments to oppose this
Contumacious Herculean Disease: and as fit means for this encounter, I prepared
three Medicines of a different Classis and Operation, to meet with the variety
of Symptoms, and Scorbutic Complications.

In the Cu^e of the Scurvy, at least in most Scorbutic cases, there are three
intentions of cure to be aimed at: the first is, Purgation or Cleansing to
carry off that Scorbutic ^mpurity or Degenerate Matter lodged in the Stomach
and B^wels, deravin^ and alienating good food da^ly received: Secondly,
roborating and st en^thning the digestive Facul^ies which are debilitated and
alienated from the integrity of their Offices; not only the Digestive Office of
the Stomach, but the subsequent Digestions also: Thirdly, Depuration of the
Blood, and cleansing the habit of the Body: Nature discharges her self from
within, and send^ng daily to the exterior parts, those also must be tainted
more or le^s, as the Symptoms will manifest; and therefore do require to be
freed from feculency, and the Blood purified.

To answer these three Purposes, I prepared three Principal Medicines, viz.
Scorbute-Pills, Catholick-Elixir, and a Sudorific-Extract; These Medicines I
have been reforming and improving alwost seven years, to advance their
Efficacions, but most gentle and benign Operations. Dies diem docet.
And for, the better effecting this endeavor and aim, the constant and daily
use of them in diverse Scorbutic persons, attended with different Symptoms of
the Disease, and complicated with diverse other Diseases, gives great
information and satisfaction to me, in the several ^ccounts I rec^ive of their
Operations, b^th at home, and abroad, by Letters from remote parts of this
Kingdom: whereby I am taught, which way and wherein it is possible to improve
them and to give them as great a Latitude of Universality and extent of
Operation, in their peculiar Classes, Nihil est simul and inventum ac perfectum.
as long experience and daily use, can dictate to their several repeated
processes and trials of making, and this is my Study and daily experience in
Chemical trials to improve these and all other Medicines I use in my Practice,
that they may attain t^ such perfection and energy, as Cito, tu^o jucunde, to
relieve the Diseased, in the most contumacious Ma adies, and deplorable C^se^,
remedible: hereby Medicines will gain greater esteem and the Art its deserved
repute and Fame, if Physicians by their own care and pains (as they ought)
would manage this Work, and be as Industrious and skillful in this, as in the
other parts of their Profession.

But occasi ns call me off from this Discourse: I must ^sten to finish the
remainder, which is a more part cular account of the Operation of Medicines in
the Cure of ^his Disease; with some remarkable Observations in difficult Ca^es
and dubious Complications, I have met with l^tely in Pr^ctice, of necessary
Consideration to others in like manner Diseased.

E. M. Med. D.
London From my House in Clarken-well-Close.
Of such Purgation and proper Purgatives, as is requisite in Curing the Scurvy.
PUrgation or Clensing is praemitted as a regular and due course in the cure of
most Diseases; and it is instituted, chiefly to cleanse the first region of the
body, and to carry off what superfluous or degenerate matter is to be voided by
the gutts: And this operation is necessary in the cure of most Diseases, though
seated in other parts; for, although the infirmity lie not in the first region
of the body, neither in the Stomach, Gall, Gutts, Mesentery, Liver, nor Spleen;
yet it is aggravated, if those parts be foul: and probably may be the original
and foundation of those remote infirmities, by consent or transmission; nor
shall medicine carry its virtue without impediment and abatement, or ^ood
clearly conveyed to nourish the body; if those parts be foul, clogged and
obstructed.

Now to make choice of a fit and good Medicine, that will cleanse the Stomach,
Gutts, Mesentery, Liver, and Spleen, without offering injury to their peculiar
Crasis or Ferments; that is, not to alienate them from their proper distinct
natures, not to impress and stamp new qualities upon them; this is a Medicine
you may freely use, and expect great relief from, in keeping the forenamed
parts pure and clean; and such a Medicine is to be used in the cure of
scorbutic persons: but if you use Purgers of a deleterious and virulent
quality, that act per modum veneni; they will characterise their virulencies,
and exotic adverse properties upon the parts, alienate and debilitate the
ferments in their Functions and Offices; and the often use of them impairs
Nature very much, though for the present sometimes alleviation does acrue from
the evacuation procured, though by bad means; and of this nature, are most of
the Purgers in use, as Senna, Coloquintida, R^uh^; Hell^bore, etc, having a
laxative venom that stimulates Nature to expulsion.

Since Purgation is thus necessary, and purgatives so choisely to be elected
and chosen, not every medicine that causes stools, but such as is also endowed
with balsamic and amicable properties, no way injurious to nature; I have
therefore been a diligent Searcher and Improver of such a Medicine, that may
answer the intentions proposed: and by degrees of improvement in some years
time, by various alterations and trials, have perfected a purgative vegetable
Extract, that fully satisfies and pleases me, in its manner of operation and
effects: and this Medicine is my Scorbute Pills, so called, because primely
intended and contrived for the most efficacious purgative medicine in all
Scorbutic Cases. Now the Scurvy (as appears in the former part of that Book) is
complicated and joins with all manner of diseases, Scorbutic Dropsies,
Scorbutic Fevers, Asthmaes, Palsies, Gouts, Scorbutic Consumptions, etc. that
a particular medicine for this or that humor, being too narrow, and not
adaequate to the latitude of the disease, will take no effect in many Scorbutic
persons: but such as are radical and graduated in universality, are the
powerful and laudable medicines; I have therefore framed and improved this
Medicine to answer the intents of Purgation, in all Scorbutic persons and
cases, and is the best purgative medicine, both in the manner of operation, and
the effects, that ever I used, or read of.

For farther satisfaction, and proof of this, I shall give you some brief
Account of these Pills from my own experience and observation, in diverse cases
upon several of my Patients.

They are effectually used against the defects and errors of digestion in the
first second and third office: in the first, namely in all diseases of the
stomach requiring purgation and cleansing downwards, and the bad symptoms
arising from thence; as Oppression, Fullness, ^aus^ing, Wind, Pain or Griping,
Wo^m^ ^s^ of Appetite; in all these cases this medicine is very proper to
cleanse and discharge the s^omack, make it clean and (...) for the reception of
wholesome food, and not t^ll then can you expect good no ^ment: if the stomach
be soul, the nutriment conveyed from thence to support and maintain the body,
must also be vitiated and impure. And here I must relate to you what happened to
a Gentlewoman that had been l^g in a Scorbutic Atrophy (a Consumption arising
from the Scurvy) for some years, but not discovered; she was observed to droop
and decline, and her Complexion change, and yet she complained not of pain in
any part; she slept indifferently, but had little or no appetite to meat.
Several conjectures there were concerning the cause of her languishing by
Physicians, and others he^ Friends, some said one thing, others another; tried
this medicine, the^ tha^; but all this while received no (...) last, she
applied to me, and upon examination of the whole matter, I found her to be
Scorbutical: I gave my judgment of her present state and condition, how and
from what causes pro^ured, and a Prognostic what whould follow if not
prevented: whereupon she willingly resigned her self to my care, and to do what
I thought sit, to restore her.

At first I appointed her to lay aside her Dyet-drinks, Restaurative
Electuaries and Potions (with which she had been loaded again and again) and to
rest Ten days before I would give her any thing of Physic; in the interim to
eat such meat as her stomach did like and best agree with, which pleased her
well, she having been strictly tied up to a Dyer: at Ten days end I gave her a
Dose of these Scorbute Pills, one over night, and two next morning, which workt
six times very gently with her that day; the night following she slept well,
and the next morning I appointed her to take a Do^e of my Catholic Elixir
sixteen d^ops in a spoonful of Sack, and likewise three mornings following, but
increasing two drops every morning: her stomach now was something better, and
she more l^vely: The fifth day I ordered her a Dose of the same Pills, which
operated much as the former: and brought away two worms; fourdays following she
took the Elixir, and the fi^th, a dose of the Scorbute Pills; and thus
intermittingly she used these two medicines for the space of six weeks. At a
fortnights end, her stomach was much better both for appetite and digestion; at
the months end she was stronger and well able to go, very cheerful, and eat her
meat with delight; her Complexion altered much for the better, and about the
sixth week she improved in flesh, and began to be something plump and full;
then I bad her desist from her Pills, but continue the Elixir, which so
strengthened the digestive faculties, that she daily improved, grew strong, and
in a short time obtained perfect health.

To reflect upon this Story: Here was a latent Scorbutic Impurity that deaded
the appetite, and what was forced down the stomach, did not digest, but
degenerate; so that the body could not thrive, nor had the benefit of that
little food received: but this vicious matter being carried off by a proper
medicine, and the loaded tired parts refreshed and relieved b a generous
spirituous Medicine; nature then revives and retu^s to her wonted duties, with
that strength and regularity as formerly. I might instance in many cases
parallel to this that I have met with in Scorbutic Patients; but I must be
brief and proceed.

Not only in Diseases of the stomach, but also in the subsequent Digestions; I
have found these Pills most effectually Abstersive and Aperitive, opening
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Mesentery and Gutts; exonerating and
discharging those parts of crude, coagulated, depraved f^rmenting matter, from
whence arise pains and flatulent humors of those parts, Cachexies, or ill
habits of body, Fluxes, Colicks, Hypochondriac Melancholy, etc. and here I must
relate the case of a Patient, pertinent to this place, worth your observation,
which was thus. A Gentleman, aged between Thirty and Forty, something studious
and melancholy, complaining of pain sometimes in his left side under the short
R^bs, sometimes in the other side opposite to it; sometimes he was Costive, a
stool once in two or three days; sometimes Laxative, two or three stools in a
day with some gripes and wind, his Belly often puffed up and distended, at
which times he complained of a shortness of breath, streightness over his
Breast, and difficulty of breathing like one that is Asthmatick: in the night
often afflicted with frightful dreams and Palpitations of the heart; after this
manner (with other Circumstances which I omit) he continued for the space of
four years or there abouts; all which time he was not negligent in procuring
help, nor sparing of his Purse (having wherewith to do it) but applied himself
here and there for advice; some was of one opinion, another of a different
judgment; and having tried variety of medicines with little success, was tired,
and resolved to sit down contented with his infirmities, and gave over Physic
nere six months: But meeting with one, formerly a Patient of mine that I had
cured, (though a different case) encouraged him to come to me, or acquaint me
by Letter first with his condition: whereupon he wrote to me (living at a great
distance) and gave me a full Relation of his case, desiring my advice and
assi^tance the^ein, submitting to what course I should appoint him: I
considering the whole story, I was sufficiently satisfied of the Disease, that
he was deeply seized with the Scurvy, as the Syndrome and Concurrence of
symptoms did certai^ly discover. Whereupon I sent him my Treatise of the
Scurvy, to contemplate his Disease at large, and to be useful to him as a
Guide, with a Box of Scorbute Pills and an Elixir; and bad him proceed in the
use of them according to Directions; which he did for three weeks, then gave me
an account, that the violence of his D^sease was much abated the Symptoms more
m^d and ease, and not so frequent: th^se (...) its he ^k a Pill, he slept more
qu^etly then at other (...); in his stools came away little lumps of a slimy
jelly of a dark color, or blackish, after which he was much at ease; his Belly
and Hypochonders were more flat and soft; that since his Physic, some dark
spots appeared in several parts of his body, with a moisture upon his skin as
enclining to sweat some nights, but chiefly toward morning: This I liked well;
and farther, appointed him the Sudorisick Medicine hereafter mentioned, to help
forward and procure breathing Sweats twice in the week, which I judged to be of
great advantage to him: this he diligently performed seven or eight times,
until the spots vanished; and then his spirits were more brisk and cheerful,
and more fit for business, having thrown off that impure matter, and dispersed
the Cloud of Scorbutic vapors that clogged and darkened his spirits; his sleep
now was quiet, and (to be short) the s^mptoms that formerly molested him did
not appear, but was reduced beyond expectation. I gave him some cautions and
advice, lest he might relapse, which he punctually observed, and stood firm for
seven or eight months after: Since, I hear nothing of him, but suppose him to
be well, for which he was not ungrateful.

I might Comment largely upon this case, and illustrate the Scurvy in the
several Symptoms, though disguised by various names usually given, not
respecting the causes: but I pass on.

I have yet a farther Account of these Pills, how, and in what principal Cases
I have used them successfully; for d^seases and infirmities of the Head, so
accounted though arising from inferior parts most often; as Apoplexy,
Epilepsies, Convulsion, Palsies, Vertigoes, Soporiferous and drowsy
Infirmities, Rheums, Headaches, etc. This Medicine is profitably used, by
Eradicating their causes, that require Abstersion and Evacuation in the lower
Regions of the Body. Diseases ascribed to the Head, though appearing there, yet
for the most part do arise from inferior parts, occasioned by their
Impurities, Obstructions, and Disorder; for one that is Idiopathically
Afflicted, ten are Sympathically affected by consent of parts, and transmission
of some Morbifick matter thither: the Disease appears in one part, but the
foundation and cause is Radicated in another, and to that part m^st the cure be
directed.

And therefore, if well observed, we frequently meet with Scorbutic Palsies,
Scorbutic Convulsions Apoplexies, Sleepy Diseases, pains of the head
Giddiness, trembling of the Nervs, Deafness, dull Sight and Blindness; and all
these arising from the Scurvy or Scorbutic impurity of the body oftentimes,
and these are not cured but by Anti-scorbutic Medicines; and those that
endeavor otherwise with their Specificks and appropriate Medicines, to the
parts where such Symptoms and Diseases do appear, labor in vain, and are
frustrated in their intended Cures.

I might instance in many more cases wherein this Medicine has done me good
service, but that would be too tedious to relate: therefore in general I must
say, for Sorbutic persons, and the various Symptoms that attend that Disease,
whether in this part, or that part; these Pills are the best Abstersive and
Purgative Medicine I ever made use of, being so amicable and friendly to
nature, in their Operation, performing with so much ease and gentleness, that I
have given them to the weakest bodies with good success, proportioning the dose
according to the ability of the body.

I shall here set down the Dose and Circumstances that belong to the taking of
these Pills.

The ordinary Dose for man, or woman is three Pills; some Bodies (though very
seldom) require four: and sometimes two Pills is sufficient, for weak bodies,
and such as work freely with a small matter.

So much difference there is in bodies for purging, that two of these Pills are
sufficient for some; but most commonly three Pills are required, seldom four:
therefore try your body first, with a lesser Dose then, if it require more, you
may add to the next; and in so doing you will not err: For example, If you have
a stubborn body, difficult and hard to purge, and the first Dose works but
little, the next Dose you may take one Pill more: Tutius est peccare in
defectu, qua^ in excessu.
but if you have a lax gentle body freer in Operation than you expected, then
abate a Pill, if the first work too nimbly with you. The difference of bodies
is such in Operation, (especially purging) that they require a different Dose,
or quantity for their proportion, which cannot so exactly be determined and
appointed by the praescience of the most skilful Physician, but by a rational
Conjecture; until the first experiment and trial of their bodies, (which
uncertainty, is not in the Medicine, but in the diversity of bodies); and after
the first Dose taken, your own reason then, considering the condition of your
body with the former, will prompt you in the next, whether to keep to the same,
to augment, or abate. Solutiva enim fortia cum succis exuperantibus magnam
spirituum laciunt solutionem.
And remember this as a necessary caution, that you covet not strong Purges and
large Evacuations, to have many stools in a day (a common error) which offers
violence to Nature, and forceably sweeping down both good and bad together;
Eradicativa evacuatio optime perplures per sicitur evacuationes minorativas.
but rather choose to draw away the offending matter gently by degrees, giving
Nature time for separation, the pure from the impure and noxious: four or five
Stools in a day is sufficient, but not to exceed six; and that number I intend
you to aim at and no more; and thus doing, you will find Physic much more
beneficial, nature more kindly assisting, and not at all weakened.

Some there are, who, unless their Physic work half a score or a d^zen times,
think they have kept House for nothing, and their Money cast away, accounting
the goodness of their Physic by the number of Stools; but they deceive
themselves very much in desiring strong Purgations, which weaken and impair
Nature, and thereby you protract your Cure and not hasten it.

Concerning preparation before Purging, much talked of; take this Advice: that
soluble bodies, readily yiedling obedience to gentle Purging Medicines, need no
other preparation than what nature has provided in the disposition of their
own bodies; but for those bodies that are more hot, dry, costive and very
stubborn in Operation, it will be advantageous to facilitate their Purgation,
by eating stewed prunes, water grewel, or barley broth with raisins and
currants, or by drinking whey, or sider, two or three days before, which will
prepare, moisten, cool, and open your body, and make it more soluble and easy
in purging.

The times for taking these Pills generally is thus, (except good reason, in
some bodies, persuade the contrary:) Take one Pill over night going to bed,
having eaten but a light Supper at six of the clock before; the next morning
early in bed, take the remaining part of the Dose; and you may sleep an hour
after if you be disposed, but not longer; nor lie long in bed after, lest you
check the Operation of the Medicine, and thereby cause you to be sickish at
Stomach in your rising: when you are up, drink a little warm posset drink, made
of small bear, or small Ale, or thin broth for this purpose, and forbear eating
until noon: but although these Pills are appointed to be taken, one over night,
the other in the morning; yet if you find any inconvenience thereby, you may
take the whole Dose in the morning very early, and lie two hours after: But if
you have not a just cause for alteration observe the Prescription.

These Pills take thus every fourth or fifth day, and you will find it best to
give such intermission: Chronick or old Diseases must have time to be
Eradicated, and you must reduce nature from an ill habit by degrees, Semper
expedit paulatim ducere qu^m subit^.
better than hastily; As diseases come on, gradually prevailing upon and
seducing nature from her Integrity; so nature by degrees, must be brought off
and restored again to her power and regularity. Cum natura male sustinet
repentinas mutationes.

For going abroad after your Pills that day, if you desire it, or occasions
require, take this advice; if your body be indifferent strong, not apt upon
small occasions to take cold, the season temperate and fair weather, having
moderated the Dose of your Pills, so as to work but three, or four times at
most; you may then go abroad without prejudice: but if it fall out to be
otherwise, then it is better to keep in, that day.

If any ask, At what times of the year these Pills are to be taken; I answer,
you may safely and with benefit, at any time of the year, provided you order
your self suitable to the season; that is, in Winter-weather, a warm Chamber
and good fire; in Summer-hot weather a cool Room free from the Sun; be moderate
in Clothing, and gentle in Motion not to heat your self.

For the Mornings in the midst of Summer, they are temperate and fit for
Physic, and the Operation will be done before the heat of the day; so that in
this temperate Climate, you may take Physic (with discretion) at any season of
the year, the Dog-daies not exce^ted, although it is an opinion among the
vulgar, that that time is dangerous; but that is a vulgar error, easy to be
refuted.

Of Restoring and Rectifying the Digestions, necessary in Curing the SCURVY.
IN the preceding Discourse of that Treatise where the Scurvy is manifested and
laid open in the causes and manner of Generation; you find it planted and
Radicated in the Digestions, or Digestive Offices; by whose Aberrations from
Integrity, and frustrations of performing their Duties as they ought, this
Disease is begotten: in the Cure therefore, we must have an eye to their
Deficiency in Vigor, and Deviation from the Rectitude and manner of their
performance being Alienated and Depraved.

The former Medicine viz. the Scorbute-Pills was designed, to cleanse and carry
off the Producted Scorbutic matter; another Medicine also must necessarily be
invented to Roborate and strengthen the Faculties, to restore and confirm them
in the performance of their Functions; or else the like Scorbutic matter will
be generated again, and nature will soon relapse into the Former state; In vain
it is to pump, except you stop the Leak; Purging carries off the Degenerate
matter, and does a necessary work; but that does not Vigorate, reinforce and
give new strength to the Digestive Faculties, that were tired and alienated in
their Principles: that must be done by another Medicine, whose property is to
excite, unite and join with the Principal agent in each faculty.

To make this more plain and easy to be apprehended by indifferent Capacities;
first I shall show you how nature does perform her daily work; Then I shall
show, how she declines and falls off; and Thirddly, I shall manifest how she is
to be assisted and restored.

So soon as food is received into the body, nature presently falls about her
business, to digest, to dissolve, and separate the parts of it, to volatise, to
distribute and transmit from one digestive office to another, to sequester and
throw aside the unprofitable and excrementitious part, to attract and suck in
the alimentary, to refine and alter it by several elaborations, to extract and
draw out the pure spirituous part for supply of spirits, the rest assimilated
into the humoral and solid parts; from hence the body is preserved, and
maintained in strength and vigor: and this is Natural Chemistry, performed
every day in man's body in the regular course of nature; but when nature
declines and fails in the ordinary and daily work of her own preservation,
whether by intemperance, improper food, irregular and injurious customs or
accidents, or Spontaneosly from an Imbecile Radication of principles, and bad
Crasis of parts; the body then decays apace, when the principle functions are
weakly and depravedly exercised; necessarily then an Auxiliary means and
Assi^tant must be applied to restore nature to her strength and regular course
again; something that must accuate and vigorate nature, that must excite and
cooperate in Conjunction with the movent principle, that as a new Spring, will
give power and force to the faculties. Considering this so necessary and useful
in the cure of most Infirmities, as also to establish and confirm a Cure
wrought from Recidivation and Relapse; I thought it a principal wo^k to find
out and form such a medicine as may answer the intentions proposed, and
therefore have by several trials and improvements effected and wrought such a
medicine to that degree and competent power, as is very efficacious in the
deficienties and enervation of the digestive faculties, to Restore and Roborate
them in their funct ons; which medicine is called, and known by the name of
Catholic Elixir (now altered and improved)

And this was the custom and manner of the ancient and most famous Physicians,
to acquire by their proper labor and sedulous industry, some great Arcana^s,
secret and choice medicines of excelling virtue, which they esteemed as a
treasure, and gave them peculiar names to be distinguished and known by: and
that such medicines might be known to the world, for the good and benefit of
the Diseased; they di^ publish their virtues, as Angelus Sala in the Preface to
his Precious Antidote, does apologize for himself in doing the like: Etiam
magni nominis medicis solenne olim fuit, medicamenti alicujus particularis
virtutes, quas quisque accurata observatione annot averat peculiari quodum
tractatu literis consignare. Oper: Med: Chym. page 420. says he, It has been
the ancient custom of Physicians, and those men of great fame, to write a
Treatise of the virtues of some particular medicine, which they had noted by
strict observation; then he extols the efficacy and worth of his medicine, and
excuses the concealment of the preparation.

Helment also, that great Philosopher and Physician, had his private medicines
which he highly valued; so also in the Writings of the most Eminent Physicians,
we find they had their Arcana's, secret medicines which they would not
discover, save only their virtues and manner of use; therefore I may say as
Angelus Sala, Quod si illis hoc vitio non fuit datum, neque mihi, qui eo^ um ad
exemplum. --

But since the late fashion of Prescribing came up in use, some ignorant
buzzards which I could name, that have objected this against me, (perhaps of
our own Faculty) think this an empirical way; but therein they discover their
ignorance, not knowing the ancient and most legitimate way of Practice, and
what is the whole duty of a Physician: See what Famous Que^cetan says upon the
Question, An medicum deceat (...)? Que^: Rediviv: page 218. Whether a Physic an
ought to make medicines; He will tell you, you are Pseudomedicus, a Counterfeit
Physician, if you do not make medicines. Pray look there, and then you will
say, it is a shame for a Physician not to be expert in making medicines.

As a duty, and following the Example of the most Eminent Physicians. I have
been and am a constant labourer in Pharmacy, thereby to acquire and purchase
the choicest Medicines that Art and pains can procure; and by continual making,
and altering upon trials, I have purchased as noble Medicines I think, as any
man can procure; not but that other Physicians that have been thus diligent in
Preparation of Medicines, as I have been, may have as good; but without this
Labor and Industry, no man can be master of such. In particular, the forenamed
Elixir, as it is now improved and advanced, I have a great esteem for, and is a
great assistant to the Stomach in the office of Digestion, for it mainly
fort^ies and roborates that Faculty, so that the bad effects of a weak or
depraved Digestion, are notably Corrected and amended; as crudity and
indigestion, flatulency or wind, Nausiousness or Vomiting, Fullness or
Opression, Loss of Appetite, Eructation or Belching; and this it performs by
asisting the Stomack's Digestive Ferment, being deficient and decayed by Age,
Intemperance, Incongruous Diet, Disorder, or Natural Infirmities.

One Case amongst the rest, relating hither, I well remember, which I think
good to relate: A woman that had been troubled with the Scurvy for some years
though scarce taken notice of, but supposed to be from other causes, what
symptoms did appear; amongst the rest, for some time she was molested,
especially in a morning with a dryness in her mouth, and an ill taste;
afterward her stomach would nauseate sometimes, and soon after did begin to
vomit: whereupon she took several medicines to stay vomiting, and to strengthen
the stomach, but all in vain, and rather aggravated her Griefs, straining to
Vomit with more violence, and little or nothing came away: when I was made
acquainted with it, and understanding the Symptoms to arise from the Scurvy;
upon examination of the whole matter, I sent her this Elixir with directions;
and at the third or fourth Dose, her Vomiting and nauseating was gone, and much
at ease: then I appointed her the Scorbute-Pills, to be used intermittingly
with this Elixir for some time; and soon after, the other Scorbutic Symptoms
which molested her, vanished, and she regained her former health: Whereby you
may observe that the Scurvy will not be tamed but by Anti-scorbatic Medicines:
and although some Symptoms of the Scurvy be common and like with those from
other diseases, whereby many are deceived in their causes: yet, if they arise
from a Scorbutic Root, they will not be cure but by Anti-scorbutic Medicines;
and therefore what Symptoms of Sickness do appear in any person, ough^ strictly
and nicely to be examined by a discerning judgment, to know the right spring
and foundation of their Rise.

But to proceed, Not only the Stomach and first Digestion is benefited and
assisted by this Elixir, but the subsequent Digestions are promoted, and their
defects corrected hereby; and this Medicine I use successfully against many
Infirmities seated in the Mesentery, Guts, Liver, or Spleen; as when they are
languid and weak, degenerating and falling off from their duties, are
obstructed with crude depraved Matter; wanting Spirit and Vigor, and acuteness
of Ferment fit for their proper works; from whence Hypocondriack Melancholy,
Stitches, Pains, Tumors, and flatulent Dissensions of the Hypoconders and
Belly: In such cases, this Medicine penetrates atteneates opens, and
discusseth, roborates and gives great relief; and likewise for Melancholy
drooping Spirits, and Palpitations of the Heart, Angustness and Compression
about that Region, arising from a Scorbutic Feculency and Impurity; an
ill-affected Spleen, or Matrix, from whence Vapors do assurge to afflict the
heart and vital Spirit; this Elixir is a proper help, and also effectual in
Scorbutic Asthmaes, difficult and short Breathing, Coughs and Scorbutic
Consumptions. But of these you may read at large, in my Treatise of
Consumptions, and I have there appropriated two excellent and highly graduated
Medicines for Consumptive persons; a Restaurative Essence, and Balsamic
Extract, with which I have recovered some, bey and expectation.

That you may be the more cautious in examining the Symptoms of Diseases, what
foundation they have, and wh^ce they do proce^ that you may not la^ur in vain
for a cur; I h^en^ed a rom ^kable Care in a Patient of mine, w^ your
Observation, which was thus: A young man about thirty years of Age, a ^u^ent
and tenderly bred, was subject to short and difficult breathing, but without a
Cough, or very little; he was advised to man^ Pectoral Medicine; to open and
ren hen the Lungs, which he used, but ^ith little effect: his Disease by time
increased upon him and he was troubled with palpitation of the Heart, and
stoppage of Breath, in his Sleep, that he was a^fraid of Suffocation; he then
unhappily fell into the hands of an Emperick, who purged him with violent
Medicines so, that he began to be Hydropical, did puff up, and limbs Swell, nor
did the other Symptoms abate. After this and other passages (too long to
relate) I was sent for, and examined the Patient; found his complaint was
chiefly under the Diaphra^rama toward the Ori^ice of the Stomach, that his
Lung^ were good, and the Cause of his short and difficult breathing was not in
the Breast, but by Compression of the Diaphragma, from a turgid aestuation of
Scorbutic matter, which threatened Suffocation sometimes: (And upon this very
cause, I knew a very Learned Doctor of Physic, that died suddenly in his
bed): I perused and made inspection into the Urine, and examined his Pulse, as
now and formerly; both which consented to, and confirmed the Scurvy: Then I
examined, what Medicines had been given him; and those were most Pectoral,
except some churlish Purges, after which he was much w^rse, and began to swell;
and now he was about to take a Dyet-drink for the Dropsy, which was like to
prove as the rest: but the Patient committing himself into my hands, I had him
desist from all Medicines but what I appointed; and first I gave him this
Elixir (he being very weak) which as a Cordial did revive him, and after a few
days was much altered for the better, and slept more quietly, with a greater
freedom in breathing: he continued this alone, for ten days; in which time he
gained strength and had a stomach to his meat: then I directed him the use of
the Scorbute-Pills, which abated the swelling of his Limbs at twice taking, and
preceeded in the use of these two Medicines. Lastly, I appointed him the
Sudorific Medicine hereafter mentioned; and in a short time, he was reduced by
this course to good health and free from his former Complaints. By the whole
Story you may observe, First, that the Scurvy is disguised, and appears in the
shape of other Diseases. Secondly, that those Diseases so counterfeited, are
not cured but by Radical Medicines which are Anti-scorbutic: and therefore it
much concerns the Sick, that their Diseases be rightly stated and determined by
one that can make a true internal Discovery; and not according to external
Appearance, and common Symptoms, which is very Fallacious.

But I proceed to let you know farther, How and wherein this Elixir is useful
to me in Practice; and that in sudden emergent cases of fainting: as also in
Languishing Diseases, and Cases of Extremity when the Patient is spent and
brought so low that no Physic can be Administered; this, as a relief and
support to the Languishing decayed Faculties, may daily be exhibited; and this
I have frequently proved: particularly, a Person of Honor, given over by his
Physicians, being spent and decayed and highly swollen in a Scorbutic Asthma and
Dropsy, was gasping for breath, when I came to him; but exhibiting this Elixir,
he did wonderfully revive, and his difficult and short breathing was much
enlarged and eased for a few days, for which he did Extol the Medicine: but,
being past the possibility of Recovery, and incapable of other Medicines,
requisite or Cure, he dyed.

But some may object: This possibly may be a good Medicine in desperate Cases,
and approaches of Death; but how can it be proper and fit for a man that can
eat his meat well, and walk abroad, only inclining to the Scurvy, and some
small Impediments from thence? I answer: That Medicine which is endowed with so
much Virtue, to bring relief to a decayed or dying man; must needs be of great
power and efficacy, to give Vigor and strength to all the Faculties: Now
Scorbutic Infirmities, or imped men's of what fort soever, do arise from the
Imbecility, Aberration, or Declining of some Faculty in the Body, injured or
decayed which requires a generous and noble Medicine to Rectify and Vigorate,
(at least, it will better be performed by such) not a languid dull Medicine;
and therefore this Objection is vain; for the greater power a Medicine has,
the more likely and better to do the business be it little or much: and
therefore if your Case require help, do it by an acute Vigorous Medicine, and
you may expect your Infirmities to be removed, Ci^us tu^ius jucu^dius, in a
shorter time, with more safety and certainty, with less disgust in taking or
trouble in Operation.

Now the main Scope and Intention of this Medicine, is, to relieve the Spirits
Oppressed or Exhausted, to Discuss Flatulent Vapors, to open Obstructions, and
to Rectify and Roborate the Digestive Faculties, from whence Scorbutic
Symptoms do arise; and such a Medicine is necessarily required in the cure of
the Scurvy, and its Complicated effects.

I have briefly showed you the power and properties belonging to an
Anti-scorbutic Medicine, requisite to be used in curing the Scurvy: such a
Medicine I say is required; it is not Purging alone will do it, but other
Operations must join to effect the purpose. For advice and rules to those that
use this Catholic Elixir (living far distant from me) that they may not Err
in the taking of it, let them observe as follows.

That in the use of this Elixir with the Scorbute-Pills, it is best to begin
with the Pills; except the person be very weak, or spent, and first require
some strengthing and reviving Medicine, then you may first begin with the
Elixir.

Also that this Elixir is not to be taken those days you Purge, but every
Intermitting day between Purging.

That this Elixir is not to be taken or tasted alone but mixed with some good
Liquor, and that ought to be the best Canary; for bad Wine alters and abates
the Virtue of the Medicine. It may be taken in French-wine, if the Patient
cannot agreee with Sack.

The Dose for man or woman, is thirty drops: for ten years old, twenty drops;
for five years, ten drops.

And observe this; that at the first taking you begin but with half the Dose
that is appointed for your age; as thus: thirty drops is appointed for a man,
let him begin with fifteen or sixteen drops, and then augment two or three
drops every day after, until he ascend to thirty, and then there continue that
Dose afterward.

Take it (in Bed if you be weak) in a spoonful of Sack, every morning, fasting
an hour and half after; and at five of the Clock Afternoon; but you are not so
strictly to observe the after-noons, but, if that your occasions do not well
permit (as when you must be abroad or the like,) you may omit.

In keeping this Elixir, let it be well stopped; for dropping of it exactly, a
Cruet is best. Some may ask, What time of the year this Medicine may, or may
not be used; I answer, No time of the year forbids the use of it; but it is
profitably taken at any season of the year: nor may women forbear the use of it
at such times of the month, when all other Physic is forbidden; but is helpful
to Nature at such a time, in procuring them with more ease and freedom.

Of Curing the Scurvy by Transpiration, and the necessary use of a good
Sudorific Medicine.
THe Scurvy is not a pa^icular Disease limited to this or that part of the
Body, but extends it self the ^ughou^ the whole as appears by the variety of
Symptoms, in several parts of the Body; and being of this extent, Medicine also
must have the same Latitude of Operation to prosecute and reach into its utmost
and farthest quarters: Pur^ation that cle^seth the Central and more inw^d
parts, as the Stomach, Guts, Mesentery, Liver and Spleen: ^anspiration that
respects chiefly the habit of the Body and external parts, purifying the Mass
of Blood, and vital streams.

These two Operations are necessary for Cure in most Scorbutic cases, as the
following discourses and observations in Practice recited, does manifest.

Some there are that deceive themselves, and lay the whole stress of the Cure
upon Purging, and that they prosecute very often (and it were well if the
purgatives be proper) but the effects may inform and tell them, that there is
something else requisite; and they find it so. The Scurvy is not so easily
dislodged and thrown out by a single Operation of Medicine; but requires
rectifying and strengthening of the Digestive Faculties also, and depuration of
the Blood.

The Body of man is perspirable, and in his due state of health continually
more or less does transpire and breath out humid vapors and a superfluous
moisture by the Pores of the Body; hereby the Mass of Blood and habit of the
Body is cleansed and discharged of that which is superfluous or impure and
unfit to be retained; and this insensible Evacuation is so requisite, that
without transpiration the Mass of Blood cannot be depurated, but remains muddy
and defiled, which forces Nature to a distempered fermentation and morbific
Eruption: Proper and amicable Purgation does well, acts a good part, and ought
to be praemitted in most cases, which alone do check a Disease and lessen it,
by carrying off a^l morbific matter in the lower Region of the Body; but if the
Mass of Blood, and habit of the Body be tainted and corrupted, the vital stream
and those parts irrigated and fed from thence, are not purified as they ought,
but by Exsudation and Transpiration; and the Spirits that are clogged and
infested by impure matter, which darkens their light, causing Melancholy and
indisposed heaviness, are hereby relieved and unfettered, become brisk, aerie,
and lively as before.

And in promoting this Operation we imitate and assist Nature which continually
does Emittere and Transpirare per Poros, at least ought so to breathe forth
superfluous vapors and humidity, and when this is cohibited and restrained, by
occlusion and shutting up the pores by cold or otherwise; or Nature unable thus
to relieve and discharge her self by reason of debility and insufficiency in
separating and protruding; it is not long but some Disease, or many, arises
from the course of Nature thus impedited; either a sudden febril aestuation; or
erratic pains in this or that part; or a slow eruption of grosser matter
sticking in the skin discoloring and spotting of it; or bringing forth Scurf,
Pustules, or other Extretions.

By this you may understand the benefit that does arise by the regular course
of Nature in her daily Operations and Excretions, and the profitable assistance
of Art in promoting them when impeded, as also the prejudice and damage by the
contrary.

And here I shall relate to you the Case of a Scorbutic Patient, pertinent to
the proceeding Discourse.

A Gentlewoman, aged between Forty and Fifty, formetly fa^t and fleshy, but
reduced to a lean state; being troubled for some years with a lassitude or
weariness in her Limbs, and Indisposition to Action, and with pains at some
times: afterward in Autumn, a weakness and numbness possessed her Limbs, that
disabled her in going: All this while she was not negligent to seek for help,
had such Advice as the Country did afford, and used many Medicines; but her
Disease prevailed still, each Spring and Autumn being worse than the former: it
happened that a Relation of her case was sent to me, (she living a great distance
from London) what was wanting in the first Relation, I interrogated in my
Answer, and the next Account I received, did fally satisfy me: I found the
Scurvy disguised to act in several Scenes, after a different manner: the
Medicines she had used were proper for the Symptoms that did appear, barely
considered; but not as they had a Relation and were grounded upon the Scurvy,
which being undiscerned did frustrate all the Endeavors for Cure: Letting of
her blood was injurious, and she grew worse upon it; soon after, a Stupor or
Paralytic numbness seized her: To be short, she was committed to my care and
management; I sent her three Anti-scorbutick Medicines, namely, my
Scorbute-Pills, Elixir, and Sudorisic Extract to be used in that order and
method as the Medicines and her Condition required: at the months end she
gained the use of her Limbs, but were something weak; yet no pains as formerly:
and upon the use of the Sudorific Extract, some spots were driven forth, and
the Latent Scurvy did appear and satisfied them more fully, what I had
determined of her disease: The Winter being very sharp, did sometimes interrupt
her Course, and retarded the completing of a Cure, which else might have been
finished in a shorter time. At the beginning of March I set her into the same
Course again, which was diligently observed; and in April following she was
perfectly restored: In the Course of these Medicines (according to the Account
received) I observed her pains to lessen and cease upon the use of the
Sudorific Extract, and not before; which Medicine chiefly restored her the use
of her Limb^; and it was reason to expect, the greatest benefit, as to that
particular in the Case, should acrue from a Diaphoretic Medicine; that
searching and penetra^ing the h^bite of the Body, by transpi^ation and
breathing Sweats should d^slodg and discuss the Scotbutic Matter which
infested the Nerves and Muscles, impeding and disabling the parts in their
Motion and Action.

By such Examples as this, and other different Cases as to the Symptoms, yet
parallel with it as to the parts affected and Morbisic Cause; I was fully
satisfi^d that a Sudorifi^ Medicine was of necessary use in many Scorbutic
Cases, and without which, a Cure could not be performed; I therefore prepared a
Medicine that might effectually answer the scope of that intention, which might
operate by Transpiration and gentle sweating, and, by a kindly assisting of
Nature in that operation, might depurate the whole Mass of blood, and free the
habit of the body from any Scorbutic Impurity and Degenerate Matter, which at
certain seasons of the year, and by acc^dental promoting Causes, ferments, and
produces various internal Distempers and Diseases, Scorbutic Fevers,
continual and intermitting Quotidian, Tertian and Quartan, Headaches, and
Pains in several parts, Plentisies, Asthma's, etc. or external and
Cutany-Disedations; as Spots, Scurff, Scabs, Pustul's, Tettars, Ringworms,
Tumors, etc. And because our blood, especially in these Northern Climates, does
abound with a serosa Colluvies, a Serosity or Superfluous watery humor; a good
Sudorisic Medicine is of great use; for when this serous matter abounds and
increase the there by the insufficient Attraction and Separation of the Reins,
that should expend and drain it; or the Pores shut up, and Trauspiration
denied, that should insensibly exhaust it, does then by Preternatural Retention
degenerate and change its Nature and Properties; that which was mild turns
acid, sharp and molesting; and variously degenerating does cause several
Diseases and Pains in diverse parts of the Body as it Circulates in the V ssels;
or extravasated and wandering about being expulsed from part to part as hostile
and injurious) by the strength and fortitude of the Archeus or innate spirit
that inhabits as the Lifeguard in each part of the body.

This Sudorific Medicine prepared for the purposes aforesaid. I appoint in all
Scorbutic Cases, requiring Transpiration or Sweating; and I find great success
in the use of it (especially being now much altered and improved) Many Diseases
are expulsed by Sudorificks, that purgatives cannot prevail against; the reason
is this; First, because some Diseases do arise, and depend upon a statulent
Spirit or Meteor that is generated in the body; and these Diseases are more
accute and dangerous, than others, because their matter is more active,
subtle, and of sudden motions, being of the Nature of a Spirit, is more
penetrative and irresistible in its motion; as Apoplexy, Epilepsy, histerical
Passions, Pest lential Seminaries, sudden Swoonings, etc. Which do not yield
Obedience to Purgatives, being of a more subtle spirituous nature, is not
ejected by Vomit, or Stool as grosser Morbific Humors are; but requires a
Medicine equiv^lent and proportionate to their Nature; that is, penetrative,
subtle and acute in Operation, proper to discuss, evaporate, and transpire.
S^condly, many Diseases though arising from grosser and humoral causes, that
would obey the Power and Virtue of Purgatives; yet by reason they are lodged in
the habit of the body and more exterior parts, are out of distance and beyond
the reach and sphere of their activity: but a good Sudorific penetrates and
searches all parts, raises the Seminaries, and enters the secret Dormitories
of lurking Diseases, and gives them expulsion by its subtle Operation and acute
Power: and here I remember the condition of a Patient which I will relate to
you, pertinent to the present discourse. A young gentlewoman of a fair
Complexion and very clear skin, by Melancholy (and other causes) was much
altered and become brown, muddy, and discolored in particular places;
afterward a Scurf did arise and some Pimples here and there, which was
troublesome by itching: th^s Gentlewoman was let blood and purge^ often, but
still be trouble remained: then she was advised to a Wash to clear the ^kin,
and to t^ke away the heat and pimples; which di^ take effect in a few days,
but upon retiring of this humor inwards, she fell desperately sick, with
violent pains in her head, and ready to faint away often. Hereupon I was sent
for, and examined the whole matter; and finding the acuteness of her sickness
to arise from an imprudent repelling of a humor, and forcing it back upon
Nature, which she had brought forth to the skin; I immediately appointed her a
Dose of my sudorific Extract to be given her, which put her into a breathing
Sweat; and when the Medicine had done its Operation, her pains and sickness
were almost gone: the next day I appointed another Dose to be given her, to
sweat gently for two or three hours, and before the Operation of the Medicine
was spent, her pain and sickness quite left her; and then appeared some of the
former Symptoms again upon the skin, but without itching. The present danger of
her sickness being over, I caused her to rest two or three days, and gave her
an Elixir to take every day, to cherish Nature and recover her strength: then
she fell to the Sudorific Extract again, to cleanse the Blood, and to breathe
out that impurity which was lodged under the skin; with convenient intermssion
she repeated this Sudorific Medicine three or four times more, and then the
former Symptoms quite lest her, and she regained her former beauty and
clearness of skin. By th^s you may understand, that a Sudorific Medicin s me
times is effectual, when Purgatives cannot prevail; yet it is injurious to
Nature, to draw back again what she has protruded and brought forth to the
Circumference of the Body: and therefore they that rely and insist too much upon
Purging, thinking to cleanse the whole Body by that Operation only, are much
deceived: Purging is good but not always; other Medicines must come in and
take their place, according as the case requires: Purging cleanses the Center,
but Sudorificks purify the exterior parts.

That you may know when a Sudorific Medicine is required as necessary, and
advantageous to the Cure, I Will tell you in what cases I appoint this Sudorific
Medicine to be taken: In curing the Scurvy, I find good success thereby, to
cleanse and purify the Blood that is degenerate and vitiated with a Scorbutic
taint and impurity: or when the Pores are occluded and imperspirable, the Body
tumified and puffed up for want of transpiration and ventilation, when p^i^xing
pains or itching in the flesh molest and trouble, by a saline or acrid Se^osity
extravasated, and erratick; when spots, tumors, pustul's, scurse, pimples, or
such like appear upon any part of the Body: This Sudorific Medicine discusseth
and discipates the confluence of Humors tesorting to any part, opens the
Pores, transpires and drives out the extrementious matter, congested and lodged
under the skin: also when a Lassitude or weariness possess the Limbs; when the
spirits are torpid, dull heavy (as it is the case of many Scorbutic persons)
being alienated from their purity and wonted vigor, by a degenerate and
depraved alimentary succus, cloging and settering them, that should support and
maintain them with an addisional supply of a congenerous extraction; in this
case a good Sudorific is the best relief, to depurate the Vital stream, and
alimentary liquors of the Body from whence the Spirits receive strength and
vigor again.

The Dose, and Circumstances that attend the taking of this Sudoific Extract is
thus: to a man or woman of a weak tender body; at first I give a dram and half,
the next time two drams, but stronger bodies (...) give two drams at the first
dose, then two drams and half, almayes beginning with a lesser dose; and
increase the quantity, as from the quantity of a Nutmeg to a Chestnut,
according to the condition and strength of the body after trial: First, because
there is great difference in bodies, some require more; as hard, dry bodies and
thicker skirns, being more difficult to transpire; and some less, as tender,
moist bodies, of a rare Texture, and open Pores, more apt to breath out.
Secondly, Nature is better pleased to receive some Medicines gradually, then
imposing a full dose at first; if Nature takes a disgust to a Medicine, she
seldom agrees with it after, though it be never so good: therefore at the first
begin with a little dose (for trial) though the Medicine be very amicable, and
the next time you may increase, and take a little more. a levioribus incipere,
and procedere ad fortiora, est ordo Sapientum.


The manner of taking is thus, Roll it in a little Sugar, and swallow it down.

Take it at Night (having eaten but a little Spoon-meat for your Supper) in Bed
covered warm; and a quarter of an hour after, drink a draught of
Rosemary-Posset, or Mace-Ale, then you may sleep as you find your self
disposed. Or you may take this Medicine in a Morning very earl^, after the same
manner, and lie in Bed ha^f that day, sleep if you will, that does not check
the Medicine, you will have the benefit of Transpiration in your sleep: Somnus
Cohibet omnem evacuationem preter Sudorem aph. nor are you to expect great
Swea^s, but only mo^st Breathings, not at all troublesome.

Some perhaps being too hasty and desirous to effect their Cure, may think one
or two great Sweats may do as much good as half a dozen gentle breathings, and
so shorten the time of their Cure; but I cannot approve that Course, to impair
Nature by violent and large Exhaustions; you thereby frustrate the benefit of
the Medicine, which rightly used, will prove very succesfull for the purposes
appointed. Saepius mediocriter Sudomovere, melius est quam Semel modum
excedando viresprosternere.
This Sudorific Extract may be taken twice in a week, on the intermiting days
when you do not purge having first taken three doses of the Scorbute Pills to
cleanse the stomach and bowels, before you begin to Sweat, that the grosser
matter and impurity of those parts be not driven into the habit of the body.
For going abroad, observe this, if you take the Sudorific in the Morning, you
must not go out that day, the Pores being open: but if you take it over night,
the weather not cold and searching, but temperate or hot; you may go forth next
day, if your disease, strength, and cond^tion of body admit.

Those persons that use the three Anti-scorbutic Medicines before mentioned, do
observe this order, except in some special Cases, and complicated Diseases, by
particular advice: First, they begin with the Scorbute-Pills to cleanse the
Center of the Body, as the Stomach, Guts, Mesentery, Liver, and Spleen: The
next day and all the intermitting days be^ween Purging, they use the Elixir, to
strengthen the declining Faculties and rectify the Digestions: and after three
doses of Purging Pills taken, they begin with the Sudorifick Medicine, to
purify the Blood, and cleanse the habit of the Body; and these are to be used
twice in a week, proceeding also with the other Medicines in their turns as
before. But now you are come to use the Sudorifick Extract, you may take the
Scorbutic Pills but once in the week, whereas before you took them once in four
or five days; this is my course and practice in curing the Scurvy and
complicated Diseases attending: which as it is a rational and exact Method
according to the Canons of Art, is also verified by much experience to be most
effectual.

The chief reason why I am so large herein the general use of these Medicines,
is to avoid the daily trouble of directions in writing to each particular
Patient, except there be good cause.

I have now finished what I proposed in my self to make Public: The Nature of
this spreading Disease the Scurvy; its variety of Symptoms and appearance, that
it may be known though in a various dress and disguise; the usual complicated
affects that associate and attend it; its internal essential Causes, manner of
Generation, and seat of Radication in the Body; the external procuring and
promoting Causes; the chief indicat^ons for Cure; three Anti-scorbutic
Medicines laid down as exemplars, answering the scope of those curative
intentions; and some remarkable Observations in Practice; And this is the sum
of the whole Work.

FINIS.

