The Last Speech of Sir GODFREY M'CULLOCH of Myretoun, Knight and Baronet, who
was Beheaded at the Cross of Edinburgh, the Twenty Sixth day of March, 1697.
I Am brought here good People to give Satisfaction to Justice, for the
Slaughter of William Gordon designed of Cardines; And therefore I am obliged as
a dying Man, to give a Faithful and True Account of that matter.

I do declare in the Sight of GOD, I had no design against his Life, nor did I
expect to see him, when I came where the Accident happened; I came there
contrair to my Inclination, being pressed by these two Persons, who were the
Principal Witnesses against me, (they declaring he was not out of Bed) that I
might relieve their Goods he had poinded; I do freely forgive them, and I Pray
heartily GOD may forgive them, for bringing me to that place.

When I was in England, I was o^t times urged by several Persons, who declared
they had Commission from Castle-Stewart and his Lady, (now the Pursuers for my
Blood) that I might give up the Papers of these Lands of Cardines, whereupon
they promised not only apiece of Money, But also to concur for procuring me a
Remission; And I have been several times since in the Country, where the
Misfortune happened, and where they lived, but never troubled by any of them:
Although now after they have got themselves secured in these Lands without
(...) they have been very active in the Pursuit, until at last they have got
me brought to this place.

I do acknowledge my Sentence is Just, and does not Repine; For albei^ it was
only a single Wound in the Leg, by a shot of small Hail, which was neither
intended, nor could be foreseen to be deadly; Yet I do believe, That GOD in his
Justice has suffered me to fall in that miserable Accident, for which I am now
to suffer, because of my many other Great and Grievous unrepented for Sins: I
do therefore heartily forgive my Judges, Accusers, Witnesses, and all Others
who have now, or at any time Injured me, as I wish to be Foregiven.

I Recommend my Wife, and poor Children to the Protection of the Almighty GOD,
who does take Care of, and Provides for the Widow and Fatherless; And Prays,
That GOD may Stir up and Enable their Friends and mine, to be Careful of them.

I have been Branded as being a Roman Catholic, which I altogether disown, And
Declare, as the Words of a Dying Man, who am instantly to make my Appearance
before the Great Tribunal of the Great GOD, That I die in the True Catholic
Reformed Protestant Religion, Renouncing all Righteousness of my own, or any
Others; Relying only upon the Merits of CHRIST JESUS, through whose Blood, I
hope to be Saved, And whom I Trust, will not only be my Judge, But also,
Advocate with the Father for my Redemption.

Now Dear Spectators, As my Last Request, Again and Again, I carnostly Desire,
and Beg, The Assistance of Your Fervent Prayers. That, Although I stand here
Condemned by Man, I may be Absolved before the Tribunal of the Great GOD, That
in place of this Scaffold I may enjoy a Throne of Glory; That this Violent
Death may bring me to a Life of Glorious Rest, Eternal in the Heavens: And that
in place of all these Spectators, I may be Accompanied with an Innumerable
Company of Saints and Angels, Singing, Hallelujah to the Great KING to all
Eternity.

Now, O LORD, Remember me with that Love thou bear to Thy Own, O visit we
with Thy Salvation, that I may see the Good of Thy Chosen Ones, and may Glory
in Thine Inheritance. LORD JESUS Purge me from all my Sins, and from this of
Blood Guiltiness, Wash me into Thy Own Blood. Great are mine Iniquities, But
Greater are the Mercies of GOD! O let me be amongst the number of those for
whom CHRIST dyed; Be Thou my Advocat with the Father, Into thy hands do I
recommend my Spirit: Come, LORD JESUS Come, and receive my Soul, Amen.

Sic Subscribitur Sir GODFREY M'CULLOCH.

Edinburgh, Printed by John Reid, and are to be sold at his Printing House in
Bells Wynd. 1697.


