The Miserable CASE OF THE Poor GLASS-MAKERS, Artificers, and several Hundred
Families that were Employed in the said Manufacture; Humbly Offered in
reference to the Duty on Glass.
THAT the said Art of Glass-making being so much Improved in this Kingdom, has
caused great increase of Workmen and Artificers, and several Hundred of
Families were Employed and Maintained in the said Art.

That the Poor Workmen, Artificers and Families, have been great Sufferers by
the present War, not having near so much Work as formerly; and the present Duty
on Glass makes our Miseries and Hardships much greater.

That since the Duty, especially on the Bottle-houses, from whence it is
supposed the chief part of the Duty comes, is so great, viz. One Penny each
Bottle, being Sixty per Cent. here, and in some parts of the Kingdom above 90
per Cent. of what the Goods was before Sold for; and indeed on all sorts of
Glass so great, as makes the vent so small, that many of us the Artificers,
have not had any Work this seven or Eight Months, nor like to have for several
Months longer; the Masters having great Quantities on their Hands, and made
since the Duty: And we the poor Artificers, being always used to Work in the
Fire, are unsuitable for other Callings, are reduced to that Extremity, that
excepting those whom some Masters lend Money to, some are sorced to Pawn their
Goods, others to Sell their very Beds, and must come to the Parishes for
Relief, if the Duty be continued.

That there is already, since the Duty Commenced, several of the greatest,
oldest, and best situated Glass-houses in England laid down, and offered to
Sale; and it is supposed that most of the Glass-houses in England will be
forced to do the same, if the Duty be continued.

And we hear there is two Glass-houses already going to be set on Work in
Holland, which if once they get the Art, we may in effect loose it.

To prevent the Evils whereof, and to take off the Burden of this great Duty,
which chiefly lies upon poor Men's Labors, which we presume will appear to be
very inconsiderable when the Accounts of the said Duty are stated, the charge
of Collecting and Debentures, for w^^^ has been and will be Exported, is
Deducted.

We most Humbly Propose to this Honorable House
These several Ways following, in Liew of the present Duty on Glass-Wares, etc.
as to your grtea Wisdom shall seem most meet.

That in England and Wales, from Dr. Davenant's Book of Essay, upon Ways and
Means; appears stated to the Year 1690. when (by gathering in of the
Hearth-Money) the Number of Houses there were 872457 And is supposed to be
since new Built 002543 Making 875000 That admit of the Use of One Pound of Soap
a Week to each House, when few using less, and in many Houses is more used
makes to each House 52 l. a Year; and for Total 100 weight. 455000 Which at 4
s. the Hundred makes 90000 l. a Year.

That this single Commodity, if Taxed, will not offend any Artificers, as does
the now Duty on Glass-Wares, etc. to their alone Ruin, nor be grievous to
either Buyer or Seller; is of general and certain Use, but a trifling Charge on
the Subject, and readily Collected, for a moderate per Annum. November 1696.
Formed by Charles Palmer.

Secondly, Or by an Additional Postage of Letters of one third more.

Thirdly, Or by a Duty upon all Lead or Lead Oar Exported, of two Shillings per
Hundred more then it now pays, which amounting to 50000 Tun per Ann. amounts to
100000 l. a Year, and requires no charge in Collecting.

Fourthly, Or by a Duty on Flax and Hemp imported, of five Shillings per
Hundred on Flax, and 2 s. 6 d. per Hundred on Hemp, more then the present Duty,
which, it is presumed may Encourage our own Growth, and is Collectable without
Charge, and supposed to amount to 200000 l. a Year.

Fifthly, Or by a Duty on Hops of one Penny per Pound, being 9 s. 4 d. per
Hundred, to be paid by the first Proprietor, and upon all Foreign Hops the same
Duty, more than is now paid, which, computing the Expense 11000 Tun per Ann.
amounts to 100000 l. per Ann. Collectable by a small Charge of one Month in a
Year.

It is therefore most Humbly Hoped, that this Honorable House will be pleased
to take into their serious Consideration these Proposals, which being general,
and no ways tending to the Ruin of poor Artificers, as does the present Duty
on Glass Wares.


