ALL THE LAWS OF MARYLAND NOW IN. FORCE.

ANNAPOLIS Printed by Order of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY By Thomas Reading, Anno
Domini 1700.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY COLONEL NATHANIEL BLAKISTON HIS MAJESTYS Capt' GENERAL And
COMMANDER In Chief of this his PROVINCE OF MARYLAND The Lands Islands and
Territorys thereto belonging, AND VICE: ADMIRAL Of the same, This Undertaking
of printing this Book of LAWS Is most humbly Dedicated and Dvoteed By His
EXCELLENCYS Most Obedient and Faithful Humble Servant WILLIAM BLADEN.

To my Honored and Ingenious Friend Mr. William Bladen at the Port of
Annapolis.
Sir,
IT is certainly an argument of a most ingenious Mind as well as good Will to
the Commonwealth, where a Man finds ways to advance his own interest and the
publi ks together, which I doubt not but wi^^ be effectually done by your happy
undertakeing of the printing and publishing the Laws of this Province, whereby
the whole Body of them now in force will be to be had at so reasonable a rate
that scarce a^^ that are willing but may have them, and as it is a laudable
principle for every Man to make himself acquainted with the Laws of the Country
he ^^ves i^, so it is very danger us to be ignorant of them, by reason of that
maxim that Ignorance of the Law ^^a^l not excuse, which though it may seem a
harsh maxim at first ight, yet when thoroughly understood is most just and
reasonable, encouraging Men thereby to attain the knowledge of the Laws under
which they live, and that by the two greatest springs of human nature hope and
fear, hope of knowledge and understanding the nature and constitution of the
government they live in, which is in the most lively manner discovered by the
laws of the Country, and fear of being punished for the breach of any of them,
that through a willful ignorance they know not: this maxim will appear more
bea^tiful when compared with its contrary, for if ignorance of the Law should
excuse, then the more ignorant the more safe, and none could be punished by the
law but them that know it, so that knowledge would be a dangerous thing, and
yet it is the experience of all ages that the more knowledge people have (which
is to be more wise) they are the happier in their government and constitution:
But this is but in general, this worthy under^^^ing as I conceive of i^ is
pregnant, with many great benefits to the Province in particular, taking this
to be granted (which I believe will hardly be denied) that very few Gentlemen
of this Province, may not all the Justices of the Provincial and County Courts
have yet had the Body of the Laws by them so as to read, meditate and digest
them, without which it is impossible rightly to know them, for indeed they were
not to be had hat at a great charge and difficult to be got at any cost, and
then but in a written hand.

I say supposing this, and now that the plain print and easy price will remove
the former difficultys it cannot I think be doubted but that all the Justices
of the Provincial and County Courts will have them in their Studies for the
reasons aforesaid, and the better to enable them to give a right judgment of
those laws when pleaded befor'em, and next to them, all other Officers of what
nature soever and others. and then

1st. In the first place it must needs prevent many tedious and chargeable
Actions that Men involve themselves in by ignorance, for the law will ^^iru^^
them what to do and what to avoid, and it will prevent cunning all Men from
imposing on their Neighbors because their Neighbors will know the law as well
as themselves, and that will make Men more pe^eeble, better Neighbors, and
eas^er to the Courts of Justice.

Secondly, As it will prevent actions and injurys among private persons, so it
will instruct the several Officers of Courts their duty, which will prevent
many mis^ea^ances in their Offices daily committed through ignorance, and which
give great delays to the Courts, now the several Officers ready discharge of
their dutys will be a furtherance to the business of the Court

Thirdly, The Justices perfect knowledge of the laws will be a great means to
facilitate the trial of every such cause, and prevent the turning over Books to
find out the laws, when they shall know at first mentioning what the law is and
how it stands related to other laws, and be able to direct the trial by their
own knowledge, and distinguish on the different Arguments of each Party which
will be a happyness no less to themselves then the Suitors.

Fourthly, The grand and petty Jurys also being acquainted and knowing the laws
will more readily and aptly discharge their several offices, more might be
enumerated but if all these benefits, nay if but some of them answer
expectation it will be a considerable advantage to the Province.

You can not but expect some who will censure and be ready to condemn both the
undertaking and the reasons for it, such (I mean) who know no other way to
raise their (...) acter then by finding fault with and condemning other Men's
actions, but that ^^^ld not discourage any one from prosecuting a good design,
which all good Men will.

THE INDEX
A
ATtachments and Executions limited etc. Folio 7 Ju^^ices, Sherri^s and ^lerks
not to plead as Attorneys Fo: 18 Annarandet and Oxford Towns and Ports 16
Admini rators and Executors secured from double payment of debts and limitting
the ^^^e for payment of obligations 50 Amerciaments 51 Appears and ^^ritts of
Error 53

B
Special Fail to be taken in the Several Countys 76 Against Blasphemy,
Fornication, Swearing etc. 82

C
Appointing Coroners 9 Coopers and Gauge of Hogsheads 23 Con^^rming proceedings
judicial etc. between the death of Governor Copley and Governor Nicholsons
arrival 24 Countys to be divided 32 Church ^ands 44 Court (...) Lands 44 Cool
Springs 47 County Courts administration of justice 49 Commissioners of the
County Coures to assess their inhabitants for the necessary charge of their
County 50 Criminals Fees 83 Commissarys Office Wills Administrations etc. 87
Criminals how to be tried and punished 113 Additional Act touching Coopers ^^^

D
For electing Delegates 16 For appin^ing Court Days 19 Divi^^on of Aan-Arundel
and Baltemore Countys 46

E
Evidence to prove foreign debts 1 Errors in Law etc. occa oned by the late
Revolution 5 Against Extortion of S^^riffs and deputy Commissarys 50 Executions
^^ay^ after the tenth of April 51 Enrolling Conveyances etc. 93

F
Convicted Felons 19 Freeschools 39 Height of Fences against burners thereof,
and the multiplicity of Horses 57

G H
Harbors preserved 14 Marking High Ways 56

I
Ingrossers and Regraters 6 Concerning Indians 7 Impost on several commoditys
exported 34 Speedy Justice and Encouragement of Trade 37 Against Trade with the
Indians for flesh etc. 49 Impost for defraying the public charge 67 Speedy
Justice for small debts 69 Prohibiting liquors to be carried to the Indian
Towns 75 For summoning grand and petty Jurys 75 For quietting differences
between the English and Indians ^^

K L
Limittation of Actions 4 Laws to be published 5 All former Laws Repealed
others confirmed 18 All Laws Repealed and the^s confirmed 34 For the speedy
conveying public Letters 55 The Land ^aw 60 All Laws to be Recorded etc. 78
^arochia^^ ^^brarys 81 Some Temporary Laws Revived 116 Certain Laws repealed
others confirmed 117 Leavy to be laid by a Committee 119

M
Marriages to be published 20 M^^^^a Regulated 99

N
Encouraging the importation of Negro's 2 Natives advanced and learning
encouraged 21 Naval Officers Fees ascertained 28 Naturalization Fees
ascertained 32

O
Appointing Officers 10 O^^marys 79 Officers Fees 104

P
Qui^cing Possessions 18 Additional Act for quieting Possessions 30 Additional
Act to the Act for ^orts 31 Damage on ^rote ed Bills of ^xchange 50 Privateers
and years punished 102

Q R
Of Recognition 1 Rights of several persons secured 3 Revennue to the Governor
12 Revennue or three pence per hog head to the Governor 59 Religion 109

S
Subbornation and Perjury 11 Standard with weights and measures 14 Sallary of
Delegates and justices of Provincial and County Courts 26 Sunday to be kept
Holy 38 Sherriffs Office 71 Servants and slaves 95 Security of the Frontiers
114

T
Tobacco seized and received by the Sherriffs and others 9 Against transporting
or conveying away persons without passes 22 Town Lands 36 List of Taxables etc.
77 Tobacco received by Merchants and others how to be secured 78

U
Against Usury 15 Ve^rv^^en to assess their Parishoners 52 Against vexations
suits, proving of debts and pleading discount 84

W
Wolves 58 Watermills. 85

MARYLAND ss.
At a Session of Assembly begun and held at the City of St Mary's in the^^
Majesty's Province of MARYLAND the 10th. Day of May 1692, and in the Fourth
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace
of GOD of England Scotland France and Ireland King and Queen Defenders of the
Faith etc. His Excellency LYONEL COPLEY Esquire being then Governor in Chief and
Captain General, These following Laws were Enacted, to the Honor and Glory of
GOD and Welfare of this his Majesty's Province.

AN ACT OF RECOGNITION.
WE Your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subjects of this your Majesty's
Province of Maryland, the Governor and General Assembly, do Beseech your Most
Excellent Majesty's that it may be published and declared in this General
Assembly and Enacted by the Authority of the same, That We do Recognize and
Acknowledge Your Majesty's are, and of Right ought to be by the Laws of the
Realm of England our Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady King and Queen of England
Scotland France and Ireland and the Dominions thereunto belonging, in and to
whose Princely Persons the Royal Estate, Crown and Dignity of the said Realms,
with all Honors, Styles, Titles, Regality's, Prerogatives, Powers,
Jurisdictions, and Authority's to the same belonging and appertaining, are most
Fully Rightfully and Entirely Invested and Incorporated United and Annexed.

An Act providing what shall be good Evidence to prove Foreign Debts.
WHEREAS diverse People of the Kingdom of England and other places, have in
their Hands Bonds of diverse and sundry Persons now residing in this Province,
and send them to certain Attorneys to be put in Suit against the said Debtors
here, which for want of a Law to explain, and ascertain what shall be
sufficient proof and Evidence for the proving the said Bonds to be the Act and
Deed of the Debtors, and by them to be sealed and delivered, neither is there
any way for the Debtors to discharge themselves of the same if they have
satisfied the same, as by bringing the Creditor upon his Oath, to declare and
set forth if he has received the said Debts or any part thereof, or whether
there be not any Accounts between the Creditor and Debtor whereby he may
discount the same, or to prove his Releases; the Witnesses living remote, and
impossible to bring them viva voce to give their Testimony therein, which thing
proves oftentimes very prejudicial to both Parties, to prevent which, and to
give Redress therein for the future, BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queen's most
Excellent Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent of this present General
Assembly and the Authority of the same, That all Debts of Record, whether by
Judgment, Recognizance, Deed Enroled and upon Record, the Exemplification
thereof under the Seal of the County's where the said Judgment was given, or
the said Judgment was Recorded, shall be a sufficient Evidence to prove the
same. And that all other Debts by Bonds, Bills, Accounts or otherwise, that
shall from and after the publication hereof be sent hither to be put in Suit
against any Person whatsoever, living or residing within this Province shall be
proved by the Oaths of the Witnesses thereunto, by a Notary Public or other
Officer Lawfully Authorized there unto of the County (...) Pl^^^ where^^ ever
it shall happen the said Bonds or Bills shall be sent from; at which time, and
before which said Public Notary or other public Officer shall be present the
Creditors, who shall then likewise before such Public Notary or other public
Officer of the place so Authorized upon his Corporal Oath declare that the said
Debt or any part thereof is not satisfied, or that there is not any Accounts
between the said Creditor and Debtor by which the said Creditor may be likewise
indebted to the Debtor to the value of the said Debt, or any part thereof for
any matter or thing accrewed since the time of the date of the said Bond Bill
or Instrument, or whether the said Creditor has not given to the said Debtor
any Release for the same, to be sent together with the proofs under the Hands
and Seals of the Publck Notary or other public Officer thereunto appointed,
which if the Creditor shall refuse or neglect to perform or do, then the said
matter and thing by the said Public Notary or other Officer so by them
certified as aforesaid, shall not be received as Evidence to prove the said
Debt. And if the said Creditor be dead, and his Executor or Administrator Sue
such Bond, Bill, Account or otherwise Sue any Debtor for the same, the Executor
and Administrator in like manner before such Notary Public or other Officer
for that purpose appointed, shall set forth and declare upon their Oath whether
or no they have not heard the Creditor in his Life time acknowledge that Debt
to be satisfied, or whether or not upon fight of the Creditors Books, Writing,
or Accounts, they have not seen Credit given to the Debtor since the Day of the
making of the said Bills, Bonds, or beginning of the Accounts so Sued for, all
which in like manner is to be certified by the public Notary or other Officer
thereunto appointed under his Hand and Seal to be sent along to this Country,
together with the Testimony of the Witnesses that have testified to the said
Bonds, Bills, Accounts or otherwise, all which if the said Executor or
Administrator refuse or neglect to do, then the said matter and thing by the
public Notary or other Officer appointed as aforesaid certified shall not be
received in Evidence for valid against the Debtor. Provided though the proofs
and Evidences are sufficient that the Plantif obtain Judgment for the said
Debt, no Execution shall Issue forth against the Defendant until the Original
be given up, or delivered up to the Defendant or his Attorney, or sufficient
and legal Releases in case the Original be lost.

And Be it further Enacted that all and every the Attorney and Attorneys who
shall be employed in the prosecution of such Suits, shall put in security to
pay the Defendant all such Costs and Charges as shall be by the said Defendant
in that case expended, in case the Plantif be cast in the Suit.

Provided likewise, That no Bill, Bond, Judgment, Recognizance, Statute,
Merchant and of the Staple or other Specialty whatsoever though proved and
cerified as aforesaid shall be good and pleadable, or admitted in Evidence
against any Person or Persons of this Province wherein the Debtor and Creditor
are both dead, and the Debt, or Thing, or Action above Twelve Years standing.

An Act for the Encouragement of the Importation of Negro's into this Province.
WHEREAS Several of the good People of this Province have been discouraged to
Import into, or purchase within this Province any Negro's and other Slaves, and
such as have imported or purchased any such Negro's or Slaves, have to the
great displeasure of Allmighty God, and the prejudice of the Souls of those
poor People neglected to instruct them in the Christian Faith, or to induce or
permit them to receive the holy Sacrament of Baptism for the Remision of their
Sins upon a mistake and ungrounded apprehension, that by becoming Christians,
they and the Issue of their Bodies are actually manumitted, and made free and
discharged from their Servitude and Bondage.

BE IT DECLARED AND ENACTED by the King and Queens Most Excellent Majesty's, by
and with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the
Authority of the same, That where any Negro or Negro's, Slave or Slaves being
in Servitude or Bondage, is or shall become Christian or Christians, and have,
or has received, or shall at any time receive the holy Sacrament of Baptism,
before or after his her or their importation into this Province, the same is
not, nor shall, or ought the same to be deemed, adjudged, construed, or taken
to be, or amount unto a Manumition or Free, enlarging or discharging any such
Negro or Negro's Slave or Slaves; or any of his her or their Issue or Issues,
from his her or their or any of their Servitude or Servitudes, Bondage or
Bondages; but that notwithstanding becoming Christian or Christians, or
receiving the holy Sacrament of Baptism, every such Negro or Negro's Slave and
Slaves, and all and every the Issue and Issues of every suck Negro and Negro's
Slave and Slaves, is, are and be, and shall at all times hereafter be adjudged,
reputed, deemed, and taken to be and remain in Servitude and Bondage, and
subject to the same Servitude and Bondage to all Intents and purposes, as if he
she or they or every or any of them was or were in, and subject to before such
his her or their becoming Christian or Christians, or receiving the holy
Sacrament of Baptism, any Opinion or Matter or Thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act for securing the Rights of several Persons.
WHEREAS many and frequent Complaints have been made by diverse good People of
this Province, who of late Years have procured of the Lord Proprietory of this
Province Warrants for the laying out and taking up several quantities of Land
within the same, and have passed their Bonds to his Lordship, according to his
late Conditions of Plantations for the same, and by virtue of their Warrants,
the several Surveyors of this Province, had before the Revolution of Affairs
within the same surveyed and laid out pursuant to the said Warrants, several
Tracts and parcels of Land for them or to their Assigns, and either had
returned Certificate of the same unto the Examiner, or had it in their Hands
ready to return before the Revolution as aforesaid; but the same Certificate
either not arrived at the Land Office of this Province, or if the same was, no
Pattents as yet granted for the same; and his Lordship having shut up the Land
Office of this Province, and no Persons being qualified to grant Pattents for
the same, they, and others in the like condition are in great danger of loosing
the Benefit and Estate, of, and in their said Lands so laid out and surveyed as
aforesaid. In Tender Consideration whereof, and for prevention of such
Inconveniency within this Province, your Majesty's most Dutyful and Loyal
Subjects the Burgesses and Delegates of this present General Assembly pray that
it may be Enacted. And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent
Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly
and the Authority of the same, That any Person or Persons whatsoever, being
Free Denizens and Subjects to the Crown of England, that at any time heretofore
within the space of five Yaars last past had obtained of his Lordship the Lord
Proprietor of this Province; himself, or from any Person by from or under him,
any Warrant or Warrants for any parcel or parcels of Land either of Resurvey or
to be taken up within this Province, and by virtue of which, any parcel or
parcels of Land whatsoever, was by any Lawful Surveyor of any County within
this Province surveyed and laid out at any time before the Revolation of
Affairs or before the tenth Day of July, One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty and
Nine, and no Pattent as yet from his Lordship granted for the same, such Person
or Persons by himself or his Attorney, at any time within twelve Months from
and after the publication of this Law in the County where such Land lies,
appearing before the Justices of the respective County in which the Land lies
as aforesaid, and producing to the Justices of the said County Courts a
Certificate under Hand of such Surveyor as made the Survey of any parcel or
parcels of Land as aforesaid, and proving the same by the Oath of such Surveyor
if living, or by the Book of such Surveyor or other Evidence if the Surveyor be
dead; that the same parcel or parcels of Land was really and Bona Fide laid out
and surveyed for such person or persons by Warrant for the same, before the
Revolution of Affairs in this Province in the year aforesaid, and filing the
said Certificate and Oath in the Records of the said Court, it shall and may be
Lawful to such person or persons to have, use, occupy; possess and enjoy all
such Lands and Tenements so laid out and surveyed as aforesaid.

And it is hereby Declared and Enacted that such person or persons shall have
and enjoy a pure and Lawful Estate of Inheritance in Fee Simple, of in and to
all such parcel or parcels of Lands and Tenements according to the Conditions
of Plantations, upon which such Warrants were granted as aforesaid, together
with all priviliges Grants and Immuities whatsoever, incident appertaining or
belonging to the same, although not in this Act so largely and paricularly
expressed, but as fully and absolutely, as if a Pattent from his Lordship had
been granted for the same, any Law Statute or Usuage to the contrary hereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for Limitation of certain Actions for avoiding Suits at Law.
FORASMUCH as nothing can be more Essential to the Peace and Tranquillity of
this Province, than the quieting the Estates of the Inhabitants thereof,, end
for the effecting of which, no better measures can be taken than a Limitation
of Time for the Commencing such Actions as in the several and Respective Courts
within this Province are brought from the time of the Cause of such Actions
arising.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this presentt General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That all Actions of Trespass, Quare Clausum fregit, all Actions of
Trespass, Detinue, Surtrover, or Replevin for taking away Goods and Chattels,
all Actions of Accounts, Contract, Debt, Book, and upon the case other then
such Accounts as concerns the Trade of Merchandise between Merchant and
Merchant, their Factors and Servants which are not Residents within this
Province, all Actions of Debt for lending or Contract without Specialty, all
Actions of Debt for Arrearages of Rents, all Actions of Assault, Menaces,
Battery, Wounding and Imprisonment, or any of them, shall be sued or brought by
any Person or Persons within this Province at any time after the End of this
present General Assembly, shall be commenced and sued within the time and
limitation hereafter expressed and not after, (that is to say) the said Actions
for Account, and the said Actions for Debt, Detinue, and Replevin for Goods and
Chattels, and the said Actions for Trespnss, quare Clausum fregit, within two
Years ensuing the Cause of such Action and not after; and the said Action on
the Case for Words, and Actions of Trespass, of Assault, Battery, Wounding and
Imprisonment or any of them, within one Year from the time of the Cause of such
Action arising and not after.

And Be It Further Enacted by and with the Advice and Consent aforesaid, That
in all Actions of the Case for Slanderous Words to be sued or prosecuted by any
Person or Persons in any Courts of Record of this Province, that has power to
hold Plea of the same, after the end of this present Assembly, if the Jury upon
the Trial of the Issue in such Action, or the Jury that shall inquire of the
Damages do find or assess the Damages under 40 s. then the Plantif or Plantifs
in such Action or Actions shall have and recover only so much Costs as the
Damages given or assessed amounts unto.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons Entitled to any the Action or Actions aforesaid, shall be at the time
of any such Cause of Action accrewing within the Age of One and Twenty Years
foeme Covert non Compis Mentis, Imprisoned, or beyond the Seas, that then such
Person or Persons shall be at Liberty to bring the same Action or Actions
within such time as is before Limited, after their coming to, or being of full
Age, Discovert Sound Memory, at Large or returned from beyond the Seas, as
other persons having no such Impediment might or should have done.

And Forasmuch as diverse Disputes formerly arose, whether persons absenting the
Province, or wandering from County to County, until the time by the late Act for
the Reasons and purposes aforesaid limited and allowed were Expired, should
have any benefit thereby, and different Judgments given thereon in the several
and Respective County's within this Province, for that the said Act was therein
all together silent.

Be It Therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
publication hereof, no person or persons whatsoever absenting themselves out of
this Province, or that shall remove from County to County after any Debt
contracted, whereby the Creditor or Creditors may be at an uncertainty of
finding out the said person or persons, or his or their Effects, shall have any
benefit by the Limitations and Restrictions in this Act specified. Provided
allways, That it is the true (...) and (...) that this Act or any thing herein
contained, shall be construed reputed or taken to prejudice or debar any person
removing himself or Family from one County to another for his convenience, or
any person leaving this Province for the time and term in this Act Limited from
the benefit thereof he leaving Essects sufficient, and known for the payment of
of his just Debts, in the Hands of some person or persons who will assume the
payment thereof to his Creditors, any thing in this Act contained to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for the Naturalization of John Ouldson and Mathias Vander-heyden.

An Act for publication of all Laws within this Province.
FORASMUCH as many new Laws have been made this present Assembly, wherein the
welfare of the good People of this Province is much concerned, and diverse old
Laws not sufficiently providing against the Offenses by them to be punished
have been made more penal, to the end many people of this Province evilly
disposed, may be deterred from evil doing; and that notwithstanding all the
Laws, intend that every person in this Province is bound to take Notice of what
is passed in the Assembly, because every person is there present in their
Representations, yet his Excellency the Governor, the Council and Assembly
desiring not the destruction of the very worst of the people of this Province
not that they should be overtaken by any Intendment in Law in a penal Act, though
not at all too severe for the misdeeds it intends to punish, do think fit that
it be Enacted, and BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queen's most Excellent
Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly
and the Authority of the same, That from henceforward all the Acts that shall
pass from this and all the succeeding Assemblies, shall be from time to time
fairly transeribed into Parchment and by Writ under the great Seal of this
Province from time to time be passed by the Chancellor for the time being, to
the Sherrif of each respective County be transmitted and commandment to them in
the said Writs shall be given as well the said Acts in their several and
respective County's, in what place to them shall seem most convenient to
publish and proclaim all the said Acts of Assembly, to be firmly observed and
kept.

And Be it ^^^ther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every several and
(...) active County shall from time to time pay to the Chancellor for the time
being (...) of the Laws so much Tobacco, as by the said General Assembly in
which the said Laws were made shall assess and allow.

An Act for taking away all Errors in Proceedings at Law and Equity, and in the
Court for Probat of Wills etc. occasioned by the late Revolution.
WHEREAS upon the late Revolution, diverse Differences and Disturbances did
arise and happen within this Province, which occasioned many Errors and
Irregularities in Proceedings of Law and Equity, and in the Court for Probat of
Wills to be committed for preventing of all Disputes and Troubles that may
happen thereupon.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majssty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That all Bills, Plaints, Process, Pleas, Judgments, Indictments,
Informations, Proceedings, Causes, Matters and Things whatsoever, commenced or
depending in any of the said Courts, since the first Day of April 1690 shall be
good and ettectual notwithstanding any Errors therein contained by
discontinuances or otherwise whatsoever, by reason of the said late Troubles.

Provided nevertheless, That no person or persons whatsoever shall have, or
take any benefit of this Act for any Error or Mistake in any of the Processes
Pleas or other Proceedings not occasioned by the said late Troubles, but that
the same shall remain and be as if this Act had never been made, any thing
herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as by reason of the late Revolution, all Judicial Proceedings
were impeded and hindered for above two Years last past viz. from the Year of
our Lord 1690, to this present time, being the Year of our Lord 1692.

Be It Enacted and Ordained by and with the Advice and Consent aforesaid and
the Authority of the same, That the said Years shall not be accounted as Years
included and meant in the Statute of Limitations for payment or demand of
Debts, due by Bond Bill or judgment, or in the Clause for the due returning of
Certificates upon Warrants for Land granted, or Suing out of Pattents for
Lands, according to the directions and Instructions of any of the Lord
Baltemores Conditions of Plantations, or in the Clause for taking or suing out
Pattents for Lands contained in his Lordships Conditions of Plantations, but
that in those and such like cases, the said Years of our Lord be passed by and
not accounted for those Years thereby meant or mentioned

An Act against Ingrossers and Regraters.
FORASMUCH as hitherto no Law has been made within this Province for
restraining and prohibiting Engrossing and Regrating, the undue and too
frequent practice whereof has been made, and still is highly oppressive and
injurious to the greater part of the Inhabitants of this Province, who are by
means thereof deprived and wholly prevented from the benefit of laying out
their Cropps of Tobacco or any part thereof with the Merchant, Adventurer,
their Factors or others, bringing all sorts of Goods Merchandises and Servants
for the purchase thereof, whilst a Covetous and Active Sort of People, but few
in number of the Inhabitants of this Province do buy and purchase all, or most
part of the Goods Merchandises and Servants yearly brought into this Province,
(without Consignment) for the purchase of Tobacco. And albeit they have not
Tobacco of their own, whereby to pay for the Goods Merchandises and Servants so
by them from time to time bought and parchased, nevertheless, such is the
necessity of the Province, that within a few days after such purchase, they can
Regrate the said Goods Merchandises and Servants and be ready for another
Market, thereby not only In hancing the prizes of all Goods Merchandises and
Servants and be ready for another, but making several returns in one Shipping
season, and in the mean time the greater Number of the Inhabitants of this
Province are disabled and totally hindered from selling their Cropps of Tobacco,
unless it be to and with the before said Huksters, or some, or one of them at
their own dear Rates and Prizes, for prevention therefore of so great a
Mischief for the future, Be It Enacted by the King and Queens most Excellent
Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent of this present general Assembly
and the Authority of the same, that whatsoever person or persons, that from and
after the publication hereof shall Ingross, or get into his her or their Hands
or Possession, by buying contracting or promise, taking within this Province
any Goods or Merchandises whatsoever, or Servants, to the Intent to sell the
same again within the space of six Months, and the same, or any part thereof
shall within that time sell again for ready Tobacco, or for Tobacco to be paid
the Shipping happening at the time of such first Sale, or for Tobacco to be
Shipped for payment or securing the payment of any Bill or Bills of Exchange,
to be drawn for the payment of the said Goods Merchandises or Servants, with
intent to elude the benefit of this Act, or the same Goods Merchandises or
Servants shall transport out of this Province, shall be accepted reputed and
taken for an unlawful Ingrosser and Regrater, and shall suffer such pains
penalties and forfeitures hereafter expressed, any Law Statute Usuage or Custom
to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And Be It Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons
from and after the publication hereof offend in any of the things before
recited, and being thereof duly convicted, by confell on of the party, or the
Oaths of two Witnesses before the Justices of the Provincial Court, or the
Justices of the County Courts for the time being where the Offenses were
committed, shall for his her or their first Offense have or suffer Imprisonment
for the space of two Months without Bail or Mainprize, and shall also loose and
forfeit the value of the Goods Merchandises or Servants so by him or them
bought or had, and if any person or persons Lawfully convicted or attainted as
aforesaid, of or for the second Offense and be thereof Lawfully convicted or
attainted as aforesaid, that then every person or persons so offending, shall
have and suffer for his or their second Offense Imprisonment for the space of
of one half Year without Bail or Mainprize, him and shall loose the double
value of all the Goods Merchandises or Servants so by or them bought or had as
aforesaid.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons being Lawfully twice convicted or attainted as aforesaid, of or for the
second Offense, and shall again offend the third time, and be thereof Lawfully
convicted or attainted, that then every person for the third Offense shall be
set in the Pillory in the City Town o^ in the full County where he shall then
inhabit and dwell, and loose and forfeit all the Goods and Chattels he or they
have to their own use, and also be committed to Prison there to remain daring
the term of one whole Year, the one moiety of all which Forfeiture^ to be to
our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen for the Support of the
Government of this Province, and the other moiety thereof to the Informer, or
him or them that shall sue for the same by Bill Action of Debt, Plaint or
Information in any Court of Record within this Province, wherein no Essoyn or
Wager of Law is to be allowed.

Provided that this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not debar or be
construed to debar or hinder any person or persons whatsoever within this
Province by or out of any Goods or Merchandises by him or them so bought or
purchased as aforesaid, to satisfy and pay unto any Workman or Servant the
hire or wages of him or them due for any work or service whatsoever.

An Act concerning Indians.
TO the End no breach of Peace may happen betwixt the Neighboring Indians and
the Inhabitants of this Province, BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens Most
Excellent Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent of this present General
Assembly and the Authority of the same, That any one whosoever shall take,
entice surprise, transport, or cause to be transported, or sell and dispose of
any Friend Indian or Indians whatsoever, or endeavor or attempt so to do,
without License from the Governor for the time being, nnd all Accessory's
thereunto shall be fined and imprisoned at the Discretion of the Governor and
Council for the time being, howbeit any one Informing or causing such Offender
or Offenders to be apprehended, shall have Satis-faction for his pains and
Indulgence therein as the Governor and Council shall think fit.

An Act Limiting the Extent of Attachments, and providing what shall be Leavied
on Attachments and Executions.
FOR Settling the manner of Proceedings on Attachments and Limiting the Extent
of them, and providing what shall be Leavied on Attachments and Executions.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens Most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from henceforth no Attachment shall Issue out of any Court of this
Province before a Writ or Summons be first made out, upon which Writ if the
Party Defendant be an Inhabitant or Resident within this Province and the
Sherrif shall retern a non est inventus, one other Writ or Sumons shall
thereupon in manner aforesaid Issue forth against the said Defendant, and if
the Sherrif shall upon the Second Writ or Summons return a non est invertus
likewise, an Attachment shall and may thereupon in manner and form hereafter
set down and be awarded, and in case any Writ or Summons shall Issue forth of
any of their Majesty's Courts within this Province against any person or
persons absent out of this Province, in such case, upon the return of a non est
inventus by the Sherrif on such Writts or Summons, and the Party Plant if his
leaving with the Attorney of such absent Defendant (if he has left an
Attorney) a Copy of his Declaration or short Notes expressing the true cause of
Action, or if he has left no Attorney, then the Plant if leaving a Copy of the
said Declaration or short Note expressing the true cause of Action at the House
where the said Defendant absent did last reside or dwell and making such proof
of his Action at the said respective Courts shall think fit. It shall and may
be Lawful for the Justices of the said Courts to award an Attachment against
the Goods Chattels and Credits of the said absent Defendant so as aforesaid
prosecuted and not appearing to the said Action, which are or shall be in the
hands and possession of any person or persons whatsoever, yea even in the
Plantiffs own hands for the Defendants use in this Province, in which said
Attachement there shall be a Clause commanding the Sherrif of the respective
County's at the time of executing the said Attachment, to make known to each
person and persons in whose hands and possession the said Goods Chattels and
Credits so as aforesaid in their hands attached should not be condemned, and
Execution thereof had and made as in other cases of Recovery's and Judgment
given in Courts of Record, at which Day of Return of the said Attachment, if
the said Defendant shall not then appear, nor the Garnishee in whose hands the
aforesaid Goods Chattels and Credits of the Defendant were attached to show
cause to the contrary, the respective Courts shall and may condemn the said
Goods Chattels and Credits aforesaid, so as aforesaid attached and awarded;
Execution thereof to be had and made, either by Capias ad satisfaciendum fieri
facias or otherwise as in other Judgments, he the said Plantif so prosecuting
as aforesaid, giving good and sufficient Security before the Justices of each
respective Court to and for the use of the said Defendant so as aforesaid,
being not found within this Province or ablent out of this Province as
aforesaid, to make Restitution of the said Goods Chattels or Credits so as
aforesaid coudemned or the value thereof, if the Defendant so as aforesaid
prosecuted, shall at any time within one Year and a Day to be accounted from
the Day of the said Attachment awarded come in and either in Person, or by
Attorney appear to the said Original Action against him, and make it appear
that the said Plantif has been, and is satisfied and paid the Debt or Demand
in the said Action, or shall otherwise in Court discount or bar the said
Plantif of the same or any part thereof, which said Condemnation and Execution
of the said Goods Chattels or Credits of the said Defendant, in the Hands of
the Garnishee or Garnishees as aforesaid had and made, shall be sufficient and
pleadable in Bar, by the said Garnishee or Garnishees in any Action brought
against him or them by the said Defendant for the same.

Provided always, that no Sherrif shall Leavy by way of Execution as aforesaid,
against any the said Garnishee or Garnishees any more than the Plantifs Debt
and Cost, nor against any Garnishee or Garnishees then what the said Plantif in
the said Action shall make appear to the said respective Courts, to be of the
said Goods Chattels and Credits of the said Defendant in the Hands of each
respective Garnishee or Garnishees, together with such Cost only as the
Garnishee or Garnishees shall put the Plantif to, by denying himself to be
indebted unto such Defendant and contesting the same. Provided also that no
Sherrif in any County within this Province, shall by any Attachment or any
other Execution had upon such Attachment, or any other Execution whatsoever out
of any Court of this Province Leavy, Seize or take the Goods and Chattels of
any the Inhabitants within this Province, so far as to deprive them of all
Lively hood for the future, but that Corn for necessary Maintenance, Bedding,
Gun, Ax, Pot and Laborers necessary Tools, and such like Household Impliments
and Ammunition for Subsistence shall be protected, from all Attachments and
Executions whatsoever.

Provided also that such as shall be found by proof or other Circumstances,
wilfully to absent themselves into the Woods or elcewhere from the Sherrifs
Sight, whereby they cannot be found to be brought to Trial, and such also as
shall be absent by Flight or Proscription out of this Province to be avered
upon Oath shall have no benefit of any favorable Interpretation of this Law.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth any person
or persons having obtained any Judgment in any Court of this Province, or that
shall hereafter obtain any Judgment in any Court of this Province against any
person or persons, It shall and may be Lawful to and for the said Plantif in
the said Judgment at his Will and Pleasure, instead of any other Execution,
without those previous Requisites as above in this Act prescribed and directed,
to take out an Attachment against the Goods Chattels and Credits of the said
Desendant in the said Judgment in the said I santifs own Hands, or in the Hands
of any other person or persons whatsoever; which said Attachment shall likewise
have the Clause aforesaid, Commanding the Sherrif of the said County to whom it
shall be directed at the time of executing the said Attachment, to make known
to each person or persons in whose Hands and Possessions the said Goods
Chattels and Credits of the said absent Defendant shall be attached, that he be
and appear at the Respective Courts at the Day of the Return of such
Attachment, to show cause (if they have any) why the said Goods Chattels and
Credits so as abovesaid in their Hands attached should not be condemned, and
Execution thereof had and made as in other Cases of Recoverys or Judgments
given in Courts of Record, at which Day of the Return of the said Attachment,
if the said Defendant shall not then appear, nor the said Garnishee, in whose
Hands the said Goods Chattels and Credits of the said Defendant were attached,
to show sufficicient cause to the contrary, the said Respective Courts shall
and may Condemn the said Goods Chattels and Credits aforesaid so as aforesaid
attached, and award Execution thereof to be had and made, either by Capias ad
satisfaciendum, fieri facias or otherwise, as the said Plantif might have had
against the Defendant himself on the Judgment aforesaid provided as aforesaid,
which said Condemnation and Execution of such Goods Chattels and Credits of the
said Garnishee as aforesaid had and made, shall be sufficient and pleadable in
Bar by the said Garnishee or Garnishees in any Action brought against him or
them by the said Defendant for the same.

An Act Imposing a penalty on all such who shall dispose of Tobacco Seized and
Received by the Sherrifs and others.
WHEREAS diverse great Grievances have happened within this Province, through
the many Cheats and Deceits that many have used in disposing and altering the
marks and quality's of Tobacco after the said Tobacco has been Seized and
Received by the Sherrifs either for Fines or Leavies, or has been paid away to
Merchants or others and by them marked and Received, whereby the public have
been much abused and wronged, and many private persons have Received great
Damages in the said Goods.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the same, That what Person soever shall dispose of any Tobacco or other
Goods Seized on and Received by the Sherrif for Fines or Leavy's or other
public Officers Fees, or that shall alter or scratch out the mark of any
Tobacco so Received, or shall alter or change the quality of Tobacco so
Received, or by any Merchant or others Received, either by uncasing or
otherwise, without any Lawful Order or Warrant in Writing under the Hand of
such Sherrif who received the same, or of such Merchant or other Person who had
received and marked the same, or for whose use the same was received and
marked, shall belly able beng Convicted by Confession or sufficient Witnesses in
some Court of this Province to Restore four Fold to the party grieved, and
stand in the Pillory two full Hours during the Court time, with his Offense
fairly written in a piece of paper and placed upon his Back. Provided that no
person shall be impleaded or prosecuted upon this Act after three Years from
the time that the Fact shall be committed.

An Act for appointing Coroners in each Respective County.
WHEREAS there has many Inconveniency's happened in this Province for want of
appointing Coroners ^n each Respective Counry.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens Most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same That the Governor for the time being do Constitute and appoint such
person or persons from time to time to be Coroners, as he shall judge most able
and best qualified for that Office in each respective County in this Province,
And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the Governor give out Commission ^o such persons,
to the intents and purposes aforesaid, and that the same as near as may be,
concur with the Laws and Constitution of England. And that an Oath be
Administered to every such Coroner by appointment of the Governor of their
entering into the said Office according to the form of the Oath of a Coroner in
England.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That the Justices of Peace in every County at the first County Court,
held after Michaelmas shall nominate and appoint some Inhabitant in every
Hundred or Precinct, who shall execute all Precepts or Warrants to him
directed, and shall in all things have the like power within the said Hundred
or Precinct as any Constable has or ought to have in a Hundred or Precinct in
England, by the Law or Custom of England; and the said Constable shall take the
Oath mentioned in an Act made in the first Year of their said Majesty's Reign
Intitul'd an Act for abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance in manner
and form following. You ssiall Swear you will well and truly Serve our
Sovereign Lord and Lady King William and Queen Mary in the Office of a
Constable, you shall see and cause that their Majesty's Peace be well and duly
kept according to your power, you shall arrost all such persons as in your
presence shall commit any Riot, Fray, or other breach of their Majesty's Peace,
you shall do your best endeavor upon complaint to you made to seize all
Felons, Barretors, Rioters, or persons riotously assembled, and if any such
Offender shall make any Resistance with Force, you shall Leavy Hue and Cry and
pursue them until they be taken, you shall do your best endeavor that Hue and
Cry be duly raised and pursued against murderers, thieves, and other felons
and fugitive servants, and the Laws and Orders against vagabonds and such other
idle persons coming within your limits be duly put in execution, at your County
Courts coming you shall present all Offenses done against the several Acts made
for the suppressing of Drunkenness, and also true presentment make of all
Bloodsheds, Affrays, Outcries, Rescues and other Offenses committed against
their Majesty's Peace within your Limits, you shall well and truly execute all
Precepts and Warrants to you directed from the Justice of Peace of this County
or higher Officer, and you shall well and truly according to your knowledge
power and ability do and execute all things belonging to the Office of a
Constable so long as you shall continue in this Office. So help you God. And if
the person so nominated and appointed shall refuse to serve in the said Office
by himself or his Deputy, or take the Oaths when tendered to him by the
Justices of Peace as aforesaid, shall forfeit the sum of five hundred pounds of
Tobacco, one moiety thereof to their Majesty's their heirs and Successors, for
and toward the Support of this Government, and the other moiety to the Church
Wardens of the Parish in which he shall dwell or reside, to be recovered by
Bill Plaint or Information wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law shall
be allowed, or suffer two Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize.

Be It Further Enected by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that all persons whatsoever that shall hereafter be
nominated or appointed to be Justices of the Peace, Sherrifs or Coroners within
this Province. by his Excellency the Captain Genetal or Governor in Chief for
the time being, that refuses to execute the Office of justice of Peace Sherrif
or Coroner within this Province, or to take the Oaths aforementioned in the Act
of Parliament aforesaid made, and the Oaths of Justice of the Peace Sherrif or
Coroner shall forfeit to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen their
Heirs and Successors 1000 l. Tobacco for the uses aforesaid, to be recovered as
aforesaid or four Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that whosoever shall be
Summoned by Writ out of any Court of Justice of this Province to serve as a
Juror in any Trial in any Court within this Province and refuse to serve in any
Cause depending whether Criminal or Civil (not being by any other Office
exempted) and thereunto Lawfully required, shall forfeit to their said
Majesty's their Heirs and Successors the Sum of five hundred pounds of Tobacco
for the uses aforesaid, to be recovered as aforesaid, or two Months
Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that whosoever being by
Writ Lawfully Summoned and thereby required to serve as a Witness in this
Province, and shall refuse to testify upon Oath in any case depending whether
Criminal or Civil, shall forfeit to out Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and
Queen their Heirs and Successors the Sum of five hundred pounds of Tobacco for
the uses aforesaid, to be recovered in manner as aforesaid, or suffer two
Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize Provided this Clause shall not
extend to People called Quakers.

Provided that this Act nor any thing therein contained shall not extend or be
inrerpreted to extend to the prejudice of any the Lords of Manors within this
Province, in their privileges of appointing Constables within their respective
Manors.

Provided that if any person dissenting from the Church of England shall
hereafter be chosen or otherwise appointed to bear the Office of high Constable
Church Warden or Overseer of the poor or any other Paro chial or Ward Office
and such person shall scruple to take upon him any the said Offices in Regard
of the Oaths or any other matter or thing required by the Law to be taken and
done in respect of such Office, every such person shall and may execute such
Office or Employment by his sufficient Deputy by him to be provided that shall
comply with the Laws on this behalf. Provided always that the said Deputy be
allowed and approved of by such person or persons in such manner as such
Officer or Officers respectively should by Law have allowed and approved.

Provided nevertheless, that it shall be Lawful for any Justice of the Peace or
other Magistrate Lawfully Authorized to commit and punish such person or
persons as shall refuse to take the Oaths mentioned in the said Acts of
Parliament according to the appointment thereof, the same Oaths being rendered
unto him or them in such manner as the said Act directs and appoints, any thing
herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for punishment of Persons suborning of Witnesses, or committing willful
and Corrupt Perjury.
WHEREAS several Persons void of Grace and the Dread of the Almighty have and
do still continue for small profits accrewing to themselves to commit willful
and corrupt Perjury, or cause or procure the same to be committed, either out
of a design for the reasons and purposes aforesaid, or merely to revenge an
imaginary Injury done them to the great prejudice of diverse of their Majesty's
Loyal Subjects inhabiting within this Province, and forasmuch as the Laws of
this Province heretofore made for the prevention of the like mischiefs and
inconveniency's have upon a mature and deliberate Consideration by this present
General Assimbly been found altogether inconsistant with the Constitution of
this Province or the Laws of England in such cases made and provided.

BE IT THREFOE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the same, That if any person or persons whatsoever from and after the
publication hereof shall unlawfully or corruptly procure any Witness or
Witnesses by Letters, Rewards, Promises or by any other sinister unlawful
Labor or Means whatsoever, to commit any wilful and corrupt Perjury in any
matter or cause whatsoever now depending, or which hereafter shall depend in
Suit and Variance by any Writ, Action, Bill, Complaint or Information in any
wise touching or concerning any Lands Tenements Hereditaments or any Goods,
Chattels, Debt or Damages in any of the Courts of Record within this Province,
or that shall unlawfully and corruptly procure or suborn any Witness or
Witnesses from and after the publication aforesaid, to be Sworn to testify in
perpetuam Rei Memoriam, that then every such Offender or Offenders being
thereof Lawfully Convicted or Attainted loose and forfeit the Sum of forty
pounds Sterling, and if it happen any such Offender or Offenders being
Convicted or attainted as aforesaid, shall not have Goods or Chattels Lands or
Tenements to the value of forty pounds as aforesaid, their every such person
or persons so being Convicted or Attainted as aforesaid, shall for his or their
said Offense suffer Imprisonment for and during the space of one whole Year
without Bail or Mainprize, and stand upon the Pillory for the space of one full
Hour at the Pillory next adjoining to the place where he she or they shall be
Convicted as aforesaid.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons being Convict or Attaint as aforesaid, shall be from thenceforth
received as a Witness to be deposed and Sworn in any Court of Record within
this Province, until such time as the Judgment given against such Person or
persons be Reversed by Attaint or otherwise, and that upon every such Reversal
the parties grieved to recover his her or their Damages against all and every
such person o^ persons as did procure the said Judgment so Reversed, to be
given against them or any of them by Action or Actions upon his her or their
Case or Cases according to the common Course or Courses of the Laws of this
Province.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, after publication hereof, either by subornation, unlawful procurement,
sinister persuasion or means of any other, or by their own Act, Consent, or
Agreement wilfully and corruptly commit any manner of wilful Perjury by their
Deposition in any Court of Record within this Province as aforesaid, or being
examined in perpetuam Rei Memoriam,, that then every person or persons so
offending and being thereof duly convicted or attainted by the Laws of this
Province, shall for his or their Offense loose and forfeit twenty pounds
Sterling, and suffer Imprisonment the space of six Months without Bail or
Mainprize; and the Oaths of any such person or persons so offending from
thenceforth not to be received in any Court of Record within this Province,
until such time as the Judgment against any such person or persons shall be
Reversed by Attaint or otherwise as aforesaid, and that upon every such
Reversal, the party's grieved to recover their Damages as aforesaid, and if it
happen that the said Offender to Offenders so offending, shall not have Goods
and Chattels to the value of twenty pounds, then he she or they shall be set on
the Pillory next adjoining to the place where he she or they shall be convict
as aforesaid, and to have both Ears nailed, and be from thence forth to be
discredited and disabled for ever to be Sworn in any the Courts of Records
aforesaid until such time as the said Judgment be Reversed, upon which he she
or they shall recover his her or their Damages in manner and form as is before
mentioned, the one moiety of all the said fines and forfeitures to be to our
Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen for the Support of Government, and
the other moiety to such person or persons as shall be grieved hindered or
molested, by reason of any the Offense or Offenses before mentioned that will
Sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information or otherwise,
in any Court of Record within this Province, wherein no Essoyn Protection or
Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons upon whom any Process out of any the Courts of Record within this
Province shall be served to testify or depose concerning any Cause or Matter
depending in any of the same Courts relating to the premises, and having
tendered unto him or them according to their Estate or Calling such reasonable
Sum of Money or Tobacco for his and their Cost and Charges, as having Regard to
the distance of the place in that behalf is necessary to be allowed, do not
appear according to the Tenor of the said Process having not a lawful
reasonable Let or Impediment to the contrary, that then the party or party's
so making default shall forfeit and loose for every such Offense ten pounds
Sterling, and to yield to the party grieved such further Recompense as by the
direction of the Judge of that Court out of which the said Process shall be
awarded, according to the Loss and Hinderance that the party which procured the
said Process shall sustain by reason of the non appearance of the said Witness
or Witnesses the said several Sums to be recevered by the party so grieved
against the Offender or Offenders by Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information
in any of their Majesty's Courts of Record in this Province, wherein no Essoyn
Protection or wager of Law to be allowed.

An Act for Settlement of an Annual Revenue upon their Majesty's Governor
within this Province for the time being.
WHEREAS by an Act of Assembly formerly made Entitled An Act for providing a
Support for the Lord Proprietary of this Province, and likewise A Supply for
defraying the public Charges of the Government, it was by the said Act
published and declared that from and after the first Day of September then next
ensuing there should be Raised, Leavied, Collected and paid to the said Lord
Proprietary the Sum of two Shillings Sterling for every Hogshead or quantity of
a Hogshead of Tobacco which should be at any time hereafter Shipped in any Ship
or Vessel to be Exported out of this Province, on Condition that his said
Lordship should Receive his Rents and Fines for Alienation of Lands in good
Sound Merchantable Tobacco when tendered at the Rate of two pence per pound for
one moiety of of the said Imposition, the other moiety by the said Act raised
to be employed toward the maintaining a constant Magazine, and defraying other
public and necessary charges of the Government and whereas the Free Men of
this Province now Assembled, upon strict Scrutiny made into the premises, do
find his said Lordship has not only been very deficient, and at final
Charges and Expenses in maintaining a Magazine as aforesaid, but that this
Province has been obliged to defray all public Charges arising for the
Support of Government, by way of an Equal Assessment upon the Inhabitants
thereof, the several Proviso's in the before recited Act to the contrary
notwithstanding. And whereas also his said Lordship the aforesaid moiety of two
Shillings per Hogshead under pretext of maintaining a Magazine as aforesaid,
has hitherto converted the same to his own use, to the impoverishing of the
Country and defraud of the public, and being now incapacitated of complying
with what by the said Act for the said moiety of two Shillings per Hogshead is
required.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the same, That the said one shilling per hogshead for the defraying the
charges of Government aforesaid, commencing from this present Shipping as well
for such Ships or Vessels as have already cleared before the making of this
Act, as for such remaining in this Province, be Raised, Leavied, Collected and
paid unto our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queens most Excellent
Majesty's their Heirs and Successors for the Support of their Government for
the time being in and over this their Majesty's Province aforesaid, and the
Territories to the same belonging, for every Hogshead and quantity of an
Hogshead of Tobacco which has been for and during the time aforesaid, or which
hereafter shall be at any time Shipped in any Ship or Vessel to be exported out
of this Province, or any the Territory's, Islands, Ports, Rivers; Creeks, or
Places thereunto belonging as aforesaid.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the said duty and Imposition shall be from time to
time paid and satisfied by the Master or Masters of every such Ship or Vessel
respectively, inwhich any such Tobacco shall be exported upon his or their
Clearing, and taking out his or their dispatch or dispatches for every such
respective Ship or Vessel and before the departure of such Ship or Vessel
coming into this Province, shall at their first Arrival here and before their
loading on Board any Goods or Commodity's, of the Growth, Production, or
Manufacture of this Province, give good and sufficient Security to his
Excellency, or to the Officer thereunto especially appointed for the payment of
the said Duty or Imposition accordingly.

Provided always, and it is the true Intent and meaning hereof, that this Act
nor any thing herein contained shall be adjudged, construed, reputed, or taken
any thing herein expressed to the contrary notwithstanding, to disanul or make
void his Lordships Right to the other moiety of the said two Shillings per
Hogshead, to be paid in consideration of his Rents and Alienation Money, in
Tobacco at two pence per pound during the term of his Natural Life; (but that
the same be kept and hereby preserved to his Lordship in as full and ample
manner as by the said Law is expressed or intended) or in the least to
discharge his Lordship of Receiving the Rents aforesaid at two pence per pound
as by the said Act is enjoined during also the term of his Natural Life nor to
discharge his Lordship from accounting for the Arrears of the one Shilling per
Hogshead for Supporting the Government, and finding Arms and Ammunition; but
that he be obliged to all the aforesaid matters aad things as fully and
strongly as if the said Law were in full Force.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Master of a
Ship or Vessel as aforesaid, at the time of his clearing shall upon Oath
declare the quality and quantity of his Loading, and that the Naval Officer by
the Governor aforesaid appointed for the time being shall and is hereby
impowerd to Administer the said Oath, and in case the said Master shall refuse
the said Oath, or upon Suspicion of having Goods on Board for which he has not
cleared,, It shall be Lawful for the said Naval Officer to Enter on Board any
such Ship or Vessel, and the same to Search for any such, Goods as aforesaid,
any thing in this Act before mentioned notwithstanding.

An Act for the preservation of several Harbors within this Province.
WHEREAS diverse persons as well the Inhabitants of this Province as Foreigners
hitherto trading in Ships of great Burden, as also in other small Vessels have
notwithstanding Laws formerly Enacted against the unloading of Ballast in the
Creeks or Harbors where they usually Ride within this Province, incontempt of
the said Laws, or by pleading Ignorance of them, notwithstanding the
Secretary's of this Province were by the said Act obliged for the time ensuing
the publication thereof to deliver unto every respective Master a Copy of the
said Law for such a Reward as by the said Law was limited and allowed, Annually
unloaded and cast out their Ballast in such Creeks and Harbors where they
usually Ride to take in their Loading, to the great damage of the chiefest and
most eminent Harbors within this Province, by reason of so great number of
Ships as yearly in them do Reside, for prevention whereof for the future,

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from and after the publication of this Act no person or persons
whatsoever, whether Inhabitant or Foreigner here Trading in Ships or Vessels of
greater or lesser Burden having a Deck, shall unload or cast out of their said
Ships or Vessels any kind of Ballast into the Harbors or Creeks where they
usually Ride; and do not lay it to the Shore, and lay it above high water mark,
shall for every such default forfeit and pay two thousand pounds of Tobacco,
the one half to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen to be employed
for the Support of Government, and the other moiety to him or them that shall
Sue for the same, to be Recovered by Action of Debt, or Information wherein no
Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That every respective Naval Officer within this
Province, or Collector for the time being, or that hereafter shall be, during
the continuance of this Act, shall be obliged at their own proper Costs, to
take out a Copy of this Act from the Office where the Original Transcript of
the Body of the Laws shall be kept Signed by the Keeper of the said Laws, and
the same affix at their respective Office Doors, to the End all Commanders and
Masters of Ships or other Vessels Decked as aforesaid may have due Cognizance
thereof on Forfeitare of two thousand pounds of Tobacco, the one half to our
Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Qeeen to be employed for the use intent
and purpose aforesaid, the other half to the Informer, to be Recovered as
aforesaid, any thing in the former Act to the contrary notwithstanding,

An Act for settling a Standard with English Weights and Measures in the
Several and Respective Counties within this Province.
WHEREAS daily Experience shows that much Fraud and Deceit is practiced in this
Province of Maryland, by false Weights and Measures for prevention whereof for
the future,

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That no Inhabitant or Trader hither, shall buy or sell or otherwise make
use of in Trading any other Weights and Measures then are used and made
according to the Statute of Henry the VII. King of England in that case made
and Provided, and for discovery of abuses of this nature, Be It Enacted that
the Justices of the several County Courts shall from time totime, and as often
as need shall require appoint some able or discreet Person in their County
living and residing convenient for the County to take care of, look after, and
preserve the standard weights and Measures that at present are remaining in
their respective County's, which persons so by the Justices appointed, are
hereby required within twelve Months after the publication of this Law at
furthest to provide all such Weights and Measures as are wanting, according to
the direction of a former Law of this Province, Entitled An Act for the
providing of a Standard with English Weights and Measures in the several and
respective County's within this Province, So that the same do contain in each
County twelve half hundred Weights, a quarter, a half quarter of an hundred, a
seven pound weight, four pound, two pound, and one pound, together with six
Stamps for the marking and stamping of Stilliards and Weights the said several
Stamps to be marked according to the direction of the abovesaid' Act, and
Caecil County to be marked with the Letter K. and also Brass measure of Ell and
Yard to be Sealed in England, and likewise a Sealed Bushed, half Bushel, Peck,
and Gallon of Winchester measure, with a Gallon, Pottle, Quart, Pint and half
a Pint of Wine measure, with three burnt Sramps for the wooden measures and
three other Stamps for the Pewter measure, such person or persons so appointed,
and procuring the same or what is wanting to make good the several Standards
aforesaid, to be allowed and paid their charges and disburstments in the County
Leavy for the same, to which Standard all persons whether Inhabitants or
Foreigners, are to repair and bring their Stilliards with which they receive
Tobacco yearly, and in every year to be tried stamped and numbered, for which
they are to pay to such person keeping the Standard aforesaid two Shillings for
every time such Stilliards shall be tried and stamped as aforesaid, and every
person or persons shall have their Barrels which are to contain five Bushels at
least, together with their Bushel, half Bushel, Peck, Gallon, Pottle, Quart and
Pint if they make use of the same or any of them in buying or selling by,
shall likewise have them tried and stamped at the Standard aforesaid, for which
they shall pay for the Barrel one Shilling, and for all other measures six
pence a piece, under the penalty of one thousand pounds of Tobacco to any
person refusing or neg lecting the yearly trying and stamping of his Stilliards
as aforesaid, and the Sum of five hundred pounds of Tobacco to any person
selling by any of the measures aforesaid refusing or neglecting to have them
tried and stamped as aforesaid, the one half of which Forfeitures to be to the
use of the poor of the Parish in which the Offender shall dwell or reside, the
other half to the Informer or Informers to be recovered in any Court of Record
within this Province etc. And if any person or persons shall refuse to pay any
Tobacco by such Stilliards tried and stamped as aforesaid, and shall thereby
compel the Owner of the same to have them tried over again within the year, if
the Stilliards are true, such person so refusing or compelling as aforesaid,
shall pay for the trying the fame, but if not the Owner of the Stilliards to
pay for the same, and if any person or persons having the keeping of such
Standard as aforesaid shall neglect or refuse to supply the defects of the
same, as is before expressed, and also to provide a Standard where there is none,
such persons so neglecting and refusing shall be fined two thousand pounds of
Tobacco to the uses aforesaid, and be recovered as aforesaid etc.

An Act against Excessive Usury.
BE It Enacted by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and consent of this present general Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that no person or persons whatsoever within this Province, whether
Inhabitant or Foreigner, upon any contract, shall from and after the end of
this present Sessions of Assembly, take exact directly or indirectly for Loan
of any Money, Wares, Merchandises or other Commodity's whatsoever, to be paid in
Money above the value of Six Pounds for the forbearance of one Hundred Pounds
for one Year, and so after that rate for a greater or lesser Sum, or for a
longer or shorter time, nor shall any person or persons whatsoever within this
Province as aforesaid, from and after the time aforesaid, take directly or
indirectly for Loan of any Tobacco's Wares, Merchandises or other Commodity's
for one Year, to be paid in Tobacco, or other Comodity's of this Province,
above the value of eight pounds of Tob acco for the forbearance of one hundred
pounds of Tobacco, and aftert that rate for a greater or lesser Sum, or for a
longer or shorter time. And that all Bonds, Contracts, and Assurances
whatsoever made after the time aforesaid, for payment of any principal Money or
Tobacco, Goods or Commodity's aforesaid, to be lent or covenanted to be
performed, upon or for any Usury; whereupon, or whereby there shall be reserved
above the rate of six pounds in the hundred for Money as aforesaid, and above
eight pounds in the hundred for Tobacco or other Goods and Commodity's as
aforesaid shall be utterly void, and that all and every person and persons
whatsoever which after the time aforesaid, shall upon any Contract to be made,
take, accept and receive by ways or means of any corrnpt Bargain, Loan,
Exchange, Chievezance, Shift or Interest of any Wares, Merchandises, or other
thing or things whatsoever, or by any deceitful ways or means, or by any Covin
Engine or deceitful Conveyance for the forbearance, or giving day of payment
for one whole Year, of and for their Money, Tobacco, Goods or Commodity's
aforesaid, above the Sum of Money or quantity of Tobacco aforesaid, for the
forbearance aforesaid, shall forfeit and loose for every such Offense the
treble value of the Money, Tobacco, Wares, Merchandises and other things, so
lent, bargained, sold, exchanged and shifted as aforesaid, the one half of the
said Fine and Forfeiture to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen
their Heirs and Suecessors for the Support of this Government, the other half
to him or them that shall Sue for the same, to be Recovered in any Court of
Record of this Province, by Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information, wherein
no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

An Act directing the manner of Electing and Summoning Delegates and
Representatives to Serve in Succeeding Assembly's.
FORASMUCH as the Chiefest and only Foundation and Support of any Kingdom,
State or Commonwealth is the Providing, Enacting, and Establishing good and
wholesome Laws for the well Ruling and Government thereof, and also upon any
necessary and emergent Occasions to Raise and Leavy Money for the defraying the
Charges of the said Government and Defense thereof, neither of which according
to the Constitution of this Province can be made, ordained, established or
raised, but by and with the Consent of the Free Men of this Province, by their
feveral Delegates and Representatives by them freely nominated chosen and
elected to serve for their several City's and County's in a General Assembly:
And forasmuch as the safest and best Rule for this Province to follow in
electing such Delegates and Representatives, is the Presidents of proceeding in
Parliament in England as near as the Constitution of this Province will admit,
the Governor, Council, and Delegates of this present General Assembly do
humbly pray that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and by the Authority of
the same, That for the future, when and as often as his Excellency the
Governor of this Province for the time being shall upon any Accident and
urgent Affair of this Province think fit and convenient to call and convene an
Assembly, and to send Writts for Election of Burgesses and Delegates to serve
in such Assembly, the Form of the said Writ shall be as follows.

William and Mary by the Grace of God of England Scotland France and Ireland
King and Queen Defenders of the Faith etc. To the Sherrif of County greeting,
These are to Authorize and Empower you immediately upon Receipt hereof, to call
together four or more Commissioners of your County, with the Clerk, who are
hereby required to Sit as a Court, and during their Sitting, by Virtue of your
Office to make or cause to be made public Proclamation, thereby giving notice
to all the Freemen of your said County, who have within your said County a
Freehold of fifty Acres of Land, or a visible Estate of forty pounds Sterling
at the least, requiring them to appear at the next County Court to be holden
for your County at a certain day within a reasonable time after such
Proclamation made for Electing and Choosing of Deputy's and Delegates to serve
in your County in a general Assembly, to be holden at the City of St. Mary's
the day of at which time of Proclamation aforesaid,, the said Freemen so
required to appear, or the major part of such of them as shall then appear,
shall and may and are hereby Authorized and Required to Elect and Choose four
several and sufficient Freemen of your County, each of them having a Freehold
of fifty Acres of Land, or visible Estate of forty pounds Sterling at the
least within your County; and you shall give to each of them severally and
respectively, by four several and respective Indentures under their Hands and
Seals to be Deputy's and Delegates for your County at the said next General
Assembly, to do and consent to those things, which then by the favor of God
shall happen to be Ordained by the Advice and Consent of the great Council of
this Province, concerning such Occasions and Affairs as shall Relate to the
Government, State and Defense of this Province. But we will not in any case
that you, or any other Sherrif in our said Province be Elected, which said
Indentures shall be between you the said Sherrif of the one part, and the said
Freemen Electing on the other part, and shall bear date the same Day upon which
the said Election shall be made, and that upon such Election, you the Sherrif
shall so soon as conveniently may be, Certify and Transmit to the Chancellor
of this Province for the time being one part of the said several and respective
Indentures, close Sealed up under your Hand and Seal, and directed to the
Governor of this Province, and also to the Chancellor; and the other part of
the said Indentures you are to keep for your Justification. Witness Lyonel
Copley Esquire Capt' General and Chief Governor of this Province etc.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That two Citizens to
Serve in the said Assembly for the City of St. Marys, to be Nominated, Elected,
Chosen and Appointed by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Common Council as
heretofore has been usual.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the aforesaid four
Delegates to be Elected in the Respective County's within this Province, and
the ^ Cityzens of the City of St. Mary's, be and are hereby bound and obliged
to attend the time and place of the meeting of such Assembly without any
further Writ or Summons to be to them sent, under the penalty of such Fines as
shall be by the House of Assembly imposed upon them, unless upon sufficient
Excuse to be admitted by the said House of Assembly their Absence to be
dispensed withal, any Law Statute Usuage or Custom to the contrary
notwichstanding.

And Be It also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Sherrif that shall
Refuse and Neglect to make Return of the Delegates so Elected by Indenture as
aforesaid, before the Day of Sitting of such Assembly, or that shall make any
undue or illegal Returns of such Elections, shall for every Fault be fined one
thousand pounds Sterling, the one half for their Majesty's for the Support of
the Government, and the other half to the Informer, or him or them that shall
Sue for the same, to be Recovered in any Court of Record in this Province,
wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act or any thing herein contained shall not
Extend to be Construed to Exclude any County or County's, City or City's
Borough or Buroughs hereafter by their Majesty's their Heirs or buccessors to
be Elected and made within this Province, from the Liberty of such Elections of
Delegates and Representatives as is before Expressed; But that such Writ as
aforesaid shall upon calling every General Assembly for this Province for the
future, to the Sherrif of every such County when the same shall be erected and
made into a County as aforesaid, And to the Mayor Recorder and Aldermen of
every such City or Borough Commanding of such Sherrif or Mayor Recorder and
Aldermen to cause four Freemen of the said County, and two Freemen of the said
City or Borough qualified as in the said Writ is expressed, to Serve as
Delegates and Represemtatives of the fame County City or Borough in the
General Assembly then next ensuing, which said four Delegates for every such
County, and two for the City and Borough shall from henceforth be Reputed and
Esteemed to be Members of the House of the General Assembly of this Province,
any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also that no Ordinary Keeper within this Province during the term of
his keeping Ordinary, shall be Elected, Chosen, or Serve as a Deputy or
Representative in the said general Assembly, so to be hereafter Called,
Convened and appointed as aforesaid.

An Act of Repeal of all Laws heretofore made in this Province, and Confirming
all Laws made this General Assembly.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That all Laws heretofore made within this Province be, and for ever
hereby stand Repealed, Annulled and Void, and that all Laws now made and
assented to this present General Assembly (and no other) be and remain in full
Force and Power, according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof; And that the
same be accounted and esteemed as the Body of the Laws of this Province, and no
other heretofore made.

Provided always, That this Law shall not Extend, or be Construed to make void
any persons Right by Acts of Naturalization, or any private Acts heretofore
made relating to any private persons, but that the same be hereby kept and
preserved to the E according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, any thing
herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for quieting of Possessions.
FORASMUCH as a good and beneficial Law Entitled an Act for quieting of
Possessions, was made the seven and twentieth Day of March Anno Domini 1671.
in this Province, which by the use thereof has been found very much conducing
to the Benefit of the people of the said Province.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the same, That all Sales, Gifts and Grants at any time before the said XXVII
Day of March Anno Domini 1671. and not after of any Lands Tenements or
Hereditaments within this Province, by any person ^^ Persons whatsoever, that
Right had to Sell, give or grant such Lands Tenement or Hereditaments made by
Writing only, with or without Seal, shall (...) hereafter be accounted good
and vailable in Law, to bar the Heirs or (...) of such Vendors, Donors or
Grantors any Error in the Form only of such Writing to the contrary
notwithstanding. And forasmuch as diverse Assignments of P^^tents written on the
back side of such Pattent for Land are now worn out, and a^^so many other Sales
in Paper either worn out, or quite lost, for which the purchase Money has been
bona Fide paid.

Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, That all Sales, Gifts or Grants at any time before the Day
and Year aforesaid, made by persons that Right had as aforesaid, if either the
Sale. Gift, Grant or Payment bona Fide can be proved by Witness, such Sale
shall for ever hereafter be accounted good and available in Law to bar the
Heirs and Executors of such Vendors, Donors, or Grantors, or either persons
claiming Dower from such Vendor, Donor or Grantor; any Law Usuage or Custom to
the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

An Act prohibiting Commissioners, Sherrifs, Clarks, and deputy Clarks to plead
as Attorneys in their Respective County Courts.
WHEREAS many Inconveniency's have happened to diverse persons within this
Province, by means of Commissioners, Sherrifs, and Clarks pleading as Attorneys
in their Respective Courts wherein they bear Office, for prevention whereof for
the future,

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the same, That from and after the publication of this Act no Commissioner,
Sherrif, or deputy Sherrif, Clark or deputy Clark of those Courts wherein they
bear Office, shall plead as Attorney for or in behalf of any person or persons
at that time residing or being within this Province upon the penalty of three
thousand pounds of Tobacco, the one half thereof to their said Majesty's for
the Support of Government, the other moiety to the Informer, or him or them
that shall Sue for the same, to be recovered in any Court or Courts of Record
within this Province, by Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn
Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed

An Act against the Importation of Convicted Felons into this Province.
WHEREAS several Masters of Ships, Merchants, Sailors and others, having used
to import into this Province several Notorious Felons and Malefactors which in
several of their Majesty's Courts have been Convicted of Crimes and Felony's as
aforesaid, and afterward procured by Masters of Ships, Merchants, Sailors and
others out of the Common Goal to Import into this Province, and here to sell
and dispose of such Felons and Malefactors as Servants,, to the geaat prejudice
and grievance of the good people of this Province, for prevention whereof for
the future,

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from and after the publication hereof, at every Office and Place
where Ships and Vessels shall be appointed to be Entered and Cleared, the Clerk
of such Office, or persons appointed for the Clearing and ^^^^ing of Ships and
Vessels shall administer an Oath to every Master of a Ship when he comes to
Enter, that he shall declare whether any Servant on Board his Ship be Felons
Convict as aforesaid, and if it shall appear by his Oath that they are such,
then the said Officer shall take good Security of the said Master, not to sell
or suffer the same to be sold, given or otherwise disposed of in this Province,
but shall transport them and every of them out of this Province, before he or
his said Ship shall depart out of this Province, or in his own Ship when the
same departs this Province.

And It is further Enacted by and with the Advice and Consent aforesaid. That
no Master of a Ship, Merchant, Sailor, or any pother erson or persons
whatsoever, shall presume to import into this Province any such convicted
Felons or Malefactors whatsoever, to sell, pay, give, or in any other manner to
dispose of, either to their own Plantations (if any they have) or to any
Inhabitant in this Province whatsoever.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Anthority aforesaid, That if any Master of a
Ship, Merchant, Sailor or other person whatsoever, from and after the
publication of this Act, shall import and bring into this Province such
convicted persons or malefacters and shall give, sell, pay or any other ways
d^spose of unto any ^nhabitant of this Province, shall forfeit and pay for
every such convicted Felon or Malefactor so imported, sold, given, paid or any
other ways disposed of to any Inhabitant of this Province the Sum of two
thousond pounds of ^obacco, the one half to their Majesty's for the Support of
Government, the other half to the Informer, or him or them that shall Sue for
the same, to be recovered by Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn
Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

An Act for appointing Court Days in each Respective County within this
Province.
TO the Intent that Court Days may be ascertained, and that the Commissioners
within their Respective County's may know justly when to attend, BE IT ENACTED
by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Aslembly and the Authority of the same, that
for the future St. Marys. Baltemore and Dorchester County Courts shall be held
the first Tuesday in September, November, January, March June for the Orphans;
and the first Tuesday in August. For Ann-Arurde^l, Charles, Somerset and Coecil
County's, the second Tuesday in September, November, January, March June for
the Orphans, and the 2d ^uesday in August. For Calvert and Talbot County's, the
third Tuesday in September, November, January March June for the Orphans, and
the third Tuesday in August. For Kent County the fourth Tuesday in September,
November, January, March June for the Orphans, and the fourth Tuesday in August.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Commissioner
that shall not appear and attend at such place appointed for the Court to be
held in his respective County at the time limited and appointed, shall be fined
two hundred pounds of Tobacco, for and toward the Pillory Stocks and whipping
Post for the Execution of Justice, or to be disposed of as the Court then
Sitting shall think fit, unless such Commissioner or Commissioners make Lawful
Excuse to be allowed of by the Court, and forasmuch as it happens many times in
the Winter Season especially, that but two or three of the Commissioners do
meet and attend upon the Days set and appointed as aforesaid, whereby all
Process made Returnable that Court do fall and abate, and the several Plaintifs
are forced to Sue out new Writts to the great damage and delay of Suitors.

Be It Therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any two or three of
the Commissioners, whereof one to be of the Quorum meeting as aforesaid, be
hereby fully Authorized and Empowered to adjourn the Court to some short time
after as to them shall seem meet, and that no Suit for want of a full Court do
fall or abate, but the same shall be continued till the next Court, to be held
according to such adjournment as aforesaid, and that if the first Day appointed
by this Act for the holding the several and respective Courts be not time
enough to do the business in that Court depending, then the Justices of such
Court are hereby Empowered to adjourn from Day to Day until such time as the
business returnable and tryable in that Court shall be finished, and whereas
there have some Scruples arisen by the Commissioners of the respective County
Courts, whether they shall or may do any other business in every June Court in
every respective Year, then what was concerning Orphans, the true Intent and
Meaning of this Act is, that the Commissioners of every respective County Court
may and ought to do, hear, judge and determine any business depending in the
said Court, at the same June Court between any persons whatsoever, as well as
relating to any Orphans Bufiness.

An Act for the puhlication of Marriages.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That all persons who shall desire Marriage shall apply themselves either
to a Minister, Pastor or Magistrate for the coneracting thereof.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all persons within
this Province intending Marriage, shall make publication thereof either at the
Church, Chapel, County Court or Meeting House next where they dwell, and that
at such time when such Church, Chapel or Meeting House shall be full, and
thereby capable to take cognizance thereof, and that it shall and may be Lawful
upon such Certificate had from the Minister, Pastor or County Court when such
application shall have been made, of three Weeks after the said publication,
for either Minister, Pastor ot Magistrate to join in Marriage such persons
aforesaid; and if any person shall presume to contract Marriage without such
publication made, and Certificate thereof had as aforesaid, or without
particular License from the Governor for the time being, do privately within
the Limits of this Province contract Marriage, every person so contracted or
married shall be liable to a Fine of one thousand pounds of Tobacco, and every
such Minister, Pastor or Magistrate joining in Marriage any persons without
such publication or License or any ways infringing this Act, shall be liable to
a Fine of five thousand pounds of Tobacco, the one half of the said Fines to
our Lord and Lady the King and Queen their Heirs and Successers for the Support
of Government, and the other half to the Informer, to be recovered by Bill
Plaint Action of Debt or Information in any Court of Record, wherein no Essoyn
Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

And Be It further Enacted, that all such Marriages as shall not be made before
some Minister, Pastor or Magistrate with five sufficient Witnesses at least,
according to the form aforementioned, shall and are hereby declared null and
void.

And Be It further Enacted by the Authority before said, that all Ministers
Pastors and Magistrates, who according to the Law of this Province do usually
join people in Marriage, shall join them in manner and form as is set down and
expressed in the Liturgy of the Church of England, which being finished, the
Minister, Pastor or Magistrate shall say, (I being hereunto by Law Authorized
do pronounce you Lawful Man and Wife)

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Minister,
Paster, or Magistrate by Virtue of this Act are empowered to ask, demand and
receive from the Party's so married or joined together the Sum of one hundred
pounds of Tobacco.

MARYLAND ss.

At a Session of Assembly begun and held at the City of St. Mary's in their
Majesty's Province of Maryland the 21st. Day of September in the VI Year of of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God
of England Scotland France and Ireland King and Queen Defenders of the Faith
etc. Anno Domine 1694. His Excellency FRANCIS NICHOLSON Esquire being then
Governor in Chief and Captain General, these following Laws were Enacted, to
the Honor and Glory of GOD, and welfare of this his Majesty's Province.

An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, and Advancement of the Natives of
this Province.
FORASMUCH as that it has frequently happened that persons coming into this
your Majesty's Province of Maryland, either out of Necessity or hopes of
Advancement, have been introduced into the chief places and Offices of trust
and profit upon private recommendation or particular Promise beforehand, made
by such person or persons in whose Power and Authority the disposing of, and
preferring of and to such places and Offices of Trust and Profit aforesaid, did
remain to the great discouragement of those persons that are qualified for the
Execution of any the said places and Offices aforesaid, who being Inhabitants
thereof have at all times as occasion required adventured their Lives and
Fortunes for the Defense of this your Majesty's Dominions, against all
Domestic Insurrections and Indian Incursions, that have hitherto been made or
attempted to be made to their no small Charge and Expense; therefore we your
Majesty's most Humble and most Loyal Subjects do humbly pray that it may be
Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with
the Advice and Consent of this gresent General Assembly and the Authority of
the same that from and after the publication hereof, no person or persons
whatsoever coming into this Province, and who have not made it their Seat of
Residency for the full space and time of three Years, shall have, hold, possess
or enjoy any place or Office of Trust or Profit within the same, either by
himself or Deputy, except such person or persons as shall have your Majesty's
immediate Commission for any such place or Office aforesaid, as also such
person or persons now possessed of any such places or Offices as aforesaid, but
that all and every your Majesty's principal Officers within this Province,
having Power, Pre-eminence, or Authority, by virtue of any Commission from your
most Sacred Majesty's to him or them granted, to dispose of any such Offices or
places as aforesaid, may upon vacancy of any place or Office whereof they have
Right to dispose, or to prefer any person or persons thereinto, being obliged
to make Choice of such person or persons as they shall think most worthy and
capable of executing of such place or Office as aforesaid out of the
Inhabitants of this your Majesty's Province, and who have been Resident therein
for and during the time and term aforesaid, (except before excepted) any Costom
or Usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be It further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons whatsoever, having your most Sacred Majesty's Commission to exercise
any Office within this Province, shall be obliged actually to inhabit within
this Province, and exercise the same in his own proper person, and not by any
Deputy or Deputy's.

An Act prohibiting all Masters of Ships or Vessels or any other Persons from
transporting or conveying away any person or persons out of this Proince
without Passes.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from and after the publication hereof, any person or persons
whatsoever intending to depart this Province,, shall first give notice of his
her or their intended departure, by setting up his her or their Name or Names
at the Secretary's Office the full space of three Months, that if in the time
aforesaid, no person shall under write the said person or persons so setting
his or their respective Name or Names as aforesaid, It shall then be Lawful for
the Governor, Keeper of the great Seal, or Secretary of this Province for the
time being, to Sign a Pass to any such person or persons to depart this
Province, for which Pass the Party shall pay to the person signing the same the
Sum of two Shillings and six pence Sterling, and if any person or persons upon
any sudden or emergent occasion are necessitated to depart this Province, not
having set up his her or their Name or Names at the Secretary's Office
aforesaid, then such person or persons giving good and sufficient Security to
the Governout, Keeper of the great Seal or Secretary to discharge and pay all
Debts and Accounts whatsoever, due and owing from the said persons to any of
the Inhabitants, then the said person or persons so departing may have a Pass
as aforesaid.

And Be It Further Enacted, that any Master of Ships or Vessels or other
persons whatsoever, that shall transport or convey out of this Province, by
Land or Water any Freeman being indebted by Bill, Bond, Account or otherwise to
any Inhabitant thereof without such pass under the Hand of the Governor,
Chancellor or Secretary aforesaid, shall be liable to satisfy all such Debts,
Engagements and Damages to the person or persons to whom such Debt or Damages
respectively shall be due within this Province, except the same be otherwise
satisfied, or that the Transportor or Conveyor away of such person or persons
procure such person or persons to return again in one Month after, whereby he
may be liable to Justice here, and every such person as aforesaid as shall
transport or convey away out of this Province any Servant or Servants being
Servants here by Condition, for Wages, Indenture, or custom of the Country,
shall be liable for to pay and satisfy unto the Master or Owner of such
Servant or Servants so carried away all such Damages as he or they shall make
appear to be justly due, to such Master or Owner for want of such Servant or
Servants as the Court before whom such cause shall be tried shall think fit;
And whereas several evil minded people inhabiting and residing at the Head of
the Bay, have customarily set persons over the Head of the Bay, and Susquehanah
River, being either Felons, Debtors, or Runaway Servants from the more remoter
parts of this Province, for some small advantage they have in buying or getting
such Money, Goods, or Apparel as such persons so absenting or flying from
Justice aforesaid have with them commonly Money, Goods, or Apparel by them
seloniously purloyned from their Masters and other Owners, by which means they
may have easy Access to another Government, in retardation of Justice, and to
the great Damage of such Creditors, Masters or Owners aforesaid.

Be It therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that from and after the publication hereof, no person or
persons inhabiting or being at the Head of the Bay, or in any other part of
this Province shall transport or convey, or cause to be transported or conveyed
any person or persons over Susquehanah River aforesaid, or any other part of
the Bay above the North side of Sassafrass River on the Eastern side of the Bay
not having passes so procured as aforesaid, or a Certificate from under the
Hands of two Justices of the Peace of that County where such person or persons
intending to travel shall inhabit and the County Seal affixed thereunto,
certifying the freedom of such persons, and that he she or they are clear to
the best of their knowledge from any engagements impediting their traveling as
aforesaid, on penalty of answering all such Debt or Damages to Creditors,
Masters or other Owners of Servants, to be recovered as by this Law is
provided, against such as shall actually set them out of this Provine^, any
matter or thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act Confirming and making valid the last Will and Testament of Augustine
Herman late of Caecil County Gent' as it now stands Recorded in the Commissary
Generals Office of this Province.

An Act for the Naturalization of Peter Ferdinando and his Children of Andrew
Imbert, Claudius Dutitree, Gerardus Weessels and James his Son, Abraham
Ambrose, Lewis de Roch Brune, John de Vagha Herman Van Burkelo, Nicolaes de la
Montaigne, Henderick Sluyter, and Jacob Sluiter Junior

An Act touching Coopers, and the Gauge of Tobacco Hogsheads.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty' by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly ands the Authority of the
same, that all Tobacco Hogsheads that shall hereafter be made within this
Province, shall be of the size of 48 Inches in length, and 32 Inches in the
head, and not under the size of 46 Inches in length, and 31 Inches in the head,
and that what Cooper or Coopers, or other person or persons that shall make
Tobacco Hogsheads and do not observe the Gauge aforesaid shall forfeit the said
Cask, and upon complaint thereof made the matter of fact being proved by two
good and sufficient Evidences, it shall and may be Lawful for the Justices of
that respective County Court where such person or persons do inhabit to give
Judgment thereupon to the party or parties grieved, and that any Cooper or
Coopers person or persons whatsoever, that shall agree with any the Inhabitants
of this Province, and undertake with him or them to set up or make his or their
Tobacco Hogsheads and Casks, shall and are hereby enjoined to set up and finish
one half of the said Tobacco Hogsheads and Casks by the tenth Day of October
next ensuing the undertaking the making of such Tobacco Hogsheads and Casks as
aforesaid, and the other mojety or half part of the said Tobacco Hogsheads and
Casks to set up and finish by or before the tenth Day of December next ensuing
such Contract as aforesaid, and if any Cooper or Coopers, person or persons
whatsoever within this Province, so agreeing and undertaking the same as
aforesaid, shall wilfully or otherwise neglect to make, set up, complete and
finish the said Tobacco Hogsheads and Cask aforesaid, according to such Gauge
and by such time as aforesaid, he shall forfeit the Sum of one hundred pounds
of Tobacco for every Tun of Cask and Tobacco Hogsheads left at the time and
times aforesaid unmade, not set up, or unfinished, to be recovered in the
several and respective County Courts where the party or paties, Cooper or
Coopers do at that time dwell or reside, unless the Cooper or Coopers, person
or persons agreeing or undertaking the said work or task aforesaid shall or can
before the Commissioners of such County Court make it sufficiently appear that
he was hindered in performing the said agreement by fikness or some other Lawful
Impedement, which Plea shall be adjudged of by the said Commissioners of the
several and respective County's aforesaid.

And Be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, than from and after the publication hereof, all Merchants,
Traders, Planters and other Inhabitants of this Province making any Cropp of
Tobacco shall provide, and cause to be fallen and fawed by the last Day of
April by the furthest every Year Respectively, all such Timber as he intended
or allotted for the making Tobacco Hogsheads to the intent the same may be well
feasoned, under the penalty of one hundred pounds of Tobacco for every Hogshead
he or they shall have set up or made of any other Timber than what shall be
seasoned as aforesaid, one half to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and
Queen, their Heirs and Successors for the Support of this Government, the other
half to him or them that shall Sue for the same, to be Recovered in any Court
of Record within this Province, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to
be allowed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that no Tobacco Hogshead or Cask for Tobacco shall be
set up or made by any Cooper or Coopers whatsoever of any other Timber then
what is herein before provided, and the same to be hewn and riven into staves
and heading by the last Day of July in every Year respectively, and that such
Cooper, Coopers or other persons undertaking to set up such Tobacco Hogsheads
as aforesaid, do at the completing and finishing of the said Hogsheads at each
respective House, burn in the Bulge of each respective Hogshead by him set up
as aforesaid with a brand Iron the two first Letters of his Name, and every
Hogshead by him so branded to weigh, and the true weight thereof with marking
Irons to cut into the Bulge aforesaid, on penalty and forfeiture of the Loss of
his Labor for every Cask or Hogshead not branded as aforesaid to the Imployer
of such Cooper, as also the Sum of one hundred pounds of Tobacco for every
Hogshead by him falsely weighed or marked as aforesaid, one half thereof to our
Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen their Heirs and Successors for the
use aforesaid, the other half to him or them that shall Sue for the same to be
recovered as aforesaid.

Provided that this Act nor any thing therein contained shall be construed or
taken to prejudice any Cooper or Coopers, or other person or persons from
undertaking to set up Tobacco Hogsheads as aforesaid for any ^rror or Mistake
in the weight of each Respective Hogshead by him so weighed and marked as
aforesaid, not exceeding five pounds weight in the Hogshead; and that all and
every person and persons whatsoever that shall undertake to make his or their
own Cask, shall and are hereby obliged to brand, mark and weigh every
respective Hogshead by him so made, under the same penalty and forfeiture as is
beforementioned and expressed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Anthority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that every Master or other Owner of any Servants or
Negro^s Coopers, or that shall employ any Servant or Negro to set up his her or
their Cask or Tobacco Hogsheads, such Master or other Owner shall be obliged to
fall, saw, rive, hew, and set up such their Tobacco Hogsheads within the
several and respective times as by this Law is before limited and appointed,
and them when finished to brand mark and weigh under the same penalties and
forfeitures as is before provided against Coopers and other persons undertaking
to set up Tobacco Hogsheads as aforesaid, In consideration of all which, the
Receiver of any Hogshead of Tobacco shall pay and allow to the Owner or Owners
thereof for each Hogshead Received the Sum of forty pounds of Tobacco,
deducting out of the gross Weight the true Weight of each Hogshead marked on
the Bulge aforesaid and no more, any other Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for Confirmation of all Proceedings Judicial Military and Civil, from
the death of his Excellency Lyonel Copley Esquire their Majesty's late Governor
and Capt' General of Maryland etc. unto the Arrival of his present Excellency
Francis Nicholson Esquire the present Governor thereof.
WHEREAS upon the death of Lyonel Copley Esquire late Governor of Maryland, Sir
Edmund Andross Knight Governor of Virginia, in their Majesty's Names did
assume and take upon him the Government and Chief Command of this Province, by
virtue of a Commission from their Majesty's, bearing date the third Day of
March Anno Domini 1691. in the fourth Year of their Majesty's Reign under their
Signet and Sign Mannual, wherein and whereby their Majesty's were pleased by
those Presents to constitute and appoint the said Sir Edmund Andross upon the
Death of Capt' Francis Nicholson, and in the absence of the said Lyonel Copley
(and not otherwise) to be Commander in chief in and over this Province, and by
virtue thereof the said Sir Edmund Andross in their Majesty's Names by his
Proclamation bearing date the 25th. day of September 1693. in the fifth Year of
their Majesty's Reign, Reciting that whereas by the death of the said Lyonel
Copley their Majesty's late Capt' General and Governor in Chief in and over
this their Province of Maryland, and the absence of Capt' Francis Nicholson
their Majesty's Leievetenant Governor of the same, the chief Command and
Government of the said Province was committed to the charge and conduct of him
the said Sir Edmund Andross Knight their Majesty's Leivetenant and Governor
General of their Colony and Dominion of Virginia, he the said Sir Edmund
Andross thereby did proclaim and declare that all Officers civil and military
should hold and continue their several and respective Places and Offices by the
same as in and by the said Commission and Proclamation remaining upon Record in
the Council Records more at large may appear; And because upon reading and
inquiring into a certain Commission of their Majesty's bearing date the 2^th.
Day of February Anno Domini 1691. to Capt' Francis Nicholson aphointing and
cou^t^^ing the said Francis Nicholson Lieutenant Governor of and in this
Province, and upon the death of the said Lyonel Copley to exercise and execute
the several Powers and Authority's in the said Commission to the said Governor
Copley, it appears to us that their Majesty's had made express provision that
the said Lievt' Governor Nicholson upon the death of the said Lyonel Copley
Esquire should Succeed to the Chief Command in this Province, and if not present
upon the place at the death of the said Lyonel Copley, that the Council should
take upon them the Government of the Province, whereof the first in Council to
preside; neither does the said Commission to the said Sir Edmund Andross
sufficiently Authorize the said Sir Edmund Andross to take upon him the
Government aforesaid, but upon the death of the said Francis Nicholson Esquire and
absence of the said Lyonel Copley Esquire, neither does the Proclamation aforesaid
of the said Sir Edmund Andross agree with the said Commission in Reciting that
his Access to the Government was by the death or absence of the said Francis
Nicholson Esquire, which in the said Commission is expressly confined to the death
of the said Francis Nicholson and not absence, neither did the said Sir Edmund
Andross take such Oath for observing of a certain Act of Parliament made in the
XII. Year of the Reign of King Charles the II. of Blessed Memory, Entitled an
Act for the Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation before his
Entrance into the Government aforesaid, as by the said Statute is commanded,
enjoined, and required of all Governors and Commanders in chief of any their
Majesty's Lands, Islands, Plantations and Territory's, nor administer or
direct, the same to be administered to Colonel Nicholas Greenbury by left him as
President, nor Sir Thomas Lawrence at his next coming, and because also that by
the Access of the said Sir Edmund Andross to the said Government, by his
Authority diverse Acts and Actions Judicial and Civil have been done, executed
and performed in Courts of Record, and otherwise in this Province; which for
the Reasons aforesaid appear precautious and doubtful: In tender Contemplation
whereof, and for the Ease and Quiet, Peace and Settlement of your Majesty's
most Loyal and Dutyful Subjects of this your Majesty's Province, they humbly
pray and befeech your Royal Majesty's that it may be Enacted.

And BE IT ENACTED by your Sacred Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent
of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That all manner
of Actions, Suits, Causes and Proceedings in all and every their Majesty's
Courts within this Province, either by holding, setting, adjourning,
continuing, or other proceeding, to hearing and determining any Suit, Action,
Motion, Petition or other Matter whatsoever, shall be had, taken, accepted and
reputed as valid in Law or Equity, and of absolute Force Efficacy and Strength
in Law to all Intents, Purposes, and Constructions as any other Judicial
Proceedings by any other of their Majesty's more ample Commissions for the due
Government of this Province heretofore granted: And all and every Officer and
Minister Civil or Military in this their Majesty's Province, shall and are
hereby confirmed, established and ratysied; for in or by Reason of any Legal
Acting and Proceeding in their Several and Respective Offices Places and
Stations, from the time of the Access of the said Sir Edmund Andross Knight, to
his Excellency's the present Governor Francis Nicholson Esquire his arrival and
taking the Government upon him, any Clause, Imperfection, or want of Authority
in onto the said Sir Edmund Andross or the Commission aforesaid, to the said
Sir Edmund Andross notwithstanding. Provided that nothing in this Act be taken
and costrued to justify Sir Edmund Andross's taking and disposing of the
public Revennues for the Support of the Government of this Province, or debar
the Assembly or any person whatsoever of their right or claims to the same
which he took.

An Act ascertaining the Expenses of the Delegates of Assembly, and
Commissioners of the Provincial and County Courts.
FOR the ascertaining, limitting and allowing unto theseveral and respective
Deputy's and Delegates that Serve or shall Serve in the General Assembly's of
this Province, and of the several and respective Commissioners o^ the
Provincial and County Courts of this Province such Sum and Sums of Tobacco as
is hereby thought necessary and sufficient for the defraying their Charges in
attending such Assembly's and Courts as aforesaid.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That all such Delegates and Burgesses of Assembly's shall be allowed the
Sum of one hundred and forty pounds of Tobacco a Day, during the time they
shall attend such Assembly's, and no more, (besides their Itinerent Charges) to
be paid and allowed by them out of the public Leavy's of this Province, and
the several and respective Commissioners of the Provincial Courts for the
defraying their Charges and Expenses during the time they shall Sit in, and
attend such Courts, the Sum of one hundred and foury pounds of Tobacco per Day
and no more, besides their Itinerent Charges to be paid them likewise out of
the public Leavy of this Province as aforesaid, and the several Commissioners
of the County Courts shall be allowed for the defraying of their Expenses
during the time they shall attend such Courts as aforesaid the Sum of Eighty
pounds of Tobacco per Day and no more, which Sum of Eighty pounds of Tobacco as
aforesaid the said Commissioners of the County Courts are hereby empowered to
Assess and Leavy where such Commissioners shall Serve as aforesaid, for
defraying the Experces aforesaid and no more.

Provided always, and it is the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, that where
any Justices of any County Court, being a full Court, or above the number of
Seven shall agree together in Court Sitting, and consent to lessen any
allowance hereby given, or if it be to take the same totally off, it shall and
may be Lawful to such full Court to lessen and take off any part of the
allowance hereby given and settled to the Commissioners of the said County
Courts, and Entering such Rule in the Record, shall for that Year be an ubsolute
Law and Rule for every Justice of that County Court as to their Expenses, and
it shall not be Lawful to collect or raise any more Tobacco for defraying the
County Court Justices Expenses, then so much as by such Consent and Rule shall
be limited and agreed on as aforesaid, and if they see fit to make the same
Rule, or such other as they shall agree on as before said, once on every Year
during this Act, any thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding. And Be It
Further Enacted, that one Act of Assembly made at a General Assembly of this
Province, begun and held at the City of St. Mary's the tenth Day of May Anno
Dnmini 1692. Entitled An Act ascertaining the Expenses of the Commissioners of
the Provincial and County Courts, be, and is hereby utterly Repealed and made
Void.

An Act for erecting Ann-Arundel and Oxford Town into Ports and Towns.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from and after the publication hereof, the Land called the Town Land
at Seavern in Ann-Arundel County where the Town was formerly, and the Land at
Oxford in Talbot County where the Town was formerly, shall from henceforth be
Towns and Ports, and Places of Trade, where all Ships and Vessels may come to
for Entering and Clearing, to which End the Collector of that District, or his
Lawful Deputy's shall constantly Reside at the said Towns and Ports, and also
Naval Officer, or Officers or their Deputy's shall also constantly Reside
there, for giving dispatch to all Ships or Vessels coming or trading into them
Ports; and that the same Ports and Towns may be capable of being built upon and
inhabited by persons defiring to dwell and inhabit in them.

Be It Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the proclaiming
of this Act, all and every the persons named herein for Commissioners shall be
Commissioners of and for the said two Towns, and each of them, and they and
every of them shall and may execute the Powers and Authority's hereby given
them, according to the directions hereafter given and prescribed, as well for
the buying and purchasing the aforesaid Town Lands of the now Owners and
Possessors of the same, as for the Surveying and Laying out the same, and
Staking out the several Lotts to be laid out in them, to the End the length,
breadth, and extent of each Lot in each Town and Port may be known and
distinguished, (that is to say) for the said Town and Port of Ann-Arundel in
Ann-Arundel County aforesaid Major Hammond, Major Edward Dorsey, Mr. John
Bennet, Mr. John Dorsey, Mr. Henry Constable, Mr. Andrew Norwood, Mr. Phillip
Floward, Mr. James Enders, and the honorable Nicholas Greenbury Esquire. And for
the Town and Port to Talbut County in Oxford aforesaid Mr. Edward Mann, Mr.
John Edmondson, Mr. Clement Sail, Mr. John Neels, Mr. John Hawkins, Mr. Thomas
Robinns and Mr. Thomas Robinns Junior, the honorable George Roebotham, and Mr.
Thomas Smithson, and Mr. Robert Smith.

And Be it Enacted that the said Commissioners herein nominated for each
respective Town in each County aforesaid, or the major part of them, are hereby
empowered some time before 25th. Day of February Anno Domini 1694. to meet
together upon the respective Lands and Places for Towns before mentioned, then
and there treat with and agree with the Owners and all persons interested in
the said Lands, and buy and purchase of such Owners and others interested in
the said Lands one hundred Acres of the said Lands, at the discretion of the
persons aforesaid least prejuditial to the Owners, and they that purchase shall
cause the same to be Surveyed, and after Survey so made, shall cause the same
to be marked, staked, and divied into convenient Streets, Lanes, and Ally's,
with other spare places to be left on which may be a Church, Chapel, Market
House or other public Building, and the remaining part of the said one hundred
Acres to be divided into one hundred Equal Lotts, marked on some Posts or
Stakes toward the Streets or Lanes with Numbers 1 2 3 4 and so to an Hundred,
out of which Lotts the Owner of such Lands shall have the first choice for one
Lot, during the space of one Year after the said 25th. Day of February, except
his Excellency Francis Nicholson Esquire Governor of this Province, who shall have
the next immediate choice of one two or three Lotts in each, or either of the
said Towns if his Excellency so please; after which the Lotts shall be taken up
by the Inhabitants of the County's only, during six Months after laying out
the same, and if the Inhabitants shall not take up the same Lotts in the time
aforesaid, it shall be then free for any person or persons whatsoever to take
up the said Lot or Lotts, paying the Owner proportionably for the same; And in
case any person or persons shall wilfully refuse to make Sale of any such
Lands therein before mentioned, or any person or persons through Nonage,
Coverture, or non Sana Memoria or other Impediment or Dissability whatsoever,
that then the Commissioners aforesaid nominated for each respective Town, are
hereby Authorized by virtue of this Act to Issue out Warrants to the Sherrif of
the said County's, to empower him to impanel and return a Jury of Freeholders
to appear before the said Commissioners, which Jury upon their Oaths to be
administered by the said Commissioners are to inquire and assess such Damages
and Recompense as they shall think fit to be awarded to the Owners and all
persons interested, according to their several and respective Interests in the
said Land or any part thereof and what Sum of Tobacco the said Jury shall
adjudge the said Land to be worth, shall be paid to the said Owners and Persons
interested, by such person or persons as shall take up the said respective Lot
or Lotts proportionably thereunto, and the said Commissioners or the major part
of them are hereby empowered by respective Warants under their Hands and Seals
to Summon the Surveyor general or the Surveyor of the County to survey and lay
out the said one hundred Acres in the places aforementioned in the manner and
form aforesaid, to be marked and staked out as aforesaid, and when the same is
Surveyed and laid out as aforesaid, and valued as aforesaid, that then
whosoever shall make choice of any such Lot as aforesaid, and make Entry
thereof before and with the Officer or person as by the Commissioners shall be
appointed to keep the Book for Entry of the same, and pay such Sum or Quantity
of Tobacco as shall by the discretion of the Commissioners be rated upon such
Lot and payable to the Owner of the said Land, and on such Lot shall build
one twenty Foot square dwelling House at least within twelve Months after
taking up the same, unless such building be larger than herein expressed, shall
by virtue thereof, and of the building and finishing as aforesaid invest the
taker up and builder as aforesaid, with an Estate of Inheritance in the said
Lot, to him his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and be a perpetual Bar to the
Owners and Persons interested in the said Landseither within or without this
Province, even against his Lordship the Right Honorable Charles Lord Baron of
Baltemore Lord Proprietary of this Province his Heirs and Successors; yielding
and paying to the said Lord Proprietary his Heirs and Successors for ever, the
yearly Rent of one Penny Current Money for each respective Lot as aforesaid,
and that the Surveyor of each Town and Port as aforesaid, shall have and
receive such Fees and Rewards for laying out and staking the Towns and Lotts as
aforesaid, as the said Commissioners shall allow and settle and no more, and
any person or persons that shall build and inhabit in such Port or Town, and
shall owe any Sum or Sums of Tobacco and will pay the same in such Town as he
shall be allowed ten per cent. for every Hogshead of four hundred weight and
upwards so paid in Towns, to be deducted out of the Debt aforesaid; or
pleadable in Bar of the Creditor.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that any person or persons that have haretofore taken up
any Lot or Lotts in either of the Towns by virtue of any former Law of this
Province and built thereon according to the same former Law, they and every of
them their Heirs and Assigns shall have and enjoy a good and sure Estate of
Inheritance to them and their Heirs for ever, under the Rents and Services
herein mentioned, and the several Lotts so built on shall be deemed and taken
as part of the one hundred Lotts as aforesaid, and the same Town laid out as
conveniently thereto as may be. And Be It Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,,
that at the Town and Port of Seavern in Ann-Arundel County shall be bought or
valued by the Jury as before in this Act is mentioned, all that parcel or Neck
of Land within Levy Neck Cove and Acton's Cove, lying and adjoining or near to
the Town Land as aforesaid, or so much thereof as by the Commissioners shall be
found convenient to be fenced in and called the Town Common or Pasture, and
paid for and fenced in at the public Charge, and shall be for the public Use
and Service when need shall require: And that the Inhabitants of the said Towns
shall not raise any Stock of Cattle or Hoggs, Horses or Sheep more than what
they can contain and raise upon their respective Lot or Lotts and not more, at
the discretion of the Commissioners of the said Towns.

An Act Impowering Richard Bishop of Talbot County Brother and Heir of William
Bishop late of Talbot County Deceased, to sell and dispose of so much Land as
will amount to Fifty Thousand Pounds of Tobacco, for the Payment of the Charges
expended in recovering of the said Estate.

An Act for Ascrtaining Naval Officers Fees.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That the several and respective Master or Masters of all Ships or Vessels
trading and coming into this Province of what Burden soever, shall at the time
of Entering such Ships or Vessels as aforesaid pay unto the Govenour of this
Province for the time being three pence per Tunn, for every Tunn of Burden the
said Ship shall be of, (all such Ships or Vessels as are bona Fide built in and
belonging to the people of this Province excepted,) or give good caution to the
Naval Officer with whom he or they shall Enter for the payment thereof.

And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the several and respective Naval Officers of this
Province, within their several and respective Districts, for the several Acts
and things relating to his or their Office by him or them hereby enjoined to be
done, shall have and receive the Fees hereafter mentioned and no more, (to wit)
for Entering any Ship or Vessel coming and trading into this Province being
under the burden of one hundred Tunn, the Master thereof shall pay unto that
respective Naval Officer with whom he shall Enter such Ship or Vessel as a Fee
for Entering thereof the Sum of five Shillings Sterling and no more, and five
Shillings more for the clearing thereof; And if such Ship or Vessel shall be
above the burden of one hndred Tunns, or of two hundred Tunns or upwards, the
Master for the Entry thereof shall pay the said Naval Officer as a Fee ten
Shillings Stetling, and ten Shillings for the Clearing thereof; And the said
Naval Officers are hereby obliged to enter all Ships or Vessels of what burden
soever of the built of this Province, and where-the Owners do inhabit and
reside within this Province the Sum of two Shillings and six Pence Sterling,
which is hereby allowed and ascertained him as a fee, therefore, and for the
Sum of two Shillings six Pence shall clear the same.

And Be It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all small Boats
belonging to this Province, and being under eighteen Foot by the Keel, shall
pass and repass without any let, hindrance, molestation or seizure of the
same, (unless they shall carry and have on Board them prohibited goods, or goods
liable to pay Custom to their Majesty's not Cocquetted or Clearing for the
same,) without being obliged to take out Permits for such passing and repassing
as aforesaid; And that the Masters of all Shallops o^ open Sloops trading
within this Province, ^o pay unto the several Naval Officers, or their Deputy
or Deputy's appointed for the granting of Permits the Sum of two Shillings six
pence yearly and no mere for the granting of such Permits as aforesaid, and
shall give good Security to be taken by such Officer aforsaid in their
Majesty's Name, that he or they shall and will duly observe the Acts of Trade
and Navigation and other good Laws of this Province relating thereto.

And Be it further Enacted That all and every Collector and Collectors of this
Province shall have and receive such Fees for Entering and Clearing such Ships
and Vessels as aforesaid, as are above allowed to the Naval Officers and no
more; And that all Collectors and Naval Officers shall make a fair Table of all
their Eees and hang them up in their Offices, under the penalty of fifty pounds
Sterling to their Majesty's their Heirs and Successors for the Support of
Government, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by
Action of Debt Bill Plaint at Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or
Wager of Law shall be allowed.

An Additional Act to the Act for quieting Possessions.
WHEREAS at a General Assembly begun and held at St. Mary's in the Province of
Maryland the twenty seventh Day of March in the nine and thirtieth Year of the
Dominion of Caecilius, etc. Anno Domini 1671. It was then and there amongst
other things Enacted viz. an Act for quieting possessions, which Act did assure
and confirm all Estates made by real Purchasers of all Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments whatsoever, before the Day of the date thereof and not after

And whereas at a General Assembly held at the City of St. Mary's the 13th. Day
of April in the two and fortieth Year of the Dominion of Caecilius etc. Anno
Domini 1674. Entitled An Act of Enroling Conveyances, and securing the Estates
of real Purchasers, it was therein contained amongst other things, viz. that
all that from thenceforth should purchase any Land of Inherirance, should
purchase the same by Deed Indented, or other sure Deed, and inrole the same in
the County where the Land lies, or in the Provincial Court, or the principal
heads of the same Deed, clearly showing and declaring the manner how Lands
should pass from Man to Man. And forasmuch as the same Law did not provide for
the Security of all those Titles that did pass from Man to Man from the 27th.
Day of March 1671. until the 13th. Day of April Anno Domini 1674. nor no other
Law extant-for Securing those Titles, being under the same circumstances as
those of 1671. We the Deputy's and Delegates of this present General Assembly
do pray that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of
the same, that the aforesaid Law Entitled An Act for quieting of Possessions,
and all the branches and proviso's therein contained be in full force and
virtue until the 13th. Day of April Anno Domini 1674. and not after.

At a Sessions of Assembly held at Ann-Arundel Town in Ann-Arundel County on
the last Day of February in the Sixth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
and Lady WILLIAM and MART by the Grace of GOD of England Scotland France and
Ireland King and Queen Defenders of the Faith etc. Anno Domini 1694. were
Enacted,

An Act for the Naturalization of Daniel Danison Senior, and Daniel Danison
Junior of Calvert County.

Ar a Sessions of Assembly held at Annapolis the 8th. Day of May in the 7th.
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady William and Mary King and
Queen of England etc. Au uoque Domini 1695. were Enacted these following Laws.

An Act for Settling Ann-Arundel County Court at the Port of Annapolis within
the same County
FORASMUCH as there is not any good Court House built and sitted for the County
of Ann-Arundel, and that the Provincial Court is now by Law Established to be
held and kept for ever hereafter at the Port of Annapolis on the River of
Seavern within the same County, where there is, and must of necessity be a
Court House built for the public use of this Province, which may be sufficient
for holding the County Courts in also, and thereby the County saved the Charge
of building a County Court House, and the said Port of Annapolis propagated and
increased.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the same, That the Justices of the County Court of Ann-Arundel County do at
their next meeting in their County Court adjourn themselves from the place the
same Court shall be held, to the Port of Annapolis upon Seavern River in
Ann-Arundel County, and there at the said Port in the Court House of the
Province, hold and keep the said County Court, and so all the County Courts for
the said County shall for ever hereafter be held and kept at the said Port of
Annapolis at Seavern River aforesaid in Aun-Arundel County aforesaid, and at no
other place whatsoever in the said County; and that the Records of the said
County be removed to the said Port there to be kept, and also that the Church
to be built and erected for the Parish in which the said Port of Annapolis is,
shall be built and crected within the said Port in such place, and part thereof
as to his Excellency the present Governor shall be thought fit and convenient,
which for ever hereafter shall be denominated, called and known by the Name of
the Port of Annapolis, and by no other Name or Distinction whatsoever.

An Act for Securing of Administrators and Executors from double paying of
Debts, and limiting of the time for payment of Obligations within this Province.
FORASMUCH as Doubts have arisen whether Executors or Administrators having
fully satrsfied so far as Assets all Debts due within this Province with
respect to the quality of the same Debts, should be liable to answer Debts
contracted out of this Province, being of a higher Nature for preventing of all
ambiguity's for the future, and to the End that the several and respective
Courts and the Practitioners thereunto apertaining may be ascertained what
methods and measures hereafter to take in cases of that nature, it is prayed
that it may be Enacted, And

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and by the Authority of the
same, that from and after the publication hereof no person or persons being
Executors or Administrators of any Estate within this Province, shall be liable
to pay or satisfy Debts contracted out of this Province, of what nature or
quality soever, Debts due to their Sacred Majesty's only excepted, before debts
due within this Province, from the Estate or Estates of any person or persons
deceased shall be paid and satisfied; if such Executors or Administrators shall
have Assetts in his her or their hands sufficient to satisfy and pay the same,
such Executors or Administrators having respect to the quality of the Debts due
within this Province as aforesaid, unless the creditor or creditors of the said
deceased being persons residing out of this Province as aforesaid on any Action
or Actions by him her or them brought against such Executors or Administrators
as aforesaid, upon any debt or contract of a higher nature than those
contracted within this Province as aforesaid, be it by Statute Merchant or of
the Staple, Judgment, Bond or otherwise do upon Trial make it sufficiently
appear that such Executors or Administrators had due knowledge and Cognizance
thereof upon due proof thereof as aforesaid, if such Executors or
Administrators shall have paid debts of an inferior nature, not recovered
against them by due course of Law, or suffered Judgment to go against them for
any such Debt as aforesaid, without pleading such foreign Debt in stay of
Judgment, such Executor or Administrator not having Asserts in his her or their
Hands sufficient to pay the Debt as aforesaid, and satisfy the same, the Court
before whom such Action shall be brought shall give Judgment and award
Execution against such Executors or Administrators de bonis Propriis, to such
Creditor or Creditors as aforesaid, as the Law in that case directs, any thing
in this prosent Act contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And for that it has been found of evil Consequence, that Bonds, Bills, and
other Oligations under the Hand and Seal of any person or persons within this
Province which are of very ancient date, and probably have been by the person
or persons who were Debtors thereby long before paid and satisfied, but for
want of due proof thereof or the Receipt for payment through length of Time
become casualy lost such Debtors are said liable by Law to pay and satisfy
such Debt or Debts by them so formerly paid and satisfied as aforesaid. Be it
therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent before said, that for the future no Bill, Bond or other Obligation under
the Hand and Seal of any person or persons whatoever, thathath been, or shall
at any time hereafter be taken of any of the Inhabitants of thsis Province
aforesaid, that shall not be renewed within five Years from the publication
hereof, or within five Years from the taking of such Obligation as aforesaid,
and so for every five Years successively be suable or impleadable in any Court
within this Province, Debts due to their Sacred Majesty's their Heirs and
Successors, Bonds formerly given, or hereafter to be given into any Office
within this Province, Debts due to any persons under Age, non Sana Memoria, or
beyond the Seas and not returning within five Years as aforesaid. (only
excepted)

Provided that this Act nor any therein contained be construed or taken to give
any advantage or benefit to persons flying out of this Province and not
returning within the time aforesaid, any thing in this present Act contained to
the contrary in any wise notwithstandng.

An additional Act to the Act for ^orts.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That the Town Land at Oxford in Talbot County constituted and appointed a
Town and Port by a former Act of Assembly made at a Session of Assembly begun
and held at the City of St. Marys the 21st. Day of September Anno Domini 1694.
be again Surveyed and Laid out, that is to say, some time before the last Day
of September next, before the Commissioners in the before recited Act nominated
and appointed, bounding the same at low water mark including the Island, and so
to the old bounded Tree at the Southermost part of the Neck, and that as well
in the said Port and Town as in the Port and Town of Ann-Arundel there be one
or more places laid out and reserved as the Commissioners of the respective
Ports shall think fit for the building of Ships and other Vossels, and that the
Officers of the Lord Proprietary for receiving the Duty's due and payable to
his said Lordship, be hereby obliged by themselves or Deputy's thereunto
Authorized and appointed to reside at the said Ports and Towns for the dispatch
of Ships and other Vessels Entering and Clearing at such Ports and Towns as
aforesaid.

And Be It also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the two Ports of
Ann-Arundel and Oxford for the future shall be called known and distinguished
by the names or apellations of Annapolis and Williamstadt,, that is to say, the
Port of Ann-Arundel to be called by the name of Annapolis, and Oxford by the
name of William Stadt, and that there be purchased to the said Town of William
Stadt one hundred Acres of Land adjacent to the said Town for a Common or
Pasture, for the benefit of all persons within this Province that shall repair
to the said Town, and that the same be laid out as above expressed, and that six
Acres of the same be reserved for poblick Buildings.

An Act for Naturalization of Mathias Mathiason alias Freeman, Peter Golley,
John and Joseph Goutee, and Joseph and John Sons of the said Joseph Goutee, and
Leonard Camperson.

An Act ascertaining the Fees for Naturalization.
WHEREAS diverse complaints have been made, that several persons have raken and
exacted immoderate Fees of persons Naturalized, for prevention thereof for the
future.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That the Eees to be taken by the several Clerks and Officers belonging to
the Assembly for the Naturalization, be such as shall be allowed and adjudged
by the respective Assembly's when and where such persons shall be Naturalized,
and that no person whatsoever presume to demand or exact any more Fees of any
such persons Naturalized than what are so allowed or to be allowed, under the
penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco to every such person exacting or
extorting more than what is or shall be allowed by such Assembly assessing the
Fees as aforesaid, the said Forfeiture to be recovered in any Court of Record
within this Province by Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information wherein no
Essoyn Protection o^ Wager of Law to be allowed the one half to their Majesty's
the other half to the Party grieved.

An Act for the division and regulating of several County's within this
Province, and constituting a County by the Name of Prince-Georg's County within
the samn Province.
WHEREAS diverse of the Inhabitants of the County of St. Marys and Kent have by
their Petitions complained that through the Irregularities of their County's
being so ill situated that their Court Houses or chief places of Judicature
within their County's, cannot be Seated for the convenience of the Inhabitants
and Suitors to the same, therefore this present General Assembly have taken
into their Serious Consideration to Redress the Agrievances for the future, do
therefore humbly pray that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of
the same, that from and after the twenty third day of April next being St.
Georges Day, after the End of this present Session of Assembly, that the Bounds
of St. Marys County shall begin at Point Look out, and extend it self up
Potomack River to the lower side of Buds Creek, and so over by a straight Line
drawn from the Head of the main Branch of the said Buds Creek to the Head of
Indian Creek in Patuxent River, and which falls into Patuxent River, including
all that Land lying between Patuxent and Potomack Rivers from the lower part of
the said two Creeks and Branches of Buds and Indian Creek by the Line
aforesaid, and Point Look out as aforesaid, and upon the upper side of the said
Indian creek and Buds Creek shall the Bounds of Charies County begin where the
upper Bounds of St. Marys ends, and extend it self upwards as far as Mattawoman
Creek and Branch, and bounding on the said Branch by a straight Line drawn from
the head thereof to the head of Swansens Creek in Patuxent River, including all
that land lying on the upper part of Buds Creek and Indian Creek Branches where
St. Marys County ends to the lower side of Mattawoman Creek and Branch and
Swansons Creek and Branch, between Patuxent and Potomack Rivers as aforesaid.

And Be It Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that the Land from the upper side of Mattawoman and Swansons
Creeks and Branches extending upward bounded by Potomack on the West, and by
Patuxent River on the East, shall be and is hereby constituted, founded, and
incorporated into a County of this Province, and shall be denominated called
and known by the name of Prince Georges County, and shall from and after the
said twenty third day of April next ensuing being St. Georges Day as aforesaid,
have and enjoy all other Rights Benefits and Priviliges equal with the other
County's of this Province, such as sending Burgesses to Assembly's, having
County Courts, Sherriss, Justices, and other Officers and Ministers requisite
and necessary and as are used in other County's of this Province.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that the several and respective persons hereafter in this
Act mentioned shall and are hereby Authorized Required, and empowered to call
to them the Surveyors of the County's and cause them to run out the Lines and
Bounds of the said County's of St. Mary's Charles and Prince Georges County's
as aforesaid, that is to say, from the heads of the Branches of Buds and
Matrawoman Creek to Indian and Swansons Creeks as aforesaid, that is to say,
Mr. Robert Mason and Mr. James Keech for St. Mary's County, Mr. John Bayn and
Mr. James Bigger for Charles County, Mr. William H^tchison and Mr. Thomas
Greenfield for Prince Georges County, who are Required and Enjoined by this Act
at or before the said twenty third day of April as aforesaid to cause the said
two Lines from the head of Buds Creek Branch to the head of Indian Creek
Branch, and from the head of Mattawoman Branch to Swansons Creek Branch, fully
to be marked and lined by a double Line of marked Trees that the same may be
known and perceived by all persons desiring to know the same, and shall return
a Certificate of the due courses thereof, one to each County concerned, that is
to say St. Mary's, Charles and Prince Georges County's, and one more
Certificate to his Excellency the Governor and Council to be Recorded in the
Council Records and each County Courts Records aforesaid, under the penalty of
one thousand pound of Tobacco to each person hereby nominated and appointed
failing, and two thousand pounds of Tobacco to the Surveyor failing, one half
to the Informer, the other half to the Vestry of the Parish where the Offender
dwells, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province, by Action
of Debt Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of
Law to be allowed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the place for holding the County Court of St. Marys
County shall for ever hereafter be at the City of St. Mary's in the State House
of the said City, there formerly built at the cost and charge of this Province,
and in no other place of the said County whatsoever, the same State House being
hereby allotted and appointed by this present General Assembly to the County of
St. Mary's for holding and keeping their Courts in, and such other decent
Services as to the Justices of the same County in full Court shall be consented
and agreed to.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that from and after the said twenty third day of April
next after the end of this present Session of Assembly the Island of Kent shall
be added ^^ and made part of Talbot County and deemed reputed and taken as part
thereof and that that part of Talbot County lying on the North side of Corseica
Creek running up the main Eastern Branch to the head thereof, and then with a
course drawn East, to the out side of this Province shall be the Southerly
Bounds of the County of Kent, and on the North by the County of Caecil, any Law
Statute or Usuage heretofore to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the persons herein nominated are authorized and
empowered and hereby appointed some time before the twenty third day of April
next to call to them the Survey or of the County of Talbot and cause the Bounds
of the said County's of Kent and Talbot to be run out and marked by a double
line of Trees to be marked between Kent and Talbot County's as aforesaid, that
is to say Mr. William Coursey for Talbot County, and Mr. Simon Willmore for
Kent County, who are hereby authorized and required to see the same done and
performed at or before the time aforesaid, and return a certificate thereof as
aforesaid, under the penalty aforesaid,, to be recovered as aforesaid.

An Act of Repeal of all Laws heretofore made in this Province, and Confirming
all Laws made this General Assembly.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That those private Acts heretofore made at a General Assembly begun and
held at the City of St. Mary's the 15th. day of May Anno Domini 1676. to wit,
An Act for Settling the Inheritance of the real Estate of Robert Cager, as also
his Personal Estate upon the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Common Council of
the City of St. Mary's and their Successors for the uses in the said Robert
Cagers Will mentioned, as also these other private Acts made at a General
Assembly begun and held at the City of St. Mary's the 20th. day of October Anno
Domini 1678. to wit, An Act for the Naturalization of Joshua Guibert, and one
other Act for the Naturalization of James Peane and Magdeline his Wife, Ann
Peane and Jacob Lookerman of this Province, and one other Act concerning the
securing a Plantation with it is Appurtnances to Mary Ward Executrix of the last
Will and Testameur of Matthew Ward of Talbot County deceased, to her and her
Heirs for ever. And that all other private Acts whatsoever heretofore made be
confirmed ratyfied, deemed, reputed, and taken to be in full Force, any Act or
Acts heretofore made to the contrary notwithstanding.

The following Laws were made at an Assembly held in October 1695.

An Act for laying an Imposition on several Commodities Exported aut of this
Province.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That
from and after the publication hereof no person or persons whatsoever
inhabiting or residing within this Province shall Export any Furrs or Skinns
within this Act hereafter mentioned and expressed for England, or any his
Majesty's Plantations here in America, but what he she or they shall pay unto
his Sacred Majesty and his Successors to be employed toward the maintenance of
a Free School or Schools within this Province aforesaid, the several Duty's and
Imposts hereafter following; that is to say for every Bear Sin nine pence
Sterling, for a Beaver four pence per Skinn, for an Otter three pence per
Skinn, for wild Catts, Foxes, Minks, Fishers and Woolf Skinns one penny half
penny per Skinn, for Muskratt four pence per dozen, for Racoons three farthings
per Skinn; for Elk Skinns twelve pence per Skinn, for Deer Skinns dressed or
undrest four pence per Skinn, for young Bear and Cubb Skinns two pence per
Skinn; And that all non Residents from and after the publication aforesaid,
that shall export out of this Province aforesaid any Furrs or Skinns herein
before mentioned and expressed for England or to any his Majesty's Plantations
as aforesaid, shall for every Skinn or Furrs by him exported of what nature or
quality soever being comprised within this Act, pay unto his Majesty or his
Successor for the use aforesaid double the Duty by this Act appointed to be
paid by Persons inhabiting and reading within this Province as aforesaid the
same several Impositions to be collected by the several and respective Naval
Officers within this Province which said Naval Officers shall once a year
render an Account of the said Imposition to the Governors Trustees and Visitors
of the aforesaid Freeschool or Schools for the time being who shall and are
hereby authorized and empowered to order and dispose of the same, to the Uses
Intents and Purposes aforesaid. And to the end the several Impositions may be
justly and duly paid without Fraud or Deceit.

BE IT ENACTED By the Authority aforesaid, that any person or persons
whatsoever exporting any Furrs or Skinns out of this Province, shall at or
before the shipping on Board of such Vessel in which such Skinns or Furrs shall
be exported as aforesaid, render upon Oath an Account of the nature quantity
and quality of the said Skinns by him her or them exported as aforesaid, and
whether the same be his her or their proper Goods and Commodity's, or the Goods
and Commodity's of any other person or persons, then whether he she or they to
whom they properly belong as aforesaid, be Inhabitants or Residents of this
Province aforesaid, which said Oath shall be exhibited by the several and
respective Naval Officers or their Deputy's thereunto especially appointed, and
if any person or persons whether Inhabitants or non Residents shall put on
Board any Ship or other Vessel any Furrs or Skinns for which he she or they
shall not have paid the Imposition aforesaid, or given good and sufficient
caution for the same to the Naval Officer of such Port and Place from whence
such Furrs and Skinns shall be Shipped as aforesaid, or to his Deputy for the
time being, and a Certificate from under the Hand of such Naval Officer or his
Deputy produce for the payment or caution by him given for payment of the
Imposition aforesaid, he she or they so offending shall forfeit and loose all
his her or their Furrs or Skinns so Shipped as aforesaid, one half thereof to
his said Majesty and his Successors for the use aforesaid, the other half to
him or them that shall inform and Sue for the same, to be recovered by action
of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information wherein no Essoyn, Protection, or wager
of Law shall be allowed. And that the Master of any such Ship or Vessel that
shall willingly or knowingly take on Board his said Ship or Vessel any Furrs or
Skinns as aforesaid, for which the party or party's Shiping the same shall not
produce a certifiicate as aforesaid, being thereof Lawfully convict shall
forfeit and pay the Sum of five thousand pounds of Tobacco, one half thereof to
his Sacred Majesty and his Successors for the use aforesaid, the other half to
him or them that shall inform or Sue for the same to be recovered as aforesaid,
and that the several and respective Naval Officers of the several and
respect-Ports may and are hereby Authorized and Empowered when, and as often as
he or they shall think fit to enter into any Ship or Vessel trading to and from
this Province, or into any House, Warehouse, or other Building and open any
Trunck, Chest, Cask or Fardle, and search to make in any part or place of such
Ship or Vessel, Houses or Buildings as aforesaid, where such Naval Officer
shall suspect any such Furrs or Skinns to be as aforesaid, for which no Account
is given or Duty paid as aforesaid, and upon finding any such Furrs or Skinns
unqualified for exportation as aforesaid, them to seize and have condemned, as
by this Law is before directed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that from and after the publication hereof as aforesaid,
all persons not being Inhabitants of this Province exporting out of the same
any beef pork or bacon shall pay unto his Sacred Majesty and his Successors for
the use in this Act beforementioned and expressed the several Imposts following,
(that is to say) for dried beef and bacon twelve pence the hundred weight, and
so proportionably for greater or lesser quantity's, and for beef or pork
undried twelve pence the Barrel, each Barrel to contain two hundred weight; And
that no undried beef and pork be exported out of this Province but in Cask as
aforesaid, which said several Impositions shall be collected and gathered by
the said several and respective Naval Officers who shall be accountable for the
same, and have full Authority to enter any Ship or other Vessel as aforesaid,
and to make search for every such prohibited Goods as aforesaid, in such method
and manner as in this Act is before mentioned and expressed, and if any person
whatsoever being non Resident as aforesaid, shall put on Board any Ship or
Vessel any beef, bacon or pork for which he she or they shall not have a
certificate as aforesaid, or that shall Ship on Board any beef or pork undried,
not being in Cask as aforesaid, such person or persons so offending shall
forfeit and loose all his her or their meats so Shipped as aforesaid, one half
to his said Majesty and his Successors to the use aforesaid, and the other half
to the Informer to be recovered as aforesaid.

And every Master of a Ship or other Vessel that shall wittingly or knowingly
take on board his said Ship or Vessel any beef, bacon or pork contrary to the
true intent and meaning of this Act, being thereof Legally Convict shall
forfeit and pay the Sum of five thousand pound as Tobacco, one half thereof to
his said Majesty or his Successors for the use aforesaid, the other half to the
Informer or him or them that shall Sue for the same, to be recovered as
aforesaid.

And for the better understanding what persons shall be adjudged non Residents,
It is hereby Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all persons
whatsoever trading to and from this Province shall be adjudg'd, deemed, and
taken as non Rasidents not having a Seated Plantation of fifty Acres at the
least whereon he or she with their Family (if any) have resided, for and during
the space of one whole Year, and that within the time and term of twelve Months
before any benefit claimed in and by virtue of this Act, or that has, or
hereafter shall have an House in some Port or Town as his or their proper
Freehold being forty foot in length and twenty foot in breadth with two Brick
Chimneys to the same, wherein he she or they shall have resided for and during
the space of one whole Year as aforesaid, and that no such person or persons
trading to and from this Province having Houses in any Town or Port within the
same, whereby he she or they may claim any Benefit or Freedom in this Act
given to the Inhabitants thereof, shall Have Hold or Enjoy, such Benefit and
Privilege as aforesaid any longer then he she or they or his her or their
Family shall in such Port or Town actualy inhabit and reside. Provided allways
that it is the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, that no Person or Persons
whatsoever as sha^ trade directly from England hither be construed, deemed,
reputed, or taken as Foreigners, but that all and every such person so trading
directly frnm England to this Province as aforesaid, have free Liberty in the
Exportation of any Skinns or Furrs whatsoever, or in the Exportation of any
meat dried or undried equal with the Inhabitants of this Province, paying such
Duty's aod Impositions for the said several and respective Commodity's as this
Law has imposed upon the Inhabitants, as aforesaid and no more.

And Be it also further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid by and with the
Advice and Consent aforesaid, that one former Act of this Province, Entitled an
Act for the laying an Imposition upon several Commodity's Exported out of this
Province, be and is hereby Repealed.

Provided allways, and it is the true intent and meaning of this Act, that no
person or persons whatsoever having in any part Transgressed against the
aforesaid Law during the time it was in force being as yet undiscovered or
unprosecuted for the same: shall have and receive any benefit or advantage by
the repeal thereof but that upon the prosecution or discovery of such person or
persons so having offended as aforesaid, the said Laws shall be pleadable in
any Court within this Province, wherein any Plaint or Information shall be
brought against any such person or persons as aforesaid, and Judgment thereupon
by the Justices of the said Court given as the nature of the case shall
require, in as full and ample manner as though the said Law at the time of the
prosecution aforesaid were then actually in Force, any thing before montioned
or tecited to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

An Act for the securing Persons Rights to Town Lands.
WHEREAS it is represented to this General Assembly (...) several persons of
this Province and others, that have taken up Lotts in several Towns Lands laid
out and Surveyed for Towns according to the directions of several Laws of this
Province heretofore made, that is to say, one Law made at a General Assembly
held at the Ridge in Ann-Arundel County the 2d day of October 1683. entitled
An Act for Advancement of Trade and one other Act made at a General Assembly
held at the City of St. Marys the first day of April 1684, entitled an
additional and supplementary Act to the Act for advancement of Trade, and one
other Act made at a General Assembly held at the City of St. Marys the 27th.
day of October, Entitled a further additional Act to the Act for advancement
of trade and the Supplementary Act of the same. as by the same several Acts of
Assembly remaining upon Record in the Secretary's Office of this Province may
appear. And notwithstanding several persons who relying and depending upon the
Benefits and Privileges in the said Laws granted, have taken up Lotts in the
said Towns entered them and paid for them or were ready to pay for them as the
Law directed, and have built and improved thereon, yet they are now threatened
disquieted and disturbed by the persons claiming Right to the said Lands upon
pretense that because that the said Acts are since repealed, the Titles of such
Takers up Builders and Improvers are destroyed and die with the said Acts of
Trade, contrary to the true Sense or rational Construction of the same Laws or
any other of like nature, to prevent therefore and take off all such
unnecessary Scruples and Doubts thereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That
all and every person or persons that during the continuance of the before
mentioned Acts of Assembly did take up, pay for, or tendered or were ready to
pay for any Lot or Lotts of Land in any Town Land laid out and allotted for
Town Lands by the former Laws or any of them and the same Lot made due entry
thereof, and has built and improved upon the same, and followed the directions
of the above mentioned Laws, they the said person and persons so taking up
entering building on and following the directions of the said Laws, their Heirs
and Assigns shall have hold and enjoy a good sure indeseazable Estate of
Inheritance in Fee Simple of in and to every such Lot and Lotts of Land so
taken up and built on as aforesaid, according to the said Laws directions to
them and their Heirs for ever, as fully largely and amply to all intents and
purposes as if the said former Laws were still in force or had never been
Repealed.

Provided always, that where any person or persons that has so taken up built
and improved, and has not paid the price set upon the same, that every such
person is hereby enjoined to pay the said value of the said Lot to the Owner
and Claimer of the said Land upon demand without fraud or covin.

An Act for the Naturalization of Michael Curtis and others.

At an Assembly held at the Town of Annapolis the 30th. day of April in the
VIII. Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King William the III. of England
etc. Annoque Domini 1696, were Enacted,

An Act impowering the Commissioners of the County of Kent to purchase three
Acres of Land whereon to build a Court House.

An Act for speedy Justice and Encouragement of Trade.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That
from and after the publication hereof, if any person or persons whatsoever be
owing to any person or persons residing within, or trading into this Province
any Sum or Sums of Tobacco or Money being above the Sum of two hundred pounds of
Tobacco or twelve Shillings, and not above the Sum of ten thousand pounds of
Tobacco or fifty pounds Sterling, being due by Bill, Bond, Note, Book or
Account, or by any public or County allowance, or any Officers Fees where
Execution is not given by Law for the same, and the party Creditor is desirous
of a speedy recovery of the same, he shall and may by virtue of this Law
recover the same in manner and form following, that is to say, when the Party
Plaintiff Sues out his Writ against the Defendant he shall deliver therewith a
true Copy of his Declaration against the Defendant to the Sherrif with the
Writ and if the Sherrif can serve the said Writ eight days before the day of
the return thereof, and at the time of serving the same shall deliver the
Defendant a Copy of the Declaration, the said Defendant shall and is hereby
bound and obliged to come to a Trial with the Plaintiff upon the Cause at the
return of the said Writ without any Imparlance or Reference whatsoever. And it
shall and may be Lawful to the Justices of the several County Courts before
whom such matters shall be brought, to award Judgment against such Defendant
upon his refusal or neglect to plead or answer, except in some very
extraordinary Cases or Accidents at the discretion of the Justices, and for the
ascertaining the allowances of the public Leavy of this Province and what each
person has therein, and for recovery of the same the Sherrif of every County
shall at the next County Court after the public Leavy or allowances comes to
his hands deliver a Copy thereof to the Clerk of the County Court signed by him
as a true Copy under the penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco for every
time such Sherrif shall fail therein, to the use of the Vestry of the parish
where the Sherrif dwells, and the Clerk shall make a true Copy thereof attested
by him and set up at the Court House, that all persons having any allowance
therein may take knowledge thereof, and the other part shall Record, under the
penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco to the use aforesaid, which Fines and
Forfeitures shall and may recovered in any County Court by the Vestry as
aforesaid, by Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn
Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

An Act for the Naturalization of John Edgar of Somerset County?

Laws made in July 1696.

An Act for Sanctifying and keeping Holy the Lords Day commonly called Sunday.
FORASMUCH as the Sanctifying and keeping Holy of the Lords Day commonly called
Sunday has been, and is esteemed by the present, all the Primitive Christians
and People to be a principal part of the Worship of Almighty God, and the
Honor which is due to his Holy Name.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Ma-jesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication of this Law, no person or persons whatsoever
within this Province shall work or do any bodily Labor or Occupation upon the
Lords Day commonly called Sunday, nor shall command or wilfully suffer any of
his her or their Children, Servants or Slaves to work or labor as aforesaid,
(the works of absolute necessity and Mercy allways excepted) nor shall suffer
or permit any of his her or their children, servants or slaves, or any other
under their Authority to abuse or profane the Lords Day as aforesaid, by
Drunkenness, Swearing, Gaming, Fowling, Fishing, Hunting or any other Sports
Pastimes or Recreations whatsoever. And if any person or persons within this
Province from and after the publication hereof shall offend in all, or any of
the Premises, he she or they so offending shall forfeit and pay for every
offense the Sum of one hundred pounds of Tobacco to the use of the poor of the
parish where the said Offender or Offenders do dwell and reside, the said
offenses or any of them being done in view of any Justice of the Peace,
Magistrate or other head Officer of any County, City or Town Corporate within
this Province within their limits respectively, or being proved by the Oath of
two or more Witnesses, or by Confession of the party offending before any such
Magistrate, Justice or head Officer within their several Limits respectively
wherein such offenses shall be committed, to which End every Justice, Magistrate
or other head Officer shall have power by this Act to administer Oath to such
Witness or Witnesses, any of which Sum or Sums of Tobacco so forfeited shall
and may be executed and leavyed by the Sherrif or Constable by Warrant to any
of them, directed from any such Justice or Justices of the Peace, Magistrate or
other head Officer as aforsaid within their several Limits, where all or any of
the said offenses shall be committed or done, by distress or sale of the
Offenders Goods rendering the party the overpluss, all which Forfeitures shall
be to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors to the use
aforesaid, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by any
person that will Sue for the same, by Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no
Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed. And the said Justices,
Magistrates, head Officers, Sherrifs or Constables shall render an Account
thereof at the next Court to be holden for the respective County's, City or
Buroughs where the said offense shall be committed; And in default of such
distress the Sherrif, under Sherrif, or Constable are hereby Authorized and
Empowered to bring the party offending before the next Justice of Peace, who is
hereby authorized and empowered to bind such Offender or Offenders over to the
next Court to be holden for the County, City or Butrough respectively, and to
be during the interval of good behavior.

And Be It Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that the Minister of each respective Church or Chapel of
this Province, do in pursuance of his Majesty's Royal Letter directed to the
Right Reverend Father in God Henry Lord Bishop of London, and Countersigned by
the Right Noble Prince Charles Duke of Shrewsbury their Majesty's principal
Secretary of State, bearing date the 13th. of February Anno Domini 1689. to be
communicated to the Provinces of Canterbury and York, by himself or Clark read
four times a Year, all penal Laws of this Province made for punishment of Vice,
together with his said Majesty's Royal Letter within their several and
respective Parishes, on penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco to be
recovered as aforesaid, to the use aforesaid.

Be It likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that no Ordinary Keeper or any other Master or Mistress of a
Family from and after the time aforesaid, either directly or indirectly by any
Color or pretense whatsoever, (unless in cases of absolute necessity) shall or
may upon the Lards Day sell any strong liquor whatsoever to any person
whatsoever, or knowingly or wittingly suffer or permit in or about his her or
their House or Houses any tippling, drunkenness, gaming, exercise or pastime
whatsoever as aforesaid, being Covicted thereof by two sufficient Witnesses
shall forfeit the Sum of two thousand pounds of Tobacco, one moiety thereof to
our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors to the use aforesaid, the
other half to him or them that shall Sue for the same to be recovered as
aforesaid, and if an Ordinary-keeper to loose his License.

And It is hereby further Enacted, that the several Clarks of the several
County Courts within this Province be obliged hereby to suffer and permit the
several Clarks of the several Vestry's to take Copy's of all and singular the
Acts of Assembly relating to Religion gratis, without taking or receiving any
Fee therefore, under penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco to such County
Clark refusing the same to the use aforesaid to be recovered as aforesaid.

To his most Excellent MAJESTY.
Dread Sovereign,
FROM the Sincerity of our humble and Loyal Hearts, we offer to your Sacred
Person our most dutyful and sincere thanks for your Royal Care and Protection
to us, for your Majesty's Princely Zeal and Pious Care of our Mother the Church
of England, and extending your Royal Benediction to our Neighboring Colony
your Majesty's Subjects and Territory of Virginia, in your gracious Grant and
Charter for the propagation of the College or Place of universal Study in that
your Majesty's said Colony. In humble Contemplation whereof, and being Excited
by his present Excellency Francis Nicholson Esquire your Majesty's Governor of
this your Province, his Zeal for your Majesty's Service, Pious End cavours: and
generous Offers for the propagation of Christianity and good Learning, herein
we become humble Suitors to your most Sacred Majesty to extend your Royal Grace
and Favor to us your Majesty's Subjects of this Province represented in this
your Majesty's General Assembly thereof, that it may be Enacted,

And MAY IT BE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice Prayer and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of
the same, That for the propagation of the Gospel, and the Education of the
Youth of this Province in good Letters and Manners, that a certain place or
places for a Free School or Schools, or place of Study of Latin, Greek,
Writing and the like, Consisting of one Master, one Usher, and one Writing
Master or Scribe to a School, and one hundred Scholars, more or less according
to the ability of the said Free School, may be made, erected, founded,
propagated and established under your Royal Patronage, And that the most
Reverend Father in God Thomas by Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury Primate and Metropolitan of all England, may be Chancellor of the
said Schools, and that to perpetuate the Memory of your Majesty it may be
called King William's School, and managed by certain Trustees to be chosen and
appointed by your Sacred Majesty, (to wit) as also by the following Trustees
nominated and appointed by this present general Assembly, that is to say, by
your Majesty's said Governor Francis Nicholson Esquire The Honorable Sir Thomas
Laurence Barro-Knight, Colonel George Robotham, Colonel Charles Hutchins,
Colonel John Addison of your Majesty's Honorable Council of this Province; The
Reverend Divine Mr. Peregrine Cony and Mr. John Hewett, together with Robert
Smith, Kenelm Chesledyn, Henry Coursey, Edward Dorsey, Thomas Ennals, Thomas
Tasker, Francis Jenkins, William Dent, Thomas Smith, Edward Booth by, John
Thompson and John Bigger Gentlemen or the greatest part or the Successors of
them, upon and in a certain place of this Province called Ann-Arundel Town upon
Seavern River, and at such other place or places as by the General Assembly of
this Province shall be thought convenient and sitting to be supported and
maintained in all time coming, and that your Majesty will for your Heirs and
Successors grant and give leave to the said Francis Nicholson Esquire and Trustees
abovesaid, or the major part or longest Livers of them that they may be enabled
to take, hold and enjoy, and that they may be apt and capable in Law for
taking, holding and enjoying all Manors, of Lands, Tenements, Rent Services,
Rectory's, Portions, Annuity's, Pensions, with all other Inheritances,
Franchisses and Possession whatsoever Spiritual or Temporal to the value of
fifteen hundred pounds Sterling, and all other Goods, Chattels, Money and
Personal Estate whatsoever of the Gift of any persons whatsoever that is
willing to bestow them for the said use, or any other Gifts, Grants, Asignments
Legacyes, or Appointment of the same, or of any of them or of any other Goods
whatsoever: with this express intention and trust put in them, That the said
Francis Nicholson and other the Trustees aforesaid, or the major part or
longest livers of them, shall take and hold the premises and shall dispose of
the same and of the Rents, Revenues, and Profits thereof or of any of them;
only for defraying the Charges that shall be laid out in erecting and fitting
the Edifices of the said intended Freeschool or Schools as they or the major
part of them shall think most expedient, until the said Freeschool or Schools
shall be actualy erected, founded, and established. And upon the Trust and
Intention, That as soon as the said Free School or Schools shall be erected and
founded: the said Francis Nicholson and other the Trustees above named, shall
from time to time and at all times hereafter apply all such Lands Tenements
Rents Annuitys Goods Chatels Profits Incoms or Advantages whatsoever Real or
Personal, or as much as shall not be laid out and bestowed upon building the
laid Freeschool or Schools as aforesaid as shall be hereafter expressed. And
that when the said Freeschool or Schools shall be so erected and established.
the said Francis Nicholson and other the Trustees above named or the major part
or longest livers of them shall Apply and Appropriate to the Use Benefit and
Maintenance out of the Revenues or Incoms to the said Trustees to the use
aforesaid, the sum of One hundred and twenty Pounds Sterling per Annum for the
salary support and maintenance of the said first mentioned Froeschool, Master
Usher and Scribe, and the necessary Repairs and Improvements of the same, as to
the said Francis Nicholson and Trustees aforesaid, the major part or Survivors
of them shall seem expedient from time to time to ordain in the Premises, and
that for the uses and purposes aforesaid, they the said Francis Nicholson and
the Trustees aforesaid, the Survivor or the major part of them shall and may be
incorporated into a Body politic by the Name of the Rectors, Governors
Trustees, and Visitors of the Free-Schools of Maryland, with full power to
plead and be impleaded, to Sue and be Sued, to defend and be defended, to
answer and be answered in all and every Cause, Complaint and Action, real,
personal and mixed of whatsoever kind and nature it shall be, whatsoever Courts
and Places of Judicature belonging to your Majesty your heirs or Successors, or
by from or under your Royal Grant or Authority, and that your Majesty will be
graciously pleased to give and grant your special License as far as your
Majesty sees expedient to the said Francis Nicholson Esquire and the other Trustees
aforesaid, that they or any of them, or that any person or persons whatsoever
after the said Free School or Schools is, or are so erected, founded and
established or before, may have power to give and grant, assign and bequeath
all or any manner of Lands, Tenements, Rents Services, Portions, Annuity's,
Pensions, Inheritances, Franchisses and Possessions whatsoever Spiritual or
Temporal to the value of fifteen hundred pounds Sterling per Annum besides all
Burdens, Reprizals and Reparations to them the said Francis Nicholson and
other the Governors, Trustees and Visitors of the said Freeschools of
Maryland, the major part or Survivors of them incorporate for the uses
aforesaid, to them and their Successors for ever.

And further, that the said Francis Nicholson and other the Governors,
Trustees and Visitors aforesaid the longest Livers and Successors of them, be
the true, sole and undoubted Visitors, Trustees and Governors of the said
Freeschool or Schools in perpetual Succession for ever, to be continued in the
way and manner hereafter specified, with full and absolute Power, liberty and
authority in making and ordaining such Laws, Orders and Rules for the good
government of the said Freeschool or Schools, as to them the said Trustees,
Governor and Visitors aforesaid and their Successors, shall from time to time
according to the various occasions and circumstances seem most fit and
requisite, all which shall be observed by the Master, Usher, Tutors and Scholars
of the said School, upon the penalty therein contained.

Provided notwithstanding, that the said Rules, Laws and Orders be no ways
contrary to your Majesty's Prerogative Royal, nor to the Laws and Statutes of
your Kingdom of England or Province of Maryland aforesaid, or to the Canons and
Constitutions of the Church of England by Law Established, and that they the
said Governors, Visitors and Trustees aforesaid and their Successors, shall
for ever be Eighteen Men, and not exceeding Twenty in the whole, to be elected
and constituted in the way and manner hereafter specified, of which one
discreet and fit person that shall be called Rector of the said Freeschool and
Schools, and that from time to time, and in all times coming the said Rector
shall exercise the said Office during one Year (Death and Legal Disability
excepted) and after till some others of the said Visitors and Governors of the
said School or Schools shall be duly elected, preferred and Sworn to the said
Office, and that from time to time, and at all times coming after the said Year
is expired, or after the death of the said Rector, the Year the Visitors or
Governors of the said School or Schools or the greatest part of them or their
Successors should have power to elect and nominate another discreet and fit
person from amongst themselves to be Rector of the said Freeschool or Schools,
and that he who is so elected, preferred and nominated into the place of Rector
as aforesaid shall have power to have, exercise and enjoy the said Office of
Rector for one whole Year except before excepted then next ensuing and
thereafter until some other Rector of the said School or Schools, shall be duly
elected, preferred to and Sworn in the said Office, and to perpetuate the
Succession of the said Governors, Roctors and Visitors, and that as often as
one or more of the Governors or Visitors of the said School or Schools, shall
die or remove himself and family out of this Province into any other Country
for good and all; That then and so often, the Rector for the time being and the
other Visitors and Governors of the said Free School and Schools then surviving
and remaining within the Province or the major part of them, shall and may have
leave to Elect, Nominate and Choose one or more of the principal or better
sort of the Inhabitants of the said Province into the place or places of the
said Visitors and Governors so dead or removed, and so to fill up the number
of the Visitors and Governors for the said School and Schools, and that he and
they be elected and chosen shall take his and their Corporal Oath before the
Rector and other Visitors and Governors as aforesaid, or the major part of
them well and saithfully to execute the said Office, which Oath the Rector and
two or more of the said Visitors shall have power to administer, and that after
taking the said Oath he or they shall be of the number of the said Visitors and
Governors of the said School or Schools.

And further, that the said Rector for the time being by and with the Advice
and Consent of three or more of the said Governors and Visitors shall and may
from time to time and as often as need shall require and they see convenient
call and convocate the said Governors and Visitors together, to do, consult
and consent to such things as for the propagation, good and benefit of the said
Freeschool or Schools shall be ordained and established, and that the said
Governors and Visitors shall and may hold such their Court or Convocation in
such Freeschool or such part thereof as to them shall seem convenient, and
shall and may from time to time punish any disorders, breaches, misdemeanors or
offenses of any Master, u^her, scribe or scholars of any such freeschool or
schools, against any orders, Laws or Decrees of the said Governors and
Visitors aforesaid, and if they find cause to alter, displace aad turn out any
Master, Usher or Scribe of any such School or Schools, and put others in their
Steads and Places as to the said Roctors, Governors and Visitors of the said
School or Schools, or the major part of them shall seem convenient and fitting,
and also that the said Rectors, Governors and Visitors of the said Freeschool
or Schools and their Successors shall have one common Seal which they make use
of in whatsoever cause and business belonging to them and their Successors
relating to the said Office of Rector, Governors and Visitors of the said
Freeschool and Schools, and that the said Governors and Visitors may have
leave to break, change and renew their said Seal from time to time at their
pleasure as they shall see most expedient.

And further, that it may please your Majesty to grant to the said Rector,
Governors and Visitors aforesaid of the said Freeschool or Schools aforesaid,
that as soon as they shall be enabled by any Gifts, Grants, Pensions, Donations
or Incoms of any Manners, Lands, Tenements or other Estate whatsoever real or
personal exceeding the Sum of one hundred and twenty pounds per Annum, allotted
and allowed for support and reparations of the first streeschool at Seavern as
aforesaid, that then as they shall be enabled as aforesaid, the said Rector
Governors and Visitors shall proceed to erect found and build one other
Free School at the Town of Oxford on the Easterrn shore of this Province in
Talbot County, or in such place of the same County as to the said Rector
Governors and Visitors aforesaid shall seem most expedient. And after the same
shall be built founded and established, to appropriate and apply to the said
second Free School out of the Treasure arrowing to them for the Benefit and
Advantage of Free-Schools aforesaid over and above the One hundred and twenty
pounds per Year allowed as aforesaid to the first Free School. The like sum of
One hundred and twenty pounds per Year for the Benefit Advantage and Support of
such second Free School, and shall and may place a Master Usher and Scribe
thereon as in the other first Freescool as aforesaid, and shall in all respects
be under the same benefits, privileges. Injunctions and Restrictions as the
said first Freeschool, and also after the said second Freeschool is built,
erected founded and furnished the said Rectors, Governors and Visitors shall
as fast as they shall be enabled as aforesaid, proceed to the erecting other
and more Freeschools in this Province, that is to say in every County of this
Province, at Present one Freeschool, and shall and may be empowered to
establish, constitute, enjoin and restrain to and under the fame benefits
advantages, injunctions and restrictions as aforesaid, and appropriate and
apply such and so much of the said Revennue not before disposed or ordained' to
each Freeschool, as to them shall seem most convenient and expedient, not
exceeding one hundred and twenty pounds per Annum as aforesaid.

And Be it hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that a supplementary Act
for Freeschools made at a Session of Assembly begun and held at the City of St.
Marys the 21st. day of September 1694. be and is hereby utterly repealed and
made void.

An Act for keeping good Rules and Orders in the Port of Annapolis.

Laws made at a General Assembly held at the Port of Anuapolis the 26th, Day of
May Anno Domini 1697.

An Act for the confirming Titles of Land given to the use of the Churches and
several Chapels within this Province, impowering the Commissioners of the
respective Countys and Vestrys of the respective Parishes to take up certain
parcels of Land for the use of the same.
WHEREAS several pious and well disposed persons have given and granted unto
the respe live Parishes whereto they do belong certain parcels of Ground for
the use and benefit of a Church and Churchyard, which said Land through the
neglect of the Vestry's whereby an Act of Assembly of this Province made at a
Sessions, of Assembly held at the Port of Annapolis the twenty th day of July
Anno Domini 1696, Entitled an act for the s^r^^ce of Almighty God and
Establishment of the ^^rotestant ^eligion, were thereby capacitated and
empowered by the names of the principal Vestryman and the rest of his Brethren
Vestrymen of such Parish to take and receive any Deed or Gift for the same,
notwithstandng the charges of the respective Parishes in building Churches or
Chapels thereon is like to be lost, or the Title thereunto very disputable, for
want of such Deed of gift or Conveyance Inroled and Recorded as by the Act of
Assembly is required, the first Dhnors or Grantors thereof being dead, and the
Heirs of such Donors or Grantors either refusing to make over such Land as
aforesaid, or under age not capable of so doing.

BE IT THE REFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Ma-jesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that all such Lands as have formerly been given to the use of any Church
or Chapel, and for which the Donors or grantors thereof in their Life times
having not given any Deed of Gifr for the same, or otherwise refusing so to do,
and in confidence of whose promise the Parish have been at the charge of
erecting and building their Churches thereon, be and remain to the use of the
Parish for ever, against all Claims or pretensions of Claims made, or that
hereafter shall be made by such Donors or Grantors, or his or their Heirs
Executors or Assigns as firmly and absolutely as if the same had been made over
by Deed of Gift, Grant or otherwise inroled and Recorded as aforesaid.

And to the end it may be known what Lands have been so given to the use of any
Church or Chapel aforesaid and made over and confirmed by Deed of Gift or Grant
as aforesaid, the Grand Jury in each respective County within this Province
next after the publication of this Act shall have in charge to inquire by what
titles such Lands, whereupon the several Churches or Chapels aforesaid, within
the respective Parishes and in their Precincts are held? and to render an
Account there of to the Court, who are hereby empowered where any such Lands
shall appear to be given and not confirmed as aforesaid, in open Court to
examine Witnesses in perpetunm Rei Memoriam, and the same Cause to be Recorded
in the County Records, which shall be deemed, adjudged and taken in all Courts
of Record within this Province as sufficient proof of the Donation or Grant, as
also to the quantity of Acres given or granted as aforesaid, and in case it
shall appear upon such examination, that Lands have been given for the use of
any Church, Chapel and Churchyard as aforesaid, but the quantity thereof not
mentioned by the Donors or Grantors thereof as aforesaid, that then, and in
every such case, the Vestry of the respective Parish where such Gift or Grant
has been made, and the quantity not ascertained as aforesaid, may demand and
take of such Lands for the use of the Church and thereto adjacent two Acres and
no more, which they shall cause to be Surveyed and staked out, and make return
of two Certificates thereof, one of which must be Recorded in the County Court,
and the other in the high Court Chancery, there to be Registered in perpetuam
Rei Memoriam as aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that where the Vestry of any Parish within this Province
have, or shall think convenient to place either Church or Chapel of Ease within
their respective Parishes for the better convenieney of their Parishoners, but
the Owner or Owners of such Land chosen out and appointed by such Vestry as
aforesaid, for the use of their Parish aforesaid, either refusing to make sale
thereof, or being unreasonable in his or their demands for the same, or
otherwise incapacitated by nonage, non sane memaria, or being beyond the Seas,
that then and in every such case, the respective Vestry's of the respective
Parishes shall apply themselves to the commissioners of the County Court
whereto they belong, upon whose application the said Commissioners shall
forthwith grant their Warrants to the Sherrif of their County thereby requirng
him at a certain day and time to be by them nominated and appointed to impannel
a Jery of substantial Freeholders next adjacent to the Land in quest aforesaid,
which said Commissioners and Jury aforesaid shall proceed in all things as by
another Act of Asiembly Entitled (an Act impowering the Commissioners of the
several and respective Countys to take up and purchase Lands for their County
Court Houses) they are directed not exceeding two Acres, as before in this Act
is mentioned and expressed, any thing in this Act, or any other ordained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the better enabling Mrs. Catherine Herman Widow and Relict of
Colonel Casparus Augustine Herman deceased, to sell Land in the Port of
Annapolis according to the contract of her said deceased Husband.

An Act impowering the Commissioners of each respective County to purchase
Lands for the use of their respective Courts.
WHEREAS it has been represented to this General Assembly that sundry Court
Houses within this Province, for the better convenience of their respective
Countys have been built upon Land whereunto the Countys could make no legal
Claim or Challenge, the Owners thereof either refusing to make sale, or
otherwise incapacirated or so doing by reason of nonage, or being beyond the
Seas, which evil if not prevented will be very prejudicial to such Counrys who
have already laid out and expended considerable Sums of Tobacco in erecting and
building such Court Houses aforesaid.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that the Commissioners of the several and respective Countys within this
Province, whose Court Houses are erected that did otherwise hold Courts on
Lands whereunto the respective County can lay no just Title or Claim to as
aforesaid, do at or before the tenth day of April next ensuing meet at their
tespective Court Houses (if any) or otherwise at such usual place where Courts
are by them held as aforesaid, and there treat, contract and agree to and with
the Owner or Owners of such Lands whereon such Court House shall stand or
Courts be held as aforesaid, for such and so much Land in that part and place
where such court house stands or courts held as aforesaid as to them may seem
convenient for the use thereof not exceeding the quantity of three Acres, and
upon agreement with such person or persons or persons partys Owners as
aforesaid, or his or their Artorney or Attorneys by him or them empowered to
make sale thereof to receive a Conveyance thereof in the Name of his Majesty
his Heirs and Successors, to the use of the County beforementioned, and the
same shall Record in the County Courts as by Act of Assembly is required, and
the Sum or Sums of Tobacco by them so contracted and agreed for to be Leavied
by an equal assessment on the respective Countys for and in satisfaction of the
purchases aforesaid. But in case such Owner or Owners, or his or their
Attorneys Lawfully empowered shall refuse to make sale thereof, or be
unreasonable in his or their demands, or other wise incapacitated to make sale
thereof by reason either of nonage, non sane memoria or being beyond the Seas,
that then and in every such ease, it shall and may be Lawful for the
Commissioners of the said several and respective Countys by virtue of this Act
to issue out Warrants to the respective Sherrifs thereby commanding and
impowering them to impannel a jury of substantial freeholders within their
respective Precincts at a certain day and time to appear before the said
Commissioners on the Lands aforesaid, which jury upon their Oaths to them first
administered by the said commioners are to inquire into the true value of such
and so much of the said Land as by the Commissioners they shall be directed not
exceeding three Acres aforesaid, and to assess such damage and recompense for
the same as they shall think fit to be awarded to the Owners and others on
their behalf entrusted, and the return of the jury to be by them made in two
parts, one whereof is to be sent to his Excellency the Governor and Council of
this Province for the time being, the other to be Recorded within the several
and respective County Court whereto they properly belong, shall be a perpetual
Bar to the Claim or pretension of Claim made, or that shall hereafter be made
to the whole or any part thereof by the owner or owners, or his or their heirs
executors or assigns for ever. And the damage or recompense by the several and
respective jury's awarded for and in satisfaction of such Lands by them
inquired of to the Owner or Owners thereof as aforesaid, shall be by the
Commissioners of the respective Countys for the time being when thereunto
required by such Owner or Owners or others Lawfully entitled to the damage
thereof, to be leavied and assessed in such method and manner as in this Act is
before mentioned and expressed. And for the better ascertaining the bounds of
the said Land so purchased or taken up for the use of the Countys aforesaid, it
shall and may be Lawful to and for the said Commissioners who are also hereby
empowered and required to issue out Warrants to his Majesty's Surveyors of the
respective Countys whereto they belong to appear at such day and place to be by
them appointed as aforesaid, then and there to survey and lay out in the
presence of the jury aforesaid such Lands by them taken up for the use of the
County aforesaid, and the same at the end of each Angle shall bound with a good
and substantial Locust Post, or other durable Wood to be six foot under ground
at the least, and five foot above, as also such and so many Posts within the
Angles aforesaid, as may be discovered from one to the other, which Posts when
and as often as they shall decay the Commissioners shall cause new ones to be
affixed in their places at the County Charge for ever, and the respective
Surveyors return two Certificates of such Surveys by them made as aforesaid
with fair Platts of the same, one whereof to his Excellency the Governor and
Council as aforesaid, the other to be Recorded and kept in the County Court as
aforesaid, any Law Statute Custom or Usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that the Lot whereon the Court House of Dorchester County
now stands, together with the Tenements thereon being formerly taken up and
purchased as Town Land, but the Records of those Lotts taken up being either
imbezled or casually lost, be and remain to the use of the County for ever as
firmly and absolutely as if the same had been actually conveyed by the true
Owner or Owners thereof, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act directing and appointing to what use the several Rooms in the
State-House in the Town and Port of Annapolis shall be applied to.

An Act for the Naturalization of Stephen Francis an Italian, and George
Sleycomb a German born.

These following Laws were made the 3 d. day of April School. viz.

An Act vesting two Tracts of Land in John Gadsby sold him by George Norman.

An Act ascertaining the Bounds and Limitts of Ann-Arundel and Baltemore
Countys.
WHEREAS by an Ordinance of Assembly Anno Domini 1696. was appointed Capt'
Richard Hill, Major John Hammond and Major Edward Dorsey of Ann-Arundel County
Gent' also Mr. George Ashman, Mr. Richard Crumwel and Capt' Thomas Hammond of
Baltemore County Gent' with the Surveyor, for the better division of the said
County's of Ann-Arundel and Baltemore, it is humbly set forth by Thomas
Richardson Surveyor, and the greatest part of the said Gent' appointed, that in
obedience to the said Ordinance they have made a perfect division of the said
County in manner and form following, beginning at three marked Trees, viz. a
white Oak, a rod Oak and a Chestnut Tree standing about a Mile and a quarter to
the Southward of Bodkin Creek on the West side of Cheasapeak Bay, the marked
red Oak on the right Hand for Baltemore County, the Chestnut Tree on the left
Hand for Ann-Arundel, the white Oak in the middle, they standing near a Marsh
and and Pond, and running thence West until it cross the Road from the
Mountains of the mouth of Maggaty River to Richard Beards Mill, then continuing
Westward with the said Road to William Hawkins path to two marked Trees the one
for Ann-Arundel County and the other for Baltemore County, thence continuing
along the said Road to John Locketts path to two Trees for the end and purposes
aforesaid, the leaving the Road by a Line drawn West to William Slades path to
two marked Trees as aforesaid. thence continuing West between the Draughs of
Maggaty and Potapsco Rivers, until it come to a Mountain of white Stone Rock,
still continuing West to a Road going to Potapsco to Peter Bonds to two marked
Trees as aforesaid for the end and purpose aforesaid, thence continuing West to
the main Road to Potapsco Ferry to two marked Pines standing near the ready
Branch written at large on the North side of the said Trees Baltemore County,
on the South side Ann-Arundel County; from thence with a Line drawn West North
West to Elk Ridge Road to two marked Trees for the end and purposes aforesaid.
thence continuing the same course of West North West to Patuxent River, and so
up the said River to the Extent thereof for the Bounds of Baltemore County.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That
from and after the publication hereof, that all that Tract of Land lying on the
North side of the said division Lines, Trees and Land Marks before expressed,
with all the Inhabitants up the Bay, from the said Lines, Trees and Land Marks
be always taken, reputed and be in Baltemore County, and that all the Land and
Inhabitants from the said division Lines, Trees and Land Marks on the South
side of the said Lines Trees and Land Marks to the ancient extent of
Ann-Arundel County be always taken, reputed and be in Ann-Arundel County, and
Law Custom or Usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the Naturalization of Peter Dwdee a Frenchman in Somerset County.

An Act for the better division of St. Paul's and Shrewsbury Parishes.

An Act for Enabling Mrs. Elizabeth Norman Executrix of George Norman to make
over two Tracts of Land to John Gadsby and his Heirs for ever.

An Act impowering the Commissioners of Caecil County to hold a Court this
present year in April

Laws made at Annapolis the 20th. day of October School.

An Act for ascertaining the bounds of a certain Tract of Land to the use of
the Nanticoke Indians, so long as they shall occupy and live upon the same.
IT Being most just that the Indians, the ancient Inhabitants of this Province,
should have a convenient dwelling place in this their Native Country, free from
the encroachments and oppressions of the English, more especially the Nanticoke
Indians in Dorchester County, who for these many years have lived in peace and
concord with the English, and in all matters in obedience to the Government of
this Province, we the ^urgesies and Delegates of this present General Assembly
therefore do pray that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that all the Land lying and being in Dorchester Coanty, and on the North side
of Nanticoke River, butted and bounded as follows beginning at the mouth of
Chickacoan Creek and running up the said Creek bounded therewith to the head of
the main branck of the same, and from the head of the said main branch with a
line drawn to the head of a branch issuing out of the northwest Fork of
Nanticoke known by the name of Francis Anderrons branch, and from the head of
the said branch down the said Andertons branch, bounded therewith to the mouth
of the same, where it falls into the said Northwest Fork, and from thence down
the aforesaid Northwest Fork bounded therewith to the main River, and so down
the main River to the mouth of the aforesaid Chickacoan Creek, shall be unto
Panquash and Annotoughquan and the people under their Government or charge and
their heirs and successors for ever, any lawusuage custom or grant to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding, to be held of the Lord Proprietary and
his Heirs Lords Proprietarys, or Lords Proprietarys of this Province; under the
yearly Rent of one Beaver Skinn to be paid to his said ^ordship and his Heirs
as other Rents in this Province by the English used to be paid.

Provided allways, that it shall and may be Lawful for any person or persons
that has formerly taken up and obtained any Grants from the Lord Baltemore for
any Tracts or parcels of Land within the aforesaid boundarys upon the Indians
deserting or leaving the said Land, to enter, occupy and enjoy the same, any
thing in this Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it may not, nor
shall be Lawful for the Lord Baltemore to ask, have or demand any Rent or
Service for any of the said Tracts or Dividends as may or has been taken up at
aforesaid within the said Indian boundarys until such time that the takers up
or owners as aforesaid do enjoy or possess the same, any Law usuage or custom
to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act impowering Trustees to purchase Land adjoining to the Fountains of
healing Waters called the Cool Springs.
WHEREAS by the Favor of Almighty God there has been of late a discovery made
of Fountains of healing Waters called the Cool Springs lying St. Marys County,
whose healing quality has been experienced by many impotent and diseased
persons to their great help and comfort, and for that so great Blessing,
Benefits and Gifts of Almighty God may not be neglected, but a right use
thereof made, it is thought most fitting and convenient, that a particular care
should be first had of all such poor imponent persons as repair thither for
cure, and for that purpose, or other such charitable or pious uses, a small
Tract or parcel of Land near adjoining to the said Fountains may be purchased,
thereon to build and crect Houses for the entertainment of the said poor, and
Fuel for Firing and other such necessary's for their Relief, the Delegates of
this present General Assembly therefore pray it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
That the persons hereafter named may and are hereby appointed Trustees for and
on behalf of this his Majesty's Province of Maryland to buy and purchase in the
name of our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs or Successors for pious and
charitable uses fifty Acres of Land adj^yning to and in which the said
Fountains shall be included.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that Colonel John Courts, Thomas
Brooks Esquire Capt' James Keetch, Capt' Jacob Moreland of St. Marys County, and
Capt' Phillip Hoskins, Capt' John Bayne and Mr. Benjamin Hall of Charles
County, or any three of them be and are hereby empowered, authorized and
appointed Trustees as aforesaid, with sussicient power given them, whereby to
enable them to treat with, buy and purchase in the name of our Sovereign Lord
the King his Heirs or Successors for ever as aforesaid, to the uses aforesaid
fifty Acres of Land or under convenient as aforesaid, and least prejudicial to
the Owners thereof.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the said Trustees
herein nominated are hereby empowered sometime before the tenth day of April
next ensuing to meet together upon the aforesaid Land, and then and there treat
with and agree with the Owners and all persons interested in the same, and buy
and purchase of such Owners and persons interested in the same Lands fifty
Acres thereof or under near adjoining to, and in which the said Fountains and
Springs shall be included as aforesaid.

And Be it Fnacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if the person or persons in
whom the right or property of the said Land is, shall refuse to make sale
thereof, or any other Logal impediment shall disable him or them from making a
good sure firm and indefeazable Right and Title to the said fifty Acres of Land
or under, that then the said Trustees before mentioned shall call to their
asistance the high Sherrif of St. Marys County aforesaid, who is hereby
authorized and empowered to Summon and Impannel twelve good and lawful Men
Freeholders of St. Marys county aforesaid, who upon their oaths shall value the
said fifty acres of land or under according as it shall be surveyed or laid out
to which purpose thesaid trustees are hereby authorized and empowered to call
to their asistance the Kings Survey or of St. Marys County aforesaid, who is
hereby likewise authorized and empowered to survey and lay out fifty Acres of
Land or under as aforesaid, according to the direction of the Trustees before
nominated.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that for what Sum of
Money or Tobacco the said Trustees shall agree to be paid for the punchase of
the said fifty Acres of Land or under, shall by an equal assessment upon the
Inhabitants of this Province be leavy'd and paid to the owners or other persons
by them appointed to receive the same, and that all and whatfoever the said
Colonel John Courts, Thomas Brook Esquire Capt' James Keetch, Capt' Jacob Moreland,
Capt' Phillip Hoskins, Capt' John Bayne and Mr. Benjamin Hall Trustees as
aforesaid, or any three of them shall execute and do in pursuance thereof shall
and is hereby ratified, confirmed and approved of, and shall for ever hereafter
be taken and deemed to be sufficient and valid in Law, and that the said
Trustees be and are hereby indempnified and saved harmless of and from all
manner of Suits and Damages that may at any time hereafter arise, for or by
means of any Act or Acts by them to be done in and about the premises, any Law
usuage or custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act in entitle William Coursey and Elizabeth his Wife, or the Survivor of
them to sell and acknowledge such Land as were left by Colouel Vincent Low to
be sold for the payment of his just Debts.

At a Session of Assembly begun and held at the Town and Port of Annapolis June
the 27th. and ended July the 22 d. in the XI. Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord King WILLIAM the III. of England, etc. Annoque Domini 1699. his
Excellency NATHANIEL BLAKISTON Esquire being Governor etc. were Enacted these
following Laws.

An Act prohibiting Trade with the Indians for any Flesh dead or alive except
Deer and Wild Foul.
WHEREAS sundry complaints have been made by several Inhabitants of this
Province, alleging that the Indians under pretense of killing wild Hoggs, do
hunt and drive away their tame Hoggs and Cattle, and do moreover sell and trade
with the Inhabitants of this Province, and likewise with Foreigners and
Strangers for Beef and Pork

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that no
person or persons whatsoever, either Foreigner or Inhabitant shall buy trade or
barter with any Indian or Indians whomsoever for any flesh dead or living,
except Venison, wild Fowl or Vermins, upon penalty of five thousand pounds of
Tobacco, the one Moiety to the King for the Support of Government, the other
moiety to the Informer or him or them that shall Sue for the same, the said
Fine to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province, wherein no
Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

An Act for the better administration of Justice in the County Courts of this
Province.
FOR the administration of Justice and Regulation of the County Court. BE IT
ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent
of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that the
Statute Books of England to this time, and Daltens Justice of the Peace be
bought by the Justices of the Peace or Commissioners of the several County
Courts at the charge of the respective County's to be kept in their several
County Courts, that the Justices and Officers and others of the said Courts may
have Recourse to the same as they shall have occasion, and that the Justices of
the said Courts do purchase and procure the same by the first day of April next
ensuing,

And Be it also Enact by the Authority aforesaid, that the Commissioners of
each respective County Courts shall and may and are hereby empowered from time
to time, and as often as to them shall seem convenient to make and ordain such
necessary Rules and Orders for the well Governing and better Regulating the
said County Courts and the Officers to the same belonging, and Suitors to the
same, as to them in their discretion shall seem requisite, and under such Fines
as they shall think fit, not exceeding one hundred pounds of Tobacco for any
one offense, all which Fines to be employed to the use of the poor of each
respective County, which Rules and Orders so by them to be made and ordained,
shall be fairly tranforibed by their several County Clarks and at every the
County Courts set up at the Court House Door that all persons may view and
peruse the same, and regulate themselves accordingly.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that where any Judgment is had
in any County Court for any matter or thing whatsoever, and after such Judgment
is had and obtained the party against whom the same is had many times flies
into another County out of the jurisdiction of the said Court, it shall and may
be lawful for the Plaintiff to procure a Certificate from the said Justices of
such party's flying, and thereupon the Justices of the Provincial Court shall
award Execution against the Body or Goods of the said party, any Law Statute or
usuage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any Bills Bonds or
other Specialty's Book debts or Accounts proved before two Justices of the
Peace of any County, or one Justice of Provincial Court, and just Credit given
to the same, and that the Balance thereof is wholly due and unpaid, and
certyfied under the hands of the said Justices shall be sufficient evidence, as
well in the Provincial as County Court within this Province; any Law Statute or
usuage to the contraty notwithstanding,

An Act impowering Benjamin Williams Administrator de bo^is non Administratis
of Joseph Williams late of Baltemore County deceased, to fell a certain Tract
of Land in Caecil County on Sassafrax River late the Land of the said Joseph
Williams called by the name of Tibauld, and containing about three hundred
Acres for the payment of his debts, pursuant to the Will of the said Joseph.

An Act for transferring over unto Major William Whittington the debts due from
the Officers of Somerset County by ver^^e of an set for raising a supply
toward the desraying the public Charge of this Province.

An Act ascertaining what damages shall be allowed upon protested Bills of
Exchange.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
there shall not be allowed to any person or persons whatsoever having just
cause to implead any person or persons whatsoever, living or residing within
the Province, in any Court within this Province, upon any Bill of Exchange
drawn for any Sum or Sums of Money whatsoever, payable in England or else
where, and brought in here pretested more than the Sum of twenty pounds per
Cent' damages over and above the debt Sued for and Recovered, together with
ordinary Cost of Suit, any Law Statute Usuage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act for Restraining the Extortions of Sherrifs, Subshrrriss and deputy
Commissarys.
WHEREAS there has diverse great Complaints from several Party's of this
Province to this General Assembly, of several Sherrifs, Subsherrifs and deputy
Commissary's of their exacting and extorting great Sums of Tobacco above their
due, and Lawful Fees ascertained by the Act of Assembly of this Province from
several of the Inhabitants of this Province, and though the Laws of this Province
have inflicted a severe penalty upon any Officer that shall charge and receive
more than his due Fees, yet the said Officers have most cunningly and crastily
evaded the said Laws by taking Bills and Writings Obligatory without ever
delivering any account signed under their hand as the law directs, so that the
Party grieved cannot sufficiently prove the said Extortions, and so is left
without Remedy, for prevention whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that no
Sherrif, Subsherrif or deputy Commissary within this Province after the
publication of this Act in their several and respective Countys wherein they
dwell, shall take any Bond, Bill or any other Writing Obligatory of any person
or persons upon any pretense whatsoever without endorsing the Account on the
back of the said Bond, Bill or Writing Obligatory for whih the same was passed,
and if any Sherrif, Subsherrif or deputy Commissary within the Province, shall
during the time that he remain in his place or Office, upon any pretense
whatsoever take any Bond, Bill or Writing Obligatory without endor^^g the
Account on the back of the said Bill, Bond or Writing Obligatory as aforesaid
by which it may appear upon what consideration the same was taken, the said
Bill, Bond or Writing Obligatory shall be void and of no Effect, and the
Officer or Officers that took the same shall loose his debt, and for ever be
debarred of Suing another Action for the recovery of the same, any Law Statute
or Usuage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And that whereas the
said Officers are prohibitted from taking Bills upon any pretense whatsoever
during the time they remain in Office to the Intent the said Officers may
receive no damage by the Act of Assembly for Limitation of Actions.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the time the said
Officers remain in Office shall not be reckoned or accounted in the Act of
Limitation, and that whereas it has been the practice of several sherrifs of
this rovince where a person has been in prison at the suit of two or three
several persons, or has lain for the satisfaction of two or more several
Judgments for the Sherrif to charge twenty a day for each Action or Judgment.
for prevention whereof.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Sherrif after the
publication of this Act shall exact or take any more than twenty pounds of
Tobacco per day of any Prisoner though he lies for the satisfaction of several
judgments, he shall be liable to the pains and penaltys of a certain Act of
Assembly for Settling Officers Fees.

An Act for Amerciamonts in the Provincial and County Courts.
WHEREAS many Suits are arisen upon frivelous occasions by letigipersons, for
prevention where (...) the future,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present general Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
all persons whatsoever that are cast in any Cause, be they Plaintiff or
Defendant, shall be amerced beads the damage and costs in the Provincial Court
fifty pounds of Tobacco, to be employed as the Governor and Council shall
think fit, and in the County Courts thirty pounds of Tobacco, to be employed
and disposed of toward defraying the County Charge in such manner as the
Commissioners of each respective County shall think fit and for the due
collecting thereof

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Clark of the Provincial
Court and the several County Courts keep an exact account of the Amerciaments,
and deliver or send the same to the several Sherrifs of the particular Countys,
who are hereby required to collect the same with the Leavy, and are accordingly
empowered for default of payment to make distress, and commanded not to return
any Arrears, except in cases of Executors and Administrators, who cannot pay
without Orders.

And Be it further Enacted, that the Clark of the respective Courts give unto
the chief Judge of such Court a List of the Amerciaments that Court imposed.

An Act for stay of Executions after the tenth day of April Yearly.
WHEREAS many of the Inhabitants of this Province are, and have been
exceedingly grieved and burdened by Executions laid upon them for Tobacco in
Summer time, when it is not portable for them to procure Tabaco for the payment
and satisfaction of their Creditors. by means whereof they are oftentimes kept
in prison a long time, and thereby disabled from making and tending their
cropps, to the great prejudice if not ruin of many the Inhabitants of this
Province, being thereby left destitute of any means to satisfy their
Creditors, for prevention whereof for the future,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That
after the tenth day of April in any year, no Execution shall issue out of any
Courts of this Province against the Body or Goods of any person or persons
inhabiting in this Province till the tenth day of October next, or until the
tenth day of October in any year during the continuance of this Act for any
debt or debts, or upon any Action, udgment or udgments ^ued, had or Recovered
again the inhabitants of or within this Province, in the Provincial or in any
of the County Courts within this province, for any cause matter or thing
whatsoever, Proviced such person or persons again, whom any such Judgment is
obtained, together with two other persons, such as the Justices shall approve
of, come before one Justice or more of the provincial Court, or before the
Mayor Recorder or any two of the ^^ermen of the City of ^t. Marys, or two
Commissioners of the ^ort of A^^ap^^, or two Justices or more of the respective
County Courts where such Judgment is obtained as aforesaid, and (...) all
confess judgment for his debt and costs of uits adjudged, with ^ay of Execution
till the tenth day of October then next following and thereof procure
Certificate under the hand of the same Justice or Justices before whom the said
udgment shall be confessed, and such Certificate shall be a sufficient
Supersedeas to the Sherrif to forbear serving Execution upon the Body or ^oods
of the person so obtaining such Certificate, and if the perty be taken in
Execution before such Certificate be produced, that then such certificate being
obtained afterward as aforesaid shall be a sufficient Supersedeas to the
Sherrif for the Release of such person out of frison upon the Execution, the
party paying or giving Security to such Sherrif for his due Fees for that
Imprisonment and the Justice or Justices before whom such judgment shall be
confessed as aforesaid shall return the Judgment so confessed unto the Clark of
that respective Court where the first judgment was obtained to be entered upon
Record, for which entry the Clark shall receive as a Fee five pounds of Tobacco
and no more, and that after the said tenth day of October it shall be Lawful to
take out Execution upon the judgment confessed as aforesaid without any Scire
Facias or any other delay against either the Principle or the Securetys, or all
or either of them for (...) judgment so confessed as aforesaid, any Law usuage or
custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act impowering the Vestrymen etc. to assess their Parishoners for finishing
and reparing of Charc^es.
WHEREAS by an Act made at a Session of Assembly begun and held at the Port of
Annapolis the ninth day of ^uly in the Year of our Lord 1696 int^uied An Act
for the Service of Almighty God and the Essablishment of the ^rote and Religion
within this Province, among other things is contained, in the ^xth Article that
the several Vestrymen of ea^h respective Farish shall within twelve Months
after the publication of this Act, provide at the charge of the pari^ fair
Register Books of paper or parchment, the which the said Registor shall keep
and therein shall ^eg^^er and fairly enter in writing the publication of all
Marriages, Births of Children, Baptisms ^urials etc.

And further in the said Clause it is Enacted, that if the Vestrymen aforesaid
shall fail in providing such a Book as aforesaid, within the time aforesaid,
they shall forfeit five hundred pounds of Tobacco each Vestryman (the Minister
excepted) etc. and notwithstanding ways prescribed how the said Vestrymen
should assess their Parishes for the pucha^ng of the said Pegister Books.

And further it is said in the twelfth Article of the aforesaid Act, Be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that where there is an Incumbent upon the
Benefice and officiate in no other place, the Vestrymen of the said Parish
shall not under color or pretext of finishing the said Church or keeping the
same in Repair, with hold or detain from the said incumbent any part of the
forty pounds of Tobacco per ^ole under any pretext whatsoever, except what is
by this Act before appointed. But forasmuch as most of the Churches in this
Province are either not wholly finished or out of Ropair, and no Rule is
provided (by the aforesaid Act) by which the several ^arish Churches shall be
finished and kept in Repair. to the end therefore that the said Vestrys may be
supplied with such Sum or Sums of Tobaco as shall be requirt and necessary to
purchase writing Books and other necessary and useful Books for their better
direction and guide in their Proceedings as also for repairing their Churches
or other Parochial Charges, it is prayed that it may be Enacted

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that when and as often as the necessity of each respective Parish shall require
such Repairs or Supply's, the Vestrymen and Church Wardens thereof shall apply
themselves to the justices of the County Court at the time of the laying the
County Leavy, who upon the necessity appearing to them, shall and are hereby
empowered to raise by an equal assessment by the Pole on the Inhabitants of
such respective parish such Sums of Tobacco, as by the said Justices shall be
adjudged necessary to supply the occasions aforesaid over and above the County
leavy, not exceeding the Sum of ten pounds Tobacco per Pole in one Year, which
Sum so raised shall be collocted and gathered by the Sherrif of the same
County. and paid to the Vestrymen of such respective Parish or Parishes, who
shall at the next County Leavy or sooner if they can, give a true account to
the said Justices how and for what they have laid out and bestowed the said
Tobacco so raised, any Law Statute or Usuage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

An Act for Appeals and regulating Writts of Error.
FORASMUCH as the Liberty of Appeals and Writts of Error from the judgment of
the Provincial and County Courts of this Province is found to be of great use
and benefit to the good people thereof.

BE IT HEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that no Execution upon any judgment obtained either in Provincial or
County Courts, or other inferior Courts of Record within this Province shall
be stayed or delayed, or any Supersedeas upon such judgment granted or issued
forth upon Appeal or Writ of Error from any such Court or Courts of Record as
aforesaid to the Court before whom such Appeal ought to be brought, or before
whom such Writ of Error ought to be heard, tried and determined, unless such
person or persons in whose name such Appeal or Writ of Error shall be made or
brought aforesaid, or some other in his her or their behalf shall immediately
upon making such Appeal or Suing out such Writ of Error as aforesaid, enter
into Bond with sufficient Suretys, such as the justices of the Court by whom
Judgment shall be given as aforesaid or the keeper of the Seal for the time
being, to whom application shall be made for such Writ of Error as aforesaid
shall approve of in double the Sum recovered by such judgment obtained as
aforesaid, with condition that if the party Appellant, or party Suing out such
Writ of Error as aforesaid, shall not pursue the directions in this Act
hereafter mentioned at the next Court ensuing before whom such Appeal or Writ
of Error to be tried as aforesaid, and prosecute the same with effect; and also
satifie and pay to the said party his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns
in case the said Judgment should be affirmed, as well all and singular the
Debts, Damages and Cost adjudged by the Court before whom such Action from
whose judgment such Appeal shall be made, or thereon a Writ of Error brought
as aforesaid, shall have been originally tried; as also all costs and damages
that shall be awarded at the Court before whom such Appeal or Writ of Error
shall be heard, tried and determined as aforesaid, then the said Bond to be and
remain in full force and virtue.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that no person or persons whatsoever against whom any
Judgment shall be given in any County Court within this Province, wherein the
debt or damages for which such Judgment shall be given, shall have any Appeal
or Writ of Error from the said County Courts or other inseriour Court of
Record to the Provincial Courts wherein the debt or damages recovered do not
mount unto the Sum of six pounds Sterling, or twelve hundred pounds of Tobacco;
and that no person or persons whatsoever against whom any Judgment shall be
given in the Provincial Court of this Province, wherein the debt or damages
recovered shall not exceed the Sum of fifty pounds Sterling or ten thousand
pounds of Tobacco shall be allowed any Appeal or Writ of Error to the
Governor and Council of this Province, but the Judgment of the Justices of the
said Courts by whom such Judgments shall be given as aforesaid, and thereupon
entered shall be definitive for any such debt and damages as aforesaid, any Law
usuage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding,

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aferesaid, that the method and rule for the prosecution of Appeala
and Writts of Error shall for the future be in manner and form as is hereafter
mentioned and expressed, that is to say, the party appealing or suing out a Writ
of Error as aforesaid, shall procure a Copy or Transcript of the full
proceedings of the said Court from whence such Appeal shall be made, or against
whose Judgment a Writ of Error shall be brought as aforesaid, under the Hand
of the Clerk of the said Court and the Seal thereof, and shall cause the same
to be transmitted to the Court before whom such Appeal or Writ of Error is or
ought to be heard, tried and determined as aforesaid, and also in the same
Court file in writing according to the Rule of the said Court, such error in
the proceedings as the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error shall think fit to
assign, or such causes or reasons as he or they had for making the said Appeal,
or suing out such Writ of Error as aforesaid; upon which transcript the said
Court to whom such Appeal shall be made, or before whom such Writ of Error
shall be brought as aforesaid, shall proceed to give Judgment.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that all Appeals made in manner aforesaid, shall be admitted
and allowed of by the superior Court to whom such Appeal shall be made as
aforesaid in nature of a Writ of Error, and that every Clerk of a Court shall
at time of the sitting of that Court to which they respectively belong, and
when any Appeal shall be demanded to enter a Memorandum of such demand, as well
in his or their Journal as in the fair Records of the proceedings of such
Court, and that no Clerk of a Court do refuse or delay upon the request of any
Appellant as aforesaid, to write and make out a transcript of the whole
proceedings as aforesaid, under his Hand and the Seal of the said Court as
aforesaid, upon penalty to pay the respective damages which such Appellant
shall sustain by such refusal or delay as aforesaid, the said party paying or
securing to be paid such respective Clerk his just Fees for the same according
to Law.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that these Officers hereafter
mentioned shall have no other Fees than are hereafter mentioned, that is to say
for a Writ of Error to the Secretary fifty pounds of Tobacco, and to the
keeper of the Seal for the Seal thereof one hundred and twenty pounds of
Tobacco, for a Supersedeas to the Secretary fifty pounds of Tobacco, and to the
keeper of the Seal one hundred and twenty pounds of Tobacco, for a Scire Faces
ad audiendum Errores to the Secretary fifty pounds of Tobacco, and to the
keeper of the Seal one hundred and twenty pounds of Tobacco, any Law usuage or
custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that all Appeals or Writts of Error triable before the
Governor and Council if it so shall happen, that the former Judgment given
shall be by the said Governor and Council afirmed, such a determination shall
be final and without any further Review, unless such Judgment so given shall
exceed the Sum of three hundred pounds Sterling, or the Sum of sixty thousand
pounds of Tobacco; then and in every such case the party against whom such
judgment shall be given, may appeal to the King and Council in England.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every
person or persons that shall conceive him or themselves relievable in Equity
from any Judgment given or obtained against him in the Provincial or County
Court aforesaid, shall exhibit his Bill and proceed in Chancery before any
Appeal be entered or prosecuted before the Governor and Council and not
afterward, and that all such persons as conceive themselves grieved by any
Decree in Chancery shall be at liberty to exhibit his Prayer to the Governor
and Council to review and examine the same, and that the Judgment Sentence or
Decree of such Court of Review shall be final as aforesaid, unless as aforesaid
the original Debt or Damages shall exceed three hundred pounds Sterling, or
sixty thousand pounds of Tobacco as aforesaid; then and in every such cause to
apeal to the King and Council as aforesaid, and that one Act of Assembly made
at an Assembly begun and held at the City of St. Merys the 21st. day of
September Anno Domini 1694. entitled an Act for Apeals and Regulating Writts
of Error be and is hereby Repealed, and that all Appeals or Writts of Error
already made and brought, or hereafter to be made or brought before the
Governor and Council, shall and may be heard by the said Governor and Council
out of Assembly time any thing in the same Writ, any other former Law or
Practico to the contrary notwithstanding. And for that it may so happen that
the Governor of this Province for the time being may hereafter be concern'dl
in an Apapeal made, or Writ of Error brought from the Judgment of the
Provincia and County Court to the Governor and Council aforesaid, or he
otherwise indisposed or absent.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that it shall and may be sufficient in every such case for
the Council only to hear and determine such matters of controversy, whereof the
first of the Council in Commission being then present shall preside, whose
Judgment thereupon shall be definitive, except before excepted, in as full and
ample manner as though the said Governor were then actually present and
presiding, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the more speedy conveying the public Letters and Pacquets of this
Province, and settling a Revennue on the Sherrifs for defraying the charge
thereof.
FOR AS MUCH as several of the inhabitants of this Province having been
formerly subject to great and manifest Inconveniency's by reason of pressing of
horses, under pretext of carrying and conveying of public Letters and
Pacquets, for prevention whereof, and that due care may be taken for the
future, that all public Letters and Pacquets relating to his Majesty, or
public Service of this Province, be securely and expeditiously conveyed
according to their directions, the Delegates of this present General Assembly
do pray that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that the Sherrif of each respective County is hereby enjoined and commanded to
take care of all public Letters and Pacquets, and expeditiously to convey them
according to their directions to the next Sherrif or under Sherrif of the
adjacent County, and for the encouragement of the several and respective
Sherrifs and their diligence in conveying such public Letters and Pacquets,
that they may be allowed the several Sums hereafter expressed, to be laid in the
public Leavy of this Province, viz. to the Sherrif of Ann-Arundel County
fifteen hundred pounds of Tobacco, who is also hereby obliged to convey all
such Letters and Pacquets as are directed and must go over to the Eastern Shore
to Kent Issand, and there to be delivered to the Sherrif of Talbot County or
his Deputy, to the Sherrif of Talbot County fifteen hundred pounds of Tobacco,
who is hereby also obliged to convey all such Letters and Pacquets that are
directed to the Port of Anapolis to the said Port, to the Sherrif of Kent
County eight hundred pounds of Tobacco, who is also hereby obliged to convey
all such Letters and Pacquets as are directed to the Port of of Annapolis to
Kent Island, and deliver them to the Sherrif or under Sherrif of Talbot County,
except he can convey them a more ready and expeditious way to Annapolis, who is
also hereby obliged to convey all such Letters and Pacquets to the Port of
Annapolis as aforesaid, to the Sherrif of Caecil County one thousand pounds of
Tobacco, who is also obliged to convey all such Letters and Pacquets as are
directed to the Northward to the Town of New Castle upon Delaware, to the
Sherrff of Dorchester County eight hundred pounds af Tobacco, to the Sherrif of
Somerset County five hundred pounds of Tobacco, to the Sherrif of Calvert
County eight hundred pounds of Tobacco, to the Sherrtf of Prince Georges County
one thousand pounds of Tobacco, to the Sherrif of St. Mary's County eight
hundred pounds of Tobacco, to the Sherrif of Charles County one thousand pounds
of Tobacco, to the Sherrif of Baltemore County eight hundred pounds of Tobacco,
which said several and respective Sums of Tobacco shall be Annually allowed and
paid to the several and respective Sherrifs as aforesaid, in consideration
whereof they Sherrifs of the said several and respective Countys shall defray
all such charges as shall accrue by reason of conveying any such Letters or
Pacquets, any former Law Usuage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any Sherrif under
Sherrif or Deputy that shall neglect or delay the speedy conveying any such
Letters or Pacquets shall forfeit and pay unto his Sacred Majesty for every
such offense the Sum of five hundred pounds of Tobacco, one half to the
Informer or him or them that will Sue for the same, to be employed for the
defraying of the County charges where any such neglect shall happen, to be
recovered in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province, by
Action of Debt, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all such public
Letters and Pacquets be indorsed for his Majesty's Service, and with the
persons name that sends them, and if any person or persons shall at any time
after the publication of this Act, presume to indorse any Letter or Letters,
Packet or Pacquets so as aforesaid, which are not for the public Service,
shall forfeit and pay for such offense five hundred pounds of Tobacco to be
employed for the use aforesaid, to be recovered in manner aforesaid.

An Act impowering Commissioners of the County Courts to leavy and raise Money
to defray the necessary charge of their Countys.
FOR AS MUCH as in the interval of Assemblys in this Province, there have been
several necessary charges laid out and expended in the several and respective
Countys of this Province, by the several and respective Commissioners of the
said Countys and others, for the good and welfare and conservation of the peace
of this Province, and of and within the said Countys, and which ought to be
born by the several and respective Countys distinctly, and have been formerly
used and accustomed to be reimbursed and defrayed, paid and satisfied, by and
out of the County Leavy, Leavied and Assessed by the Commissioners of the said
respective Countys, by an equal assessment upon the Estates and persons of the
inhabitants of the said several and respective Countys, but the said
Commissioners of the said County Courts not having sufficient Warrant and
Authority to raise such Leavy.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
for the future it shall and may be Lawful to and for the several and respective
Commissioners of the several and respective County Courts within this
Province,, at their several and respective Courts to be held for the said
Countys upon examination had before them of the public charges of their said
several and respective County's, and allowances by them made of the same, to
leavy and raise Tobacco for payment and satisfaction of the said several and
respective County Charges and the Sherrifs Sallary for the collecting thereof,
by an equal assessment of the taxable persons of the said several Countys; any
Law Act custom and usuage heretofore had and made to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always that the accounts of the said County charge be kept upon
Record in a Book fair written by themselves signed by the Clerk of the said
County Court, and that upon complaint of any person that the said charges are
not allowable, or that he is over charged or otherwise agrieved, the said Acts
shall be examined and rectified in the Provincial Court of this Province.

An Act for the marking high ways, and making the heads of Rivers, Creeks,
Branches and Swamps passable for Horse and Foot.
WHEREAS it is thought convenient and very much for the benefit of the
inhabitants of this Province, that Roads and Paths be marked, and the heads of
Rivers, Creeks and Branches be made passable,

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that all public and main Roads be hereafter cleared and well grubbed fit
for traveling twenty foot wide, and good and substantial Bridges made over all
heads of Rivers, Creeks, Branches and Swamps where need shall require at the
discretion of the Justices of the County Courts, and for the better
ascertaining what is or shall be deemed public Roads,

Be it likewise Enacted, that the Justices of the County Courts shall set down
and ascertain in their Records once every year what are the public Records of
heir respective Countys and appoint Overseers of the same, and that no preson
whatsoever shall alter or change any such public Roads without the leave or
license of the Governor and Council or Justices of the County Courts, upon
penalty of five hundred pounds of Tobacco; and if any Overseer so appointed
should neglect to clear the Roads so as aforesaid, he shall be fined five
hundred pounds of Tobacco in Cask, and every Labourer that shall refuse to
serve and obey the Overseer, and every Master of Servants that being Summoned
or warned shall refuse to send all his taxable Male Servants to the Overseer
aforesaid, he or they shall be fined, that is to say, every Labourer one
hundred pounds of Tobacco, and the said Master for every Servant warned and not
sent one hundred pounds of Tobacco, and the Clerk of the County is hereby
obliged to issue out Warrants to the Overseer appointed, upon penalty of one
thousand pounds of Tobacco, and the Sherrifs of each respective Countys are to
deliver the same to the several and respective Overseers so appointed as
aforesaid, ex Officio, on penalty of ono thousand pounds of Tobacco in Cask,
the one half of all which Fines shall be employed and disposed of toward the
defraying the County charge in such manner as the Commissioners of each
respective County shall in their discretion think convenient, the other half to
him or them that shall inform or sue for the same, to be recovered in his
Majestys Name for the use aforesaid, by Bill Plaint or Information in any Court
of Record within this Province, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to
be allowed And that all Roads that lead to any Ferrys, Court house of any
County or to any Church, or leading through any County to the Port of Annapolis
shall he marked on both sides the Road with two notches if the Road leads to
Annapolis, the Road that leads there at the leaving the other road shall be
marked on the face of the Tree in a smooth place cut for that purpose with the
letters A A set on with a pair of marking Irons and colored and so with two
notches all along the Road, and where at any place it leaves any other road
shall be again distinguished with the mark aforesaid, on the face of the Tree
with a pair of marking Irons and colored as aforesaid, and any Road on the
Eastern Shore in Talbot County that leads to the Port of Williamstadt, at the
entering into the same, and upon parting with or dividing from any other Road
shall be marked on the face of a tree in a smooth place out for that purpose
with the letter W, and so with two notches all along the road, and the roads
that lead to any County Court House shall have two notches on the trees on both
sides the road as aforesaid, and another notch a distance above the other two;
and any road that leads to a Church shall be marked at the entrance into the
same, and at the leaving any other road with a slip cut down the face of the
tree near the ground, and any road leading to a Ferry and dividing from other
public roads shall be marked with three notches of equal distance at the
entrance into the same; and these rules and methods the several Justices of the
County Courts shall from time to time give in charge to the Overseers of the
high ways by them to be appointed for that purpose, who are likewise enjoined
carefully and strictly to observe and perform the same under the penalty
aforesaid, and where any road shall lead through any Seated Plantation or old
Fields,

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and Consent
aforesaid, that the several and respective Overseers within their several and
respective Precincts do set up posts, so many as may be perceived from one to
the other, which posts shall be marked and notched according to the place they
lead to, as before in this Act for the marking and notching of roads have been
appointed, and that the posts of all gates through which any such roads shall
lead as aforesaid, be marrked and notched as aforesaid, under the penalty
aforesaid, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act concerning the height of Fences and to punish burners thereof, and also
to restrain the multiplicity of Horses and Mares.
WHEREAS diverse people within this Province have and do make insufficient
Fences about their Corn Fields, whereby Cattle and Horses are apt to get in and
destroy the Corn there planted, for prevention whereof for the future, this
present General Assembly do humbly pray that it may he Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that all Fences which are intended or designed to enclose Corn ground or
preserve Corn there planted, shall be at the least five foot high quite round
the Field well and sufficiently made, in the judgment of two indifferent Men
viewing the same when any trespass is committed, and in case any horse, mare or
cattle shall leap over or break down any such Fence as aforesaid thereby
getting into such ground, that then the owner of such horse or horses, mare or
mares, or cattle shall be liable to an action of trespass, if the damage
thereby sustained shall in the judgment of two such persons as aforesaid amount
to two hundred pounds of Tobacco or upwards, or if less, the owner of such
Beast or Beasts to be conveyed before some one ustice of the ^eace in the same
County who is hereby empowered to award such damages as he shall think
convenient upon such evidence as shall be produced before him, any Law or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas diverse of the good people of this Province, have and do suffer
much damages by the notorious ill practices of ill disposed and malicious
persons burning Fences, to the end therefore that so great abuses may be either
restrained or punished,

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person or persons
whatsoever within this Province, shall wilfully and maliciously burn, pull
down or any ways destroy any Corn Field, Pasture or Orchard, or any other Fence
or Fences whereby any of the inhabitants of this Province are or may be harmed
or damnified, the person or persons so offending being thereof Lawfully
convicted by cofession, or the testimony of two Witnesses, or one Witness and
pregnant circumstances agreeable thereto, shall make restitution to the party
grieved by paying of trebble the damage sustained thereby, as the said justices
before whom such matter shall come shall determine, or a jury in such case shall
award. And forasmuch as it often happens, that peoples Corn Fields are
generally destroyed by the intolerable number of horses and mares that are
usually suffered to run at liberty in the woods and other places, thereby going
so wild that they are not only prejudicial to most of the Neighborhood, but
also are of little or no use to the owners.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the
tenth day of March next after the publication hereof, when and as often as any
horse mare or gelding, or any other Beasts shall happen to get into any Corn
Field, Wheat or Oat ground so enclosed with such a Fence as is above mentioned,
the owner of such ground as aforesaid shall be obliged the first and second
time such Beast shall get into such enclosed grounds as aforesaid to give
notice to the owner or owners of such beast as aforesaid, and if the aforesaid
owner of such Beast or Beasts shall neglect or refuse to restrain such beast or
beasts from committing the like offense, it shall and may be Lawful for the
owner or lawful possessor of such ground to shoot, kill or any ways destroy
upon their said lawful possession such beast or beasts that shall commit such
trespass the third time.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any the owner or
owners of any such beast as aforesaid, shall not be known to the party or
parrys grieved or damnified as aforesaid, he she or they so agrieved, shall and
are obliged with two sufficient Evidences to take notice of the color, natural
and artificial marks of any such beasts in writing, and the same to afix and
set up at the most public place within the County where such damage as
aforesaid shall happen to be done for the space of one whole month, at the end
of which no owner appearing, it shall and may be lawful for the partys grieved
to shoot kill or destroy upon his her or their possession as aforesaid any
beast or beasts as aforesaid, any Law Stature or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act for killing of Woolves.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
every person that shall bring the head of a Woolf to any of the Commissioners
or Justices of the Peace in any County within this Province, shall be allowed
two hundred pounds of Tobacco from the County where the Woolf shall be killed,
and that such Commissioner or Justice of the Peace to whom the Woolf's head
shall be brought, shall cut out or cause to be cut out the Tongue, and cut or
cause to be cut off the Ears of the said Woolf's head, to prevent the deceit of
twice or oftener paying the same,

And Be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall and may
be lawful to and for the several Justices of the several and respective Countys
with in this Province, and they are hereby authorized, empowered and required
yearly, and every year during this Act, at the time of the laying the County
Leavy, to raise and assess by an equal assessment upon the taxables of the said
County such Sum or Sums of Tobacco as to the Justices of the several and
respective Countys shall seem meet and convenient, and such Sums of Tobacco
raised as aforesaid, shall lay out and dispose for the purchasing of duffells
or matchcoats, and when the same is purchased, shall deliver to such and so
many persons residing convenient to the Indians as the Justices aforesaid shall
think fit, who shall render an account to the said Justices at the next laying
out of the Leavy, how such matchcoats delivered him or them have been disposed,
and what part thereof remains in his or their possession or hands.

And Be it Enacted, that such person or persons having such matchcoats
delivered as aforesaid, be and are hereby required to deliver to any Indian or
Indians for every Woolf or Woolves heads not having been paid for before one
matchcoat containing two yards of duffells, and give a true account of the same
at the next County Leavy as aforesaid to the Justices aforesaid, and shall mark
such Woolves heads as aforesaid to prevent deceit as aforesaid.

An Act to enable the purchasers of the Subscriptions to the Freeschool to
recover the same

An Act for settling a Revennue on his Majestys present Governor.
WHEREAS his most Sacred Majesty out of his Royal Bounty and Princely Favors
has been pleased to constitute and appoint his Excellency Colonel NATHANIEL
BLAKISTON his Capt' General and Chief Governor in and over this his Majestys
Province of Maryland, to whom we his Majestys most Loyal Subjects yield all due
obedience as by his Royal Commission we are obliged, and the better to
demonstrate our most humble gratitude, and to show the good respects we have
for and toward the said Colonel Nathaniel Blakiston our present Governor, and
the great hopes and expectation we have of his Excellencys good Government over
us, we most humbly pray that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that an imposition of three pence per Hogshead over and above the one shilling
per Hogshead keretofore granted for Support of his Majestys Governor here,
upon all Tobacco that shall hereafter be exported out of this Province by land
or water, allowing 400 pounds of Tobacco to each Hogshead, and the like
quantity in bulk, may be raised, leavied and paid by the Master of every Ship
Vessel trading into this Province in ready Money or Bills nf Exchange at the
election and choice of the said Master, to be collected by the Naval Officer of
the Port or District where such Ship or Vessel shall enter, or such other
person as his Excellency shall think fit to appoint.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Tobacco
should by any casual means be lost after the imposition paid, that then and in
all such cases the Owner or Freightor of all such Tobacco shall have free
liberty to Freight and Ship of the like quantity again without paying the
additional three pence, this Act to endure so long as the said Nathaniel
Blakiston Esquire shall continue Governor of this Province.

An Act ascertaining the bounds of Land.
WHEREAS at the first taking up of Lands in this Province, necessity
constrained his Lordship to commissionate such persons to be Surveyors as was
but very meanly skilful in the Art of Surveying, and for the windings, courses
and turnings of the several Rivers, Rivolets Creeks and Coves many times by
these Branches folding one in another were unknown to the Surveyors, nor for
fear of the Indian Enemy then numerous and strong, dare they stay on Shore to
examine the windings and courses aforesaid, but marking some trees by the sides
of such Rivers Creeks etc. did without further troubles prescribe certain
bounds and courses to the several tracts by them surveyed or intended to be
surveyed, and the said bounds are generally expressed in such uncertain terms,
and being many times contradictious and incosistant in themselves, whereby it
comes to pass that at this time is very uncertain, and many chargable and
tedious Suits in Law happen about such bounds, which are most times (as it
were) by the favor and inclinations of Jurors arbitrarily determined differing
ways, in parallel cases, to prevent which for the future, and that judgment may
go more direct and that Neighbors may more certainly know their bounds and
avoid trespassing upon one another, and for the more general ascertaining the
meets and limits of every particular Man's Lands, there can be no better way
than by a Law, to put one certain interpretation upon such contradictory
expressions observed to be in ancient Certificates, and by demonstrating one
example of each interpretation in a fair parchment to be to this Act annexed as
part of the said Act.

Wherefore the Delegates and Representatives of the City of St. Marys and of
the several and respective Countys of this Province humbly pray that it may be
Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that if any Man or his Assigns hold a tract of Land lying in the woods, and
from his first or other marked tree or end of the line, or otherwise run a
certain course and certain number of perches to a Bay River Creek Branch or
Beaver damm which have a constant Sream or certain Bed of a Channel if the
course directs thereto and the number of perches fall short thereof, in such
and the like cases, if adding fifty per cent. thereto will reach the said Bay
River, Creek, Branch or Beaver damm expressed in the said grant, the said line
shall be extended thereto, as in other cases hereafter, being certain natural
and unalterable bounds.

And where the said line intersects the water of the said Bay, River, Creek or
Beaver dam or Run of the said Branch, which are, or shall be expressed in such
grant, such intersection shall be deemed and adjudged the certain prick or
point of such tract of Land, but if the said adding of the said fifty per cent.
will not reach the said Bay or River etc. expressed in the said grant, and such
certain number of perches give the quantity of Land, which by conditions of
Plantations is expressed in the grant of the said Land to have been due to him
with his said certain number of perches, and shall not extend his bounds
further then his certain number of perches to the prejudice of any latter
Survey, notwithstanding any gift, grant or pattent of confirmation granted or
made after the date of any certificate of latter survey.

And if a tract of Land by a River, Creek or Branch side, and from any marked
tree or end of a line run a certain course and number of perches up the River
creek or branch to the head of the said River Creek or Branch, and the Record
of Survey do not express any marked tree to which as an undevidable prick the
line might be supposed to come, the said tract shall be concluded by the
certain number of Perches, but if in this or the former case, there be a marked
tree expressed in the certificate of Survey and well and sufficiently proved, to
which either the course or the creek, River or Branch directly leads, and may
be attained by adding ten per cent to every hundred perches of that line which
leads to it, the owner or owners of such Land shall hold that surplusage
granted by the said ten per cent. against any latter taker up, and even against
the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietor his Heirs and Successors, at the
granted Rent without any alteration by reason of the words more or less.

And if the said marked tree be attained by adding of fifty per cent. to every
hundred perches of the said line which leads to it, the owner of such Land
shall hold that surplusage against any latter taker up, that is to say all
between the said trees against the Lord Proprietor, paying Arrears of Rent at
two pence per pound in Tobacco, but if the fifty per cent. will not attain the
second tree, it is out of measure unreasonable, and then the owners of such
Land shall be concluded by his preise number of perches as if he never had any
second marked tree, and if in either the former cases, or any other case where
thh aforesaid fifty per cet. will attain the second tree, so as by this Act the
owners may hold the surplusage, the second line is drawn from the second tree
the just length, as for example one hundred Acres, a line from the first tree
be mentioned North one hundred perches to the second marked tree but is really
one hundred and fifty perches, and then from the second tree a line is drawn
East one hundred and sixty perches the just length, then from the end of the
said East line, a line is drawn South one hundred perches but no marked tree
there expressed it will leave a gore betwixt a line drawn West to the first tree,
and the end of the hundred perches South, in all such cases by virtue of this
Act the third line shall be extended of equal length with the first and tke
fourth line shall be parallel with the second as in the first example
demonstrated, that the tract of Land may be square, and one and the same being
laid out backward or forwards, but if in the certificate of Survey it be
expressed in the third line a certain course and number of perches, and then or
from the end thereof or such like synonimous expressions with a straight line
to the first bounded Tree, such straight line shall be the bounds thereof,
although the third line be not of equal leogth with the first, and if any second
or latter taker up of Land shall have taken up the said gore or land that may
include it, and not improved or built thereon, the owner of the firstt tract
shall pay him his reasonable charges expended in taking up the same, and
reimburse him all the Rent paid for the same, and the first owner shall
entirely hold the full square, paying his Lordship his succeeding Rent for the
surplusage, but if the taker up of the said Land or Gore including it have
built thereon, he shall not be liable to an Action of Trespass, but if in case
the owner of the first Tract do not agree with him about paying him for his
improvement, then the taker up of the gore shall fot the improvements sake hold
it such a number of years, not exceeding fourteen years to come as a Jury of of
Resurvey shall adjudge, and this all to be required, and the number of years to
commence when the owners of the first tract shall by a Jury resurvey and
ascertain his bounds according to this Act.

And if any Man hold a Tract of Land by the side of a Creek, River or Branch
and it be described to begin at a marked tree by the side of the said Creek
River or Branch, and at the last is on that side to be bounded with the said
Creek, River or Branch, but it is expressed from the said marked tree to run up or
down the said creek river or branch a certain number of perches or a certain
course, which declines from the water side and runs into the Land and no marked
Tree appointed for it to end at, in all such like cases the owners of the said
Land shall reverse his last line, viz. as suppose the first course is North one
hundred perches to the branch creek or river and the other West one hundred and
sixty perches and then South one hundred perches, and then East, or on a
straight line to the first marked tree, he shall run from his first tree West
one hundred and sixty peches, and then South one hundred perches, and then East
unto the said creek river or branch, and where the said East line intersects or
falls into the water it shall determine his bounds, and he shall hold from that
intersection by the water side to the first tree, but in this case or any cases
parallel, if fifty per cent. will not intersect the branch, creek or river,
then the precise lines and course to be the bounds thereof, and the reversing
of lines shall determine bounds, when the lines by the water fide slants over
the creek, river or branch, and in that case the creek river or branch shall be
the bounds of such tract, and it shall not pass over as in the second third and
fourth example is demonstrated and the reason why fifty pir cent. is allowed to
reach the creek, river or branch, that if more is there will be no coherence
between the creek and the course.

And if a Tract be discribed to lie on a certain side of a creek river or
branch, and begin at a marked tree, and run a certain course, as suppose North
one hundred perches up or down the said creek or river to another marked tree by
the river side, which second marked tree is known and really stands by the water
side; and make the breadth of the Land within fifty per cent', there the second
line supposing east shall be drawn from the second tree the certain number of
perches, supposing one hundred and sixty and from the end thereof South, till
it intersect a line drawn also East from the first tree, though the said East
line last mentioned be more or less in this case than fifty per cent. over or
under, and from that intersection a line drawn West to the first tree, the
water the west and the South Line shall be the bounds of such tract, and all
such tracts in cases parallel, because that generally takers up of such
backward Land have so allowed the tracts fronting the River to lie, and that
with good reason, and as for the reasonableness of it, it cannot be otherways
on acted, so if it should be other ways enacted it would make a general
confusion in all backward lands, bounded first upon the frontier tracts, and
then one upon another, and in the cases aforesaid, although there be a great
variation betwixt the prescribed course and the real course, from the first to
the second tree, yet all the land betwixt the said trees by its general
bounding on the water shall be adjudged part of the said tracts, and afterward
from the second tree it shall be determined by lines as aforesaid, as in the
fifth and sixth example.

And if a tract of land be laid out for a certain number of Acres on such
courses, which though the length of the lines yet the acuteness of the Angles
will not make the certain number of Acres, yet the tract shall be confined by
such bounds, as supposing the first line be north fifty perches, and then north
east or north north east or the like eighty perches, and so parallel, and yet
the owner shall be contented, and all latter Surveys adjoining to such lines
shall be good as in the seventh example.

And if any Man have a greater number of perches given him in length or in
breadth by express words, then he ought to have, yet he shall hold the same
against any latter taker up, and against the Lord Proprietor rendering Rent, as
suppose north fifty perches, then east eighty perches, and so lines parallel
for one hundred Acres as in the eighth example.

Every Man that has an Island entirely granted to him, although he have
Surplusage shall hold the same although lines or courses or number of perches be
not rightly expressed to conclude the same against any latter taker up, and
against the Lord Proprietor rendering Rent, if his Lordship shall for discovery
of such Rent cause the same to be resurveyed, and his Lordship his Heirs or
Successors shall not for any Surplusage entirely damn or confound any Pattent
upon pretense of being deceived in his grant or any other pretense, because
every Man had land granted him in consideration that by performing conditions
of Plantations it was due to him, except where his Lordship has granted any
Lands ex mero motu de gratiae specialia

And whereas by this Act it is provided that if any Man hold fifty per cent.
above his number of perches betwixt his known bounds he shall maintain the same
against any latter taker up etc. and will not resurvey his land in due time,
but that the Lord Proprietor grant the Svrplusage to another, yet if the first
taker up have seated his Plantation and made his improvement after the certain
number of perches is determined, yet the Surplusage shall not be said to be
there only after such determination of such number of perches, hecause after
the Surveyor has once by description as it were shapt the land it is then all
granted at once uno flatu, and the Surplusage shall be assigned by a Jury
entirely to lie together, but to the least detriment of the first Grantee.

And if a certain number of perches in any case be prescribed to run by a
Creek, River or Branch side, and no marked tree nor certain course expressed, the
said number of perches shall not be spent away by the several windings of the
River Creek or Cove but brought to a straight line of that length, or else be
regulated by the other courses as in other cases is provided.

If Land be bounded by a Creek or Cove running a certain course or number of
perches, as suppose north one hundred perches, if that branch creek or cove
were out and expire, or unreasonably wind above five points from the course
into the land before the number of perches be determined, so that there be no
certain running Stream or certain Bed or Channel of a Stream continuing to the
end of the line, or if there be such windings as aforesaid, in such cases the
lines shall be the bounds from the beginning to ending; provided that all the
adjacent lands betwixt the creek and the line before it comes to slant over the
branch creek or cove shall be added and taken to be part of the Land, that is
so far as the creek includes as in the ninth example.

If Land begin at a marked tree by a River, Creek, Branch or Cove, and so go up
or down the said River, Creek, Branch or Cove to another marked tree at the
mouth of a Creek or Cove, and then be prescribed to run a certain course or
number of perches by the said creek or cove, and the spending away of the
number of perches upon the winding of the said creek or cove would shorten the
line from extending far enough into the woods, and the creek wind outward from
the land, and varying from the course, in this case the full line and course
prescribed shall be run out, and from the end of that line shall be drawn a
line revent to the next course which is to be run till the line reverse
intersect the said creek or cove, and by that intersection it shall be
described kow far that tract shall be bounded by the creek etc and the rest of
the bounds skall in such case be ascertained by the fourth example, as suppose
from the second tree at the mouth of a cove etc. the line prescribed East one
hundred and sixty perches by the cove and bounded by the cove, and the said
creek winds away East North East, the east line of the one hundred and sixty
perches shall be run out, and if from the end of the east line the course
should be south, then there shall first be drawn a line north to the cove, and
that north line shall describe at the place where it interfects the cove how
far that tract shall be bounded by the cove, and then at the intersection the
south line shall be begun and continued till it intersects a line drawn east to
the first tree as in the fourth example aforesaid, always provided the south
line be not fifty per cent. more than it ought to be, but if the south line be
fifty per cent. than it ought to be then the south line shall be the bounds and
not the creek or cove, and if the south line go to the westward of the first
tree, then the east line aforesaid shall be further extended that the south
line may at least come to the beginning tree.

In all cases where positive eye witness cannot be had, there traditional
widence viva voce concurring with and agreeable to Record shall be accounted
good proof declaring from whom they had their tradition, and not affirming any
marked tree or bounds other then or differing from what is expressed on Record,
and where the first marked tree is wanting, and the beginning cannot be
reasonably proved, but yet a second or third marked tree is found, the tree so
found shall rule the bounds of the whole tract, according to the rules of this
Act mentioned, or hereafter to be mentioned, where a Man holds a Penninsula or
Neck of Land and have several marked or lined trees upon the points or capes of
his tract which do not very exactly agree in course or distance, and yet by
good evidence prove his exterior bounds, and the whole neck as it is commonly
called or Penninsula be granted to him, there all things shall be favorably
interpreted, to his holding the whole neck against any later taker up alrho' he
has built and improved, because it is unreasonable a 2 d. taken up for a small
skirt of land shall have the same advantage of range as the other, but yet if
the second taker up be ejected, the first shall not have any action of trespass
against him, except the Court which gives Judgment upon the titles, being the
same Court that Judgment is given and not after in due form moved allow such
action to be brought upon consideration of the reasonableness of the matter,
and that is humbly prayed to be thus enacted because such Penninsula or Necks
of Land do not fall under any ordinary rule of regulation, provided that
nothing be allowed of which is directly contrary to any other rule of
regulation or clause of this Act.

And if any tract of land be described to begin at the uppermost or lowermost
tree of another tract, when the record of the former tract mentions not any
tree marked for the uppermost or lowermost bounds thereof, in all such cases the
second tract shall begin where the uppermost or lowermost bounds of the first
tract terminates by this Act except it can positively and very strongly by good
witness be proved that the Surveyor and not the taker up, then and there at the
raking up did mark a tree for the beginning of the second tract be said to
bound upon the first, yet it shall not be allowed to do so to the prejudice of
any latter Survey, but may come to it is beginning by its prescribed line or
lines parallel to the tract on which its said to bound, and the land betwixt
may be taken up by a common Warrant, as in the tenth example by which all cases
parallel may be adjudged and determined.

If a tract of land be described to lie on a certain side of a River, Creek or
Branch with a stream or cove, and at the last by general bounds is described to
be bounded by the said River Creek etc. and the first line is drawn from the
river etc. into the woods from the river etc. and there are other courses
prescribed, and at last come to the river etc. yet if any of the former courses
come to the river branch or coye, the courses shall there determine, and thence
by the water be bounded and shall not pass over, but the owner shall be content
with what land is between (...) Lines and the water be it never so little, and
apply himself (if he please) to his Lordships favor for the benefit of his
Warrant as in the twelfth example.

If a tract of land be described to begin at a certain tree and to run a
certain course expressing no certain number of perches till it insersect
another tract of land, which course goes clear from such lands, and no
determinate number of perches to limit the lines it is a void survey, and shall
be deemed to include nothing by one part of one side and another part of
another side of a river, creek, branch or cover etc.

If a tract of land begin at a certain marked tree, running to the head of a
creek, branch or cove it shall be determined as aforesaid is described in such
like cases, and then if for more breadth it begin again at the head of the said
river, creek, branch or cove, and on the other side thereof, the beginning on
the other side shall be adjudged to be right oppont to the ending of the first
side, except there be a marked tree expressed on the second side to regulate that
part otherwise.

If one tract of land be so laid out, and the one part of it lies on the one
side of a former Survey, and another part of it lies on the other side of the
former survey, and part is taken away by the said former survey, yet the owner
of the second tract shall hold all that is clear of the former survey, and all
former surveys whatever on both sides, for that the land is not granted perch
by perch as the surveyor measures it, but the grant is uno ftatu all at once of
every part of it, and if any manamarkt tree or trees stand within another man's
lands, the owner of the said land in whose land the said trees stand, shall not
on any pretense cut down or destroy the said tree or trees, except he first
give notice to the owner of that land whose bounds such tree is, and there in
his presence either plant other sufficient Locust or Cedar post on stone or
stones in the stead and place of that tree, under the penalty of six pounds
Sterling to be paid to the party whose bounds that tree was, to be recovered by
Action of debt etc.

And it is hereby made lawful for every Men having such tree or trees within
another Man's land, and having special Warrant of Resurvey, or order of
Prvincial or County Court for resurvey of their land to ascertain his bounds
having asked leave, and being denied with Surveyer, Jury witnesses and chain
carriers go on such land, whereon or wherein his marked tree stands, and from
such marked tree measure his course and distance required, provided he make all
fences as good and tight as they were found, and that he nor any along with him
in measuring the same do not manifest damage, detriment or harm to the owner of
the land where on they go or if accidentally any damage happen, that then in
such cases he prosser and within three days make reparation and amends.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Man shall have ten per
cent. given him to the precise number of perches, except it be by that addition
of ten per cent. to reach to a marked tree or other natural bounds, but if he
have no marked tree or natural bounds he shall not take ten per cent. to the
damage of any latter Survey, but if the latter Survey begin off from the first
Survey and run toward it and there be ten per cent. betwixt the end of the
precise number of perches the first taker up shall enjoy it, and in all such
cases if ten per cent. added to both will make their lands to bound on each
other no third person shall take up or hold any land betwixt them.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Man hold land by a
river or creek side, yet so as there lies marsh betwixt the firm land and the
river, such adjacent marsh shall not be taken up, or being already taken up by
any other shall not be held, but such adjacent marsh shall be deemed and
adjudged absolutely to belong to the land to which it is adjacent, and be
bounded by the same courses drawn from the firm land into such river or creek
as the firm! and is bounded by, except in Somerset County, and upon Dellaware
and the Ocean.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Man hold land which
is bounded or expressed to be bounded by a line drawn from a certain tree or
other individable point of intersections, a certain course to a certain marked
tree in the woods, and the said tree or trees do not correspond to the said
certain course or courses, but that the courses and trees differ very much as
it is too common, and that the courses prescribed give the quantity of land due
to the taker up, in such cases wherein it is not otherwise before in this Act
provided in ascertaining of the bounds of land by the water side, the lines
shall be the bounds of such lands, and the trees shall be deserted, and one
line shall be drawn from the end of another, because the errors of such surveys
was in the misplacing of trees, yet so if any second taker up has begun at any
the as^ resaid deserted trees and run lines parallel to the first taken up
lands, and that by this regulation, some part of the land of the second taker
up will now fallwithin the lines of the first taker up, in such case the first
taker up shall have ^o Action of I respass against the second taker up for any
supposed trespass within his lines which he could not have had before, but on
the contrary, if the second taker up has made any improvement on the land now
to be taken away he shall hold his improvement and all the land that falls to
be within the lines of the first taker up by reason of this regulation for such
number of years as a Jury shall think such improvement deserves, not exceeding
fourteen years, to be reckoned from the time that the first taker up resurvey'd
his land by a Jury, and the said Jury shall there one tenus determine the matter.

And whereas this may occasion that some land may lio clear by or about these
deserted rrees or otherwise, in such cases the Jury, or the major part of them
shall determine in writing under their Hands and Seals what part of such land
happening to be clear shall be assigned to the first taker up to take up again
by common Warrant, and what part shall be assigned to the second taker up to
take up again in like manner, which by this Act they are empowered to do, to
make good what disadvantage may happen to either part, and no other person for
a year and a day after shall take up any the land so assigned, and if they do
it shall be of no effect, not shall any grant for the same upon any such
surreptitious Survey be of validity in Law, and if the first taker do not
within a year and a day after the publication of this Act in the County where
such land lies resurvey his land and as^^^^^^ his bounds, that then after one
year and a day expired the second taker up (may if he pleases) for certainty
sake cause the same to be done at his own cost and ^^^ges. And Be it Enacted
etc. that the Justices of each respective County Court may grant a Warrant of
resurvey and a ve^ire for a Jury if required when the reason of Resurvey is
only ascertaining of bounds, according to this Act, the petitioner paying only
to the Clerk sixteen pounds of Tobacco for his Warrant, and thirty pounds of
Tobacco or two shillings six pence to the Commissioners toward supporting
their expenses, and where the Warrant of reservey is granted as aforesaid there
the Survey or shall have only such sees as in a pr^^^^itive Survey, any Law
Statute or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And shall certify that by
virtue of such Warrant be has resurveyed a tract of land called A at first
laid out for B described to lie and be bounded as follows, (here the
situation and bounds of land to be expressed) and that he has resurveyed and
regulated the same according to the first second or other example of the Act
for regulating and ascertaining etc which certificate with a sair platt shall
be returned to the Examinor of the County, and being approved by him to the
County Clerk to be recorded, and to that end Be it Enacted that the Governor
for the time being may constitute and apoint one discreet person to be Examiner
of the said County and to do therein as to such Office belongs etc. taking for
his fees for every such certificate fifty pounds of Tobacco, if the same be for
five hundred Acres or under and one hundred pounds of Tobacco if the same shall
keep a fair Book, and Record the certificate and platt.

And Be it Enacted etc. that if any person hold a tract of land, which on any
line is said to run a certain course and certain number of perches to another
Man's land, and that certain number of perches and fifty per cent. added on the
same course to that line do not come to the said land, yet the number of
perches give the quantity of land which the taker up had due to him, he shall
be contented with his precise number of perches, and shall not extend his line
further to the damage of any latter Survey, although his Survey be said to be
bounded by the other Man's land, but the land betwixt being surveyed by common
Warrant shall be sure to him that surveyed it, provided that is not already
taken up, he shall have a year and a day from the publication of this Act to
take it up by common Warrant, except in such cases as falls under the
regulation of the eleventh example.

And if any owner of land perceiving that he has more breadth betwixt his
trees which gives him more land then was due to him at first have already
whilst he was owner of the first tract by common Warrant taken up the
surplusage, he shall by virtue of such survey and his Lordships grant hold the
same according to his grant, notwithstanding the said land seem to have been
formerly surveyed, but there shall not be made any other line then is expressed
in the Record of survey to join the land together.

And Be it further Enacted etc. that no warrant or grant to alter any survey
upon pretense that the surveyor has not taken up the intended land, or was
mistaken in prescribing his courses or any the like pretenses shall take effect
or be good in ^aw to the altering the bounds of any land to the damage of any
latter taker up that has seated and improv, d where the Area of such first
survey includes considerable land of any quality and has but one marked tree,
but where such Area includes no land at all but water, there the mistake was
manifest, and it shall be adjudged in case of difference according to the
intent of the surveyor manifestly so proved and adjudged, notwithstanding if
any man have ^ well known trees by the water side marked for his breadth of
land, and has seated, improved and paid Rent, and quietly for seven years
enjoyed the land betwixt the said trees, and yet by some error or mistake in
the Surveyor or Clark the said land is expressed in the body of his grant or
pattent to begin at one of the said trees and run to the other, but the line
prescribed runs directly contrary (that is to say) in running up the said river
creek etc. instead of down the river creek etc. or down instead of up to the
second tree, and leave out the intended land where such mistake is manifest,
and the first taker up has as aforesaid seated and improved betwixt the said
trees, and never claimed other land by virtue of that grant, but the land
betwixt the said trees the first taker up shall enjoy it as if no such mistake
had been, and if there be any other errors in his back lines it shall be
regulated as in like cases is before expressed for other land, and the second
taker up may by virtue of this Act and his Lordships Favor make use of his
Warrant elsewhere, and the first taker up shall reimburse the second his
reasonable charge for letting his Survey fall, to be adjudged by the County
Court upon his petition or motion, the first taker up being first called and
heard, and after such Jvdgment award Execution by fieri facias or Attachment,
but yet if such second Survey have been made above seven years before this
present Sessions and has been seated and improved by the second taker up and
never yet seated and improved by the first taker up or his Assigns, then the
first taker up and not the second shall be put to seek for the benefit of his
Warrant elsewhere, and this word up the river creek etc. instead of down, or
down instead of up shall not vitiate any grant or deed by which land is
conveyed from one Man to another, where the rest of the words in the said grant
or deed manifestly imply it only to be a mistake, and the first taker up shall
rectify his Survey and take a new grant, which shall be under the same rent
and no other.

Provided always, and Be it Enacted, that nothing in this Act contained shall
alter, change, make void, make erroneous or defeat any Judgment given and
recovered in the Provincial Court before the making of this Act, nor make void
any Arbitration or Award under Hand and Seal given before the making of this
Act, although such Judgments and Awards are given contrary to the meaning of this
Act, but all such Judgments and all such awards though they might not otherwise
be good about land shall be and are hereby confirmed, other errors in Law
excepted, provided such Awards shall within a year and a day be recorded in
their respective County Records after the publication of this Act, and
acknowledged in open Court by one of the Arbitrators or Umpire.

And if a certificate be so defective that one whole line be left out, yet if
the other lines be so expressed that they show what length and breadth were
designed, and that the length and breadth would make out the quantity of land
which the taker up had due to him, and the lines expressed do infer to common
Reason and Sense that the lines were left out by mistake, in all such cases the
first taker up shall hold his land against any latter taker up as if the
certificate were good and entire.

And if any Man hold a tract of land which is expressed to bound on another
tract, and to begin at a marked tree standing in the line of that tract on which
it is said to bound, but the first marked tree cannot be proved nor found, yet
if any other marked tree of the tract be found and proved, that found and proved
tree shall rule the bounds of the tract, yet so as only the precise number of
perches shall be held, but if no tree be found the owner may resurvey and lay
it out again, beginning in the line where it was at first said to begin, but it
shall then be accounted later than any other Survey in them parts, and the
taker up shall not intrude nor hold p of any tract of land whereon a Plantation
is seated, and whereof there is certain proof of the bounds because a certainty
is to be preferred before an uncertainty, but what land he shall include by his
Survey clear of other tracts he may hold for ever by virtue of his first
Warrant, and the like shall be adjudged in all parallel cases where no tree is
to be found, if the owners shall think it any advantage by saving his Warrant,
but then after such Survey he shall not pretend to his former Survey any more
for ever, yet if any such marked tree was said to begin in the point of a fork
at the mouth of a creek or such other place which is as it were a natural
beginning, there if no tree is found yet if the place is certainly known and
proved, a Jury shall find a point or prick to begin at most agreeable to the
description in the certificate of Survey or Grant of the same, no evidence
admitted to prove a marked tree where the Record expresses none.

And lastly, Be it further Enacted etc. that if any controversy happen about
the bounds of land, whereof there is no parallel within this Act, the
Provincial Court shall not give Judgment therein, but it shall be put to the
Assembly to be determined by an Act and to be made a president for the future.

An Act of gratuity to Colonel Ninian Beale.

The humble Petition of Henry Wallice of Kent County.

An Act for continuing the late Act for imposing three pence per Hogshead upon
Tobacco to the use of his present Excllency from the time of his arrival here
to the end of this Sessions of Assembly.

An Act for settling Assemblys and Provincial Courts at the Port of Annapolis
in Ann-Arundel County.
BE IT ENACTED by the King most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
the Port of Annapolis in Ann-Arundel County be the chief place and Seat of
Justice within this Province, for holding Assemblys and Provincial Courts, and
that all Writts, Pleas and Process issuing or that has issued out and
returnable to the Provincial as aforesaid, or to the Court of Chancery, shall
from and after the end of this present Sessions of Assembly continue and be
made return able to the Port of Annapolis in Anu-Arundel County aforesaid.

An Act for raising a supply toward the drfraying of the public charge of
this Province, and to prevent too great a number of Irish Papists being
imported into this Province.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof all Masters of Ships or others importing
Irish Servants into this Province by land or by water, at the time of their
entry shall pay unto the Naval Officer for the time being belonging to such
Port or place where they make their Entry the Sum of twenty shillings Sterling
per Pole toward the defraying of the public Leavy of this Province for every
Irish Servant so imported, on penalty and forfeiture of five pounds Sterling
per Pole for every Servant so concealed at the time of his entry aforesaid, the
one half thereof to be appropriated to the uses aforesaid, the other half to
the Informer or him or them that shall sue for the same to be recovered in his
Majestys name in any Court of Record within this Province, by Action of Debt
Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be
allowed.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that for every Negro so imported
into this Province either by land or water, the importor or importors of such
Negro or Negro's shall pay unto the Naval Officer aforesaid the Sum of twenty
shillings Sterling per Pole for the use aforesaid, on penalty and ^orsciture of
five pounds Sterling per Pole for every Negro kept back or unaccounted for to
be ^^plied for the uses aforesaid, and to be recovered as aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the
publication hereof all Masters of Ships or other Vessels that shall (...) by
(...) water import any Rum of Wino into this Province shall pay un^^ the (...)
Officer aforesaid where they make their entry the Sum of three pence per gallon
for every gallon of Rum or Wine so imported into this Province as aforesaid, to
be applied for the uses aforesaid, Liquors from England always excepted.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc that all Ships or
other Vessels which have been butlt in this Province or bereafter shall be
butlt as aforesaid, which are solely and wholly belonging to the inhabitants
thereof, shall be wholly exempted and acquitted from paying the imposition of
three pence per gallon aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Rum or Wine upon
which the dutys aforesaid are assessed shall be landed or put on shoat out of
any Ship or other Vessel which shall import the same, or any other without due
entry thereof made with the Officer thereby appointed (upon Oath of the said
person or persons importing any of the aforesaid liquors) for colle^ing the
same, in the Port or place where such liquors shall happen to be imported as
aforesaid, or before the duty due and payable for the same be satisfied or
^^^our'd to be satisfied, and a Warrant for the landing thereof be signed by
the Officer for that purpose appointed upon pain and peril that all such
liquors landed and put on shoat contrary to the true intent and meaning of this
Act shall be forfeited and lost, or the full value thereof: one half to be
appropriated toward the defraying of the public Leavy of this Province, and
the other half to the informer or him or them that shall Sue for the same, to
be recovered in his Majestys Name, in any of his Majestys Courts of Record
within this Province by Action of debt bill plaint or in formation, wherein no
essoyn protection or wager of Law to be allowed.

And for the better encouragement of all Masters, Merchants, Owners and other
persons whatsoever to make due entrys and payment of the dutys, rates and
imposts raised by this Act, in consideration of leakige and other damages, the
Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to make allowance and abatement of
20 gallons in every hundred gallons of all such liquors so to be duly entered as
aforesaid, and the officers hereby appointed for collecting and gathering the
dutys aforesaid, shall and are hereby empowered upon any suspicion of fraud or
deceit by any importor owner or proprietor of any such liquors, in concealing
and not making due entry of the same, to go and enter on board any Ship or
Vessel, or into any house or ware house on shore, and from thence to seize,
bring on shore or secure all such liquors for which the dutys aforesaid are not
duly paid or secured to be paid as aforesaid, and that the said officers and
their deputys may freely stay and remain on board until the goods are delivered
and discharged out of the said Ship or Vessel, and all officers as well
military as civil of this Province, and all masters and officers of Ships are
hereby required and enjoined to be aiding and asisting to such Naval Officers
in discharging of their duty aforesaid, for all which the said Officers and
others asisting them shall be saved and kept harmless by virtue of this Act.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all such Naval
Officers shall give good security to the Governor of this Province for the
time being, and shall take their several Oaths well and faithfully to gather
the impost so arising by virtue of this Act or any clause herein contained, and
adjust and faithfully to account twice a year, and to give and render to the
public Treasurer of this Province for the time being authorized for receiving
the said impost, for which the said Treasurer shall have for their sallary 4 l.
per Cent' who are to give good Bond for the same, to be accountable and render
account to the next meeting of Assembly, to be by them disposed of toward the
defraying of the public leavy of this Province.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesad, that every Master of a
Ship or other Vessel at the time of his entry of such Ship or Vessel wherein
(...) liquors shall be imported as aforesaid, shall render upon oath an account
of the quantity and quality of liquors aforesaid, and several and respective
Naval Officers within this Province for the time being, shall at the time of
their entry of such Ship or Vessel as aforesaid take good and sufficient
security in his Majestys name for the payment of the imposition aforesaid to
such use and purpose and in such manner and form as by this Act is appointed,
all which dutys arising by such impositions upon liquors as aforesaid, shall be
collected and gathered by Naval Officers in their several and respective
Districts, for which they shall have for their Sallary eight pound per Cent'
and no more.

Provided always, that if any importer of Rum or Wine into this Province after
the end of this Sessions of Assembly, and within three Months after his arrival
and such his report made to the Naval Officer or such other Officer legally
empowered as aforesaid to take the same as aforesaid, shall export any of the
said rum or wine by him imported as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful for
every such importer by way of debenture or draw back Money to stay and detain
three fourth parts of such imposition; always provided that the said exporter
who desires the benefit of the said debenture or draw back shall declare on
his corporal Oath to be administered by the said Officer on the Holy Evangelist
that the said Rum or Wine by him desirous to export is part of the said Rum or
Wine by him imported and made report thereof as aforesaid, This Act to endure
for three years, or to the end of the first Sessions of Assembly which shall
next happen after the end of the said three years.

An Act for speedy Justice for small Debts.
FORASMUCH as this present General Assembly have taken into their serious
considerations the great damage and inconveniency accruing to the good people
of this Province for the recovery of small debts by a due course of Law in the
several and respective County Courts thereof, it often happening that such
Creditors rather choose to loose their just Rights and Credits than be put to
the trouble to Sue for the same, and further, it does also appear to be no less
a grievance and burden to the debtors of such Creditors (persons for the most
part indigent and poor) who being Sued frequently pay three times more cost
than their original Debts amount unto, for the Redress of both partys for the
future, and the immediate and speedy recovery of just Rights and prevention of
the like agrievances for the time to come it is therefore prayed that it may be
enacted.

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Ecellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that no County Court within this Province shall hold Plea or have Jurisdiction
for the hearing, trying or determining of any Action or Actions before them
brought either by Bond, Bill, Assumption, Reckoning or Account wherein the real
Debt or Damages does not exceed the Sum of two hundred pounds of tobacco, or
sixteen shillings and eight pence in money, but that in all such cases it shall
and may be lawful for any one Justice of the Peace within the several and
respective Countys, wherein the person debtor does reside, to try, hear and
determine the matter of controversy between them, the party and partys debtor
and creditor as aforesaid, upon application to him made by any creditor or
creditors of such debtor or debtors as aforesaid, and at the time of such
application such Justice is also authorized and empowered, also willed and
required to issue out his Warrant and to depute such person for to execute the
same as he shall think fit to command and bring before him the person of such
debtor or debtors, and also summons to issue out for such witness or witnesses
as either Plaintiff or Defendant shall have occasion to make use of with power
to administer an Oath or Oaths to either Plaintiff or Defendant, or to either of
their Evidences as occasion shall repui^e for the better clearing of the matter
in controversy before him, and upon full hearing of the Allegations of both
partys, what may or can be given upon Oath in Evidence by both their witnesses,
to proceed as the nature of the case shall require, whose determination shall
be sinal; all which such Justice of the Peace before whom such matter of
controversy shall be brought, shall do the same without any fee or reward; and
if such party or partys against whom Judgment shall be given, shall refuse or
delay to pay such debt as shall be awarded against him or them, then it shall
and may be lawful for such Justice of the Peace to award Executon against the
said party or partys for the debt aforesaid, by fieri facias or capias ad
satisfaciendum directed to the Sherrif of the County, which said Sherrif upon
receipt of such precept from such Justice aforesaid shall immediately leavy the
same upon his her or their Goods Chattols or Body, as the nature of the Writ
shall require, all which such Sherrif shall do ex officio, saving to such
Sherrif his sees of imprisonment if the party shall remain in custody twenty
four hours.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc. that in all Actions
that shall be brought by any person or persons in any of the County Courts of
this Province after the publication of this Law, wherein upon trial it does
appear to the Court that the just balance does not exceed two hundred pounds
of Tobacco or sixteen Shillings and eight Pence in Money the Plaintiff shall be
non suited, and Judgment shall not be given any County Court of this Province
to any person or persons for any such balances aforesaid, but that the
Plaintiff shall be nonsuited as aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid that in any action or
actions after the end of this Sessions of Assembly that shall be brought in the
Provincial Court of this Province and upon trial it does appear to the Court
that the just balance is under fifteen hundred pounds of Tobacco, or six
pounds five shillings in Money the Plaintiff shall be nonsuited as aforesaid.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that his Majestys high Court of
Chancery within this Province shall not hear, try, determine or give Relief in
any Cause or Causes wherein the original Debt or Damages does not amount to the
Sum of twelve hundred and one pounds of Tobacco or five pounds and one penny in
Money but that the Judgments of the County Courts of this Province for 12
hundred pounds of Tobacco or five pound in Money shall be final, any Law custom
or usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for rectifying the ill practices of the Attorneys of this Province, and
ascertaining the Attorney General and Clerk of the Indictments Fees.
WHEREAS by a certain Ordinance of Assembly made at a General Assembly held at
the Port of Annapolis the twentieth day of May Anno Domini 1695. it was
ordained that the Attorney General of this Province should have four hundred
pounds of Tobacco Fee for all Actions he should bring upon Bonds taken in the
name of our Sovereign Lord the King, and put in Suit in the Provincial Court of
this Province to be paid by the party bound in the said Bond, and for all
Criminal Causes where the Grand Jury shall find the Bill in the Provincial
Court the Attorney General to have four hundred pounds of Tobacco, and that the
Clerk of the Indictments in the several and respective County Courts should
have two hundred pounds of Tobacco of the Criminals where the grand jury found
the Bill by color of the said Ordinance and lucre of Fees several Bonds have
been put in Suit without any default, and several venires have been issued
before any presentment of the grand jury, or any order of the Court, so that
diverse of his Majestys good Subjects of this Province have been unjustly
grieved, troubled and molested upon every trivial and slight complaint to the
Atorney General and to the said Clerks of Indictments, for preventing of which
great evil for the future the Delegates of this General Assembly do humbly pray
that it may be Enacted, And

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
after the end of this Sessions of Assembly no Summons or other Process for any
Criminal matter or misdemeanor shall issue out of any of the Courts of this
Province against any person or persons whatsoever without a presentment be
first found against the said person or persons by the grand jury, unless by a
special order of Court, and if the Attorney General or any other Attorney of
the Provincial Court shall issue forth Summons or any other Process against any
person or persons and no presentment or order of Court appears upon the Record
to justify the same, the said Attorney so offending shall forfeit and pay for
such his offense the Sum of five thousand pounds of Tobacco, the one half to
his Sacrad Mai^sty toward the defraying of the public Leavy of this Province,
the other half to the party grieved, or him or them that shall inform or sue
for the same, to be recovered in the Provincial Court of this Province by Bill,
Plaint or Information, and if any Clerk of Indictments in any of the County
Courts of this Province, or any other Attorney practicing in the said Courts
shall issue forth any summons or other process against any person or persons
for any Criminal, matter or misdemean or without presentment be found first by
the grand jury against the said person or porsons or special order of Court
appearing upon Record to justify the same, the said Clerk of Indictments or
other Attorney so offending shall forfeit and pay for such his offense the Sum
of two thousand five hundred pounds of Tobacco, the one half to his Majesty
toward the defraying the County Leavy, the other half to the party grieved or
to him or them that shall inform or sue for the same, to be recovered in any
Court of this Province, wherein no Essoyn or Protection shall be allowed.
Neither shall the party offending have any Appeal or Writ of Error, but the
judgment of the County Court shall be definitive therein, and if the Clerk of
the Provincial Court of this Province, or any of the Clerks of the County
Courts of this Province shall issue out summons or other process in criminal
causes without an order for the same, under the hand of an Attorney practicing
in the said Court or Courts to justify the same, the said Clerk or Clerks so
offending shall be liable to the same forfeitures and penaltys of Attorneys so
offending, and the said forfeitures to be recovered and go to the use aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Attorney
General of this Provincel shall not recover nor receive any fee for any
Navigation Bond put in Suit, either where the certificate was before the Suit
of the said Bond lodged in the Secretarys Office of this Province, or where it
can be proved that he knew there was such certificate returned, neither shall
the said Attorney General receive or have any fee for any Bond taken for
Country dues, where the said Bond appears not to be forf cited, which was the
true intent and meaning of the said Ordinance of Assembly, and if the said
Attorney General after the end of this Sessions of Assembly shall sue any Bond
taken contrary to Act of Parliament, or any Bond taken for Country dues, and no
Bills of Exchange appearing protested, nor no other failure to forfeit the said
Bond, or where the certificate is returned into the Secretarys office appointed
for keeping the same, any of which cases appearing to the Provincial Court, the
said Attorney General shall not only loose his see but pay the honorable
Secretarys fees and what other charges the party has been out in defending the
same, to be adjudged by the Provincial Court; and whereas several persons have
been sued in his Majestys Name for a certain Sum, without ever mentioning for
what the said Bond was taken, so that the said persons do not know what courses
to take or whom to apply themselves to. The refore

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that when any Writ is
issued forth upon a Bond taken in his Majestys name it shall be indorsed on the
backside as follows, if a Navigarion Bond, for whom the person was bound and
in what year, if a Sherrifs Bond, at whose request and prayer it was sued, or
Bond taken in any of his Majestys Offices in this Province it shall be indorsed
at whose request it was sued, and for want of such indorsment the Writ shall
abate, and the party grieved shall recover his cost against the Attorney that
sued forth the said Writ.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that upon any
presentment of the grand jury upon the breach of any of the penal Laws of this
Province, save that for suppressing of Criminals and trying of them in the
County Court if the party presented confesses his crime and submits to the
Court the Clerk of the Indictments shall have his fee for the same, but if the
party traverse and puts himself upon a jury, then the laid Clerk to have two
hundred pounds of Tobacco fee, and that upon any presentment grounded upon the
Law for suppressing Criminals upon any Statute of England, if Bill be found by
the grand Jury, the Clerk of the Indictments shall have two hundred pounds of
Tobacco fee, and that upon presentment found in the Ptovincial Court the
Attorney General to have four hundred pounds of Tobacco fee.

An Act of directions for the Sherrifs Office in this Province.
FORASMUCH as great complaint has been made by many the inhabitants of this
Province, that great and many inconveniencys have happened and for the future
may happen and accrue to Merchants and other persons tradeing into or
inhabiting in this Province, who have several debts and Sums of Tobacco due
unto them from several persons in this Province, who for satisfaction of their
said debts have paid away and delivered to their several creditors several
quantitys and hogsheads of Tobacco, and such hogshead or hogsheads of Tobacco
have been received marked and nailed by such Merchants or others trading into
or residing within this Province as aforesaid, and thereupon the said creditors
have delivered up unto their said debtors their Bills or other Specialtys given
for security of the said debts, or otherwise the said debtors have procured
releases and discharges for the said debts. Yet notwithstanding afterward the
Sherrif of such County upon pretense of public debt due from the said persons
debtors have seized the said creditors Tobacco so received, marked and nailed
as aforesaid and lying in the said debtors tobacco houses, and by that means
the said creditors are left without remedy for recovery of the said debt again
to the great discouragement of trade and prejudice of such creditors, for
prevention whereof for the future the Delegates of this present General
Assembly do pray that it may be enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that any person or persons whatsoever Merchants or others within this Province,
that have at any time within twelve months last past received marked and nailed,
or for the fvture shall receive, mark or nail any hogshead or hogsheads of
tobacco within this Province of any person or persons debtors within the same,
and which has been paid and delivered to them for satisfaction of their said
debts and such Merchant or others have upon reseit, marking and nailing such
hogshead or hogsheads of tobacco delivered up their Bills or other security to
their respective debtors of their said debts, o^ if the said Merchants or
others have given releases or discharges to their said debtors of the said debt
and that before the said Merchant or others could remove the said hogshead or
hogsheads of tobacco from the said debtors tobacco houses, if any Sherrif shall
come and seize such tobacco so marked and nailed as aforesaid, that then and in
every such case, if the party refuse to make and give to the said Creditors
some other full satisfaction for their said debts, it shall and may be lawful
for any two of his Majestys Justices of the respective Countys within this
Province upon due proof thereof made before them of the said debt and Sherrifs
seizure as aforesaid, and the party debtor refusing to make that full
satisfaction to their Creditors for their said debts at the said Creditors
request to award him Execution with Cost, such Cost not exceeding one hundred
pounds of tobacco against the Body Goods and Chattels of such debtor, to be
executed by the Sherrif for satisfaction of the creditors just debt and cost as
aforesaid, in as full and ample manner as if the debt was recovered by due
course of Law.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Sherrif, under
Sherrif or Deputy that seize any tobacco unstript, nor seize or mark any
merchant or other tobaco received marked and nailed as aforesaid for any cause
whatsoever but only for Leavys, and the several Sherrifs are hereby empowered
to break the Lock of any tobacco house or other houses where tobacco is or
shall be secured with design to prevent the said Sherrif from seizing such
tobacco for public leavys and any Sherrif so seizing and marking any hogshead
or hogsheads of tobacco containing more than what is justly due to the public
for Leavys, without making satisfaction to the person whom such tobacco does
belong, as by giving credit, or suffering him to take the overplus out of such
hogshead of tobacco, at the choice of the party paying or owing the same, shall
pay for every such default the sum of two thousand pounds of tobacco, one half
to his Majesty for support of Government, the other half to the party grieved,
to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by Action of Debt
Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be
allowed.

And if it shall so happen that any time any Sherrif shall seize any hogshead
of tobacco which shall weigh more than such Leavy or Leavys shall amount unto,
if the remaining part due to the party or partvs from whom they shall receive
such Leavy or Leavys be the greater quantity, then and in every such case the
said Sherrif or Sherrifs shall take out of the said hogshead such quantity or
quantitys of tobacco due to him for such leavy or leavys, and the said hogshead
and the remaining part of the tobacco shall be and remain with the party or
partys paying the same, but if the remaining part of such hogshead of tobacco
so seized as aforesaid and belonging to the party or partys paying the same
shall be the less quantity than is due to the said Sherrif or Sherrifs for
leavys as before said, then and in every such case the owner or owners of such
tobacco shall take our the overplus of such tobacco, and the hogshead with the
remaining part shall belong to such Sherrif or Sherrifs receiving the same.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Sherrif within
this Province shall take, exact or receive of or from any person whatsoever
Fees, Sallary, Gratuity or Reward for serving any Writ, Warrant or Precept
from the Governor and Gouncil, or from any Justice of the Peace, or for doing
any other thing in any of the Courts of Record upon any Suit or Suits in
Criminal Causes but the several Sherrifs are hereby enjoined to execute the
same ex officio. And every Sherrif offending shall forfeit the sum of one
thousand pounds of tobacco for every such offense, the one half to his Majesty
his Heirs and Successors for the support of Government, the other half to the
party grieved, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by
Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Effoyn Protection or
Wager of Law to be allowed.

And whereas many letigious persons have, and for the future may commence
Actions of Trespass upon the Case rather out of spite and malice than any real
cause of Action and not setting forth in the original Writ the cause of such
Action, yet lay damage to a vast sum to deter persons from being Bail thereto,
for prevention whereof for the future.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that in all Actions of Trespass upon
the Case where damages are laid to be above four thau^and pounds of tobacco, if
no Declaration be sent with the Writ expressing the true cause of Action, the
Sherrif shall not require a Bail Bond exceeding the sum of eight thousand
pounds of tobacco, although the damage be laid in the Writ for any greater sum
whatsoever, and any Sherrif offending herein shall forfeit the sum of four
thousand pounds of tobacco, the one half thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and
Successors toward the support of Government, the other half to the party
grieved, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by Action
of debt bill plaint or information, wherein no essoyn protection or wager of
Law to be allowed.

And to the end that public Creditors may be speedily satisfied their debts
due from the public, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every
public Creditor in this Province shall be at his election to make application
to the Governor of this Province for the time being to put such Sherrifs Bond
or Bonds in suit or otherwise may imediatly have an action of debt against such
Sherrif in the County where the fact arises for such public tobacco as shall
be due to such creditor

And to the end that no officer or other person may be surprised or unjustly
molested either upon the account of payment or collection of public dues, Be
it likewise Enacted, that no person or persons having public tobacco to them
due, or fees in any Sherrifs hands to collect, and that do not signify to such
Sherrif or Sherrifs their dependence and resolution of making use of the same
on or before the 25th day of December in the year the same shall to him or them
be due, shall have take or demand any benefit or advantage by this Act allowed
for that present year and so every year successively, nor shall the Sherrif of
any the respective Countys leavy by way of Execution for any public dues or
officers fees, or from any the inhabitants within this Province where they have
not made a demand thereof at or before the 20th day of January for that present
year, and so every year successively.

And where any person having public tobacco or fees in such Sherrifs hands and
have made their demand thereof as aforesaid, or the said Sherrif demanded any
public dues or officers fees of the respective inhabitants within his Baily
wick within the times before limited, such demandant shall be obliged to take
the fame and discharge such debtor, for such and so much as shall be by him
received, and on refusal of receiving thereof, the said tobacco so intended to
be paid as aforesaid, being viewed and found merchantable by two honest Men of
the neighborhood shall be weighed and marked for the use of such demandant,
and be a sufficient discharge to the person or persons paying the same for so
much as the same did amount unto, provided the same be tendered on or before the
tenth day of April, otherwise such tobacco to lie at the risque of the Sherrifs
or others intending to receve advantage hereby, any thing herein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Sherrif within this
Province have in his hands any public officers fees to collect shall presume
to leavy by Execution on any the inhabitants within this Province any fees to
him committed to collect, where the person or persons from whom such fees
appear to be due produce the former Sherrifs receipt, or otherwise make appear
payment of the same, under forfeiture and penalty of treble the sum, executed
to the party or partys grieved, to be recovered with cost in any Court of
Record within this Province by Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn
Protection or wager of Law shall be allowed.

And forasmuch as Sherrifs Bonds have of late years been usually taken in the
County Courts for the better convenience of the Sherrifs getting security
without any certain form thereof prescribed.

Be it therefore Enacted, that all Sherrifs Bonds hereafter to be taken
throughout this Province to be made in manner and form following.

Maryland ss.
KNOW all Men by these presents that we A B etc. of the County of (...) in the
Province aforesaid Gent' are holden and firmly bound unto our Sovereign Lord
King William etc. in the full sum and just quantity of two hundred thousand
pounds of good sound merchantable leaf tobacco and cask, to be paid to his said
Majesty his heirs and succossors, to the which payment well and truly to be
p^ie we bind our selves and either of us, our and either of our Heirs
Executors and Administrato jointly and severally for the whole and in the whole
firmly by these presents as witness our hands and seals the day of in the year
of his Majestys Reign Annoque Domini

THE CONDITION of the above Obligation is such, that if the above bounden A. B.
do well and truly serve his said Majesty his heirs and successors in the office
of high Sherrif of the said County of (...) within this Province aforesaid, and
also shall render unto his said Majesty and other his said Officers a true
faithful and perfect account of all and singular his said Majestys Rights and
Dues and to his Officers a true and just account of their fees, that he shall
or may be entrusted with, by his Majestys Governor and other his Officers
within this Province afoiresaid to receive and collect, and his account to his
said Majesty his heirs and successors, or to his or their Goaernour here for
the time being for the sines and forfeitures and other dues belonging to his
said Majestys Government, as also his account of all fees, dues or sums of
money or tobacco for leavys or fees due to any his Majestys Officers and other
good people within this Province, shall pass an account for by the tenth day of
April next ensuing the date hereof, and in all other things as Sherrif of the
said County of (...) shall behave himself well and honestly toward all
persons, according to the best of his power, skill and knowledge, then this
obligation to be void and of no effect, or elce to stand in full force strength
and virtue.

Which said Bond when taken in form aforesaid, if by the County Court the
Commissioners thereof shall transmit the same into the Secretarys Office
together with all former Sherrifs Bonds by them taken, and the said
Commissioners are hereby required and enjoined to take new security yearly, and
every year, of such Sherrifs so long as they shall continue in the said Office,
having especial regard not to admit any person to be security as aforesaid but
such as are good and substantial Frecholders within their County, and also to
make the obligation of such Bond so to be taken from any Sherrif answerable to
the public charge of their respective Countys. And for encouragement of such
persons now bearing or that shall hereafter bear the office of Sherrif and who
shall punctually comply with the public Creditors, it is also hereby further
Enacted, that it shall and may be lawful for his Majestys Governor for the
time being where no just complaint is made against such Sherrif to continue and
make good their Commission for the time and term of three years successively
but no longer.

An Act prohibiting the inhabitants of this Province or any others from carring
Liquors to the Indian Towns.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof any person or persons whatsoever
inhabiting or trading into this Province, that shall presume to carry any
liquors whatsoever to any Indian Fort or Town, or within three miles of such
(...) or Town, and shall vend or dispose of the same to any Indian or Indians
whatsoever, such person or persons shall forfeit the sum of five thousand
pounds of ^^^^co, one half thereof to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and
successors toward the Support of Government, the other half to him or them
that ^^al inform or sue for the same, to be recovered in any Court of Record
within this Province, wherein no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be
allowed.

An Act for Summoning grand and petty Juries.
WHEREAS by Law it appears to be the indubitable Right and Property of the
Kings Majestys-Subjects throughout all his Majestys Dominions in all cases,
either meum and tuum or Criminal matters to be tried by their equals, that is a
grand and petty Jury. And for that the constitution of this his Majestys
Province will not admit of such ways and methods as is practiced in the Kingdom
of England by reason of the small number of inhabitants, and diverse other
impediments not to be avoided.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that the chief Clerk of the Provincial Court shall issue out several
Writts of venire facias for two good and lawful Men Freeholders to serve upon a
grand Jury for the Body of this Province, and several other the like Writts of
venire facias for three like good and lawful Men to serve upon petty Juries,
which Writts of Summons shall be directed to the high Sherrifs of each
re-Countys in this Province, by virtue of which said Writts the said Sherrifs
shall 20 days at least before the Provincial Court at which the said Jurors
shall serve summons and give notice to the said party and partys, that they be
and appear as by the Writts of Sumons shall be directed, (Justices of the Peace
and Delegates allways excepted) and for default hereof, the Sherrif so
offending shall forfeit and pay a Fine of one thousand pounds of tobacco, and
each party so summoned and refusing to serve and not appearing at the time and
place appointed shall forfeit and pay a fine of five hundred pounds of tobacco,
and if it so happen by casualty or by accident that there shall not appear a
sufficient number for a grand Jury legally summoned, then the number to be made
good and completed by the high Sherrif attending the said Court of other
persons by standers of the same County if any be present, but if none present,
of the next adjacent County legally qualified to serve as aforesaid, and upon
refusal they shall be subject to the like fines as aforesaid, and for such
their service and attendance of the grand Jury at each Court they shall have an
allowance of three thousand pounds of tobacco out of the public Revennue of
this Province toward the de fraying of their charges and expenses.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the high
Sherrifs of each and every respective County in this Province are hereby
authorized and empowered to summon a sufficient number of Frecholders, good and
lawful Men to serve on a grand Jury in the County Courts of this Province twice
yearly at the least, that is to say at March and November Court, and oftener if
need require, at the discretion of the Justices of the said Countys, and to
summon the said grand Jurors at least ten days before each Court, for which
Service the Justices of each respective County Court shall and are hereby
empowered to make such reasonable Allowance as to them shall seem meet, not
exceeding the sum of four hundred pounds of tobacco each court and the said
Seerrifs neglecting their office and duty herein as aforesaid, shall for every
such offense forfeit and pay the sum of five hundred pounds of tobacco, and the
party or partys so refusing to serve when legally summoned shall forfeit and
pay the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds of tobacco, and the said fine to be
leavied upon all petty Jury Men legally sumoned who shall be legally qualified
as before in this Act recited and provided.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every the Fines and
Forfeitures that shall fall or accrue by virtue of this before recited Act
shall be paid to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors for the
Support of Government, any Law Statute or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. This Act to endure fot three years, or to the end of the next
Sessions of Assembly which shall first happen.

An Act for taking special Bail in the several Countys in this Province, upon
Actions and Suits depending in his Majestys Provincial Court.
FOR the greater ease and benefit of all persons inhabiting and residing within
this Province in taking Recognizances of special Bail in all Actions and Suits
depending or to be depending in his Majestys Provincial Court of this Province.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
when special Bail is required by the Provincial Court by the Plaintifs Attorney
at the calling over of the appearance Docket, and that the Court does rule that
special Bail shall be given, and the partys against whom the rule is that he
shall give special bail be present, the party defendant shall then and there
give special bail in open Court, and shall be deemed to be in the custody of
the Sherrif that arrested him in that Action till he give special bail as
aforesaid is required, but if the said party defendant be not able at the said
Provincial Court then and there to procure special bail, yet the said party
shall remain and be in custody of the same Sherrif that arrested him, and by
him in safe custody kept and guarded, and carried back into the County where
the Defendant was arrested, and there in safe custody kept until he can procure
such special bail, but if the said party against whom such rule is that special
bail shall be given be not present at the Provincial Court, then the Sherif of
that County where the said party defendant was arested may and shall by virtue
of such rule aforesaid for special bail to be given take the party into his
custody again, and there keep till he can procure special bail according to the
rule of Court; And for the greater ease of making and taking Recognizances of
such special bail, it shall and may be lawful for any person that shall be by
his Majestys Commission appointed one of the Justices of the Provincial Court
of this Province within such County where such Justice of the Provincial Court
shall inhabit, and in case of death or absence of such Justice of the
Provincial Court then it shall be lawful for the President of the County Court
to take and receive all and every such Recognizance or Recognizances of Bail or
Bails as any person or persons shall be willing or desirous to acknowledge or
make before him in his County, in any Action or Suit depending or hereafter to
be depending in the said Provincial Court; which Recognizance shall be taken in
manner and form as follows, viz.

J: Do. Plft' I You A: B. and C: D. and either of you do undertake for the
against I said R: Roe: Defendant in -- pounds of tobacco to

R: Roe Deft' I be leavied on your and either of your Lands and Tenements,
Goods and Chattels to the use of the said J: Do the Plaintiff, upon condition
that if the said J: -- D. -- obtain Judgment in an Action of Debt or Trespass
upon the case depending in the Provincial Court against the said R: -- R. --
the Defendant, that then the said R, -- R. -- shall pay the condemnation, or
deliver himself to the prison of our Sovereign Lord the King or you will do it
for him, they acknowledge themselves to be content therewith, this -- day of --
before me

To the honorable Justices of the Provincial Court.
Which said Recognizance or Recogninances of Bail or Bail Prizes so taken as
aforesaid, shall be transmitted to the Justices of the said Provincial Court at
the next Provincial Court sitting when and where such Action or Suit shall be
depending; which Recognizance or Recognizances of Bail Prizes so taken as
aforesaid, the said Court shall receive upon payment of such Fees as have been
usually received for the taking of such special Bail by the Officers of the
said Court, and shall be of like force and effect as if the same were taken de
been esse before the Justices of the said Provincial Court during their
sitting, for taking of every such Recognizance or Recognizances of Bail or Bail
Prizes, such Justices of the Provincial Court, or President of the County Court
that shall take such Bail, shall receive only the sum of five shillings and no
more.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Justices of the
Provincial Court shall make such rules and orders for the justifying of such
Bails and making the same absolute as to them shall seem meet, so as the
Cognizer or Cognizors of such Bail or Bails be not compelled to appear in
person in the Provincial Court to justyfie him or themselves.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that such
Justices of the Provincial Court before whom any Recognizance of Bail may
happen to be taken, such Justice has and power is hereby given him to examine
the Suretys upon Oath touching the value of their respective Estates if
occasion shall require, any Law usuage custom orpractice notwithstanding.

An Act for the Constables taking a List of Taxables.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof every Constable within this Province
shall at or before the 20th. day of June in every year respectively repair in
person to every respective house or habitation within his hundred, and there
require of the Master, Mistress, Dame or other chief person of the Family a
true List from under their hands of all their taxable persons they and every of
them have within their respective Familys, out of which List the said Constable
shall make two fair fair Lists under his hand, and one he shall send to the
Sherrif of the County, and the other he shall present to the next County Court
to be set up, and if in case any Master, Mistress, Dame or other chief person
of a Family shall refuse or deny to give such List, or in their absence leave
at their dwelling houses or quarters such a List and Account of their taxable
persons of their several Familys, or in the said account shall conceal any
taxable person or persons in his or their Family, for every such offense not
giving a true list and account of them to the Constables by the time required,
and for every taxable person by them concealed shall forfeit and pay for every
such offense the sum of five hundred pounds of tobacco for every person so by
him or them concealed, and every Constable neglecting his office herein, shall
forfeit and pay the sum of five hundred pounds of tobacco for every such
offense, one half thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors for the
Support of Government, the other half to the informer or him or them that will
sue for the same, to be recovered in any Court of Retord within this Province,
wherein no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be allowed.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc. if any inhabitant
within this Province, shall from the time herein appointed for taking the list
of taxables, on the last day of July purchase any taxable person or persons, he
or she shall with all convenient speed give notice of the said taxable or
taxables to the Constable of the said hundred, who is hereby enjoined to give
account to the next County Court, and to the end that no person for the future
may be ignorant what persons are taxables and what not.

Be it Enacted by and with the Advice and Consent aforesaid, that all Male
Children born within this Province and resident in it shall be taken and
accounted taxables at the age of sixteen years and upwards, and all Male
Children Servants imported into this Province at the age of sixteen years and
upwards shall be accounted taxables, and all Slaves whatsoever either Male or
Female imported into or born in this Province at or above the age of sixteen
years shall be accounted taxables and so rated, and that all Freemen within
this Province (except Clergy Men and likewise such poor impotent persons that
receive Alms from the county) shall be accounted taxables being above the age
of sixteen years.

An Act for the due Recording of all Laws of this Province in the Secretarys
Office, as also transmitting the Journal of the house of Delegates into the
Secretarys Office.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
the Secretary of this Province in whose custody the Records remain, do at or
before the tenth day of March next cause all such Laws and Acts of Assembly as
shall be of force at the end of this present Sessions of Assembly to be entered
upon Record in a large new Book of a large Folio and good and substantial Paper
well bound, either in Leather or Parchment to be writ in a fair legible hand,
as also all other Laws hereafter to be made within six Months after any
Sessions of Assembly that shall hereafter happen, to be kept in the Secretarys
Office only, and also cause the same to be examined by the orignal Acts, to
which the Governor has affixed the broad Seal, and the same so entered shall be
signed by the Honorable the Secretary and sealed with the lesser Seal, and
that his Honor the Secretary cause a List or Catalogue of the said Laws to be
entered in the said Book, and an Index or Table directing to every Act in the
same, and in default thereof by the time aforesaid, shall pay as a Fine for the
same the sum of ten thousand pounds of tobacco, to be recovered in his Majestys
name, the one half to his Majesty for the support of Government, the other half
for him or them that shall sue for the same, and when the same is written and
done, the said Secretary shall at the next General Assembly be allowed and paid
out of the public Leavy so much as the said Secretary shall reasonably deserve.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Clerk of the
House of Delegates for the time being transcribe the Journal of the said House
within two Months after the Prorogation or Dissolution of any Assembly now held
or to be held hereafter, upon penalty of five hundred pounds of tobacco, to be
forfeited and paid to our Sovereign Lord the King one half of which Fnes for
the support of Government, and the other half to him or them that shall sue for
the same, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by Bill,
Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be
allowed.

An Act for securing Merchants and others tobacco after they have received it.
BE ITENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof every Housekeeper and In habitant within
this Province having a Plantation whereon he makes or causes to be made any
tobacco, shall build and erect, or otherwise sit up and make ready a good right
House, with a good Door Lock and Key upon every Platation where such tobacco is
made as aforesaid, and sufficient to contain the tobacco made on every
Plantation.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Inhabitant or
Housekeeper as aforesaid, having a Plantation whereon he makes or causes to
be made any tobacco as aforesaid, and that shall pay away and dispose of any
tobacco to any Merchant, Master of ship or Sailor or any other person
whatsoever, shall notwithstanding such disposure or payment, secure and keep
the said tobacco as he would do his own proper Goods for and during the space
of one whole year, commencing from the time of receiving the tobacco and no
longer; and if any tobacco so received as aforesaid for the want of such house
as aforesaid should be damnified or stole, the person neglecting to provide
such house shall make satisfaction to the party that received the same.

Provided always that nothing in this Act contained shall be construed meant
and intended to make any Inhabitant or Housekeeper liable to any damage which
shall or may happen to any tobacco so lest with him to keep secure through any
other casuality whatsoever.

An Act for regulating of Ordinarys, and limitting the number of them within
this Province.
FOR the better regulating Ordinarykeepers and Inholders within this Province
for the future BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of
the same, that from and after the publication hereof, the Commissioners of each
County Court and the Mayor Recorder and Aldermen of the City of St Marys at the
Mayors Court, be and are hereby empowered and authorized from time to time as
often as need shall require to grant Licenses to such person and persons as
they shall think sit to be Ordinarykeepers and Inholders for the keeping of
Ordiuarys and houses of entertainment, so long time as is such and so many
places within their several and respective Countys and City aforesaid, for the
ease and convenience of the Inhabitants, Travelers and Strangers as to them
respectively shall seem meet, for which Licenses the said persons that shall be
so licensed to keep Ordinarys, except all such persons as shall keep Ordinary
or Ordinarys in the Port of Annapolis in the County of Ann-Arundel, shall at
the time of his or their taking such License or Licenses be bound and obliged
to pay unto the Secretary of this Province for the time being if he or they
keep Ordinary within the Port of Annapolis in Ann-Arundel County or within two
miles thereof the sum of two thousand pounds of tobacco yearly for a fine for
every such License, or if he or they do keep Ordinary within the City of St.
Marys, or at any County Court House, or at the Town and Port of Williamstadt
within this Province the sum of twelve hundred pounds of tobacco, and if any
person or persons shall keep any Ordinary or houses of enterta inment in other
remoter parts, for entertainment of travelers shall pay to the said Secretary
for the time being yearly for a fine the sum of four hundred pounds of tobacco
and no more, and give Bond for the payment thereof.

And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the Clerk of each respective County Court within
this Province, and the Clerk of the Mayors Court of the said City of St. Marys
shall cause such License and the sines for granting such Licenses and the
security given for the payment and performance thereof, to be duly entered upon
Record in their several Courts, and then transmit the said Bonds to the
Justices of the Provincial Court for his Majestys said Secretarys use, for
which said License and Bonds such Ordinarykeepers shall pay to such respective
Clerk sixty pounds of tobacco and no more.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc. that the
Commissioners of the several County Courts, and the Mayor, Recorder and
Aldermen of the said City be and are hereby authorized and empowered at their
several County Courts and Mayors Court in the Month of January and the Month of
August half yearly and every year during the continuance of this Act, having
summoned each respective Ordinarykeeper within their respective Countys and
City, then and there to set and assess the Rates and prices of all liquors
whatsoever in this present Act not hereafter mentioned by them the said
Ordinarykeepers vended or to be vended for the year ensuing, and so for every
year during the continuance of this Act, which rates and prices so to be set
and assessed, limited and appointed by the Commissioners aforesaid, and by the
Magistrates of the City aforesaid, shall be by their several and respective
Clerks transcribed and set up at their several and respective County Courts and
City aforesaid, in some public place or places there, that every person or
persons may peruse the same, the Copy of which table and prices of liquors
every Ordinarykeeper within each County are hereby obliged to transcribe fairly
and keep the same set up in the most public place of their house or houses for
the perusal of all persons that receive any Ordinary accomodations from them,
under the penalty of one thousand pounds of tobacco, to be applied to the use
of the County where such Ordinarykeeper shall live, to be sued for in case of
non payment thereof in his Majesty name, for which sums and table of prices
every Ordinarykeeper shall pay to such Clerk the sum of forty-pounds of tobacco
and no more. And any Ordinarykeeper and Inholder that shall after the setting
and assessing the rates and prices aforesaid, directly or indirectly take,
exact, demand or receive for the price and pay for any such liquors for which
the rates and prices shall be set and assessed as aforeresaid of any person or
persons whatsoever above the rates and prices so assest as aforesaid, shall for
every such offense forfeit and pay the sum of five hundred pounds of tobacco,
one half thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors for the use of the
County, and the other half to him or them that shall in form and sue for the
same, and loose every such debt so unjustly charged, exacted and demanded, the
said forfeitures to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province,
wherein no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be allowed.

And every such Ordinarykeeper that shall demand, exact or receive above the
sum of ten pounds of tobacco per gallon for small beer, twenty pounds of
tobacco per gallen for strong beer, for a nights lodging in a bed four pounds
of tobacco, for a p^ck of shaled Indian Corn or Oats for a Horse twelve pounds
of tobacco, for past urage for a horse per night six pounds of tobacco, for hay
or straw for a Horse per night ten pounds of tobacco, shall also pay and
forfeit for every such offense the sum of five hundred pounds of tobacco, one
half thereof to his said Majesty his Heirs and Successors for the use of the
County, and the other half to him or them that shall ^i^for^ or sue for the
same, to be recovered as aforesaid, and loose every such debt so unjustly
charged as aforesaid; And to the intent that all persons inhabitants, strangers
and travellors may be certain of good and sufficient accomodations for
themselves and their horses.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Ordinarykeeper or
Inholder to be licenced as aforesaid, shall within six months after granting
their respective licenses be hereby obliged to provide and maintain if the said
Ordinary be kept at the Court House in the said County, or the Port and Town of
Annapolis and Williamstadt twelve good and substantial beds over and above what
is for their own Familys use with covering for the same, together with
accommodation of oats, hay, and straw for litter and indian corn, with stabling
for twenty horses at least, and if any such Ordinary be kept at any other part
of the County then at the Court House aforesaid, such Ordinarykeeper shall
within the time aforesaid be provided with four spare beds with covering, and
sufficient stabling and provinder for six horses at the least, under the
penalty of five hundred pounds of tobacco, one half thereofto his Majesty his
heirs and sucoessors for the use of the County, the other half to him or them
that shall inform or sue for the same, to be recovered by Bill Plaint or
Information, wherein no Essoyn Projection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

Provided always that no or person persons so licenced or to be licenced to
keep Ordinary as aforesaid, shall during their time of such their keeping
Ordinary be Justices of the Peace nor Comissioners in any County Courts within
this Province, nor any Mayor, Recorder or Alderman of the said City of St.
Marys, any thing in this present Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any
Ordinarykeeper keeping evil Rule in his House upon complaint made thereof to
the Justices of the County Court of such Ordinarykeepers misbehaviour or
keeping evil rule in his house, the said Justices of the County Courts are
hereby authorized and empowered to suppress such Ordinarykeeper, and call in
such License.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any Ordinarykeeper
disabled or suppressed as aforesaid, or any other person that shall presume to
keep Ordinary without License first had and obtained as aforesaid, shall for
every month he or they shall keep Ordinary as aforesaid forfeit and pay two
thousand pounds of tobacco, one half to his Majesty for the use aforesaid, and
the other half to him or them that shall sue for the same, to be r^overed in
any Court of Record within this Province by Bill plaint or information, wherein
no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be allowed. And

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no person or persons
inhabiting within this Province, not having lawful license shall sell by retail
any sider quince drink or other strong Liquors to be drank in his her or their
houses, or about his her or their Plantations upon forfeiture of every time he
she or they shall be legally convict thereof the sum of one thousand pounds of
tobacco, one half thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors for and
toward defraying the County charge where such forfeiture shall become due, and
the other half to the informer or to him or them that shall sue for the same,
to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by Action of Debt
Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be
allowed.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that no person or persons whatsoever so licenceed to
keep Ordinary as aforesaid, shall refuse to credit any person capable of giving
a Vote for election of Delegates in any County within this Province to the
value of four hundred pounds of tobacco per Annum for any accomodations by him
vended, whereof any such person so capacitated as aforesaid shall have occasion
of or require to be acomodated with, under the penalty or forfeiture of four
hundred pounds of tobacco, by each Ordinarykeeper so refusing to credit such
person as aforesaid, one moiety thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors
for and toward the defraying the Countys charge where such forfeiture shall
become due, the other moiety to the informer or him or them that shall sue for
the same, to be recovered as aforesaid.

And whereas it has been found prejudicial to the inhabitants of this
Province, that such Ordinarykeepers or Inholders have frequently entertained
diverse Freemen and loose persons a great time tippling at their Houses, as well
to many other persons great damage as their own ruin.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that it shall not be lawful for any such Ordinarykeeper or
inholder to keep such Ordinary or House of Entertainment, until they have
passed before the Justices of each respective County granting their Licenses a
Bond with good Security to the value of twenty pound Sterling that they shall
not entertain any Freeman or other loose person in their House above twenty
four hours, unless such person be capable to give his vote fot a Delegate in
the said County, or that they be retained as a Servant to the said
Ordinatykeeper or Inholder, any Law usuage or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And it is also hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Justices of
the Provincial Court and the Commissioners of the respective County Courts
shall give this Act in charge to the several grand Jurys, and also to the
several Commissioners of the respective Courts, and the Magistrates of the said
City to their several and respective Constables to inquire into the breach of
this Act, and into all disorders committed in the said Ordinarys and present
the same (if any be) to the several Courts to be examined and punished
according to Law.

And that all and every Act and Acts formerly made concerning Ordinarykeepers
are hereby repealed and made void. This Law to continue for three years, or the
end of the next Sessions of Assembly, which shall first happen after the end of
the said three years.

An Act for securing the Parochial Librarys of this Province, and that the care
and charge thereof be committed to some worthy and learned Person.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
the Librarys appointed for the several and respective Parishes within this
Province shall be and remain in the hands and possession of the Minister of the
Parish and if any Minister be presented, appointed or inducted to the said
Parish during his residence in the Parish aforesaid, who is and shall be
obliged to keep and preserve the said Library from wast and imbezlement, and be
accountable for the same to the Governor and Council and Vestry as often as
required; And to that purpose the said Minister shall pass two receipts for the
said Books, inserting what they are, and the title and page of the same, one
receipt to go to the Governor and Council, and the other to the Vestry of the
Parish to be recorded in their Records, and the said Vestrys are hereby obliged
to visit the said Librarys twice in the year, and inspect the same; and in case
of any damage or imbezlement thereof to require and cause satisfaction to be
made for the same, and in case any Minister having the charge of such Library
shall be removed from his charge, he shall deliver the said Library to the
Vestry of the Parish and make satisfaction or reparation if any damage (...)
wast suffered before his departure out of the said Parish, except by fire or
such like unavoidable accident, or in case of the doath of any such Minister
having the charge of such Library, the Vestry of the said Parish shall
immediately take the said Library into their custody and keeping and pass their
receipts for the same as above directed, and shall in all points be answerable
for the same, except by ^re or such like accident as aforesaid; And for the
better preserving and securing the said Librarys, the learned and worthy Doctor
Thomas Bray or his Successors is herereby appointed chief Visitor of all and
every the said Librarys within the said Province.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that one Act of Assembly
made at^a General Assembly held at the Port of Annapolis the sixteenth day of
September 1696. Entitled An Act for securing the Parochial Librarys of this
Province be and is hereby Repealed and made Void and of no Effect.

An Act for punishment of Blaspheming, Fornication, Adultry, profane swearing
and cursing.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof, if any person or persons whatsoever
inhabiting or being within this Province shall blaspheme GOD (that is to say)
curse him, and deny our Savior Jesus Christ to be the SON of GOD, or shall
deny the Holy Trinity, the FATHER SON and HOLY GHOST, or the God head of any of
the three Persons or the unity of the God head, or shall utter any reproachful
p^eches, Words or Languages cancerning the HOLY TRINITY or any of the three
Persons thereof, for his her or their first offense shall be bored through the
Tongue and fined the Sum of twenty pounds Sterling to his Sacred Majesty
toward the defraying the County charge where the said offen ce^ shall be
committed, to be leavied upon his her or their Goods and Chattels, Lands and
Tenements (if any they have) but if such offender or offenders have not Goods
and Chartels, Lands and tenements to the value aforesaid, then such offender or
offeders shall suffer six months imprisonment without bail or mainprize, and
for every second offense whereof every such offencer or offenders shall be
legaly convict, he she or they so offend as aforesaid shall be stigmatized in
the Forenead with the letter B, and to be fined forty pounds Sterling to the
uses aforesaid, and in case he she or they so offending as aforesaid shall not
have Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements to the value aforesaid, every such
offender or offenders shall suffer imprisonment for the space of one whole year
with out bail or mainprize as aforesaid, and for every third offense whereof
any such offender or offenders shall be legally convicted as aforesaid, he she
or they so offending shall suffer death with confiscation of all his her or
their Goods and Chattels to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority Advice and Consent aforesaid, that
every person or persons committing Fornication and being thereof convicted,
shall for every time so offending be fined (by the Court before whom such
matter shall be brought) to his Sacred Majesty in the sum of twenty shilling
Sterling, or four hundred pounds of tobacco, to be leavied etc. for and toward
the defraying the County Leavy where such fact shall be committed, or receive
corporal punishment by whipping at the discretion of the said Court, not
exceeding thirty nine lashes, and that every person or persons committing
Adultery and being thereof legally convict shall be fined as aforesaid for the
uses aforesaid, in the sum of forty shillings Sterling or eight hundred pounds
of tobacco to be leavied as aforesaid, or to receive corporal punishment as
aforesaid. And

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that every person or persons who shall harbor, entertain
and provide for the maintenance of any lewd Woman or Women, or frequent her or
their companys, or the company of any such lewd Woman or Women, after public
admonition to avoid the same given by the Minister, or Churchwardens, or Vestry
of the parish or parishes where such person or persons dwell; and in case there
be no Ministers by the Churchwardens of the same Vestry aforesaid, shall for
every time it shall be proved that be she or they shall cohabit together, or
frequent the company of each other after such admonition given as aforesaid
undergo such pains and penaltys as is by this Act provided for such who are
legally convicted of Fornication or Adulcry, and whereas those horrid and
detestable sins of profane swearing and cursing are notwithstanding several
good Laws heretofore made grown so ripe, that is to be found, they provoke the
Divine Vengeance to inflict many and terrible punishments upon us, to prevent
such wickedness for the future,

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that if
any person or persons whatsoever within this Province after the publication of
this Act profanely swear or curse in the presence or hearing of any one
Justice of the Peace or other head Officer of any Town, City or Borough within
this Province, or that shall be thereof convicted by the Oath of one witness
before any one Justice or other head Officer, or by confession of the party
offending shall forfeit and pay for such offense the sum of five shillings
Sterling to our Sovereign Lord the King for the use of the poor of the County
where the offense shall be committed, to be leavied upon such offender or
offenders immediately by Command or Warrant from such Justice of the Peace or
head Officer of any Town, City or Borough before whom such offoder or
offenders shall be convicted, to the Constable or other person whom such
Justice or head Officer shall command or appoint, by distress or sale of his
her or their Goods or Chattels, rendering to them the overplus, and in case any
person should refuse to obey to execute the Command or Warrant of any Justice
of the Peace or head Officer as aforesaid, in this case such person or persons
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of five Shillings to be leavied as aforesaid, to
the use aforesaid. And

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that for every time any
person or persons shall profanely swear or curse in any Court House during the
sitting of any Court within this Province and be thereof convict aforesaid, he
she or they so offending shall imediatly forfeit and pay the sum of ten
shillings as aforesaid to the uses aforesaid, or set in the Stocks for the
space of one hour, by order or command of any such Justice of the Peace or head
Officer as aforesaid.

Provided allways, and it is hereby Enacted, that no person shall be prosecuted
or troubled for any such profane swearing and cursing, unless the same be
proved or prosecuted within ten days next after the offense committed.

And lastly, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that every Justice of the Peace or head Officer
aforesaid, are hereby obliged to receive all such forfeitures as aforesaid,
that are leavied as aforesaid, and render a just account thereof to the
Justices of each respective County yearly, at the time of laying the County
Leavy to be by them disposed of to the uses aforesaid.

An Act for recovering the Arrears due from the public Officers, and
transferring several debts arising therein.

An Act for payment of sees due from Criminal Persons.
WHEREAS diverse complaints have been made by several Countys of this Province,
occasioned for that they have been forced to pay the fees of imprisonment,
Criminals the persons by whom such fees ought heretofore to have been paid, or
hereafter to be paid being released and going free, to the great encouragement
of offenders, for prevention whereof for the future.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authoity of the same, that
from hence forward no Person Sherrif, Jailer, Clerk or Crier shall charge
either their own County to which they belong or the public with any fees for
any Criminal committed to the charge of the said Sherrif or Jailer, having
sufficient Estate in this Province wherewith to pay the same, or being capable
to pay the same by servitude, but that such Criminals being discharged by order
and due course of Law, shall pay their own sees to Sherrif, Jailer, Clerk and
Crier according to Act of Assembly, either out of his Estate or by Servitude or
otherwise, provided always that this Act shall not extend to malefactors that
are executed, or to such other persons who are banished having no Estate in
this Province, or Servants Criminals, for whom the Country shall pay the fees
due to the Sherrif Jailer, Clerk, Crier and other Officers of such Court where
such Criminal shall be convicted.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Officers fees
due from Criminal Servants shall be paid by the County where the fact shall be
committed and that all and every such Criminal Servant for whom the County
shall pay the fees due to such Officers as aforesaid, shall after the end and
expiration of his time of servitude to his Master satisfye unto the
Commissioners of the County who paid such his fees for him to the Sherrif and
other Officers as aforesaid, for the use of such County such sums as they have
paid as aforesaid, and the several Commissioners of the several Countys shall
and are hereby empowered to make inquisition after all such Servants Criminals
for whom the County has defrayed the said fees to the Sherrif and other
Officers as aforesaid, aad they the said Commissioners according to their best
discretion shall order for the said Servants to make such reasonable
satisfaction to the County as they shall think fit, and in such manner as they
shall find convenient, And for the better security of the County which shall
pay such fees for such Criminal Servants as aforesaid,

Be it Enacted, that the Master, Mistress or Dame of all such Servants be and
are hereby enjoined and required at the expiration of the time of such Servants
servitude to such Master, Mistress or Dame to render up and deliver to the
Justice or Justices of the County for the use of the County aforesaid such
Servants Criminal as aforesaid, under the penaltys to such Master, Mistress or
Dame refusing or neglecting to deliver up such Servant as aforesaid, of making
satisfaction and paying to the County all such fees as by the County aforesaid
have been paid for such Criminals as aforesaid, and such Justice or Justices to
whom such Criminal Servant shall be delivered as aforesaid, are likewise
required to serve such Servants Criminals as aforesaid in such manner and way
as to the said Justice or Justices shall seem meet or convenient, so that he be
and appear at the then next County Court to be held for the said County to be
disposed on as the Court shall consider.

An Act for preventing vexatious and unnecessary Suits at Law, and for proving
of debts and pleading discount in Bar.
WHEREAS diverse and sundry persons within this Province contracting debts by
accounts with Merchants and others, for which they stand and remain only debtor
upon their Book of Account, the which though they be honest and well disposed to
pay the same upon demand first had and required of the said debtor, by the
creditor or other persons lawfully authorized to receive the same, without
which it is impossible for the said debtor to know where or to whom to pay the
said debt, yet several of the said creditors through vexatious and avaritious
humors do daily commence their Suits at Law against such their debtors,
without any demand of such their debts of their said debtors, whereby the said
debt is much increased, and the said debtor thereby greatly burdened and
impoverished by means of such their vexatious and unjust Suits in Law.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that from and after the publication of this Act no person whatsoever his
Executors or Administrators living or trading into this Province, shall for any
debt due or owing to him by account, book or otherwise, and for which the
debtor has not passed his hand and seal to such his creditor, sue or implead
at Law such debtor for any such debt contracted as aforesaid, and not under
hand and seal of such debtor as aforesaid, unless he shall first demand and
require the same of the said debtor in the County where he shall inhabit, to
prove which demand the creditor or demandants own oath shall be sufficient, but
if the debtor be not at home to bespoke with, then such demanandt shall leavea
noat under the hand of such creditor or demandant, or those he shall empower to
receive the same, what time and to whom the same shall be paid, and if
thereupon the same be not accordingly paid, then it shall and may be lawful for
such creditor to sue and implead such his debtor for the said debt, and recover
against him all such cost and damages as upon legal trial in any Court in this
Province shall be adjudged against him, and in case any person or persons shall
sue and implead any such his debtor as aforesaid contrary to this Act he shall
loose all his co^s of such suit, and be liable to satisfy such his debtor all
such damages as shall accrue to the said debtor by such his vexatious and
unjust suit at Law.

Provided always, that this Act, nor any thing herein contained shall be
construed to intend to the benefit of any person debtor as aforeresaid, either
run away out of this Province, or wilfully absconding himself within the same
from his said creditor, but that he may be proceeded against as before this Law
made, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that an account sworn to by the Plaintiff, or a Bill
proved by his evidence before any Justice of the Provincial Court, or any two
Justices of the County Courts of this Province, shall be sufficient evidence to
prove the debts in the Provincial or any county Courts within this Province.
Provided allways that the party who shall swear or give evidence as aforesaid
to prove any debt as aforesaid, shall at the time declare upon his oath whether
he knows of any payment or discount of any part or parcel of the account or
debt so to be proved, which shall be certifyed under the hand or hands of such
ono Justice of the Provincial Court, or two Justices of the County Court before
whom the account or debt shall be proved with certificate made and signed as
aforesaid, shall be taken and received as sufficient proof of any such debt or
account as aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that if any defendant upon trial can prove either by
such certificate as aforesaid or other sufficient proof that there is any sum
of tobacco or money paid to the plaintiff or his order in part of the debt sued
for, the Court before whom such trial is had may cause the same to be
discounted in Court and give Judgment thereupon against the defendant for so
much only as shall be remaining to the plaintiff with ^cost of Suit, provided
the balance exceeds two hundred pounds of tobacco or sixteen shillings and
eight pence in the County Courts, and fifteen hundred pounds of tobacco or six
pounds five shillings sterling in the Provincial Court, otherwise the plaintiff
shall be nonsuited as by other Laws are provided

An Act for Encouragement of such persons as will undertake to buid Watermills.
DALLY Experience shows that the want of Water-mills is the true cause that
Husbandry in tilling the Ground and for sowing of Wheat and Barley is but coldly
prosecuted, though the advantage thereby in raising the stock of neat cattle be
great; And forasmuch as for the most part the places fit for setting up of
Water mills are already in the hands of persons under age, or unable to be at
the charge of building a Water-mill, or elce such as are wilfully obstinate in
forbiding and hindering such persons as would purchase the said places fit for
building Water-mills and set them up, to the increase of our trade and
navigation, much to the public damage of the Province.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that if
any person or persons from and after the publication hereof, that shall desire
to set up a Water-mill upon any Land next adjoining to any Run of water within
this Province, not being the proper possession or frecholds of such person or
persons, nor leased to them to the intent thereon to set a Water-mill, they
shall purchase a Writ out of his Majestys Court of Chancery directed to the
Sherrif of the County where such Land lies, requiring him by the oaths of
twelve Men of his County to inquire what damage it would be to his Majesty or
others to have a Mill set up in such a place as aforesaid, the form of which
Writ follows. viz.

William by the Grace of God of England Scotland France and Ireland King
Defender of the Faith etc.
To the Sherrif (...) County greeting,
We command you that by the Oath of twelve honest and lawful Men of the County
by whom the truth of the matter may be better known, diligently to inquire if
it be to the damage of us or others if we grant -- of -- County twenty Acres of
Land lying at N. -- in the County aforesaid, viz. ten Acres of the one side
such Run, and ten Acres on the other side such run of water, together with
liberty to take, fall, cut down and carry away either by land or water any wood
or timber fit for building a Mill, other then timber fit to split into Clap
Boards upon any of the Lands next adjoining to the said twenty Acres of Land
lying on each side of the said run of water at N: N. aforesaid in the County
aforesaid, and if it be to the damage and prejudice of us or others, then to
what damage and prejudice of us, and to what damage and prejudice of others,
and of whom and in what manner, and how and of what value they are by the year,
according to the true value thereof now before any further improvement made of
the said twenty Acres of Land, and who are the present possessors of the said
twenty Acres of Land, and what Lands and Tenements remain to the present
possessors over the said twenty Acres, and if the land remaining to the present
possessors over the said twenty Acres will suffice to uphold their manner, viz.
the sixth part of their manner allotted by the conditions of Plantations for
the Demesne as before the Alienation so as the County by the Alienation
aforesaid, in default of the present possession more than was wont be not
charged and grieved, and the inquisition thereupon openly and distinctly made
to us in our Chancery, under the Seal and Seals of them by whom it was made,
with out delay send etc.

Upon return of which Writ in case the person or persons whereby the said
inquest shall be sound to be true owners and possessors of the said land fit to
build a Mill upon, shall refuse to build a Mill thereon, and give security to
his said Majesty by Bond of fifty thousand pounds of tobacco, with condition to
build a Mill thereon within one year from that day to be computed and reckoned,
and the same building to prosecute and finish within two years after the said
beginning or laying the foundation as aforesaid for the public good of the
Province, it shall and may be lawful for his said Majesty his Heirs or
Successors, or for their chief Governor here for the time being from time to
time to grant any such twenty Acres of Land fit to build a Water mill upon as
aforesaid, together with free egress and regress to the said Water mill, either
by land through any Man's land next adjoining or elce by water, together with
liberty to fall any timber for building the said water mill, other then board
timber fit to split or cleave into clap boards for any time or term, not
exceeding eighty years then next to come, under the yearly rent of the land
then by the oath of twelve Men by virtue of the Writ aforesrid returned to be
paid to the owner of the said land so found and returned as aforesaid, which
said grant from his said Majesty his Heirs and Successors or from the chief
Governor here for the time being as aforesaid shall be good and available in
Law to the grantee as aforesaid for any term of years, not exceeding eighty
years as aforesaid against all persons whatsoever any Law, custom or usuage
heretofore had, made or used within this Province to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always that before any person or persons whatsoever shall have such
grant to build a Water-mill as aforesaid, they shall enter into a Bond with his
said Majesty with two sufficient Suretys in the sum of fifty thousand pounds of
tobacco with condition to begin to build the said Water-mill within one year
then next to come, and the building to prosecute and finish within two years
after such beginning, and for the great advantage that is already found to the
Province in general by the Mills already built, some of which do stand upon
lands whereof the title is doubtful for want of due form of the Conveyance, or
the last wills and restaments by which the lands have been conveyed or devised
to the builders of such Mills.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every such
person or persons as aforesaid who have built Mills shall or may have such
Writ or Writts as aforesaid, to inquire of the true yearly value of the land
where such Mill does stand, and of ten Acres of land on each side of the said
run as aforesaid, and upon return of such Writ as aforesaid, shall have a
grant from his Majestys chief Governor here as aforesaid for any term not
exceeding eighty years, and yearly rent return as aforesaid, to be paid to the
right owner of the said land as aforesaid, any Law or usuage to the contrary
hereof notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the
publication hereof no person or persons whatsoever, having or that shall
hereafter have obtained any grant for any lands whereof such person or persons
are not the real owners or possessors thereof, and whereupon he she or they
have already built or shall hereafter build a Water mill as this Law has
before directed, shall have any right, title or claim to any land granted to
them for any time or term whatsoever after such Mill by him or them already
built as aforesaid, or that shall hereafter be built, shall be casually broke
or gone to decay as aforesaid other then two years for the new erecting,
building, finishing and repairing of such Mill as aforesaid, but that in all
and every cause where any person or persons that have already built or that
shall hereafter build any Water-mill which are or that shall hereafter be broke
or gone to decay as aforesaid, and shall not within two years after the
publication hereof, or within two years after such Mill shall become broke or
gone to decay as aforesaid, cause the same to be new built, repaired or
finished as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful for the real owner or owners
of such land to such person or persons so granted as aforesaid to reenter upon
the same, and in case such person or persons shall deny or refuse to give the
owner and owners of such land as aforesaid peaceable and quiet possession
thereof, such owner or owners shall and may recover his right to the same, bw
ejectment or otherwise as the Law does direct, any thing in this Act contained
to the contrary notwithstanding. And for prevention of the abuse frequently
committed by persons keeping Water-mills by taking excessive tole.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that from and after the publication hereof as aforesaid, no
Master, Owner, Miller or other Person properly belonging to otherwise owning
any Mill within this Province, shall ask, demand or receive for grinding any
quantity or quantitys of Indian corn or Wheat whatsoever above the sixth part
of every bushel of Indian corn, and eighth part of every bushel of Wheat by him
or them so ground as aforesaid, upon penalty and forfeiture of one thousand
pounds of tobacco to the use of his Majesty his Heirs and Successors for the
support of Government, to be recovered in the respective County Courts by
Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoy Protection or wager
of Law shall be allowed, any other Act usuage or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always that if any person upon encouragement of former Acts hereby
repealed have begun to build any Mill they shall still have all those
advantages that they might have had by such Act hereby repealed, as if the
former Act or Acts were still in force.

An Act for the better administration of Justice in Probat of Wills and
granting Administrations, recovering of Legacys, and securing Filial Portions.
WHEREAS for the due administration of Justice it is most necessary that there
be a settled Succession from the dead to the living, and that the wills of all
Persons may be duly proved, and Letters of Administration of the Estates of all
persons dying witthout Wills may be granted to such persons who have the best
Right to succeed thereto, that there may in that case be no failure of Justice,
but that it may be duly administered within this Province, and all Legacys
speedily recovered, and Filial Portions and Orphans Estates duly secured and
easily obtained, according to the true intent of the Laws heretofore made, (now
in force) or hereafter to be made.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
the Judge or Commissary General for probat of Wills and granting
Administrations shall hold his Court once in two Months at the least, or oftener
as the case shall require, regard being had to the distance of the inhabitants
of the Suitors in the said Court, and the dispatch of persons not inhabiting in
this Province who have frequent occasion to seek Justice in the Court for
probat of Wills and granting Administration before the Judge thereof, and
forasmuch as certainty is the Mother of Repose, and that our dependence upon
England obliges us to make all our Laws as rear as may be consonant to the Laws
of England.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Judge for probat of
Wills and granting Administrations within this Province in all cases relating
to probat of Wills and granting Administrations shall proceed according to the
laws of England now in force or to be hereafter in force within twelve Months
after such Law shall be published in the Kingdom of England if pleaded before
him, saving in such cases as by this present Act is provided, and that it shall
and may be lawful for the judge for probat of Wills to prove any last Will
within this Province although the same concern title to land, any law usuage or
custom of England to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to the end that all Filial Portions may be secured to the Children of all
persons dying interstate, and legacys paid to legatees of persons who make
wills, be it likewise Enacted, first that the Judge for probat of wills and
granting administrations shall call all Executors and Administrators to account
for the Estate of all persons deceased within twelve Months next after
administration committed, and if any Administrator shall fail to give an
account within the time aforesaid being lawfully thereunto cited, that then the
said Judge shall revoke the first letters of admidi^^ration to such
Administrators committed, and shall grant administration de bonis non
Administrat' to some other person as in his discretion he shall think fit,
which said Administrator duly appointed shall give security as all other
Administrators do, and shall sue and implead the former Administrator before
the Judge aforesaid for an account of the Estate of the Intestate, and in case
it shall appear to the Judge aforesaid, that the former Administrator has
wasted and imbezled the Estate of the Intestate, then the Judge shall assign
the Bond entered into by the former Administrator and his Surety unto the latter
Administrator to be relieved against them for sach wasting or imbezling.

secondly, That the Judge upon account given by the first Administrator as
aforesaid shall make division of the clear Estate of the deceased after debts
paid and funeral expenses defrayed, that is to say, shall allow to the Widow
or Relict of the said Intestate (if any such be) one full third part thereof,
and the other two thirds be equally divided among the children of the said
deceased (if any such be) and if no such be, then between the next of blood of
the said Intestate, and after such division made shall transmit the account
thereof to the several and respectiv Justices of the County Courts where the
said Estate shall be and remain, who are by this Act appointed, authorized and
enjoined to put the persons Lands, Goods and Chattels of the Orphans into the
hands of such persons as they shall think fit, taking Bond with two sufficient
suretys in the names of the Orphans themselves, for the securing and delivering
of the said Estate to the said Orphans or their Guardians when thereunto
lawfully called, according to the rules and directions here after by this Act
prescribed, established and ordained and not otherwise, which rules shall be
rules not only for the Justices of the County Courts to proceed by is taking
the accounts of Guardians or Trustees for Orphans, but also for the Judge for
probat of Wills and granting Administrations in the account of Adminstrators
and bare Executors to the benefit of others, nor shall the Judge give any other
allowances to any Administrator or Administrators upon his or their account but
for debt bona side owing from the deceased, and realy paid or secured to be
paid by the several and respective Administrators.

1. No Negro or other slave shall be sold or disposed of by any Administrator
for payment of debts, or otherwise reserved for the Administrators own use, in
sarisfaction for any debts due to the said Administrator, nor any Execution
served upon any Negro's or other Slaves so long as there shall be other Goods
of the deceased sufficient to satisfy the just debts of the deceased, but
shall be kept upon the hazard of the Estate and employed for the benefit of the
Creditors and Orphans if any be during the first year, at the end of which the
Adminisstrator is to account for the Estate and the profits of such slaves
shall be Asserts to the Creditors and dividable between the Wife and Children
or Relations of the said deceased if there be no Creditors the Judge for probat
of Wills upon passing the account by such Administrator shall allow him his
reasonable charges.

2. That no Account be allowed for Diet, Clothes, Phyzick or Education to any
Administrator or Guardian to any Orphan against the Estate of the Intestate, or
against the filial part of any Child committed to any Guardians or other
persons entrusted by the County Court, but that the said Orphan shall be
maintained and educated by the interest of their Estate and the increase of
their Stocks, so far forth as their said intrest and increase will extend; But
if the Estate be so small that it will not extend to a free education of such
Orphans, shall be bound Apprentices to some handy craft Trade or other person
at the discretion of the County Courts, until they arrive to the age of twenty
one years, except some Kin^man or Relation or some other charitable persons
will maintain them for the increase of the small Estate they have without any
diminution of the principle, which shall always be delivered to the Orphans at
the years hereafter in this Act limited and appointed, then such Kinsman,
Relation, or other charitable person is thereby obliged to perform the same,
as is by this Law before enjoined, and to be ascertained by the County Courts.

Provided always that no Orphan shall be put into the hands of any person of
different judgment in Religion to that of the deceased parents of the said
Orphans.

3. That all Cattle Horses and Sheep shall be returned in kind by the Guardians
or other persons entrusted with Orphans Estates, (that is to say) so many
cattle, horses and sheep were of at the time they were delivered to the
Guardians or Trustees of the Orphans.

4. That all Money, Plate, Rings and Jewels be preserved and not used by the
Guardeans or Trustees and delivered in kind to the Orphans when they come to
age, and that all household stuff and lumber be appraised in money and not
otherwise, and the value thereof paid to the Orphans as aforesaid, either in
money sterling according to the apprisement or in tobacco at the then price
current, and in case any difference shall arise what shall be the price current
at the day of payment in the Bond taken limited, the Judges of the County
Court where the Orphans Estate does lie shall then determine what shall be the
price current.

5. That every Male Orphan shall be of full age to receive his Estate from his
Guardian at the age of twenty one years and not before, but in case any person
by his last Will and Testament does appoint any person to be his executor or
executrix that is full seaventeen years of age, that person so appointed shall
be adjudged to be of sufficient age to be Administrator Executor or Executrix,
and if such Executor or Executrix be under the age of seaventeen years, the
administration shall thou be committed to such other persons as the Judge for
probat of Wills and grant. Administrations shall approve of d^^ante minoritate,
and so to the profit, use and behoof of the Infant Executor or Executrix and
not ottherwise nor in any other manner. And forasmuch as the right to
administration of the Goods of persons intestate may fall upon persons under
the age of seaventeen years, it is hereby declared that as they are within like
reason so they are within like law with Infant Executors.

6. That every Female Orphan shall be accounted of full age to receive her
Estate at the age of sixteen years or day of marriage which shall first happen.

7. That all Negro's and other Slaves after the transmitting the Estate to the
County Court as aforesaid, shall be praised to the Guardians or Trustees and be
preserved by them, and be employed to the said Guardians or Trustees use and
benefit, and the like number of Slaves, and of the like ability of body be
returned to the said Orphans out of their increase if any be, at their full age
by this Law limited, and if any of the said Slaves be grown aged or otherwise
impotent, or be lamed, and that the increase will not make the original Stock
good, as to the number and ability of body, that then they shall be again
appraised by the said County Courts, and the Guardians or Trustees shall pay to
the Orphans so much money or tobacco as the County Court shall adjudge the
Orphans Stocks of Negro's then to be of less value then they were at the time
of their first appraisment and delivery of their said Slaves to the said
Guardian or Trustees, but in case no guardian or other person will upon these
terms accept af those slaves, then it shall and may be lawful for the said
several and respective County Courts to put the said slaves out upon other
terms to any other person so that the said original stock of slaves be not sold
nor any of their increase, but in the best manner preserved for the Orphans
till they come to their several ages by this Act limited and appointed, to the
intent they may have their first stock made good to them in number value and
ability of body if it may be:

8. That all Servants for years be likewise returned in kind to the Orphans at
their full age, that is to say, the same number at the same age and sex and by
like number of years to serve, and of the same ability of body as near as can
be guest as the Servant were when received by the guardian or trustee.

9. Whereas every Administrator in Inventary inserteth what debts are sperate
and what debts are desperate, the Judge for probat of Wills shall transmit
those desperate debts with the division of the overplus of the estate unto the
several and respective justices of the County Courts where the Estate shall^y,
to the end the said justices may inquire whether the said Administrator has by
fraud or otherwise neglected to recover the same, or has received and never
accounted for the same, and shall with the residue of the said Estate commit
the said desperate debts to the care of the guardians or other trustees by them
employed and shall yearly and every year call the said Guardians to account for
the same, and duly inspect what of the said debts they have received or might
have received, and if the said guardian or trustee fail to give in his account
yearly, or by fraud or covin neglect or forbear to recover the same, the said
guardian or trustee shall stand and be accountable for every such debt by them
received and not accounted or neglected or forborne to be recovered. 10. That
the Justices of the County Courts take able and sufficient Security for Orphans
Estates, and inquire yearly of the security, and if there be just cause that
they require new and better security, and upon refusal to give new and better
security to remove the Orphans Estates into their hands. And further,

That the justices of the County Courts shall yearly in June Court inquire by a
Jury of good and lawful Men to be sumoned out of the several Hundreds of the
County not under the number of twelve, who upon their oaths shall inquire the
form of which oath is hereby expressed, viz. Whether the Orphans be kept,
maintain and educated according to their estates, and whether apprentiees
yearly are taught their Trade, or rigoroufly used and turned to common labor
at the Ax and Hoe instead of learning their Trades, and if they find that
Orphans are not maintained and educated according to their Estates, or
Apprentices neglected to be taught their Trades upon pretense that the last
year is enough to learn their trade, that they remove them to other guardians
and masters respectively, and in case the Jury find that any Apprentice is not
taught his trade but put to other labor as aforesaid, the County Court shall
condemn the Master of such Apprentice to make the Apprentice such satisfaction
as in justice his years of labor at other work shall deserve, and five hundred
pounds of tobacco to be paid to the said Orphan.

11. That the Justices of the County Courts cause the conditions of the Bonds
they take of guardians or trustees of Orphans estates be exactly drawn to the
Act, and Recorded in the County Court and the Indentures for Apprentices
likewise, that it may duly appear to the Judges whether Guardians Trustees and
Masters do right and justice to Apprentices, and to the Country, that the
Justices do right between them, and to that end that they cause the Clark of
their Court to present the Jury with a list of the Orphans and Apprentices of
their County every June Court

12. That no more be allowed to Guardians or Trustees for collecting debts due
to Orphans than ten per cent' the usual allowance to Administrators and Factors
by the Merchants.

13. And further, in regard by the Judges or Commissary General for proving of
Wills and granting Administrations Commission their is a saving to all persons
of their right of appeal from the sentence of the said Judge to the chief
Governor of this Province for the time being.

Be it Enacted, that all and every person and persons appealing from the
sentence of the said Judge, shall within fifteen days at the furthest after
such sentence given enter his appeal before the said Governor, and within
fifteen days more petition the Governor of this Province for the time being to
examine the sentence of the said Judge, or appoint such other person or persons
as be shall think fit to hear and determine the same, whose sentence shall be
final, without other appeal, repeal or review. And for that diverse Bonds have
been taken by the several and respective County Courts of this Province is the
name of the worshipful Commissioners of the County Court, or in some such other
terms amounting thereunto, and for the use of the several and respective
Orphans in the several and respective Countys of this Province, with condition
to pay to the said Commissioners or Justices of the Peace the respective sums
of tobacco or money in the respective conditions contained in pursuance of this
Act, when in truth the said Comissioners of the County Court are no Body
politic nor capable of suing the said Bonds to and so the use of any Orphan
within this Province.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Bonds so as before taken,
to and for the use of any Orphans in this Province in pursuance of this Act,
shall be sued and recovered in the names of the Orphans to whose use such Bonds
were taken, either in the County or Provincial Court at the election and choice
of the said Orphans, any Statute or usuage to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And for the ease and benefit of the good people that hereafter
shall have occasion to resort to the said Judge in testamentary causes for the
probat of Wills and granting Administrations,

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Commissary General of this
Province, Chancellor or other Person that shall from time to time be appointed
as Judge in testamentary causes for granting administrations, shall from time
to time and at all times during his continuance in such office, constitute
ordain and appoint some able and sufficient person of good repute and a
freeholder in every respective County within this Province to take the probat
of any last will or testament of any person or persons either noncupative or in
writing, even though the fame be concerning titles of Land, and likewise the
granting of any administration of persons dying intestate in the respective
Countys where each person or persons so appointed shall reside and inhabit,
which said person in each respective County of this Province so appointed as
aforesaid, shall and may take the proof of any will whatsoever as aforesaid, of
any person as aforesaid within the County as aforesaid and grant Letters
testamentary upon the same, and likewise grant any administrations to any
person or persons whatsoever that right has to the administration of any person
deceased within the County where he dwells as aforesaid: But if any contest
or dispute shall arise between any persons concerning the right to
Administrations or Executorship, the same shall be divided by the Chancellor,
Commissary General or Judge in testamentary causes, and not by such person
appointed in each County as aforesaid, neither shall such person grant
administration or take the probat of such will till such time as such dispute
and difference shall be decided and determined by the proper Judge thereof, and
certificate from such Judge of the same, and such person so appointed as
aforesaid, shall and is hereby allowed as a fee for granting such Letters of
Administration as aforesaid, swearing the Administrators and Appraisors as for
the probat of any will, and swearing the Executor or Executrix and Letters
testamentary the sum one hundred and fify pounds of tobacco, to be paid by such
person or persons requiring administration or letters testamentary as
aforesaid, unless the Estate be so small as the Inventary of such Estate does
not amount to two thousand pounds of tobacco as aforesaid, there shall be paid
to such person so appointed for such Letters of Administration or Letters
Testamentary as aforesaid the sum of fifty pounds of tobacco and no more, and
then in every such case the Commissary General shall have no fees.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Guardians of Orphans that
shall have any real Estate in lands with the Orphan or Orphans to whom the same
belongs committed to them, other then such whom the Testator in his life time
by his last Will and Testament has otherwise ordered and disposed of, within
one month after the taking upon him or her the guardianship of such Orphan or
Orphans shall with one Commissioner of the said County where the land lies and
two other persons of good repute and well skilled in building and Plantation
affairs neither of them being of kin, indebted or otherwise interested in
either Orphan or Guardian enter into the said Land and Plantation to such
orphan or orphans belonging, and view the dwelling houses and out houses,
lands, orchards and fences that are upon the said Plantation, and then and
there the said two persons so qualified as aforesaid, shall take their corporal
oaths upon Holy Evangelists by the said Commissioner to be administered, that
according to the best of their skill and judgment they will make a just
estimate of the annual value of the said lands and plantation, and what
dwelling houses, out houses and orchards are upon the same, and what repair
they are in, and in what part of the said land they judge the said Guardian may
be further permitted to clear upon the said Plantation, as well to raise the
yearly rent so valued as aforesaid, as also toward his yearly charge in
keeping the said dwelling houses, out houses, orchards and fences in repair and
so by him to be left, always having a regard to leave a proportionable part
both for quality and quantity of the uncleared Land, for the benefit and
advantage of the Orphans or Heir when at age to possess the said Land or
Plantation, as also the Orphans maintenance out of the same, where the profits
of personal estates be not sufficient to maintain him or them, and the same to
certify under their hands and seals atte^^ed by the Commissioner so
administering the oath as aforesaid, in the County Court next ensuing after such
view so had and made as aforesaid, and there to remain upon Record until the
said Orphan or Heir come to age, which certificate so entered and remaining upon
Record as aforesaid shall be sufficient Evidence in Law for the said Orphan or
Orphans to recover double damages in an Action of wa^, by them to be brought
when at age for any wast, sale or destruction committed or done in any of the
premises, other then what the persons have certify'd and thought necessary,
with due respect had to all circumstances and matters aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Commissioners
of each County Court within this Province by virtue of this Act shall have full
power from time to time, and at all times hereafter upon presentment of the
Orphan jury, or other information given to them of any such sale, wast or
destruction made, done or committed upon any Orphans real Estate by any such
Guardians by legal Warrant to cause the said Guardian to appear before them in
the County Court, and ii upon examination thereof the said information be
sufficiently provid, that the said Guardian to answer the damages of such wast
by him committed contrary to the Law, when Orphans come to age that then the
said Commissioners do require the said Guardian to give sufficient Security to
make satisfaction to the said Orphan or Orphans when at age as aforesaid, and
upon refusal thereof, as the said Orphan or Orphans if at age, to choose his
her or their Guardians shall elect, and if not, then such other as the
Commissioners shall think meet being willing to take the same, who shall enjoy
the said Land or Plantation, committing no wast and performing all such matters
and things at his entry thereupon as is by this Act required until the said
Orphan comes to age, and the said person so chosen, or by the justices put in
possession as aforesaid, shall in the name and to the use of such Orphan bring
his Action of Wast against the former Guardian for the damages by him
committed, and the Comissioners of each respective County are hereby obliged to
give the same in charge every June Court to the said Orphan Jury under the
penalty of five hundred pounds of tobacco each Justice, one half thereof to his
Majesty toward the Support of Government, and the other half to him or them
that shall Sue for the same, to be recovered in the Provincial Court by Bill
Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be
allowed.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforeresaid, that the several and
respective Deputy Commissarys which are and shall be in each several and
respective Countys within this Province shall and are hereby sufficiently
authorized and empowered to pass audite and allow all such accounts as shall
come before them relating to dead Men's Estate wherein they have granted Letters
of administration or Letters testamentary not exceeding fifty pounds sterling,
and to transmit the same to the Commissary General, for which pa^^ing such
accounts the said deputy Commissary is to be allowed as a fee the sum of ^^fty
pounds of tobacco and no more, and if such deputy Comissary as aforesaid shall
exact, demand or receive of any person whatsoever more h^^ is by this Law for
executing such his Office is allowed him, he shall be liable to such pains and
penaltys as are included in a certain Act for limitting Officer, fees within
this Province, but in case it shall so hapden that only person or persons
having any inetrest or claim in such Estates shall make any objections to the
legality or interest of any article or articles contained in the said accounts,
then the said deputy Commissarys are forthwith to mark such articles and
transmit the accounts with all papers thereunto belonging unto the Commissary
General, before wh^^ all partys concerned are to appear and defend their
interest.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall be at the election
of such Widows having dev^i^s as aforesaid, to take and receive the same in
full satisfaction of all claims and rights to both personal and real Estate,
and be thereby barred for ever from all claims to the same, or to refuse such
Legacys and Devices as aforesaid, and take their third part of the personal and
real Estate as Widows whose Husbands die intestate in this Province. And
whereas many Orphans have greatly suffered by the second marriage of such
Widows, who having their Estates in possession by will or Right of
administration, either by the one or b^^^ of them the said Estates have been
wasted and imbezled, and if the Woman die, the said Husband refuses to render
an account of such Estate, alleging that he is neither Executor nor
Administrator of his Wife, nor of her former Husband, whereas at common Law a
Woman Covert Executrix can do no act to prejudice her Husband, all such acts
during the same be void without his consent, he not preventing such wast when
in his power ought to answer for the same.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc. that every such
permitting and suffering such wast by such second Husband during the coverture,
such Husband shall account for the same, and be liable to be sued for the said
Estate due to such Orphan by such Orphan if at age, or if under age by his
Guardian, as well as the Security, or together with his Wife if living, and if
the Security be insolvent then by himself, and also for all wast committed by
his Wife before marriage if sued during coverture; And whereas Orphans of
persons dying intestate by the good provision of this Law in committing them to
the care of the County Court to inspect the good condition of their Securitys
and good usuage as aforesaid, are by experience found to be in better condition
in respect of both than the Orphans of Testators, whose Executors hitherto
rarely given any Security, and that the Security they have given many times
proved insolvent.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Judge for probat
of Wills shall hereafter take good and sufficient Security of all Executors and
Administrators to the use of any Orphan or Orphans in any Will mentioned (and
not solely to their own use) for the true performance of such last will and
testament according to the Law and Intent of the Testator, and the Justices of
the several County Courts shall at the same time that they by the Jury inquire
of the good usuage and good condition of the Security, or other Orphans shall
also inquire of these, and if they find the Securitys like to be insolvent or
the Orphans ill used, to transmit the same to the Judge for probat of wills for
the time being to be relieved according to Law and the Testators intent. And
for the more speedy administration of Justice to Orphans, Legatees and others
in his Majestys Court for probat of wills and granting administrations which
has hitherto by the tedious methods used in Chancery before the Judges
Sentence in the said Court can take effect, the methods of England being at
present not practicable here.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every person or
persons that shall not after Sentence given in the said Court against him or
them within fifteen days after such sentence enter his Appeal with the said
Judge from such sentence, and within 15 days more procure an examination
thereof by a Court of Delegates, nor in the mean time comply with the Sentence
of the said Judge, it being sent to them under the hand and seal of the said
Judge, nor give in Security to perform the same and oath made of the refusal
thereof, it shall and may be lawful for the said Judge to issue forth of the
said Office under his hand and seal an attachment against the bodies of such
persons so refusing, and him or them to imprisonment until he or they satisfy
and comply with the said sentence or give in good security to do the same, this
Law not to bar the said Judge to proceed against persons not complying with
sentences given before the making of this Act according to the former usuage
and custom to compel them to the same; And whereas Orphans and Creditors are
many times injured by the low appraisments and undervaluing of the Estates of
the deceased. therefore

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that when any Executor or
Administrator does appraise the Estate of the deceased he shall give notice of
such his appraisment, and call together two of the next of kin to the said
deceased and two of the Creditors of the said deceased if any then be, who
shall be present at the said appraisment with the sworn appraisors, and shall
certify to the Commissary or his deputy under their hands that they were
present at the appraisment and do approve thereof, and if any Executor or
Administrator return any Inventary without such certificate as aforesaid the
said Judge or his deputy in each respective County of this Province shall not
accept or receive the same into his or their Office.

An Act for enrolling of Conveyance, and securing the Estate of Purchasers.
FOR the better establishing a way and method for conveying of Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Heridatamets for the future, and for the avoiding abuses and
deceits by Mortgages

BE IT ENACTED by the.Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authoity of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof no Manors, Lands, Tenements or
Heridataments whatsoever within this Province shall pass, alter or change from
one to another whereby the Estate of Inheritance, or Freehold or any Estate for
above seven years shall be made to take effect in any person or persons, or
any use or tru^ except the Deed or Conveyance by which the same shall be
intended to pass, alter or change the same be made by writing, indented and
sealed, and the same to be acknowledged in the Provincial Court or before two
justices thereof, or in the County Court, or before two Justices of the same
where such Manors, Lands, Tenements or Heriditaments do lie, and such Deed or
Conveyance to be enrolled in the Provincial or County Court where the same does
ly, such inrollment to be made within twelve months after the date of such
writing indented as aforesaid, and for the caption of such inrollment there
shall be paid to the partys taking the same twelve pence sterling and no more,
and the Clark shall well and sufficiently inroll such Deed or Conveyance in a
good sufficient Book in Folio, to remain in the custody of the Clark of the
same Court for the time being amongst the Records of the same Court, and that
the same Clark shall on the back of every such Deed in a full legible hand make
an indorsment of such inrollment, and also of the Folio of the Book in which
the same shall be enrolled, and shall unto such indorsment set his hand.

Provided always, and be it hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
when the grantor or grantors bargainor or bargainors of such lands, tenements
or heriditaments shall live remote from either the Provincial Court or County
Court, where the land lies, it shall and may be lawful for such grantor or
bargainor to acknowledge the same in the County where such bargainor lives,
and a certificate of such acknowledgment under the hand of the County Clark and
under the Seal of the same County, such acknowledgment shall be taken, deemed,
reputed and be as good and valid as if the same had been acknowledged either in
the Provincial or County Court where such land lies, and be a sufficient
Warrant for such County Clark where the land lies to inroll the same, and if
any such grantor or bargainor of any such lands or tenements as aforesaid shall
happen to be out of this Province and within any his Majestys Dominions at the
time of the ensealing such writing or writings indented, so as the same cannot
be acknowledged in manner and form as is-before directed or enrolled, within
the time for that purpose herein before limited, that in every such case, such
lands or tenements as aforesaid shall be ecknowledged by Letter of Attorney
well and suffieiently proved, either in the Prouincial or County Court where
such lands or tenements lie, or before two Justices of the Provincial or County
Court as aforesaid for acknowledgment and be enrolled as aforesaid, any thing
herein before contained to the contrary hereef notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every such writing
indeared to be acknowledged and intolled as aforesaid, shall have relation as
to the passing and conveying of the premises, and the Estate and Estates
thereby passed or intended to be pa^^ed and conveyed by and from the day of the
inrollment of the same and not from the day of the date thereof, and shall at
all times be construed and take more savourably and beneficially for the
benefit and advantage of the grantee or grantees, and more strongly for the
barring of the grantor or grantors therein to be named, and according to such
intents as the words thereof shall appear to have been the true intent of the
partys thereunto, although the same be not so firmly drawn as is used in England,
where the advice of Council learned in the law may easily be had.

Provided always, that if any Feme Covert be named a party grantor in any such
writing indented, the same shall not be of force to debar her or her heirs,
except upon her acknowledgment of the same, and the person or persons taking
such her acknowledgment shall examine her privately out of the hearing of her
husband whether she Goth make her acknowledgment of the same willingly and
freely, and without being induced thereunto by fear or threats of or used by
her husband or fear of his displeasure, and the person or persons so examining
her shall in a note or certificate of the said caption of the said
acknowledgment certify her examination and acknowledgment thereupon, and that
such certificare be likewise inroled upon Record, in which case and by such
Feme Covert shall be barred and not otherwise, any thing herein before
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

WHEREAS there have been several Acts provided against servants runaways which
have hereto proved ineffectual, in regard they do not sufticiently provide
encouragement for such person or persons inhabitants of this Province as shall
seize such runaways or servants by this Act deemed runaways, therefore for the
better discovery seizing and apprehending such runaways,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof no servant or servants whatsoever within
this Province whether by Indenture or according to the custom of the country or
hired for wages, shall travel by land or water ten miles from the house of his
her or their Master Mistress or Dame without a noat under their hands, or under
the hand of his or their Overseer if any be, under the penalty of being taken
for a runaway, and to suffer such penaltys as are hereafter provided against
runaways.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any such
servant or servants as aforesaid unlawfully absenting him her or them from his
her or their said Master, Mistress, Dame or Overseer shall serve ten days for
every one days absence, to be judged when such Master, Mistress or Dame shall
bring their said servant before the Justices of the Provincial or County Court
where the owne^ master or dame or overseer of such servant shall live during
the sitting of the Court, be it before or after the expiration of such sera
abrs first time of service by Indenture or otherwise.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any person or
persons whatsoever that shall wittingly and willingly detain any such servant
or servants unlawfully absenting him her or themselves as aforesaid, shall be
fined five pounds of tobacco for every night or four and twenty hours that such
person or persons shall give entertainment to such servant or servants
unlawfully absenting him her or themselves as aforesaid, the one half to his
Majesty for the support of Government, and the other half to the informer or
him or them that shall sue for the same, to be recovered in any County Court of
this Province by Action of debt bill plaint or information, wherein no essoyn
protection or wager of Law to be allowed.

And for the better discovery of runaways, it is hereby Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that any person or persons whatsoever within this Province
traveling out of the County where he she or they shall live or reside without a
pass under the Seal of the said County, for which they are to pay ten pounds of
tobacco o^ one shilling in money, such person or persons if apprended not being
sufficiently known, or able to give a good account of themselves, to be left to
the discreton and judgment of such Magistrate or Magistrates before whom such
person or person as aforesaid shall be brought to judge thereof, and if before
such Magistrate shall be deemed and taken as runaway, and shall suffer such
fines and penaltys as i^ hereby provided against runaways.

And for the better encouragement of all persons to seize and take up such runa
ways, it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every person or
persons as aforesaid, seizing or taking up such runaways traveling without
passes as a foresaid, not being able to give a sufficient account of themselves
as aforesaid sha have and receive two hundred pounds of tobacco to be paid by
the owner of sucrunaway so apprehended and taken up if a Servant, and if a
Freeman and refusing to pay the same, then to make satisfaction by servitude or
otherwisc as tha Justice of the Provincial or County Courts where such person
shall be so apprended an^ our Neighbor Indians to seize, apprehend or take up
any runaway setvants, and bring them before some Magistrate, shall for a reward
have a matchcoat paid him or them or the value thereof which said reward to be
repaid and satisfied by the county where such person shall be apprended, and
such runaway to reimburse the said County by servitude or otherwise as the
Justices of the Provincial or county court shall think fit.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that at what time soever
any of the said persons runaway shall be seized by any person or persons within
this Province, such person or persons so apprehending or seizing the same
shabring or cause him or them to be brought before the next Magistrate or
Justice of the County where such runaway is apprehended, who is hereby
empowered to take into his cu^tody, or otherwise him her or them to secure and
dispose as he shall think ^t, until such person or persons so seized and
apprehended shall give sufficient security to answer the premises the next
Court that shall first ensue in the said County, who is also to secure such
person or persons till he or they can make satisfaction to the party that shall
so apprehend or seize such runaway or otherper son as by this Act is required,
except such person shall make satisfaction as aforesaid before such Court shall
happen, and that notice may be conveniently given to the master, mi^^tiss, dame
or overseer of runaways taken up as aforefaid, the Justiecs of the peace or the
Commissioners of County shall forthwith cause a noat of the runaways name so
seized or apprehended as aforesaid, and also cause a noat to be set up at the
next adjacent County Courts, and at the Provincial Court and Secretarys Office,
that all persons may view the same, and see where such their Servants are and
in whose custody.

And furthermore, for the better ascertaining what each servant according to
the custom or the Country shall have at the expiration of their servitude, Be
it Enacted by the Authority advice and Consent aforesaid, that every Man
Servant shall at such time of expiration of his servitude asoresaid, have
allowed and given him one new hat, a good cloth suit either of kersy or broad
cloth, a shift of white linnes to b^ new one pair of new french fall shoes and
stockings, two hoes and one ax, and one gun of twenty shillings price not above
four foot by the barrel, nor less than three and a nalf; all Woman Servants at
the expiration of their servitude as aforesaid, shall have allowed and given
her the like provision of clothes and three barre's of indion corn, and to the
intent the many great mischiess and incoveniencys ar^^ing and accrewing to
diverse good prople of this Province by transporting or carrying and conveying
away or cau^^ng to be transported carried or conveyed away out of this Province
any inhabitant within this Province whether Master or Freeman not thereunto
lawfully licenced, or an Apprentice hired Servant or slave may for the future
be prevented,

Be it further (...) by the Authority aforesaid, that every person or persons
that shall transport, carry or convey away or cause to be transported carried
or conveyed away out of his Province any inhabitant of this Province that is or
shall be indebted or engaged here and not having a sufficient license or pass
according to the Law of this Province in such case made and provided, shall be
liable to pay al such debes, engagements or damages as the said-person or
persons for ransported, carried or conveyed away should be liable to satisfy to
any person to whom the same shall be respectively due in this Province, unless
the same be otherwise satisfied in some convenient time, or that in short time
he cause or procure such person or persons so carried and conveyed away to
return again into this Province, whereby he may be liable unto Justice here,
and any person or persons whatsoever that shall from henceforth entice,
transport or privately carry away out of this Province any apprentice, hired or
other servant or slave belonging to any inhabitant in this rovince shall for
every such offense forseit and pay to the imployer or owner of such apprent ce
hired or other servant or slave trebble damages and cost, to be adjudged by the
^u^^ices of each respective County Court, or the Justices of the Provincial
Court for the time of such apprentices hired or other servants or slaves
unlawfully transported or carried away as aforesaid.

And whereas many great inconveniencys happened and accrewed unto many Masters,
Mistresses or Dames within this Province by the wickedness and infidelity of
servants purloyning their said Matter M^tress or Dames Goods, and then by
bartering, selling and conveying away the same unto Seamen and others whereby
Masters and Mistresses of Familys are or have been very much damnified and
abused for prevention whereof for the future ^e it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that no person whatsoever shall trade, barter, commerce or
any ways deal with any servant whether hired or indented, or slave belonging or
appertaining to any inhabitants within this Province without seave or license
first had and obtained from such servants master, mistress, dame or overseer
for his so doing under the penalty of two thonsand pounds of tobacco, the one
half thereof to his Majesty for support of government, the other half to the
master, mistress or true owner of such goods so purloyned, bartered or conveyed
away, when proved by sufficient winess or consession of the party, to be
recovered in any Court of this Province by action of debt, bill plaint or
information, wherein no essoyn protection or wager of Law to be allowed.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc that if the goods so
traded or bartered as aforesaid shall exceed the sum of one thousand pounds of
tobacco, that then the party or partys whose goods shall be imbezled or
bartered away as aforesaid, shall have his action at law for the damage
sustained against the person or persons so offending, dealing and bartering for
the same, any thing in this Act to the contrary hereof in any wife
notwithstanding. And in case such person or persons so offending shall not be
able to satisfy the same, then such person or persons shall be bound over by
some one Justice of the Peace and put in security either to appear at the
Provincial or County Court whereupon conviction by consession or sufficient
witness the offender shall be punished by whipping an the bare back with thirty
stripes.

And for the ascertaining and limitting of servants sines of servitude, Be it
Enacted by and with the Advice and Consent aforerefaid, that whosoever shall
transport any servant into this Province without Indentures, such servant being
above the age of 22 years shall be obliged to serve the full space and term of
5 years, ^f betweenn 18 and 22 without Indentures 6 years, if between 15 and 18
without Indentures 7 years, if under 15 and without Indentures shall serve till
he or they arrive at the full age of 22 years.

And Be it further Enacted by the Advice Consent and Authority aforesaid, that
all Servants transported out of Virginia into this Province shall complete
their time of servitude here which they ought to have served in Virginia and no
more.

And be it further enacted, that every master, mistress or dame, assignee or
trustee whatsoever owning or keeping any such servant as aforesaid, whether by
virtue of transportation purchase or otherwise, shall within six months after
the receiving such servant into their custody within this Province, except he
she or they claim but five years service of such servants, bring the said
servants into the respective County Courts where they do inhabit, and every of
the said Courts are hereby authorized to judge and determine of the age of such
servants so bought and cause the same to be entered upon Record, and every owner
as aforesaid, neglecting or refusing to ^^ing such servant or servants before
the Court as aforesaid, shall not only stand to the determication of the Court,
but also forfeit the sum of one thousand pounds of tobacco to the King for the
support of government, for depriving the Court of their opportunity of viewing
the partys, and if any Master or Servant aforesaid be grieved with the
determination of the Court, he shall within the time determined for their
service produce a certificate authentic of such servants age, and shall have
remedy to the ages aforesaid mentioned.

And forasmuch as disputes have formerly arose at what time servants time of
servitude whether by Indenture or otherwise should commence, for the better
explanation whereof for the future, Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that all Servants transported into this Province whether by Indenture or
otherwise, the time of service of such Servant so bound or adjudged as
aforesaid shall commence ^om the first anchoring of the Vessel within this
Province, any law usuage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And beit enacted also by the Advice Consent and Authority aforesaid, that no
Indenture made by any Servant during the time of service due by former
Indenture or by determination according to the tenor of this Act shall any ways
oblige any Servant for longer time than by his first Indenture or determination
of the Court shall be limited and appointed, provided that this Act not any
thing therein contained shall not give or be construed to give any benefiit to
any Negro or Slave whatsoever.

And be it further enacted by ihe authority aforesaid, that for all such
runaway Servonis or Slaves that shall be apprehended and taken up in the
Province of Pensilv^^^^ or Colony of Virginia, and from thence brought into
this Province and delivered to a Magistrate of the County into which they shall
be brought, the person for so doing shall have paid and allowed him by the
master or owner of such runaway four hundred pounds of tobacco and cask, or
forty shillings in money, upon his producing a certificate from the said
Justice or Shs^rif of the delivery of such runaway, except servants or runaways
brovght from Accomack into Somerset County, for such only two hundred pounds of
tobacco and twenty shillings, an^ the like from that side of Virginia next the
River Potomack, for which said sum or sams paid such runaway shall make
satisfaction when free, by service or otherwise more than the ten days for one
as the Court shall adjudge; But if such person so apprehended brought and
delivered as aforesaid be a Freeman and refuse to pay such sum or sums of
tobacco or money, then and in such case the Magistrate before whom be shall be
brought shall forthwith commit the said person so refusing to prison till he
give sufficient security or make full satisfaction by service or otherwise.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any master
mistress or other owner of any servant whatsoever, or overseer by the order and
consent of any such master mistress or owner shall deny and not provide
sufficient meat drink lodging and clothing or shall unreasonably burden them
beyond their strength with labor, or debar them of their necessary rest and
sleep, the same being sufficiently proved before the Justices of the County
Court the said Justices have hereby full power and authority for their first
and second offense to leavy such fine upon such offender as to them shall feem
meet, not exceeding one thousand pounds of tobacco, to the use of his Majesty
his Heirs and Successors for the support of Government, and for the third
offense to let such Servant so wronged at liberty and free from their servitude.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all Ngro's and
other Slaves already imported or hereafter to be imported into this Province,
and also all Chidren now born, or hereafter to be born of such Negro's or
Slaves shall be Slaves during their natural lives.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforcsaid, that any white woman
either free or a servant that shall suffer her self to be begot with child by a
Negro or other Slave, or ftee Negro, such woman so begot with child as
aforesaid, if free shall become a Servant for and during the term of seven
years, if a servant the shall sinish her time of servitude together with the
damage that shall accrue to such persons to whom she is a servant by occasion
of any child or children begotten as aforesaid in the time of her servitude,
and ^er such satisfaction made shall again become a servant for and during the
term of 7 years aforesaid, and if such begetter of any such chile as aforesaid
be a free Negro he shall become a servant for and during the term of seven
years aforesaid, to be adjudged by the justices of the County Court where such
fa^t is committed, according to this Law in the clause made and provided
against such servants as have bastards, and the issues or children of any such
unnarural and inordinate copulations shall be servants until they arrive at the
age of 31 years, and any white man that shall beget any negro woman with child
whether freewoman or servant shall undergo the same penaltys as white women,
all which times of servitude by this Act imposed on any the persons issue or
children of such inordinate copulations shall be taken care of by the Justices
of each respective County within this Province, and such servitude to be
disposed of or employed as the Juscices of such County shall think fit, the
produce whereof shall be appropriated toward the relief of the poor.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every servant woman
having a bastard child and nutable sufficiently to prove the party charged to
be the begettor of such child, in every such case the mother of such child
shall only be liable to satisfy the damage so sustained by servitude or
otherwise as the Court before whom such matter is brought shall see convenient,
provided that where the mother of any such child as aforesaid do prove her
charge by sufficient testimony of witnesses, confession of the party charged,
or pregnant circumstances agreeing with her declaration in her extremity of her
pains or throws of travel and her oath taken by some magistrate before the time
of her delivery of every such bastard child or after her deliv'ry, then the
party charged if a servant to satisfy half the said damage if a Freeman then
the whole damage by servitude or otherwise as the Court before whom such matter
is brought as aforesaid shall think fit, and if any such mother as aforesaid be
able to prove by such testimony or consession of the party charged, that he
being a single person and a Freeman did before the begetting of such child
promise her marriage that then he shall be at his choice either to perform his
promise to her or recompense her abuse according as the Court before whom such
matter is brought shall adjudge.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc. that after the end
of this present Session of Assembly that it shall and may be lawful for the
Provincial and County Courts of this Province to hear and determine any
complaints between masters and servants by way of petition to give Judgment and
award Execution upon the same, and that upon any Apeal or Writ of Error brought
upon the same from any County Court of this Province to the Provincial Court,
or from the Provincial Court to his Excellency the Governor and Council no
such Judgment shall be reversed for want of Judicial Process, or that the same
was not tried by Jury, or any matter of form either in the entry or giving of
Judgment, provided it appears by Record that the party Desendant was legally
summoned and not condemned unheard.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that Servants imported
into this Province,, or any Servant that bindt himself for years within this
Province or any bound out by the County Courts of this Province, that if any
matter of dispute arises either in relation to their indentures, contracts or
wages, or any other matter of difference between the faid Masters and Servants
the same shall be tried, heard and determined by petition as aforesaid, any Law
Statute or Usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for imposing a Fine upon Edward Dorsey, convicting him of a debt of
three hundred thirty three pounds fix shillings and eight pence to the King,
and imposing a Fine on the Sherrif of Gaecil and Talbot Counties.

An Act for the ordering and regulating the Militia of this Province for the
better defense and security thereof.
BE IT ENACTED by he Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authoity of the same, that from
and after the end of this Sessions of Assembly the Militia of this Province
shall be mustered, trained and exercifed according to these instructions and
directions following.

1st. That every Colonel, Major or Captain of Foot already commissionated or
hereafter to be commissionated by his Excellency the Governor of this Province
for the time being, shall have power to enlist such and so many inhabiting
within this Province not hereafter excepted in their several and respective
divisions between 16 and 60 years of age as they shall think fit, by as equal
propositions of the said inhabitants as posibly they can to be of the Militia
or Trainbands of this Province, which said persons so enlisted, they shall
muster, exercise and train in and atsuch places, and at such certain times as
to them shall seem meet, or the Service Safty or Defense of this Province shall
require, or as his Excellency the Governor of this Province for the time being
shall see cause to order.

2dly. That every such Colonel, Major or Captain shall give notice or summons
upon every training or must ering to every person so enlisted as aforesaid
within his respective division or limit at the head of his company, or at the
house of the party by an officer of his company or warrant under his hand to
appear at such time and place as he shall appoint for such training or
mustering, and that if any Man after such notice given and summons as aforesaid
shall neglect to appear at the place and time appointed as aforesaid, or that
shall resuse when he has so appeared to be enlisted into the militia and
trainbands aforesaid, or next that being so enlisted shall not from time to
time as he shall be summoned or warned as aforesaid to appear and bring with
him one good serviceable Gunn fixed with fix shoots of powder, shall for every
such offense if a Freeman forfeit and pay the sum of one hundred pounds of
tobacco, and if a Servant let or hindered by his Master, Mistress or
Overseer, then such master, mistress or overseer to forfeit and pay the like
sum of one bundred pounds of tobacco for every such servant so let or
hindered as before said, for the use of the Foot Company to purchase Drums and
Colors and other nacessarys for the Company as the Commanders thereof shall
direct. Provided that this clause be not to countenance any Officer to press
Arms or Ammunition for any further Expedition or Service than training, but
that upon all such occasions they be supply (...) out of the County Magazine or
Store, all which forfeitures shall be adjudged of, heard and determined by such
Colonel, Major or Captain of any Foot Company as aforesaid, and account thereof
kept in writing by the clark of the company, which said Colonel, Major or
Captain of such company as aforesaid, is hereby authorized and empowered to
award Execution against the Goods and Chattels of such persons so refusing,
neglecting or failing as aforesaid, and that upon occasion of all such
Executions the respective Clark and Sherrif of each respective County within
this Province shall issue out and serve Execution without any Fee or Reward.

3dly. And for settling the Horse Forces that a Captain of Horse in each
respective County for making up of his Troop elect and enlist his number of Men
out of the inhabitants of the said County, according to such instructions as he
shall from time to time receive from the Governor of this Province for the
time being.

Provided always, that such Troopers shall ride their own Horses, and that no
person shall be a Trooper without he be owner of a good serviceable Horse which
shall pass mu^er, and that such Troopers in consideration of their great pay
hereafter to be allowed, be bound and obliged to find themselves with good able
and sufficient Furniture for their Horses, and likewise to find themselves with
Swords, Carbines, Pistols. Houl^^ers and Ammunition, and if any Troopers shall
neglect or refuse upon notice given them as aforesaid (to the foot) to appear
at musters at the time and place appointed as aforesaid by each respective
Captain of Horse accoutered and equipped as aforesaid, shall forfeit and pay
the sum of one hundred pounds of tobacco to be leavied as aforesaid to the use
of the Troop for purchasing of Trumpets and Colors and other necessarys as the
Commander shall think fit, and that all such Troopers for and in consideration
aforesaid, at all such times as they are out a ranging shall find their own
provisions, but when in actual Service to be found provisions at the charge of
this Province to be paid by the public, and if it shall happen that any
troopers Horse should be killed in the service, then the said Trooper to be
paid for the said Horse by the public and not otherwise.

4thly. That all persons in holy Orders, Delegates, Magistrates and Constables
shall in their proper persons be exempted from being compelled to muster and
train either in horse or foot during such time as they officiate or bear such
offices as aforesaid, provided that this clause shall, not extend to such
persons as already have or hall hereafter accept of Commissions for military
service from the Governor of this Province for the time being, so as to
discharge such persons from their respective charges mentioned in such their
several and respective Commissions, neither shall this lause or any part
thereof be construed or taken to exempt any Delegates. Magistrates or
Constables as aforesaid to send into the field to muster or training either to
horse or foot when and as often as due notice and sumons to them shall be given
as aforesaid, some other person or persons in his or their stead or places so
equipped and provided as aforesaid, upon forfeiture as aforesaid.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Negro's and Slayes
whatsoever shall be exempted the duty of training or any other military service.

5thly. That the pay for the Officers and Soldiers of the Foot and Horse
aforesaid, but not other then is hereafter mentioned, and for no longer time
then such Officers and Soldiers shall be in actual Service viz.

To every Colonel of Foot 2000 pounds of tobacco per month, to a Major of Foot
1200 per mo: to a Captain of foot 1000 per mo: to a Lieutenant of foot 700 per
mo: to an Ensign 600 per mo: to a Sergeant 400 per mo: to a Corporal 400 per
mo: to a Drummer 400 per mo: to every private Soldier 300 per month.

To every Major General chief Commander in the Field 3000 per month, and that
every Colonel of Horse have 2300 por mo^ a Major of horse have ^500 per mo: a
Captain of horse to be allowed 1300 per mo: a Lievt' of horse to be allowed
1000 per mo: to a Cornet 900 per mo: to a Quartermaster ^00 per mo: to a
Corporal 700 per mo: to a Trumpeter 700 per mo: to every private Troopor 600
per month. And that all these rates and allowances for such Officers and
Soldiers aforesaid shall be allowed and paid and no more, and that the months
beforementioned be accounted, computed and reckoned according to Calender and
no otherwise.

6thly. And to the intent that whenever it shall appear to the chief
Governor of this Province for the time being, or his Council to be necessary
to raise forces for the suppressing of any foreign invasion or domestic
insurrection or rebellion, or any war with any indians, that the officers and
soldiers may be duly paid according to the proportions aforesaid, and all other
charges and expenses for the charge and management of such war may be duly paid
and discharged, without which this Province cannot be defended and secured.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from henceforth all such
necessary charges of such war and Soldiers pay as aforesaid shall be paid,
discharged and defrayed by a Public Leavy by an equal a^e^ment upon the
taxables of this Province, by the consent of the ^reemen of this Province by
their Representatives in a General Assembly and not otherwise, whatsoever.

7thly. And to the intent that the inhabitants of this Province may not be
abused by having their Goods and Provisions pres^^by loose and idle Fellows who
many times abuse their^ ommissions and the People.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from henceforth the
commissioners of each respective County shall yearly and every year viz.
between the 29th day of September and the 25th day of December nominate and
appoint two honest and substantial Men of their Countys to be pressmasters for
the year ensuing, and if any one die or depart the Country, or be lame or ^^ck
within that time, that then the next Justice of the peace to nominate and
appoint another in his stead, that if occasion require they and no other shall
impress victuals and other things given them in charge to be pressed by warrant
from his Excellency the Governor in chief for the time being, and if any other
but pressmasters so appointed shall presume upon pretense of any power as a
pressmaster to seize, take, press or carry away any goods or commoditys of any
the inhabitants of this Province, shall pay to the person grieved treble the
value of the goods or commoditys so as aforesaid unjustly pressed. Provided that
no pressmaster or any person or persons whatsoever shall presume at any time to
seize, press or carry away from the inhabitants resident in this Province any
arms or ammuniton of any kind whatsoever upon any duty or service or upon any
account whatsoever under the penalty aforesaid, any Law Statute or Usuage to
the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

8thly. And Be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the
Commissioners of any County Court within this Province who shall not between
the 27th day of September and the said 25th day of December in each respective
year by precept from the County Court signed by the Clark of the Court nominate
and appoint such and so many pressmasters for every County as aforesaid, shall
each of them forfeit and pay unto his Majesty for the support of government 500
pounds of tobacco, and such pressmaster who shall be so nominated and appointed
as aforesaid, by such precept as aforesaid to him or them directed, and shall
thereupon refuse or neglect to serve and truly perform and execute the said
place and office of pressmaster shall forfeit and pay unto his Majesty for
support of government for every time he or they so nominated and appointed as
aforesaid the sum of five hundred pounds of tobacco.

9thly. And for the more and better encouragement of such soldiers as shall in
the time of war adventure in the service of the Country and defense thereof
against any Indians. Be it Enacted, that the booty, prizes, pillage or plunder,
or any Indian seized or taken prisoner, shall by the Commander be equally
distributed and divided amongst the soldiers by a division or distribution to
be made by the pole.

10thly And for the encouragement of such soldiers as shall adventure their
lives in the service and defense of this Province, and for the provision of
some reasonable pension to be for the future settled on such soldiers as shall
happen to be maimed or rendered incapable to get a livelihood for themselves and
family.

Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every person that shall
adventure as a soldier in any war in defense of this Province, and shall
therein happen to be maimed or receive hurt so as to be rendered incapable of
zetting a livelihood as aforesaid, shall according to his disability receive a
yearly pension, to be raised out of the public leavy of this Province for the
time being of such his disability, and everyperson slain in the service of this
Province leaving behind him a wife and children shall also be allowed a
competent pension to the wife during her widowhood and the children till they
be of the years able to get their liveng, or be put out apprentices; and that
this pension be yearly paid and allowed out of the fifty thousand pounds of
tobacco per Annum to be raised by the Governor of this Province for the time
being or the Council, as in this Act is hereafter to be provided in the
interval of Assemblys, the party petitioning for such pennon and allowance
procuring a certificate from the County Court where he the or they live, that
he she or they are objects of charity and deserve to have such pennon and
allowance.

11thly. And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if upon any
foreign invasion any person or persons whatsoever, except before excepted, that
shall be prect or be an enlisted Soldier within this Province shall upon the
command of his Officer being a Captain at the least obstinately refuse to appear
and serve in arms for the necessary defense of this Province, such person or
persons so obstinately refusing to appear and serve in arms as aforesaid, shall
upon certificate thereof under such Officers hands as aforesaid, to the next
Justice of Peace of the County where such party lives be proceeded against in
manner following, that is to say, the same Justice of Peace to whom such
certificate as aforesaid shall be made, shall immediately i^ue out a warrant to
the constable of the hundred where such party lives to apprehend him and bring
him before himself or some other Justice of the Peace of the same County, there
to render a sufficient excuse if any he has for such his refusal or
nonappearance aforesaid, and if the Justice of Peace shall not find the excuse
of such party in such case to be reasonable and sufficient, then he shall
immediately commis such person to the cu^^^dy of the Sherrif of such County
there to remain until he shall find ^^r^ty to appear a^t^e next Provincial
Court to be held for this Province there to be proceeded against according to
the due course of Law, and if thereupon he shall be convict of such his
ob^inate refusal or disobedience as aforesaid he shall be ^ned and imprisoned
according to the directions of the Justices of the Provincial Court, and for
the prevention of the great charge of Annual Assemblys who may meet for no
other occasion but to lay the public Leavy in time of peace.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Governor and Council
during the intervals of Assembly for defraying and payment of the small charge
of this Province be and are hereby empowered to aness the same, equally to be
leavied upon all the inhabitants of this Province for the defraying the said
small charge in time of peace as aforesaid, any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding. Provided always, and it is the true intent and
meaning of this Act the said sums for the small charges of this Province so to
be assessed by the Governor and Council as upon the inhabitants of this
Province as aforesaid, exceed not in any one year the sum of fifty thousand
pounds of tobacco, and the disbursments of the said tobacco to be accounted for
at the next General Assembly after the raising and disbursing the said tobacco
as aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all soldiers
hereafter to be employed in any public service within this Province be paid in
the respective Countys where the said soldiers live, this Act to endure for
three years or to the end of the next ^estions of Assembly after the end of the
said three years.

An Act for the punishment of Privateers and Pirates.
WHEREAS it highly tends to the honor of his Sacred Majesty our Sovereign Lord
William the 3d king of great Erittain Fr^n^ and Ireland, and most consistent
with the duty of his Majestlys Loyal ^ubjects, that such Articles as are
concluded on in all treaties should in a strict manner be most inviolably
preserved and kept. and notwithstanding his Majestys late treaty of peace made
with his Allies, and likewise his Royal proclamation to that effect sent
throughout all his Majestys Dominions, yet diverse of his Majestys ill minded
and disobedient Subjects of order of his Maje^^ys Dominions as well by
themselves as in company with the Subjects of other Princes, and in their
service have committed diverse Robberys, Murders and Pyra^ys to the great
scandal and reproach of the English Nation, and contrary to their Duty Faith
and Allegiance, for preventing of the said evils and punishing of all such
offenders we pray it may be Enacted.

And BE IT ENACTED by his most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof it shall be Felony for any person which
now does, or within five years last past, heretofore has or hereafter shall
inhabit or belong to this Province that shall commit any act of hostility by
Commission from or in the service of any foreign Prince State or Potentate, or
any imploy' do or under any of them against any other foreign Prince State or
Potentate in amity with his Majesty, and that all and every such offender or
offenders contrary to true intent of this Act, being thereof legally convicted
in his Majestys Provincial Court of this Province, to which Court authority is
hereby given to hear and determine the same, as in other cases of Felony shall
suffer pains of death without benefit of Clergy.

Provided nevertheless this Act nor any thing therein contained shall extend to
any person or persons which have been in the service and employment of any
foreign Prince State or Potentate whatsoever, that has returned to this
Province and left and deserted such service and employment according to his
Majestys Proclamation before the tenth day of May ^ast past, rendering him or
themselves to the Governor or Commander in chief for the time being, and give
him such security (...) he shall appoint for their future good behavior, and
also that they shall not depart this Province without the Governors Pass,
under the hand and seal of the said Governor or Commander in chief for the
time being

And for the better and more speedy execution of justice upon such who having
committed Treason, pyracys, Felonys and other offenses upon the Sea that (...)
be apprehended in this Province or brought hither in order to receive their
ttyal^ here, Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
treasons, felonys, pyracys, robberys, murders or confederacys committed or
that hereafter shall be committed upon the Sea, or in any River, Haven Creek or
Bay where the Admiral has jurisdiction shall be inquired, tried, heard,
determined and adjudged within this Province in such like form as if such
offense had been committed in and upon the Land, and to that end and purpose
Commissions shall issue under the great Seal of this Province directed to the
Judge or Judges of the Admiralty of this Province for the time being, and to
such other substantial persons as by his Majestys Governor or Commander in
chief of this Province for the time being shall be named or appointed, which
said Commissioners or such a Quotum of them as by such Commission shall be
thereunto authorized shall have full power to do all things in and about the
inquiry, hearing, determining, adjudging and punishing of any person or persons
convict of the crimes and offenses aforesaid as any Commissioners to be
appointed by Commission under the great Seal of England, by virtue of a Statute
made in the ^8th year of the Reign of King Henry the VIII chap. 15. are
empowered to do and execute within the Kingdom of England, and that the said
offenders which are or shall be apprehended or brought prisoners to this
Province shall be liable to such order, process, judgments and executions by
virtue of such Commission to be grounded on this Act as might be awarded or
given against them as if they were proceeded against within the Realm of
England by virtue of any Commission granted upon the said Statute.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and every person or
persons that shall any way knowingly entertain, harbor, conceal, trade or hold
any correspondance by letter or otherwise with any person or persons that shall
be deemed or adjudg'd to be Privateers, Pirates or other offenders within the
purview of this Act, and that shall not readily endeavor to the best of his or
their power to apprehend or cause to be apprehended such offender or offenders
shall be liable to be prosecuted as accessorys and confederates, and to suffer
such pains and penaltys as in such ease by Law is provided.

And for the better and more effectual execution of this Act, Be it further
enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all Commission Officers in their
several Precincts within this Province are hereby required and empowered upon
his or their knowledge, or upon notice given, that any privateers, pirates or
other persons suspected to be upon any unlawful design in any place within
their respective precincts, to raise and leavy such a number of well armed Men
as he or they shall think needful, for the seizing, apprehending and carrying
to Goal all and every such person or persons, and in case of any resistance or
refusal to yield obedience to his Majestys authority, it shall be lawful to
kill or destroy such person or persons that shall oppose or resist by striking
or fiting upon any of the partys commanded to aid and asist, they so resisting
skall be deemed, taken and adjudged as Felons without benefit of the Clergy,
and every such Officer that shall omit or neglect his duty herein shall forfeit
thirty pounds sterling for every such offense, to be recovered in any of his
Majestys Courts of Record within this Province, by bill plaint or information,
wherein no essoyn protection or wager of Law to be allowed, one moiety thereof
to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors for and toward the
support of the government of this Province and the contingent charges thereof,
and the other moiety to the informer that profecutes or sues for the same, and
all and every person or persons that upon orders given him or them that shall
refuse to repair immediately with his or their arms well fixed and ammunition to
such place or places as shall be appointed by the said Officer and not readily
obey his commands in the execution of the premises, shall be liable to such
fines or corporal ou^i^hment being legally convicted thereof, as the justices
of his Majestys Provincial Court shall think fit.

An Act for appointing Ptrsons to treat with Workmen for the building of a
Church at the Port of Annapolis.

An Act for limitation of Officers Fees.
THE Burgesses and Delegates of this present General Assembly taking into their
serious consideration the great complaints heretofore and still made by diverse
the good people of this Provinc of the great extortion and opprestion which as
and has been in this rovince under color of office committed by several
Officers and Mini^^ers of this Province, and every of their deputys, ministers,
servants and officers in exa^^^ing unreasonable and excessive Fees from the
good people of the same, and for prevention of the like abuses for the future
the Burgesses and Delegates of this present General Assembly pray that it may
be Enacted. And B^ IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by a^^ with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Autho^^y of the
same, that from and after the publication hereof no officer or officers
hereafter mentioned in this present Act, their ministers, servants or deputys
by reason or color of his or their office or offices have, receive or take of
any person or persons directly or indirectly any other Fees then by this Act is
hereafter limited and allowed to the several Officers hereafter mentioned.

To the Chancellor or Keeper of the great Seal.
For Seal of an original Writ ^ pounds of tobacco, for Seal of a Recordari 12,
for ^^al of ubpena ad resp^ndendum with three names or under 15, for every name
more than three ^, for Seal of a Proclamation of Rebellion 21, for Seal of a
Commission of Rebellion ^00, for Seal of a grant of Land for 100 Acres or under
120 for every ^undred Acres above 100. 12, for Seal of a decree in Chancery
430, for Seal of an ^^junction in Chancery 240, for Seal of an Audita querela
120, for Seal to Execution of a decree in Chancery 162, for Seal of a Writ of
Covenant for (...) a Fine 15, for Seal of a Commission to take acknowledgment
120, for the Chancellors hand to a Writ of Assize 240, for Seal to a Writ of
Error to the Council 240, for Seal to scire fa^ias thereupon 240, for Seal of a
Supersedeas thereupon 240, for the Seal to a Certiorari 240, for the Seal of an
exemplification of land the same with a ^attent or Grant, for the Chancellors
hand to a Writ of Covenant 240, for the Seal to a mandamus 120, for the Seal of
a melius inqui^^^^^^ 120, for the Seal to 2 Commission for County Court 430,
for Seal of dedimus (...) to sweat the justices 240, for Seal of a Supersedeas
to a Commssion of Rebellion or Supplica^it^ 240, for Seal of a Sharrifs Pattent
for his Office 480, for Seal of the posse comitatus 120, for Seal of a Writ of
discharge if any 120, for Seal of a Pattent of Denization 430, for the Seal to
a ne exeat Provinciam 120, for Seal of a Writ of Error from County Court 120,
for Seal of a scire f^cias thereupon 120, for Seal of a supersedeas thereupon
120, for Seal of all and every other matter and thing that shall pass the great
Seal and not herein contained each 120.

To the Commissary General or chief Judge in Testamentary Causes.
For every Letter of Administration or Letter Testamentary 100 l. of tobacco,
for every Bend 60, for every Oath 16, for a Warrant to Appraisors 28, for every
Warrant to swear them 28, for every Commission to prove a Will or to take Oath
to account or of administration 100, for recording Wills. Inventarys or copying
the same, or any other matter out of the Commissarvs Office 16 per side
copying, 7 words to a line and 15 lines to a sheet 16, fos every order in
testamentary causes 16, for every Citation 20, for filing every Libel, Answer,
Replicavit, Petition etc. 40, for Subpaena for costs 16, for drawing definitive
Sentence per side 16, for filing of costs 16, for copy of costs 16, for
Recording definitive Sentence per side 16, for execution of desinitive Sentence
per side 16, for Seal to the definitive Sentence 480, for Seal to the execution
of such definitive Sentence 240, for copy of every Libel, Answer, Replicavit or
Rejoy^dure per side as before 16, for drawing depositions of witnesses per side
16, for filing laterrogatorys 40, for entry of a demand for administration or
probat of wills 8, for entry of every Return 8, for every appearance 16, for an
attachment of contempt 56, for a quietus est 100.

Sacretarys Fees.
For a Recordari 12 l. of tobacco, for a Subpaena ad Respond' with 3 names 15,
for every name more then 36, for attachment of contempt 18, for Proclamation of
Rebellion 120, for an injunction 240, for an audita querela 120, for a Writ of
covenant to pass a fine 1^5, for a Commission to take acknowledgment 120, for a
Writ of A^^ze 30, for a Commission to fine Officers upon a melius inquirendam
or monstra verunt 120, for a ne exeat Provinciam 120, for drawing any
instrument that pass the Seal if it exceed one side computing 7 words to a line
and 15 lines to a side and so pro rato for more 16, for recording the same as
before, for entering any other matter upon Record not exceeding half a side of a
leaf 8, if the matter entered upon Record be above half a side computing as
before for every Folio 16, copying the same with recording, for any Warrant or
License against or to one person only, not under the Seal 15, for any Warrant
or License being against or to more then one not under the Seal then for each
15, for any other pass or discharge not under the Seal 15, for search of a
Record the first year nothing, for search of a Record above one year standing
for every year after per Annum 4, for filing every Bill in Chancery 40, for
every the same shall continue 40, for filing every answer 36, for every Oath to
the same 12, for writing a Commission a Bond and recording it for every
Sherrifs Office 240, for Writ of posse comitatus 120, for Writ of discharge
if any 120, for writing and recording a Commission and dedimus potestaetem for
the County Court 330, for every Writ and return 28, for every Subpaena and
Return 38, for filing and recording every Declaration per side accounting 15
lines to a side and 7 words to a line 16, for copy of the same at the same
tate, for every appearance entered 12, for entry of an imparlance 8, for a
continuance or reference 8, for filing a plea if not special 8, for special
plea per side as before 16, for making up the Issue 32, for rule to plead or
for trial 8, for a venire facias for Jurors 28, for copy of panel 8, for every
verdict 8, for Writ of enquiry of damages 88, for entering Judgment 32, for
signing Judgment 24, for copy of Judgment 32, for transcript of the whole
proceedings per side as before 16, for filing of a Bill of cost 16, for copy of
it if demanded 16, for every Execution and Return 28, for an artachment and
scire facias 56, for every special Bail 16, for filing and recording any Demur
or 16, for drawing a Protest and recording it 240, for drawing any other matter
as public Notary attested under the Seal 50, if such matter exceed one side
then per side 16, for Recording a Pattent for Land 120, for proving Rights per
pole 2, for entering a signment not exceeding half a side 16, for entering
certificates for land 16 per side as before 16, for warrant for land 28, for
warrant of Resurvey per order of Council ^0 for habero facias possessionem 28,
for a Repievin 28, for a Procedendo 28, for a Writ of Restitutution 28, for
drawing dedimus potestatem to examine witnesses 50, for a habeas corpus 50 for
Certiorari 50, for a Commission to audite 50, for an Elegit 50, for a
Commission of Resurvey 50, for a Writ of Diminution 28, for a Writ of Error
to the County Court 50, for a scire facias thereupon 50, for a Supersedeas
thereupon 50, for entering an acknowledgment of Land in Court 12, for recording
a Conucyance at 16 per side as before 16.

For the Secretary in Criminal Cases.
For taking every Recognitance in Court 28, for discharge of every Recognizance
28, for every venire facias or warrant to apprehead Criminals 30, for
appearance 16, for every Respit and continuance 28, for every order in Criminal
cases 16, for copy of every Recognizance 28, for every Indictment 16 per side
as before 16, for copy of every Indictment the same, for filing plea to the
same 8, for confe^^^on of every Indictment 16, for allowance of a Writ of
Error 28, for every indictment after the (...) name 24, for rule for trial 16,
for copy of Panel 8, for recording verdict 8, for entering conviction and
signing judgment 56, for Writ of Execution thereupon 56. All other Fees not
herein comprised belonging to the Secretarys Office to be charged as Officers
do in England, pro rato at one penny per pound.

To the Surveyor General and his Deputys.
To the Survey of 100 Acres of Land or under one pound of tobacco per Acre, for
any quantity above 100 Acres and under 200 Acres for the first hundred as
before and half a pound of tobacco fot the re^^ per Acre, if between 200 and
500 acres then for the first 200 acres as before and a quarter of a pound of
tobacco for all above, for 500 acres as before, and for all above ten pounds of
tobacco per 100 acres, for every platt allowing three platts for every Survey,
(that is to say) 1 to the party 1 exammer general ^ the other to be entered upon
the surveyors book ten pounds of to bacco for the first 100 acres or under, and
after the rate of 5 pound of tobacco per cent' for all above the first 100
acres. For journey Fees if the same be di^^ant from the Surveyors House 20 miles
or under 40 pounds of tobacco, if above 20 and under 40 miles 80 pounds of
tobacco, if above 40 miles and under 6^ then 120 pounds of tobacco, and so pro
rato to the party finding a Boat and Hands and other necessary provi^^ons. For
every Certificate of Survey be the quantity more or less 5 pounds of tobacco,
for the Resurvey of 140 acres of land or under made with circumferenter chains
and other necessary instruments 400 l of tobacco, for Resurvey of any quantity
of land above 140 acres double Fees above spicified, for Survey in all respects
except it be otherwise limited by the Act for ascertaining the bounds of Land.

Sherriffs Fees.
For serving a Writ and Bail Bond 35 l. tobacco, for tending on a prisoner one
day 24 hour in custody 20, and so pro rato for a longer time, for collecting
the public dues for every hundred 10, for serving an Attachment or Execution
10, and if an Execution be for above 100 and under 500 l. tobacco 50, if it
exceed 500 pounds of tobacco then 100, if it exceed 1000 then for the first
1000 100, and e-1000 afterward 50, and after the same rate for money or
tobacco. And it is hereby declared that it is the true intent and meaning of
this Act the several and respective Sherriffs shall have no more Fees then for
what shall appear to be justly due upon such execution, and the same Fees for
leavying any Attachment for any sum whatsoever money or tobacco or the value
thereof in any Goods or Merchandises, provided the same be condemned to the use
of the party plaintiff attaching the same, and pro rato for such part thereof as
shall be condemned, but if no part shall be condemned that shall be attached,
then the said Sherriff shall have only ten pounds of tobacco for returning the
Writ aforesaid and no more. For impannelling a Jury 120, for serving any
extraordinary Warrant or Commission to be regulated by the Court, for serving a
scire facias including the persons sumoned 30, for serving a Citation 30, for
executing a Commission of Resurvey per day 100, for impannelling Jury 240, if
empowered to swear Jury and Evidences then for every Oath 12, for every non est
inventus returned 10, for serving a Subpaena 30 pounds tobacco.

To the Coroner.
For viewing the body of any person or persons murdered, slain or otherwise
dead by misadventure, to be made out of the Goods and Chattels of the party so
dead if any there be, otherwise to be leavied by the Commissioners of the
County where such accident shall happen 250 pounds of tobacco, for arresting or
sumoning any Sherriff sued or prosecuted in any Court, and for taking security
for such Sherriffs appearance 40, for arresting, sumoning or attaching any
other person or persons wherein the Sherriff is Plaintiff such Fees as are
allowed to be taken by the Sherriff in such cases and no more.

To the Crier of the Provincial Court.
For swearing every Jury 144 pounds tob^^co, for swearing every Witness 12, for
swearing the Bailiff 12, for every special Bail 72, for every good behavior 72
for clearing every Prisoner by Proclamation 80, for the acquittal of every
Prisoner 80, for every appeal from the County Court 50, for every Writ of
Error returned from the County Court 50.

To the Clerk of the Council.
For every Petition in Council and Order in favor of the party 200 l. tobacco,
For any Commission or other instrument prepared by the said Clerk to pass the
broad Seal if for a place of profit 400. For every Sherriffs Commission 400,
For every Ranger, Surveyor or Commission of profit granted in Council 200, For
Recording any matter in Council per side 24, and so pro rato for more or less,
For copy of any matter or thing from the Council Records the same per side For
all Searches to the Clerk of the Council as is to the honorable Secretary. For
every private Bill 100.

To the Clerk of the high Court of Appeals.
For Recording every Writ of Error Scire facias and Return per side 24 l.
tobac' ^o, and so pro rato 7 words to a line and 15 lines in a sheet, the like
Fee for Recording the transcript, the like Fees for Recording the Errors, For
entering and signing Judgment 84, For filing a Bill of cost 24, For copy of the
same 24, For all other Fees as are taken in the Provincial Court Office.

To the Clerk of the County Courts.
For a Writ and Return 16 l. tobacco, for every Declaration if a side 8, and
so pro rato if more, for copy of the same if demanded as before, for entering
the Desendants appearance 6, for every Imparlance 4, for filing every Plea and
Demurrot if not a special one 4, if a Folio pro rato, if any copy delivered pro
rato, for entering any matter upon Record if half a side 4, if more then pro
rato as before, for a Subpaena if but one name 10, if 2 or 3 names 16, for Rule
to plead or trial 4, for making up the issue 8, for copy if delivered 8, for
entering Judgment 16, for signing judgment 12, for venire facias for jury 12,
for entering the panel 4, for filing Bill of cost 8, for copy of the same 8,
for Execution and return 16, for scire faciaes and return 16, for special Bail
6, for Writ of inquiry of damages 44, for entering an Appeal 8, for the return
of certificate and copy of the Record per side 8, for entering a Writ of Error
8, for every Oath 6, for proving any deed or writing 8, for copy of the same if
required per folio 8, for recording the mark of Cattle and Hoggs 4, for taking
the acknowledgment of Land in Court 12, for recording a conveyance for land per
side 8, for allowance of an habeas corpus 8, for search every year after the
first 4.

For Criminals.
For taking every recognizance 14 l. tobacco, for discharge of recognizance 14,
for venire facias or warrant 15, for evety appearance 8, for every respit or
continuance 8, for every order 8, for copy of recognizance 14, for every
indictment (...) side 8, for copy of indictment per folio as before 8, for
filing plea 8, for confession on indictment 8, for copy of the panel 4, for
recording the verdict 8, for entering the judgment 28, for execution of the
judgment 28.

To the Crier of the County Courts.
For swearing every Jury 72 l. tob' for swearing the Bailiff 6, for every Oath
6, for special Bail 3^, for good behavior 36, for clearing every prisoner by
Proclamation or Acquittal 40 l. tobacco. Provided always that in case any
person shall refuse to pay the same so by this Act limited and allowed, it
shall and may be lawful for the Chancellor, Secretary, Judge for probat of
wills, Surveyor General or his Deputys, Sherriff, Coroner, Clerk of the
Council, Clerk of the Court of Appeals, the several Clerks of the County
Courts, Crier of the Provincial Court and the Cryers of the several County
Courts to recover the same by way of execution against the goods, tobacco or
chattels of the person or persons so refusing and no other: Provided always
that such person or persons having no tobacco, and that shall refuse to show to
such Officer or Officers as shall collect the same such goods and ckattels, it
shall be lawful for such Officer or Officers to take the body or bodies of such
person or persons in execution for the same.

Provided also that no Officer or Officers in this Act particularly mentioned,
and whose Fees are hereby settled and limited shall by virtue thereof either
leavy or cause to be leavied any Execution upon the Body Goods or Chattels of
any person or persons whatsoever for any Fees in this Act limited and
contained without delivering or causing to be delivered a true and just accoun
of the Fees to them due by this Act as aforesaid, under the hand or hands of
such Officer or Officers to the person or persons from whom such ^ees demanded
are due as aforesaid thirty days at the least before Execution leavied, and in
case any of the said Officer or Officers as aforesaid shall in any wise act or
do contrary directly or indirectly to this Act he or they so offending shall
loose and forfeit to the party grieved trebble damages sustained, and shall
also forfeit th sum of six thousand pounds of tobacco or forty pounds sterling,
the one moiety thereof to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors
for the support of government, to be recovered in his Majenys name, the other
moiety to the party or parrys that shall sue for the same, to be recovered in
any Court of Record within this Province by Action of Debt, Bill Plaint or
Information wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

And it is further provided that if any Fees for any matter or thing hereafter
to be done bejonging to the several Officers aforesaid, and by the Governor
and Council to allowed and adjuged and not in this Act mentioned, limited,
allowed and adjudged, it shall be lawful for such Officer to have such Fee or
Fees as the Governor and Council for the time being shall adjudge and allow of
and no more under the penalty aforesaid, to be recovered as aforesaid; this Act
to endure for three years or to the end of the next Sessions of Assembly which
shall first happen.

FINIS
In the XII. Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King William the III. of
England etc. At a Sessions of Assembly Begun and Held at the Town and Port of
Annapolis April the 26th. And Ended May the 9th. Anno Domini 1700. Were Enacted
these Laws following. viz.

An Act for the Service of Allmighty God, and Establishment of Religion in this
Province, according to the Church of England, etc.
FORASMUCH as in a well-grounded Christian Common Wealth, Matters concerning
Religion, and the Honor of God, ought in the first place to be endeavored and
taken into Consideration, as that which is not only most acceptable to God,
but the best way and means to obtain his Mercy and Blessing upon a People or
Country.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present general Assembly, and the Authority of the
same; That all things that have been heretofore Legally done, by Virtue of
former Acts of this Province for this purpose made, and bearing this Title, or
tending thereto; in and since the Year 1692 be and are hereby Ratified and
Confirmed, according to the reasonable Intent and Direction of the said Laws;
to the Intent that the further proceedings on so great and good a Work, may be
advanced and perfected by this Law. To which purpose, Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments, with other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use
of the Church of England, the Psalter or Psalms of David, and Morning and
Evening Prayer therein contained, be solemny read, by all and every Minister or
Reader in every Church, or other place of public Worship within this Province.
AND whereas the present Constitution of this Province, being in its infancy,
will not admit of raising a maintenance by way of Tithes as in England; Be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the Encouragement of Faithful and
Able Ministers Laboring in the work of the Gospel, to come and reside in this
Province, instead of such Tithes usually in England as aforesaid; a Tax or
Assessment of Forty Pounds of Tobacco per Pole, be yearly, and every year,
successively Leavied upon every Taxable Person within each Respective Parish
within this Province; as they have been, now are, or hereafter shall be laid
out, limited, and appointed by the Law of this Province; and entered upon
Record, as the said former Laws therein did direct; which said Assessment of
Forty Pounds of Tobacco per Pole, shall allways be paid and allowed to the
Ministers of each respective Parish; having no other Benefice to officiate in;
Presented, Inducted, or appointed by his Excellency the Governor of this
Province, or other Person thereunto Legally Authorized, in manner hereafter
Expressed and Ordained: And every such Minister is hereby required, and
enjoined to appoint, and constantly to keep a Clark of such Parish Church, and
to pay and satisfy such Clark the Sum of one Thousand Pounds of Tobacco
yearly, and every year, out of the said Forty per Pole. And to prevent all
illegal and unlawful Marriages, not allowable by the Church of England, but
forbidden by the Table of Marriages. Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That no Minister, Priest, or Magistrate shall presume to join together in
Marriage any Persons whatsoever, contrary to the Table of Marriages, by this
Act appointed to be set up in every Parish Church within this Province; Nor
shall any Persons forbidden to Marry together by such Table of Marriages,
presume to be joined in Marriage under the penalties following. That is to say,
under the penalty of five Thousand pounds of Tobacco, upon the Minister,
Priest, or Magistrate joining such Persons in Marriage: And under the like
penalty of five Thousand pounds of Tobacco upon the Persons so joined in
Marriage; to our Sovereign Lord the King, for the uses in this Act hereafter
mentioned. And to prevent any Lay Persons, from joining any Persons in
Marriage, where a Minister or Priest can be had, and to ascertain what shall be
paid for Marriages. Be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That In
every Parish, where any Minister or Incumbent shall reside, or have charge of
Souls, therein no Justice or Magistrate shall join any Persons in Marriage,
under the penalty of five thousand pounds of Tobacco for such Offense, to our
Sovereign Lord the King as aforesaid. And that it shall be lawful for every
Minister to take and receive of every Person or Persons by him Married, the Sum
of five Shillings Sterling, and no more, any Law to the contrary
notwithstanding. Previded such persons come to such Parish Church or Chapel at
time of Divine Service, for contracting such Marriage. And for the better and
more effectually collecting the said Duty of forty pounds of Tobacco per Pole,
and paying the same to the uses by this Law intended and appointed; as also for
incorporating a pollitical Body, capable in Law to recover and receive all
Rights and Perquisites accrewing or growing due in Law or Conscience, to any
Parish Church, or Churches for any pious use, or uses whatsoever.

Be it Enacted, that the Sherrif of each several County shall, and is hereby
obliged to collect, and gather the said Assessment of forty per Pole of the
several Persons within each respective Parish in his County, in the same
manner, and by the same authority as the public and County Leavy is collected,
and shall pay the same forty pounds per Pole to the Vestry of each respective
Parish by this Act constituted and incorporated a Body pollitick, if there be
no Incumbent or Minister inducted, instituted, or appointed, but in every such
Parish where there is such Minister or Incumbent, and who shall be legally
Invested with the said Duty of forty per Pole, the same shall be allways paid
to the said Minister or Incumbent by the order of the Vestry, as the same shall
arise and grow due, after such Minister or Incumbents Qualification as
aforesaid; each Sherrif deducting for his Sallary in collecting the same, five
pounds of Tobacco per Hundred, and no more; any usuage or custom to the
contrary notwithstanding. And the better to enable the Several Vestrymen by
former Laws, and by this appointed and confirmed, to Execute the Trust and
Authority Reposed in them; Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by
and with the Advice and Consent aforesaid, That the Several Vestrymen of the
several Parishes within this Province, that now are, or hereafter shall be
chosen and elected, as they have been, so they shall be and continue; and are
hereby Confirmed and Constituted a Body Corporate, and so to remain, and be by
Succssion in times to come, to the uses and purposes following; that is to say,
for the receiving the said forty pounds of Tobacco per Pole, and the applying
and disposing the same as by this Act ordained. And the said Vestryman, are
hereby Empowered and Enabled by the Names of the principal Vestryman, and his
Brethren Vestrymen of such Parish, to recover take, and receive, into their
cussody and possession, to be disposed of in pious uses, for the benefit of the
Church and Parish, any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, or any Estate in any
Lands, or Tenements of what nature or kind soever; or any manner of Goods,
Chattels, Debts, Credits, or other personal Estate, of what nature or kind
soever; and by what manner of way soever, given, granted, bequeathed, or
bestowed, either by Deed, Gift, Promise, or Grant of the Donor or Donors in
Life, or by any last will and testament, or any otherhonest and lawful Ways or
Means whatsoever: which said Vestry's, or Bodies Corporate are confirmed, and
hereby made capable of Suing, and being Sued by the Names and Titles aforesaid,
of, for, and touching any the premises; of which Vestry, or Body Corporate the
Number shall allways be six at least, except upon death o^ absence of any one
of them; and in such case of death, or absence, or other Legal Incapacity of
Serving, the remaining part of such Vestry, shall with all convenient Speed
meet, and by Majority of Voices, elect and choose one or more sober and
discreet person or persons Freeholders, of each respective Parish, to supply
such absence or defect, and such persons so elected and chosen, after taking
the usual Oath appointed by Act of Parliament; instead of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Oath of a Vestryman, appointed by this Act.
That is to say, I do solemnly Swear and Declare, that I will justly and truly
execute the Trust and Office of a Vestryman of this Parish, according to my
best Skill and Knowledge, without Prejudice Favor or Affection; but with equal
Right to all Persons, for the benefit of this Church and Parish: And will not
diminish or detain, from any Minister Legally quallified and presented,
inducted or appointed by his Excellency the Governor, or other person Legally
Authorized thereto; any Right Perquisite or Benefit given by Law, So help me
God. And subscribing the Test and Association, shall be deemed and taken as one
of the Vestry, to all intents and purposes. And if any person so chosen
Vestryman, shall refuse to serve and take the Oaths aforesaid, he shall be
fined one thousand pounds of Tobacco, to his Majesty as aforesaid. And the same
method shall allways be observed, to perpetuate the Succession of the Vestry,
in all time to come. Provided allways, That in every Parish, where any Minister
or Incumbent is, or shall be instituted, inducted, appointed, and invested with
the forty per Pole, and residing therein, he shall during his continuance
aforesaid and no longer, be one of the Vestry of such Parish, and principal of
such Vestry, although there be the Number of six persons before; and for keeping
a fair Register of all such Vestries proceedings, and for Registring of all
Births, Marriages, and Burials, in each respective Parish. BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority Advice and Consent aforesaid, That each Vestry shall, and is hereby
obliged, to appoint, and keep a ^^t person for a Register, who shall at all
timer keep a fair Register of the Vestries proceedings, in Executing their
Trust and Authority; which Register shall also take the Oaths aforsaid, and
also an Oath given him by the said Vestry, for the due and faithful executing
his said Office: and shall make true Entry of all Vestry Proceedings, and of
all Births, Marriages, and Burials, (Negroes and Mallattoes excepted) That is
to say, the Christian and ^ir name, with the Day, Month, and Year of every such
Birth, Marriage, or Burial; to which purpose, all and every the Inhabitants of
each Parish, that are either Parents, Guardians, Overseers, Masters, or
Mistresses of any persons, Born, Married, or Buried; are hereby injoynd and
required, to give notice to the Register, of such Parish within two Months
after such Birth, Marriage, or Burial; and pay him six pence for Entrng it, at
the time of giving Notice aforesaid; under the penalty of one hundred pounds of
Tobacco to such inhabitants aforesaid; refusing or neglecting as aforesaid. And
under the penalty of one hundred pounds of Tobacco to such Register, refusing
or neglecting to enter it, having received his Fee for the same; and such
Register, is likewise hereby obliged to show any person or persons reasonably
desiring it, any such Register, or give a Certificate of any Register of
Births, Marriages, or Burials; that shall be reasonably required of him, and
shall have for his Fees from such persons six pence for any Search, and six
pence for any Copy or Certificate given as aforesaid, and no more; hereby
Ratifying and Confirming as valid, all Registers or Entries of any Births,
Marriages, or Burials heretofore made, with any Clark of any County Court,
according to Directions of such Laws as were then in force; before any of these
^aws were in being. And that the Register of each Parish, may be enabled to
perform the Charge hereby required of him. BE IT ENACTED by the Authority,
Advice, and Confent aforesaid, That if there be any Vestries of any Parishes,
that have not already provided good and substantial Writing Books well bound,
sufficient for Registring such proceedings in, aecording to the Directions of
the former Laws, That in every such case, of such Neglect or Omission, the
Vestry of such Parish shall at the Parish Charge, provide such Book or Books,
within six Months from the End of this Session of Assembly, under the penalty
of five hundred pounds of Tobacco each Vestryman, (the Minister only excepted)
neglecting as aforesaid, to our Sovereign Lord the King, for the uses herein
mentioned. And that there may be no neglect in the Vestries, or those employed
under them, in the careful and Conscionable Performances of their Several
Charges in this Law contained; the said several Vestrles are hereby obliged to
meet frequently, or as often as need shall require, upon notice given by the
principal Vestryman of each Parish, to consult of the Methods and Ways of
performing the several Authorities Reposed in them; and from which Vestries so
appointed, no Vestryman without Lawful Impedement shall absent himself, under
the penalty of one hundred pounds of Tobacco to each Vestryman, wilfully
neglecting to appear as aforesaid; and under the same penalty, to such
principal Vestryman who shall not appoint such Vestry to meet when need shall
require; such Omissions and Neglects to be Noted in the Vestries Register of
proceedings, and Recovered in his Majesty's Name. And the said several and
respective Vestries are hereby further enjoined, that where there is not Tables
of Marriages already put up in their Respective Parish Churches, with all
convenient speed, and within six Months at themost, to procure a fair Table of
Marriages transcribed, and set up in their Respective Churches; and the same
keep continually in the said Church, that persons being thereby informed what
Marriages are forbidden, may avoid the contracting any such unlawful Marriage;
and that the said Vestrymen, do once every Year, in or about the Month of
January, yearly make choice and appoint two sober and discreet Freeholders of
their Respective Parishes, to be Church Wardens for that Year, upon penalty of
two hundred pounds of Tobacco each Vestryman, (except those excepted)
neglecting either in the Table of Marriages, or appointing Church Wardens to
our Sovereign Lord the King as aforesaid, which Church Wardens so chosen, shall
take the usual Oaths, and likewise declare on his Oath given by the Vestry,
well and faithfully to execute that Office the ensuing Year, according to the
best of his knowledge; and any such person or persons so chosen, Church Warden
or Wardens, that shall wilfully refuse to serve in the said Office, and take
the Oaths aforesaid, shall be sined one thousand pounds of Tobacco to our
Sovereign Lord the King, and the Church Wardens, and Vestry are Authonsed and
Required, to take constant Care to satishe and pay the Farochial Charges, and
of all necessary Repairs and amendments of the respective Churches, Chapels or
Churchyards; and cause the same at a^^ times to be repaired and amended, as
need shall require; and satis e and pay for the same, either out of the forty
per Pole, where no Minister is appointed, or out of such other Gifts, Grants,
Goods, Chattels, or Credits as shall come to their Hands, for the Church or
Parish use; if there be any Minister instituted therein. But if it shall so
happen, that there should be a Minister Legally instituted therein, and the
Ve^ry have not any Enects in their Hands, besides the forty per Pole, to pay
Parochial Charges, as aforesaid, or to make such necessary Repairs as is
required, then and not otherwise, it shall be Lawful for the justices of the
County Courts, upon application of such ^ari^^, Ve^ry, and Church Wardeus to
assess the Respective Pari^hes, by a certain sum of Tobaceo, not exceeding ten
pounds of Tobacco by the I ole in any one Year; which abetment, made by such
County Court, and a Certificate there of under the County ^eal, shall be
sussicient to the Sherrif of such County, to Leavy such Tax by the pole, on the
Taxables of such Parishes in the same manner as other public Dues are Leavied,
and shall not deduct above five per Cent. for his Sallary, and pay the same to
such Ve^ry, for the use aforesaid; and to the Intent that this Act may answer
the End of the Makers. Which is, That his Majesty's good Subjects of this
Province, may be in ructed in Religion, and therein, of their Duty to God, his
Majehy and themselves: And those Pious and Exemplary Persons that shall Labor
therein suitably provided for. Be it Enacted by the Authority Advice and
Consent aforesaid, That no Minister or Incumbent shall at one time, hold more
than two Parishes, nor two Parishes, but by the Denre and Agreement of the
Vestry of the said adjacent Parish, and Consent of the Ve^ry's where he rendes,
and the appointment of his Excellency the Governor, or other person Legally
Authorized thereunto for the time being; nor claim other, or larger part of the
fonrty per Pole, than what such adjacent a^ish shall Consent and agree with him
yearly to pay. And it is the true intent and meaning of this Act; That what Sum
or Sums of Money, Tobacco, Goods, Chattels or any other Interest, except Land,
given to the use of the Church, and the forty per Pole, that shall come into
the Veary's Hands, by any means whatsoever as aforesaid; shall always be
employed in the first place, to Repairing the Church, or Chapel, and what
appertains to it; and providing decent Ornaments and Requisites for the same,
and other parochial charges; and in the next place, for and toward the
Educating and Instructing poor Orphans of the Farish, that are not able to
procure Instruction to themselves; and if any thing remains, over and beyond
what will answer these occasions, to such other pious and Charitable uses, as
the Ve^ry and Church Wardens of of such Parish shall and most requisite in
their Directions; and that the several Vestrymen of each respective Parish may
not be discouraged, to look after any thing, that by any means as aforesaid,
becomes the Parish Right and Due. Be it Enacted by the Authority Advice and
Consent aforesaid, That in any Action by them Commenced in the Name of a
Vestry, and for the benefit of the Parish as aforesaid, they shall not be
obliged to pay any Fees or Cost of Suite, to any Person or Officer, unless they
Recover in the same Action; nor pay the Defendant any Cost, in case the Vestry
shall not recover, or be Cast on such Trial. And that the major part of the
Members of every Vestry, shall be Construed the Vestry, capable to proceed in
any matter; and that where there are not, or shall not be Ministers, in any
Parish it shall, and may be Lawful for the Vestry to provide some sober and
discteet Person as a Reader, and agree with him for such Service, ter year, or
otherwife for less time; and allow him his pay out of the forty per Pole, what
part thereof they shall agree for, not exceeding the one half yearly of such
Revenue; and and upon such Reader's taking the said Oaths appointed by Act of
Parliament, subscribing the Test and Association, and procuring License from
his Excellency the Governor, or other Person thereunto authorized; shall and
may Read Divine Service, Himilies and other good Authors, of practical Divinity
at the usual times in such Church or Chapel, and therein shall demean himself
according to the Liturgy of the Church of England as aforesaid. Lastly, it is
Ordained, and Enacted, by the Authority Advice and Consent aforesaid, That the
several Fines and Forfeitures that shall happen by the Tenor of this Act, shall
be recovered by Action of Debt in his Majesty's Name, his Heirs or Successors;
and applied to the use of the Parish, and in such manner as before directed in
this Act. And that one Act made at a General Assembly begun and held at the
City of St. Mary's the 10th. Day of May 1692. Entitled An Act for the Service
of Allmighty God etc. One other Act made at a Sessions of Assembly begun and
held at the Port of Annapolis the Eighth day of May 1695. Entitled An
Additional Act to the Act of Religion, One other Act made at a Sessions of
Assembly begun and held at the Port of Annapolis the Ninth Day of July 1696.
Entitled An Act for the service of Allmighty God etc. And one other made at a
Sessions of Assembly begun and held at the Port of Annapolis the 28th. Day of
June 1699. Entitled An Act Impowering the Vestry to Assess their Par ishoners
for finishing and and repairing their Parish Churches, and every part of every
of the said Laws, be and are hereby Repealed and made Void.

An Act for speedy Trial of Criminals, and ascertainining their punishments in
the County Courts, when prosecuted there.
WHEREAS many Acts of Affcmbly have been heretofore made against Theiving and
Stealing, which at this present are experienced in effectual, to prevent the
Committing those Crimes, nor sufficiently to punish them, when Committed.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present general Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That it shall and may be Lawful, for and to the several justices of the
County Courts of this Province, to hold Plea of Adjudge, and in Lawful Manner
determine, all Theiving and Stealing of any Goods or Chattels of what nature or
kind foever, that are fit for the necessary use Service or Support of Mankind;
not being above the vallue of one thousand pounds of Tobacco, Robbery Burglary
and House Breaking excepted, and every Person or Persons Legally Convicted of
any such Theiving and Stealing (except before excepted) by the Testimony of one
or more snfficient Evidence, not being the Party greived, before any such
County Court as aforesaid, shall or may cause to be punished, by paying four
fold of the vallue of the Goods so theived and stolen, to the Party or Parties
greived thereby, and by putting in the Pillory and whipping, so many Stripes as
the Court before whom such Matter is tried shall adjudge, not excecding Forty;
which Court shall allways adjudge the vallue of the Goods so theived and stolen
as aforesaid, and if any such Persons so Convicted, have not sufficient Goods
and Chattels, or be a Servant, whereby he is incapable to have Goods and
Chattels to satisfy and pay such four fold as aforesaid, in every such Case,
such Person or Persons shall receive the Corporal Punishment as aforesaid, and
satisfy the Four Fold, and Fees of Conviction by Servitude; the Freemen being
destitute of Goods as aforesaid, his time to commence from the time of
Conviction as aforesaid, and if a Servant, to Cemmence from the End of such
Servitude as he is then at such Conviction bound to, the time of Service to be
adjudged by such County Court, either to the Party greived, or any other Person
the Court shall order such Convict to, that will then and there pay, or secure
to be paid the said four Fold and Costs aforesaid, at the Discretion of the
Court; and if any person or persons shall receive, or take part of such stolen
Goods, or assist the person so stealing as aforesaid, to make away or conceal
them, being Legally Convicted as aforesaid, shall suffer the same pains, and
incur the same penalties, with the Party stealing as aforesaid; any Law or
Usage to the contrary notwithstanding. And if any person or persons having been
once Convicted of any such theiving and stealing, (except before excepted) and
shall after be again presented for theiving and stealing of any Goods or
Chattels laid to be above the vallue of twelve pence, it shall not be tried and
determined by any County Court, but the party's presented on such presentment,
shall be proceeded against in the Provincial Court as a Felon, for simple
Felony; according to the Laws of England, and the Transcript of his former
Conviction: And such presentment shall by the Clark of every such County Court,
be imediately sent to the then next Provincial Court, under the penalty of one
thousand poun ds of Tobacco, to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors; and the Party's Witnesses against such Felon, if in Court at the
time of such presentment, to be bound over to give Evidence as aforesaid, or
otherwise if not in Court, an account of their Names and places of dwelling to
be sent the Attorney General, to be Summoned against the then next Provincial
Court in order to such Trial, and the Party presented if in Court, to be bound
over also by due Course of Law, to answer such presentment, or if not in Court,
proceeded against by due course of Law as aforesaid, and to prevent the
ranitiplicity of Wood Rangers.

Be it (...) by the Authority Advice and Consent aforesaid, that no person
whatsoever shall presume to Range in the Woods or Forests, after Wild Neat
Ca^^^ or Horses, without a License from his Excellency the Governor in Chief
for the time being, under the penalty of five thousand pounds of Tobacco for
every such wild Creature, that such unlicenced Ranger shall kill, take, or
convey away alive or dead: one half to our Sovereign Lord the King, the other
half to the informer, or him or them, that will Sue for the same; by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein to Essoyn, Protection, or Wager of
Law shall be allowed; and that any person or persons whatsoever, that shall
kill any unmarked Swine being above three Months old, if not upon his or their
own Land, or not in Company with his or their own Stock, shall and is hereby
adjudged a Hog-stealer, and shall be liable to restore four fold, and to suffer
such Corporal pains, as against the first Offense in this Act menrioned; and to
prevent any such person or persons concealing or disfiguring the mark of any
Swine killed as aforesaid.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority Advice and Consent aforesaid, that if
any person or persons killing any such unmarked Swine, in the Woods, or others,
and shall wilfully disfigure the Mark or Cut of the Ear of such Swine, so as
to conceal the true and real Mark, or whether it were marked or not, shall be
deemed and adjudged a Hog-stealer, within the purview of this Act and shall
suffer accordingly; and to prevent the abussing, hunting, or worrying any
Stocks of Hogs, Cattle, or Horses with Dogs or otherwise. Be it Enacted that if
any person or persons whatsoever, that have been Convicted of any of the Crimes
aforesaid, or other Crimes, or of evil Fame, and dissolu^e Living, that shall
shoot, kill, and hunt upon any persons Land, whereon there shall be a Seated
Plantation without the Owners Leave, having been once before warned, shall
forfeit and pay one thousand pounds of Tobacco; one half to our Sovereign Lord
the King, the other half to the party greived, or those who will Sue for the
same, to be Recovered as aforesaid. And the better to imprint the paint and
penalty's of this Law into the Minds of all forts of People, and to prevent the
committing any such Comes and Offenses aforesaid.

Be it also Enacted that this Act shall be publicly Read four times a year in
every Parish Church of this Province, at the time of a full Congregation either
before or after Service, by the Clark or Reader of such Church, under the
penalty of one thousand pounds of Tobacco Forfeit to our Sovereign Lord the
King, for the use of such Parish, to be paid or Recovered of every Clark or
Reader so neglecting.

And Be it Enacted that every Clark of the Several and Respective County Courts
of this Province, be, and are hereby obliged, ex Officio, to deliver unto the
several Clarks of their Parishes, wirhin their County's, a fair Copy of this
Act for publishing and reading as aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by and with the Authority Advice and Consent
aforesaid, that one Act made at an Assembly, begun and held at the Town of
Annapolis the 28th. Day of June, in the Eleaventh Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord-King William the Third Anno Domini 1699. Entitled An Act for
speedy Trial of Criminals, and Ascertaining their punishmets in County Courts
when prosecuted there: Alland every Clause therein contained, is, and are
hereby Repealed and made Void.

An Act for the present Security of the Frontier Plantations, against the
Incursions, and Violence of Indians etc.
WHEREAS his Excellency the Governor, has at a Late Treaty with the
Piscattaway Indians, Renewed the Articles of Peace formerly made betwixt the
English and the said Indians, who thereupon promised to return again and settle
among us as heretofore, and to observe and perform the said Articles in all
points according to Agreement, but by reason the time appointed for their
Return is not yet accomplished, and in consideration of their Infidelity, and
the little Regard they have to perform Promises, and Agreements with them made.
Be it Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of this prosent General Assembly, and the Authority of the same; That
Capt' Richard Hill, Mr. Samuel Tongue, Mr. John Wo^^tkington, Mr. William
Hutchison, Mr. Thomas Greenfield, Mr. Walter Smith, Mr. Elish^ Ha^, Mr. Phillip
Hoskins, and Mr. Ben^amin Hall, or the major part of them, be, and are hereby
Coustituted and appointed a Comittee, to join with (...) Excellency the
Governor, and his Majesty's Honorable Council, in advising and concerting
such measures, as will suppress any violence, which may be offered to this
Province by the Indians, after the breaking up of this present Sessions of
Assembly, until such time as the said General Assembly can po^^bly be again
Convened.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That Colonel John Thompson, James Frisby Esquire and Mr.
John Hall, with what other persons they shall think fit, be dispatched with all
convenient Speed, to the Susquehannah and other Neighboring Indians; to
Ratyfie and Confirm the League formerly made with them, and to Enter into such
furcher Articles as by his Excellency the Governor, and Council, and Comitee
before appointed, shall propose to them: And that a present be given to the
said Indians, and what shall be consul^ed, agreed on, and done by the Governor
and Council, with the Advice of the said Committee, is hereby allowed of, and
con^^rmed by the General Assembly. This Act to endure fill next Sessions of
Assembly and no longer.

An Additional Act, to the Act touching Coopers, and the Gauge of Tobacco
Hogsheads.
WHEREAS an Act was made in an Assembly begun and held at the City of St.
Mary's, the 21th. Day of September, In the Sixth Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord and Lady King Williams and Queen Mary Anno Domini 1694.
Entitled An Act touching Coopers, and the C^ge of Tobacco Hogsheads; In which
said Act are several penalties laid on Coopers for their Neglect, and
Nonperformance of the several Clauses in the said Act to them Relating. And
whereas it plainly appears that the Planter or Imployer is the p^^cipal
Transgressor of the said Act, by causing the Cooper with whom he agrees to make
the said Hogsheads of a larger size, than is by the said Act provided and
directed.

BE IT THEREFORE FURTHER ENACTED by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly, and the Authority
of the same; That any Person whatsoever, that shall hereafter agree with, or
employ any Cooper, or other Person, to make Tobacco Hogsheads, and shall make,
suffer, or cause the same to be made of a larger size, than by the said Act is
directed, shall for every Cask or Hogshead so made, forfeit and pay the Sum of
two hundred pounds of Tobacco, and after the same rate for a greater or lesser
quantity; the one half thereof to be paid to our Sovereign Lord the King, and
the other half to the Informer, or him or them that will Sue for the same; to
be Recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province, wherein no Essoyn, Protection,
or Wager of Law to be allowed.

And Be it furthor Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Law be given
in Charge by the Justices of every Respective County in this Province, to the
Grand Jury, by them to be enquired of.

This Act to be, and Remain in full Force, till the Act herein mentioned be
Repealed, or otherwise made Void.

A Petitionary Act for Confirming Land given to Christ Church, in Calvert
County, by the last Will and Testament of Captain Richard Ladd, of that County
deceased.

An Act for quieting differences that may arise between his Majesty's Subjects
within this Province, and the Several Nations of Indians, of what places soever.
WHEREAS many differences have, and may hereafter arise and grow, between the
English and Indians, which for want of a speedy way of determining the same,
many great charges and Ilconveniencies have, and may happen thereupon by the
said Controversies, being brought from the Remotest Parts of this Province, to
be heard and determined before the Governor and Council, to the very great
trouble of the Persons concerned, and the public charge. Which to prevent, and
to give a speedy Redress in all such matters.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That
the Persons in this Act hereafter mentioned and appointed, be, and are hereby
Authorized and Empowered, to hear, and determine all manner of Controversies,
and Differences whatsoever, that shall, or may hereafter happen, or grow
between the English and Indians, in private, or personal Controversies; not
exceeding the vallue of twenty Shillings Sterling. That is to say; the Choptico
Indians, and the English in St. Mary's County, and the parts adjacent, Ralph
Foster and James Swan. And for the Acokik, Piscattaway, and Paymonkey Indians,
and the English in Charles and Prince Georges County, and the parts adjacent,
Colonel John Addison, Mr. William Hatton, and Major James Smallwood. And for
the Susquehanochs, Shavanals, and Delaware Indians and others, in those
Frontiers, Colonel John Thompson, and Mr. Edward Blav. And for the Nanticoke,
Ababcoes, and Hachwop Indians, and the English in Dorchester County, and parts
adjacent, Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Ennals, and Mr. Thomas Hicks. And for the
Monokins, Rokohankins, and Monte Indians, and the English in Somerset County,
and parts adjacent, Colonel William Whittington, and Mr. Levin Denwood Senior.

And Be it Euacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the Persons
in this Act beforementioned, be, and are hereby Authorized and Empowered, upon
hearing and determining any such Difference or Controversy as aforesaid, and
judgment thereupon given, either Party refusing to perform the same, then, and
in every such case, the Person or Persons so Empowered, shall by way of
Distress, take into his Custody the Goods and Chattels of the Offender, and out
of the same, make full satisfaction to the Party wronged, at the discretion of
the Persons so Authorized and by this Act Empowered; and the overplush to
return to the Owners thereof.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in any Matter of
Difference of a higher Nature or greater Vallue; then the Person or Persons
hereby Authorized shall have power to hear only, and after Examination, the
whole matter to transmit to the Governor and Council for the time being, whose
final determination shall be effectual according to Law.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such
Difference shall happen between the English and the Indians in this Province,
where particular Persons are not herein nominated and appointed, to hear and
determine the same as aforesaid; that then, and in every such case, the next
Justice of the Peace is hereby Empowered to hear and determine the said
Difference, according to the Rules and Methods herein prescribed.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case of Death or
Absence of any the Persons in this Act nominated and appointed, that then it
shall, and may be Lawful, for the Governor for the time being, to nominate,
constitute, and appoint one, or more in his, or their Stead and Place; who
shall hereby have full Power and Authority to do, and act in all things, as by
this Act is directed. This Act to endure for three years, or to the End of the
next Sessions of Assembly, which shall first happen.

An Act for Reviving some Temporary Laws of this Province.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly, and the Authority of the same, That
one Act of Assembly of this Province, made at a General Assembly, begun and
held at the Port of Annapolis the 28th. Day of June in the Year of our Lord
1699. Entitled An Act for Limitation of Officers Fees, One other Act made at
the same Assembly, Entitled An Act for Summoning Grand and Petty Jury's, which
said two Acts of Assembly, and all and every Article, Clause, and Thing in the
said two Acts contained, shall be, and are hereby Revived and Continued, to
stand and be in Force and Effect, for, and during three Years, or to the End of
the next Sessions of Assembly, which shall happen, after the End of the said
three Years.

An Act for Repealing Certain Laws in this Province, and Confirming others.
WHEREAS Diverse Laws have been heretofore made in this Province, which Time and
Experience have rendered, useless and not agreeable to the present Constitution
to the state of Affairs as they are now settled.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly, and the Authority of the
same, That all Laws made before the beginning of a Sessions of Assembly begun
and held at the Town of Annapolis the 28th. Day of June Anno Domint 1699. be,
and are hereby utterly Repealed and made Void. Except such as by their
particular Titles are express and set down in a Schedule, or Catologue hereunto
annexed, and Acts for private purposes, which said Laws so excepted, are hereby
Ratyfied and Confirmed; (saving to any Person the benefit, and advantage of any
Suit or Action which is already commenced, or sued upon any the said Repealed
Acts) that is to say.

An Act of Recognition. An Act providing what shall be good Evidence to prove
Foreign Debts. An Act for the ncouragement of the importation of Negroes. An
Act for securing the Rights of several Persons. An Act for Limitation of
certain Actions for avoiding Suits at Law An Act for the Naturalization of John
Old, on, and Mathias Vanderhayden. An Act for publication of all Laws within
this Province. An Act for taking away all Errors in proceedings at Law and
Equity. An Act against ^ngro^^ers and Regrators. An Act concerning Indians. An
Act Limiting the Extent of Attachments, and providing what shall be Leavied on
Attachments and Executions. An Act Imposing a penalty on all such who shall
dispose of Tobacco Seized, and Received by the Sherriffs and others. An Act for
appointing Coroners. An Act for appointing certain Officers. An Act for
punishment of Persons, Suborning Witnesses, or committing willful and corrupt
Perjury. An Act for settling an Annual Revennue upon the Governor etc. An Act
for preservatian of several Harbors within this Province. An Act for Settling
a Standard with English Weights and Measures, in the several Counties within
this Province. An Act against Excessive Usury. An Act directing the manner of
Electing and Summoning Delegates, and Representatives to serve in succeeding
Assemblies. An Act for quieting Possessions. An Act for Repeal of all Laws
heretofore made in this Province, and Confirming all Laws made this General
Assembly. An Act for appointing Court Days in each respective County of this
Province. An Act prohibiting Commssioners, Sherriffs, Clarks, and Deputy Clarks
to plead as Attorneys in their Respective County Courts. An Act against the
Importation of Convicted Felons into this Province. An Act for publication of
Marriages. An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, and Advancement of the
Natives of this Province. An Act prohibiting all Masters of Ships or Vessels,
or any other Persons, from transporting or conveying away, and Person or
Persons out of this Province without Passes. An Act for Confirming and making
valid the Last Will and Testament of Augustine Herman. An Act for the
Naturalization of Peter Ferdinando and his Children and others. An Act touching
Coopers, and the Gauge of Tobacco Hogsheads. An Act for Confirmation of all
Proceedings, Judicial, Military, and Civil, from the Death of his Excellency
Lyonel Copley Esquire Governor of Maryland, unto the Arrival of his present
Excellency Francis Nicholson Esquire present Governor An Act ascertaining the
Expenses of the Delegates of Assembly, and the Commissioners of the Provincial,
and County Courts. An Act for Erecting Ann-Arundel and Oxford Towns. An Act
Impowering Richard Bishep of Talbot County Son and Heir of William Bishop late
of Tallbot County deceased, to Sell and dispose of so much Land as will amount
to fifty thousand pounds of Tobacco, for the payment of the Charges expe nded
in Recovering the said Estate. An Act for Tonnage and Naval Officers Fees. An
Additional Act to the Act for quieting Possessions. An Act for the Recontinuing
the late discontinued Process and Proceedings of St. Mary's County Court An Act
for Naturalization of Daniel Danison Junior of Calvert County. An Act for
settling Ann-Arundel County Court at the Port of Annapolis, within the same
County. An Act for securing Administrators and Executors from double paying of
Debts, and limiting of the time for payment of Obligations within this
Province. An Additional Act to the Act for Ports. An Act for the Naturalization
of Mathias Mathiason alias Freeman, and others. An Act for ascertaining the
Fees for Naturalization. An Act for the Division and Regulating of several
County's within this Province, and Constituting a County, by the Name of Prince
Georges County, wirhin the same Province. An Explanatory Act to the Act of
Repeal of all Laws heretofore made in this Province, and Confirming all Laws
made this General Assembly. An Act securing Persons Rights to Town Lands. An
Act for laying an Imposition on several Commodities exported out of this
Province. An Act for the Natutalization of Michael C^rlis and others. An Act
impowering the Commissioners of the County of Kent, to purchase three Acres of
Land, whereon to build a Court House. An Act for speedy Justice, and
Encouragement of Trade. An Act for the Naturalization of John Edgar of Somerset
County. An Act for Sanctifying and keeping Holy the Lords Day. To the Kings
Most Excellent Majesty. An Act for keeping good Rules and Orders in the Port of
Annapolis. An Act for Confirming Titles of Land, given to the use of Churches
and Chapels. An Act for the better enabling Catherine Hermar to sell Land in
the Port of Annapolis. An Act Impowering the Commissioners of each Respective
County, to purchase Lands for the use of their Respective Courts. An Act
directing and appointing to what use the several Rooms in the State House in
the Town of Annapolis shall be applied to. An Act for Naturalization of Stephen
Krancis and George Slaycomhe. An Act ascertaining the Bounds and Limits of
Ann-Arundel and Baltemore County's An Act for Naturalization of Peter Dowdee.
An Act for recontinuing of the late discontinued Process and Proceedings of
Caecil County Court. An Act for better division of St. Paul's and Shrewsbury
Parishes. An Act Enabling Elizabeth Norman Executrix of George Norman to make
over two Tracts of Land to John Gadsby 2nd his Heirs for ever. An Act
Impowering the Commissioners of Caecil County to hold a Court this present year
in April. An Act ascertaining the Bounds of a certain Tract of Land to the use
of the Nanticock Indians so long as they occupy and live upon the same. An Act
Impowering Trustees to purchase Lands adjoining to the Fountains of healing
waters, called the coll Springs. An Act to Entitle William Coursey and
Elizabeth his Wife, or the Survivor of them, to sell such Lands as were left by
Colonel Vincent Low, to be sold for the payment of his Debts. An Act vesting
two Tracts of Land in John Gadsby, sold him by George Norman.
An Act for the Naturalization of Michael Bellicane Senior, Michael Bellicane
Junior, Christopher Bellicane, and James Bellicane his Sons, and Christopher
Mounts, all of Caecil County, and born of Dutch Parents.

An Act for Establishing and making Vallid the Last Will and Testament of James
Tyer of Charles County Gent.

An Act Impowering a Comittee to Lay, Assess, and apportion the public Leavy,
for thi^ present Year 1700.
WHEREAS this present general Assembly have for the defraying the public
charges of this Province, to this 9th. day of May 1000. raised a certain Sum of
Tobacco and Money, amounting to the Sum of two hundred twenty two thousand, two
hundred fifty and eight pounds of Tobacco, and five hundred sixty and nine
pounds five shillings and eight pence Sterling; but by reason more public
charges may arise, and grow due, before the usual and accustomed time of
payment, which is the tenth day of October yearly, at which time again to call
and convene the whole Assembly for that occasion only, considering the great
numberof them, and the Remoteness of their habitations from the place
appointed, would be very chargable and burthensom to the whole Province in
general. For the prevention whereof, BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of this present general Assembly
and the Authority of the same, That one Burgess or Delegate out of each County,
and one out of the City of St. Mary's, be, and are hereby authorized and
appointed a Comittee to join with some of his Majesty's honorable Council, to
lay and equally assess the said public Leavy of this Province, viz. of his
Majesty's honorable Council, Thomas Brook Esquire and Colonel John Hammond, and of
the House of Delegates Colonel Thomas Smithson Speaker, for Talbot County Capt'
Thomas Waughop, for the City of St. Mary's Major John Low, for the County of
St. Mary's, Major Thomas Smith for Kent County, Capt' Richard Hill and Mr.
James Saunders for Ann-Arundel County, Major Walter Smith for Calvert County,
Capt' Philip Hoskins for Charles County, Mr. John Hall for Baltemore County,
Colonel John Thompson for Caecil County, Mr. Thomas Greenfield for Prince
Georges County, Major Thomas Ennals for Dorchester County, and Mr. John Bozeman
for Somerset County, or the major part of them, shall be, and appear at the
Town of Annapolis on the 10th. day of October next, then and there to lay and
assess the said public Leavy already raised, and also to allow, leavy, and
assess what further charges may accrue, which to them shall justly appear to be
due from the public, not exceeding sixty thousand pounds of Tobacco, more than
what is already raised; and likewise to apportion, order, and pay out of the
public Treasury of this Province, the Sum of five hundred sixty nine pounds
five shillings and eight pence Sterling, to the several Persons to whom the
same shall be due, as by the Journal of the Comittee of Accounts appears, and a
fair Journal of all the Proceedings to deliver to the Clark of the Assembly,
for the satisfaction of all Persons therewith concerned. And if it shall
happen, that his Excellency shall please to Convene an Assembly before the
10th. day of October aforesaid, then this present Act, and all and every Clause
therein contained shall be void and of no Force.

FINIS.

