NOAH'S DOVE, with a green Olive-Leaf, OR, The National Covenant, and Solemn
League Renewed.
That it was Antecedently a Duty, before it was made and sworn, delineated and
proved To what; and how far it was Obligatory.
Zechariah Ch: 14: He shall be King over all the Earth! His Name ONE. John 17:
11: v: Christ's mouth prays for a specific Union. Octogesimus, Octavus,
mirabilis Annus,
Clade Papistarum faustus ubique piis.

To the suffering Remnant, of the Protestant Reformed Church in Scotland.
THe BIBLE assures us, The Earth shall disclose her Dead, and no more cover her
slain. The Widows bloody napkin cries, how long! GODS book is by Him, and His
bottle by Him, He will hold a Court of Oppression, Psalm 9. Antichrist has
carried the Grapes of Christ's Flesh into the Wine Press of the wrath of GOD,
and squeezed it by wicked men, who are GODS Hands and his Sword, says David,
yet he keeps the handle in his own hand: Tho no simple National or Personal
interest, can answer the great Design of God either in his Glorious
Manifestation! or Mavelous Dispensation, a Wheal in a Wheel, and Hand under
the Wing, or by Blazing Comet; in the 1681: and 1682: whereon we observed, then
in Print, what was relative to the rise, reign, ruin of the man of sin. Yet as
Israel a chosen Family of old, so other nations since may be said, to be more
dear, and near GOD! Whom He brings into the school of Correction, when others
are brought into the place of Execution, else we had been as Sodom; witness
that famous Bohemian Martyr, a Noble Man, ardently in prison, imploring the
Mediator for a sign of that poor Churches Restoration, and accordingly (...)
Rainbow appeared over the Execution place; and he sung that Psalm 85. 17. A
symptom that GOD will rake up the Ashes of that Church, as Ours upon these
Considerations.

Con: 1. We were previously bound to extirpat Popery, which is Idolatry,
overturning the Foundation of Religion, either in flat terms, or by consequence
of the Cossandrian Doctrine, whose League makers we enervat, in that Book
printed in 1^8^: Entitled, Scotland pulling down the gates of Rome: Proving
the difficulty of the Salvation of a Papist living and dying in Perjury and
Idolatry. These: 2 Ch: 11: v: No Faith, no Covenant, keep either to GOD, or
Man, but kill, murder and destroy, such truculent practices are Mercenary
duties, witness their own Patriots, and the Jesuits morals.

Con: 2. Prelacy in Scotland, is a bitter Sprig of the same Tree, springing
from the verge of the Civil Roman Empire, as Learned Burnet and Baxter
delineats! It Is true the University of Salmon say: that there is no model of
Primitive Church discipline, but that God has left, in equilibrio to humane
choice. (When all Divines agree, that the Essentials of a Church Officer, are
in ruling as well as teaching.) But they afterward check themselves in a
Recantation. The Laws of England, say, we grant, and we give to the Clergy, the
Title of Lords, Jure Carolino, but go near, to make it Treason, if they should
plead Jure Divino. tho we, derogare, nothing from the Bishops of Englands due
worth: resembling in their Lives more the Scripture Bishops then ours! Pious
Usher calls himself Primus Presbyteriorum. Yet their Famous Historian,
Holingshead commensurates the dimentions of the Primitive Bishops, according to
their Pastoral Relation; unus Episcopus was the note of their individination.
And Ignatius requires to know, their flock by name, denominating their Church,
Fraternity, Consociation, Or Presbytery. Taking Episcopacy of oversight
willingly! Pamelius, Albaspineus. Hence there is no Delegation, of teaching and
ruling Power, establishing non residency: Can the Privy Seal of a Nation
delegat his Charge, Christ's Royal Priesthood, to the hands of Hirelings, whose
Sword is on their right Arm, and right Eye utterly Darkened Which we have
discussed in the Discipline of Christian Religion, Printed in the 84 So that a
Scripture Bishop, is nothing else save a Preses or Speaker in a Parliament,
else its Oligarthical Tyrranny! Thus of the Authority which the Lord has given
to us not for destruction, but for your Edification against Popery which is
Idolatry, Prelacy: Perjury, Tolerarion, a Grave for Reformation.

Con: 3. We do not retreat from a positive Divine Law, to a Covenant Law, Save
when John's and Israel Prince and People, enter in a Solemn Covenant, the ^^eath
whereto in Perjury and Bloodshed; GOD avengeth and expiateth by a Thunderbolt of
his wrath on the race of Saul for many years after. As also Almerick King of
Jerusalem, Vladislains breaks Covenant with the Turks, Herold last King of
the Danes in England! Nor can we shelter our selves by the Irregularities of
Joshuas Covenant, for they do not annihilat the Obligation; it being only the
sinfuln^ss of the matter sworn, not the circumstances conversant about the Act
of Swearing Tho Jephtha should be robbed of their dearest delights and
Zedekiah, besieged with Tumults within and Wars without! Hea^ken Bishop Hall,
the facilite of Israel, led them into a Covenant, yet most they not in ringe
their Oath, etc. King Charles 1st, advises to keep Covenant in all Just ways
to his Son King Charles the 2d. The Kirk of Scotland was unite 54 years by
means of Discipline. Learned Bishop Sanderson grants the vanity of that
Distinction: Relaxation of the matter and of the Oath! But some say, a King
cannot be under the Laws of Federacy. But say I, how then is he under the Laws
of Matrimony.

Con: My will contracts according to what my knowledge reaches: mutually
espousing Persons, Lives, Goods, etc. The Commons Espousing, the Ministers, in
rescuing, them from Death: tho we have been Eye Witness to the Pilla^ing,
R^bbing, yea Murdering 1^00 and 5^ men, 9 Women; within these 27 years who
sealed this with their Blood. We shall for Antiquity of Presbytery, refer you
to he convyance of Presbytery done by us. Hence to be the witness to those
Barbarities, where Men's hearts were shot through their Backs, and Noses shot
through their Necks, in the open Field, and many died in the Mountains, and not
in their station. To assist made us as guilty as we had been the Actors; And
this we may read love in GODS Heart, yet there is wrath in His Hands (till we
humble our selves under the Mighty Hand of GOD, by sincere Fasting and Prayer)
seeing a volumn betwixt the Sun and the Earth could not contain our Perju^ies,
Apostacys, etc. Christ's dethroning supremacy, yea, exquisite tortoring by
Boots, by Pricks, Thumikens, and fire matchess drowning Women very young, of
some exceeding Aged. Yet sure I am: Though I cannot Determine, whether it shall
be by a Formal Sworn Covenant: or more Glorious Manifestation: that CHRIST
shall be a Crowned King over his Church: against Papists, Athiests,
Anabaptists. Yea that Scotsmen, shall darken the Seat of the Beast, the
Revelation alluding to Scotizei in the Greek Language.

Thus have we cleared the lawfulness of the Covenant, against Popery, Prelacy,
Toleration, that Popish ^ugar plumb, betraying the Mediatory glory of CHRIST,
into the hands of Tyrany, and Lawless Liberty: Yet are 44. Ministers who did
not accept it, only among the causes of GODS Wrath, we fear, I Kings 20. 43.
Because thou let the man go whom I pointed to utter destruction.

FINIS.

