A CLEAR CONFUTATION OF Mr. Richard Allen, And his Five Commendators, From
their own Confessions, collected out of the Vindication of his Essay, and
fairly improved against them, to the Overthrow of their Conjoined Singing in
Artificial Tunes in Gospel Worship.
To which is added, An Answer to Mr. William Collins's Defense from the Charge
exhibited against him in my Book, Entitled, The Controversy of Singing
brought to an end, etc.
THere being so much already said in my former Treatises, to the Argumentative
Part of the Controversy of Singing, and having in my last Discourse I
published brought it to an End, for my own part I see but little or nothing
else to do, than to clear it at the end, and so to finish my present Testimony
for the Truth. And that I may do it the more effectually, I shall first answer
some few Exceptions in Mr. Allen's Reply to me, which I think are most material
to clear the way for a full Confutation of his Error from his own Confessions.
And,

1. Mr. Allen says in page 59. That there is no Evidence in the Text, ( Exodus
15.21.) that either these Dances or Musical Instruments were used by them in
the Church of God as such, but those Dances of the Women with Music (mentioned
ver. 20.) seem plainly to be spoken of as a Consequence of their Religious
Thanksgiving in the Church-Assembly, mentioned in the foregoing part of the
Chapter.

Answer. I have sufficiently proved in my last, as well as in my other
Treatises of singing, that Deborah and Barak did not sing vocally together;
For, 1. Some part of the Song, Judges 5.7. (viz. until that I Deborah arose,
that I arose a Mother in Israel) was not proper for Barak to express. 2. It Is
said, ver. 12. Awake, awake Deborah, awake, awake, utter a Song: Arise Barak,
and lead thy captivity captive, thou Son of Abinoam; which Expressions show,
that this Song was uttered by Deborah, and part of it to Barak, and so all of
it was not proper matter for Barak to express; and also that this was sung at
the same time before Barak had led his captivity away; and yet in ver. 1. it is
said, Then sang Deborah and Barak, etc. and so in Exodus 15.1. Then sang Moses
and the Children of Israel; yet it does not follow, that the Children of Israel
sang all vocally together, any more than that Deborah and Barak sang with
conjoined voices, which we find they did not; neither does it from thence
follow, that the Women's singing with Timbrels and Dances, separate from the
Men, Exodus 15.20. was afterward at a different Season, any more than if we
should against the Light of Scripture suppose, that Barak joined in spirit with
Deborah in the chiefest part of her Song, at a different Season, or after he
had led his captivity away. Besides, as there is nothing expressed that lays a
foundation for this Objection, so there is reason to believe that the Women
sang with Timbrels and Dances at the same time when Moses and Israel sang, v.
1. seeing that as it is said Moses and Israel sang to the Lord, so also Miriam
began the Song to the Lord, which shows that Miriam's and the Women's singing
was as much a religious Thanksgiving to the Lord, as the Children of Israel's
was, ver. 1, etc. and at the same season, and not afterward.

2. To what Mr. Allen in page 59. says concerning my Authors, which show the
signification of the Greek Word Hymneo, (which is simply to praise or give
thanks, and also to lament or complain) I shall here answer,

1. That he plainly owns that the word Hymneo is not limited in its
signification to Songs of Praise, but he strives to prove that its most proper
signification is to sing praise, which I deny, and have produced witness enough
against it; and there is no need to contend about it, seeing our last
Translators have rendered the Hebrew Word Tehillah, and the Greek Word Hymnos,
in the Old Testament, simply Praise.

2. By his picking out of several of my Authors (which render the word Hymneo
various ways) some expressions that renders it to sing a Hymn or Praise, and by
his improving those that speak most in this Language, he has labored to raise
a dust, that their Testimony should not be so clearly discerned.

But Observe, he has not, neither can he charge me with any false Citation of
them, and so cannot destroy the Evidence I bring them for, nor the fuller and
clearer Testimony of the rest of my Authors that are noted in my little Tract,
where I have only briefly mentioned them, and not largely cited the Evidence of
several of them, whose Testimonies were more fully given before in my
prelimited Forms, and in my Reply to Mr. Keach, to which I refer the Reader, if
he please, for further Satisfaction, in this and many other matters that I
could not treat of in so small a Tract on Singing as I lately published, with
my Remarks on Mr. Allen's Essay. But,

3. Mr. Allen says, page 61. That the Learned Mr. Ainsworth does not translate
the word (as our Author represents him) simply praise, (as if it signified no
more) but he tells us (on Psalm. 3.) that there be three kinds of Songs
mentioned in this Book, of which one (he tells us) is called Tehillah, in Greek
Hymnos, a Hymn or Praise.

Answ. It Is true, Mr. Ainsworth says that there be three kinds of Songs in that
Book of Psalms, viz. Psalms, Hymns and Songs; but though he calls them all Songs,
whatever Titles they bare, yet it is because they were all Songs for
Temple-worship, and not from the signification of every Title; for some of the
Psalms, viz. Psalm 17, and 86, and 90, and 102. are entitled a Prayer of
David, of Moses, etc. which denote the nature of those Psalms or Temple-Songs
to be Prayer, and not that they are Songs from their Title of Prayer; and so
the word in Hebrew, Tehillah, Greek, Hymnos, signifies the nature of the Psalm
or Song to be a Praise, as the word is simply and rightly translated by Mr.
Ainsworth, who translates it in the Psalms, and renders the word in his
Annotations on them in eight several places singly or simply to praise, See
Psalm. 40.3. Psalm. 65.1. Psalm. 71.6. Psalm. 119.171. Psalm. 148.14. Annot. Psalm.
1. An. Ps. 145. An. Psalm. 3.
and I cannot find that he renders it in any one place a Song of Praise, or to
sing praise, but singly to praise. And therefore Mr. Allen has done ill to join
with Mr. Collins against my former complaint, which is now justly against them
both, with the rest of their Companions, for abusing my Author in so plain a
case, as renders them very unfair in their dealing with me.

4. Mr. Allen in page 71. says, The Divine Psalmists do often not only speak of
their own singing the Divine Praises, but also call upon others to join with
them therein; see Psalm. 9.2, 11. and 27.6. and 145.7. and 146.1, 2. etc. which
plainly shows that the People were to do more than barely say Amen, Psalm. 34.4.
and 33.1, 3. etc.

Answer. These being all the Scriptures I find he brings to prove, that the
People sang vocally together with the Levites in the Instituted worship of God
under the Law, I shall briefly reply in general, That for David to say, I will
sing praises to the Lord, and to exhort the righteous to sing, and such like
Expressions are sometimes to be taken of David's personating of Christ, as in
Psalm. 18.49. applied to Christ, Romans 15.9. sometimes of Misterious Prophecies
to be fulfilled at or in the glorious day of Christ's Kingdom yet to come, and
some to those Gospeltimes which had the Spiritual Gift of singing, when the
Saints did sing in Spirit together by the single voice of their Minister,
according to Gospel-Rule, 1 Cor. 14.15, 16, 26, etc. And those Scriptures that
relate to David personally, and the righteous in his day, must be understood as
its said of David, 2 Chronicles. 7.6. that David praised the Lord by the Ministry,
or Hand of the Levites, and that the People of Israel did not vocally sing with
their Levites and Singers, is also confirmed by the Office or Order of Singers,
that singing in the public worship of God was confined to under the Law, 1 Chronicles. 16, to 25. and by the Peoples saying no more after the Levites had done
singing than Amen, prase ye Lord, Psalm. 106.48. Deuteronomy. 27.14, 15. so that Mr.
Allen is not able to bring one Text of Scripture in the whole Bible to prove
that ever the Congregation of Israel vocally sang together with their singing
Levites; and although those Ministers under the Old Testament might sing more
than their own experience, yet this is no warrant for others to do the like
under the Gospel: Because, the Legal Worship and Service was a formal, carnal,
shadowy and prophetical Ministration, 'till the time of Gospel-reformation, and
the Heavenly Things themselves were come, Mat. 11.13. Heb. 9.1, 9, 10, 23.
Chap. 7.12.

5. Mr. Allen in page 76, 77. to justify his Argument for Art in Singing, viz.
That much art was used by the Holy Penmen of the Scripture in writing them, he
asks me, whether holy Men of God could write the Scriptures without the Art of
Writing?

Answer 1. They were required by the Holy Ghost to write the Scriptures, but
Mr. Allen is no way required by the Lord to make use of writing, or any other
Art, to practice his way of Singing. Besides, though the Holy Penmen of
Scripture might use the art of writing to record them for us, yet the matter of
Scripture so delivered, was formed by the inspiration and movings of the Holy
Ghost, and not merely by humane art, as Mr. Allen's Songs are, 2 Pet. 1.21.

6. Before I proceed farther, I shall take some Notice of what Mr. Allen says,
page 33. concerning those three Hebrew Words, viz. Halelu eth jehovah, in the
Hebrew Bible, Psalm 148.1. which Mr. Allen in his Essay left out in citing that
verse, to make it look like Hebrew Rhyme and Meter; says he, I did not omit
them on purpose to make it Rhyme, is plain, in that instead of four lines a
rhyme, as I have there set it down, there are six if those words are put in. To
which I briefly answer, That it is easy to demonstrate this to be a cheat from
Mr. Allens own words, for seeing he makes the three Hebrew words left out
before now into one line or verse by themselves, for the second line of his
six, and cuts off the word Hallelujah from the first line that was of his four
lines before, to make it by it self the first line of his six lines now, then
either his five lines that he made but four lines before, or the four lines
must be a wrong to the Rhyme and Meter as he cites them for in the sacred Text:
For if it be, as he says, Rhyme and Meter in the Hebrew Bible, it must be so as
we find it there without alteration, and therefore for him to make four lines
of verses in Rhyme in one book, and five lines of verses in Rhyme in another
Book of the same matter, is such an alteration, that renders it a plain Cheat
either in his four lines or in his five lines of verses. And by this one
instance the unlearned Reader may easily guess at the rest of his Hebrew
Rhyming, especially considering he does not tie it to any equal order of Meter.
And the true reason of it must be, because the Psalms of David (nor the Songs
of Moses, and Deborah, and Barak) are not in Rhyme in the Hebrew Bible, as I
have showed in my last Treatise, from the Testimony of several Jews learned in
the Hebrew Tongue.

Secondly, Having hitherto been removing those Exceptions that were necessary
to take some notice of, I shall now proceed to the confutation of Mr. Allen's
practice of singing, from his own Confessions; and in order thereunto I shall
here premise, That

Those five Commendators of Mr. Allen's Vindication of his Essay, viz. Joseph
Masters, William Collins, Joseph Stennet, John Piggot and Thomas Harrison, do
in their Epistle say, Though the Author of the Animadversions on Mr. Allens
Essay, -- has thought meet to let fly -- at us who subscribed a Preface to that
Treatise, for no other crime than that of commending the Subject of it to the
Reader, and of giving our Opinion of the ability of its Author to speak for
himself on that Argument, with out needing our Recommendation, we are neither
afraid nor ashamed to let the World know, that we have yet seen no Reason to
retract our words, and we dare venture to say as much of this Reply. To which I
answer,

1. That these Words, viz. For no other crime than that -- of giving our
Opinion of the ability of its Author to speak for himself: Although they are
brought in as the cause of Dr. Russel's letting fly at them, yet I do not find
that he has in that manner expressed himself in any part of his Book: And
therefore I conclude, that those words are the five Commendators own
Expressions, as it is further confirmed by that which follows, viz. We are
neither afraid nor ashamed to let the world know, that we have yet seen no
reason to retract our words: For these Expressions relating to the Foregoing
words implies an Assertion of them to be their own, viz. That [they] gave their
Opinion of the ability of its Author ( i. e. of the Essay) to speak for
himself: So that it sollows,

2. That in these words of the aforesaid five Commendators, there is a false
Insinuation, for they not only implicitly say that they commended the Subject
of that Essay, but that they gave their Opinion of the ability of its Author to
speak for himself on that Argument, without needing their Recommendation, which
how true this is, the Reader may judge from their own Words in their former
Preface to Mr. Allen's Essay, where they say, How well he has acquitted himself
in the management of this Argument, is by himself submitted to the judgment of
the world in his publication of it* We shall only say, that as it is not our
Business to use many Words, to prepossess the Reader in his Favor, so it is our
Opinion, that the Book is able to speak for it self, and needs not our Suffrage
to recommend it. So that those five Ministers have begun their Testimonial
Recommendation to Mr. Allen's Vindication with a false Insinuation, that in
their la^^ Preface they gave their Opinion of the Ability of the Author to
speak for himself, without needing their Recommendation, when in truth they
said it of the Book it self, distinguished by them from the Author. Now I
cannot conceive why they should utter this false Insinuation, unless it be to
squeez themselves from under their absolute commendations of those Errors in
Mr. Allen's Essay, which are justly charged upon them. But surely no sober
judicious Christians will either take this false Insinuation for the least
acknowledgment, or public satisfaction for the wrong they have done our
Profession, or the Truth, or will from this latter Preface discharge them from
those Errors which they have without exceptions recommended in their former
Preface to Mr. Allen's Essay: Especially considering, that in their last to his
Vindication, They stoutly tell us, that they are neither afraid nor ashamed to
let the World know, that they have seen no reason to retract their former
Words, and also that they dare adventure to say as much for this his Reply. So
that I conclude from their former Preface, confirmed in their last, wherein
they likewise recommend Mr. Allen's Vindication of his Essay, that both his
Books without the least Exceptions are recommended by those five Ministers.

Thirdly, The next thing therefore to be considered is, what those five
Ministers have recommended. As to the former part of their Vindication, I leave
the particulars thereof (if any think them worth their Notice) to such as are
or may be more properly concerned with it: And as to the latter part of it,
which had also the approbation of the aforesaid five Ministers, this relating
to me I have said something in answer to it before, and therefore I shall now
proceed to confute Mr. Allen's practice of singing from their own Confessions,
collected from both the Parts of his Vindication: As in page 59. he says, on
Mat. 26.30. and Mark 14.26. That though this be true, that this word Hymneo be
not limited only to Songs of Praise, it will not prove (says he) what this
Author affirms, that it is properly used, or signifies simply to praise. And in
page 69. Mr. Allen says thus, I bring not these Testimonies ( viz. James 5.13.
Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16.) to prove conjoynt Singing of the whole Congregation
together, but only to prove that singing of Psalms is the Duty of every
Christian: The lawfulness of conjoynt finging I argue from other Scripture
Grounds in my Essay. And in page 12, 13. Mr. Allen says, as to singing with the
conjoined voices of many together, I only plead for the lawfulness and
warrantableness of it, which I prove from several Scripture Arguments. -- Not
but that I allow, that it is also lawful for one voice alone to sing the praises
of God. Indeed in a public Assembly I conclude it is much more warrantable for
the whole Congregation to sing with conjoined voices than for one Person there
to sing by himself, because we have several unexceptionable Instances in
Scripture for the former, but none (as I know of) of the latter: And therefore
seeing Singing either singly or conjointly are but different Circumstances of
performing the same thing, I appeal (says he) to every impartial Reader,
whether I ought not (as I did) to consider, whether singing the praises of God
be at all a Christian Duty, before I discourse of these or any other
Circumstances of it. And much more is it unreasonable, that he should oblige me
to prove, that it is no less than a Christian Duty to sing in Meter or Rhyme,
and with artificial Tunes, which are but accidental modes of singing, and not
essential to it. And so far am I (says he) from asserting it to be a Christian
Duty, in this particular mode of it, that I expressly declare it wholly
indifferent, to sing the Divine Praises either in Prose, or Meter or Rhyme,
according as we judge most for Edification. Indeed I give my opinion for the
preference of the latter before the former, as more easy to be performed in a
harmonious and regular manner, and therefore more generally practiced by the
protestants than singing in prose.

And in like manner (says Mr. Allen) I discourse concerning singing by
artificial Tunes, not asserting or believing them essential to the Performance
of this Duty, but only requisite for the more regular performance of it.

And in page 82. Mr. Allen further says, That whatsoever becomes of these
accidental Modes of Meter, Rhyme, and Artificial Tunes, it is singing the Divine
Praises it self, in a proper sense, viz. vocally, that I assert to be a
Christian Duty, which Duty may be performed (though I think, with the generallity
of Protestants, not so well) without these modes, as well as a Person may be
rightly baptized after another manner than with his Face upward. And in page
81. Mr. Allen says, The difference I have shown to be between the parts of
Divine Worship, and the accidental modes and ways of its performance. And he
also tells us, that the Holy Scriptures is to be our only Rule in Divine
Worship, and that therefore, 1. For all the essential parts of Divine Worship
we must have an express Prescription in the word. And, 2. All the accidental
Modes and Circumstances of Divine Worship must be ordered suitable to the
general Rules thereof, viz. so as may be most for Order and Edification, as he
says in the foregoing part of the same page, that Christian Churches have
liberty to order such accidental modes and circumstances of Divine Worship as
are not particularly prescribed in the Word, as they shall judge most for
Edification. And in page 47. speaking of external modes and circumstances of
Worship, which (says he) I take to be in the power of the major part of a
Church, so far as to warrant their own practice therein.

Fourthly, Having made the preceding Collection of Mr. Allen's words,
recommended and approved by the foresaid five Ministers, I shall make
Observations on them as follows. And,

1. That seeing Mr. Allen on Matthew. 26.30. and Mark 14.26. confesses, that the
Greek word Hymneo, which in our last Bibles is there Translated to sing an
Hymn, is not limited in its signification only to Songs of Praise, then surely
considering also that the same Bibles render the same word Hymneo, and Tehillah
in the Old Testament, simply to praise, notwithstanding the stir he makes about
it, he cannot from his own Confessions prove from those Texts that Christ and
his Disciples sung the Hymn or Praise after Supper, nor that Paul and Silas
sang their praise, for it is the same Greek word, Hymneo, that is there also
used, Acts 16.25.

2. In page 69. Mr. Allen says, That he does not prove conjoynt singing from
James 5.13. Ephesians. 5.19. Colos. 3.16. but only that singing of Psalms is a
Duty: So that their own Pens having owned so much of the insufficiency of those
Texts of Scripture to prove their way of Singing, I think we may fairly
conclude from their own Confessions, that it cannot be a Gospel-Ordinance.

3. Mr. Allen plainly distinguishes and makes a difference between the
Essential parts of Divine Worship, and the Accidental Modes and Circumstances
thereof.

4. He says, That for all the Essential parts of Divine Worship we must have an
express Prescription in the Word: But that all the Accidental Modes and
Circumstances thereof which he distinguishes, and makes no Essentials of
Divine Worship, these he says are left to the liberty, and he takes to be in
the power of the major part of a Church to warrant their own Practice therein.

5. Mr. Allen tells us what those accidental modes and circumstances of singing
are, that are no essential parts thereof, nor of Divine Worship. And, 1. He
says, that the conjoined singing in a public Assembly, or of a whole
Congregation, is but a circumstance, and that he only pleads for the lawfulness
and warrantableness of it. Observe it well, he only pleads so for it as he
says, from several Scriptural Instances, which to reconcile his Discourse
fairly together, must imply that he does not plead for singing with conjoined
voices as an absolute Duty, from any express prescription in the Word of God,
but as a lawful Circumstance from some (pretended) instances, and so he makes
his conjoined voices but an accidental Circumstance of singing, and no
essential part of Divine Worship. 2. Mr. Allen asserts, that singing in Meter
and Rhyme is no essential part thereof. And, 3. That singing with artificial
tunes are but accidental modes of singing, and not essential to it, nor to
Divine Worship. 4. Mr. Allen says, that singing the Divine Praises it self may
be performed without these modes, viz. of Meter, Rhyme, and Artificial Tunes,
and I may fairly add without their singing with conjoined voices, it being as
he says but a circumstance of singing, and so also as I have showed it is no
essential of it, nor of Divine Worship: So that Mr. Allen and his five
Commendators, viz. Joseph Masters, William Collins, Joseph Stennet, John
Piggot and Thomas Harrison, having expressly owned and confessed publicly in
print, that singing with conjoined voices is but a circumstance of
singing-worship, which they themselves show is no essential part thereof, and
that singing in Meter and Rhyme, and also by Artificial Tunes, are all but
accidental modes of Divine Worship, and no essential parts thereof; it is all
one as to say, (except their prestinted forms of words and matter) that their
whole external mode, manner, way and practice of singing, is no essential part
of Divine Worship; and herein I agree with them, and so (except their
prestinted form of words) they have joined issue with me, to bring this
Controversy of singing to an end, and to a single point, viz. That a Christian
Church has liberty to order such accidental modes and circumstances of Divine
Worship as are not particularly prescribed in the Word of God, as she shall
judge most for Edisication.

5. The Controversy of Singing being now reduced from Mr. Allen's and his five
Commendators Confessions to this single point, and they having showed and
asserted their singing with conjoined voces, in Meter and Rhyme, by Artificial
Tunes, to be but accidental modes and circumstances of Worship, that differ
from the essential parts thereof, so as that for all the essential parts of it
we must have an express prescription in the Word, and that all the accidental
modes and circumstances of it are lest to the Liberty of a Church, it
consequently implies, that all their aforesaid accidental modes and
circumstances, or ways of singing, have no prescription in the Holy Scriptures.
And suppose we should grant them (as he asserts them) to be no Essentials of
his Singing-worship, yet I cannot conceive what his Cause will gain by it; for
whatever Name he gives them, and flutter he makes, as if he had some
Scripture-ground for his conjoint-singing, more than for his artificial Tunes,
Rhyme and Meter, yet seeing he makes it but a circumstance, and all of them
accidental modes and circumstances, that are left to the Liberty of a Church,
and consequently that none of them are prescribed in the Word of God, I cannot
see but that they are of the same nature, as all the superstitious modes and
circumstances of Worship of the Church of Rome are, and so Mr. Allen has still
no better warrant for his practice of singing than the Papists have for all
their Trumpery, which according to his Doctrine before recited, the major part
of his Church has Liberty and Power to warrant their practice of: So that Mr.
Allen's, and his five Commendators Popish principle, tends to the ruin of
ours, and the Protestants Reformation more in general.

Fifthly, I shall demonstrate, That although Mr. Allen asserts his unscriptural,
accidental modes and circumstances of singing, to be no essential parts
thereof, and I agree with him, that they they are no essentials (nor any parts)
of Divine Worship, yet I do not agree with him that they are no essential parts
of his singingworship, because he uses his artificial Tunes and conjoint vocal
singing, as such modes and circumstances of it, that without them he cannot
perform his singing Church-worship, and therefore they are essentials of it;
for that which is essential to any thing, is that which so belongs to the being
of it, that without it it cannot completely be, which I shall explain more
particularly. And,

1. That his singing with conjoined voices is an essential part of his standing
Church-ordinance is plain, because without this mode of conjoined voices his
Ordinance cease, and he must either bring into the Church the practice of
singing with a single voice, or no proper, vocal, melodious singing at all.

2. Though he calls his artificial tunes accidental modes of singing, yet they
are essentials of his singing, because he cannot perform his Singing-Worship
with conjoined voices without such Tunes. Indeed he tells us, That that Singing
it self which he asserts to be a Christian Duty, may be performed without such
tunes, page 82. but what kind of singing he there means, which is not his
practice by artificial Tunes, he yet conceals from us. As for Tunes immediately
inspired by the Holy Ghost, he pretends not to them, and as for natural Tunes
they may serve to make a natural noise, enough to fright away natural men,
rather than to gain their affections to his Worship.

3. His singing in Rhyme and Meter he calls an indifferent thing, and also
accidental modes of Worship; but though he terms them so, or does account them
indifferent Circumstances, yet he does not use them in his church, as
accidental or circumstantial parts of a common civil action, as such, but of
his Divine Worship, and therefore whatever he calls them, they are essentials
of it, for there are no circumstances of worship but what are essential to the
complete performance of it. It Is true, there are Circumstances attending
Worship that are not of Worship, but of actions merely as such, as one
particular fixed hour of the day for Christians to meet together does attend
the time and place of their Worship, but one particular prefixed hour is but a
circumstance of the action of meeting as such, and so no essential circumstance
of Worship, as time and place is, for another hour may serve as well, but
without the circumstances of time and place the Worship it self cannot be. And
notwithstanding Mr. Allen tells us plainly, that artificial Tunes, Meter and
Rhyme, are not essential to singing, yet I perceive that he himself in effect
makes them essential to it: For he says, that it is his Opinion, that to sing in
Rhyme and Meter is more easy to be performed in an harmonious and regular
manner than in prose, and that singing in artificial tunes is requisite for the
more regular performance of it. Now is not that which is requisite for the more
regular performing of that Worship essential to it, seeing it is not so regular
without it? Surely, if artificial Tunes, Rhyme and Meter, are either his Rule,
or make his Rule of Singing, whatever it be more perfect for that Worship, they
must needs belong unto it, and be essential to the more complete performance of
it, than without those modes and circumstances.

Sixthly, To me it seems plain, that Mr. Allen's terms of accidental modes
and circumstances are only to gild over his Error, that our People may the
easier swallow it down, and how much he writes after the Copy of the Church of
England, in the preface to the Book of Common Prayer, appears from the
following Citation out of it: For it is there said, That the particular forms of
Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed to be used therein,
being things in their own nature indifferent and alterable, and so
acknowledged, it is but reasonable that upon weighty and important
Considerations, according to the various exigency of Times, and Occasions, such
Changes and Alterations should be made therein, as to those that are in place
of Authority, should from time to time seem either necessary or expedient. And
concerning their Ceremonies that have had their beginning by the Institution of
Man, it is there further said, That those that remain are retained for
Discipline and Order, which (upon just causes) may be altered and changed, and
therefore are not to be esteemed equal with God's Law. From whence I Observe,

1. That as it is 'said the particular Forms of the Service of the Church of
England are things in their own nature indifferent and alterable, so Mr. Allen
makes his singing in Rhyme and Meter, and by artificial Tunes, but indifferent
things, that are alterable; for he says, that singing the Divine Praises may be
performed without them, as well as a Person may be rightly baptized after
another manner than with his face upward, page 13, and 82.

2. That as the Ceremonies of the Church of England, originally instituted by
Man, are for Discipline and Order, so Mr. Allen says, That all the accidental
Modes and Circumstances of Divine Worship must be ordered suitable to the
general Rules thereof, viz. (says he) so as may be most for Order and
Edification, page 81.

3. As the Ceremonies of the Church of England are not to be esteemed equal
with God's Law, so Mr. Allen calls his ways of singing in rhyme and meter, and
by artificial tunes [with conjoined voices] but accidental modes, and
[circumstances] that he asserts are not equal with the essential parts of
Divine Worship prescribed in the Word of God.

4. The same Scripture that is used in the preface to the Book of Common Prayer
for their Ceremonies, is used in Mr. Allen's Essay, page 88. for his mode of
singing in artificial tunes, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and
in order; which to understand otherwise than of the Order and Decency
prescribed in the Word, and before laid down in the Rule of Worship, in the
same Chapter, is a Subversion of the Word of God.

5. I may also add, That as the Church of England did formerly press their
Forms and Ceremonies of Worship, under the Notion of indifferent things, upon
the Consciences of the Dissenters, who by no means could be made to swallow
them down, though gilded over with their Terms; so though Mr. Allen has declared
against imposing of his accidental modes and circumstances of Worship, yet he
and his Companions have so far followed the former steps of the Church of
England, as to press their modes and circumstances, which they own are no
essential parts of Gospel Worship, so hard upon our Churches, as to occasion
many Troubles and Distractions among us. So that Mr. Allen and his five
Companions agree so well with the Preface to the Book of Commonprayer, about
the nature of humane modes and circumstances of Worship, that we have reason to
believe they have learnt their Notions from the Church of England, whereby they
are infecting our Churches with such Principles as will naturally lead them to
conform at least to their worship.

Seventhly, I shall take some Notice of what Mr. Allen refers us to in page 81.
Where he tells us, that he has shown the Difference between the parts of Divine
Worship, and the accidental modes and ways of its performance, in his foregoing
-- page 15. And in page 47. speaking of those accidental modes and
circumstances of Divine Worship as are not particularly prescribed in the Word,
he says, That there are many such, every one must needs know, whereof some
instances (says he) have been given, page 15. where I find Mr. Allen
mentions the three following particulars.

1. He there says, For a Man to provide for his Family all I presume (says
he) will grant to be a Christian, yea, a Moral Duty, but it is at the Liberty of
every man's choice in what just way he does it, whether by the use of this or
the other Art or Trade.

Answer. What is this to our case of Divine Worship? because every man has
liberty to choose and use what lawful Art or Trade he pleases, for the
maintenance of his Family, therefore must Christians have so great a Liberty to
choose and practice what accidental modes and circumstances of Worship they
please? If this be granted, then if our Churches please they may practice not
only common Singing, but the Common Service of the Church of England,
Common Prayer, Common Baptism, or Sprinkling of Infants, Common Gossips to
Answer for them, Kneeling at the Altar, and at Confession and Absolution,
Bowing to the East and Name of Jesus, and may set up Organs for their Publik
Worship, and a heap of other Ceremonies that were never appointed by Jesus
Christ, but accidentally happened from the Errors and Inventions of Men, who do
thereby virtually deny that Christ has left his Gospel Church complete
Directions in the Holy Scripture for the Worship of God.

2. He there faith, in page 15. It Is the Duty of Ministers to Preach the
Gospel, for the Conversion of Sinners, and the Edification of Believers; but
none (says he) I suppose will affirm it is so, to preach it in this or the
other particular way or method.

Answ. Having published my mind concerning Preaching, in my Reply to Mr.
Benjamin Keach 's Breach Repaired, page 75, 76. and 119, to 123. and it being
too large to recite here, I shall refer my Reader thither for further
Satisfaction, if it be desired, and only here say, That though I greatly
disapprove of Pre-stinted Forms of Words in Preaching, yet there is some
difference in Scripture between the case of Preaching and modes of Praises or
Prayer. However, it is not at the liberty of preachers to unite their Voices
together in that Service; and if any argue for a Pre-stinted Form of Preaching,
it is no Example for a liberty of modes, or for a Pre-stinted Form of Singing:
If it be, Why not for a Pre-stinted Form of Prayer also, which they may equally
bring it for? And till they answer me this Argument, there is no need of any
other. 2 Timothy 1.13. and 2.15. and 4.5. 1 Cor. 2.13. and 4.6. 1 Timothy 4.13, 15.

3. Mr. Allen, in the same page, says of Water Baptism, That the Dipping of
Believers, is Essential to it, but there are (says he) different accidental
modes wherein it may be administered, which are at the liberty of the
Administrator to choose.

Answ. There are no modes nor circumstances of that Ordinance but what are
Essential to the right and complete performance of it, for such modes and
circumstances that are left to the liberty of the Administrator, viz. whether
to Dip the Person with his Face upward or downward, are no modes nor
circumstances of or belonging to the Ordinance it self, because the complete
performance of it is not tied to the use of either of them; and therefore,
though the Administrator has liberty to make them modes and circumstances of
the Action of Dipping, yet not as of or Essentially belonging to that
Ordinance, because neither of them are prescribed in the Word, and that
Ordinance may be performed without any one, or either of those modes and
circumstances.

Thus I have discovered the Weakness of Mr. Allen's Arguments, or Instances to
justify his accidental modes and circumstances of Singing, to be left to the
liberty of a Church; which Notion, in my Opinion, his own Pen does also
confound and clearly overthrow; for in page 58. he asserts, That though the
Light of Nature be sufficient (if duly attended to) to teach us, that we ought
to use all our Faculties for the Glory of our Creator and Benefactor; yet I
count it not so perfect a Guide as sufficiently to instruct us what peculiar
faculties we should exert in stated Church-worship, or how we should use them
therein, without the more perfect Guidance of the Word. Now if this be true, as
I firmly believe it is, then surely to leave to the Liberty of a Church,
according as Mr. Allen says, to warrant the practice of his unscriptural and
accidental modes and circumstances, and consequently his practice of singing,
which from his Confessions is showed to be no essential part of Divine Worship,
is to leave a mere humane Invention to the Liberty of the insufficient Guide of
the Light within, to be warranted and used for Gospel Worship. But as our
Savior says, That In vain they do worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, Mat. 15.9. So the Reformation from Popery brake forth, and
was maintained by the Light and Authority of the Holy Scriptures, which the
Faithful Saints and Martyrs of Christ embraced, in opposition to all the
Ceremonies and Inventions of Men, rejecting all things in the Worship of God
and Administrations of Gospel Ordinances, which they believed were not
prescribed in his Word, as has been particularly showed in my last Treatise.
Besides, we have the Testimony of the Servants of Christ in this last age, who
declare in their Printed Confessions of Faith, viz. in the Presbyterians,
Independants, and Baptists Confessions of Faith, (to which last is Mr. William
Collins's Name) where in Article 21, 22. they say, That the acceptable way of
worshipping the true God, is instituted by himself, and so limited by (or to)
his own revealed Will, that he may not be worshipped according to the
Imaginations and Devices of Men, or the Suggestion of Satan, under any visible
Representations, (mark the following words) or any other way not prescribed in
the Holy Scriptures. Which in Article 1. they say, are the Supreme Judge, by
which all Controversies of Religion are to be determined. So that Mr. Allen's
Principle of the Liberty and Power of a Gospel Church, to order and warrant
their own practice of unprescribed modes of Divine Worship as she pleases, does
strike at a Foundation-principle of ours, and the Protestants Reformation more
in general.

Eighthly, I desire it may be duly considered, how our singing Brethren are
driven from refuge to refuge, and at last have had their Practice of singing
clearly confuted from their own Confessions: For those Elders and Ministers
whose Names are set to the Reply to Mr. Robert Steed's Epistle, among whom are
set the Names of some of our aforesaid Ministers, viz. Joseph Masters, William
Collins, and also R. Allen, in page 8. they say, That such was the Singing of
God's People under the Law, ( viz. with voices lift up together) and the
Churches are enjoined to sing Psalms in the New Testament, and no other way
prescribed or laid down how they should sing. Ergo, (say they) the Churches are
now to sing in the times of the Gospel, as God's People under the Law. And they
farther say, in page 24. That though Music and Singing-men ceased when Christ
came, yet singing did not cease, -- because (say they) it is part of Moral and
Natural Religion, and therefore a standing Ordinance. From whence we may
Observe, That notwithstanding the stir they have made about the Singing we find
in the New Testament, and of Christ and his Disciples, and of Paul and Silas
singing together, yet we may plainly see from their own Words, that they do not
rely upon Gospel-Evidence as sufficient, to justify their way of singing; and
finding no countenance for their Practice, from any Example or Institution
under the Law, they flee for help to their natural Light within, to make their
Singing a standing Ordinance. And though Mr. Allen and his five Commendators, in
their Essay and Vindication of it, make a flutter, as if they had found
something in the Psalms of David for their singing with conjoined Voices,
(which I have showed proves nothing of it) yet they still stick to the
insufficient Guide of the Light within, the major part of a Church, as their
warrant for the prectice of it. So that if we consider their way of singing
with conjoined voices, artificial tunes, and rhyme, and meter, which they own
are not prescribed in the New Testament, and as Mr. Allen shows are no
essential parts of singing, and so no parts at all of Divine Worship, it cannot
from their own Confessions be a Gospel-Ordinance, because they own it is neither
contained in the New Testament, nor is any part of Gospel Worship. And
therefore I hope Mr. Allen and his five Companions (with the rest of our
Singing Brethren) will neither plead for it, nor practice it any longer, seeing
they have no better Warrant for that Worship than the insufficient Guide of the
Light within, the major part of a Gospel Church, which is nothing more than
what may be said for a thousand Humane Inventions more.

Therefore seeing their own Pens has thus overthrown the whole of their way of
singing, (except their prestinted Form of Words, and this also until they have
found some other tune to sing them by than what are artificial) and that Mr.
Allen says in page 82. in distinctinction to his accidental modes of Singing,
that it is singing the Divine Praises it self (which he there says may be done
without those Modes) in a proper Sense, viz. vocally, that he asserts to be a
Christian Duty; if he and his Commendators will stand by these their plain
Confessions and Assertions, I hope our Controversy is not only brought to an
End, but also will be quickly ended. For we reject as no Essentials of Divine
Worship, all that they would have us believe they have so rejected, as before
is showed: And we do assert, Singing the Divine Praises it self in a proper
sense to be a Christian Duty, but depending on an extraordinary Gift (or
Fullness and Enrichings of the Word and Spirit) as other extraordinary ways of
delivering the Word of God in the Apostles time, with strange Tongues and
Interpretations, etc. did, and so all the difference between them and us, so
far as I can see at present, is, That they assert Singing prestinted forms of
Praise, etc. to be a Duty, and at present are so far in the dark how it should
be performed, as effectually to tell us, that their manner, ways and practice
of Singing, is not prescribed in the Word of God, but that it is at the
Liberty, and in the power of a Church to warrant their own practice thereof as
they please.

But we say, That that Rule of Gospel Worship in 1 Cor. 14.15, 16, 26, etc.
which they subject unto for other parts of Divine Worship mentioned with the
Psalm, as alike pertaining to it, though they will not sing by it, with a single
voice: This, we say, gives as clear Directions how, and in what mode or manner
Singing should be performed in a Gospel Church, as for the delivering other
Gifts of the Holy Splrit. Besides, we are not in the dark about it, as they
are, but can, and have already, again and again clearly showed them from the
Light of the New Testament, that both the matter and the melody of
Gospel-Singing was as the Spirit gave them utterance, and it was a kind of Duty
exhorted unto, as the Saints were exhorted to covet after other extraordinary
Gifts of the Holy Spirit, and so was not commanded as an absolute continual
Ordinance, but as a Circumstantial and Additional Duty to the great Ordinance
of Thanksgiving and Praising of God, and of Teaching and Admonishing, which
were performed by the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit, which Ordinances
themselves still remain to be Ordinances, and are to be performed in an
ordinary ministration, without the additional mode of Singing, while we have
not such an Additional Gift as the Primitive Christians had, till God may
please to adorn his Worship again with it, by a fresh effusion of his Holy
Spirit, and then Singing will be a Duty to those that are qualified for it, and
for all to seek after, as after the perfection of Gifts and Graces for Private
and Public Worship.

Ninthly, To conclude on the aforesaid matters, Seeing our Antagonists are in
Effect, Sum and Substance, brought to these Acknowledgments, viz. That there
is no way prescribed or laid down in the New Testament how they should sing, i.
e. for their manner of Singing with conjoined Voices, Artificial Tunes, and
Rhyme, and Meter, and that they have no sufficient Warrant in the Scripture,
nor from the Natural Light within, to make those modes of Singing which are
practiced as Divine Worship, any Essential Parts thereof.

I propose it to the Judgment of all Sober and Judicious Christians, whether
their Confessions do not clearly demonstrate they are convinced in their
Consciences, that their practice of Singing is a mere Humane Invention? and
whether if Mr. Allen or any of his five Commendators do either practice it, or
open their mouths for it, as a Gospel Ordinance or a Christian Duty, they may
not be fairly charged from the Testimony of their own Pens with Will Worship,
or to act or speak against the Light of their own Consciences? And if they
trouble our Churches further with it, and their Popish Principle of the Liberty
and Power of a Gospel Church, on which they ground their Warrant for their way
of Singing, whether there will not be reason at least to suspect, that for some
outward Interest more than for Conscience sake, they are turning Adversaries
against the true Interest of the Baptists Churches, and wilful Betrayers of our
Reformation, and are laying the Foundation among us of a grand Apostasy in
Divine Worship? And considering that Mr. Allen and his five Companions in
Defense of their Singing Worship, have given us Ground to fear they design to
alter our Churches Settlement, and to new model them; and seeing the Light and
Power of Truth has forced their own Pens to crumble their cause to nothing, or
to such a point as may be fairly drawn from their own Confessions and Practice,
which they have cause to be ashamed of, viz. That those accidental modes and
circumstances of singing, and many others that are not particularly prescribed
in the Word of God, and (as they say) are no Essential Parts thereof, nor of
Divine Worship, are left to the Liberty of the Insufficient Guide of the Light
within, the major part of a Gospel Church, to warrant their own Practice of, as
Divine Worship, or as Essential Parts thereof, so as she shall judge most for
Edification. I hope therefore it is a seasonable Request, that they will at last
show themselves to be such good Christians, and real Friends to that
Foundation-Principle which they have struck at, as before is showed, of the
Protestants Reformation in general, and to the Baptized Churches in particular,
as under a due Sense of the wrong they have done our Profession, and the shame
they have brought upon it, to labor to heal their wounds, to confirm the minds
of their Brethren whom they have shaken, and to satisfy all that are
concerned, with sincere Acknowledgements of their Errors, and Hearty Assurances
that hereafter they will join with their Brethren against all Innovations in
Gospel Worship, and Defilements of Humane Inventions whatsoever: And in so
doing, our Churches will have cause to give thanks to God for their Recovery.
And their Objection against my present being no Member of any Church, (the
occasion whereof is so well known, as that they do not, neither can they justly
blame me for it) I hope will quickly be removed, for excepting some of them
(whose Churches differ in Profession, and are not in Comnion with the rest of
their Churches as I know of) it is they and other Singers that have so muddied
the Communion of their Churches, that I cannot with Satisfaction of Conscience
join my self to any of them until I see a Reformation.

The foregoing matters being concluded, I shall now proceed to answer Mr.
William Collins's Defense, at the end of Mr. Allen's Vindication of his Essay:
But before I treat thereof, I shall here premise, That the practice of singing
with united voices of Men and Women, Professors and Profane, in the Worship of
God, in his Gospel Church, being first preached up, and vehemently pressed upon
us by several of our Brethren, and asserted in Print to the view of all men, I
thought it necessary for the preservation of the Peace and Purity of the
Baptized Churches, to present them with some Arguments against that way of
Worship; which notwithstanding they were offered in a Christian manner, and
were consonant to the Principles of our Churches, yet several of our Singers
have appeared in print against me, in such a subtle Spirit of Injustice, Deceit
and Lying, as has cost me much Labor, Time and Money, out of my own private
Purse to maintain the Truth and Common Cause and Interest of our Churches, from
being crushed by them, an Account whereof has been already given in Print, so
far as has been thought sufficient to answer the Calls of Providence, and to
clear my Books from those false Representations of my Principles about Singing,
gross Abuses and foul Untruths published in Mr. Keach's Breach Repaired, and
other Pamphlets, in wrong to me and my Printed Treatises; which Abuses being
justly charged upon him and them in Print, many of them under the Hands of
several Pastors of Churches, and several particular things by nine other
Brethren, they still remain unanswered, on so clear a Record, as that they have
not since in more than four years time appeared in vindication of themselves:
And the reason why they have not done it may easily be perceived, for the
matter charged upon them is in their own Books, and so cannot be stifled from
the knowledge of any that will take the Trouble to look into it. But to
proceed, my chief Business being to give an Answer to Mr. William Collins's
Defense, and to clear my self from his Slander, I shall here recite Mr.
Collins's Words, which are the ground of my Charge against him, and are as
follows: Says he,

The Author which Mr. M. cites out of Marlorate on Mat. 26.30. pretends it is
uncertain with what words they praised God; that is, whether it was with the
common Passover Hymn, or some other of Christ's own, which might be more
suitable to the occasion, and whether they saug this Praise, or spoke it
simply; the following Words of the Author not being well rendered by Mr. Timme,
I shall set down, they are these, Graecum verbum laudem quidem, maxim quae Deo
debetur; includit, non autem necessario evincit, quod cecinerint; i. e. The
Greek Word indeed includes praise, chiefly that which is due to God, but
undoubtedly it does evince that they sang. 1. From the genuine signification of
the Original Word. And, 2. From the Current of Learned men, who go this way.

Thus the Latin was falsely Englished, for it should be as it was afterward
altered by them in a few of those Books, but it does [not] necessarily evince
that they sang; which is the same in sense as my Author Mr. Timme reads it,
viz. but it does not thereupon follow that they did sing it. Now as to the
Correction that was made (after this Abuse was taken notice of abroad) the
whole Paragraph was not taken away, as it ought to have been, neither was the
former part of it at all altered, which discovers the Design of Mr. Collins to
deceive his unlearned Reader with a false Translation of the Latin, as plainly
appears from the Paragraph. 1. Because for Mr. Collins to tell us, that Mr.
Timme had not well rendered Marlorate's Latin, when he had rendered his true
sense, he must needs do it on purpose to deceive his unlearned Reader with his
false translation of it; for otherwise seeing Mr. Timme had done it in the
right sense, there was no need at all for Mr. Collins to write that Paragraph
against him. 2. If the word [not] had only been left out in Mr. Collins's
English, we might have imputed it to be the Printers fault; but we also find
that Mr. Collins says, that Mr. Timme pretended it is uncertain, whether they
sang that Praise, or spoke it simply, and then in contradiction to him, he
asserts, That undoubtedly it does evince that they sang. 3. It Is plain that the
word [not] was left out, on purpose to deceive the unlearned Reader, because
there is no Reason to believe, that Mr. Collins did design positively to affirm
from Marlorate's Latin, That Christ and his Disciples did not sing the Hymn
after Supper, by translating the Latin falsely, to give an undoubted Testimony
against his own Cause, but to make his unlearned Reader believe that
undoubtedly they did sing, when he knew in his Conscience that the Latin
leaves it undetermined, saying only, That it does not necessarily evince or
show that they sang, Mat. 26.30.

Moreover, I well remember, that I told Mr. Collins, between him and me alone,
of his abusing my Author, and he excused it with laying the fault upon the
Printer; but I answered, that though Printers sometimes correct Words, yet they
never use to add a whole Paragraph to their Authors Books; and therefore I
said, it looked like a designed Abuse, to which he made me no answer, and so we
parted.

And as to the Correction that was made in some few of those Books, to cover
the Deceit from me at first, it was not of the former part of the Paragraph,
for the alteration began at the last Clause of the Englishing the Latin. And I
have yet reason to complain, that it was no sufficient satisfaction for the
wrong done me, because some time after it was told me that this Abuse was
corrected, I desired my Brother Mr. Luke Leader to go to Mr. Keach for one of
them, and my Brother testifies that Mr. Keach took down several of those Books
from off the Shelf, before he could find one that was corrected; and to my own
knowledge since it was pretended they were corrected, some of those Books were
in other places exposed to public sale uncorrected. Besides, I have also seen,
and can produce two others of those Books, that are testified to be lately
bought at Mr. Keach's, or of his Daughters, that sold them in their Shop in the
months of June and July last, 1696. that have this abuse remaining in them
uncorrected, in the last leaf of the Book, which might easily have been removed
if they would. Having thus recited the matter of Fact, though not in the same
Order as it was printed before, I shall here take some notice of Mr. Collins's
Defense that he makes for himself, at the end of Mr. Alllen's Vindication of
his Essay. And,

1. I Observe, that Mr. Collins owns that he wrote that sheet of Paper, viz. at
the end of Mr. Keach's Breach repaired.

2. He acknowledges there was a false Translation of a Latin Passage in it,
but says, that this was done by the Overseer of the Press, who altered the
truth of his Translation: And by this he also owns himself to be the Author of
that Paragraph, the former part whereof, which proves that he designed to make
that false Translation, he makes no Answer to.

3. He tells us that he strictly enjoined the Author of the Book, ( viz. Mr.
Benjamin Keach) that the leaf wherein it was should be reprinted, and that a
Letter was immediately sent to me, to let me know that this false Translation
was not in his Copy; and yet notwithstanding this that I falsely in Print charge
him with this Translation: And he also says, that this willful Sin he laid to
my Charge, before an Assembly of Elders and Messengers at Devonshire-Square
Meeting House some years ago, where being Self-condemned, (as he says) I had,
to the best of his remembrance, nothing to say in my own Defense. This being
the Sense and Substance of Mr. Collins's Defense, my Answer follows. And,

1. To what he says of a Letter being sent me, I must return him this Answer,
viz. That I have not the least knowledge of any such Letter that was ever sent
me, or came to my Hands, from him or any other Person whatsoever, concerning
that matter: But if it had been so, yet his Evidence in this case had been no
better than what he has now presented to us in print, and is disproved by the
former part of his own Paragraph, which is as clear a Testimony, as if there
had been an hundred personal Witnesses against him: And therefore, the main
part of his Defense, which is that he corrected the English, and added the word
[not] which was left out, does not at all clear him from my charge, grounded on
the former part of his Paragraph, viz. That he wrote it, and consequently did
falsely English that Latin, on purpose to abuse my Author, and deprive his
unlearned Reader of that sound Testimony of the true signification of the Greek
Word Hymneo, in Mat. 26.30. In the next place my business is to clear my self
from the latter part of Mr. Collins's Defense, where he says, that this willful
Sin ( viz. of charging him with this false Translation) he laid to my Charge
before an Assembly of Elders and Messengers at Devonshire-square Meeting House,
some years ago; where being self-condemned, as he says, I had, to the best of
his Remembrance, nothing to say in my own Defense. To which I Answer,

1. That that Assembly of Elders and Messengers at Devonshire-square
Meeting House, which Mr. Collins speaks of, was in the Year 1692. and was the
first time that such a general Assembly met in that place, that ever I heard
of, or was concerned with, and since that I have not been present at any such
Assembly; and therefore what Mr. Collins asserts concerning my
self-condemnation, cannot relate to any other time.

2. Through the unrighteous Clamor and Influence of Mr. William Collins and
Mr. Benjamin Keach, with the help of some of their Friends, the Names of my two
Books, or Reply and Nartive bound up in one Book, in answer to Mr. Keach, were
printed in a Paper, to which was put the Names of seven Brethren, who in that
Paper determined, That none of the Members of the Churches do buy, give or
disperse any of these Books, (say they) aforesaid under writ. But as my Name
was not at all mentioned in that printed Paper, so there was no particular
matter or thing charged in it on me, or any of my Books, in wrong to any Person
or Books whatsoever. Besides, in the same printed Paper, those seven Brethren
did there own, that they had not seen my Books, which they had there censured,
and determined that I should call them in, and leave them to their dispose,
insomuch as it does appear that this sower contrivance (of foisting the Names
of my Books in at the end of that Paper, which propely concerned other Persons
and Books therein named, and not mine, which they own they had not then seen)
was not to relieve Mr. Keach and Mr. Collins from any wrong done to them by me,
or any of my Books, but to stifle my Testimony for the truth that was then
coming forth, in my large Reply to Mr. Keach's Breach repaired, and that his
Abusive Book might have the freer course to advance their singing among the
Churches. Therefore I desire it may be well considered, whether there is any
reason to believe that I was self-condemned for falsely accusing Mr. William
Collins, when those seven Brethren in their printed paper laid no particular
matter or thing, in wrong to any person, unto my charge: Nor does Mr. Collins
in his Defense pretend they did. What reason then is there to imagine, that at
the same time I should in apparent wrong to my self, condemn my self?
especially considering, that as soon as I could (after I had knowledge that my
Books were so abused in that paper by those seven Brethren) I drew up and
printed some Remarks on it, in vindication of my self, and to clear my Books
from that Injustice, which Remarks have never yet been answered. Surely
therefore this carries a demonstration that I was not self-condemned, and that
Mr Collins's Assertion of it is a contrived Lie, a Confirmation whereof you
have as follows.

AT the Request of Mr. Isaac Marlow, who desired me to testify what I remember
of what past in the General Assembly of the Messengers of the Baptized
Churches, in they year 1692. concerning him, I do hereby declare, that I do
remember there was then some Discourse that passed from him and Mr. William
Collins, about some matter of Difference between them two: But I do not
remember that there was any thing spoken to Mr. Marlow aforesaid, by the Elders
and Brethren then present, by which it might seem as if they judged him
self-condemned: And I do believe they did not see any reason to charge him with
the same, neither was there any conclusion made by them against him, tending to
any such thing; for had there been such an apprehension and conclusion about
him, it would be inserted in the Narrative of their Proceedings, that was
published of that Assembly; in which all that peruse it will se there was no
such thing charged on him. In Witness whereof I have set my Hand this 29th. of
the 8th. Month, 1696.

William Kiffin. [a Pastor]

THese are to certify whom it may concern, that I was at the Assembly of
Elders and Messengers held at Devonshire-square Meeting House, in the year
1692. and heard the matter indifference debated between Mr. William Collins and
Mr. Isaac Marlow, and Mr. Marlow did stand firmly to what he had written and
printed in his Book. And I also declare, that I do not remember that I heard
Mr. Marlow say any thing in order to Self-condemnation; (had there been such a
thing declared by him, I do not question but I should have heard it fully
improved against him) nor that the Assembly or any part who acted by the
Authority of the whole, did charge Mr. Marlow or any of his Books, with doing
any wrong to any Person or Books whatsoever.

Witness my Hand October. 10. 1696.

Hugh Smith. [a Minister]

Whereas it is desired that we should give some brief account in relation to a
particular case concerning Mr. Isaac Marlow's being self-condemned at an
Assembly of Elders and Messengers at Devonshire-square Meeting House, in the
year 1692. for falsely charging Mr. William Collins with a false translation of
some Latin, we do hereby testify, that we were in that Assembly, where we
heard Mr. William Collins mention something concerning Mr. Timme, and a false
translation of a piece of Latin, which he said was the Printers fault; but
though we were there concerned as Messengers and Members of that Assembly, yet we
know of nothing that passed there from Mr. Isaac Marlow, that had any tendence
to his selfcondemnation; but contrary wise the said Mr. Marlow did strongly
persist in his own vindication. And we farther testify, that that Assembly,
nor any part thereof, that acted by their appointment, did neither charge Mr.
Marlow nor any of his Books, with any particular thing in wrong to any Person
or Books whatsoever that we remember.

Witness our Hands, Robert Steed. [a Pastor] John Scot. [a Pastor]

I Being desired, have here drawn up the truth of what I know concerning the
case of Self-condemnation, which Mr. William Collins asserts that Mr. Isaac
Marlow was under, and I testify as follows, viz. That I was at the Assembly
of Elders and Messengers, at Devonshire-square Meeting House, in the year 1692.
where on Mr. William Collins and Mr. Benjamin Keach's Reflections on Mr. Isaac
Marlow, the said Mr. Mnrlow did earnestly desire that his Books might be
examined, and did there freely promise, that if they could show, that he had
done any wrong to any, or committed any mistake, he would make full
satisfaction; but no particular abuse or wrong was alleged by the aforesaid
Assembly, or any acting by their Order against the said Mr. Marlow, who there
stood firmly and instantly in his own vindication: And in all the frequent
converse I have had with him, both before and since, I never found any thing
like self-condemnation in him about those things; and therefore I greatly
wonder that Mr. William Collins should dare to assert that Mr. Marlow was
self-condemned, seeing all his words and actions showed plainly and absolutely
the contrary: I cannot therefore but conclude, that that assertion of Mr.
Collins is an untruth, against the Light of his own Conscience, for which great
Evil I desire the Lord would give him true repentance.

Witness my Hand, October. 12. 1696.

Luke Leader.

Moreover, this Mr. William Collins (with an other Person) is named in the
aforesaid printed Paper, as one that was to Answer for the slander raised on
our first Baptized Churches, in their Reply to Mr. Robert Steed's Epistle,
where it is said, page 9. We ask you whether or no generally the same Baptized
Churches, in those times, did not as unanimously conclude, and declare it too,
that for a Gospel Minister to have a yearly allowance, or a competent
maintenance, was an humane Invention, and Antichristian? We speak in part upon
our own knowledge, and by good Information we have had from others, that both
those Gospel Duties and Ordinances were equally decryed; ( viz. Singing with
voices together, and Ministers maintenance)

To this Mr. William Kiffin, Mr. Robert Steed, Mr. George Barrat, and Mr.
Edward Man, ancient Pastors of Churches, in their printed Answer, page 17, 18.
say, To this Charge we answer, That nothing can be more falsely asserted, or
more slanderously uttered: -- What the judgment of those Churches in their
first constitution was, concerning the maintenance of Ministers, may be seen in
the 38th. Article, (of their Confession of Faith, printed in the year 1644.) in
these Words, We do believe that the due maintenance of Ministers should be the
free and voluntary communication of the Church, that according to Christ's
Ordinance, they that preach the Gospel should live on the Gospel, etc. Likewise
at the end of my printed Narrative nine other Brethren have cited this Article
out of those Churches Confession of Faith, and have given their public
Testimony against the aforesaid Slander, which was not only published with the
Authority of Mr. William Collins's name, but he by his own agreement obliged
himself as a Person particularly to answer for it, as appears in the aforesaid
printed Paper, wherein those seven Brethren condemned that slander as a great
wrong to the first baptized Churches: And I see no reason why Mr. William
Collins as well as his Fellow Singer, that was equally concerned with him,
should not have been required, as he was, to make the same acknowledgment of
his Error. And if Mr. Collins should say, that he was not required to make an
acknowledgment of his evil in that slander, because the fault was the other
Persons alone, and therefore it was laid on him only: I answer, that Mr.
Collins, etc. in that slander says, We speak in part upon our own knowledge,
and by good information we have had from others, etc. which being expressed in
the plural number, includes more than one Person; and Mr. William Collins
having submitted himself as the other, to answer for it, he must also be taken
for one of the two principal Authors of that Slander, which was condemned as
aforesaid. So that had those seven Brethren been more impartial, (some of whom
I believe are sincere Christians, though surprised and drawn aside to cover the
designs of subtle heads for singing) we might have had less occasion now to
have treated on these matters.

Which to conclude, seeing Mr. William Collins, for the sake of his
Singing-worship, has made himself guilty of so foul a slander on our first
baptized Churches, it is the less wonder that I and some of my Authors should
meet with such evil Treatment from him; and to find his name (with his four
Companions) to recommend Mr. Allens aforesad Cheat about the Hebrew Rhyme, and
to other unfair matters: For which public Failings, and all other Sins, I
desire he may have the Grace of true Repentance given to him, that his sins may
be blotted out, when the times of refreshment shall come from the presence of
the Lord.

Moreover, Forasmuch as Mr. Allen and his five Companions have so far followed
the Steps of their Fellow-Champions that went before them in this controversy,
as to set their Names in print, (as before is showed) to such Deceit and Error,
that cannot be justified by any of them, I think our People have no reason to
regard their writings of it, nor to credit their public Testimonies. And I
hope those Churches that are particularly concerned, will in Obedience to
Christ, and for Truths sake, discourage that Spirit of Deceit and Lying, that
has appeared in defense of the common way of singing, and is an evident sign of
its being false Worship, that so the failings of particular Persons may not
become their Churches Sin and Shame unto Posterity: And that they and other
Churches will be watchful against the mischief of false Worship, even where it
is not practiced. For while any of our Churches which do not practice the
common way of singing, hold Communion at the Lords Table knowingly, with any of
their Members that practice it with other People, such Churches defile their
Separation in the same nature as if they had Communion with a whole Church that
practiced the same, and lay a foundation of Ruin to their own Reformanion from
false worship; for if it be lawful by the Word of God, for a Church to have
such full Communion knowingly with one Person that practices false Worship
with other Christians, why not with ten Persons, and with a whole Church that
practices the same Worship? and if this be lawful, then why may they not so
hold Communion with the same false Worship (or with false Worshippers
respecting that particular) practiced in their own Church, as well as with
another Church that is in the practice of it. So that the natural consequence
if followed, of a Churches allowing full Communion at the Lords Table with one
person that practices false Worship, leads to the bringing of it into use
among themselves, and so to ruin their Separation and Reformation. And if any
say, that such a strict Discipline as I am for, will hazard the breaking or
dividing of many of our Churches about London: My Answer is, That if so, it is
chiefly to be attributed to our singing Elders and Ministers, that have so far
corrupted them, that they cannot bear a thorough Separation and Reformation,
and then we may see what sad work they have made among us. The Lord awaken his
People unto Righteousness, and supply the want of true Reformers, that I and
others who have walked in Church Communion for many years, which at present are
unsettled, may to our Comfort in the Bosom of a pure and completely constituted
Church of Christ, leave this World when our appointed time is come.

And that none of our Churches may be under the Conduct of such a Treacherous
Popish Principle of the Liberty and Power of a Gospel Church, as appears in Mr.
Allen and his five Companions, which does not only cast contempt upon the
Sufferings of the Saints for Reformation in Divine Worship, but openly
confronts the Confessions of the Protestant Dissenters in this Nation, and is a
shame unto those six Ministers that have broached it among the Baptists
Churches.

Isaac Marlow.
London, December 1. 1696.
FINIS.

