Whitehall, June 7. 1697. The Mail from Holland of Friday last arrived this
Afternoon; though that of Tuesday the first of this Month is not yet come in.
Published by Authority.

Geneva, May 26. N. S.

THe last Advices we have received from Provence give an account, That 12 Men
of War lay ready at Thoulon, and 32 Galleys at Marteslies, being all ordered to
fail toward Barcelona. The Cardinal of Bouillon, who came in one of the Great
Dukes Galleys from Marseilles, landed two days ago at Savona, and arrived have
yesterday in his way to Rome.

Venice, May ^1. The Ban of Cro^ has sent to Sigm^r Mocenigo, who commands the
Venetian Forces in Daimatis, to acquaint ^m, that in pursance of the Orders he
had received from the Emperor, he was upon his march with an Army of 24000. Men
to Be^ege the Fornes^ of Biharz, and to desire him to give the Turks at the
same time a Diversion on that Frontier. We have no fresh Letters from the
Levant.

Madrid, May 29. The King of Spain continues in very good Health; and the Queen
is recovered of her late Illness. We have an account from Barcelona, That the
French Army Rendevouses near Gironne, 28000 strong. The Spaniards are about
18000. Count Harach the Emperor's Envoy is arrived here.

Corunna, June 8. On the 22th of the last month came into this Port the
Elizabeth and Katherine, and the Speedwell, the first bound to Barbados, and
the other to Nevis, who came out with the West-I^^a Fleet; and the 26th they
failed again. On the 30th were seen off Cape Prior 14 great Ships standing to
the Westward.

Vienna, June I. The last Letters from Croatia give an account. That the great
Rains which had fallen in that Country had for several days retarded the Siege
of Bihatz, but the weather growing fair again, the Troops were on their march,
and they intended to invest the place the first of this month. General
Staremberg is forming a Camp near Verismarton. We have Advice that the Town of
Baya is burnt down, with the Magazine of Forage laid up there; every body
believes 'twas occasioned by Treachery.

Francfort, June 9. The Forces of the Allies continue in their Camps formerly
mentioned; The Regiments who have not yet joined them are on their march; it is
believed they Will in 3 or 4 days be all formed in one Body; And Prince Lewis
of Baden, who is at present at Ausburg, intends to go thence to morrow to the
Army. The Marechal de Choiscul is marched from his Camp at Neuistar nearer to
Mentz; His Army is about 30000 Men.

Mentz, June 10. The Forces of the Allies, which lay at ^nglmgen, marched from
thence yesterday to Cost^; where they are to pass the River Man^e, and after
(...) the Rhine, near this City, in order to Post them in our Neighborhood.
The French Army moves (...) way; Were yesterday at Lampensheim; and it is ^ght
they ins to posiess themselves of their old (...) at Ne^.

Cologne, Jan 11. Ten B^talions of the Lunenbu^g (...) pa^ the Rhine at Son and
Lintz the ^th and (...), and are marched toward Brabant; ^d the (...) the
Lunen^urg Tr^, and those of (...) intend pass the Rhine tomorow (...) ^and to
continue their march likewise to (...). They write (...) That P^ (...) was
expected in the Cont^ (...) on the (...) or 12th o^ this (...) which (...) then
march ^ds the (...) she ^ no other design (...)

(...) the Danish Forces, to the (...) Holmen Fort ^lon^g to the (...) not yet
made use or A^ry against the (...) mean time the Ende^ are (...) ters. Three
Ambassadors from the Czar of M^ fcovy arrived at Coningsberg the 27th past with
a nu^us Ketibenue, and had Audience of the Elector or ^and^ourg on the first
instant; and from thence they are to go to Vienna. The last Letters from Poland
lay, the ^r had not yet made choice of a Marshal, but in the mean time had
appointed a Gentleman, who was Marshal of the last Diet, to preside in their
Assembly; though nothing of great moment would be done till all the Gentry were
^r^ed.

Paris, June 10. Yesterday arrived here an ^press from the French Army in
Catalonia, whence he parted on the (...) of this month, and brings an account,
That the Spaniards upon the march of our Troops had put 6000 of their best Men
into Barcelona; and that the Duke de Vendo^me had invested that place; That the
Count^d Estree lay before the Port with a Squad ^n of Men of War from ^on; and
the Gali^es, who had been stop^ by bad weather at Balam^s, were daily expected,
They begin to have here but (...) hopes of the Prince of Con^i's succeeding in
his Prete^ions to the Crown of Poland; though tour Man's of Lives have been
already spent to promote this design and (...) more are promised after the
Election. An O^cer arrived here the 7th at night with the Arti^es (...) the
Surrender of Ath, which were signed the 5th of this month.

B^ussels, June 12. The Garrison of Ath, after the French had taken the Ravelin,
and made two Breaches in the Walls of the Town, and were preparing for a
General Assault, Capi^ulated the 5th in^ in the Evening, and the Articles after
some dispute being signed, the Garrison marched our the 7th in the morning with
Arms and Baggage, Drums Beating, Colors Flying, and other Marks of Honor, and
were conducted to Dendermond; but Marshall Catinat caused the Prince de Chimay
Colonel of Ho se, Lieutenant Colonel Catoire, a Major and two Captains to be
made Prisoners, on pretense of making Reprizi^s for the Hostages that were
stopped by the Allies at Namor^or Payment of the Debts the French had contracted
in that Town.

From His Majesty's Camp at Promelles, June 13. The Enemy remain still in their
Camps near Ath; O^ Tuesday they fired all their Cannon for the taking of that
Place. His Majesty saw put of the Army drawn our yesterday and will continue
the Review tomorrow. Brigadier Spar is sent with 4 Regiments to rei^f^rce the
Garrison of Audenarde, which contained of 3 before. The Tro^ps of Lunenburg are
come as far as M^c^triche and may join us the next week, several Dragon and
Fush^rs who have Deserted the F^e^ch Army within these 2 ^r 3 days, are come
hither with their Horses and Accoun^ments.

Hague, June 14. N. S. His Excellency Sir Joseph Williamson being arrived here
from Ro^ erdam, assisted on Wednesday at the Conference a^ Ryswick. On Thursday
^ait^ent out of the Texell ^on Dutch Men of War with the Mere^r Ships bound to
Sp^in and Portugal, We have Advice that cu Bar designs in few days to fall
with his Squadron from (...) kirk.

Plymouth, June 4. Yesterday came in the Lion of London, William. Sexton Master
from Antegoa, who reports, That before their leaving that Island, they had an
Account from Barbados, That Vice Admiral Nevill and Commadore M^s were both
come thir^, and joined on Saturday the 24th of April, being then 18 Men of War,
who ^er two days stay at Ba^es, were to fail for ^at, and there to meet and
Join two other ^h Men of War, and (...) that they would proceed (...) to look
for (...) Squadron. And he ^dds, That the (...) of t^ Islands, as ^at ^ama
(...) under no a^ (...) of the French, (...) was (...) to be against the
Spanish (...) at (...).

(...), with His Majesty's (...) Wal^ward.

Printed by Edw (...) in the S^voy. 1697.


