The Manner of Impeachment of the Twelve Bishops

The 12 Bishops
Jo. Abp of York Ths. Bp of Durham Joseph Bp of Norwich Rob. B. of Coventry and
Litchfield John B. of St. Asaph Wm B. of Bath and Wells Geo. B. of Hereford
Matthew B. of Ely Robt. B. of Oxford Godfrey B. of Gloucester John B. of
Peterborough Morgan B. of Llandaff


The manner of the Impeachment of the 12 Bishops, accused of High Treason.

For preferring a Petition and making a Protestation to the subverting of the
Fundamental Laws, and being of Parliaments.

Whereunto is added the said petition and Remonstrance of the said Bishops.

Printed at London, and reprinted at Edinburgh.

THe House of Lords was pleased on the 10. of December, to send a message to
the House of Commons by Sir John Banks, and Judge Reeves, to desire a present
conference by a Committee of both Houses, touching matters of dangerous and
high consequence.

And at the conference, the Lord Keeper in the name of the House of Peers
delivered, as follows.

That this Petition and Protestation of the twelve Bishops, containing matter
of high and dangerous consequence, and such as my Lords are very sensible of,
and such as require a speedy and sudden resolution: It extending to the deep
intrinching upon the fundamental privileges and being of Parliaments.
Therefore the Lords have thought fit, that this matter concerning the whole
Parliament may be communicated to the House of Commons; it being a thing of so
great and so general concernment.

This being thus communicated to the House of Commons, they came to this
resolution, to accuse these twelve Bishops of high Treason, for endeavoring to
subvert the fundamental Laws and being of Parliaments.

And Master Glynne was ordered to go to the Lords, and at their bar in the
name of the House of Commons and all the Commons of England, to accuse these
twelve prelates of high Treason, for endeavoring to subvert the fundamental
Laws of the Realm, and the very being of Parliaments manifested by preferring
that Petition and Protestation: and to desire the Lords that they may be
forthwith sequestered from Parliament, and put into safe custody, and that their
Lordships would appoint a speedy day for the Commons to charge them, and they
to answer for that, the Commons were ready to make good their charge.

He was further ordered, to give the Lords thanks for communicating this
Petition, with so much affection and speed, and for expressing their sense
thereof.

After Master Glynne had delivered this at the bar, the Lords sent the Black
Rod instantly to find out these Bishops and apprehend them: and by eight of
the clock at night they were all taken and brought upon their knees to the
bar; and ten of them committed to the Tower, and two (in regard of their age,
and indeed of the worthy parts of one of them, the learned Bishop of Durham)
were committed to the Blak Rod.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers now assembled in
Parliament.
The humble Petition and Protestation of all the Bishops and Prelates now
called by his Majesty's Writs, to attend the Parliament and present about
London and Westminster for that service.
THat whereas the Petitioners are called up by several and respective Writs,
and under great penulties, to attend in Parliament: and have a clear and
undubitate right to Vote in Bills, and other matters whatsoever debetable in
Parliament, by the ancient customs, Laws, and statutes of this Realm, and
ought to be protected by your Majesty, quietly to attend and prosecute that
great service.

They humbly remonstrate and protest before God, your Majesty, and the noble
Lords and Peers now assembled in Parliament; that as they have an undubitate
right to sit and vote in the House of the Lords, so are they (if they be
protected from force and violence) most ready and willing to perform their
duties accordingly. And that they do abhominate all actions or opinions
tending to Popery, and the maintenance thereof: As also, all propention and
inclination to any malignant party, or any other sect or party whatsoever, to
the which, their own reasons, and consciences, shall not move them to adhere.

But whereas they have been at several times violently manassed, affronted,
and assaulted by multitudes of people, in their coming to perform their
services in that honorable House, and lately chased away and put in danger of
their lives, and can find no redress for protection, upon sundry complaints
made to both Houses in these particulars.

They likewise humbly protest before your Majesty, and the noble House of
Peers, that saving unto themselves all their rights and interists of sitting
and voting in that house at other times. They dare not sit or vote in the House
of Peers, until your Majesty shall further secure them from all affronts,
indignities, and dangers in the premises.

Lastly, whereas their fears are not built upon fantasies or conceits, but upon
such grounds and objects as may well terrify men of good resolutions, and much
constancy. They do in all duty and humility protest before your Majesty, and
the Peers of that most honorable House of Parliament, against all Laws,
orders, votes, resoluitons, and determinations, as in themselves null, and of
no effect, which in their absence since the twenty seventh of this instant
month of December, 1641 years, have already passed: as likewise against all
such as shall hereafter pass in that most honorable House, during the time of
this their forced and violent absence from the said most Hon: House, not
denying: but if the absenting of themselves were wilful and voluntary, that
most honorable House might proceed in all these premises, their absence for
this their Protestation notwithstanding.

And humbly beseeching your most excellent Majesty to command the Clerk of that
House of Peers to enter this their Petition and Protestation amongst his
Records.

They will ever pray to God to bless and preserve, etc. Jo: Eborac. Thomas,
Duresme. Robert. Co: Lich. Jos: Norwitch, Jo: Asaphen. Guil. Ba: and Wells.
Geo: Hereford. Robert: Oxon. Ma: Ely. Godfr. Glouc. Jo. Peterburg. Mor:
Llandaff.

Vera Copia,

Jo: Brown Cleric. Parliament.




