A PROPOSAL FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF TRADE, Upon such PRINCIPLES As must
Necessarily Enforce it.

LICENSED

Roger L'Estrange.
April. 13th. 1676.
To the READER.
IT being most manifest, that where the Inhabitants of any Land do
industriously apply themselves to Traffic and Commerce, they enjoy not only
the Conveniences of Life, but abound in all manner of Plenty; It would be an
enterprise highly Laudable in Persons, of the most eminent Abilities, to find
out such means, as may most augment our Trade, as well within the Realm, as
with foreign Parts; As to the former we have endeavored its advantage by
discovering briefly in the following Lines, such a Way as must necessarily
produce it: And we doubt not, but will also by the consequence of it, advantage
the latter, in removing all those grand impediments, which have hitherto
obstructed the Current of our Trade. Vale.

Robert Murray and Comp'

THE Money that is Current within his Majesty's Dominions, consisting only of
Foreign Bullion, we cannot absolutely at all times secure to our selves a
sufficient quantity thereof to supply our Occasions; so that (it being the
Common Measure wherewith all Trade is Driven) men are enforced to stand still
in their Occupations, to their great Impoverishment: Now if a means can be
found out to supply this defect, Trade will be enlivened, notwithstanding any
accident that may hinder the Importation, or occasion the Exportation of
Bullion, or any other way obstruct our Money in its due Circulation, which is
the Cause of the many lamentable Calamities and ruinous Effects that are found
amongst us.

Money being no more than a deposite given for such Commodities as men part
withal; if in lieu thereof, a Credit be raised upon a substantial Fond, it will
in all respects answer the use of Money. And such is the Credit which we
propose to issue forth, which all men may easily obtain by depositing their
DEAD STOCK, without the least disrepute or inconveniency to themselves, upon
the reasonable terms of six per Cent. per Annum; to which purpose Magazines are
prepared at Devonshire house, without Bishops-Gate, London, for the reception
of any Goods for which credit shall be given for two thirds, or three fourths
of their value, according to the quality thereof: and because it is intended to
take deposites no longer than for six Months, all persons that shall accept of
the said Credit, may at the expiration of seven Months, repair for payment to
the place aforesaid, and at any time view the Fond upon which the Credit is
raised; and in case it so happen that the Goods deposited be not redeemed by
Money, Credit, or any other equivalent deposite, at or before the time
contracted for, the same shall be sold to the best advantage of the interessed,
and the overplus made good on demand, and in the mean while the Credit being
Current, will be as serviceable to all intents and purposes as Money it self;
for seeing all Necessaries for Life and Trade are obtainable from one
Occupation or other (to complete the body of Commerce in all parts), due Care
is taken by engaging a sufficient Number of all Trades, who will receive the
said Credit; entering their Names, Trades, and Habitations, from time to time as
they offer themselves, who are no longer obliged than they shall find it secure
and profitable; of which they may be assured, in as much as all persons may
upon this Credit issue forth their own Commodities, and with the same
immediately procure to themselves what their Occasions require.

And if any Person shall think fit to make use of the said Magazine, for the
lodging and disposing of any Goods, by way of Commission only, they shall be
punctually served therein, and probably will find better opportunity for
selling their Goods and serving their Occasions than has hitherto been found.

Men are also freed from those great Damages that often attends such as are
necessitated to Pawn Goods of considerable value for small Sums, until the same
can be sold, and do entrust the Receivers with the sale thereof at reasonable
Rates; which notwithstanding is often retarded on purpose to gain to themselves
an Extravagant Usury, which Extortion will here be prevented.

To the rendering this Credit Current, no more is required than what is already
practiced in Banks here and abroad, where Men deposite Money, and obtain the
Bank-Credit, which generally passes in Receipts and Payments without the real
issuing of Money, the Money remaining as a Pawn or Ground of Security in the
Cash Chest, or else is employed by the Banker to his own benefit, the Paper
Credit being chiefly Current amongst Traders; and if the Banker miscarry in his
Adventures (and the Money being upon Interest, must not lie dead without his
inevitable ruin) the Fond that should secure the Credit is gone; and whereas
he takes in Moneys we receive Wares and Merchandise, which are always to be
found in the Magazine, and not so liable to be Imbezel'd, Robbed, or Seized:
Wherefore is in all respects a better Security than a Money-Bank.

This Enterprise is of so large an extent, that it seems a Complication of
diverse things already practiced in the World; tho no place afford us an exact
M^^^^ of it, (...) a Bank and Lumbard united; but so differenced from both,
that in effect it is neither; for the foundation of Credit in Bank is Money,
this Goods and Merchandise: and in Lumbards Goods are received, and Money
dedelivered out, here Credit; yet in some respects it is like both: for after
the same manner, as in Lumbards, all Goods are received in Public
Repositories, and Conformably to foreign Banks Credit is issued out.

It frequently happens that several Goods are only proper to be sold at
certain times and seasons, and the Owner wants Money or Credit to prosecute his
Trade, who by the method proposed may be accommodated: as for Example,

A Clothier having a parcel of Clothes, which at present he cannot vend, must
therefore attend the opportunity of a better Market: in the interim to carry on
his Trade in the Country, he leaves them, as aforesaid, with order to dispose
thereof at a price limited with the allowance of the customary Factorage, and
thereupon forthwith receives the said Credit, which supplies him with all
manner of Necessaries, as from the Salter, Oyl-man, Spanish Merchant, etc. who
again furnish themselves, as their respective Occasions require, by virtue of
the same Credit; the like may be done by the Norwich Man, those who deal in
Tyn, and Lead, Myners, and all other Professions; so that this will enforce a
Trade, operating alike on both Parties, as well the Seller as the Buyer: and
beget mutual, quick, and frequent returns; and though upon every particular
Sale, the Gain may be small, the Profit at the years end will be found to be
great, making thereby a small Stock, equally beneficial to a great one, with
slow returns; and so consequently Money will be less wanting, by reason the
Occasions for it are lessened; but if any Person shall be necessitated for
Money, it is not to be doubted but Monied Men will be glad to issue forth their
Cash upon this Credit left with them; because all Men may have recourse to the
place aforesaid, and there be satisfied with the real Security upon which every
Note is grounded that is issued out; due care being also taken to prevent
Frauds by Counterfeiting the same.

And for the better satisfaction of such as may any ways be concerned with the
said R. Murray at the Comutation Office, some Citizens have engaged themselves
with him to be responsible for whatsoever Goods as shall be there deposited,
and Credit issued out thereupon.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin at the three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1676.


