A most Wonderful and True RELATION Of one Mr. Philips, who was Stung to Death
by a Serpent. In Stocks-Market on Saturday last, and was afterward brought to
Life again and perfectly Cured by a Wonderful Medicine, is half an Hours time,
and is it perfect Health. With Account what that Medicine was, and who prepared
it.
ON Saturday last, March the 26. School. The famous Mr. Stringer the Chemist,
(who made the Extraordinary Seperations of Metals, and the Artificial Gem,
before his Imperial Majesty the Czar of Muscovy, mentioned the last Wednesday's
Mercury) went to see the Curious Collection of Animals, Minerals, and Rectified
Vegetables, now showed in Stocks-Market; It chanced that the Man who showed the
Curiosities, seeing him more than ordinarily diligent in his Enquiries and
Remarks upon such natural productions, attempted to take the Viper (or Serpent)
out of its Glass, as Mr. Stinger did a Snake out of another Glass; but had the
misfortune to be Bitten by it, whereupon his Finger swelled suddenly; and
dismal Symptoms approached instantly: a Chyrugion was fetched, who nauteriz'd
the Finger with hot Irons; Venice-Treacle and Oil of Vipers was applied, but
all in vain; several great Physicians proposed to be advised with, and
Messengers dispatched to fetch the Doctors, but before any could be brought to
him, the Contagious Poison seized his Head, Stomach, and Blader, with extreme
Swellings of his Hands and Arms, and he to apperance turned Yellow, and Dead.
Then Mr. Stinger discovered himself, saying, It was time for him to go to work
since no other help could be had: He produced an Acid Preparation of his own
preparing (called Elixir Vi^iols Colebachij) and caused a small Chyrurgion (who
lives in New Round Court in the Strand) to Anoint the Swelled part, and gave
him some of the same inwardly which wrought (...) Mi^oulons (...) that not only
all (...) that the Person revived, and was ^ble in Half an Hours time to walk,
and did more then walk half a Mile home to his Ludgins, and in perfect Health:
Which made the Physicians wonder, when the me^, eve^ing that i^ a most
Mir^culons Cure, the like of which they had never read of, nor ^n, A^ that it
is the plain^st demonstration yet produced to the World by any Man, that all
Animal Poisons are Alkalions, and not Acid: A more perfect History of this will
be suddenly published by a Great Physician, in a little ^ne. It is said that
this Mr. Stringer now (...) come to love in York-Builds in the Strand.

If any doubt the Truth of this Rel^ion they may be (...) by the Man own Mouth,
at the Collection in Stocks-Mar^. aforsaid.

Because that many perhaps, have not seen the last Wednesday's Me^cury, we have
here Inserted some Passangers betwixt the ^zat of Muscovy and Mr. Stringer.

The C^ sent some days since for Mr. Stringer, an Oxford Chemist, to show him
some (...) Choicest Secrets and Experiments known in England; accordingly Mr.
Stringer drew up a Class (or Number) of Experiments, viz. Some in ^parating and
Refining of Mer^ and Minerals, some Geometrical, some Medicin^, others
^losophical, to the number of 24 Exper(...) when they were drawn up, the Czar
elect ^ne to be done first; and it seems it was one of the most difficult
Operations, which shows that (...) is skilled in Natural Philosophy. However ^e
^ired to see the Experiment done, which (...) Metals, with a destroying Mineral
together (...) Gold, Silver, Copper, and ^on, with An(...) to one Lun^, then to
dissolve them all, and then (...) separate each Metal distinct again, without
destroyning and called the Gold from the rest of the Metal mi^, being
transported into a merry Vein, cold (...) ^f his Majesty would wear that Gold
is a Ring for his sake, he would make him an Artificial Ce^ of (...) color in
pleased to name, to set in it, out of an Old Broom staff and a piece of Flint
that lay by them (...) H^ Majesty being pleased with the Fancy^ or^ed it to be
done, be staying by part of the time, and (...)ry the rest till it was done,
and then it proved so hard, that it cut Glass.

Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed and Sold by J. Bradford in Little Brit^in.


