A New and Useful Invention for Light very beneficial by Sea and Land.
AN Experiment thereof having been made in his late Majesty's presence at
White Hall, He was graciously pleased to approve of it so well, as not only
highly to commend it, but to grant his Letters Patents for the Promotion and
Encouragement of the same.

Now the several Uses of this Invention being almost innumerable, it was
thought sit by the Patentee and others who are concerned with him, to
demonstrate some part thereof in the City of London on Tuesday Night, being the
eighth Day of December last past, where several of the most Eminent Citizens,
and other Persons of good Quality, were pleased to give their Approbations. And
being well approved of, it is thought necessary to particularize several of the
uses of the said Invention, and the great advantages that may accrue to the
said City and other Places thereby, if encouraged.

I. It will be of extraordinary use for Ships, to be used instead of their
common Lanthorns, first in respect of their durableness, being so durable, that
nothing ever of that kind is to be compared to it: secondly in respect to their
great (...) crease of Light, giving ten times a better Light, than any
Lanthorns now in (...) and will burn with great clearness from Sunsetting to
Sunrising, and the to(...) of the Ship will not disorder them. And they are
also contrived for the P(...) and to use between Decks and in the Hold, and are
secure from the dar(...) siring Powder and other Combustible Materials, giving
such Light, ^ha(...) Person may read or do any business there, where Light is
required.

II. This Invention will be of very great use for Light-Houses, where (...)
will appear much more conspicuous, less troublesome and be cheap(...)
Coal-fires now in use.

III. Those Lucidaries will be of extraordinary advantage in (...) of Light to
very great distances, and will be secure against Dar(...) rise, and put out the
Lights they now use.

IV. They will be of excellent use to inlighten the Streets of (...) where they
may be kept constantly burning from the Hour (...) Twelve, being three Hours
longer than the Lights now in u(...) and at as small a Charge as the
Inhabitants are now at, and givi(...) Light; also they will very much ease and
take off that trouble (...)tants of the City of London (who are obliged to hang
or put o(...) a Light) by committing them to the care of such Persons as
sha(...) for that purpose: And they will be of very great use to Shops that
(...) and will much encourage People to go out and by, who keep at home(...)
for want of being better accommodated with Light; and many abuses (...) mitted
upon Passengers for want thereof, as by frequent Examples are (...) And if the
Inhabitants shall think fit to continue the Lights from twelve (...) the
Morning, and consider the Charge, they may receive these further ad(...) by
them. First they will be of great benefit in case of Fire. Secondly th(...) be
of great Service to their Watches, whereby Burglaries and House-breaking (...)
be much better prevented. Thirdly they will also be of great use to that
Pr(...) on for clean^ing of the Streets in the Nightime, whereby the
Inhabitan(...) be very much freed from those Nauceous Smells that arise from
the Filt(...) Soil carried through the Streets in the Daytime, and those
Persons that will (...) employed so to cleanse the Streets in the Night will be
very serviceable in ca(...) Fire, and will much prevent House-breaking, as
aforesaid.

V. They will be of great use in Universities, Inns of Court and Chancery, an^
all public Halls, Offices, Brewhouses, Landing-places, Wharfs, Warehouses
Sellars, Stables, and all other great Places whatsoever.

If any Person have a desire to use these Lucidaries the Undertakers will give
the Attendance daily, from the Hours of Eleven till One, at Lawrences
Coffee-hous(...) in Freemans Court Cornhill, where they may make Agreements
upon such Reasonable Terms as will, we hope, be well approved on by such as are
willing to encourage an Invention of so great use.

January 2d. 1685/6.

This may be Printed R. M.


