THE LAVVFULNES OF Hearing the Public Ministers OF THE Church of England.
PROVED, By Mr. PHILIP NIGH, AND Mr. JOHN ROBINSON, Two Eminent Congregational
Divines.

Together with the Judgment of Dr. Goodwin, Dr. Owen, and other INDEPENDENTS,
as well Ancient as Modern, concerning Forms of Prayer, Parish-Churches, and
Communion with them: And the Judgment of other Nonconformists about Kneeling at
the Sacrament.

Published, as well to satisfy those that yet scruple Communion with the
Church, as to vindicate those that have complied, from the uncharitable
Censures of those that vilify them, as Temporizers; or that they have done so
to qualify themselves for an Office, to serve a Turn, or to save themselves
from the Penal Laws.

LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

TO THE READER.
THe design of these Sheets, is, to satisfy the Consciences of those Dissenters
that hold Communion with the Church of England unlawful; beseeching them
seriously to consider what is here said (in order to the Church's Peace, and to
prevent their designed ruin) by Learned and Holy Men that are of the
Separation, commonly called Independents. I have quoted none of the
Presbyterian Persuasion (only in the business of kneeling at the Sacrament)
because it would be an endless work, they generally (both Ancient and Modern)
having asserted the lawfulness of (at least) Lay-Communion with the Church of
England. And besides, I perceive their Arguments will not prevail with
Independents who deny a National Church: I know there are many that are
convinced it is lawful to Hear Sermons, but not the Liturgy as an imposed Form.
They may find here, what the Reverend and Learned Dr. Owen says concerning
Forms of Prayer, in the latter end of these Sheets. And whereas they complain
the Church-Prayers are empty Forms; I wish they would come and fill them with
Spirit and Zeal. But the greatest Scruple that hinders them, is kneeling at the
Sacrament; and that which pinches them most, is, that this Gesture is said to
be Adoration given to the Elements; but they should consider what the Church
says concerning that Gesture, which me thinks should remove that Scruple, and
satisfy every reasonable Man in that particular, which for their satisfaction I
here quote at large, Viz.

Whereas it is ordained in this Office, for the Administration of the Lord's
Supper, that the Communicants should receive the same Kneeling; (which Order is
well meant, for a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgment of
the Benefits of Christ therein given to all worthy Receivers, and for the
avoiding of such profanation, and disorder in the Holy Communion, as might
otherwise ensue); Yet, lest the same Kneeling should by any Persons, either out
of ignorance and infirmity, or out of malice and obstinacy, be misconstrued and
depraved; It is here declared, that thereby no adoration is intended, or ought
to be done, either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received,
or unto any Corporal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood. For the
Sacramental Bread and Wine remains still in their very natural substances, and
therefore may not be adored, (for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all
faithful Christians) and the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are
in Heaven, and not here; it being against the truth of Christ's natural Body,
to be at one time in more places than one.

This Caution (which wholly denies Transubstantiation) together with that
Prayer about the Gunpowder-Treason, being now incorporated in our Liturgy, do
(as Dr. Goodwin told a Reverend Doctor of the Church of England, now living)
make it impossible there should be any Reconciliation with the Church of Rome.

The Reverend and Learned Mr. Perkins (an old Puritan) says to this effect,
That that Adoration used in the Sacrament, is not terminated in the Elements,
but a token of Godly Reverence to Christ himself sitting in Glory, etc.

Mr. Cartwright says also, That a Man must not refuse to receive the Sacrament
kneeling, when he cannot have it otherwise.

Mr. Fenner speaks to the same purpose.

And the Learned Mr. Vines says, That Gestures at Receiving, are Movables, and
not of the Freehold of this Ordinance.

In short, whether Men are satisfied in whole or in part, I wish they would
consider seriously what that excellent Man, Mr. Jer. Buroughs (a
Congregational Divine) says, in his Irenicon, page 182. viz. That one great
dividing Practice has been this, That because Men cannot join in all things
with others, they will join in nothing.

Mr. PHILIP NY's Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Viz.
Whether we may lawfully hear the Now Conforming Ministers, who are
Re-ordained, and have renounced the Covenant, and some of them supposed to be
scandalous in their Lives?

Answer. FOr the Resolution of this Case, there is a threefold Consideration
pertinent.

Consideration I.
About the Duty it self, Hearing the Word.
There are four ways by which at this Day the Great God conveyeth the knowledge
of himself and his Mind unto sinful Man. 1. His Works of Creation and
Providence, Psalm. 19.2. 2. The suggest of Conscience, even the remainder of
God's Image in us. 3. The Word or Law of God written, expounded, or applied in
ordinary Preaching. 4. The Church, which is the Ground and Pillar of Truth, the
Knowledge of God and his Mind is more especially there held forth, by the Gifts
given, and Offices therein appointed by Christ. These are distinct Ways and
Methods of God, by which he is pleased to make known himself: and we are
obliged, even by the Law of Nature, to attend when God does speak; it is
therefore an undoubted moral Duty, to attend the speaking of God, in whatsoever
way by Providence brought unto us.

The Scripture, with the Interpretation and Application thereof, commonly
termed Prophesying or Preaching, is one of the forementioned Means by which God
makes known himself to us; this is a National Gift according as God in his
Providence shall dispose, Psalm. 147.19, 20.

Such National or Public Preachers, may be said to have their Call from
Christ, he having a hand in ordering the Motions of Providence for the Good of
his Church, John 5.17. And particularly in this Providential sending of
Ministers, Mat. 9.38. and this is the calling and sending mentioned, Romans
10.15. The Lord in these Administrations, by Preachers thus sent, according to
the good Pleasure of his Will, finds out a People before they seek him. This is
a dispensation of God to Men as his Creatures.

For Application to the Case.
The Word of God interpreted and applied by preaching in this providential way,
is a choice Mercy and Gift, wherewith God has blessed this Nation for many
Years, to the Conversion and Edification of many thousands. The Governors
thereof have successively, according to their Light, made diverse good Laws and
Statutes for improving this Mercy for the best advantage of the Nation, as
appears in that, 1. There are Schools and Universities maintained for the
bringing up of Persons in Learning; also there is a constant settled Maintenance
for encouraging of such as shall be sent out to the several parts of the Nation
in this great Work. 2. There is a sum of Doctrinal Truths, which in the
Enlargement and Application, are sufficient both for Conversion and
Edification, to which the Preachers are to assent; and there is provision made
by our Laws, that such Persons only who are sound in the Faith be employed
therein. 3. The Inhabitants of this Nation, are required to be present, and to
give attendance to Instruction, that they may Learn the Fear of the Lord.


Assertion. These things being so, although some of us do enjoy the Instruction
of our Pastors being in a Church-Relation, yet it is a Duty that we and our
Families frequent also (as we have Liberty and Opportunity) the more Public
and National Ministry, for these Reasons.

Reason 1. Where the Lord has appointed various Ways and Methods, in which he
will draw near to us, and manifest himself, we ought to make use of all in
their place and season. This is a several and distinct way or appointment of
God, not only in respect of God's Works and our Consciences, but also in
respect of the teachings of Church Officers; as appears in these Particulars.

1. The one is Cultus Naturalis, from the first Commandment, directed by the
Light of Nature; and the other is Cultus Institutus, and a Duty of the second
Commandment; and our direction herein is only from Gospel Light. 2. In respect
of the Persons that are the primary Object of each Prophesying, that is,
Church-Preaching, serves not for them that believe not, but for them which
believe. It is principally for building: for a Church State supposes them
Believers, though such preaching has occasionally its efficacy in converting
the Weak, and more directly in relation to the Children of Members. This
National or Providential Preaching, is principally for Conversion, and has for
its primary and main Object, Persons in their natural Condition; such a
Preacher was Noah, 2 Pet. 2.5. 1 Pet. 4.6. Mat. 16.3. Preaching is before
Believing, and Believing before any Church-Ordinance: There were Preachers in
all Nations, and in every City, before there were Churches in every City. 3.
The one is from Gifts only as necessarily requisite, but Church-Instruction
supposes the Person to be not only of some eminency in Gifts, but Grace also,
and set apart to Office according to Christ's appointment.
And now having seen the difference of these two Methods, the Consequence will
follow; they ought to be attended with due reverence each of them.

Reason 2. As we are Members of Churches, so we are Subjects and Members of
this Commonwealth, and are obliged thereby to observe the lawful Command of
our Governors, and to be Examples therein to others. As Members also of this
Civil Body, we ought to join with it in a thankful acknowledging this happy
Providence of God, by which we, and our Children after us, may be instructed;
which may be a means to have it continued, and a neglect thereof would give
just cause to fear the contrary.

Reason 3. If Church Members, or any one Godly Man has a Warrant to forbear
hearing such Ministers upon this account of unlawfulness; then all Godly Men
ought at all times so to do; and if so, the Examples of the Godly to the
generality being very leading in the Matters of God, this Ordinance thereby
will be little frequented, and of less efficacy to those that do come to it.
And by asserting it unlawful to hear such Ministers, we imply, it were better
for the Nation there were no preaching but in particular Churches: and if so,
what can we expect will become of many thousands in an ordinary way of
Salvation, that have no benefit at all by our Church-Instructions? We are to
walk wisely, yea, mercifully toward them that are without.

Objections Answered.
Object. 1. Where there is no true Church, there can be no true Ministry: the
Church of England is no true Church, Ergo, etc.

Answer. There may be a Lawful and True Ministry, or Administration of the
saving Truths of God, though the Nation, or any parcels of it as yet be in no
Church State. We say, each particular Church materially considered, is part of
the Church Catholic. The Matter must needs have being before the Form can be
introduced. No Man becomes a Member of the Catholic Church but by his
effectual Calling, and that is by preaching the Word. I conclude therefore each
particular Church to have its production from such an Administration, and not
this Ministry to have its original or state from the Church.

Object. 2. The National Ministry is Antichristian, derived from Rome.

Answer. If Antichristian: it is either so from their Standing, as deriving
their Ordination thence, (of which in the third Consideration) or from their
Doctrine. If any such Doctrine be preached, it is the miscarriage of particular
Persons, and contrary to the National Provision. The Articles of Religion, to
which the Ministers are to conform their Instructions, are Orthodox, and framed
for the casting and keeping out of Popery.

Object. 3. It offends our weak Brethren; it is a complying with the Corruption
of the Times, it is an approbation and encouragement to Conformity.

Answer. These, and other Objections of the like nature, have their weight and
place in practice when the matter is indifferent, and may be done or left
undone without Sin, and not in relation to any moral Duty. Though I know
gathering of Churches in a Congregational way, preaching without Ordination,
Baptizing of Infants, and the like, as well as hearing a Conforming-Minister,
are a great offense to some that are truly Godly: yet may I not say, If such a
Fellowship, if such Baptizing, and the rest, offend my Brother, I will do no
such thing while the World stands, lest I should offend. It were sin so to
resolve: because these are moral Duties, and not left to my liberty, as Meats
and the rest, 1 Cor. 8.13. and Acts 8. wherein the nature of indifferent things
is laid down.

Consideration II.
About refraining a Moral Duty for the Evil mixed with it, or in the Persons
performing it.
1. As we are not to do Evil that Good may come of it, no more ought we to
leave what is morally Good undone, for the Evil that is some-way mixed with it.
Zeal for Good is to be preferred to that which is against Evil. The greatest
Good is better than the greatest Evil is back Whatever good thing we do, tends
toward our Union with the chiefest Good, the refraining of Evil not so
immediately. 2. Betwixt things indifferent, and what is morally good, you have
this difference. If there be any mixture of evil with the one, it becomes
wholly evil, there is nothing of good in it to give stop or preponderate; but
what is morally good will remain so still, though mixed with evil. We may allay
the worth of it, as baser Metals mixed with Gold, but yet it is Gold still, and
may be perfectly severed. 3. When I would do good, says the Apostle, evil is
present with me. I cannot hear, or read, or pray, and the rest, but with a
mixture of Sin, yet upon this account I may not cease from, or neglect a known
Duty, not though materially considered the evil accompanying being greater than
the good; As in meditation, when blasphemous thoughts arise, etc. To omit a
known Duty is a sin of wilfulness, the evil from me in it is but infirmity
only. The least wilful Sin is greater and more provoking than the greatest Sin
of Infirmity.
For Application to the Case.
1. Governors otherwise pious and zealous, yet not so knowing in matters of
Church-Orders, may possibly in the discharging of their Duty, and doing this
good Work, occasion a mixture of evil with it; Being persuaded that Preachers
and Preaching, will be accepted with more reverence, and become more effectual,
if by Persons ordained as well as examined and tried, for their fitness; and if
accompanied also with set and solemn Forms of Prayer, and other Vniformities,
they therefore by their Laws establish and enjoin these things. The Persons
also appointed to this Work (though not approving all that is imposed) through
infirmity yield and submit, rather than let so good a Work fall.

2. The things therefore objected as Evils, by which some are deterred from
hearing, are the Infirmities of others mixed with the Duty; I say Infirmities,
for so in charity we ought to judge. Now if I may not omit a Duty in respect to
the Evil mixed with it, which is my own, much less may I thus leave an
Ordinance for the Evil that is another Man's, no way mine, or to be charged
upon me. This were to make another Man's Sins or Infirmities more mine than my
own.

Objections Answered.
Object. 1. We cannot judge such Imposition, and submitting to these
Infirmities, especially after so much Light and Reformation.

Answ. 1. If the known Integrity and Piety of some of them who have Conformed,
is such, that there is ground to hope what they have done herein is through
want of Light, Misapprehension, or the like Infirmity; we may then conclude
that the grosness, wilfulness, or whatsoever may make those Actions more than
an Infirmity in any other Conformist, must arise only from the internal frame
or badness of the Mind and Intentions, for externally they are the same. If so,
then it is nothing at all to us; to them it is, Prove. 21.27. for in respect of
the lawfulness of our joining with the administration, or unlawfulness, whether
it be done with a better or worse mind, is not observable by us; outward and
visible Sins only pollute others that be in relation. If Envy, Pride,
Hypocrisy, or the like Evils of the Mind did so, we should be constantly guilty
of other Men's Sins, and without Remedy.

Answ. 2. Whatever Sins are in the Person as to himself, they are to me but as
Sins of Infirmity, that is, such Evils adhering to the Worship as I have no
power to prevent; I may and ought to mourn for such mixtures, as for my own
Infirmities, but avoid them I cannot without I avoid the Duty.

Object. 2. There is much Error mingled with the few Truths they preach, as
Popery, Arminianism, etc. There are also invective Reflections, yea, railings
against the People of God.

Answ. 1. What is morally Good, will bear the mixture of a great deal of Evil,
and yet retain its Goodness still: the Goodness being from God, who is a
greater Good, than Satan or Sin, is an Evil.

Answ. 2. We cannot expect from Men of ordinary Gifts, that Truth be preached
without the mixture of Errors more or less: We know but in part, therefore are
to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, Heb. 5.14. A Saint, as
other Creatures, though weak and newly born, has a taste of what is Food
suitable, and what sincere.

Answ. 3. As for those intemperate Expressions and Reflections on the People of
God, I confess it is sad; but were there not such against Paul and his Party?
Phil. 1.15. yet notwithstanding they are to be heard, even by the same Persons
they enveighed against for the Truth's sake.

Object. 3. The Lives of most of our Conformists are vile and abominable, full
of Pride, Covetousness, Luxury, Drunkenness: How can we expect a Blessing on
their Labors, though they preach Truth and good Things?

Answ. 1. The mixtures in Sermons are nearest; the Irregularities of their
Calling the next; the Sins of their Conversations farthest from their Doctrine,
and therefore have less efficacy at such a distance to prejudice it.

Answ. 2. It Is God's Word, and not their own, they preach. Truth is blessed
from the Lord for its own sake, and his whose it is. When Christ blessed his
Disciple; with the promise of his presence, Mat. 28.20. Lo I am with you
always, even to the end of the World; it is to be applied rather to their
Doctrine than Persons: for they were sometimes left to humane Infirmities in
their lives, and they lived not to the end of the World. If it be not Truth,
though an Angel from Heaven bring it, no Blessing will come with it; but if it
be Christ that is preached, whoever is the Instrument, there is matter of hope
and rejoicing, Phil. 1.15, etc. Some preached Christ who were not sincere,
though at the same time others who were blameless preached the same Truths.
What then? says Paul, verse. 18. Notwithstanding, every way Christ is preached,
and therein do I rejoice, and will rejoice. Those Peter mentions, they sed the
Flock, the Flock then heard them, and were instructed by them: yet we are told
those Ministers were Covetous, Ambitious, took up their Ministry for filthy
Lucres-sake, and were Lords over God's Heritage. More cannot be objected
against our Ministers that Conform, than might against the Scribes and
Pharisees in Christ's time; either in respect of their Doctrine, which was
laden with Traditions; their Standing, which was not according to Law; their
lives, which were vicious: yet Christ not only permits, but requires us to
attend the Truths they deliver.

Consideration III.
About partaking with another Man's sins.
This arises from some special relation, as a moral touch: which is either in
respect to the Person transgressing, or the Sin it self.

1. Our Relation to Persons may either be, 1. Transient, or Occasional. For a
Man becomes guilty with him that sins, by applanding, approving, or
encouraging him in his Sin, John 2.10, 11. Romans 1.32. and in some cases by
silence, being present when some gross Sin is openly committed. Or, 2. our
Relation may be set and stated, either Civil, as between Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, etc. This will not be much to our purpose: or Sacred,
viz. that settled Relation that arises from Gospel-Communion, as in particular
Churches between Officers and Members, and one Member with another. By virtue
of this Relation, Sins are transmitted from one to another with the greatest
celerity and efficacy; A little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump.

The Evil of another, and that Duty we join in, may so relate, as I may partake
of his Evil, though I act nothing with him but what is a Duty on my part.
Receiving of Rents and Tenantship are so nearly related, that if the Person
with whom I partake thus, have forfeited his Tenantship, and of right is no
Tenant, yet by my accepting of Rent from him, I make him one notwithstanding
his forfeiture. To exercise a Judicial Act, relates so much to the Person
legally constituted a Judge, that if I submit my Cause to him that is not so,
and suffer, I sin against my own Liberty. In each of these what I do is good,
but partakes somewhat with the evil of another. In our Spiritual Affairs, that
is a full instance, 1 Cor. 10.18. They that eat of the Sacrifice, partake of
the Altar; that is, from the Relation and Connection betwixt the Altar and the
Gift. Mat. 23.19. The Altar sanctifies the Gift. It is either not a Sacrifice,
or not a Lawful Sacrifice, but by reason of the Altar.

For Application to the Case.
1. My being present, and hearing of a Conformist, is no Approbation of the
evil of his Conformity, and so no occasional or transient Relation is raised
thereby. Approbation is an act of the Mind or Heart; It is not showed to him or
others by me, until it be expressed outwardly by my Words or Gestures which I
have not in this case any occasion to do; his Evil being done elsewhere, and
formerly, and not in our presence that now hear him.

2. Nor is there any set or standing Relation between him and me, though he
preach and I hear him constantly: This creates no Church Fellowship or
Communion. To instruct and learn, is an humane or natural converse, and differs
not from teaching or learning any other Faculty, though the subject Matter I
hear be Divine. It Is true, by the addition of a special Institution, it becomes
a Church-Ordinance: so giving of Alms, visiting of the Sick, and the like,
which are Actions of common Humanity, when brought under a special Institution,
do thereby become as much Church-Ordinances as Preaching, 2 Cor. 6.14. What
fellowship has Light with Darkness? or a Believer with an Infidel? that is, in
respect to Church Communion and Fellowship, there is none: yet a Believer and
an Infidel may Preach and Hear, may Teach and be Taught, Acts 17. 1 Cor. 14.
Romans 1.13.

3. For any special Tincture derived from his Evil to the Duty we perform with
him; it must be either from the Sins of his Person, or his Ordination: The
former has been spoken to. As for the evil of his Ordination, it relates not
to his Preaching, by any such near aliance, as that the one may not be done
without the other. It is the duty of all Christians (says Ames) to do their
utmost to advance the Kingdom of God, and therefore to teach others the
Knowledge of God. Why may not a Man Preach and Instruct others, if he be able,
by word of Mouth, as well as by Writing and Printing Theological Discourses?
This latter was never questioned by any sober Man.

OBJECTIONS ANSWERED.
Object. 1. My presence at such Men's Preaching, if I be silent and give no
testimony against them, will be an encouragement to their way.

Answ. 1. If I had no other just and apparent reason for my being present, it
might be so interpreted; but my presence relates, and ought so to be judged,
unto the Word Preached. If I be present in some consecreated place, adorned
with Images, to hear a Sermon, my presence ought not to be interpreted a
Countenancing those Superstitions, but the Preaching of Gods Word. When the
Preaching of Christ, and a malicious Spirit, was in one Man, Paul's rejoicing at
the one, was no Countenancing of the other.

Answ. 2. We do not so easily derive guilt or pollution by being present, or in
the Company of Sinners, though we do not testify against them, when they are
not in Spiritual Communion with us. A little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump,
but no more. The Contagion goes no further than the Relation. The Apostle, 1
Cor. 5.9. lays down clearly this difference from that Verse to the end. He
speaks of Judging, that is, censuring of others, that we may prevent partaking
with them in their Guilt. By Judging we are to understand not only the Censure
it self, but the telling our Brother, the reproving, convincing, and other
private Duties in relation thereunto, and avoiding their Company afterward:
and it is applied with distinction of Persons in respect of their relation to
us. There are Fornicators of this World, ver. 10. and such are without, ver.
12. Now there is not that Obligation lying upon us to reprove their Sins, as if
a Brother be a Fornicator, ver. 11. In some cases we may be silent, and leave
the former to the Judgment of God, ver. 13. But in no case if he be a Brother.

Answ. 3. To Reprove or give Testimony against an evil, is a tender Duty, and
we may easily miscarry, if the rules thereof be not strictly observed. 1.
Especially, if public, in the Face of a Congregation come together peaceably
to worship God. 2. And the Person an Elder, at least so reputed generally by
the Congregation. 3. The Sin also must be a gross Sin, and apparent so to the
Assembly. But if it be doubtful, as in our Case, whether it be a Sin, or such a
Sin; whether committed upon the place, or formerly, we know not where, nor how
long since: if possibly he has repented of it, or is able to clear himself at
least from the grosness of it: I say, in such a case, were he a Brother, and in
this Relation, I have no Call to reprove, or give a public testimony, in such
time or place especially.

Answ. 4. This Objection renders not my coming to hear, an Evil, but my not
reproving. I am the rather bound to come, for I have hereby not only an
opportunity to receive, but to do good, if such reproving be a duty.

Object. 2. Ordination and Conformity, and Common Prayers, and Ceremonies, are
connexed with Preaching, as one entire Service; by partaking thereof of the the
one, we contract the pollution of the other.

Answ. 1. What God himself in a moral way joyneth together, no Man may
separate, only God himself: But what God in Nature has joined together, he
gives us leave to separate, as Chaff from Wheat, etc. And so likewise for what
Man joyneth together, especially in the Service of God, and such matters
thereof as God has not required; A set Liturgy, or stinted Form of Prayer for
matter and Words to be used (much less to be inseparably joined with Preaching)
is not required by the Lord, nor indeed is there any such necessary dependence
by our Laws.

Answ. 2. Ordination is not so necessarily connexed with Preaching, either by
God or Man: Scripture Light mentions Preaching and Hearing as Duties, Romans 10.
whereas yet there could be no Ordination; nor are they so inseparably joined by
our Laws: But if they were, it is sufficient to my Conscience that God has not
so joined them. Our actings, and the reasons or grounds of them, are not to be
interpreted in Church Matters by Humane Laws; If they were, it would be
difficult to inhabit in some Commonwealths with a good Conscience. Our living
within the Precincts of such a Parish, our Laws interpret a being of the same
particular Church with them for all Church-Ordinances: but this being Man's Law
only, we judge our selves not so necessarily involved by our habitation. A
Church according to Scripture is a Spiritual Body: The Limits are part of the
essence and constitution of such a Body, and therefore ought to be Spiritual
and of the same nature, and not merely humane, as is the division of Parishes.

Answ. 3. To speak more properly, we cannot say nearness by an external
disposition of things connexeth them any more, than Unity makes kindred, or of
one Blood. No, it must be where there is such a dependency of things, that the
being, at leastwise the orderly being, of the one is not without the other. In
this Sense Baptizing, breaking of Bread, and other Ordinances that relate to,
and necessarily depend on an Office, and connexed with it, and so our being
called thereunto, and invested therein; and if the person with whom I partake,
be either not in such an Office, or in any apparent disorderly way, I partake
with his Sin: so near are these Duties related in their orderly Administration.
But Preaching in a Providential way, as by Persons gifted, and out of their
Charity administering to us, or by Provision of the Magistrate, is altogether of
another nature. And though Ordination and Preaching be joined together in the
vulgar esteem; yet it is not the voice or sanction of Man can bring things into
a nearer Relation than the Spirit has set them.

Object. 3. Why may we not as well go to Common Prayer?

Answ. If there were no other things to be objected against those Prayers, but
Ordination, Conformity, or other Sins of the Minister's, questionless we may:
for we question not to join with them in Prayer before or after Sermon, more
than with his Preaching.

Object. 4. Where there is any better Preaching than Ordinary, especially in
the City, it is so thronged, as by that time Prayers are ended, there is no
hearing.

Answ. It is one thing to abstain upon such an account which is prudential
only, as upon the account of bodily infirmity: another thing to abstain upon
the opinion of unlawfulness. Now the thing contended for, is to vindicate the
Lawfulness of hearing such Ministers, notwithstanding what has been objected
to the contrary, and to deliver us from an Error of very ill consequence: for
this Opinion, that it is unlawful to hear such Ministers as have been spoken
of, is an error of very ill consequence, in many respects.

1. It puts us upon such singularity, as by which we divide in our practice,
not only from our Brethren of the Presbyterian persuasion, but likewise from
diverse of the soberest Separatists. Where a good Conscience necessitates, as in
many things, to differ from other Godly Brethren on each hand, it is a sad
Providence to have these differences increased by an erroneous Conscience.

2. Except it be the reading of Scriptures, this Ordinance alone, of all other
public Ordinances amongst us, has by the good hand of God been kept and
continued by our National Establishment free in it self from all disputable
Mixtures and Impositions; and the benefit and fruit of this Public Ministry,
has accordingly been visibly great, as in any part of the World. Let us fear
therefore lest we our selves now by raising groundless scruples, lay this as
low, as others by their unwarrantable additions have done the other Public
Ordinances.

3. In most of the misperswasions of these latter times, by which Men's Minds
have been corrupted, I find in whatsoever otherwise they differ one from
another, yet in this they agree, that its unlawful to hear in Public; Which I
am persuaded is one constant design of Satan, in the variety of ways in
Religion he has set on Foot by Jesuits amongst us. Let us therefore be the
more aware of whatsoever tends that way.

4. Such reasonings against Hearing, though they convince not the unlawfulness
of it, yet they leave such prejudices in the minds of them which are tender, as
perplex and render Hearing less profitable and edifying, even to those that are
persuaded of its Lawfulness. To bring the lawfulness of known Ordinances under
dispute for some circumstances affixed, has even been of great advantage to
Satan, whether in such disputes he prevails or not: For Men are either beaten
wholly off from the duty, or perform it with a more remiss and unsuitable
Spirit, which lies more directly in the way to prevent a blessing, than the
evils of others we ordinarily object. Those disputes about the Morality of the
Sabbath, as they have prevailed with many to a total neglect; so with more to a
remiss observance, though convinced of it as a moral Duty. If for substance the
Duty be so evident, as not to be liable to a dispute in it self (as this of
Hearing is); then Satan fastens Scruples about Circumstances; which prevailing,
we have as little benefit from the Ordinance or Duty, as if it were not.

The end of Mr. Nye's Reasons touching the lawfulness of hearing the Public
Ministers.
ADVERTISEMENT.
TO stop the Mouths of many, especially those Ministers that continually from
Press and Pulpit do maliciously, as well as ignorantly, tell the People that
the Dissenters (especially Independents and Anabaptists) do act contrary to
their own Principles, in Communicating sometimes with the Church of England;
and that they do so merely to qualify themselves for an Office, to serve a
Turn (as they spitefully phrase it) or to save themselves from the penal Laws,
I have here inserted in what follows, the Opinion not only of the Independents,
but even the Brownists themselves, many years since about this matter.

VIZ. A TREATISE of the Lawfulness of Hearing the Public Ministers in the
Church of England.
Penned by that Learned and Reverend Divine, Mr. JOHN ROBINSON, late Pastor to
the English Church of God at Leyden: Printed there in the Year 1634, and now
published for Public Satisfaction.
AS they that affect alienation from others, make their differences as great,
and the adverse Opinion or Practice as odious as they can; thereby to further
their desired victory over them, and to harden themselves, and their side
against them: So on the contrary, they, who desire peace and accord, both
interpret things in the best part that reasonably they can, and seek how and
where they may find any lawful door of entry into accord and agreement with
others. Of which latter number I profess my self (by the Grace of God) both a
Companion and Guide: specially in regard of my Christian Countrymen, to whom
God has tied me in so many inviolable bonds: accounting it a Cross, that I am
in any particular compelled to dissent from them; but a benefit, and matter of
rejoicing, when I can, in any thing with good a Conscience unite with them, in
matter, if not in manner; or, where it may be, in both. And this Affection, the
Lord and my Conscience are my Witnesses, I have always nourished in my Breast,
even when I seemed furthest drawn from them. And so all that have taken
knowledge of my Course can testify with me, and how I have still opposed in
others, and repressed in mine own (to my power) all sower zeal against, and
peremptory rejection of such, as whose Grace: challenged better use and respect
from all Christians.

And in testimony of mine affection this way, and for the freeing of mine own
Conscience, and information of other Men's, I have penned this Discourse,
tending to prove the hea^^ng of the Word of God preached by the Mi^isters ^f
the Church of Engl^^d, (...)^n and apply the Doctrins of (...) ^d in cases
necessary for all, of all Sec^s or sorts of Ch^ (...) ^ity and occasion of so
doing: though sequestring themselv^^ (...) ^ll C^^^^nion with the Hierarchical
Order there established.

Three sorts of opposites I make account to meet withal. The first of them, who
truly desire, and carefully endeavor to have their whole course both in
Religion, and otherwise, framed by the holy and right Zeal of God's Word,
either for their confirmation in the Truth; or Reformation, wherein, through
humane frailty they step aside. And unto them especially I direct this my
Discourse: begging at his hands who is the Father of Lights, and from whom
comes down every good and perfect Gift, for them, as for my self, that as he
has given us to set our Faces toward Heaven, and to seek him with the whole
Heart, so he would not suffer us to wander from his Commandments, to the right
hand or to the left.

A second sort is of them, whose tender and scrupulous Conscience, makes them
fearful, and jealous of every thing, which has in it the least appearance of
evil; lest coming too near it, they be defiled by it, one way or other. This
their godly Zeal, and tenderness of Heart is to be loved of all Men, and
cherished by all good means. Only such are to be entreated, for their own good,
to take knowledge of a distinction most useful for their direction, in things
lawful in their kind, and good in their right use. Of which some are only
naturally good in their kind, but not simply commanded of God, as to get, and
keep the riches and credit of the World; to enjoy outward Peace, or other
bodily Comfort. Others are morally good in their kind, and commanded of God, as
to hear the Word of God, obey the Magistrate, and the like. Now in things of
the former sort, it is very requisite (considering both their Nature and ours)
that we keep a jealous Eye, and strait Hand over our selves, and our ways. For
them, they are not in their kind enjoyed as the other: neither do the
Scriptures any where require of Men, to be rich, or the like: as they do to
hear Gods Word, obey Authority, etc. And for our selves we are prone, and in
danger to over-strain for the getting and enjoying of them, as being naturally
pleasing good things. So as if out of a godly jealousy over our Hearts toward
them, we keep not our selves from going too near the side, for the getting or
keeping of them; we shall by one storm of Temptation or other, be blown into
the ditch of Sin and Destruction. But now, for the practice and performance of
Duties simply moral, and commanded in their kind, as is the hearing of God's
Word, specially by God's People, we ought to strain to the uttermost, and to go
as near the wind as may be; seeing nothing but apparent Sin in the way can
excuse the withdrawing from it, when occasion of enjoying it is offered. O that
there were not to be found some, who being very scrupulous of coming near to
any thing amiss in outward Ordinances, or to any person failing in them; yet
make no scruple of complying, and conforming with the World so far in the eager
pursuit of Worldly Profits, immoderate use of worldly Delights, and fulfilling
the Lusts of the World and Flesh dwelling in them, as that there appears scarce
an hair's-breadth of difference between them, and mere Worldlings which know
not God. Which latter Evils are both worse in themselves, as being expressly
condemned by the Law of God, and Light of Nature; and more odious in the
persons, as being more personal, free, and voluntary than those in the other,
to which they are carried by the violent Current of the Times.

A third sort of Opposits I make account to meet with, more untractable than
the former, and more vehemently bent against the things propounded by me, out
of prejudice and passion, than the other by scruple of Conscience, or show of
Reason. To them I can hardly say any thing; (it not being their manner to
read, or willingly to hear that which crosses their prejudices) yet something
I must say touching them, out of the woeful experience of many years taken of
them, though not much (I thank the Lord) amongst them unto whom I have
ministered.

Some of these I have found carried with so excessive admiration of some former
Guides in their course, as they think it half Heresy to call into question any
of their Determinations, or Practices. We must not think that only the
Pharisees of old, or Papists of later times, are superstitiously addicted to
the Tradition of the Elders, and Authority of the Church. In all Sects there
are diverse (especially of the weaker sort, who being the less real in their
conceptions, are the more personal) that rather choose to follow the path of
blind Tradition, if beaten by some such fore-goers as they admire, than the
right way of God's Word by others, to be showed them afterward.

Some again are as much addicted to themselves as the former to oothers;
conceiving in effect, though they will not profess it, the same of their own
heads, which the Papists do of their Head the Pope, (viz.) that they cannot
err, or be deceived: and this specially in such matters as for which they have
suffered troubles and afflictions formerly; and so having bought them dear,
they value them highly. But it is too Merchant-like to strive to over-sell a
thing, which we have formerly over-bought: We must buy the Truth, and sell it
not at any rate; but must account nothing either true or good, according to the
valuation which we have set upon it, but God.

There is also a third sort highly advancing a kind of privative Goodness and
Religion; and who bend their force rather to the weakening of other Men in their
courses, than to the building up of themselves in their own; and in truth,
rather to separation from Men not only in evil, but even in that which is good,
for some other evil conceived in them, than to Union with God and his People in
his holy Ordinances: and half imagining that they draw near enough to God, if
they can withdraw far enough from other Men. Great Zeal they have against the
false Church, Ministry and Worship so being, or by them conceived so to be; and
against any appearing evil in the true, but little for that which is true and
good, as their practice manifests: But Evil is as contrary to Evil, as Good is
to Evil; and so is that Zeal plainly carnal, which carries a Man further
against Evil, than for Good; seeing no Evil is so evil, as Good is good.

Fourthly; There are some to be found so sowred with moodiness and
coffeehouse, as they become unsociable, and almost Lukanthropoi; Werewolfs,
as they speak; if they see nothing lamentable, they are ready to lament: if
they take contentment in any, it is in them alone whom they find discontented:
if they read any Books, they are only Invectives, especially against Public
States, and their Governors. All things tending to accord and union any manner
of way, are unwelcome unto them. They have their Portion in Ishmael's Blessing,
Genesis 16.12.

Lastly; There want not some, who (as Jehu in his fierce marching, covered his
Ambition, Cruelty, and Zeal for his own House, under pretext of Zeal for God's)
think to cover and palliate their both grosser, and more proper and personal
Corruptions, under a furious March, not only against the Failings, but the
Persons also failing, of Infirmity in matters of Church Order and Ordinances.
Who if they were well acquainted, and duly affected with their own, both more
voluntary, and greater Sins, would slack their Jehu's Peace, yea turn their
Course, tho not to walk with others in Evil (which God forbid) yet to apply and
accommodate themselves unto them, in that which is good, so far as possibly
they could observe any way by the Lord opened unto them. I could instance in,
and name diverse particular Persons monstrously grown out of kind, this way. But
that Course I leave unto them, who rather desire the disgracing, than the
bettering of them against whom they deal: Or perhaps conceive in their leavened
Hearts that there is no other way of bettering, specially Persons of mean
Condition, than by disgracing them. But let not my Soul come in their Secret,
in whose Habitations are such Instruments of Cruelty. Genesis 49.5, 6.

These things thus premised, the Objections follow, which I have either heard
from others, or can conceive of my self most colorable against the Practice by
me propounded. And they are of two sorts: Some of them are framed upon
Supposition, that the Ministers in that Church are in themselves lawful, and of
God: but now yet to be heard by reason of the Abuses, and Evils to be found in
their Ministrations. Others withdraw herein (and those the more) upon the
contrary Supposition: To wit, that the very Order and Constitution of that
Church and Ministry is Papal, and unlawful. Now the Examination of the Grounds
of the one or other I will not in this place meddle with: but (though both
cannot be true) will for the satisfying of the withdrawers on both Parts, grant
for the present, to either Part their Ground, and so examine distinctly what
Exceptions they can or do build thereupon.

But first, for the former: Supposing a Church and the Ministry thereof
essentially lawful, it cannot but be lawful for the Members of other Churches
in general Union and Association with it, to communicate therewith, in things
lawful, and lawfully done: seeing the end of Union is Communion. God has in
vain united Persons, and States together, if they may in nothing communicate
together. But he who would have us receive the weak in Faith, whom God has
received, would not have us refuse the Fellowship of Churches in that which is
good, for any Weakness in them, of one sort or other. And this we have so
plainly, and plentifully commended unto us both by the Prophets, yea, by Christ
himself, in the Jewish Church; and Apostles, and Apostolical Men in the first
Christian Churches; in which many Errors, and Evils of all kinds were more than
manifest: and the same oft-times both so far spread, and deeply rooted, as the
reforming of them was rather to be wished, than hoped for: As that no place is
left for doubting in that case by any, who desire to follow their holy Steps in
Faith toward God, and Charity toward Men, and effectual Desire of their own
Edification.

The Objections of the former sort follow.

Object. 1. There is danger of being seduced, and misled by the Errors taught
in the Assemblies.

Answ. 1. We must not lose the Benefit of many main Truths taught, for danger
of some few Errors, specially in lesser matters. This were to fear the Devil,
more than to trust God. 2. There were in the Jewish Church in Christ's time,
and in diverse of the Apostolical Churches afterward, more and greater Errors
taught, than are in any, or all the Churches in England; of which also there
are not a few; which if their Ministers did as fully and faithfully teach and
practice all Truths, as they keep themselves carefully from Errors, might
compare in this Business, with any reformed Church in Europe. 3. This Exception
has its weight against the hearing of Priests and Jesuits, specially by the
weaker sort, and less able to discern of things that differ: But not against
many Ministers of the Church of England.

Object. 2. He that in any thing partakes with that Church in which Sins known
are suffered unreformed, partakes in all the Sins of that Church: as he that
swears by the Altar, swears by the Offerings upon it which it sanctifies, Mat.
23.19, 20.

Answ. I partake not in the Sins of any, how great or manifest soever the Sins
be, or how near unto me soever the Persons be; except the same Sins either be
committed, or remain unreformed by my Fault: Otherwise Christ our Lord had been
inwrapped in the Guilt of a world of Sins in the Jewish Church, with which
Church he communicated in God's Ordinances, living and dying a Member thereof.
If my Brother sin a scandalous Sin, and I by just order make Complaint thereof
to the Church, I have done my Duty; It appertains to the Church to
excommunicate him, if he repent not; but not to me, except (Popelike) I would
make my self the Church. I am guilty of the Evil in the Commonwealth and
Family, for redressing whereof I do not my duty in my place: which if I do in
the Church as I can, I am free from the Sins done and suffered there; which
Sins and Evils I can no more be said to suffer (wanting power to reform them)
than to suffer it to blow or rain, because I hinder it not.

But the proof of the Assertion from Mat. 13. is of admirable device. How does
the Church sanctify the Sin of the Sinner, as the Altar does the Offering of
the Offerer? The Altar makes that to become actually an Offering, or holy Gift,
which before was not an Offering actually, but only Gold, Silver, or other
materials. So does not the Church make any Man's Sin to become his Sin, which
it was not before, but only suffers the Sin that was. But to strain the strings
of this imagined proportion to make them meet; and to suppose the Church in a
sense to be as the Altar; yet this only follows thereupon, that, as he who
partakes with the Altar in the upholding of the Offering, partakes with the
Offering: So he that partakes with the Church in the upholding of any Evil,
has his part in the Evil also.

And this I grant willingly: but deny, as a most vain imagination, that every
one that partakes with a Church in things lawful, joins with it in upholding
the things unlawful to be found in it. Christ our Lord joined with the Jewish
Church in things lawful, and yet upheld nothing unlawful in it.

Object. 3. But this course of Hearing will offend weak Brethren, not persuaded
of the lawfulness of it.

Answ. 1. It will offend more, and many of them weaker, and that more
grievously, if it be not performed.

2. It is an Offense taken, and not given; seeing the thing is in it self good
in its kind, commanded by God; and in that particular, by Men in Authority; and
directly tending to my Edification: and not like unto eating of Flesh, or
drinking of Wine, or the like things of indifferent nature, and left to my free
liberty to use, or not to use.

And these are the principal Objections upon the former Grounds: They upon the
latter follow.

There is in the hands of many, a Treatise published by a Man of Note,
containing certain Reasons to prove it unlawful to hear, or have Spiritual
Communion with the present Ministry of the Church of England. This has been
answered, but indeed sophistically, and in passion: Neither has the Answerer
much regarded what he said or unsaid, so he might gainsay his Adversary. With
that Answer was joined another, directed to my self, and the same doubled,
pretending to prove Public Communion upon Private: but not pressing at all, in
the body of the Discourse, that Consequence; but proceeding upon other Grounds,
and in truth, consisting of a continued Equivocation in the terms, Public,
License, Government, Ministry, and the like; drawn to another sense than either
I intended them, or than the matter in question will permit. Whereas he that
will refute another, should religiously take, and hold to his Adversaries
meaning. And if in any particular it be not so plainly set down, should spell
it as it were out of his words. But it is no new thing, even for Learned and
Godly Men, to take more than lawful Liberty in dealing with them against whom
they have the Advantage of the Times favoring them, like the Wind on their
Backs. But God forbid I should follow them herein: I will on the contrary use
all plainness and simplicity, as in the sight of God, that so I may make the
naked Truth appear as it is to the Christian Reader's Eye what in me lies.

And for the Treatise mentioned, it must be observed, how both in the Title and
body of the Book, the Author confounds as one hearing of and having Spiritual
Communion with the Ministry, etc. Which as it is true of such as stand in
spiritual and political Church-Union with a Church, and the Ministry thereof,
who accordingly have Church Communion in the public Acts and Exercises of that
Church; so is it not true of others, which are not Members of, nor in
Ecclesiastical Union and Combination with the said Church.

For the better clearing of things, let us in a few words consider distinctly
of Religious Actions, according to the several Ranks in which they may rightly
and orderly be set. Some such Actions are Religious only, as they are performed
by Religious Persons. And of this sort is Hearing (and so Reading) of God's
Word. The Scriptures teach, and all confess, that Hearing of the Word of God
goes before Faith: For Faith comes by Hearing, as by an outward means, ( Romans
10.7.) Hearing then being before Faith, and Faith before all other Acts of
Religion inward or outward; it must needs follow, that Hearing is not simply,
or of it self, a work of Religion, and so not of Religious Communion. Hearing
is properly, and of it self, a natural Action, though it be the hearing the
very Word of God. And I call it a natural Action in it self, in a double
respect: First, for that the Light of Nature teaches every Man to hear and
listen to another, that can and will teach and inform him in any thing for his
good, divine or humane. Secondly, for that a mere natural Man, Jew, Turk,
Infidel, or Idolater, lawfully may, yea necessarily ought to hear God's Word;
that so of natural he may become spiritual.

In the second rank, I place Preaching and Prayer; which are properly Acts
religious and spiritual; as being to be performed the one by a Gift, the other
by a Grace of God's Spirit. Psalm. 50.16, 17. Prove. 15.8. John. 9.31.

Of a third sort is the Paricipation in the Sacraments; which ordinarily at
least requires a Membership in some particular and Misterial Church in the
Participant, they being public Church-Ordinances.

In a fourth Order I set the Power of Suffrage, and Voice-giving in electing of
Officers, and cesuring of Offenders; for which there is requisite an Interest
of the Person so voting, in that particular Church, as a Member thereof.

Of the last sort is the Ministration of Sacraments, which requires, with the
rest forementioned, a public State of Ministry in the Person administering
them.

Now for Preaching by some, and Hearing by others (which two always go
together) they may be, and often are performed without any Religious or Spiritual
Communion at all passing between the Persons Preaching or Hearing.

When Paul preached to the superstitious Athenians, shall we conceive he had
Spiritual Communion with that Heathenish Assembly? How much less had they
Spiritual and Religious Communion with him, who performed not so much as a
Religious Work in their hearing? As God gave any of them to believe, they came
into invisible, or inwardly Spiritual Personal Communion with him: as they came
to make Personal Manifestation and Declaration of their Faith, they came into
outward Personal Communion with him: Lastly, as they came to join in, or unto
some particular Church, into Church Communion with him, else not. So when there
comes into the Church-Assembly Unbelievers, Heathens, Turks, Jews, Atheists,
Excommunicates, Men of all Religions, Men of none at all, and there hear; what
spiritual Communion have they with the Church or State of the Teacher, or one
with another, either in regard of the nature of the Act done, or by God's
Ordination and Institution? Hearing simply is not appointed of God to be a
Mark, and Note either of Union in the same Faith, or Order amongst all that
hear; or of differencing of Christians from no Christians, or of Members from
no Members of the Church; as the Sacraments are Notes of both in the
Participants. The hearing of the Word of God is not so enclosed by any hedge or
ditch, divine or humane, made about it, but lies in common for all, for the
good of all.

The particular Objections follow.

Object. 1. No Man may submit his Conscience to be wrought upon by an unlawful
and Antichristian Ministry: neither has God promised, or does afford any
Blessing upon it; neither can any have the sanctified use thereof.

Answ. It cannot be said properly that the Office of the Ministry works upon
the Conscience of the Hearer. The Office only gives power and charge to the
Teacher, to teach in such or such a Church State. And as it resides in the
Person of the Officer alone; so the Communion (lawful or unlawful) which any
has with it, is in regard of the lawful or unlawful Ecclesiastical Relation
and Union foregoing between the Persons; and not in any working of the Office
upon the Conscience of any. Secondly, Though God bless not the unlawful Office
of the Ministry, which is not of himself: yet he may and does bless the Truths
taught by the Officer, which are of himself, and from Heaven. To deny this of
many in the Church of England, is ( Balaam-like) to curse, where God would have
us to bless.

Object. 2. To hear such a Minister, is to honor, approve, and uphold his
Office of Ministry.

Answ. 1. If this be simply true; then when the heathenish Athenians heard Paul
preach: or when an Unbeliever comes into the Church-Assembly, and hears the
Preacher, he approves, honors, and upholds the Office of the Ministry, which
what it means, he is altogether ignorant.

If any reply: We know the Ministry of the Church to be as it is.

I answer: That the knowing of it makes not our act the more or less an act of
Approbation. If I do an Act wherein I indeed approve of a thing, if I know the
thing, I really approve of it upon Knowledge; if I know it not, I really approve
of it, but ignorantly. 2. If I approve of the Office simply, because I hear the
Officer preach, then I much more approve of all the Doctrines which he
delivers, because I hear him deliver them. If the latter seems unreasonable, so
is the former much more, except I be in Church Communion with the Officer, and
then indeed I really approve of his Office, as I also do of his Doctrine, if it
be according to the Confession of Faith made by me; for then I am in former
Union with him in the one or other, and so have Communion in the Acts thereof.
If this were a good ground, that every one approves of the Evil done in matter
or manner, where he is present, none could live with a good Conscience in the
Society of Men upon Earth. Persons so minded are best alone; for with others
they will keep no Peace, no not with themselves neither, if they be true to
their own Grounds. But they plainly balk themselves in their Courses, either in
weakness of Judgment, or partiality of Affection, or throught want of due
Consideration of their Ways.

Object. 3. By this then it seems a Man may be present at any act of Idolatry,
and do as others do that practice Idolatry, yet not approve of it. And so the
three Nobles in Daniel needed not to have put themselves upon such Pikes of
Danger as they did, for not falling down as others did in the Place.

Answ. 1. In preaching the Truths of the Gospel no Idolatrous Act is performed,
as there was. 2. It must be known, that Approbation is properly in the Heart,
and only the manifestation of Approbation in outward Gesture, Speech or
Writing: Both the one and other are evil, if the thing be evil. But here it
must be considered, that I may in some cases do the same outward Act which
others do, and wherein they manifest their Approbation of Idolatry or other
Evil, and yet I be free in Truth and Deed from all such Approbation and Stain
thereof. The Jews after Christ's Death, and the taking away and abolishing the
legal Ordinances thereby, circumcised their Infants, and frequented the Temple
for Purification, and other Mosaical Ceremonies as parts of God's Worship, and
still remaining of Divine Institution. Paul also circumcised Timothy, entered
the Temple for Purification, and yet did not approve any manner or way of the
Error and Evil in the Jewish Worshippers. To come nearer home: it is the Custom
in Popish Countries, that all that pass by a Cross, must in honor of it, leave
it on the Right Hand, as they may be reason of the placing of it, coming or
going. Now if I ride with others that way, I may do the thing that they do, and
keep Company with them, and yet not honor the Cross as they do. It is, besides
the former, the manner that such as so pass a Cross, should in further honor,
put off their Hat to the said Cross. But if I do this also, I plainly manifest
an Approbation of the Superstition. The reason of the Difference is, because I
have another just Cause to do the former thing, namely to keep on with my
Company, but have no just cause of the latter. But now, suppose that at the
very place where the Cross stands, I meet with some Friend or other, to whom I
owe that civil Respect of uncovering my Head; I may then do that lawfully also
upon the former Ground. So, if I had just and reasonable cause either of coming
or standing by the Magistrate (to whom I owe this Civil Honor) whilst he is
performing some Act of Idolatry in the Streets, or elsewhere; I might upon the
same Ground, go or stand uncovered by him without just Blame. To apply these
things to the Objection moved, seeing no other Cause could resonably be
conceived of the King's commanding such a thing, or of their doing the thing at
his Commandment, save the worshipping of the Idol; they in so doing could not
have escaped the just blame of Idolatry: But now I have just Causes more than
one of my Hearing, and amongst the rest my Edification; and therefore cannot be
challenged therein to approve of the Ministers state or standing. Besides that,
as formerly answered, here is no Idolatrous Act performed.

Object. 4. He that hears them preach, hears them as Ministers of the Church of
England, and as sent by the Bishops, and so in hearing them, hears and receives
them that send them; according to that of our Savior, He that hears you, hears
me; and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. Luke 9.16. Joh. 13.10.

Answ. I grant the former part of the Objection, and account the denying of it
a point of Familism, seeing the Officers of public States in the executing of
their Offices are to be esteemed according to the public Laws and Orders of
those States, and not according to any underhand either Course or Intention by
themselves or others. They are heard as they preach, and preach as Ministers of
the Bishops sending, and the Parishes receiving, to which they are sent by
them. And so I profess I hear them as the Ministers of the Bishop's sending,
and of the Parishes sent to; but not as my Ministers either sending, or sent
to, except I be of those Parishes, or at least in Ecclesiastical Union with
them. Every one, whether of a false Church, or no Church, or excommunicated
from the Church, that hears me, hears me as the Pastor of the Church which I
serve, but not as his Pastor, I suppose, nor in way of any his spiritual
Communion with mine Office of Pastorship. Secondly, By hearing and receiving
there, Christ's means properly the hearking to, believing and obeying the
Doctrine taught by the Apostles, which many despised, unto whom he opposes the
former that heard it. Now the Ministers in the Parishes have not the Doctrines
of the Gospel from the Bishops, as they have their Office; but from God in his
Word, and so far forth as a Man hears, that is, hearkens to, and receives them
by receiving it, he so far hearkens to and receives Christ.

Object. 5. Yet such as hear them, have Communion with their Office of Ministry
what in them lies.

Answ. That is, they have no Communion at all with it, if it lie not in them to
have any, as it does not. If I hold up my Hand as high as I can, I touch Heaven
with my Finger, what in me lies: Do I therefore at all touch it? If such think
to have, any such Communion, it is their Error and Ignorance, but makes not the
thing to be the more, than if they thought not so.

Object. 6. Is there then no Communion at all between the Teacher, and taught?
What Profit then comes there by such Hearing?

Answ. The Church Officer feeds the Flock and Church over which he is set, as
the Object of his Ministry; such as come in (being not in Church-Union
therewith) hear him so doing; and, as a Stander-by, hearing me talk to, or
dispute with another (tho I speak not a word to him) may reap as much, and more
Fruit by my Speech, than he to whom I direct it; so may and does it often come
to pass with him that hears the Minister feed the Flock whose Minister he is,
tho he be no part of it: He may reap Fruit by hearing him feed his Flock, or
seeing him minister Baptism to any Member thereof: Here is Communion only in
the effects of the Truths taught. It were Usurpation in any to partake in a
Church-Priviledg (which the Office of Ministry is) that were not in a
Church State first; and so if hearing simply imported Church Communion, none
but Church Members might lawfully hear.

Object. 7. In the true Church indeed is Order, that the Church Covenant go
before Church Communion, but not so in the false.

Answ. In the true Church there may be unlawful Church Communion without a
preceding Church Covenant, as well as in the other; to wit, if an Act of
Communion (properly) pass between the Church, and him that is no Churchmember;
as for Example, Participation in the Sacraments; but hearing being not properly
an Act of Communion, cannot import Communion necessarily with the one or other;
not otherwise then according to a foregoing Church-Union; whereas to partake
in the Lord's Supper imports Communion in both lawful in him; that is, a lawful
Churchmember, and unlawful in him that is not in such a Church State.

Object. 8. But it is the Order of the Church of England, that all that hear,
are, and so are reputed Members of that Church.

Answ. I deny that there is any such Order; let the Law or Canon either be
showed that so orders things.

Excommunicates are permitted to hear Sermons, tho not Divine Service, as they
call it. 2. What if there were such an Order? It no more either made or
declared me to be a Member there, than does my dwelling in such or such a
Parish make me a Member of that Parish Church; which latter is indeed the Law
and Order there. If the Church with me should make a Law, Canon, or Order, that
all that come in and hear me preach, should thereby become Members of it; we
were the more foolish in making such an Order, but they never a whit the nearer
either for Membership or Communion.

Object. 9. He that hears, appears to have Communion with the Church, and
Ministry, and all Appearance of Evil is to be avoided: 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.

Answ. The Scripture is not to be understood of all that appears Evil to
Others, out of an erroneous and deceived Judgment; for then we must abstain
from almost all Good; seeing there are some to whom almost all Good seems Evil;
but it is meant either of the Doctrine in Prophesy, of which I have some
probable Suspicion; of which the Apostle seems properly to speak; or of that
which appears Evil to a rightly discerning eye. By this imagined Exposition I
might not hire a House in a Parish where I were not known: seeing thereby I
appear a Parish-member.

Object. 10. None can hear without a Preacher, nor Preach except he be sent,
Romans 10.14, 15. Therefore I cannot lawfully hear him that has not a lawful
sending.

Answ. That conclusion is neither in Text, nor sound: I may lawfully hear him
that has no lawful Calling, as I have formerly showed.

2. The Apostle's meaning there, is not to show what is unlawful, but what is
impossible. It is impossible to believe without hearing, and impossible to hear
without preaching, and impossible to preach without the sending there intended;
that is, without God's gracious work of Providence in raising up of Men, by
enabling, and disopsing them to preach for the effectual calling of the Elect
of God, of which he there speaks. If any make a Question, Whether Faith come by
the hearing of the Preachers there? It is more questionable, whether they
themselves want not Faith, which are so barren of Charity, in which true Faith
is fruitful. If Faith come by the Preaching in England to any; it follows
thereupon that such Preachers are sent in the Apostle's sense.

Object. 11. The Sheep of Christ hear his Voice, but strangers they will not
hear. John 10.3, 8, 27.

Answ. Christ does not there speak of the outward Hearing, but of the harkening
unto; that is, as he expounds himself, ver. 3, 4, 5, 14, 15, 16, 17. of the
knowing and beieving of his Voice, and following it. So Chap. 9. I told you
before, and ye did not hear; that is, not believe, ver. 27. And, God hears not
Sinners, ver. 31. that is, approves not of them and their Prayers. So Chap. 11.
I know that thou hear me always; and a thousand times in the Scriptures. The
drift of Christ in the place is (without question) to show the difference
between such as were his Sheep, and such as were not his Sheep. His Sheep heard
his Vioce, and they which were not his Sheep heard not his Voice. But they
which were not his Sheep, nor heard his Voice, as there he speaks, heard him
preach outwardly as well as the rest which were his Sheep: Besides, they which
were his Sheep, and would not hear Strangers in the Lord's Sense, heard
outwardly those Strangers preach, and by hearing them discovered them to be
Strangers, that is, false Prophets. The Strangers of whom he speaks were of the
true Church, and of Israel, but brought false Doctrine tending to kill the
Soul. Such Strangers none should hear, that is, believe and follow.

Object. 12. The Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament warn God's People
of false Prophets, which the Ministers of that Church are, having an unlawful
Calling.

Answ. 1. They warn, not to hearken unto them, nor to believe them, Deuteronomy. 13.3.
1 John 4.1. but to try them, which without hearing them, cannot be done. Not
that all false Prophets are to be heard by all, that they may try them, for
that were to tempt God: But I now answer the Scripture cited, which speaks of
Prophets in the true Church, which were to be heard till they were orderly
repressed, or at least plainly discovered by their Doctrine heard to be such.

2. No Man's unlawful outward Calling makes him a false Prophet, nor his
outward lawful Calling a true; but his true or false Doctrine only makes him a
true or false Prophet. A Man may have a lawful Office of Ministry, and yet be a
false Prophet, if he teach false Doctrine; so may he be a true Prophet, if he
teach the Truth, tho in an unlawful and Antichristian State of Ministry. Yea
Balaam was both a false Prophet in cursing (in purpose) where God would have
him bless, and in teaching Balack to put a Stumbleng-block before the People of
Israel; Numb. 22.25. Josh. 13.22. 2 Pet. 2.15, 26. Rev. 2.14. and yet a true
Prophet in blessing Israel by the Spirit of Prophecy, and Word of the Lord put
into his Mouth. Numb. 25.5, 9, 10, etc. and Chap. 24.23, etc. He is a Prophet
that speaks or declares a thing past, present, or to come: And to prophesy in
our Sense, is nothing else but to speak to Edification, Exhortation, and
Comfort. 1 Cor. 14.3. He that does this is a true Prophet, he that speaks the
contrary, a false. It were good if they, in whose Mouths the challenge of false
Prophets is rifest, would better weigh how themselves expound and apply the
Scriptures in their prophesying, lest notwithstanding any outward lawful
Church State, they be deeper wounded by the rebound of their Accusations this
way, then their Adversaries.

Object. 13. The Lord forbids Judah going to Gilgal or to Bethel. Hos. 4.15, 16.

Answ. The meaning is plain, and the words express that they were not to go
thither to offend, and play the harlot in joining to Idols, verse. 15, 16, 17.
This I grant is to be done in no place; but deny any such thing to be done in
the Hearing by me pleaded for. The Scriptures every where forbid the going, or
coming to such Places, or Persons, as in or by which some Evil is done, to wit,
for the doing of any thing evil, or unlawful in, or with them.

Object. 14. They that eat of the Sacrifice partake of the Altar, 1 Cor. 10.18.
so they that receive the Word from an unlawful Officer, partake with his Office.

Answ. I deny the Consequence; The Office is not to the Word, as the Altar is
to the Sacrifice. The Altar makes the things to be offered, actually to become
a Sacrifice, which it was not before, save only in Destination; as Christ
plainly teaches, saying, The Altar sanctifies the Gift, Mat. 23.19. but so
does not the Office make that to become the Word of God, which was not so
actually before. This Argument has its special weight, being applied to
Sacraments, or proper Institutions. The Church and Ministry under God, make (in
a good sense) the Bread and Wine Sacramental, in their use, which before they
were not. And to the Sacraments (especially the Supper of the Lord) the Apostle
in the place cited has an eye; showing the proportion between the eating of
the Sacrifices in Israel, which in that use became their Sacraments; and the
eating the Sacrifice of the Heathens, which were their Sacraments; and the
eating of the Lord's Supper, as the Sacrament of Christians. With these things
join in the last place, that Sacrifices considered as proper Institutions,
might not be offered or eaten, but in the place chosen, (Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6, 7.) and
sanctified by the Lord for that purpose. No more may Sacraments now be eaten,
but in the Church; whereas the Word may be preached to any, as well out of the
Church as in it.

Object. 15. The Places called Temples and Churches, having been built for
Idolatry, should be demolished, and therefore are not to be frequented,
specially being accounted and made Holy Places, Deuteronomy. 12.3.

Answ. 1. The difference of Places under the Law, when all other places, (for
the most solemn Worship) as opposed to that one place as holy, were unholy, is
now taken away; so as no place now is holy, or unholy, as then.

2. Suppose it be the Magistrates Duty to destroy them, (of which I now dispute
not, nor how far he should proceed therein) yet I deny the Consequence, and
that I may not use that lawfully which he ought to destroy.

The Magistrate ought to have destroyed such Cities in Israel, as whose
Inhabitants had been corrupted with Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.12, 13, 14. Yet might
the Cities (if spared by the Magistrates) lawfully be dwelt in afterward; and
Synagogues in them both be built and frequented for God's moral Worship.
Jericho should have been an execration and heap for ever, 2 King. 2.3, 5. yet
being built again and standing, was the Seat of the School of the Prophets. The
Murderer ought to be put to death: yet if he be spared, and survive, his Wife,
Children and Servants, lawfully may, and in Conscience ought to converse with
him according to the natural and civil relations between them and him.

3. I know no Law in force, nor Doctrine received in the Church of England,
that ascribes any holiness to the places. And for Errors and Abuses personal,
they rest in the persons so erring. I suppose some such Holiness be abscribed
unto them, as to Holy Churches, Holy Buildings, Consecrated Places, etc. Yet I
see no sufficient reason why I may not use lawfully a natural and civil place
in them, for any lawful Work, Civil or Religious, Private or Public, for there
is one reason of all these. If any think those places like the Idolathites, he
mistaketh therein: The things offered to Idols, and eaten in the Idols Temple,
and Feast, were in proportion, as the Bread and Wine (being blessed) in the
Lord's Supper; as both the Apostle, and reason of the thing manifests. Whereas
the place which I use (though for a religious Action to be performed in it)
whether in the Temple, or in mine own House, has only the Consideration of a
natural and civil Circumstance. The Temple as a Temple (which yet I do not
think is done in England by any, either received Doctrine, or Law) may be made
an Idol by Consecration; and yet every particular place in it not made unlawful
for all Uses.

If any further Object, that in preaching and hearing God's Word therein, we
have a religious use of it, they err, not considering that tho the Work done be
religious, yet the Place is no more religious therefore than the time in which
I do it. Time and Place are natural Circumstances, and without which no finite
Action can be performed; and some time and place more commodious and fit than
others for the doing of things of all kinds. I have no more religious Use of
the place which I hear publicly, than in which I pray privately in my House or
Chamber.

Object. 16. Seeing whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, what Word of God, and so
of Faith is there for this Practice?

Answ. Every Scripture that either commands the hearing of God's Word, and
promises a Blessing to them that hear and keep it: Mat. 7.24. Luke 11.28. or
that commands me to edify and build to my self: 1 Pet. 2.5. or to obey the
Magistrate; Tit. 3.1. or to follow after Peace: Heb. 12.14. or to prevent
Offenses: 1 Cor. 10.32. warrants and in Cases enjoins this Practice, supposing
no Sin to be in the way: of which in answering the former Objections (to which
I suppose all other of weight or color may be referred) I hope I have cleared
it.

And for any unsatisfied, or other-wise minded, I wish I knew their Reasons
either for their good, by a sufficent Answer to be given unto them, or for mine
own, by admitting of them, as there may appear weight in them. In the mean
while, let me entreat of the differently minded one way or other, that they
would exercise mutually that true Christian Charity one toward another, and
Compassion one of another Infirmities, which becomes all that will be in Truth
and Deed, Followers of Christ Jesus; and which is most needful (specially in
things of this kind, for the preserving of the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond
of Peaee; which Bond of Peace whilst Men are not careful to keep inviolated by
brotherly Forbearance in matters of this nature, they miserably dissipate, and
scatter themselves, and one another, even as the Ears in a Sheaf are scattered
when the Bond breaks.

But as few or no good things of any kind are so well used by some, but others
as much abuse them; so it is to be feared, there will not want, who will change
the lawful Liberty this way, into lawless Licentiousness, and so take up
instead of all other religious Exercises, a Hearing Course only.

And those specially of them who disliking the present Church State in England,
yet want due Zeal and Love to that which themselves approve. Let me a little
turn my Speech to such, for the preventing in some, and remedying in others of
that inordinate and broken Course.

And first I demand of such, what is this Course of hearing such Ministers, as
whose state of Ministry they approve not? Is it any particular Ordinance left
by Christ, and enjoined all Christians in all Ages and Places? Verily no. It
were to be wished that no Church-Ministry were to be found, which is not
approveable by the Word of God, notwithstanding any good Act performed by them
that possess it. This Hearing is only a work-of natural Liberty it self, as I
have showed, and sanctified to Believers by their Faith. It is lawful to use it
upon occasion, as it is to borrow of other Men; but to make it our Course, is
to live by borrowing, which no honest Man, that can do otherwise possibly,
would do. Yea what differs it from a kind of spiritual Vagabondry in him that
can mend it, tho with some Difficulty, to live in no certain Church State, and
under no Church Order, and Government.

To print deep in our Hearts the Conscience of our Duties this way, let us
briefly consider how many Bonds of Necessity the Lord has laid upon us, to
walk in the Fellowship, and under the Ordinances of the ministerial and
instituted Church.

First, We have lying upon us the necessity of Obedience to Christ our Lord, in
the Commission Apostolical enjoining, that after we be made Disciples, as the
Word is, and baptized, we be withal taught to observe whatsoever he has
commanded, Mat. 28.19, 20. It must not then suffice us that we are Disciples
and Christians, but we must join herewith the entire observation of all the
Ordinances of Christ (as we can find means) from the greatest to the least. And
let us beware that like the Scribes and Pharisees, we call none of God's
Commandments little, because we would make our selves, and others believe, that
little and light account is to be made of observing them; lest we our selves be
called little, that is, be indeed none in the Kingdom of Heaven. Our Sins of
Ignorance and humane frailty, alas, are too many, let us not add thereunto
presumptuous Sins, either of Commission or Omission, to provoke God withal.

2. The Church, and ministrations therein, are not needless, but most needful
means sanctified of God, and given of Christ for our Salvation and edification
thereunto; which he that despises, that is, does not submit his Soul and Body
unto (as he has means) and converse therein with good Conscience, tho in
Affliction and Persecution, despises not Man, but God and Christ, to the
depriving of himself of the Fruit of God's most gracious presence in his House
and Temple, where he has promised to dwell; and of Christ's ascension into
Heaven, for the pouring out of all Kingly Gifts and Largesses upon Men for the
Work of the Ministry.

3. Our great Insirmities, whereof both the Scriptures every where, and our own
experience warn us, show in what great need we stand of all the Lord's Holy
Ordinances and Institutions, for the supplying of what is wanting in us, and
correcting what is amiss, and continuing and increasing of what is good, unto
the coming of the Lord: where we must also take knowledge, and remember, that it
is one note of difference, and the same very clear, between the wisdom of the
Flesh, and the wisdom of the Spirit, that the former will be sure to provide
for the Body, and outward Man, what may be, tho with danger and prejudice of
the Spiritual; the other will take care and order for the Spiritual State, tho
the outward pinch for it. And if any, out of the view, and persuasion of his
own strength of Grace, come to conceive, that he stands in no such need of
Christ's Ordinances, or of any Christian Fellowship for the dispensing of them:
let such a Man consider, that the less need he has of others by reason of his
greater plenty of Grace received, the more need others have of him for their
supply. But whatsoever any imagine of himself, the Apostle, who was not
partial, teaches, that the very Head (the chief and highest Members) cannot
say to the Feet (the lowest and meanest Members) I have no need of you, 1 Cor.
12.21.

4. And lastly, It is necessary for our sound and entire comfort with the Lord
our God, that our Obedience be entire in respect of all his Holy Commandments,
which we do, or can discern to be such, and to concern us, according to that of
the Man of God, Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy
Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. That so we may have our part in the Testimony given
by the Holy Ghost of Zachary and Elizabeth: which was, that they were Righteous
before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless, Luke 1.5, 6. That is, both in the Moral Precepts, and Sacred
Ceremonies, and Institutions of the Lord. Whose Examples we in our Place and
Times are to follow, not balking with the Lord in any thing, great or small:
nor seeking starting-holes, whereby to escape from him in his Word, which is
holy, good, and pure. Good, as coming from our good God, good in it self; and
good for us, if we converse therein as we ought, in good Conscience toward
God, Zeal for his Ordinances, Modesty in our Selves, and Charity toward other
Men; specially toward them with whom God has joined us in the most and best
things: taking heed lest by any uncharitable, either judgment of, or
withdrawing from their Persons, for such humane Frailties, as unto which, into
one kind or other, all Adam's sinful Posterity are subject; we sin not more by
our course held against them, than they by theirs in them, which God forbid.

To conclude; For my self, thus I believe with my Heart before God, and profess
with my Tongue, and have before the World, that I have one and the same Faith,
Hope, Spirit, Baptism, and Lord, which I had in the Church of England, and none
other: that I esteem so many in that Church, of what state or order soever, as
are truly partakers of that Faith (as I account many thousands to be) for my
Christian Brethren; and my self a Fellow member with them of that one Mystical
Body of Christ scattered far and wide throughout the World: that I have always
in Spirit and Affection, all Christian Fellowship, and communion with them, and
am most ready in all outward Actions and Exercises of Religion, lawful and
lawfully done, to express the same: and withal, that I am persuaded the heating
of the Word of God there preached, in the manner, and upon the grounds formerly
mentioned, both lawful and, upon occasion, necessary for me, and all true
Christians, withdrawing from that Hierarchical Order of Church Government and
Ministry, and the appearances thereof: and uniting in the Order and Ordinances
instituted by Christ, the only King, and Lord of his Church, and by all his
Disciples to be observed. And lastly, That I cannot communicate with, or submit
unto the said Church Order and Ordinances there established, either in State or
Act, without being condemned of mine own Heart, and therein pro^oking God, who
is greater than my Heart, to condemn me much more. And for my Failings (which
may easily be too many) one way or other, of Ignorance herein; and so for all
my other Sins, I most humbly crave pardon first, and most at the Hands of God.
And so of all Men whom therein I offend, or have offended any manner of way;
even as they desire, and look that God should pardon their Offenses.

Thus far Mr. Robinson.

ADDENDA.
The Judgment of several other Independent Ministers, as well Ancient as
Modern, concerning this Matter.
MR. Henry Jacob (a strict Independent) in his printed Declaration 1612,
annexed to his Book, called, The Divine Beginning and Institution of Christ's
True Visible Church, he has this Assertion, page 6. For my part I never was
nor am separated from all public Communion with the Congregations of England.
I acknowledge therefore that in England are true visible Churches and Ministers,
tho accidentally, yet such as I refuse not to communicate with; and those of
the Separation, in some Matters, are streighter than I wish they were.

And the Brownists, in their Confession of Faith, printed 1616, they declare,
That a Minister receiving Prelatical Ordination, if he be a Parish Minister, it
makes not a nullity of the Ministry of him in every respect besides. That is,
it makes not void all truness of Ministry in him, as a believing Congregation
assenteth to hear him, and uses him for their Minister, when on some weighty
occasion, they join only to that which is true in the said Minister, and
testify in the best manner they can that they do so, orrdinarily leaving the
Parish Congregation and Ministry for their Error. With all professing,
publishing, and practicing, freely and constantly, the simple Truth therein
with our selves; this quitteth us from all Evil, and appearance of Evil in this
Matter, it being no Evil, nor appearance of Evil, to join with the
Parish-Congregation and Ministry in such respects; and so far forth as is
aforesaid, we ought sometimes, on weighty Occasions, so to join, and we sin if
we do not. -- And though we do not think every form of Prayer sinful and
absolutely unlawful, yet we think it not so profitable, and to some hurtful.

Mr. Norton of New England, upon those words of our Blessed Savior; The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, all things that they say unto you,
that observe and do. Which, says he, not only permits, but requires and
implies full Communion.

The five dissenting Brethren, ( viz. Dr Goodwin, Mr. Bridge. Mr. Ny, Mr.
Greenhill, and Mr. Sydr. Simpson) in their Apologetical Narrative, page 6. they
say, We have always professed, and that in those times when the Churches of
England were the most, either actually, overspread with Defilements, or in the
greatest danger thereof, -- that we both did, and would hold a Communion with
them, as the Churches of Christ.

Mr. Firmin argues about this Matter, page 29. Suppose there should be some
humane Mixtures, are all the Ordinances of God polluted? Why do you not
communicate with them in those Ordinances which are pure? And in his Separation
Examined, page 40. says, Corrupt Members there were enough in the Jewish
Church, and so in the Christian Church soon after, and in the Apostles Times;
but you have no Example of separating from them.

Dr. Thomas Goodwin on the Ephesians, page 487, 488, 489. -- His Judgment
concerning Parish Churches, Ministry and Communion.

In my last Discourse I handled what was meant by the word Church. There was a
necessity that lay upon me to open that distinction of Church Universal and
Particular. I gave you two Cautions about two Errors concerning each of these,
both toward the Church Universal, and toward Particular Churches. Concerning
which I must necessarily say something to take away some Mistakes and
Misapprehensions of my meaning, for I walk by this Rule, to give no offense to
Jew or Gentile, or to the Churches of God, as the Apostle speaks.

The first Error, I told you, was of the Donatists of old, who denied the
Church Catholock, and restrained it to one part of the World; and yet the
imputation of this Error lies upon those whom you call Brownists to this day;
this I cleared them from, and it is as great a clearning as can be.

The second Error, was of those who hold Particular Churches (those you call
Parish-Churches) to be no true Churches of Christ, and their Ministers to be no
true Ministers, and upon that ground forbear all Church Communion with them in
Hearing, or in any other Ordinance. And as I acquitted these from that other
Error, so I acquitted my self from this, and my Brethren in the Ministry. I
would not now have touched upon it again, but, as I said, to clear, not my self
so much, as some mistakes about it.

The first is this, It was understood as if I said, that all Parish-Churches
and Ministers generally, were Churches and Ministers of Christ, such as with
whom Communion might be held. I said not so, I was wary in my Expressions; I
will only say this unto you about it, There is no Man that desires Reformation
in this Kingdom, (as the generality of all Godly People do) but will acknowledge
and say, that multitude of Parishes, where Ignorance and Profaneness
overwhelmeth the generality, Scandalousness and Simony, the Ministers
themselves; that these are not Churches and Ministers fit to be held Communion
with. Only this, The Ordinances that have been administered by them, so far we
must acknowledge them, that they are not to be recalled or repeated again.

But here lies the Question, my Brethren, and my Meaning. Whereas now in some
of the Parishes in this Kingdom, there are many Godly Men that do constantly
give themselves up to the Worship of God in public, and meet together in one
Place to that end, in a constant way, under a Godly Minister, whom they
themselves have chosen to cleave to, (tho they did not choose him at first).
These, notwithstanding their mixture and want of Discipline, I never thought
for my part, but that they were true Churches of Christ, and Sister Churches,
and so ought to be acknowledged. And the contrary was the Error that I spoke
against.

Secondly, For holding Communion with them. I say, as Sister-Churches,
occasionally as Strangers, Men might hold Communion with them. And it is
acknowledged by all Divines, that there is not that Obligation lying upon a
Stranger, that is not a Member of a Sister-Church, to find fault in that
Church, or in a Member of it, as does on the Church it self to which one
belongs.

I will give you my Reasons, that moved me to speak so much. It was not simply
to vent my own Judgment, or simply to clear my self from that Error; but the
Reasons, or rather the Motives and Considerations that stirred me in it, were
these;

First, If we should not acknowledge these Churches, thus stated, to be true
Churches of Christ, and their Ministers true Ministers, and their Order such,
and hold Communion with them too in the sense spoken of, we must acknowledge no
Church in all the Reformed Churches; none of all the Churches in Scotland, nor
in Holland, nor in Germany, for they are all as full of mixture as ours. And to
deny that to our own Churches, which we do not to the Churches abroad, nothing
can be more absurd. And it will be very hard to think, that there has been no
Church since the Reformation.

Secondly, I know nothing tends more to the peaceable Reformation amongst us,
than to break down this Partition Wall; for there is nothing provokes more than
this does, to deny such Churches to be true Churches of Christ. For do but
think with your selves, and I will give you a familiar Example: You come to a
Man, whom you think to be a Godly Man; you tell him, he has these and these
Sins in him, and they are great ones; it is as much as he can bear, though you
tell him he is a Saint, and acknowledge him so. But if you come to him, and say,
besides this, You are a Limb of the Devil, and you have no Grace in you; this
provokes all in a Man, when there is any ground in himself to think so, or in
another to judge him so. So it is here, Come to Churches, and say, You have
these Defects among you, and these Things to be reformed; but if you will come,
and say, Your Churches and your Ministers are Antichristian, and come from
Babylon, there is nothing provokes more. Therefore, if there be a Truth in it,
(as I believe there is) Men should be zealous to express it; for this is the
great Partition Wall that hinders of twain making one.

Then again, This is that which I consider, and it is a great Consideration
also. I know that Jesus Christ has given his People Light in matters of this
nature by degrees. Thousands of good Souls that have been bred up and born in
our Assemblies, and enjoy the Ordinances of God, and have done it comfortably,
cannot suddenly take in other Principles, you must wait upon Christ to do it.

In this Case, Men are not to be wrought off by Falsehoods, God has no need of
them. No, rather till Men do take in Light, you should give them all that is
comfortable in the condition they are in; we should acknowledge every good Thing
in every Man, in every Church, in every Thing, and that is a way to work upon
Men, and to prevail with them; as it is Philem. verse. 6. That the Communication
of thy Faith may become effectual by the acknowledgment of every good thing,
which is in you in Christ Jesus. It is that which builds men up, by
acknowledgment of every good thing that is in them.

Lastly, The last Inconvenience is this, It does deprive men of all those Gifts
that are found amongst our Ministers, and in this Kingdom, that they cannot
hold any Communion or Fellowship with them. So that I profess my self as
zealous in this Point, as in any other I know; And for my part this I say, and
I say it with much integrity, I never yet took up Religion by Parties, in the
lump; I have found by trial of things, that there is some Truth on all sides. I
have found Holiness where you would little think it, and so likewise Truth; and
I have learned this Principle, which I hope I shall never lay down till I am
swallowed up of Immortality; and that is that which I said before, To
acknowledge every good Thing, and hold Communion with it, in Men, in Churches,
or whatsoever else. I learn this from Paul, I learn this from Jesus Christ
himself, he fills all in all; he is in the Hearts of his People, and fills
them in his Ordinances to this day; and where Jesus Christ fills, why should
we deny an acknowledgment, and a right hand of Fellowship and Communion.

My Brethren, this Rule that I have now mentioned, (which I profess I have
lived by, and shall do while I live) I know I shall never please Men in it.
Why? it is plain, For this is the nature and condition of all Mankind; if a Man
dissents from others in one thing, he loses them in all the rest; and
therefore if a Man do take what is good of all sides, he is apt to lose them
all, but he pleases Christ by it, and so will I for this particular.

Dr. Owen, page 177. of Evangelical Love, says, That it is pleaded indeed, the
Substance of the Worship of God ought to be no other than what Jesus Christ
has appointed; yet the Manner and Mode of performance of what he does command,
with other Rites and Ceremonies, for Order and Decency, may lawfully be
instituted by the Rulers of the Church; let it therefore at present be granted
(says he) that so they may be by them, who are persuaded of the lawfulness of
those Modes, and of the things wherein they consist.

Indeed he very much condemns Communion with such Apostatical Churches who are
guilty of Idolatry, and require unscriptural Terms of Communion: but what
Churches those are, remains to be proved. I am sure he asserts, that many
Errors in Doctrine, Disorders in Sacred Administrations, irregular walking in
Conversation, with neglect and abuse of Discipline in Rulers, may fall out in
some Churches, and yet not evacuate their Church State, or give sufficient
warrant for any Person to leave their Communion, and to separate from them,
Page 76. Evang. Love.

And, page 176. We wholly deny that the Mistakes of Christians in joining
themselves unto such Churches as have no warrantable Institution, ought to be
any cause of the diminishing of our Love toward them; for they may be Persons
born of God, united to Christ, partakers of the Spirit, and belong to the
Church Catholic Mystical, which is the first principal Object of all Christian
Love and Charity; notwithstanding their Errors and Wanderings from the Truth in
this Matter.

And the said Dr. Owen, who in his Discourse of the Work of the Spirit in
Prayer, writes against the making or composing of Forms of Prayer for our
selves to be used privately, desires the Reader, p. 200. to observe that he
does not argue against Forms of Prayer as unlawful to be used. And, page 222.
he grants, that Men or Churches may agree upon a prescribed Form by common
consent, as judging and avowing it best for their own Edification.

Again, page 228. Whether they are approved or disapproved of God, whether they
are lawful or unlawful, we do not consider, but only whether they are for
Spiritual Benefit and Advantage for the good of our own Souls, and the
Edification of others, as set up in competition with the Gift before described.
So that it seems the Doctor does not judge such Forms of Prayer unlawful which
are for the good of our own Souls, and the Edification of others, and which are
not in competition with the Gift before described.

And therefore ( p. 231, and 232.) supposing that those who make use of, and
plead for Forms of Prayer, especially in Public, do in a due manner prepare
themselves for it by holy meditation, with an endeavor to bring their Souls
into a holy frame of Fear, delight and reverence of God; let it also be
supposed that they have a good End and Design in the Worship they address
themselves unto, namely, the Glory of God, and their own Spiritual Advantage;
the Prayers themselves, tho they should be in some things irregular, may give
occasion to exercise those Acts of Grace which they were otherwise prepared
for: And I say yet further, that whilst these Forms of Prayer are clothed with
the general Notions of Prayer, that is, are esteemed as such in the minds of
them that use them, are accompanied in their use with the Motives and Ends of
Prayer, express no Matter unlawful to be insisted on in Prayer, directing the
Souls of Men to none but lawful Objects of Divine Worship and Prayer, the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and whilst Men make use of them with the true
design of Prayer, looking after due assistance unto Prayer, I do not judge there
is any such Evil in them, as that God will not communicate his Spirit to any in
the use of them, so as that they should have no holy Communion with him in and
under them. Much less will I say, that God never therein regards their Persons,
or rejects their praying as unlawful: For the Persons and Duties of Men may be
accepted with God, when they walk and act in sincerity according to their
Light, tho in many things, and those of no small importance, sundry
Irregularities are found, both in what they do, and in the manner of doing it.
Where Persons walk before God in their Integrity, and practice nothing contrary
to their Light and Conviction in his Worship, God is merciful unto them, although
they order not every thing according to the Rule and Measure of the Word. So
was it with them who came to the Passover in the days of Hezekiah, They had not
cleansed themselves, but did eat the Passover otherwise than it was written, 2 Chronicles. 30.18.

And, p. 235. he grants, That such Forms of Prayer have not any intrinsecal
Evil in the composition of them; but argues against the setting up and
prescribing such Forms of Prayer universally, in opposition, and unto the
exclusion of free Prayer.

And, p. 236. If they appear not contrary unto, or inconsistent with, or are
not used in a way exclusive of that Work of the Holy Spirit in Prayer, which we
have described from the Scripture, nor are reducible to any Divine Prohibition,
I shall not contend with any about them.

Much more might have been collected, even out of the Writings of the
Congregational Ministers concerning these weighty Matters, but this is
sufficient. I know the Reader will be sollicitous to know their Judgment about
the Lord's Supper, and kneeling thereat; but I must confess, at present, I
cannot find they say any thing particularly about it, only the practice of some
of them in receiving the Sacrament according to the manner of the Church of
England, does evince, that all of them do not deny the lawfulness of it, but
that they may sometimes communicate there, tho ordinarily they do with their
own particular Churches, for better-Edification, as they judge.

Mr. Tombs, a learned Minister, and a great Anabaptist, wrote a Book to prove
it lawful, both to Hear and Communicate with the Church of England; and his
practice at Salisbury was conformable thereunto.

Indeed the Nonconformists that are called Presbyterians, both Ancient and
Modern, do generally allow the lawfulness of Communicating with the Church of
England, tho at the same Time they held the Ceremonies to be burden some, and
therefore would avoid them if they could; but if they could not have the
Sacrament otherwise, they took it as they could have it.

Thus says Mr. Baxter in his Christian Directory, page 859. First Edition; Had
I my choice, I would receive the Lord's Supper sitting; but where I have not, I
will use the Gesture which the Church uses. And it is to be noted, that the
Church of England requires the Communicants only to receive it kneeling, but
not to eat and drink it kneeling, when they have received it.

And his Resolution of this Case ought to be considered, viz.

Quest. May the Communion-Tables be turned Altar-wise? and railed in? And is it
lawful to come up to the Rails to Communicate?

Answ. 1. -- God has given us no particular Command or Prohibition about these
Circumstances, but the general Rules for Unity, Edification, Order and Decency:
Whether the Table should stand this way or that way, here or there, etc. he
has not particularly determined.

2. They that turn the Table Altar-wise, and rail it in, out of a design to
draw Men to Popery, or in a scandalous way which will encourage Men to, or in
Popery, do sin.

3. So do they that rail in the Table, to signify that the Vulgar or
Lay-Christians must not come to it, but be kept at a distance; when Christ in
his Personal Presence admitted his Disciples to communicate at the Table with
himself.

4. But where there are no such Ends, but only to imitate the Ancients that did
thus, and to show reverence to the Table on the account of the Sacrament, by
keeping away Dogs, keeping Boys from sitting on it, etc. The professed Doctrine
of the Church condemns Transubstantiation, the real Corporal Presence, etc.
as ours does. In this Case Christians should take these for such as they are,
indifferent things, and not censure or condemn each other for them; nor should
any enforce them on any that think them unlawful.

5. And to Communicate, is not only lawful in this Case, where we cannot prove
that the Minister sins, but even when we suspect an evil Design in him,
which we cannot prove; yea, or when we can prove that his personal
Interpretation of the Place, Name, Situation, and Rails, is unsound; for we
assemble there to communicate in, and according to the professed Doctrine of
Christianity, and the Churches and our own open Profession, and not after every
private Opinion and Error of the Minister. As I may receive from an Anabaptist
or Separatist, notwithstanding his Personal Errors; so may I from another Man's,
whose Error destroys not his Ministry, nor the Ordinance, as long as I
consent not to it; yea, and with the Church profess my dissent.

6. Yet caeteris paribus, every free Man that has his choice, should choose to
Communicate, rather where there is most Purity and least Error, than with those
that swerve more from regular Exactness.

FINIS.

