THE Letters Patents OF THE States General, (Translated out of DUTCH) GRANTED
TO William Walcot, Esquire Upon their Seeing the Demonstrations of his ART of
Making Seawater Fresh, etc. And Putrified-Water Wholesome.
THE States General of the United Netherlands, To all that shall see these
Presents, or hear the same to be read, Greeting. We do make known, That we
Received the Humble Petition to us presented, in the Name, and on the behalf of
William Walcot; purporting that he the Petitioner, by the Use of his own
Industry had found out a New Invention, not only to make Foul Stinking Water
useful to be Drank, but also and principally Salt or Brackish Water comeing out
of the Sea, to make Sweet and Fresh in a short time, in great quantities, for
all Ships, in long Voyages at Sea; upon Reasonable Terms; and to Make and Use
the same as occasion shall be in Cities, Legers and Ships, or elsewhere, where
no Fresh Water is to be had, and where Annoyed with Brackish or Stinking Water,
for the Ease and Sustenance of all Men, as well by Land, as upon the Water,
upon any occasion whatsoever: For the finding out of which Invention, the
Petitioner had been at great Expense, and that therefore he ought to enjoy he
Benefit thereof: And that he the Petitioner was informed that some Ill
Designing Persons were endeavoring to Imitate his said Invention, and so to
draw the Benefit from him. He thereupon desiring our Octroy or Patent, and we
having taken the same into our Consideration, and finding our selves inclined
to the Prayer of the Petitioner, Have Consented, Agreed, and Granted unto him;
and by these Presents do Consent, Agree, and Grant unto him, that he only,
(...) of all ^^^ers, Make, Practice, let at Work, and Use, and also Sell the
said New Invention for the Term of Fifteen Years now next Ensuing, in these
United Netherlands, Associated Countries, Cities, and Members thereof, for
making Stinking Waters useful to be Drank, and Salt, or Brackish Water Sweet
and Fresh: And we therefore Prohibit all, and every the Inhabitants of the
aforesaid United Netherlands, Associated Countries, Cities, and Members
thereof, within the said Space of Fifteen Years next Ensuing, the said New
Invention in part, or in whole, either great or small, to Imitate, or cause to
be Imitated; or being Imitated, to Import, Sell, or Use the same, under
forfeiture of all the Imitated Works and Instruments: And moreover, of the Sum
of Three Thousand Carolus Gilders; One Third Part thereof to go to the Officer
who shall Inform, another Third Part to the Use of the Poor, and the remaining
Third Part to the Use of the Petitioner; Ordering and Commanding all Officers,
Justices, Magistrates, and Inhabitants of the aforesaid Countries, and all
others whom it may Concern: that they permit and suffer the said Petitioner to
Enjoy and have the full Effect of this our Octroy, Consent, and Privilege, any
Let or Opposition to the contrary, notwithstanding. He the Petitioner being
nevertheless bound by this our Octroy, to Desire, and also Obtain an Octroy
from such Province or Provinces, where he shall Practice, and set at Work his
aforesaid New Invention.

Given at the Hague under the Seal of the State, and the Firm of the Lord
presiding in our Assembly, and the Hand of our Secretary, the 16 th. of
September. 1684. By the Command of the aforesaid Lords States General. L. S.
Francis Verbolt. H. Fagell.

This Agrees in Substance with the Original,

London, the 17 th. of January, 1692. WILLIAM SCOREY, Not.



THE Letters Patents OF THE States of Holland, (Translated out of DUTCH)
GRANTED TO William Walcot, Esquire Upon their Seeing the Demonstrations of his ART
of Making Seawater Fresh, etc. And Putrified-Water Wholesome.
THE States of Holland and West-Friezeland do make known, That Whereas William
Walcot, Esquire has showed unto Us, That he, Petitioner, by Long Study, and
Unwearied Labor, and very great Charge in making Instruments for Trial of
Experiments, has perfectly Attained the so long sought for Art of Making of
all Impure, Stinking, as also Salt and Brackish Water, Sweet, Fresh, and
Wholesome for the Service and Support of all Men, by great Quantities in a
Short Time, and with small Charge; the Clear Proof whereof the Petitioner had
shown in part to the Lords Deputies out of the Assembly of Their High and
Mightinesses, and likewise to several of Our Assembly: But the further
Serviceableness and Benefit, he will make more clearly appear, when the same
shall be brought under the Protection of our Grant (with Exclusion of all other
Gain-seeking Men) for a General Use both by Sea and Land. The Petitioner humbly
requests that We would please to take into Consideration the Resolution of
their High and Mightinesses, Dated the 11th of March, 1684. Exhibited unto us,
taken upon a Request of the Petitioner delivered to their High and
Mightinesses, therein Offering, That if his Adversary Mr. Fitzgerald, with his
Adherents, could in all things Outdo, and better Manage and Work the
Petitioners Invention than the Petitioner, they might then obtain a Free Grant;
and the Petitioner, notwithstanding the Great Charges he has been at, would be
content to depart without Speaking of a Conjunction, or Asking a Grant. And
forasmuch as it did very Clearly Appear to their High and Mightinesses, and to
diverse of Our Assembly, by the Petitioners Grant from the King of England,
Dated the 28th. of October, 1675, That the Petitioner was the True Inventor,
and the first who had given Right Demonstration thereof; and that his Opponents
could as yet do no otherwise, than what in times of Necessity many Years past
had been done in Ships, but was never Approved for Good or Wholesome Water; In
pursuance whereof, the Petitioner desires the Benefit of the abovementioned
Resolution: Also the Allowing of Two Grants for one and the same Invention, was
a thing contrary to the General Custom of Nations, and would hinder the
Practice of Art, as appeared in England, and at once discourage the Petitioner
to put forward in the same; for then his Opponents making themselves Masters
thereof, would quickly Vaunt it over all the World, (of which the Petitioner
has already had some effect) and thrust the Petitioner thereout; they as is
now clearly manifest had not the Art to make Salt Water, standing, Foul and
Stinking Water Wholesome, or to do more or otherwise than any Ordinary
Distiller, who might altogether pretend to as much Right to a Grant as his
Opponents: The Petitioner most humbly Requested, that we would please to
observe that the whole Regard and Design of his Opponents appears here to be as
they have done in England, to hinder the Petitioners part Design of putting in
Practice his Laudable Invention, (a Matter of so great Esteem and
Serviceableness for the Whole World) and to force him to a Compliance, whereby
the Fruits of the Petitioners Study, Cost, and Labor might be brought to them,
as they had Endeavored to do in England, by Great Expenses of Money, and
Powerful Interest of Friends; against which the Petitioner did not use such
Means, but submitted his Case to the Justice and High Wisdom of Our Famous
Assembly, on which it now depends to keep alive this Serviceable Secret, that
it may be made Practicable in the World. The Premises being considered, the
Petitioner most humbly prayed, That We would please to bestow on him a Grant,
Prohibiting all others directly or indirectly, by Sea or by Land, to Serve
themselves therewith, and that for so many Years as has been Granted by Us to
other Finders out of Inventions of great Weight. Now, So it is, That We having
Considered the aforesaid Case and Request; and being Inclined at the
Petitioners Prayers, (after having taken the Judgment and Advice of the Lords
Deputies of the City of Dort, and others by Us Appointed for Sea-Affairs and
Manufactures) Have of Our Right Knowledge, Sovereign Power and Authority,
Consented, Agreed and Granted, We do Consent, Agree, and Grant unto the
Petitioner by these presents, That he, during the Time of Fifteen Years next
following, with his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, his said Invention of making
Foul, Stinking, and Salt Water Sweet and Good, as well by Sea as on Land,
within our said Countries, Only shall and may Make and Use, and Cause to be
Made, Used, and Practiced. Forbidding therefore all and every Person to make
Use of his said Invention, and Works, Directly or Indirectly, at Sea or on
Land, or to Imitate the same, or the same being Counterfeited, to bring or Sell
the same in Our said Countries, upon Forfeiture of the Imitated Works, and a
Fine of Fifteen Hundred Gilders to be Forfeited over and above, to be Applied,
One Third Part to the Informer, One Third Part to the Poor of the Place where
it shall happen, and the Remaining Third Part to the Petitioner, his Heirs,
Executors, and Assigns. And to the End, the Petitioner may Enjoy this Our
Consent and Grant, as he ought; We Charge all and every, Whom it may Concern,
that they may Permit and Suffer the Petitioner peaceably, quietly, and fully to
Use and Enjoy what is here contained, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

Done at the Hague under Our Great Seal here Appending, the Fourteenth of
September, in the Year of Our Lord and Savior, One Thousand, Six Hundred,
Eighty Four. Gasp. Fagel.
By Ordinance of the States,

Simon Van Beaumont.


It Agrees in Substance with the Original: Which I Testify,

London, 16th. January, 1692. WILLIAM WIGHTMAN, Not.



THE Letters Patents OF THE States of Zeeland, (Translated out of DUTCH)
GRANTED TO William Walcot, Esquire For the Encouragement of his ART of Making
Seawater Fresh, etc. And Putrified-Water Wholesome.
THE States of the Land and Earldom of Zeeland, do make known, That we having
seen the Octroy Granted by the High and Mighty Lords, States General of the
United Netherlands, and of the Lords States of Holland and Friezeland, to
William Walcot, Esquire for the Space of Fifteen Years, all Salt, Brackish, and
Stinking Water, Fresh, Clear, Sweet, and Sound, to make; but chiefly Salt and
Brackish Water coming out of the Sea, in a short Time, and great Quantities,
for all Ships in long Voyages at Sea, upon Reasonable Terms, to make Sweet and
Fresh Water; and as occasion shall serve to cause the same to be made for, and
used in Cities, Legers, and Ships, or elsewhere, where no Fresh Water can be
obtained, and where Annoyed with Salt, Brackish, or Stinking Water, for the
Ease and Support of all Persons, as well by Land, as upon the Water, upon any
Occasion whatsoever; for the finding out of which Invention, great Charges had
been Expended, so that of Right he ought to Enjoy the Benefit thereof; but the
Petitioner being Informed that some Ill Designing Persons Endeavored to
Imitate his aforesaid Invention, and so to deprive him of the Benefit of the
same; He therefore desired Our Octroy: Which having considered, So it is, That
we finding our selves inclinable to the Prayer of the aforesaid Petitioner,
have Consented, Agreed, and Granted unto him; and do Consent, Agree, and Grant,
by these Presents, That he Only, with Exclusion of all others, for the Space of
Fifteen Years next Ensuing, in this Province, the aforesaid New Invention of
Making Stincking-Water fit to be Drank, and Salt or Brackish, Sweet and Fresh
Water, may Make, Exercise, Set at Work, and Use; also Sell, and Dispose of the
same. Forbidding all and every the Inhabitants within the aforesaid time of
Fifteen Years, next Ensuing, the said New Invention, in Whole, or in Part,
Great, or Small, to Imitate, or cause to be Imitated, or Used; or Imitated
elsewhere; to be Brought, Sold, or Used in this Province, under Forfeiture of
all the Imitated Works and Instruments. And moreover, the Sum of Fifteen
Hundred Gilders; One Third to go to the Officer who shall Inform, One Third to
the Poor of the Place where the Matter shall happen, and the remaining Third
Part to the Petitioner. We Charging and Commanding all, and every one, whom it
may Concern, That they Permit and Suffer the Petitioner, Peaceably, Quietly,
and Entirely, to Enjoy and Use the Contents of this Our Octroy, all Impediments
to the contrary notwithstanding.

With a Hanging Seal. Thus done at the Court of Zeeland, at Middlebrough, the
30 th. of April, 1685. By Command of the aforesaid Lords States.

V. Verheye.


This Agrees in Substance with the Original,

London, the 17th. of January, 1692/3. WILLIAM SCOREY, Not.




