A Letter of the Lord North, touching Thirlow School.
For Sir Henry North.
My Noble Friend and Kinsman;
KNowing your worthy inclinations judgment, love to Justice and Truth, with
your industry and assidual exercise thereof in your course and Country.

Whereas by virtue of a Commission for Charitable Uses, (so pretended by the
procurers) many Suffolk-Gentlemen of worth and quality have been named and
employed, but mainly intended for the outing of a poor Village-Schoolmaster
maligned upon private spleen and dislike: the Country being full of discourse
and contest about the proceeding therein; I have judged fit to i^ part to you
(conversant with the best) what I have met with by my diligent enquiry of the
steps and agitations therein.

I was at first as much a stranger, as uninterested in the matter and parties;
but hearing by common Fame somewhat of the ground and obliquity of intentions
against the Defendant, I became moved to a Christian commiseration, having
received many Testimonies considerable on his behalf.

The Commission thus taken out, Complaints were upon the meanest sort of
Neighbors, with their following Subscriptions, labored for; and procured for
a groundwork, and consequently a Jury provided in a place remote to pass upon
the Evidence exhibited, which surprizingly produced a casting Verdict: both
Jury and Commissioners ignorant of the concealed plot and practice, could not
well but be swayed thereby: which I finding as yet but an imperfect Embrion
toward a Decree (by some my writing) interposed, offered some preventing
informations and considerations; whereupon to avoid subsequent trouble, charge
and disgraces, but nothing prevailing, a Decree past as well against others, as
the Schoolmaster, much unexpected to be drawn in. This undermining Stratagem
was thus broached and carried on.

Mr. Thomas Bucke on our Lords day after Sermon called together the Inhabitants
of Little Thirlow, tendering them a Writing to subscribe against Mr. Holmes,
which some refusing, lost his favor, and their dinner.

Other prolings there were about the Country for hands upon specious pretexts,
meeting also some refusals.

In the appointed meeting of the Commissioners diverse suspected of
non-concurrence had no warning, who after knowledge complained, and met with
the rest at a more indifferent place; but finding Resolution much taken, and
Conclusions framed upon the preceding Verdict, desisted to appear at the next
meeting, though offended at the premises.

After Verdict, some Counsel was heard to plead, alleging how improper the
business was to the Commission, as more belonging to the Ecclesiastical trial,
after the Diocesans License, with much more: also Sir Thomas Soame a Trustee
not having power to transmit to Mr. Buck who had nothing to do in the Case,
much less to examine sufficiency which he assumed, and upon the Defendants
refusal to submit, offense was taken, though had he done otherwise, he had
showed himself poorly simple; after what his Admission, Exercise, and diverse
years Teaching had privileged him, rather to examine his Boys, then to be so
examined. Whom one of the Electors, Mr. Owen, had harbored long in his house,
and upon his knowledge of his Capacity chose him Schoolmaster, however now upon
particular Quarrel has labored against him, and for occasion of exception
withdrew his Children from his Teaching.

He, Mr. Buck, and Mr. Soame of Little Bradley have been the prime Movers in
this rare project, which Mr. Soame has since acknowledged in himself, and now
reconciled upon a difference he had with Mr. Holmes, and finding the disgraces
urged on against Sir Thomas his Kinsman and others, extraordinarily dissents
and disapproves. Never was so poor a matter managed with so much Artifice and
Industry.

Mr. Holmes was conceived Friendless, and, by undue withholding his Stipend,
Pennyless; easy to be outed, disgraced, and undone at the first Assault. But
God has raised friends unto him, and the disgrace may fall somewhere else.

The Clamor cease in great part, and both Great Thirlow and many of Little
Thirlow (where the School is) disavow, as approving of Mr. Holmes, who finding
the strong bent against him, offered upon reasonable Terms, with payment of
Arrears due for serving in the School, to quit and quiet all. In sort that the
Commissioners took much satisfaction, and employed to Mr. Buck some of
themselves to draw him to acceptance, but he refused, having been at great
Charge to pay himself with the money in his hands.

I to my cost made way to his ends, and end of trouble, nothing prevailing, all
must down before him for a new model, inexorable, without remorse either to
himself or others.

Mr. Holmes he terms a Nocent, and me by consequence for my Charity not
Innocent I had in pity and favor made Mr. Holmes my Chaplain.
I think by his fair professions he would willingly have stopped my mouth, but
cannot stop his own: if I have erred it is with good company, but till Mr.
Holmes be farther convinced to deserve that Malefactor Term, I will not be
ashamed of my good intents.

I intended to insert the Tenor of Sir Stephen's Will concerning his School,
with the Decree exceeding the prayer of the Petition for Ejectment; also Doctor
Dillingham's Letters in vindication of himself against aspersions, and
asserting Mr. Holmes his good Ability, with Mr. Buck his solicitation to place
him Schoolmaster, convincing him of an Eminent activity which now he denies,
making himself passive; moreover Doctor King's, and others certifying in
writing for Mr. Holmes his well-deserving, with some Letters of mine own at
large tending to pacification in good offers complying with Mr. Buck's first
pretexts, but all fruitless, and would prove too tedious; wherefore I must
leave them to your discreet Comprehension from this half Light, reserving to
your farther satisfaction, upon demand, a Volume of papers conducing to clear
the truth of all that is affirmed.

A kind of continued Characters of diverse worthy persons slighted, Assertors
for Mr. Holmes.
Mr. Doctor Dillingham Master of Clare-Hall, where Mr. Holmes had been
Graduate, several times Vice Chancellor.

Mr. Doctor King Master of Trinity-Hall, well reputed, learned, and a chief
Neighbor in Great Thirlow.

Mr. Billingsley Minister of Great Bradley, near Neighbor on the other side,
honest, learned, and preceding Schoolmaster in Thirlow-School.

Mr. Chambers Minister of West-P^utting, inhabitant in Great Bradly.

Mr. Morden of the said Town, an understanding and well-esteemed Gentleman,
with other his Conscribers to a favorable Certificate in the Rise of the
Business.

Standing Electors according to Sir Stephen Soame his Will, laid by to a new
Model.
Mr. Howsman Minister of Great Thirlow, a well famed and learned able Judge for
such a concernment, ejected for being essential to all Elections, though won by
me to assent to a new one, without breach of the Will, such as the prosecutors
would place.

Mr. Owen of Thirlow, parum adverse to Mr. Holmes, but as is conceived
expecting advantage.

Sir Thomas Soame surviving Executor to the Care of the School, in modesty
finding a fairly recommended and orderly placed man by the two
Electing-Neighbour-Ministers in the office of Schoolmaster, more competent to
judge then himself living far off; but knowingly by a silent approbation
assenting, after having been much abused and misled by his suffering himself to
become instrumental to the plot; though professing now to me to have nothing
that he would allege in disparagement of Mr. Holmes, (who had been much and
wrongfully traduced in pretended disrespects toward him) is now disgracefully
turned out from his Father's institution, in recompense of having served the
Contrivers as an useful property.

Some preceding active Characters are omitted.
As also a foul scurrillous Libel reflecting upon diverse of the abovenamed,
with one Reyner formerly in deep difference with Mr. Buck, which hangs in
charge against some of the most Eminent.

Mr. Holmes was mainly accused through the whole Train of illiterate
insufficiency to the learned Country Jury: but the more wise Commissioners
found ground enough to compose the Decree without it.

After all this, Mr. Buck pretends great kindness expressed to Mr. Holmes, and
respect to me; excelling in his Language, unanswerable in his proceedings.

I have troubled you and my self too much in so poor and unworthy abusiness,
but I affect your right information.

Thus much for a Narrative manifest, and my Apology, pardon my haste and
confusion in this dark intricate scene, and know me ever,

Your most affectionate Kinsman and Servant, Dudley North
To avoid trouble and mistakings of writing, I am contented to print some few
Copies for choice friends.

An Appeal, as a last Anchor, is necessitated and goes on.

March 26. 1666.


TO pass by all Mr. Bucks Arts for the outing Mr. Holmes from being
Schoolmaster at Thurlow, where he diverse years taught by Mr. Bucks active
concurrence in placing him, and wherein he had so wrought by stirring up the
meanest Inhabitants (all otherwise quiet) and thereby Sir Tho: Soame also
against him, from whom he derived to himself a delegated, transmitted power of
managing the Ejectment, etc. Having otherwise no color of his own right to act
therein. Which his ill-grounded Cunning, made most credibly known unto me,
moved me in Christian Charity and Compassion to appear as far as I well might
in favor to prevent the effects of that ruinous Plot, laid against Holmes, and
trenching to the disgrace of many well famed and respectable persons, who had
appeared on his behalf, which I have industriously done, by words, Letters, and
addresses from the entrance into the business in all constancy even until this
present day; patiently hoping (but by unreasonable obstinacy failing) of my
peaceable desires, which the following Letters successively (though not
succesfully) continued, will demonstrate, and for my own satisfaction, I have
thought good to gather in their Series and order together, in relation to my
Letter to Sir Henry North for his Information.

Gentlemen.
Whom it may concern I was desired to write formerly in the behalf of Mr.
Holmes, yet Schoolmaster of Thurlow, but refused it, as averse from meddling in
others Interest, yet from thus much I would not contain my self, That upon the
constant testimonial of many of my honest, well-famed and Judicious Neighbors,
who well know him and are able to judge I understand not any thing of
enormously scandalous or incompetent for the place, which he has diverse years
exercised, in which sense, nothing doubting of the Justice and just
inclinations of the worthy Commissioners joined in the examination of
perversions from Charitable uses, (wherein how far schools are intended I
conceive not) except in withholding what has been given for their maintenance:
I do zealously certify in Christian Neighborhood, that for want of some
formalities or small exceptions from which no man is exempt, and without fair
admonition, I cannot but hope that the main Defendant, and they who have both
placed him and continued him so long time, shall not suffer disgrace, in which
assurance I subscribe as to all causes that I conceive fair and good

Nov. 6. 1665. Du. North.

Mr. Buck.
I Acknowledge the favor of your last visit, which being near dark in the
evening, my self in my Chamber engaged to some Physic, yet I delayed not but
friendly and freely entertained you in patient long hearing and answering you,
in the way which I had formerly appeared intending to peace and a fair
undisgraceful way in the prosecution of the business concerning Mr. Holmes,
wherein many considerable men were involved by what they had declared in his
behalf: But all my open hearted inclinations as to a Brother were so
ineffectual, that the subsequent prosecutions were rather more than less
furious, carried on not only against him, but others who had either brought or
suffered him to teach in Thurlow-School, I imagine you would never have
troubled yourself unconcerned therein with much cost and prejudice to your
health, had not some others spleen urged and wrought over much upon you, and
bred such an overflowing of your gall, as (if yet not prevented) may stayn your
Complexion and Reputation, and if (which was much) the outing of the
Schoolmaster might have satisfied, it was offered, which many of your friends
would have had you accept, but you were so far from it, that all must down who
conceived all done according to the Founders will, strange that after four
years teaching the Teachers capacity should be questioned, other objections
being small and no admonition given: your self party to the Introduction, and
till lately taking no exceptions tantaene animis Caelestibus irae? my strong
information of a shameful ruin, and utter undoing plotted against him, not
only detaining his due stipend, but a fine urged upon him as an Intruder, moved
me in Christianity (though a mere stranger) to compassion, helping to case his
fall upon my own Shoulders, making him my Chaplain, and helping him in some
subsistence, whereby I am now become concerned in my choice, and his disgrace,
and howsoever you may in the present triumph, yet in his appeal and the world
possessed with the Artifice and carriage of the business, you will not find your
self at so fair an end as possibly in your reduction of the Defendants poor
necessitous Condition you may have conceived. Men of worth are interessed, the
Esquier Natural Visitor not consulted, may resent and expect to be heard, and
all this as yet you may notwithstanding recollect, and suspend execution,
prevent farther trouble and disgrace with your own quiet inward and outward,
which your great Age and Infirmity much require, and stand fairer in wonted
estimation than threatens. I have heard you intend me the favor of another
visit for my clear Information: which if you do, and come with a mind more
disposed to peace than rigor, hard heartedness and persecution, it will joy my
open abounding heart with recompense to this your and my trouble, and send us
in quiet and good Conscience toward our Graves, which is the Prayer of

Written in haste this 26. of Dec. 1665. Your affectionate friend and well
wisher to serve you Du. North.

Good Mr. Buck.
ONce more and no more I presume to trouble you in my well wishes to you peace
and a fair end of the ill-sounding engagement, thanking you for your
yesterdayes obliging favor in good expressions to me, wherein your good will to
me abounds, I would your passion did not more abound, I yet appeal to your
farther and cooler consideration, you have had already too much trouble and
cost, inflame and increase it not, whilst it may be fairly avoided, you seek
the performance of the will of the Founder, and the good effect of it, in the
free and sufficient teaching of a School for the good institution of Neighbors
Children, the present introduced Master you except against, his willingness and
my compliance to your design give you satisfaction therein, and an expedient of
placing another as you would wish, therein is the will of the dead and the
charitable intention accomplished. But in the progress you urge an Insuper
invading, breaking the Tenor and trenching upon the Will, unproperly and
unnecessarily, by disgracing the surviving Executor, a tacit modest concurrent
to the pursuance of the Will, in the placing Mr. Holms as Master by the
standing Electors of the two Thurlowes, whose sufficiency might well be
presumed on, as Scholars, Neighbors, and Ministers ejected, and disgracing
them, without any visible transgression, think better on it and suppose not any
of the Commissioners or any good intelligent body will prove offended at so
fair and peaceable an end, and that farther charge, altercation, and trouble,
be not wedded to an invincible sense of your own, but gratify all parties
concerned, for me if my endeavors to peace miscarry, yet with Gods good
acceptance I regret them not but rest in my pacifick meaning,

Jan. 3. 1665. Sir, Your most affectionate Friend, Du. North.

Mr. Buck.
YOu have given me occasion to write to you beyond my meaning, finding my self
to have lost much labor and good will by not prevailing the least tittle with
you in any thing that I have said or written, but now you having told Dr.
Bolderough that since my seeing him you had given me satisfaction: It is a
misinformation, for I am not in the least point satisfied with your
proceedings, and very little in your sayings: You have named to him my Son as
one of your Commissioners who never sat, and diverse had they had timely notice
and sitting would have been far from being carried away by your blinding
surprising artifices; I grieve to see so many worthy Gentlemen misled by
importuned subscriptions, and a present prepared Jury who could not but judge
according to what appeared unto them; but all is yet pendente lite: the Appeal
to come, you have also lately failed in your promise made in my house though
not in my presence that you would presently pay Mr. Holmes forty and five
pounds of his arrears in your hands, which when he came to receive you refused
to do upon pretense, that young Mr. Soames was landed and now (though never
before) to be consulted, you have been at strange cost and trouble more than
incumbent upon you, which you have thrust your self into, nor indeed if you
would have taken the shortest and directest way, by an ecclesiastical trial of
him, who was licensed to keep a School by the Lord Bishop, and had many strong
and considerable testimonies of his sufficiency thereunto, all slighted and
passed by, though most competent to have judged betwixt a Teacher and his
Scholars; His taking money has been objected, which is denied except of such
Towns as were not specified by the Will to have privilege; now had he notice
of the terms of the Will fully till very lately, which was also concealed from
Mr. Buck himself. And if any thing has been taken through ignorance he has
offered to repay it, Mr. Holmes was put in upon pursuance of the Will,
exercised the duty required many years without exception. And whereas great
negligence is taxed upon him, he is ready to justify the contrary having never
considerably absented himself, but once in a Christmas time, and that little
more than a Month, three weeks cessation being ordinary to all Schools, and
even then he had taken care to have his place supplied, against his disrespect
(alleged) to Sir Tho. Soame, he can fully justify himself, as also in refusing
before the Commissioners to be examined by Mr. Buck or his Assigns, wherein he
had otherwise done most basely and sillily: But you have not lost your cost and
ends, for you may have him out and others in, at your choice, the Will stand
inviolate, the Country taught, Animosities and disgrace prevented, charge and
trouble saved, and good men satisfied; Sir Thomas Soame upon whom your workings
have prevailed to give you color of power not cast out in recompense. These
are the good effects you may attain by not pursuing your Decree, and my self,
whom you would render not innocent by countenancing a Nocent remain your friend,

Jan. 29. 1665. Du. North.

Noble Dr. (...) Buckenham.
I Never admired any thing more than Mr. Bucks inconsistent intellectuals and
obstinate malice in blind and blinding Arts for the overthrow of a poor Village
Schoolmaster placed upon his own solicitation and paid and allowed by him, for
above two years when he stirred up and picked a Quarrel against him, the ill
favor whereof flew so about the Country, that I upon credible testimonies of
Holms his good capacity and carriage (though a stranger to the man and matter,)
took it to heart in Christian compassion, industriously interposing what I
could to effect a right understanding, and prevent a charge trouble and
consequent disgrace to such as had appeared for him, or were otherwise
interessed with importunate persuasions, to Mr. Buck of his being il-grounded,
yet complying with him so far as to produce his ends both in removing Holmes
and bringing another, all in vain; After much contest with him, one repayring
to me asked me, if I would have any thing, I answered only this, cui bono all
this cost and trouble? at last I became indeed interessed at least in
reputation, as my Letter to Sir Henry North mentions. Buck has slighted many
fair proffers for a peaceable desistence and retraite, has put jeering and
threatening upon me, if I persisted in laying him and my self open, it but the
more animates me, it can be but honor to me and shame to him, nor am I of a
consistence to fear any thing that Man, or dare or can say against me, the more
this puddle is stirred the worse the vapor, they who refuse peace and quiet. It
belongs to them to suffer in the contrary, but of others quid meruere. To Buck
belongs the blame, who may clear the stage and leave all in statu quo: nor Law
nor good then but will rather joy than be offended in a good agreement:
Buck-bears shall not fright

Catledge June 26, 1666. Your affectionate Friend to serve you, Du. North.
Thus much in my good respect to you, who as I hear never sealed to the Decree,
I presume to send you what I assure my self you have heard of, if not seen my
Letter to Sir Henry North.

Mr. Thomas Buck has so acted as Substitute to Sir Thomas Soams in his
executory power to his Fathers Will, as cannot but conclude through the whole
agitation concerning Thurlow School, as well for placing as displacing: Sir
Thomas must be implicitly concurring thereunto, else Mr. Buck must have been a
strange Intruder without the least Authority in what he has assumed.



My Good Dr. (...) Paman.
PArdon my presumption, who affect to be more and more yours by this your
farther courtesy, I am a great exalter of Charity (if not exerciser of it) no
doubt of your concurrence: I have in word, writing, and deed, extraordinarily
showed it in the business betwixt Holms and Buck, manifoldly and importunately
laboring peace and prevention of charge, trouble, animosities and disgraces,
but rancor and invincible spite has frustrated my endeavors, (wherein
failing) Bucks crafty and malicious steps have been gathered though his whole
course, and are ready to be proved and Printed, which I have hitherto stopped
expecting his recipiscence, but his most uncharitable intents cloaked with
Charity continuing, and a costly course of Appeal enforced Holms, (whose
stipend Buck has since his quarrel withheld) though placed by his desire and
paid by him for diverse years reduced to great want, having forbore to sue or
seek for his right, until the heirs return, to whom he constantly referred
himself as his proper play master and Natural overseer, I can do no less than
intercede for the Laborers hyre, who rather than not to prosecute his
vindicating himself against undeserved disgrace and utter ruin, must be
enforced to be received in forma pauperis. Oblige me in your assistance and
imparting thus much to the Esquier and procuring his answer to me herein, Mr.
Buck has complained to Dr. Dillingham, more remiss and submiss than formerly,
and imploring his advise, in this his misfortune and exigent, who told him he
might desist if he would relent, which he may yet do, nor the Law nor any good
man will be offended in a peaceable, agreement and conclusion. Blessed are the
Peacemakers, no man will be a looser thereby, disgraces avoided, the Founders
Will inviolated, and nothing but malice defeated, this is easy and obvious, and
a good peace never too late. The Angels sang Glory to God, and peace on earth,
good will toward men, better than libelling and disgracing Churchmen. I have
written and said much in vain, may this prove more successful with my service
to my kinsman and all good affection, to your self I rest in haste.

Jan. 21. 1666. Your really respectful Friend to serve you, Du. North.

Now fiat justitia and currat lex: I am resolved to trouble my self no more,
but leave Mr. Holms to be Schoolmaster at Thurlow, Rectus in Curia or a
disgraced undone man, withdrawing my self and all those offers that I would
have contributed to a fair peaceable end, they go now for nothing, as retracted
and fruitless.

Ju^^ 2. 1666. Du. North.


