To all the Dearly Beloved PEOPLE OF GOD, Mercy and Peace.
THere is nothing dear and precious to me in this World, but God's Truth, and
his Life of Righteousness; for which I have for saken all the World, and
whatever was dear to me therein, I have hated and counted it as an Enemy, that
I might obtain Christ, the Fountain and Spring of that Eternal Life of Truth,
the Beauty whereof I cannot express, as I see it and feel it: The Loveliness
thereof to my Soul has so dearly united my Spirit to all that bear the Image
and Life of it, that there can be no Separation, but my Life suffers thereby;
and I can truly say, that there is no other thing whatsoever that can unite me,
as one with any Creature living, but this Image and Life, where I see it born
up, or breathing to Life; but in whomsoever it be (without respect of Persons)
that I see the least appearance of this Seed of Life is, I can (by that Power
of Love the Father has begotten in me) lay down my Life to serve for the
Seed's sake. And wherein I have come short of this formerly, and have respected
the High, more than stood only in this Seed, I have been judged of the Lord,
and my evil Thoughts therein condemned; yea, and I do condemn them before all
the World, to be of that which favors Self, and not the Things of Christ: And
the lower God does bring me, and the nearer to himself, the more does this Love
and Tenderness spring and spread toward the poor, simple, and despised ones,
who are poor in Spirit, meek and lowly Suffering Lambs; and with those I choose
to suffer, and do suffer, wherever they are found; and I bear my Testimony
against that Spirit by which they suffer, wherever it is found; and this lies
upon me from the Lord: Hearing and feeling a Spirit of Enmity having got head,
by what the Lord has done with me, and now does exercise its Power against the
Peaceable Meetings of the Lord's People, the Burden where of lies heavy upon
me, and I suffer under it, and have long waited with Prayers, and Tears of
Sorrow, Night and Day, to receive Counsel from the Lord what to do in it, in
that Condition I am now in at present: God knows, I Lie not; for there is
nothing of all my Hardships that has lain and does lie upon me like this, that
any of the Flock of God should be offended, or suffer through me; therefore I
have not ceased to warn (as God has opened to me) such as I could speak to, to
live in Peace and Love; to suffer, but not to act Strife and Violence; and have
denied that Spirit, not to be of the Lamb, but an Enemy to him, though the
Creature may not know it, but may think it is doing God service; it being got
above the suffering Seed in themselves, would scatter and devour it in others:
And this Spirit the Lord has showed me, and its end, and has redeemed me from
it by the Spirit of the Lamb; and I shall never join, as Head or Tail,
therewith; but shall earnestly pray to the Father, that a deep Search of Truth
may seriously pass through the Hearts and Reins of all Contenders, that all
that are guilty herein may speedily come to Repentance, left they be hardened
therein, and there come a time when they would give whatever is dear to them
for one Hour's Society with the People of God, and cannot obtain it; then with
lamentable Woe shall the Wrath of that be known, that is now trampled on,
without the true Fear of God, or Life of his Love: And having at length
received this Favor of the Lord, I have taken this time, in the tender Bowels
of Love, (as one wounded therewith) to warn you hereof: Beseeching you all, for
the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that you all search low for the Bowels of him who
loved you, and suffered for you, when you were his Enemies, and put them on
toward all Men, but especially toward one another, who have been called by
one Spirit into one Truth; that so the holy Spirit be no more grieved, nor
Satan get any more advantage; whose Work is to sow Dissension, even among
Brethren.

And the Lord God of Love give us all to see, that whatever our Gifts or Powers
be, yet if we have not the Life and Power of Love, it avails not with God,
though Men may esteem of us never so high: For only he that dwells in Love,
knows God, and lives in him; the rest knows not what Spirit they are of. And
this I feelingly declare, from that dear Love of God in me, begotten to all his
People; whereby I am so far from taking delight in troubling the People of God,
that their growth in Peace and Truth, upon the Foundation laid already, was
never so much desired; and my Love to them is daily increased, beyond what I
can here express, yet the Lord knows it, and whence it is, whether it be
received by Men or no; yet the Seed snall feel it (in God's time) to which it
is, and in whose Peace only I have Peace; and I hope, in the Power of that
Love, God will so strengthen me, that nothing of Shame, Loss, or Reproach,
shall ever be too hard to take up for the advancement thereof, as God shall
show and lead me therein, without whom I dare do nothing, lest I deny his Work,
or confound it with my own.

And concerning you, the tender Plants of my Father, who have suffered through
me, or with me, in what the Lord has done with me, in this time of great Trial
and Temptation; the Almighty God of Love, who has numbered every Sigh, and put
every Tear in his Bottle, Reward it a Thousand-fold into your Bosoms, in the
Day of your need, when you shall come to be tried and tempted; and in the mean
time fulfill your Joy with his Love, which you seek after. The Lord knows, it
was never in my Heart to cause you to mourn, whose Sufferings is my greatest
Sorrow, that ever yet came upon me, for you are innocent herein: But the
Envious One has taken his advantage, which the Lord will turn to his
disadvantage, and utter ruin in many Souls; and in this believing, is all my
rest, in my great trouble of heart, concerning you or my self; and in Patience
I wait to see it, when the Man of Sin has had his time, to be revealed. For I
have seen the good Hand of God all along working in it; whose End is good to
all that love him, else had I been destroyed e're this, such has been the
Violence of the Enemy of my Soul: But he has numbered my Hairs, and not left me
in the Fire or Water; when none else was with me, thou were my Comforter. O
that I may never hide thy Praise, by covering my Sin or Shame! God forbid.

By a way unexpected did the Lord open a way to declare these Words, all other
means of writing being taken from me. Blessed be He, on whom I wait further to
see his Will, that I may do or suffer it.

The Presence and Peace of the Almighty comfort his People, whom I salute in
the Bowels of Love. James Naylor.
I beseech you (all that can) to receive it, even as you would be received of
the Lord; and for the rest, the Lord give me Patience to suffer, till the Lord
make up the Breach.



A Testimony to Christ Jesus, delivered to the Parliament, who Persecuted him
as a Blasphemer; written in the time of his Imprisonment in Bridewell.
CHrist Jesus, the Immanuel, (of whose Sufferings the Scriptures declare) him
alone I confess before Men; for whose sake I have denied whatever was dear to
me in this World, that I might win him, and be found in him, and not in my
self, whose Life and Virtue I find daily manifest in my mortal Body, (which is
my Eternal Joy and Hope of Glory) whom alone I seek to serve in Spirit, Soul
and Body, Night and Day, (according to the measure of Grace working in me) that
in me he may be glorified, whether by Life or Death; and for his sake I suffer
all things, that he alone may have the Glory of my Change, whose Work alone it
is in me: Even to that Eternal Spirit be Glory, and to the Lamb for ever.

But to ascribe this Name, Power and Virtue to James Naylor, (or to that which
had a beginning, and must return to Dust) or for that to be exalted or
worshipped, to me is great Idolatry, and with the Spirit of Christ Jesus in me
it is condemned; which Spirit leads to Lowliness, Meekness, and Long-suffering.

So having an opportunity given, (with readiness) I am willing in the Fear of
God the Father, (in Honor to Christ Jesus, and to take off all Offenses from
every simple Heart) this to declare to all the World, as the Truth of Christ is
in me, without Guile or Deceit, daily finding it to be my Work to seek Peace in
Truth with all Men in that Spirit.

James Naylor

J. N's ANSWER to the FINATICK HISTORY, In Relation to himself.
AS for thy Charge against J. N. through the Everlasting Mercy of my God, I
have yet a Being amongst the Living, and breathe to answer for myself, though
against the Intents of many Bloody Cruel Spirits, who pursued my Soul unto
Death (as much as in them lay) in that Day of my Calamity, when my Adversary
was above; and wherein I was made as a Sign to a Backsliding Generation, who
then would not see nor hear what now is coming upon them, but rejoiced against
this piece of Dust, and had little pity toward him that was fallen into their
Hands; wherein God was just, in giving me up for my Disobedience for a little
moment, as a Father to correct; yet should not they have sought to aggravate
things against me, as thou do: For it was a Day of deep Distress, and lay
sore upon my Soul; and the pitiful God saw it, who, though he was a little
displeased, yet his Thoughts was not to cast off for ever, [but extend Mercy]
as it is at this Day: Glory be to his Name from my delivered Soul eternally.

And in that Day there was many Spirits flocked about me; and some whom, while
my Candle shone upon my Head, I ever judged, and kept out from me; who then got
up, and acted and spoke several things, not in the Light and Truth of God; by
which they who sought occasion against me, then was strengthened to afflict this
Body; and he that watches for Evil in thee, and some others, makes use of
still, against God's Truth and Innocent People; whose Mouths the God of my
Mercy stop, and so finish the Trouble of my Heart, as to that thing. For my
Soul has long dwelt among Lions, even among them that are set on Fire, whose
Teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongues a sharp Sword, speaking
mischievous things to shed Blood.

But O Man, or Men, whatever you be, whose Work it is to gather together the
Failings of God's People in Time of Temptation, or Night of their Trial, and
aggravate them, and add thereto the Wickedness and mischievous Lies of your own
Hearts, as thou have done in thy Book, and then come out with those against
God's Everlasting Holy Truth, it to Reproach! I say, you are set to work by an
Evil Spirit; and you do but show your selves to be Enemies to God and his
Children: And it is our Sorrow that any of us should give such Spirits occasion
to blaspheme; and it has been Trouble of Soul to all the People of God, that
have ever loved Righteousness, when they have thus occasioned the Joy of the
Wicked, or to feed that Man that watches for Iniquity, and feeds on Mischief.
Yet know this, you that are of that Brood, God will not cast off his People,
though he be sometimes provoked to correct them, even before their Adversaries,
(which is a Sign to them;) yet is his Anger but for a moment, and his Favor
shall return as Streams of Life. Then shall the Food be taken out of the Mouth
of the Viper, and the Prey from between the Teeth of the Devourers; and God
shall feed them with their own Vomit; and the Poison, that has long lain under
their Tongues, shall be bitter in their own Bowels. Thus will God certainly
plead with Zion's Enemies, as he bends her Sons for himself, and God will make
up her Breaches. And this has my Soul seen, Jacob's Captivity restored, and
the Diggers of the Pit are fallen therein: Neither has he smitten him, as he
smote them that smote him; or is he slain, according to the Slaughter of them
that are slain by him; but this is all his Fruit, to purge away his Sin.

So he that had long waited for my failing, then got advantage against me; yet
had I then Power to bear his utmost Envy, through Christ Jesus, whom I then
confessed before Men, who then was my support in all, and under all, and who is
over all, blessed for ever, of all who have proved him in the depth.

But that which was and is the Sorrow of my Heart, is the advantage the Enemy
then took against the Name of Christ, his Truth, and his despised People, in
that time of Temptation, which is that which thou art now pursuing, with Hatred
and Lies; as that I had a Woman in Bed with me the Night before I suffered at
Bristol: When there was Six or Seven Persons in the Room that Night, and a Man
(to wit, Robert Rich) in Bed with me. But this, and several other false things
thou have written in thy Book, of which I am clear before the Lord, so they
touch me not at all; nor shall I here mention them against thee in particular:
But to God alone I look, in his time, to be cleared from all Offenses in his
sight, who only knows my Heart in this thing; in whose Presence I can say, that
nothing is more odious and burdensome to my Soul, than that any of that Glory
or Worship, which belongs to God or to Christ, should be given to Flesh and
Blood, in my self or others: And how it was with me at that Day, many talk of,
but few knows; so the Judgment of such I bear: Desiring, that none in Judging
me, might have Condemned themselves in God's sight, whose Counsels are a great
Deep, and the End of his Works past finding out, till he himself reveal them;
but in the End he will be justified of all, and in all he does, that all Flesh
may be silent before him.

And however my self, or any others, may be left to themselves, to be tried in
the Night; yea, should any utterly fall, or whatever may be acted by any Man or
Woman, that is not justifiable in God's sight; yet in vain do thou, or you,
gather up Sin, or watch for Iniquity, to cast upon the Light, which Condemns it
in every Enlightened Conscience, and there will clear himself to be no Author
nor Actor therein: And I know by the Spirit of Jesus, which I have received,
and which works in me, that this is not his Work, nor his Seed, nor in him
that loves thy Enemies, thou art not, but the old Accuser of the Brethren it is
that works strongly in thee; and in the Light which thou Reproaches, art thou
seen to be the Man that makes Lies, and carries Tales to shed Blood, Ezekiel. 22.
9, 12.

Another Paper added.
THere is a spirit which I feel, that delights to do no Evil, nor to revenge
any Wrong, but delights to endure all things, in hope to enjoy its own in the
End: Its hope is to outlive all Wrath and Contention, and to weary out all
Exaltation and Cruelty, or whatever is of Nature contrary to its self. It sees
to the End of all Temptations: As it bears no Evil in it self, so it conceives
none in Thoughts to any other: If it be betrayed, it bears it; for its Ground
and Spring is the Mercies and Forgiveness of God. Its Crown is Meekness, its
Life is Everlasting Love unfeigned, and takes its Kingdom with Entreaty, and
not with Contention, and keeps it by Lowliness of Mind. In God alone it can
rejoice, though none else regard it, or can own its Life. It Is conceived in
Sorrow, and brought forth without any to pity it; nor does it murmur at Grief
and Oppression. It never rejoices, but through Sufferings; for with the
World's Joy it is murdered. I found it alone, being forsaken; I have
Fellowship therein, with them who lived in Dens, and desolate Places in the
Earth, who through Death obtained this Resurrection and Eternal Holy Life.

J. N.

London, Printed in the Year 1660.


