A new Revolution, or the High-Flyer turned Whig, in a Letter from a Parishoner
to his Churchman.
SIR,
THE Relation you stand in to me as my Parish Minister, has necessarily drawn
upon you the present Trouble, for to whom should I apply for Solution of my
Religious Scruples, but to him who has the more immediate Care of my Soul? My
Manner of Life you very well know has been according to that Sect of our Church
called Tories or High-Flyers, who have distinguished themselves from their
Brethren the Whigs or Low-Churchmen, by Pretenses to unlimited Loyalty, and an
extravagant Zeal for the Safety of the Church, and this I must say of my self,
that bating my having frequented her Assemblies oftener, drank less, and swore
seldomer for her; no Man has outstrip'd me in Zeal on all Occasions. I have
heard the Sin of Scism discrib'd in such odious Colors from your Pulpit, and
the Schismatic so often delivered over to Satan, that it has created in me an
utter Abhorrence of one, and an Opinion that a Man could not consistently with
his being a good Churchman, allow the common Privileges of Humane Nature to
the other. You have taught me, that one might, with less Hazard to his
Salvation, be guilty of Murder, Adultery, Drunkenness or Blasphemy, than of
Schism; and consequently I should rather have chosen to be found in a House of
unlawful Pleasure, than seen in an Assembly of our Schismatical Dissenters,
whose Paces of Worship I have with Pleasure seen demolished and brunt, and (GOD
forgive me for it) so far has my Zeal for the Church transported me, as to
wish their Preachers had perished in the Flames: Thus have I all my Life long
hugged my self in the Opinion of my own Or^hodoxy, and a Contempt of those you
have taught me to call Schismatics till a little Discovery has dismounted my
Confidence; and I am full of doubt whether after all this while that I have
accounted my self Something, I am still Nothing, but have miserably deceived my
self: In short, Sir, I am stung with that cuting Reproach, "Thou art
inexcuseable O Man, whoever thou art, that judges; for wherein thou judge
another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same Thing:
Nor can I stand that wounding Interrogatory, and think thou this O Man that
judge them who do such Things and do the same, that thou shall escape the
Judgment of GOD? You will naturally conclude, its the late Schism charged upon
us have given me this Uneasiness, a Charge, which if it cannot be removed lays
us under the most dreadful Circumstances; it is a Mine our very Foundation, and
if it spring with Success, must ineviteably bury us all in its Ruins; wonder
not then at my Concern in this Matter, wherein I take my Eternal Salvation to
be in Dispute, I shall never forget such Passages in your former Discourses as
these, 'Schism is a Sin directly opposite to that Spirit of Love and Union, the
peculiar Mark of CHRIST's Disciples, without which Spirit its impossible for
any Man to be saved.

'Men may much better disturb the Peace of the State, than that of the Church.
Now if Eternal Damnation be the Reward of the one, what Degree of Damnation is
due to the Schismatic, who disturbs the other? i. e. If I understand your
Meaning, a Degree of Damnation beyond Eternal: Oh dreadful! -- Again, no
Returns of Prayers can be expected by such as join with Schismatics, nor no
Benefit of Sacraments -- 'Once more, our Communicating with Scismaticks, makes
us Schismatics, and by Communicating with Excomunicates (which alas, is the
Case) we not only lose all our Labor, but we get a Curse instead of a
Blessing, and turn our very Prayers and Sacraments into Sin. Alas! Alas! What
have I been doing all my Lifetime! The very Thoughts fill me with Horror; ever
and anon am I frightened out of my Sleep, with these dreadful Words, Shism!
Schism! Resistance! Damnation! Like Peals of Thunder ring in my Ears. Sir, if
you have any Bowels of Compassion for a poor distressed Creature, lend me your
Assistance to refute the Charge, which I can no more of my self, than I can
remove a Mountain. I have used all the Arguments I am Master of to no Purpose.
Sometimes I please my self that a Majority must needs be Orthodox; but when I
consider that we had never reformed from Popery, and consequently never been a
Church, if it were not a possible Case for 99 Parts in 100 to be in the Wrong,
and for Truth to rest with the small Remainder, this Argument will not serve
me; sometimes I shelter my self under the Protection of an Act of Parliament,
but I am presently terretted hence with those memorable Passages of yours,
'Schism is an Offense against the Laws of GGD, and does not depend upon the
changeable Will of our Superiors -- Schism is a Breach of Church Peace and
Love, and will always be the Breach of Church Peace and Love, let our
Governors say or tolerate what they please.

My last Refuge was to the Validity of the Ordination of these Bishops who join
in the Revolution; but I find this Defense is not Canon Proof, for you tell me,
Bishops, though duly constituted, yet associating with others who are Intruders,
become Schismatics. Nor is this all, for it seems they are Excomunicates to,
and Excommunication (say you) certainly includes in it a Deposition from
Episcopal Authority, for it metamorphoses us into Heathens, if these Assertions
of yours, Sir, are true, Lord have Mercy upon us? What a Condition are we all
in, who have sat under the Ministry of a Set of Men who have no more Power to
exercise any of the Sacerdotal Functions, than my Groom has! I have thought my
self a married Man these 15 Years, and am the Father of half a Dozon Children;
but after all, it seems I have only kept a Mistress so long, and must look on
my faucied Wife as the wretched Partner in unlawful Embraces, and those
Childred I used to behold with Pleasure, as the dear Pledges of a vittuous
Love, I can only regard as the unhappy Issue of a polluted Bed; nor have I the
Consolation to think, that Baptism has mended their Condition, and made them
Members of CHRIST, Children of GOD, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven;
for alas, they received it from Schismatical Hands, whose Ministrations are
mere Nullities, and so the poor Creatures are in a State of Heathenism still. I
have been a constant Observer of the Feasts and Fasts of the Church, and duly
attended her Sacraments; but Woe is me! All this will not so much as afford me
the poor Negative Comfort, that I have only been doing Nothing to the Purpose,
for it seems I have hereby increased the Score of my Sins. I conjure you, Sir,
to use your best Endeavors to quiet my Mind, under the Apprehensions of this
dreadful Guilt; and if you can, without giving up the Independency of the
Church, the Necessity of an uninterrupted Episcopal Succession, and the
Doctrine of Non Resistance, repal this Charge of Schism, then you will be a
happy Instrument of removing those Scruples which perplex many a good
Churchman, and amongst the rest,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, ZELOTES.


