At the General-Sessions of the PEACE, held at St. Johnstone the first Tuesday
of May, 1656. By his Highness the Lord Protectors JUSTICES of PEACE for
PERTH-SHIRE.
THe Justices of his Highness Peace for the said Shire, in pursuance of that
Trust reposed in them for on carrying, preserving and maintaining the Peace
there, do judge it their duty to make the Acts and Resolutions of this and the
former Sessions known to all the Shire, that such as transgress, and commonly
plead ignorance, may be inexcusable. And because provoking Sins undetected and
punished will undoubtedly prove a continual trouble of our Peace. Therefore it
is Ordained,

That the Clerks of the Kirk-Sessions of ilk Paroch within the Shire, in all
time coming, as well as since the first of January, 1651. give a true Extract to
the Clerk of the Peace, of the Names of all Persons in the Paroch convict of
Blasphemy, Incest, Adultery, Fornication, Swearing or Cursing, Breach of the
Sabbath, Reproaching or mocking of Piety, Drunkenness, Tippling or such like
Crimes, That every Transgressor since that time, who has not been censured
conform to the Instructions by the Judicatories competent, may be punished, and
such wickedness; suppressed and crushed for the future.

That the Overseers (who are to be the most pious and understanding men in the
Paroch) and Constables, give up to the Clerk of the Peace a List of every
Alehouse-keeper who sell Ale or Strong waters, etc. at unlawful times, or who
keep not good order in their houses, or who harbor or entertain lewd, profane,
or idle men or women, sturdy Beggars, Tinkers, Gamsters, or masterless people;
that all such Ale-sellers, etc. may be punished as the cause requires.

That all persons who are not in present service with a Master, or who are not
Land-labourers, or who have not a Trade, Calling, or Revenue to maintain them;
be reputed Vagabonds, and their Names sent by the Overseers and Constables in
ilk Paroch, to the next Justice, or to the Clerk of the Peace, that they may be
presently punished as such.

That no Housekeeper whatsoever, recept, harbor, give or send entertainment to
any Vagabond, Thief, Gypsy, unknown and suspect person, under the pains and
penalties contained in the Acts of Parliament anent Resetters.

That if any Paroch wherein a Robbery is committed, do not answer the Hue and
Cry raised on committing thereof, and follow the Constable on the pursuit till
he return, such Paroch shall be liable in payment of the Robbery.

That all Overseers take strict care not only to put all such Beggars or poor
people who belong not to the Paroch, and want a sufficient Pass or Testimonial
out of the Paroch, But also to keep all such out, by sending such as return, to
Prison; and presenting those who either harbor or give them any entertainment,
that they may be punished therefore.

That no person make any Linnen-Cloath to sell under an Ell in breadth, if the
price of the Ell be above ten shillings; And under three quarters in breadth,
if the price of the Ell be under ten shillings: And that no person bleitch any
Linen with Lime, under the pain of forfeiting all the Cloth of less breadth,
or so bleitch't: The one half whereof to any who after Midsummer 1656.
discovers the same.

That no person take Salmond, or their Fry, with an Angle-wand in another man's
Waters, without the owners leave, under six pound Scots ilk fault.

That as the General-Sessions for the Peace are to be kept the first Tuesdayes
of February, May, August, and the last Tuesday of October yearly; So, special
Sessions are to be kept in ilk Sub-division of the Shire, The first Tuesdayes
of March, June, September and December yearly, where all differences betwixt
Masters and Servants, and such other things as may be judged out of the
General-Sessions will be determined; And every Master who rests any Fee to his
Servant, will at the General Sessions be compelled to pay the same, if the
Servant sue therefore.

That during the scarsity of Money and cheapnesse of Victual, no person give or
take more Fee or Wages then what is after-specified, To wit, A common able
Manservant, nine Merks Scots termly, with a pair of double-soal'd Shoes, two
Else of Scots Grays, and three Ell of Hardin, as his Bounteth; or in stead
thereof, one pound four shillings for the shoes, one pound four shillings for
the Hardin, and one pound sixteen shilling for the Grays.

A common able Lad-servant, four Merk and a half termly, with the like
Bounteth, or Money proportionably therefore.

A common able Woman-servant, four Merk and a half termly, with a pair of
double-soal'd Shoes, three ell of Plaiding, three ell of Hardin, and one ell of
Linen, as her Bounteth; or in stead thereof one pound for her Shoes, one pound
seven shillings for the Plaiding, one pound four shillings for the Harden, and
twelve shillings for the Linen.

A common able Lasse-servant is to have two Merk and forty penies termly, with
the like Bounteth, or Money proportionably therefore.

The Harvest-fee of the able Man shearer is not to exceed six pound, or six
shillings ilk days work: And the able Woman-shearer four pound, or four
shillings for ilk days work.

That all Servants give their Masters a quarters warning before their removal;
And that no Servant pane out of, or come in to any Paroch, without a
Testimonial under the Minister and Overseers hands of the Paroch where they
last dwelt, under the pain of being punished as Vagabonds, besides fining their
Resetters.

That no Servant leave his Master at the Whitsundayes Term, if his Master be
willing to keep him till the Mertimasse following upon the former Terms
conditions, unless such Servant show lawful cause for his departure, to some
uninterested Justice in that Division where he dwells.

Shomakers are not to exceed two shillings six penies the Inch of measure for
the pair of double-sol'd Shoes from eight Inches upward; And two shillings the
Inch from eight Inches downward: And for the pair of single-soal'd Shoes, one
shilling six penies the Inch above eight Inches of measure; and one shilling
four penies the Inch from eight Inches downward: Providing always the Leather
be well tanned, and the Shoes sufficient Market ware.

Weavers are to weave ilk Ell of Linen, for one penny halfpenny out of ilk
twelvepence that the Ell of green Linen is worth: Plaiding for an halfpenny
the Ell, with a peck of Meal to the stone: Grays and Secking for twelve penies
the Ell: Tycking and Dornock Napery for two shillings the Ell; And Dornock
Table-Cloath for four shillings the Ell.

Wackers are to take for the ell of Hosen, one shilling four penies only: And
for ilk ell of Grays or Plaiding, four penies the ell only, and no more.

Masons, Slaters, and Wrights, are not to exceed a Merk Scots without, and half
a Merk with meat, for the days work, from March first to October first; And
thereafter to abate in their days Hire proportionably, except they work with
Candlelight.

Tailors and Shoe-makers are not to exceed four shillings a day and their meat,
when they work abroad for daily hire.

Malt-makers are not to take above one peck of Malt for making the Boll of Beer
in Malt.

Makers of Peny-Bridals are not to exceed eight shillings a-piece for the
ordinary of ilk Man and ilk Woman, at Dinner or Supper.

That as their Rates, Fees and Prices, etc. are not intended in the prejudice of
those Masters who usually hire their Servants, and have their Work wrought
cheaper; so all other persons are to conform themselves to the foresaid Prices,
under the pain of paying a Terms Fee, or ten days Hire, the one half to the
Discoverer, and the other half to Prisoners and the Poor in the Paroch.

That the Constables at ilk general Sessions faithfully present all
Contraveeners of any of the above-written Acts; All Forestallers or Regraters;
All keepers of, or sellers with false Weights, Mets or Measures; And all other
Misdemeanors that shall come to their knowledge betwixt the Sessions.

That whatever person assists not the Paroch-Constables in executing their
Offices; And whatever Constable, Overseer, or other person assists not, and
gives obedience to the High-Constable of ilk of their Sub-divisions, in the
execution of any Orders of Session directed to him, shall be imprisoned and
fined as the Justices think fit.

That all Overseers give notice to the next Justice in that Division where he
dwells, before the first of June yearly, of such Highwayes or Bridges within
the Paroch as are out of repair, or fit to be made, that the same may be mended
and made that summer, as the special Sessions the first Tuesday of June shall
direct, under the pain of six pound Scots for ilk failye.

That any person who shall inform against the Breakers of any of the
above-written Acts, and make it appear that the person or persons informed
against, are guilty, shall be sufficiently rewarded for ilk Discovery: And if
it be made appear that any Constable or Overseer shall connive at, or compound
with any Transgressor of the foresaid Acts, such Constables and Overseers shall
be forthwith imprisoned, and fined, as the Justices think meet.

That as the Dues of the Clerk of the Peace here, are not to exceed those of
the Clerks of the Peace of Mid-lowthian and Fise-shires: So the Dues of the
Justices Clerks here are only: For all the Recognizances written in one Action,
twelve shillings Scots, payable by the party succumber: For all Warrants or
Summons to compear anent one Action, six shillings only, payable by the party
aforesaid: For writing ilk Witnesses Deposition, two shillings, payable by the
party aforesaid: For every Absolvitor before a particular Justice, six
shillings: And for every Mittimus, eight shillings Scots.

That Correspondence be kept with our neighbor Shires, for the joint
oncarrying of the Work of the Peace, and punishing all Contraveeners of the
Acts and Ordinances made in any of the said Shires.

That the Constables cause read their Presents at every Paroch Kirk in the
Shire, after the first Sermon; and thereafter affix and set up the same on the
most patent Door thereof.

Extracted out of the Registers for the Peace of Perth-shire. By ROBERT
ANDREWS, Clerk of the Peace.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1656.


