One Story is Good till the other is Told. A Roman Story told by Dick to Tom on
a Winters Night Concerning the Ingratitude of the Romans to Julius Caesar, that
famous Emperor who fell a sacrifice to the Malice of some Persons whom he had
raised to great Honors and Preferment.
Ad Generum Gereris Sine Caede and Sanguine pauci descendnat Reges. Tom Well
Dick I am told thou have been Bred a Scholar, and it is like you can tell some
Story to divert us, prithee be not sparing of your labor.


Dick, withal my heart Tom I will oblige you, but what kind of Story is it you
like.


Tom. Nay, you are the best Judge, but if I were to choose I would have a Roman
Story for I have often heard talk of those People.


Dick. Well then Tom, He tell you a Story that seems to run parallel to the
Transactions of Forty One. It Is about Julius Caezar the first of the Roman
Emperor's. who for his Illustrious descent, his extraordinary Virtues and
personal Courage was the only Person that was capable of putting an end to
Consular Government, which after the Expulsion of the Tarquins, had lasted for
some hundreds of Years.


Tom. But pray why was he called Julius.


Dick. Because he was lineally descendded from Julus the Son of AEneas, that
famed Trojan, who after the Destruction of Troy sailed into Italy, and whose
posterity were the Founders of Rome, he was at first one of the Triumviry, but
after the Death of Pompey and Crassus, the Administration of Affairs came into
his own hands, and he by an unwearied application to business of State so
gained upon the Hearts of the People, that he was by Universal consent
Proclaimed Emperor,


Tom. But what is the Difference between King and Emperor.


Dick. They are different Names, but the Power in both is the same absolute and
unresistable in any Case whatsoever, and to resist, either I hold to be a
damning Sin, and there is on every Subject, an indispensible Obligation to obey
the Monarch, whether King or Emperor as supreme Magistrate.

Julius Caezar after his Accession to the Imperial Dignity demeaned himself
with all imaginable sweetness and Condescension; he was also a great lover of
Learning and those hours he could spare from Public business he dedicated to
Study which was greatly furthered by his happy Genius for he could rise our
seand write at the same time; he wrote Commentaries or Memoirs of his own Life
which was truly Heroic, ^s did our late Gracious but unhappy Sovereign King
Charles the first* In a Book entuled the Protraiture of the King.


Tom. I belive there are other circumstances of their Lives which agree as well
as that one.


Dick. Aye, their Lives, agree in the most Fatal circumstances; for it was the
Misfortune of both to have to do with the most ungrateful Persons and to be
betrayed by those in whom they reposed the greatest Trust, they were both
Barbarously Murdered, one by the hands, the other by the sentence of the
Senators.


Tom. But what was it excited those Rebels to so inhumane a proceeding.


Dick. 'Twas either ambition of raising themselves an Affectation of
Popularity; or a false notion of liberty, which they Judged inconsistent with
Obedience to any one Person.


Tom. But who were the Chief Persons concerned in the Murder of Caezar, and
wh^t Means did they use to effect it.


Dick. Brutus and Casius were the head of the Conspiracy, Men by nature cut out
for such an Enterprise, the latter being a Crafty, Sly Inv^^^rate Man, the
former a Resolute Ambitious and daring one, but what was most remarkable was
the Ingratitude of Brutus who had been raised by Caezar, to Great and Signal
Honor. And was his greatest favorite in so much that he was wont frequently
to call him Son in Token of his love? Nevertheless this Man was easily induced
to endeavor a change of Government, and brought over to his Interest, many of
the greatest Quality in Rome, whom he engaged to help to dispatch Caezar the
first oppertunity,


Tom, Methinks this Man was something like Oliver Cromwell.


DICK. their Principles were much the same, and though they were both monstrously
ungrateful Brutus's Proceedings were much more honorable for he had not the
Impudence to Impeach his Sovereign openly, or put him to a formal Trial, but
had him dispatched not by the Hand of the Common Executioner, but by Men though
Rebels, nobly born; but after several persons of Note had entered into this
Conspiracy, the opportunity to execute the design was wanting at length it was
agreed, that as soon as Caesar came into the Senat-House they should fall upon
him; He had several warnings of his approaching Fate, for there was a certain
Man skilled in divination who told him the Ides of March would be Fatal to him,
and the Night before the Assassination, his Wife Calpburnia dream's that the
Palace fell down and crushed him to death in her Arms, and at break of day a
Raven was seen to flutter about the Window and make dismal Noise.


Tom. That looked indeed as if Heaven was careful for his preservation.


Di^k. Undoubtedly the Gate of Heaven is concerned in preservation of the life
of every Man, but more particularly in defending the Sacred person of a King,
who is the Vicegerent of God Almighty on Earth: But besides the entreaties of
his Wife to put off the Meeting till another day, he found in himself a
backwardness to go, and pretended an indisposition, but the Conspirators being
all Assembled, sent several Messengers to tell him the House was full, and that
they impatiently expected his coming, upon which he went; and in his way
thither, met the Man who told him the Ides of March would be Fatal to him, to
whom he smilling Cried, well you see the Ides of March are come. Ay! But
replied the other, they are not past yet, and when he had gone a little
further, there was a Letter delivered him by an Unknown Ha^^ and the Messenger
desired him to Read it, saying 'twas matter of great concern, for it contained
an Account of the Conspiracy, but he believing it to be a Letter of Request,
put it among other Papers, and went directly to the Senate House, where the
Rebels fell upon him, he for sometime withstood the fury of them all, but
seeing Brutus strike at him, he ceased to defend himself, and mildly reproached
him in these words, and you too my Son, as if he had said, I neither deserved
nor expected this at your Hands, there fell the Valient Caesar after he had
received above twenty Wounds.


Tom. But what became of Brutus after, for I long to hear whether he suffered
deserved Punishment. I hope he did not Escape hanging till after he was Dead as
our Oliver did.


Dick. After the death of Caesar, Mark Anthony made a Funeral Oration to the
people, in which he mentioned several Glorious Acts of Caesar, and in the
Middle of his Speech, lifted a Cloth which covered the Body* and showed his
wounds all Bloody. which so enraged the People, that they lighted Torches and
ran about the Ci^y with a design to destroy the Conspirators, and burn their
Houses. In this Hurry Brutus and Cassius made their Escape, and having gathered
an Army of Rebels they prepared to defend themselves, but were overthrown by
Octavius and Mark Anthony at Philippi, where after their defeat Cassius
despairing, and oppressed by his Melancholy Temper, killed himself, of which
when Brutus heard he wisely followed his example. At length Civil Wars being
over, Augustus who was Nephew to Julius Caesar was Proclaimed Emperor, who was
not Inferior to his predecessor in any virtue, but was much more Fortunate, and
under whom the Romans enjoyed a long and happy Peace.


Tom. I think that is not unlike the Restoration of our late Gracious Sovereign
King Charles the II: and you know his was a peaceable Reign.


Dick. Why Tom thou have a good fancy, and it is Pity thou were a Scholar.


Tom. I wish I were innocent, but it is too late to begin to learn, but I fear
Dick there are Persons of Disti^^ion among us who would play the part of Brutus
or Cromwell if they had the Opportunity.


Dick. Very Probable Tom, but I am sure, that they who have the Power at
present, have not the will, and they that have the will, may they never have
the Power.


AT Chapple-Izod, at the Gardens of the late Mr. Robert Wadeley, Gardner,
Deceased: The following Trees are to be Sold at Reasonable Rates, either by
whole Sale or Retail, (viz) Elms, Horse hest* Nuts, Flowering, Laurestines,
Cyprus, Junipers, Yews, gilt Hollies Holly Stocks; all manner of Shrubs,
Gilt-Box, all manner of House Greens, as Oranges, Lemons, Mertiles, Alloways,
Pomgranets, Olives, fine Arbatus, all manner of choice Fruit Trees, for Walls
or Standards, as Peaches, Apprecocks, Neckterins, Apples, Pears, Plum^,
Cherry*s of all kinds, G^ajs Frames for hot Beds, Bell-glasses very fine,
Likewise Two Gardens well planted with choice of Wall Fruit, and Standards, and
two Meadows for Gress. The Garddens and Meadows to be Set severally or
together, by the year or for a Term of Years. Enquire of Mr. DUDLEY DONNELLY at
the SWAN, opposiee to the Queen's Gardens in Ch(...)


