Information and Direction TO Such Persons as are inclined TO AMERICA, MORE
Especially Those related to the Province OF PENNSYLVANIA.
That the Value and Improvement of Estates in our Parts of America, may yet
appear with further clearness and Assurance to Enquirers, I propose to speak my
own Knowledge, and the Observation of others, as particularly as I can; which I
shall comprise under these Heads.

I. The Advance that is upon Money and Goods. II. The Advance that is upon
Labor, be it of Handicrafts or others. III. The Advance that is upon Land. IV.
The Charge of Transporting a Family, and Fitting a Plantation. V. The Way the
Poorer sort may be Transported, and Seated, with Advantage to the Rich that
help them. VI. The easier and better provision that is to be made there for
Posterity, especially by those that are not of great Substance. VII. What
Vtensels and Goods are fitting to carry for Use or Profit.
For the first, Such Money as may be carried, as pieces of eight, advances
Thirty, and Goods at least Fifty per cent. Say I have 100 l. sterling. If I am but
six in Family, I will pay my Passage with the advance upon my money, and find
my hundred pounds good in the Country at last. Upon Goods, well bought and
sorted, there is more profit: but some money is very requisite for Trade sake;
for we find it gives Goods a better market; so that considering the great
quantity of Goods already carried, it were not amiss at present, if one half
were in Money, and the other in Goods.

Thus in General. But it particularly encourages Merchants, because the profit
by advance, is seldom less then 50 l. sterling. per cent, which is very
considerable; and we have already got some things for returns, as Skins, Furrs,
Whale-Oyle, Tobacco, etc.

II. For Labor, be it of Handicrafts, or Others, there is a considerable
Encouragement by advance of price, to what is here, because the Goods
Manufactured there, advance equal to those the Merchant sells, and where
Provision is at least as cheap, and there is such additional gain, to the first
Gain of Handicrafts here (of whom the Merchant buys) the American Handicraft
must have an extraordinary time of it. The like may be said or Under Laborers,
for some time, until the Country be better replenished with People.

III. The Advance upon Land is Encouraging, which will be best apprehended by
an English understanding in a Comparison with the Lands of England, that he is
familiarly acquainted with.

If 500 Acres of unclear'd Land there, indifferently chosen, will keep as many
Milch Cowes, or fat as many Bullocks for the market in Summer, as 50 Acres of
improved Land in England, as chosen aforesaid, can do; then by Computing the
value of the Summers Grass of such fifty Acres of Land here, we shall the
better find the value of 500 Acres of Land in America; for within that compass
the same quantity of Cattle may be well kept. Admit this then that the (...)
Grass of 50 Acres of midd^^ng Land in England, is worth 15 l. I conceive that
makes 20 l, which is the price of the Inheritance of the 500 Acres, no dear
Purchass. The cost to go thither is no Objection, because it is paid by the
Advance that is upon the Money and Goods at the rate aforeforesaid. If the
hazard of the Seas be Objected, we see that the five hundredth Ship using those
parts, does not miscarry, and the Risk is run for themselves only. However,
except in Winter, Passages are pleasant, as well as safe.

But this Comparison draws an Objection upon us that must be obviated. What
becomes of your stock in the Winter? I say our Woods usually keep them for the
Market till December, and unless it be a more then ordinary Winter (which is
observed to happen but once in four or five Years) or that they are young
stock, or Cattle big with Young, they mostly shift for themselves. But if
Fodder be wanted, we have a supply by H^y, we mow in the Marshes and Woods, or
the Straw of the English Grain we use, or the Tops and Stalks of Indian Corn,
and sometimes that it self; a Thing hearty, and easily raised, and is good to
fat as well as keep, and answers to Oats, Pease, Beans and Fetches here, tho we
have of them also.

This Scheam of Grazing and keeping of Stock, may inform Inquirers what the
Woods and unbroken Lands of those Countries in some sort will do in proportion
to Lands here, and consequently, what they are worth to Lands here, allowing
equally for Care and Fodder on both sides

To be short, the produce of wild Land there in this respect, is within less
then ten to one, of what our cleare^ Land is here, and the purchase here, is an
hundred to (...) Dearer, which must needs make American Lands (...) Bargain to
the Purchasers.

Now for clearing of our Wood-lands in (...) corn; the diff^culty is not so
great as is imagined; our Trees, being not so thick, or not so burdensome, but
that four hands, in four months time, may easily clear five and twenty Acres
for the Plow; which, at 15 d. English per Day, for each hand, comes to twenty
five shillings per Acre. The increase of which, is with less then half the seed
at least equal to the Improved Land of England. Add to this, the ten pence
which buys the sea of an Acre unclear'd, and an Acre of Land, producing the
like quantity with English Ground, shall cost 1 l. 5 s. 10 d. which at eight
years purchase, ought to yield three shillings two pence three farthings per
Annum. Now, where it brings an increase equal to Land of ten shillings per
Annum in Eng^and, and what it produces, yields not, at present, a less value,
the advantage is almost four to one, which I conceive is no inconsiderable
advance.

Having given this general account of Lands in those parts ^f Amer^ca, which
for Variety of Earth, and Number of Fountains, falls not short, in my Opinion,
of any Country I have seen in Europe; I shall in the next place, for their Help
and Direction that intend thither,

IV. First, S^t down the Charge of Transporting an or^in^^y Family.

Secondly, The Method and Charge of their settling a P^^^^ation when there,
which will serve for all Ranks, proportion still considered. I will suppose my
self worth but one hundred pounds.

l. s. d. For my Self, W^fe and two Men Servants, at 5 po^nd per head, and one
Child of ten years old, 50 s. (for to that age Children pay no more) 22 10 00
For a Tunn of Goods, each a Chest gratis, 02 00 00 For the ship Doctor per head
2 s 6 d. 00 12 06 For 4 Gallons of Brandy and 24 Pounds of Sug^r for the
Voyage. 01 00 00 For Clothes for my Servants, each 6 Shirts, 2 Waistcoats, a
Summer and a Winter Shute, one H^t, 2 Pair of Shoes, Stokings and Drawers. 12
00 00 38 02 06

When it pleases God we are well arrived, which I suppose to be about the first
of October, the First thing is to get a Lodging in some Town or Village at
hand, for my, Fam^ly, and there stay one Week, and take something for our
health, refresh our selves, and advise where to settle, if my land be not
already fixed: This done, I take my two men and g^ to my Lot, which is, say,
five hundred Acr^s. I lodge them at the next Village, or House to the place, and
then go to felling of Trees, proper for a first House, which will very well
serve for the present occasion, and afterward be a good out House, till plenty
will allow me to build a Better.

To build then, an House of thirty foot long and eighteen foot broad, with a
partition near the middle, and an other to divide one end of the House into two
small Roo^s, there must be eight Trees of about sixteen Inches square, and cut
off, to Posts of about fifteen foot long, which the House must stand upon; and
four pieces, two of thirty foot long, and two of eighteen foot long, for
Plates, which must lie upon the top of those Posts, the whole length and breadth
of the House, for the Gifts to rest upon. There must be ten Gifts of twenty
foot long, to be^r the Loft, and two false Plates of thirty foot long to lie
upon the ends of the Gifts for the Rafters to be fixed upon, twelve pare of
Rafters of about twenty foot, to bear the Roof of the House, with several other
small pieces; as Wind beams, Braces, Studs etc. which are made out of the Waste
Timber. For Covering the House, Ends, and Sides, and for the Loft, we use
Clabboard, which is Rived feather edged, of five foot and a half long, that
well Drawn, lies close and smooth: The Lodging Room may be lined with the same,
and filld up between, which is very Warm. These houses usually endure ten years
without Repair.

l. s. d. For the Carpenters work for such an House, Land my Servants assisting
him together with his Diet. 07 00 00 For a Barn of the same Building and
Dimentions, 05 00 00 For Nails, and other things to f^nish Both 03 10 00

The lower flour is the Ground the upper Clabbord: This may seem a mean way of
Building, but it is sufficient and safest for ordinary beginners. It Is true,
some of our Folks have exceeded much, even in Villages; but how wise they were
in it, is the Question: An ordinary House, and a good Stock, is the Planters
Wisdom; Else, some of our Neighboring Provinces, improved by persons, whom
Necessity had made ingenious and provident, had not succeeded so well as they
have done. Howbeit, if better are desired, people may have them suitable to
their abilities.

This House may be finished by the middle of November, the Barn by the Spring,
but there being little use for it till the next fall, it may be built at
Leisure, and the Winter employed to clear Land for the Spring, by which time,
they may easily have cleared fifteen Acres.

The Spring come a stock must be bought.

l. s. d. For three Milch Cows and Calves by their sides. 10 00 00 For a Yoke
of Oxen, 08 00 00 For a Breeding Mare, 05 00 00 For two Young Sows and a Boar,
01 10 00 24 10 00

Here will fittly come in our Years Provision.

l. s. d. To each person of the Family 8 Bushels of Indian Corn at 2 s per
Bushel, and 5 Bushels of English Wheat at 3 s 6 d per Bushel, which comes for
five persons to, 08 07 06 For two Barrels of Mollasses, for Beer, 03 00 00 For
Beef and Pork, at a 120 pounds per head, and 2 d per pound 05 00 00 For 5 Gall.
of Spirits, at 2 s per Gall. 00 10 00 16 17 06

I fall now to the Land I have cleared to Plant, upon which, with Gods ordinary
Providence, a Crop may be thus made of diverse Grain, viz.

l. s. d. The three Working hands may Plant and tend, especially with a little
help of the Woman and Boy 20000 Indian Corn Hills, which generally make about
400 Bushels, which at 2 s per Bushel coms to 40 00 00 They may sow eight Acres;
half with Summer Wheat, and half with Oats, which computing at 15 Bushels per
Acre, there will be 120 Bushels of both, and Oats at 2 s per Bushel, and Wheat
at 3 s 6 d per Bushel, come to 16 10 00 To Indian Pease 01 10 00 To Gallavances
and Patatoes 01 10 00 (a tolerable increase) 59 10 00

By this time the Year is bought about, and October is come again. Let us see
now what we are Worth.

Planter Debtor.
l. s. d. TO Passage and Clothes for my Servants, being part of my first
Principle 38 02 06 To two months Lodging till an house be built 01 00 00 To an
House and Barn 15 10 00 To Provisions for one Year for the Family 16 17 06 To a
Stock in Cows, Oxen, Swine and a Mare 24 10 00 96 00 00 Rest Due 04 00 00 100
00 00

Per Contr. Creditor
l. s. d. By the remaining part of my 100 pounds 04 00 00 To the advance of
five and twenty per Cent upon thirty pounds worth of goods to bring them to the
sterling value of money 07 10 00 By an House and Barn worth together with the
assistance the Carpenter had 30 00 00 By 15 Acres of Land Cleared 18 15 00 By
Corn and Grain, being the produce of this years Crop 59 10 00 By the stock, as
good as when Bought, 24 10 00 144 05 00

With the overplus of the Grain I have, to what I want, I furnish my self the
ensuing Year with two Barrels of Mollasses, two of Meat, and two of Fish, to
save my young stock; and proceed to clear more Land for Indian Corn and Oats,
and Employ the other Land to English Wheat and Barley: A Garden Plat, next the
House, and an Acre in an Orchard, follow of course. And thus ^end with my
settlement of a Plantation, leaving the Planter to live by his industry and
increase, and make what he can of the rest of his five hundred Acres, that for
the sake of this very setlement, is in reputation worth, three times more then
it was.

For those that have greater abilities, and aim at better settlements, they
have the means in their own Hands, and the People of the Country skill enough
to answer their desires be it in fine Timber or very good Brick Buildings. But
for the Poorer sort, that either can but just transport themselves, or that are
not well able of themselves to do that, I shall, for the encouragement of such,
as well as of those that shall assist them, propose my former Meth^ds somewhat
better explained.

V. The way the Poorer sort may be transported, with advantage to the Rich that
hely them, is thus;

In the first place, there are such as are able to transport themselves and
Families, but are unable to build or stock themselves when they are there;
others that have not enough to Transport themselves and Families, and such will
come under a different Consideration.

The first of these may be entertained in this manner, Say I have 5000 Acres, I
will settle Ten Families upon them, in way of Village, and build each an house,
an out-house for Cattle, furnish every Family with Stock; as four Cows, two
Sows, a couple of Mares, and a yoke of Oxen, with a Town Horse, Bull and Boar;
I find them with Tools, and give each their first Ground-seed. They shall
continue Seven Years, or more, as we agree, at half increase, being bound to
leave the Houses in repair, and a Garden and Orchard, I paying for the Trees,
and at least twenty Acres of Land within Fence, and improved to corn and grass:
The charge will come to about sixty pounds English for each Family: At the
seven years end, the Improvement Will be worth, as things go now, 120 l.
besides the value of the increase of the Stock, which may be near as much more,
allowing for casualties; especially, if the People are honest and careful, or a
man be upon the spot himself, or have an Overseer sometimes to inspect them.
The charge in the whole is 832 l. And the value of stock and improvements 2400
l. I think I have been modest in my computation. These Farms are afterward fit
for Leases at full Rent, or how else the Owner shall please to dispose of them.
Also the People will by this time be skilled in the Country, and well provided
to settle themselves with stock upon their own Land, which shall be a thousand
Acres their Landlord will give them, which is one hundred to each Family, in
some part of his five thousand Acres, they only paying for the same ten
shillings yearly, which is a shilling for each Family.

The advantage of this way, is chiefly to those that go, for as the benefit
seems greater, so is the hazard, by loss or embezlement of stock, unless one
were present, or a dilligent and honest Overseer there: But those that design
going, and have money, and aim to live with most Ease, cannot do better; for
the half increase of the stock and labor of those Families will supply them
with Provisions; so that they need not toil, in a way, they are perhaps
unacquainted with, for their accomodations of life. And if half increase be
thought a way too uncertain, it may be brought to a certain value, by paying a
yearly Rent for such stock as aforesaid.

The other sort of poor people may be very beneficially transported upon these
terms: Say I ave 5000 Acres I should settle as before, I will give to each
Family 100 Acres, which in the whole makes 1000; and to each Family thirty
pounds English, half in hand, and half there, which in the whole comes to 300
l. After four years are expired, in which time they may be eane, and in a good
condition, they shall each of them pay five pounds, and so yearly for ever, as
a Fee-farm rent; which in the whole comes to 50 l. a Year. Thus a man that buys
5000 Acres may secure and settle his 4000 by the gift of one, and in a way,
that hazard and interest allowed for, amounts to at least ten per cent. upon
Land security; besides the value it puts upon the rest of the 5000. Acres,
which will be, for that reason, really worth three times as much as before. In
these Families I propose that there be at least two working hands besides the
wife, whether son or servant; and that they oblige what they carry; and for
further security bind themselves as servants for some time, that they will
settle the said land accordingly, and when they are once seated, their
improvements are security enough for the Rent.

There is yet another expedient, and that is, give to, ten Families 1000 Acres
forever, at a small acknowledgement, and settle them in way of Village, as
before; by their seating thus, the Land taken up is secured from others,
because the method of the Country is answered and the value such a settlement
gives to the rest reserved, is not inconsiderable; I mean, the 4000 Acres;
especially that which is Contiguous: For their Children when grown up, and
Handicrafts will soon covet to fix next them, and such after settelments
beginning at an Improved Rent in Fee, or for long Leases, on small
Acknowledgements, and good Improvements, must advance the whole considerably. I
conceive any of these methods to issue in a sufficient advantage to
Adventurers, and they all give good encouragement to feeble and poor Families.
Now I know some think this looks a little hard upon the People that are to pay
the said Rent, the thing that is most contrary to my inclinations, as well as
design in making this proposal. But I am of another mind; for in Ire^and, money
bears the Interest of ten per cent: Thirty pounds then, will deserve three
pounds a Year, three Years Interest makes Nine pounds. The 100 Acres surveyed
and Patented are worth eight pounds at least, for that is one of the lowest
prises Parchasers sell again at. The Interest of this eight pounds for three
Years at ten per cent, is Eight and forty shillings; there is also three
shillings for three years rent. Now put the thrity, the nine, the eight and the
two pounds eight shillings, and the three shillings together, and there will be
forty nine pounds eleven shillings, which wants but twelve shillings of fifty
pounds, and you advance no more then money does in Ireland, that is nearer
home, and an improved Country. To which add, the hazard that is Run, in this
way, above a double Bond for the payment of the fifty pounds in Ireland; for if
the ship perish, my money is gone, if the man or working hands Dye, I have a
Charge instead of a Revenue that will follow me; which plainly evidences that
the proposition is not grievous, but re^sonable and charitable too, and
especially when we Consider that Sixty five Days out of the Year, at eighteen
pence by Day, will, within half a crown, pay the Rent, and he has three Hundred
to himself. Nor is this ail, he is come to a Country where Land is cheap, and
does Pise, and where those that have hands cannot but (...) and (...) way too,
not subject to the Contingences and decays of Trades; for as below the grownd
none can fall, so here every one falls upon his own; which brings me to the
Sixth Particular, about the benefit these Countries bring to Posterity.

VI. There is an easier and better provision to be made there for Posterity,
especially of such as are not of great Substance. I never thought, but mere
Trades would do as well here as there, but when People have gained something
here by their ingenuity and Toil, say 1000 l. how much Land will that buy here,
and how much incom will that fetch; perhaps 50 l. per Ann. on Bond, or 40 in
Land, which at 10 s. by the Acre, comes to fourscore Acres. This, to bring up
five Children, Feed, Cloth, School, and Portion them, will be very scanty; but
then, what will this do to Estate their Children, and so forward.

Now in America, a thousand Pounds discreetly laid out, is an Exchequer to a
Family. I will suppose I have one hundred Pounds in Land, which contains 3000
Acres. This I stock, to half increase, for 360 l. upon this half increase I
live well, till my Children are of age. By this time at least, the Tennants
Term is up, and I place my Children in those Tenements, with a proportion of
stock, without Portions or Rents to pay: Each has 500 Acres, besides my five
hundred after my decease. If each of them have five Children, there is an
hundred Acres apiece for them, besides the 500 Acres I leave them; and if any
take to Trades, the rest have the more Land. By this time, an hundred Acres may
be reasonably presumed to be worth as much as a 1000 was in their Fathers time,
and it must advance yet: All improved Countries teach us this. Now this is a
way of putting people into the natural Channel of life, to wit, Agriculture,
and of Adjourning care for posterity to the Fourth Generation. Let it be
remembered that there is but 360 l. expended of the 1000 l. so that to carry me
and my Family, and settle us in some proportion to our Degree, as also to
Traffic and increase portions, there rests 540 l. now if a 1000 l. in Europe,
cannot have so natural an increase, free of those Contigences that other means
of life are subject to, I conceive America somewhat a better place for the good
of Posterity, especially of such as are not wealthy, o^ have many Children,
that they would not should too unequally live and be provided for.

VII. Now as to what Utensels and Goods are fittest to carry for use and
profit, I say, in general, all things relating to Apparel, Building,
Housholdstuff, Husbandry, Fowling and Fishing: but for Particulars, English
Woollen, and German Linen, As ordinary Broad-Clothes Kereseys, Searges,
Norwich-Stuffs, some Duffels, Cottons and Stroud-waters, for the Natives, and
White and Blew Ozenburgs, Shoes, and Stockins, Buttons, Silk, Thread, Iron
ware, especially, Felling Axes, Hows, Indian Hows, Saws, Frows, Drawing-Knives,
Natles, but of 6. d, and 8. d. a treble quantity, because they use them for
shingling, or covering of Houses. Powder and Lead are often wanted for the
Woods, in Winter for Water Fowl, that are very numerous. There are lesser
things that will be convenient to carry; but being trivial in themselves, and
what People can hardly miss to think upon; I shall close this Information and
Direction with my usual Caution, and good Wishes. Let none be Hasty or
Presumptuous. The even humble Temper will best endure the difference of the
Change either way. A Wilderness must want some things improved Countries do
enjoy; but Time and Labor will reprize, where Industry sooner makes an
Inheritance. And tho we have not the Ornaments of Life, we want not the
Conveniences; and if their Cost were put in Balance with their Benefit, the
World would be greatly debtor on Account. If then we have less of Art, we have
more of Nature; and the Works of God are fitter objects for meditation and
Delight; then the Inventions of men: In vain do we admire the First and Simpler
Ages of the World, and style them Golden, while we object against America
Rusticity and Solitude.

I will Say no more, but if Jacob dwelt in Tents, and Herds and Flocks were his
Revenue, a Life like his should be no stop with those that love his Plainness
and Integrity. I beseech God it may be so with them that go, and I am sure they
will not have much Reason to repent their Change.

FINIS.

