THE True Protestants WATCHWORD, INSTRUCTING All True Protestants what they
ought to do in a Peaceable Way of Opposition against POPERY, at this Juncture
of Time.

By T. P. a Friend to Truth and Peace.

Vita unita fortior.

And a threefold Cord is not easily broken,

Eccles. 4.9, 10, 12. LONDON, Printed for H. B. Anno 1679.

THE True Protestants VVATCH-VVORD.
THE holy Scripture of Truth tells us Job 36.15.
That God opens the Ear by Oppression; and it would be a very great mercy to
England, if God would be graciously pleased to open the Ears of all true
Protestants in this Nation by the Cry of Oppression, and cause them to hear his
voice Mich. 6.8, 9. Zeph. 1.14, 15, 16.
In Romes Masterpiece ordered by a Committee of the House of Commons in
Parliament the first day of August, 1643. to be Printed; you have a particular
Discovery of the Popish Plot and Treason against the late King, Kingdom, and
Protestant Religion, and to raise the Scottish Wars, p. 13-26. and the
Observations thereon, p. 30-35.

In the King's Proclamation for Banishing the Papists ten miles from London,
dated October. 30. 1678. He calls the then Popish Conspiracy, A bloody traitorous
Design of Popish Recusants against His Royal Person, the Government, and the
Protestant Religion.

And in a Vote of the House of Commons, approved by the House of Lords at a
Conference, November. 1. 1678. -- Resolved, etc. That this House is of Opinion,
that there has been, and still is a damnable and hellish Plot contrived, and
carried on by Popish Recusants for Assassinating and Murdering the King; and
for subverting the Government; and rooting out, and destroying the Protestant
Religion.

By this threefold Authentic Testimonies it does undeniably appear, that
there has been, and still is a most cunning, strong, execrable Conspiracy
contrived at Rome: And for many years together most vigorously pursued in
England with all industry, policy, and subtilty, by many active and potent
Confederates of all sorts, to subvert the Government, to re-establish Popery,
and to destroy the Protestant Religion. Therefore it greatly concerns all true
Protestants to consider seriously, what they ought to do at this juncture of
Time, in a pious, peaceable, and righteous way, against Popery, and all Popish
Recusants in England.

I am not ignorant that several Expedients have been, and are proposed to
accomplish a firm Union, and mutual Agreement amongst all Protestants (though
otherwise of different Persuasions) against our Common Adversaries the Papists,
but they have not proved Effectual to that End: Yet there is (at least in my
Opinion) a Medium, which, if we Protestants could all agree in the Knowledge
and Practice of, would certainly conduce very much unto the full accomplishment
of this sweet, lovely, and innocent thing, called Union and mutual Agreement
among all true Protestants.

That Medium, which I intend, and humbly offer, consists of two general and
principal parts, viz. first, That Royal Law of our LORD Jesus Christ; Matthew
22.39.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Secondly, That fundamental Law of
this our Nation, called Magna-Charta, with its Anathema, administered in
Westminster Hall the third day of May, 1253. at the Restoring and Confirmation
of the same Magna-Charta, the King, Lords and Commons being present, and
consenting to the same Anathema; the words are these, We Excommunicate,
Accurse, and from the Benefit of the holy Church Sequester all, that secretly
or openly, by Deed, Word, or Council, do make Statutes, or observe them being
made; or that bring in Customs, or that keep them being brought in against the
said Liberties of Magna-Charta, the Writers, Lawmakers, Counselors, and the
Executors of them, and all those that shall presume to Judge against them.

That we Protestants may agree in the Knowledge and Practice of that Law of our
Sovereign Lord Jesus, Mat. 22.39. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; we
must understand, 1. That every true Protestant (in England especially) is our
Neighbor. 2. That to love him (as our selves) is to pity and compassionate
him, to help and succor him, to relieve and preserve him, when he is wronged,
injured, unjustly oppressed, and in danger to be destroyed; yea and by all
lawful ways and means to preserve his Life, Liberty and Estate from the
illegal Violence and Oppression of any person or persons whatsoever.

And the lawful ways and means, which all true Protestants may and ought to
use in this case, are these, viz. first, They ought to make fervent and
constant Prayer to Almighty God for the Protestants, their Cause, Lives and
Liberties, against the Papists, and all their Adherents, that seek to destroy
them, as before is evidently declared: And herein all true Protestants ought to
be unanimous, as the Church was, Ast. 12.1-5. But prayer was made by the Church
unto God for him without ceasing, and verse 12. And Psalm. 83. throughout. Keep
not thou silence, O God, hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God. For in,
thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lift up the head.
They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and cousulted against thy
hidden ones. They have laid, Conte, and let us cut them off from being a
Nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. For they have
consulted together with one consent: they are confederate against thee. The
Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites: of Moab, and the Hagarens. Gebal, and
Ammon, and Ammalek: the Philistines with the Inhabitants of Tire. Assure also is
joined with them: they have helped the children of Lot. Selah. Go unto them as
to the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to Jabin at the brook of Kison. Which
perished at Endor, they became as dung for the Earth. Make their Nobles like
Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their Princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna: Who
said, let us take to our selves the Houses of God in possession. O my God, make
them like a wheel: as the stubble before the wind. As the fire burns a wood:
and as the flame sets the mountains on fire: So persecute them with thy
tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Fill their faces with shame, that
they may seek thy Name, O Lord. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever:
yea, let them be put to shame, and perish. That men may know that thou whose
name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most High over all the Earth. Yea fasting and
prayer in this Case, as Esther, Mordecai, and the Jews did, when Haman the
Kings Favorite, and his Confederates ha^ Plotted their Destruction, Aesth.
4.3.16. Secondly, All Protestants as one Man ought every Man to arm himself,
that they might be ready to defend themselves, when the bloodthirsty Papists
(Who have Conspired to burn their houses and Massacre their Persons, and so
destroy the Protestant Religion) shall attempt their Hellish Plot; as Nehemiah,
the Nobles, the Elders, the Rulers, and all the Jews did generally, yea every
one had his sword guirded by his side; the Labourer, and they that bear burdens
had weapons for their defense. Read Nehem. 4.7. When Sanballat, Tobiah, the
Arabians, the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, v. 8. Conspired all of them
together to come and to fight against Jerusalem, and v. 12. And be upon them,
v. 11. And the Adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, will we come
in the midst among them, and slay them, etc. Thirdly, The Protestants being
provided with Arms for their own defense, may and ought to Petition the King
for their lives, and to pray his Majesty and his Counselors for an Edict unto
Lieutenants, and the Deputies, and Rulers or Governors of their respective
Provinces, Countries, Cities, Towns-corporate, etc. Wherein the King and his
Counselors may be desired to grant unto the Protestants in all his Dominions
(especially in England) to gather themselves together, and to stand for their
Life, to destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish all the Power of the Papists,
that shall assault them. As Esther and Mordecai did in their case and danger,
which is Recorded in the Book Esther, Chap. 7.1.2.3. Chap. 8.9, 10, 11.

And touching the second Part of the Medium propounded, viz. the Magna-Charta
of England, which fundamental Law of the Land of our Nativity will justify all
true Protestants of this Nation, in our due obedience to that Royal law of our
Lord Jesus Christ aforementioned, viz. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. For I beseech all true Protestants to Consider we hold by one common
Tenure all the outward Liberties, Privileges, and Interests, that we have in
our lives, estates, and all other Proprieties that we have, and the best
Security that English men have for the holding thereof, is the fundamental Law
of the Land: And therefore if this grand Security be violated in any one
English-mans just Case, every Man's Life, Liberty, Privilege, Interest and
Propriety is invaded by that particular violation, as well as his to whom the
violation is done: And my legal and just Defending his Right, as my own, is, to
love my Neighbor as my self.

Yea, the security of our Lives, Freedoms, and Liberties, is so firm by
Magna-Charta, and the fundamental Laws of the Land, that though Dudley and
Empson had a Law of King, Lords and Commands to justify them, yet
notwithstanding they were condemned and executed, and the Act it self judged
and declared illegal. And it will be a difficult Task for any one to give a
clear and true Instance of any Persons, or Person, (except in time of war by
which Justice may be obstructed) that ever brake the Fundamental Laws of
England, but sooner or later it cost him his Life for the Breach he made upon
them. Nor is any thing more frequent in our English Annals, than the cutting
off Offenders, for but endeavoring to Subvert the Fundamentals Laws of this
Nation.

Now to conclude it does behave all true Christians to lay aside all our
differences, and agree in this harmless Medium propounded for Unity and Safety
of all true Protestants, and the Protestant Religion, against all the Hellish
Plots, Confederacies, Treacheries and Designs of the Papists.

FINIS.

