THE SPEECH OF THE EMPEROR OF RUSSIA To His most Sacred MAJESTY K. WILLIAM At
VTRIGHT the of October 1697.
Most Renowned EMPEROR,

IT was not the desire of seeing the celebrated Cities of the German Empire, or
the most Potent Re-publick of the Universe, that made me leave my Throne in a
Distant Country, and my Victorious Armies, but the vehement passion alone
(...) seeing the most Brave and most Generous Hero of the Age. ^^ ve my wish,
and am sufficiently recompensed for my Travel, (...) being admitted into your
presence: Your kind Embraces have (...) me more Satisfaction than the taking of
Asoph, and tri^mphing over the Tartars; but the Conquest is yours: Your ^artial
Genius directed my Sword and the Generous Emulation ^f your Exploits, instiled
into my Breast the first thoughts I had ^f enlarging my Dominions. I cannot
express in Words the Ve^eration I have for your Sacred Person, my unparalled
Journey is ^he proof of it. The season is so far advanced, and I hope the ^ce
too, that I shall not have the opportunity as Maximilian ^^d of fighting under
the Banner of England, against France ^e common, etc. If the War continues, I
and my Armies will ^adily observe your Orders; and if either in War or Peace
your ^dustrious Subjects will trade to the most Northren Parts of the ^orld,
the ports of Russia shall be free for them, I will grant them ^ater Immunities
then ever they yet had, and have them enrolled ^ong the most precious records
of my Empire to be a perpetual ^emorial of the Esteem I have for the worthiest
of Kings: (...)


