A PROPOSAL of a Plain and Ready way to raise a very great Sum of Moneys, by a
Tax, or Poll upon Quick Stock, which was never yet Charged nor Assessed.
THIS present Parliament having, like Good Patriots, and Loyal Subjects,
generally and unanimously declared, they are resolved to support His Majesty
against his Enemies both at home and abroad, and effectually supply him to
carry on the War against France with Vigor. Thinking of the many great
Occasions, and extraordinary Necessity there will be for raising of Moneys, and
the difficulty of finding Ways, and Means to Effect it; And amongst other
things, considering that all Quick Stock, namely, Cattle, Sheep, Horses, and
Swine, have of late years sold at very good Rates, to the great advantage of
Farmers, and all other Proprietors of them; and in all probability like to
continue so as long as the War lasts; it being the occasion of the
extraordinary Consumption, and Use of those Goods, more Meat being spent in
Victualling the Fleets, and more Horses employed in the Army. Therefore, with
all humble submission to the Great Wisdom and Understanding of the Honorable
House of Commons, I here propose a Tax upon Quick Stock, being never charged
before; although perhaps it may be objected, and said, that Quick Stock is the
Product of the Land, and to lay a Tax upon that, is to lay a heavier burden
upon Land; but to solve that is answered, That as all good and kind Landlords
pay, and bear all, or the greatest part of the Land Tax of 4 shillings per
Pound, so it is proposed that the Tenants, and Proprietors bear all the Tax of
the Quick Stock; And then although the Load be heavier, there will be more hands
to support and bear it; and if a Weight be increased, as long as there are more
Bearers, it will be carried with the same ease as it was before when lighter,
and had fewer supporters; And there being also a great quantity of Moneys
employed, and got by the Quick Stock as well as the dead Trading Stock; It is
presumed, with humble submission, that the one is no more an Excise than the
other, and that it is not unreasonable that one should be Taxed as well as the
other; especailly at this juncture of time when there are so many great
occasions for raising of Moneys. And as the last Parliament gave an instance
for Taxing dead Trading Stock, so I most humbly refer it to the Great Wisdom
and Consideration of the present Parliament for the Taxing of the Quick Stock;
which, as hereafter proportioned, cannot be thought a grievous, or heavy Tax,
being but about the sixtieth penny of every Man's Quick Stock; and yet if duly
Assessed, and Collected, may, its presumed, raise in one year more than three
times the sum the Chimney Money did; and if approved of, may be continued one
year or more, as the Parliament in their Great Wisdom shall think requisite,
and necessary, and may serve for a Fund for the making good, and Re-coining the
Clipped and Corrupt Moneys of the Nation, or for any other supply; And what
thinking and unprejudiced Man, where there is an absolute necessity, would not
willingly, without grumbling, part with a Penny out of five Shillings toward
redressing so great a grievance as the Clipped and Corrupt Moneys is, and to
secure Religion, and Property.

The Method and Rates of this Tax proposed to be laid upon Quick Stock, viz.
Cattle, Sheep, Horses, and Swine, are as follows;
FIRST, For Cattle, being in all Counties some good, and some indifferent, it
is proposed to Tax them in all Counties alike, viz. A Calf under a year old, a
penny; A year old two pence; A young Beast two years old, four pence; A young
Beast three years old eight pence; And at four years old (being then partly
come to their full growth) or upward, twelve pence.

Next for Sheep, there being a difference in their Breed; in some Countries the
generality of them being not worth one with another above 4 s. or 5 s. a piece;
and in other Countries the generality of them being worth 9 s. or 10 s. a piece
one with another: It is therefore proposed to Tax them differently: And in
those places where the generality of them are worth but 4 s. or 5 s. a piece,
to Tax every Sheep at 3 Farthings per Annum; and where they are generally worth
9 s. or 10 s. a piece, to Tax them at 3 Half pence a Sheep; and all to be
reckoned Sheep, excepting Lambs under 6 Months old.

For Horses, they being in all Countries as Cattle are, some good, and some
indifferent, it is proposed to Tax them alike in all Counties, viz. A Foal
under a Year old 3 Halfpence per Annum, a Year old 3 d. a two Year old 6 d. a
three Year old 9 d. a four Year old 12 d. and at five Years old (being then
near their full growth) 15 d. And for every Stone-Horse, Gelding, or Mare of
that Age, or more, being worth 10 l. to be Taxed 2 s. 6 d. and for the more
equality of the Thing, if worth 15 l. then to be Taxed 3 s. 9 d. and if worth
20 l. to be Taxed 5 s. but to Rate none higher, because a Horse that is really
worth 20 l. is as useful, and good for Service, as one that may be valued to
three times that Price: And none to be free, or exempted, but Military Officers
and Soldiers Horses, that are actually in His Majesty's present Pay and Service.

And lastly, For Swine in all Countries, to Tax and Assess every One that is
worth Five Shillings, a Penny; if worth Ten Shillings, 2 d. if worth 15 s. then
3 d. and so on to the utmost value: But none to be rated but such as are worth
5 s. a piece.

Having thus set down the several Rates proposed to Tax the Quick Stock at, I
now come to propose a way for the exact Assessing and Managing this Tax, and to
make it plain and easy, without Rigor or Partiality: In the first place it is
proposed, That there be two Assessors chosen in every Parish, on more, where it
is large and requires it, that are conscientious and understanding Men, who are
to be sworn to do Justice to the best of their Judgment and Knowledge, in
taking an exact Account of every Man's Quick Stock aforesaid, and in valuing
and assessing the same according to the forementioned Rates, and to make true
Duplicates thereof in the Form hereafter shown; whereof one to be given to the
Collectors of the Parish, to gather the said Tax by; and another to the general
Receiver of the County, that he may understand what is due from every Parish.
And for the receiving and collecting of the said Tax, the Collectors of the
Land Tax in every Parish, and the general Receiver of that Assessment in the
County may serve, having the same Allowance per Pound for the receiving of this
as is allowed for the Land Tax; and so it will come readily, and at an easy
Charge, into His Majesty's Exchequer.

For the commencing of this Tax, it is proposed to be from Lady Day, 1697. for
the Year 1697. And for the time of assessing and making this Tax, it is
proposed to be betwixt Lady Day and May Day; and so by that time if may be
exactly known what it will amount to.

The Days of Payment to be as the Land Tax are.

And, to prevent Disputes and Evasions, it is further proposed, That every
Person and Proprietor shall be assessed for all the Quick Stock aforesaid,
which shall be found in his possession at the time of Assessing, whether bred,
bought, or sold, that he may not pretend they are not his own, and so not to be
Taxed for them.

And if any Person shall conceal, or deny to give a just and true Account of
his Quick Stock (which is not easy to be done, because every Man's Quick Stock
is visible, and known to his Neighbors) all such Cattle, Sheep, Horses, and
Swine, so concealed, or denied, to be forfeited, and one Moity of the value
thereof to go to the Discoverer, and the other to the King, and added to the
Duplicate: Or any other Penalty, which the Parliament in their great Wisdom
shall think more proper and expedient.

Note, That this Tax, if rightly considered, cannot be said to affect the Poor,
or oppress the Rich, for the Poor having no Quick Stock, are not Chargeable,
and those that have, pay but proportionable for what they have, at easy, and
moderate Rates; but about the Sixtieth Penny, as aforesaid, and so cannot be
thought to be an Oppression, especially when there is an absolute necessity to
raise Moneys, and, perhaps, no way to be found out that will be more effectual,
and more reasonable, and moderate, and give less Offense and Disturbance to the
People than this; for, here are no Officers to Insult, or Impose, but such as
every Parish chooses it self, and those such as are alike concerned: Nor can it
be said to lie heavy upon the Bearers, when it is also considered, that the
Tenants and Farmers, (being the generality of the Proprietors of the Quick
Stock) have had very good Times, by the well selling of their Commodity, and,
in a manner, paid little or nothing toward Carrying on the War; and there
being many extraordinary, and pressing occasions for Moneys, which must be
supplied, and that this Proposal will effectually raise a very considerable
Sum, and be readily, and easily managed, It is therefore humbly presumed, it is
better to do it such a way, than to clogg peoples Purses and Patience with
lingering Payments for many years; for, as in desperate Distempers, a sharp
Remedy, that will effect the Cure, is better bore, and taken by a Patient, than
a tedious Course of Physic, which requires many small, and troublesome
Medicines, of which he sees no end and may, perhaps, be overtaken with another
Illness, before he is recovered of that which at present he languishes under.
But besides all; This Tax carries no weight, nor force, either to hurt the
Buyer, or Seller, for it is but about a Penny in 5 s. which, in any Commodity
of that value, is but an inconsiderable share, and alters it but little in its
Rate or Price, and so cannot be thought any sensible prejudice to the Poor, in
making any thing dearer they are to buy.

An Example for the Form of the Assessment or Duplicate.
A. B. Quick Stock. l. s. d. 4 Calves, under a Year old, at a Penny a-piece 0
00 4 4 Year old Calves, at 2 d. a-piece 0 00 8 6 two Year old, at 4 d. a-piece
0 02 0 7 three Years old, at 8 d. a-piece 0 04 8 6 four Year old, at 12 d. a
piece 0 06 0 Sheep 100, at 3 Farthings a-piece 0 06 3 2 Foals under a Year old,
at 3 Halfpence a-piece 0 00 3 3 of One Year old, at 3 d. a-piece 0 00 9 2 of
two Years old, at 6 d. a-piece 0 01 0 3 of three Years old, at 9 d. a-piece 0
02 3 2 of four Years old, at 12 d. a-piece 0 02 0 2 young Horses of five Years
old, at 15 d. a-piece 0 02 6 And one of five Years old, worth 10 l. 0 02 6 In
all 1 12 1

F. G. Quick Stock. 6 Cows at 12 d. a-piece 0 06 0 8 Oxen at 12 d. a-piece 0 08
0 200 Sheep at 3 Farthings a-piece 0 12 6 2 Horses, 5 Years old, at 15 d.
a-piece 0 02 6 6 Swine worth 20 s. a-piece 0 02 0 In all 1 10 0

T. S. Quick Stock. 4 Cows at 12 d. a-piece 0 04 0 5 young Beasts, 3 Years old,
at 8 d. a-piece 0 03 4 50 Sheep worth 9 s. or 10 s. a-piece, at 3 Halfpence
each 0 06 3 2 Horses, 5 Years old, at 15 d. a-piece 0 02 6 2 young Horses, two
Years old, at 6 d. a-piece 0 01 0 3 Swine worth 15 s. a-piece 0 00 9 In all 0
17 10

And so on.

W. P.


