A perfect Relation of the most Glorious and Entire Victory obtained by the
Christian Army (under the Conduct of the D's of Lorain and Bavaria) over the
whole Turkish Forces, near Darda, taking all their Baggage and Cannon.
Brought by Express to his Excellency the Spanish Ambassador, August the 20th.
1687.
YEsterday Morning arrived a Flanders Mail, which brought no fresher Letters
than the 11th from Vienna, there having been that Morning an extraordinary
Courier arrived from the Imperial Camp, with Advice that the Duke of Lorain was
marched from Mohatz toward Darda, with full Resolution, (considering how
important it was to the present conjuncture of Affairs,) by some stratagem or
other, to oblige the Prime-Vizier to a Battle: The said Courier reports, that
being a League on his way, early in the Morning, he heard the Discharge of a
great many Cannon, and continued Vollies of Muskets, which gave subject to
believe, that the Armies began then to engage. The Gentlemen of Horse of the
Marquess Cactanaga Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, arrived at the same
time here being sent express to Don Pedro de Ronquilio, the Spanish Ambassador,
to impart to him the Glorious Victory the Christian Army has obtained over the
whole Ottoman Force in Hungary, being 80000 effective fighting Men, being
brought to Brussels, by the Gentlemen of Horse of the Marquess Burgamanero, the
Spanish Ambassador at Vienna, and sent from his Highness the Duke of Lorain, by
the Prince of Savoy, to the Emperor; Dated from the Imperial Army, in the
Turkish-Camp, near Esseck, the 7th of August, 1687. which for the Valor and
Conduct of the Generals, as well as the good of Christendom, shall give what
particulars can at present be obtained.

His Highness the Duke of Lorain having since his re-passing the Drove, reached
his Bridge of Boats over the Danube, at Mohatz, not thinking the Prime Vizier
would have abandoned his strong Retrenchments about Esseck, was about entering
upon the design of Besieging some strong-hold the Turks yet possess in Hungary,
when Advice was brought him, that the whole Turkish Army, with all their
Cannon, Baggage, and Artillery of War, passed the Drove, the 28th. of last
Month, and strongly Encamped themselves near Darda; On the 30th. the Duke of
Lorain held a Council of War, where they resolved, that it was absolutely
necessary, to preserve their new Conquest, to return and Fight the Enemy, if
they could be possibly drawn to accept it; and secret methods were among the
Generals concerted how to induce the Turks to quit their Encampment, and fight
on equal terms. The Duke made a present Detachment of 8000 Horse to cover
Sycloss, and five Churches, from the Insults of the Enemy, which lay most
exposed; and so leaving his heavy Baggage behind him at Mohatz, Mustered his
Army, which did not much exceed 40000 Men; the next day Marched toward the
Enemy with easy Journeys, not too much to Fatigue his Men, skirmish'd with
some Parties of them in his Passage; on the fourth, came within a League and a
half of their Camp, made Entrenchments; and finding that'twas impossible to
force them from their Post, on the fifth, sent a Detatchment notwithstanding,
to make a show of attempting it, who Retired with some loss to the Camp. In the
night the Duke of Lorain caused the Elector of Bavaria, with a considerable
Body of the Army, to draw out of the Camp one way, and some Generals another as
if they were retreating, which the Prime Vizier being advised of by his Spies,
and believing (through the disadvantage they were in the day before) that the
Christian Army was retiring, as they did when they re-passed the Drove: Seeing
them now separated, by six the next morning the Prime Vizier, before they were
all retreated, drew out his Army from their Post attacqued the Christian Camp,
thinking to have eat them for a Breakfast; but they valiantly maintained the
Fight till almost Noon, before the first Detatchment, which was Marched some
miles round, fell in upon their Rear, and soon after another Body of Christians
on their Flank, which put them into so great a Consternation, seeing themselves
decoyed that they began to give ground, taking their flight toward Esseck, and
some thousands of them were driven into the Drove, which through the rapidness
of the Stream, were most of them drowned; but in some places the Fight was very
obstinate and bloody, and continued till ten at Night, but in conclusion their
whole Army was discomfited, the Christians being in a full pursuit after them,
they having entirely quitted the Field, leaving all their Cannon, Baggage, and
Attirals of War behind them, which is said to be full as rich as their Camp
before Vienna. The number of the slain are computed to be 8000 on the spot, and
almost as many drowned in the River; besides a good Accouut will be had of the
pursuit, which every Post, for some time, will bring us more particularly. The
Germmans, in this Days Action, have so approved themselves for their Valor and
Conduct, as they will for ever be dreadful to the Turks, and the success of
this Engagement, being the Turks last effort, will bring no small advantage to
the Emperor. The christian Army being not wholly returned from the pursuit
there is no certain Advice of the loss on our side, but as it may be computed
700. some think 1000 may be slain; and we do not miss, as yet, any considerable
Officer of Note: But few of the Turks are mad^ Prisoners, the Germans being so
enraged for the Action of Esseck, as to give no quarter.

POSTCRIPT.
JUst as this happy News arrived, when the Emperors Affairs were thought to be
declining in Hungary, we received the joyful Advice, That the Venetians have
been also successful in the Morea, General Morosini having Landed his Army at
the mouth of the Gulf of Lepanto, laid Siege to the Fortress, and after some
days resistance, made himself master thereof.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, City and College, Anno DOM. 1687.


