OBSERVATIONS ON THE LAST Dutch Wars, In the Years 1672, and 1673.

WITH SOME REFLECTIONS UPON THE CITY and COUNTRY.

Deuteronomy. 23. 9. When the Host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked thing.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1679.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE LAST Dutch Wars, etc.
I It being my fortune, as well as other younger Brothers, to run the risk of
the world, to live gentily; it was my chance to be in the last Dutch Wars,
where through my own observation and the Sailers complaint, I took notice of
these three things: First, the general neglect of the Lords Day throughout the
whole Fleet, we working upon the Sunday as much, if not more, than we do upon
others, and that whilst we are in harbor; and all this is done under the Name
of Expedition: And when we are at Sea, a Commander thinks himself sufficiently
excused to God and the World, if he can find any trifling business to shift off
his Chaplain from the duty of the day; if it be but the providing of a Dinner
for two or three of his Brother Captains; and a Lieutenants Command for a Rope
for the Boat, shall be sooner answered with Boatswain's call, than the Bell for
prayers: And this is exactly contrary to the first Article of War, Anno decimo
tertio Caroli Secundi Regis: That all Commanders, Captains, and Officers at
Sea, shall cause the public Worship of Almighty God, according to the Liturgy
of the Church of England, Established by Law, to be solemnly, orderly, and
reverently performed in the respective Ships; and that Prayers and Preachings
by the respective Chaplains in holy orders of the respective Ships, be
performed diligently; and that the Lords day be observed according to Law. He
that was ever able to read his Bible, can tell that Joshua's Sword prevailed no
longer than Moses held up his hands, and had it not been for Moses's Prayers,
Joshua, for all his valor, had been defeated. But we like the Scribes,
Pharisees, and Hypocrites, pay Tithes of Mint, Annise, and Cummin, but omit the
weightier matters of the Law; and think that Powder and Bullet will do
sufficient Execution without the blessing of God; and that a Commander saying
Bear in, and keep your Luff, shall as soon put a Fleet to flight, as Gideon
discomfit an Host; but let us remember that it was the Sword of the Lord and
Gideon: And we see that God in Deuteronomy. 20. assigns an employment to the
Priests, as well as to the Officers of the Camp: But they cry out what good do
these Churchmen do? And as they are little regarded there, so are they not
taken notice of when they come home; as if there were no respect or preferment
deserved by venturing their Lives in the service of God and their King. This
fault is not only to be found in his Majesty's Navy, but also to be deplored in
the Country, the Lords Day being set apart only for some idle business, which
we cannot afford our selves time enough to do in the Week; or otherwise to run
to hear a man that preach's twice a day, calls us Saints and the Children of
God, but never instructs us what we must do for the attaining of these Titles,
and this only amounts to spiritual pride; for they being once puffed up with
being the Children of God, they never think of honoring their Fathers and
Mothers according to that Law which God has enacted. Such that pride
themselves in the knack of Preaching, and neglect Catechizing; make more Rebels
than good Subjects: Two such Parsons I hear of not far off, who strive to
out-Preach one another; not, I guess, who should make the best Christians, and
consequently the best Subjects; but who shall get the most popular Applause,
the Country People being more delighted with a well nosed Tone, than Sense and
Reason. This might easily be remedied, were those Acts put in execution, which
are made for the observing of the Lords Day: But alas! most of our Justices
understand nothing but to cry so ho to a brace of Greyhounds, and to speak well
to a pack of Dogs; and as much Law as to take away a man's Gun, to make him pay
his Fine for killing of a Hare or a Pheasant, and threaten to whip a Beggar to
save an Alms; but in the more weighty points of the Law, would be baffled upon
the Bench by every High-shooe; were it not for those worthy Gentlemen, who
never made profession of the Law, but have made it their study, and those that
have been bred to that noble Profession, and are in that honorable Commission:
Such Peruk'd Novices rendering the name of a Justice as ridiculous, as a Fool
does that of a Clergyman. This day was very exactly observed by the French,
and very much to our shame; and how unreasonable is it since God has given us
six for own labor, we don't, according to his command, allow him the seventh
for his service?

The second is that dreadful Profanation of the Lords Name, for every Sailer
can ring a peal of Oaths as true as any of your London Huffs, to whom if your
back be toward, when you hear him open, you cannot distinguish him by his mouth
from one of your Town Gallants, for he carries the shauntee behavior in his
Tongue, though not in his Hat and Knee: And this is exactly contrary to the
second Article of War, Anno Decimo Tertio Caroli Secundi Regis: Every Person
and Persons in his Majesty's pay, using unlawful and rash Oaths, Cursings,
Execrations, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, or other scandalous Actions in
derogation of Gods honor, and corruption of good manners, shall be punished by
Fine, Imprisonment, or otherwise, as the Court Marshal shall think fit. This,
as I have been told, was punished by the gallant Earl of Sandwich, with the
loss of their victuals for that day; and they themselves, I have heard, in a
Godly humor complain and say, For these two things we do not prosper; and that
it was not so in Oliver's days: And we know that God will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain. Yet though they look upon this and
other Sins as Beams in their Brothers, they only esteem them as Motes in their
own eyes; and most of them, like our empty Bullies, think not the other words
(which God knows in respect of Oaths and Curses to be very few) to have any
thing of Luster without these foyls; and many of them like some of our
Gentlemen, are made up of nothing but Oaths and Execrations: so that if men
were but aboard a Ship, they need not send for such a one to hear him swear,
for there they may have their ears deafned with this hellish Thunder, which
will give as smart and as brisk claps from their Jaws, as from the mouths of
those formal Fops, who made it their study to let them off with a Grace. And if
the Fine for it were appropriated to his Majesty's use, it would (until this
vice was reformed) amount to much more than Chimney-money: Yet however if
punished according to Law, our Corporations would quickly be provided of
sufficient Stocks to employ their Poor in work; and if every Seaman did pay his
Twelvepence, his Majesty might without any charge to himself and Subjects,
relieve all the Slaves in Turkey. But this and the forementioned Law (with many
others were most excellently well enacted, but never thoroughly executed.

Thirdly, I never saw any real love betwixt the Commanders, they being
distinguished by two Names, the Terpolian and the Gentile; the Terpolian
envying the Gentile, and yet neither the Gentile or the Terpolian heartily
loving one another: For let them caress one another never so kindly, yet as
soon as they are parted, they will jeer and scoff at him, whom they have but a
little before took about the Neck and kissed; a pretty Complement which becomes
the Sons of Cupid and the Daughters of Venus, and not the Sons of Mars. This
makes me believe that they regard their own private, before the public
Interest, and don't so diligently observe the Fighting Instructions, of which
Prince Rupert was so jealous, that in one Fight he commanded that one should
stand upon the head, and another upon the Poop of every Ship, to observe the
performance of him who was next a Head and next a Stern to him: And, as I have
been told, Sir Edward Spragg had always his Prospective Glass at his Eye, to
behold the behavior of those that were in his Squadron. If there are any
private grudges amongst them, methinks they might lay them aside, till they
have ended the public quarrel; and not imitate those, whom Hudibras in the
second Canto of his third Part, so ingeniously describes. Lay public Bills
aside for private,
And make 'em one another drive out;
Divert the Great and Necessary
With Trifles to Contest and Vary.


I only mention this, for if I were Seaman enough to give any instances, I
should not, for the reason which the Learned Hooker gives in his Book of
Ecclesiastical Polity, page 1. He that goes about to persuade a multitude,
that they are not so well governed as they ought to be, shall never want
attentive and favorable hearers, because they know the manifold defects
whereunto every kind of Regiment is subject; but the secret letts and
difficulties, which in public proceedings are innumerable and inevitable, they
have not ordinarily the judgment to consider; and because such as openly
reprove supposed disorders of State, are taken for principal Friends to the
common benefit of all, and for men that carry singular freedom of mind; under
this fair and plausible color, whatsoever they utter passes for good and
current. That which wants in the weight of their Speech, is supplied by the
aptness of men's minds to accept and believe it. So that if my Pen were able to
reveal the least mishap in his Majesty's affairs, I should presently have the
Tongues of our Coffee-Politicians come into our assistance, and make it a grand
fault and a downright miscarriage. They, who whilst they are smoking their
Pipes of Tobacco, can Rigg, Victual, and Man a Fleet, set to Sea, Fight the
Dutch upon the Galloper and never run aground, beat them at Southwold Bay; and
before they have whiffed out their Pipes, can return again with victory,
without the loss of either Legs or Arms; yet after all the Fire and Smoke they
have been in, dare not board their Coffee-dishes without much huffing and
puffing, for fear of scalding their Chops: These Turkey News mongers, who with
their Pipes and Dishes look as learnedly, as the Mohammedan in the Sign does
with these Ornaments, often tell for truth their own inventions. Thus they
reported that the Duke of York was ashore at South-wold a Feasting, and the
rest of the Captains a drinking, which was a damnable lie; for he was never
ashore from the nineteenth of April, until the eighteenth of September; and, as
my Captain told me, had given strict Command that no Sea Captain should go from
his Ship; And I never heard that any were missing from their Ships in the time
of Fight, unless it were some Land Officers and some Sea Lieutenants, who were
sent ashore, to see their men fill their water, and to hasten them aboard again
when they had done. And although this Engagement was fought over again at the
Coffee Table, and the Dutch routed by those who only carry in their Noddles the
models of Fights, and the valor of Soldiers in their Fancies; yet let me tell
them, that it was fought with excellent valor and conduct by his Highness the
Duke of York, who had the Prince and the Saint Michael disabled under him, and
hoisted his Standard aboard the Royal London. The Royal Katherine was taken,
and after she had been in the Enemies possession three hours, was retaken by
her own Ships company: The Henry (after the loss of her Captain, the valiant
Digby, who although he had lost his hand, did lose none of his heart; for it is
no sooner dressed but he is again upon Deck to encourage his men, and falls by a
small Shot) having lost most of her other Officers, and being disabled in her
Masts and Rigging, fell into the hand of the Enemy; but is retaken by that
modest and gallant Gentleman Captain Roger Strickland in the Plymouth, who for
this service was deservedly Knighted; besides the taking of one man of War of
theirs, with the sinking of diverse others: And had not the next day proved
thick and hazy, few Dutch Ships had went home to have told the News; for we
having the wind of them, the Duke was resolved to have fought them Yard Arm and
Yard Arm. The bloody Flag was put out twice, but it is no sooner out, but there
came such thick mists, that we could not see the Dutch Fleet, notwithstanding
we were almost within shot of it: But oh! we lost the Royal James: It is true
we did, but I shall not now stay to answer you by demanding your Resolutions to
some Questions, but expect to hear, since there is such need of your wit,
valor, and conduct, that you have laid aside your women's weapons (I mean your
impertinent and reviling Tongues) that you have broke your Pipes and Coffee
dishes, and that all your scattered Forces are drawn up into a main body, and
that you are marching into Scotland under the Command of one of your Great, but
insignificant Fops; and when we shall hear that you are advanced within a mile
of the Rebels Camp, and are entrenched upon the top of some high hill within
sight of them, we shall expect a Packet that your breath did prove more
destructive than a Plague, and that your eyes, like the Basilisk's, did kill
the Camp at a distance; for your valor consists only of a little prate, and
your Politics of a premeditated discourse: For had your Actions been as great
as your Talk, without doubt the French King had employed many Regiments of
Coffeeteers in his service; but that he knew the Gentlemen at Arms would do
more execution than you with your blustering blabs. From you Jacks of all Trades
it is returned to our public spirited Country Gentlemen, who drink for and
stand to their Country, and course and hunt, who swallow your News with as much
eagerness as they do a Bumper to a Miss, and give you giddy Politicians as much
veneration, as a wise man does an Oracle of State; immediately setting to work
to get your Letters memoriter, that they may be able to repeat them with as
much wit as gravity, the next time they meet their Tenants over a Tub of Ale
about some Town business, where they are sure to be admired and to have their
Tenants Hats off with their Pots in their Hands, and all of them ready at the
period to drink their Landlords good health, wishing all their Governors like
their Worships; with which applause they are so much tickled, that to admire
their wisdom they turn their Optics in upon it, and after they have took a
severe view of their long reach, they think no Pilots so fit to bring the Ship
of State into harbor as themselves; when alas! most of them are not able to
manage their own Persons, much less work their own little Yachts as they should
do. The wooden Shoe need not have been thrown into the Speaker's Chair, to
have hindered his Majesty's proceedings; for let our Country Gentlemen look
home, and they will find in their own Lordships many poor Tenants, that have
wasted their stocks upon their Grounds, and are forced to go barefoot and
barelegg'd, being kept at the charge of their other Tenants, who though they
may eat Leeks and Onions, yet seldom meat to the full; especially amongst those
Landlords whose Country has given them good Estates, but France their grand
breeding: Yet these poor men must and will open with their Landlords, and run
full cry against great Taxes, though they be never so much for the good and
benefit of the whole Nation, never considering at our Lady and Michaelmas days,
how deaf they are to their just desires for some abatement of their wonted
Rents, or the giving them a small stick for their help of repairs; being never
willing to ease them but out of the stock of State. As they employ their small
Rhetoric to diminish Taxes, so on the other side they do it to raise their
Rents; and if any Person stand up for his Religion and Property (the things so
much sought after) he shall presently be discharged, and must march off at our
Lady day, unless by foregoing his right, he makes a Composition with his
Landlord. Nay, if a Freeholder does stand up for his Property against the great
man of the Town, he shall be threatened with ruin, and not him alone but a
whole Corporation if they displease him: And how shall this be brought to pass?
why, by giving themselves and their Servants that great selfdenyal of not
taking their wonted swills of its only Manufacture called Ale. Thus most
Country Gentlemen in their Stations imitate the French, and if their Tenants
Daughters are handsome, always executing the Law of Ewen the Scotch King, and
only revile our merciful Sovereign, because they cannot be Nero's to the whole
Nation. But this is not all, for after every Fight you shall have your Country
Villages filled with a parcel of idle Fellows, who pretend to be either Seamen
or Soldiers, complaining that they are forced to run away for want of Victuals,
how they are cheated of their Pay, and of the ill Conduct of their Commanders;
crying out their Country is betrayed: Such Rascals Reports being as Authentic
with the Vulgar, as an Account from the Admiral is to his Majesty after a
Council of War, for the particulars of the Engagement; and are as much crowded
for their News, as a Ballad Singer in the Market is for his Ditty. These
incorrigible Rogues, if taken up and sent to his Majesty's Plantations, would
not only ease, but also might prove very serviceable to their King and Country
howsoever, if taken and sent to the House of Correction according to Law. And
thus far I shall vindicate his Majesty's Affairs by experience, that no man
wanted his Victuals aboard, unless it were for a fault, and if they were put to
short Allowance (which is very sufficient to maintain any reasonable man) they
had their pinch-gut money paid them as soon as they came into harbor, and no man
went without his pay, unless he was made run by the Clerk of the Cheeque. But
at parting, let me repeat to you Sir Robert Cotton's Preface to his twenty four
Arguments concerning Popish Practices: I am not ignorant (says he) that this
latter Age has brought forth a swarm of busy heads, which measure the great
mysteries of State by the rule of their self conceited wisdoms, but if they
would consider that the Commonwealth, (though I think the Kingdom the better
name) Governed by grave Counselors, is like unto a Ship directed by a skilful
Pilot, to whom the necessities of Occasions and grounds of Reason, why he
steereth to this or that part of the Compass are better known than to those
that stand aloof off, they would perhaps be more sparing, if not more wary in
their Resolutions. Indeed I confess, that our mouths ought always to be open
against Popery, but I would not have their Diameters exceed the Ring of
Charity; for had not good Language and good Carriage been a point of Religion
as well as of Civility, the Apostle had not commanded his Corinthians ( Ep. 1.
Cap. 10. v. 32.) to give no Offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles,
nor to the Church of God. But since we have the Ship of Rome to the Leeward of
us, and are pouring in all our Broadsides upon her, so that she must needs
sink, unless she prove more impenetrable than she has done infallible; let us
keep our Stern chase out against another Enemy, who now claps on all the Sail
he can, and intends to get up with the Church of England, and in this
Engagement weather her, and once more make her strike sail to him: I mean Jack
Presbyter, whose hot headed Zeal has been more Injurious to the Church of
England, than the Romish Flames; for they only lighted an Army of her Martyrs
to heaven, but this has raised an Host of Phanaticks perpetually to torment
her; and though they pretend to be men of tender Consciences, yet when they had
took her, they proved more hard hearted than the most inveterate Romanists, and
outed more men of their Livings in the space of three years, (says Doctor
Heylin in his History of them, lib. 13. page 459. paragr. 30.) than were
deprived by the Papists in the Reign of Queen Mary: And for their inhumane
cruelties they did not come far behind them, as you may see in Doctor Heylin's
Bill of Mortality of the Clergy of London, lib. 13. page 455. paragr. 29. For
they did not only Imprison, Plunder, and put to Flight; but exposed, in Ships,
their Persons to the mercy of a Raging Sea, their Wives and Children they
turned out of doors to gnawing Hunger and pinching Poverty; whilst these
Pharisees, with long Prayers and Vultures Stomachs, devour their Estates: And
when with their seditious whinings, they had modeled our beauteous Church
according to their Schismatical Humor, she appeared a greater Monster than
Apelles's Masterpiece. But moderate and temperate men who were good Subjects,
and afterward some of them Martyrs, drew this; the other being the product
only of hot-brained Jack's tumultuous and seditious Fancy. Our Church has so
often routed the Pope's Legions, that his Combatants have thrown away their
Argumentative Arms, and have took up Sword, Fire, and Pistol, to reduce us into
the subjection, not only of the Bishop, but Monarch of Rome: So when the
Presbyterians cannot outdo us by dint of Argument, they imitate the furious
Goddess in the Poet. Flectere si nequeo superas, Acheronta movebo.

If Heaven will not defend their unjust cause, they are sure Hell will, and
presently they bring in the Devil for their Disputant; wherefore I shall not
venture to frame a Glass that may describe these Conjurers, lest, with the
famous Sherlock, I should have a Dialogue with Satan. Their Glasses now are all
set about the Room, let them look into Fabian Philips his Veritas inconcussa,
and there they may behold themselves, setting the best of Kings for a mark to
my Lord of Essex's Canon: Let them look into the History of Independency, and
there they may see themselves not only the greatest Rogues, but also the
meerest Fools in Nature: Let them behold themselves in Bishop Bramhal, and if a
Presbyterian and a Papist can there distinguish Countenances, I don't know my
own face from another. Let them look upon themselves in Heylin's History of
them, and there they will appear to be the only Incendiaries of the World; And
if ever they would be accounted Loyal Subjects, they must clap on a thicker
Mask than that which Mr. Thomas of Christ-Church took off; for King-killing is
a Principle of the Presbyterians as well as of the Jesuit, which they
desperately maintained and thoroughly executed: For when King Charles the First
had parted with those Regal Jewels to them, that if they had suffered him to
have lived, he would only have been Magni Nominis umbra, nothing would quench
their fiery Zeal, and satisfy their unsatiable desires, but his innocent
blood; they being resolved to murder him by the Sword of the Law, or the Law
of the Sword. Wherefore Mr. Christopher Love declares their minds, in his
Preachment at Uxbridge Treaty, page 32. 'Twas the Lord (says he) that troubled
Achan, because that he troubled Israel: Oh that in this our State-Physicians
(he meant Cutthroats sure) would resemble God, to cut off those from the Land
who have distempered it: Melius est ut pereat unus quam unitas, immedicabile
vulnus ense recidendum est; and that they should not forget this passage, nor
misconstrue his Latin, page 39. He thus puts them in mind, and farther explains
himself: Men (says that Presbyterian) who lie under the guilt of much innocent
Blood, are not meet Persons to be at peace with, till all the guilt of Blood be
expiated, and avenged, either by the Sword of the Law, or by the Law of the
Sword. Thus they proved more barbarous than the Inhabitants of Mesech, and
those that dwelt in the Tents of Kedar: For when David desired to be at peace
with these his Enemies, they only made ready for Battle; but when our blessed
King, whom they had deprived of his Power and Strength, did labor for peace,
and spoke to them thereof that were his Subjects, and ought in all Allegiance
to have obeyed him; they declared for his Murder, and if their young and
unentred Lawyers will not condemn him to the Block, according to their
King-killing Principles, they are sure their well flushed Redcoats, who
assassinated him in Effigy at Winchester Cathedral, would murder him in
Person when they had brought him back to the House of Parliament; and for this
execrable service of theirs, they might without the Pope have received
Absolution from Stephen Marshal, as well as for their Oaths. Thus the
Presbyterians cry down the Pope and preach up the Jesuit: Those that cannot
remember, yet if they can read must needs know, how Jack Presbyter run about
with his Hue and Cry against Popery and evil Counselors, and that his only
design of raising an Army, was to extirpate the one (for whose entrance he has
made a wide gap) and to take his Majesty from his pernicious (as they
pretended) Council, and to make him an absolute Prince: But they no sooner got
him into their Clutches, but according to their Traitorous distinction, they
killed him in his politic Capacity, and only gave a terrible groan (I mean one
of their sighs) because they did not murder Charles Stuart, and that that
cursed and desperate blow was not celebrated by one of their extemporary
Prayers: And though they may endeavor to make the World believe that they made
prayers for the King, yet we never heard of any of their Petitions, until that
Jackcall Cornet Joice had robbed them of their prey, and brought it to the Lion
Cromwell, and when they saw him in his paws and ready to be devoured of him,
they might say to God as the taunting and not understanding Jews did one to
another, when our Savior cried out in his Agony, Eli, Eli, lamasabacthani;
they might say, let us see whether God will save him: For as to his
Circumstances, he was in the same capacity as our Savior, and required as
great a miracle to redeem him from the Block, as there must have been to have
took our Savior from the Cross; for it was impossible for his Majesty to have
escaped, unless that God had empowered the Bishop that was upon the Scaffold
with him (like Moses and Aaron) by the throwing up of Ashes toward Heaven, to
have struck them with Boyls, so that they might not have been able to have
stood before him; or that he had enabled one of his Captains (like Gideon) with
three hundred men to have discomfited this Host of Midianites, or that his
words (like our Saviors) should have driven them backwards and made them to
have fallen to the ground, when he told them he was their King; or that at his
prayer God would have sent him more than twelve Legions of Angels: No, Curse ye
Meroz, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, (thas is all good Subjects
who will fight for, and will not fight against their King) Judge. 5.23. was the
excellent Doctrine at Edghill, Newberry, and Naseby Fights. Thus Presbyterians
mock God, and never think of Death but talk of Heaven; and thus they blackned
the whitest of Kings, and made the best of Subjects vassals: And now the Pope
is on foot again, but whilst they run him hard, they bark damnably against the
King and his Council, and I believe would bite too if they durst; intending to
snatch up the Church of England in the Ring. They scorn to curse (which
according to the Original is disrepect) the King in their thoughts, or that the
bird of the Air should tell the matter; No, these Rabshekah's call God, Men,
and Angels to witness, and show the thoughts of their hearts by telling of
lies, and talking scandalously of him in Coffee-houses and the open Streets,
never opening their Fanatical Chops but pretending they reveal as great secrets
of him, as those barbarous wretches did of his Father, who printed his Letters:
Nothing now will serve their turns but concessions from his Majesty, but if the
King part with his Prerogative, then farewell property and hang up Magna Charta;
for his Subjects shall no more be tried per probos et legales homines, but run
down by a pack of bloodhounds, who will prey upon our Estates as soon as John
Catch does cry dead, dead, has paunch'd and stripped their Bodies: Let us
therefore that are right-bred Englishmen, who don't cut out our Religion by the
Romish pattern or after the Geneva mode, nor our manners after the French
fashion; I say let us not be choused again by a humoursom and a rapacious
faction, of our King, Magna Charta, and all those Privileges that belong to
all true Englishmen and good Subjects; and once more become Slaves and Vassals
to this Tyrannous Kingdom of Saints, who cry out Religion and Liberty, but
intend to clap on Shackles upon our Hands, Tongues, and Consciences; so that if
we don't submit to what they please to call the Law and Reason of the Land, and
to what their Saintships shall term Religion; the Dungeon or the Gallows shall
be Umpire and decide the case. I am certain there is none of us too old, though
many of us may be too young, to remember how it was High Treason to pass a Jest
upon Oliver's Nose: How we were enslaved by a Military, Arbitrary, and
Oligarchical Government, who contrary to our known Laws oppressed us with
illegal Taxes, and whilst with much Travel we labored for a Livelihood under
them, how a parcel of Brewers, Draymen, and Cobblers revell'd it upon the sweat
of our Brows. No, let them with their demure looks and canting tone cheat their
zealous Sisters of their Bodkins and Thimbles, whilst we that are good
Christians and Royal Subjects, follow the wisest of Kings advice, Prove. 24.21,
22. Fear God and the King, and meddle not with those that are given to change:
For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them both?

FINIS.

