To his Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and Honorable Estates of
Parliament.
The Petition of Patrick Porterfield of Comistoun, And other Heritors near
Adjacent to the Town of Edinburgh,
Humbly Shows,
THAT there being an Act presented in Parliament upon Friday the fourteenth day
of June instant, by the Magistrates of Edinburgh, Making mention, That the
said Magistrates had been at Vast Expenses in purchasing Toddies well, and
some other Springs, And in making of Lead-Pipes, Conduites; and Cisterns, for
conveying in the same to Edinburgh, And that the said Fountains do not furnish
sufficiency of Water for the Numerous Inhabitants of the said City, and others
thereto Resorting; And that in the time of Drought or Froasts, the same do
furnish little or no Water. And it being necessar for perfecting their Design,
That Comistoun and all other adjacent Heritors be obliged to sell and dispone
to the said Magistrates, such Wells and Fountains as may be necessar for the
use of the Burgh, Together with the Ground needful, lying about the said
Wells, for preserving the same; And for laying of the Pipes and Conduites, for
bringing in of the said Water to the Pipes, and Cisterns already made;
Therefore His Majesty, etc. did empower the Lords of Privy Council to call
before them the Lord of Comistoun, and any other Heritors that may be
concerned, and whether they appear or not, To cause Appretiate any Wells or
Springs belonging to Comistoun, or the said other Heritors, as might be
us^full for the Town of Edinburgh, with the Ground next adjacent thereto; And
upon their consignation of the sums, at which the samen should happen to be
appretiate, To decern Comistoun and all the other Heritors and Superiors, To
make R^signation thereof in the Towns Favors. To the effect they may hold the
samen immediately of the King; And that Comistoun and the other Heritors may be
discharged to Digg, Hew, or set down any Pitts, Holes, or Sinks, near to the
said Wells^

This Act was appointed to ly on the Table till Thursday, the 20th: instant, To
the effect that Comistoun and the other Heritors concerned, may give in their
Objections against the same; And seeing the said Act is principally intended
against Comistoun, He Humbly craves Liberty to Represent to my Lord
Commissioner, his Grace, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament, The Severe
and Hard measures he has already met with from the Town of Edinburgh; And
what further prejudice he is justly apprehensive of from Them, in case the
foresaid Act should pass in their Favors.

Comistouns Mother having (in his Minority) disponed Toddies well, and six Else
round the same, to the Town of Edinburgh, for the sum of 1000 me^ks Scots
allenerly, to be holden Few of her self, and her Successors, for yearly
payment of four pounds Scots. She took them expressly obliged to Repair all the
Damage she should sustain by the breaking her ground to lay in their Pipes,
etc. And she was so apprehensive of their further Encroachments, That in case
the said Todds-well were not sufficient to serve the Town with Water. They
should be obliged to supply the same from the upper Springs in Pentland hills;
And she was only obliged to allow them liberty to convey their Pipes to
Todds-well.

Albeit the Lady Comistoun, nor her Son after he succeeded in her Right, did
never violate any Article of that Contract in the least; Yet the Town of
Edinburgh did use many Acts of Oppression against Com^stoun; 1mo. By casting up
his ground, and leaving many Pitts and Stanks open therein, by which many of
the Bestial did perish in the Winter. 2do. They did by open Bangstrie and
Oppression take in other two Wells, to which they can pretend no imaginary
Right, and builded houses over the said Wells. 3tio. When Comistoun came with
a Notar and Witnesses, and made civil Interruption against the said unjust
Encroachment and Oppression, They did pursue him before the Privy Council as
guilty of a Riot; And did thereby put him to very great Trouble and Expenses,
albeit he was Assoilzied from that complaint by the Justice of the Privy
Council. 4to. They still retain the said two Wells so unwarrantably robbed by
Them, and thereby Comistoun has neither a wholesome Spring for the use of his
own Family, Nor any convenient watering place for his Cattle: And after
Comistoun was Assoilzied from their complaint before the Privy Council, One of
the Members of the Town Council of Edinburgh, did in presence of the
Magistrates themselves, Threaten Comistoun to his Face, By saying. That if he
offered to Debate with them, they should ruin him entirely, as they formerly
had done the Lord of Restaltig.

The Lord of Comistoun has lately found our upon his ground both a
Lime-Stone-Quarrie, with a good Coal, and a very good Copper mine; And having
set down a Sink for his Coal, And a quantity of his Copper being already
melted, and found sufficient; And he being in Terms of a Bargain with some
Englishmen for his Copper, by which he expects more benefit in time coming
than three times the Value of his yearly Rent will amount to. This Act is
levelled and contrived principally against Comistoun to frustrate the well
grounded hopes he has of his Copper, Coal, and Limestone: And therefore he
humbly expects from the Justice of the High Court of Parliament. That no such
Act can pass in Favors, of the Town of Edinburgh, to his so great and evident
prejudice; Because, 1mo. Comistouns Wells being his uncontraverted Property,
And the Inheritance of his Fathers; No Law can Obliege him to Sell or Dispone
them to any other person; Especially, where his retaining and refusing to
dispone the same. cannot be pretended to be done, In Aemulationem, But only for
the Conveniencie and necess^r Accommodation of his own Family and Lands, it
being impossible for him to Live, or keep the Lands, Tennants-stead without
these Wells, And he has, de facto, been necessitate to keep the mains of
Comistoun in his own hand, Because, no Tennant will take it from him, for fear
of the Town of Edinburghs Encrocahment and Oppression, For seeing they used
Comistoun himself in manner above represented, What could a poor Tennant expect
to meet with from them. 2do. As it is an uncontraverted principle, That Water
is the Mother of Coals, and all other Minerals; So Coals and all other Minerals
are found near to Springs of Water, And seeing that Coals and Copper cannot be
wrought without Sinks and Levels, And that the setting down and working thereof
does frequently Drain and take away the Water from these Springs; The allowing
of these Springs to the Town of Edinburgh; And discharging to set down a Sink
near to these Wells, imports no less than to discharge Comistoun from working
of his Coal and Copper-Mines. The Town of Edinburgh may as well crave, That
Comistoun may be Forefeited (albeit he be guilty of no Crime, and that his
Forefeiture may be gifted to the Town of Edinburgh.)

3tio. If the said Act should be past, Comistoun should be absolutely debarred
from inmp^oving his Ground by Ditching, Enclosing and Planting; Because all
Enclosures are useless where there is no Water; And where can Comistoun have
Water when all his Springs and Wells are by Act of Parliament, Appropriat and
Declared to belong to the Town of Edinburgh. 4to. By this Act as it is
conceived, Neither Comistoun nor any of his Tennents can have as much as Water,
for their own Families, or the use of his Carrel, without a License from the
Town of Edinburgh; And they might pretend to bring their Water through his own
Closs, Dwelling house, or Gardens, or through the Tennants Dwelling-houses; or
Corn-yeards, etc. And what an intolerable Servitude would this prove upon all
Comistouns Estate? And whither or not the same might in a short time lay the
Estate entirely waste, if settled in such potent hands as the Town of Edinburgh
is known to be, and whither or not, any rational man, would pay an a adequat
price for lands affected with such an intolerable servitud in ^av^urs of the
Town, Is referred to the consideration of this high and Honorable Court. 5to.
The former grounds are likewayes propond for all the other Adjacent Heritors,
Because if the said Act were past, they would be liable to the Servitude and
Damages above represented, and the Town of Edinburgh would thereby have the
same pretense to insult over them, and oppress their Interest, and keep them
from improvement thereof, which they crave by the said Act against the Lord of
Comistoun. 6to. To convince your Grace, and the Honorable Estates of
Parliament, That the Town of Edinburghs true design in this affair. is only to
fix an intolerable Servitude upon Comistoun, and the hail other Adjacent
Heritors, and to hinder them from the lawful Improvements of their own
Interests, There are more Springs upon Pentland Hills, a little above Toddies
well, and which may easily be brought down, and conveyed to that Toddies well,
without doing the least prejudice to any Man's Property, than will serve the
Town of Edinburgh three times over: And Comistoun is expressly obliedged by his
Mothers Contract, to allow them Liberty to convey the Springs from Pentland
hills to Toddies well; So that seeing the Town may be abundantly served that
way. It were above all measure hard to allow the Town of Edinburgh such an
intolerable Servitude upon Comistoun and the other Heritors, so much to their
prejudice, Especially, seeing the Sinks set down, and to be set down by
Comistoun, and other Improvements intended by him, are at such a distance from
Toddies well, and from the Springs which they may have from Pentland hills,
That they neither are, nor ever can be prejudged therey in the least.

May it therefore please your Grace, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament,
To consider the Premises, and the great Prejudice and Servitude, if not the
total ruin of our Fortunes, designed against us by the Town of Edinburgh, in
the foresaid Act, and to reject the same as unjust and unreasonable. And your
Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.


