A LETTER TO Mr PENN WITH His Answer.

LONDON: Printed for Andrew Soul, And are to be Sold by the several
Booksellers in London and (...)

To the ^^^ourable William Penn Esquire. Proprietor and Governor OF PENSYLVANIA.
HONORED SIR,
THO the Friendship, with which you are pleased to honor me, does afford me
sufficient opportunities of Discoursing with you upon any Subject, yet I choose
rather at this time to offer unto you, in Writing, some reflections which have
occurred to my Thoughts, in a matter of no common Importance. The Importance of
it does primarily and directly respect your self, and your own private
Concernments: But it also consequentially and effectually regards the King, his
Government, and even the peace and settlement of this whole Nation. I entreat
you therefore to bear with me, if I endeavor in this manner, to give somewhat
more weight unto mywords, than would be in a transtient Discourse, and leave
them with you as a Subject that requires your retired Consideration.

You are not ignorant that the part you are supposed to have had of late Years
in public Affairs, tho without either the Title, or Honor, or Profit of any
Public Office, and that especially your avowed endeavors to introduce amongst
us a general and inviolable Liberty of Conscience in matters of Mere Religion,
have occasioned the mistakes of some Men, provoked the malice of others, and,
in the end, have raised against you a multitude of Enemies, who have unworthily
defamed you with such Imputations as I am sure you abhor. This I know you have
been sufficiently informed off, though I doubt you have not made sufficient
reflection upon it. The Consciousness of your own Innocence seems to me to have
given you too great a contempt of such unjust and ill-grounded Slanders. For
however glorious it is, and reasonable, for a truly Virtuous Mind, whose inward
Peace is founded upon that Rock of Innocence, to despise the empty noise of
popular Reproach, yet even that Sublimity of Spirit may sometimes swell to a
reprovable Excess. To be steadyard immovable in the prosecution of wise and
honest Resolutions, by all honest and prudent means, is indeed a Duty that
admits of no exception. But nevertheless it ought not to hinder that, at the
same time, there be also a due care taken of preserving a sair Reputation. A
good Name, says the Wise Man, is better than a Precious Ointment. It is a
Perfume that recommends the Person whom it accompanies, that procures him every
where an easy Acceptance, and that facilitates the Success of all his
Enterprises. And for that reason, though there were no other, I entreat you to
observe, that the care of a Man's Reputation is an essential part of that very
same Duty that ingages him in the pursuit of any worthy Defign.

But I must not entertain you with a Declamation upon this general Theme. My
business is to represent to you, more particularly, those very Imputations
which are cast upon your Self, together with some of their evident
Consequences; that, if possible, I may thereby move you to labor after a
Remedy. The Source of all arises from the ordinary Access you have unto the
King, the Credit you are supposed to have with Him, and the deep Jealousy that
some People have conceived of His Intentions in reference to Religion. Their
Jealousy is, that his Aim has been to settle Popery in this Nation, not only
in a fair and secure Liberty, but even in a predominating Superiority over all
other Professions. And from hence the inference follows, that Whosoever has any
par(...) the Councels of this Reign, must needs be Pop^^^ly affected: But, that
to have so great a part of them, as you are said to have had, can happen to
none but an absolute Papist. That is the direct Charge. But that is not enough.
Your Post is too considerable for a Papist of an ordinary sorm: and therefore
you must be a Jesuit. Nay to confirm that Suggestion, it must be accompanied
with all the circumstances that may best give it an Air of Probability; as that
you have been bred at St. Omers, in the Jesuits College; that you have taken
Orders at Rome, and there obtained a Dispensation to Marry; and that you have,
since then, frequently officiated as a Priest, in the Celebration of the Mass,
at White Hall, St. James's, and other Places. And this being admitted, (...)
can be too black to cast upon you. Whatsoever thought amiss either in Church or
State, the never so contrary to your Advice, is boldly attributed to it. And if
other Proofs fail, the Scripture it self must be brought in to confirm, That
whosoever offends in one Point, (in a Point especially so essential as that of
our too-much-affected Uniformity) is guilty of the Breach of all our Laws. Thus
the Charge of Popery draws after it a Tail, like the Et-caetera-Oath, and, by
endless Iunuendo's, prejudicates you as guilty of whatsoever Malice can invent,
or Folly believe. But that Charge therefore being removed, the Inferences that
are drawn from it will vanish, and your Reputation will easily return to its
former Brightness.

Now, that I may the more effectually persuade you to apply some Remedy to this
Disease, I beseech you, Sir, suffer me to lay before you some of its pernicious
Consequences. It is no trifling matter for a Person raised, as you are, above
the common level, to lie under the Prejudice of so general a Mistake, in so
Important a Matter. The general, and the long, prevalency of any Opinion gives
it a strength, especially amongst the Vulgar, that is not easily shaken. And as
it happens that you have also Enemies of a higher Rank, who will be ready to
improve such popular Mistakes, by all sorts of malicious Artifices, It must be
taken for granted that those Errors will be thereby still more confirmed, and
the Inconveniences that may arise from thence no less increased. This, Sir, I
a^ure you, is a melancholy Prospect to your Friends. For we know you have such
Enemies. The ^ign of so Universal a Liberty of Conscience, (...) Principles
have lead you to promote, has of(...) many of those whose Interest it is to
cross (...) I need not tell you how many, and how powerful they are. Nor can I
tell you, either how far, or by what Ways and Means, they may endeavor to
execute their Revenge. But this however I must needs tell you, That in your
present Circumstances, there is sufficient ground for so much Jealousy, at
least, as ought to excite you to use the Precaution of some public
Vindication. This the Tenderness of Friendship prompts your Friends to desire
of you; And this the just Sense of your Honor, which true Religion does not
extinguish, requires you to execute.

Pardon, I entreat you, Sir, the earnestness of these Expressions; nay suffer
me, without Offense, to expostulate with you yet a little farther. I am fearful
lest these personal Considerations, should not have their due weight with you;
and therefore I cannot omit to reflect also upon some more general Consequences
of your particular Reproach. I have said it already, That the King, His Honor,
His Government, and even the Peace and Settlement of this whole Nation, either
are, or have been concerned in this matter. Your Reputation, as you are said to
have meddled in public Affairs, has been of public Concernment. The promoting
a General Liberty of Conscience having been your particular Province, The
Aspersion of Popery and Jesuitism, that has been cast upon you, has reflected
upon His Majesty; for having made use, in that Affair, of so disguised a
Personage as you are supposed to have been. It has also weakened the force of
all your Endeavors, obstructed their Effect, and contributed greatly to
disappoint this poor Nation of that inestimable Happiness, and secure
Establishment, which I am persuaded you designed, and which all good and wise
Men agree that a just and inviolable Liberty of Conscience would infallibly
produce. I heartily wish this Consideration had been sooner laid to Heart, and
that some demonstrative Evidence, of your Sincerity in the Profession you make,
had accompanied all your endeavors for Liberty.

But what do I say, or what do I wish for? I confess that I am now struck with
Astonishment, at that abundant Evidence, which I know you have constantly
given, of the Opposition of your Principles to those of the Romish Church; and
at the little Regard there has been had unto it. If an open Profession of the
directest Opposition against Popery, that has ever appeared in the World, since
Popery was first distinguished from common Christianity, would serve the turn,
this cannot be denied to all those of that Society, with which you are joined
in the Duties of Religious Worship. If to have maintained the Principles of
that Society, by frequent and servent Discourses, by many elaborate Writings,
by suffering Ignominy, Imprisonment, and other manifold Disadvantages in
defense thereof, can be admitted as any proof of your sincere Adherence
thereunto, this, it is evident to the World, you have done already. Nay
further, If to have enquired as far as was possible for you, into the
particular Stories that have been framed against you, and to have sought all
means of rectifying the Mistakes upon which they were grounded, could in any
measure avail to the settling a true Character of you in men's Judgments, this
also I know you have done. Dr. Tillot son.
For I have seen under the Hand of a Reverend Dean of our English Church, a
full acknowledgement of Satisfaction received from you, in a suspiciou he had
entertained, upon one of those Stories, and to which his Report had procured
too great Credit. And though I know you are averse to the publishing of his
Letter without his express leave, and perhaps may not now think fit to ask it,
yet I am so thoroughly assured of his Sincerity and Candor, that I cannot doubt
but he has already vindicated you in that matter, and will (according to his
Promiss) be still ready to do it upon all Occasions. Nay, I have seen also your
Justification from another Calumny of common Fame, about your having kidnapp'd
one who had been formerly a Monk, out of your American Province, to deliver him
here into the Hands of his Enemies; I say, I have seen your Justification from
that Story under that Persons own Hand: And his return to Pensylvania, where he
now resides, may be an irrefragable Confutation of it, to any that will take
the pains to inquire thereinto.

Really it afflicts me very much to consider that all this does not suffice. If
I had not that particular respect for you, which I sincerely profess, yet I
could not but be much affected, that any man who had deservedly acquired so
fair a Reputation as you have formerly had, whose Integrity and Veracity had
always been reputed spotless, and whose Charity had been continually exercised
in serving others, at the dear expense of his Time, his Strength, and his
Estate, without any other Recompense than what results from the consciousness
of doing good, I say, I could not but be much affected to see any such Person
fall, innocently and undeservedly, under such unjust Reproaches as you have
done. It is a hard case, and I think no man, that has any Bowels of Humanity,
can reslect upon it without great Relentings.

Since therefore it is so, and that something remains yet to be done, something
more express, and especially more public, than has yet been dove for your
Vindieation, I beg of you, Dear Sir, by all the tender Efficacy that
Friendship, either mine, or that of all your Friends and Relations together,
can have upon you; by the due Regard which Humanity and even Christianity
obliges you to have to your Reputation; by the Duty you owe unto the King; by
your Love unto the Land of your Nativity; and by the Cause of Universal
Religion and Eternal Truth; Let not the Scandal of Infincerity, that I have
hinted at, lie any longer upon you; but let the Sense of all these Obligations
persuade you to gratify your Friends and Relations, and to serve your King,
your Country, and your Religion, by such a public Vindication of your Honor
as your own Prudence, upon these Suggestions, will now show you to be most
necessary and most expedient. I am, with unfeigned and most respectful
Affection,

London, October the 20th. 1688. Honored Sir, Your most humble and most
obedient Servant.

Mr. PENN's ANSWER To the foregoing LETTER.
Worthy Friend,
IT is now above twenty Years, I thank God, that I have not been very
solicitous what the World thought of me. For since I have had the Knowledge of
Religion from a Principle in my Self, the first and main Point with me, has
been to approve my Self in the sight of God, through Patience and Welldoing: so
that the World has not had weight enough with me, to suffer its good Opinion to
raise me, or its ill Opinion to deject me. And if that had been the only Motive
or Consideration, and not the desire of a good Friend, in the name of many
others. I had been as silent to thy Letter as I use to be to the Idle and
Malicious Shams of the Times. But as the Laws of Friendstip are sacred with
those that value that Relation, so I confess this to be a Principle One with
me, not to deny a Friend the sattisfaction he defires, when it may be done
without offense to a good Conscience.

The Business chiefly inlisted upon, is my Popepery, and endeavors to promote
it. I do say then, and that with all Sincerity, that I am not only no Jesuit,
but no Papist. And which is more, I never had any Temptation upon me to be it,
either from doubts in my own mind about the way I profess, or from the
discourses or writings of any of that Religion. And in the Presence of
Almighty. God I do declare, that the King did never once, directly or
indirectly, attack me, or tempt me upon that Subject, the many Years that I
have had the Advantage of a free Access to him; so unjust, as well as sordidly
false, are all those Storys of the Town.

The only Reason, that I can apprehend, they have to repute me a Roman
Catholic, is my frequent going to Whitehall; a place no more forbid to me than
to the rest of the World, who yet, it seems, find much sairer Quarter. I have
almost continually had one Business or other there for our Friends, whom I ever
served with a steady Solicitation, through all times since I was of their
Communion. I had also a great many personal good Offices to do upon a Principle
of Charity, for People of all persuasions; thinking it a Duty to improve the
little Interest I had, for the good of those that needed it, especially the
Poor. I might add something of my own Assairs too; though I must own, (if I may
without vanity) that they have ever had the least share of my Thoughts or
Pains, or else they would not have still depended as they yet do.

But because some People are se unjust as to render, Instances for my Popery
(or Hipocrisy rather, for so it would be in me) it is fit I contradict them as
particularly as they accuse me. I say then solemnly, that I am so far from
having been bred at St. Omers and having received Orders at Rome, that I never
was at either Place; nor do I know any body there; nor had I ever a
Correspondency with any one in those Places, which is another Story invented
against me. And as for my officiating in the Kings Chapel, or any other, it is
so ridiculous as well as untrue, that besides that no body can do it but a
Priest, and that I have been married to a Woman of some Condition above sixteen
Years, which no Priest can be, by any Dispensation whatever, I have not so much
as looked into any Chapel of the Roman Religion, and consequently not the
Kings; though a common curiosity warrants it daily to People of all Persuasions.

And once for all, I do say that I am a Protestant Dissenter, and to that
degree such, that I challenge the most celebrated Protestant of the English
Church, or any other, upon that Head, be he Layman or Clergyman, in Public
or in Private. For I would have such People know, it is not impossible for a
True Protestant Dissenter to be Dutiful, Thankful, and Serviceable to the King,
though he be of the Roman Catholic Communion. We hold not our Property or
Protection from Him by our Persuasion, and therefore His Persuasion should not
be the Measure of our Allegiance. I am sorry to see so many that seem fond of
the Reformed Religion, by their Disaffection to Him, recommend it so ill.
Whatever, Practices of Roman Catholics we might reasonably object against (and
we know such there are) yet He has disclaimed and reprehended those ill things,
by His declared Opinion against Persecution; by the Ease in which He actually
indulges all Dissenters; and by the Confirmation he offers in Parliament for
the Security of the Protestant Religion and Liberty of Conscience. And in His
Honor, as well as in my own Desence, I am obliged in Conscience to say that he
has ever declared to me it was His Opinion; and on all occasions, when Duke, he
never refused me the repeated Proofs of it, as often as I had any Poor Sufferer
for Conscience sake to solicit His help for.

But some may be apt to say, Why not any Body else as well as well as I? Why
must I have the preferable access to other Dissenters, if not a Papist? I
Answer, I know not that it is so. But this I know, that I have made it my
Province and Business; I have followed and pressed it; I took it for my Calling
and Station, and have kept it above these sixteen Years; and which is more, (if
I may say it without Vanity or Reproach) wholly at my own Charges too. To this
let me add the Relation my Father had to this Kings Service; his particular
Favor in getting me released out of the Tower of London in 69; my Fathers
humble Request to Him upon his Deathbed to protect me from the Inconveniences
and Troubles my Persuasion might expose me to; and His Friendly Promise to do
it, and exact Performance of it, from the moment I addressed my self to Him; I
say, when all this is considered, any Body that has the least pretense to Good
Nature, Gratitude, or Generosity, must needs know how to interpret my Access to
the King.

Perhaps some will be ready to say this is not all, nor is this yet a fault,
but that I have been an Adviser in other matrers, disgustful to the Kingdom,
and which tend to the Overthrow of the Protestant Religion, and the Liberties
of the People. A likely thing indeed, that a Protestant Dissenter, who from
fifteen Years old has been (at times) a Sufferer, in his Father's Family, in
the Vniverfity, and by the Government, for being so, should design the
Destruction of the Protestant Religion! This is just as probable, as it is true
that I died a Jesuit six years ago in America. Will men still suffer such Stuff
to pass upon them? Is any thing more foolish, as well as false, than that
because I am often at White Hall, the refore I must be Author of all that is
done there that does not please abroad? But supposing some such things to have
been done; pray tell me, if I am bound to oppose any thing that I am not called
to do? I never was a Member of Council, Cabinet, or Committee, where the
Affairs of the Kingdom are transacted. I have had no Office or Trust, and
consequently nothing can be said to be done by me; nor, for that reason, could
I lie under any Test or Obligation to discover my Opinion of Public Acts of
State; and therefore, neither can any such Acts, or my Silence about them, in
Justice be made my Crime. Volunteers are Blanks and Ciphers in all Governments.
And unless calling at White Hall once a day, upon many Occasions, or my not
being turned out of nothing, (for that no Office is) be the Evidence of my
Compliance in disagreeable thingt, I know not what else can with any Truth be
aledged against me. However, one thing I know, that I have every where most
religiously observed, and endeavored in Conversation with Persons of all Ranks
and Opinions, to allay Heats, and moderate Extremities, even in the Politics.
It Is below me to be more particular. But I am sure it has been my endeavor,
that if we could not all meet upon a Religious Bottom, at least we might meet
upon a Civil One, the good of England; which is the common interest of King and
People: That He might be great by Justice, and we free by Obedience;
distinguishing rightly on the one hand, between Duty and Slavery, and on the
other, between Liberty and Licenticusness.

But, alas, I am not without my Apprehensions of the Cause of this behavior
toward me, and in this I perceive we agree; I mean, my constant Zeal for an
Impartial Liberty of Conscience. But if that be it, the Cause is too good to be
inpain about it. I ever understood That to be the natural Right of all men; and
that he that had a Religion without it, his Religion was none of his own. For
what is not the Religion of a man's choice, is the Religion of him that imposes
it. So that Liberty of Conscience is the first Step to have a Religion. This is
no new Opinion with me. I have writ many Apologies within the last twenty Years
to defend it, and that impartially. Yet I have as constantly declared, that
Bounds ought to be set to this Freedom, and that Morality was the best; and
that as often as That was violated under a pretense of Conscience, it was fit
the Civil Power should take place. Nor did I ever once think of promoting any
sort of Liberty of Conscience, for any body, which did not preserve the Common
Protestancy of the Kingdom, and the Ancient Rights of the Government: For to
say Truth, the one cannot be maintained without the other.

Upon the whole matter, I must say, I love England; I ever did so; and that I
am not in her Debt. I never valued Time, Money, or Kindred, to serve her and do
her good. No Party could ever bias me to her Prejudice, nor any Personal
Interest oblige me in her wrong. For I always abhorred discounting Private
Favors at the Publicks Cost.

Would I have made my Matket of the Fears and Jealousies of People, when this
King came to the Crown, I had put Twenty Thousand Pounds into my Pocket, and a
Hundred Thousand into my Province. For mighty numbers of People were then upon
the Wing. But I waved it all; hoped for better Times; expected the Effects of
the Kings Word for Liberty of Conscience, and Happiness by it; and till I saw
my own Friends, with the Kingdom, delivered from the Legal Bondage, which Penal
Laws for Religion had subjected them to, I could with no Satisfaction think of
leaving England; though much to my Prejudice beyond Set, and at my great
Expense here; having in all this time, never had either Office or Pension, and
refusing ever the Rewards or Gratuities of those I have been able to oblige.

If therefore an Universal Charity, if the asserting an Impartial Liberty of
Conscience, if doing to others as one would be done by, and an open avowing,
and steady practicing of these things, in all times, to all Parties, will
justly lay a Man under the Reflection of being a Jesuit, or Papist of any Rank,
I must not only submit to the Character, but embrace it too; And, I care not
who knows, I can wear it with more Pleasure, than it is possible for them with
any Justice to give it me. For these are Corner Stones and Principles with me;
and I am scandalized at all Buildings that have them not for their Foundations.
For Religion it self is an empty Name without them; A Whited-Wall; a
Painted-Sepulchre; No Life or Virtue to the Soul; No good or Example to ones
Neighbor. Let us not flatter our Selves; We can never be the better for our
Religion, if our Neighbor he the worse for it. Our fault is, we are apt to be
mighty hot upon speculative Errors, and break all Bounds in our Resentments;
but we let practical ones pass without Remark, if not without Repentance: As if
a mistake about an obscure Proposition of Faith were a greater evil, than the
breach of an undoubted Precept. Such a Religion the Devils themselves are not
without; for they have both Faith and Knowledge: but their Faith does not work
by Love, nor their Knowledge by Obedience. And if this be their Judgment, can
it be our Blessing?

Let us not then think Religion a litigious thing; nor that Christ came only
to make us good Disputants, but that he came also to make us good Livers.
Sincerity goes farther than Capacity. It is Charity that deservedly excels in
the Christian Relegion. And happy would it be, if where Unity ends, Charity did
begin, instead of Envy and Railing, that almost ever follow? It appears to me
to be the way that God has found out and appointed to moderate our Differences,
and make them at least harmless to Society; and therefore, I confess, I dare
not aggravate them to Wrath and Blood. Our Disagreement lies in our
Apprehension, or belief of things; and if the common Enemy of Mankind had not
the governing of our Affections and Passions, that Disagreement would not prove
such a Canker, as it is, to Love and Peace in Civil Societies.

He that suffers his Difference with his Neighbor, about the other World, to
carry him beyond the Line of Moderation, in this, is the worse for his Opinion,
even though it be true. It is too little considered by Christians, that men may
hold the Truth in Vnrightcousness; that they may be Orthodox and not know what
Spirit they are of. So were the Disciples of our Lord. They believed in him,
yet let a false Zeal do violence to their Judgment, and their unwarrantable
heat contradict the great end of their Saviors coming, Love.

Men may be angry for God's sake, and kill People too. Christ said it, and too
many have practiced it. But what sort of Christians must they be, I pray, that
can hate in his Name who bids us love, and kill for his sake, that forbids
killing, and commands love, even to Enemies.

Let not Men or Parties think to shift it off from themselves. It Is not this
Principle, or that Form, to which so great a Defection is owing, but a
degeneracy of Mind from God. Christianity is not at Heart: No Fear of God in
the inward parts: No aw of his Divine Omnipresence. Self prevails, and breaks
out, more or less, through all Forms, but too plainly: (Pride, Wrath, Lust,
Avarice:) so that though People say to God, Thy Will be done, they do their
own: Which shows them to be true Heathens under a mask of Christianity; that
believe without Works, and repent without forsaking: busy for Forms, and the
Temporal Benefits of them; while true Religion, which is to Visit the
Fatherless and the Widow, and to keep our selves unspotted from the World, goes
barefoot, and like Lazarus is despised. Yet this was the Definition the Holy
Ghost gave of Religion before Synods and Councils had the meddling with it, and
modeling of it. In those days Bowels were a good part of Religion, and that to
the Fatherless and Widow, at large. We can hardly now extend them to those of
our own way.

It was said by him that could not say amiss, Because Iniquity abounds the Love
of many waxes cold. What soever divides man's Heart from God, separates it from
his Neighbor; and he that loves self more than God, can never love his
Neighbor as himself, For (as the Apostle said) if we do not love him whom we
see, how can we love God whom we have not seen?

O that we could see some men as eager to turn People to God, as they are to
blow them up, and set them one against another. But indeed those only can have
that pure and pious Zeal, who are themselves turned to God, and have tasted the
sweetness of that Conversion, which is to Power not Form, to Godliness not
Gain. Such as those do bend their thoughts and pains to appease, not increase,
Heats and Animosities; to exhort People to look at home, sweep their own
Houses, and weed their own Gardens. And in no Age or Time was there more need
to set men to work in their own Heart, than this we live in; when so busy,
wandering, unruly, and licentious a Spirit prevails. For whatever some men may
think, The Disease of this Kingdom is Sin, Impiety against God, and want of
Charity to men. And while this Guilt lies at our Door, Judgment cannot be far
off.

Now this being the Disease, I will briefly offer two things for Cure of it.
The first is, David's clean Heart and right Spirit, which he asked and had of
God. Without this we must be a Chaos still. For the Distemper is within; and
our Lord said, All Evil comes from thence. Set the inward Man right, and the
outward man cannot be wrong. That is the Helm that governs the humane Vessel.
And this nothing can do but an inward Principle, the Light and Grace that came
by Christ, which the Scripture tells us Enlightens every one, and has appeared
to all men. It is preposterous to think that he, who made the World, should
show least care of the best part of it, our Souls. No, he that gave us an
outward Luminary for our Bodies, has given us an inward one for our Minds to
act, by. We have it: And it is our Condemnation that we don't love it, and bring
our Deeds to it. It Is by this we see our Sins, are made sensible of them, sorry
for them, and finally forsake them. And he that thinks to go to Heaven a nearer
way will, I fear, belate his Soul, and be irreparably mistaken. There are but
Goats and Sheep at last; whatever shapes we wear here. Let Us not therefore,
Dear Friend, deceive our selves. Our Souls are at Stake. God will not be mocked.
What we sow we must expect to reap. There is no Repentance in the Grave; which
shows, that if not there, then no where else.

To sum up this Divinity of mine, It is the Light of Jesus in our Souls that
gives us a true sight of our selves, and that Sight that leads us to
Repentance, which Repentance begets Humility, and Humility that true Charity
that covers a multitude of Faults; which I call God's Expedient against man's
Infirmity.

The second Remedy to our present Distemper is this, Since All of all Parties
profess to believe in God, Christ, the Spirit, and Scripture, that the Soul is
Immortal, that there are Eternal Rewards and Punishments, and that the Virtuous
shall receive the one, and the Wicked suffer the other; I say, since this is
the common Faith of Christendom, let us all resolve in the strength of God to
live up to what we agree in, before we fall out so miserably about the rest in
which we differ. I am persuaded, the Change and Comfort which that pious course
would bring us to, would go very far to dispose our Natures to compound easily
for all the rest; and we might hope yet to see happy days in poor England: for
there I would have so good a Work begun. And how it is possible for the Eminent
Men of every religious Persuasion, (especially the present Ministers of the
Parishes of ENGLAND) to think of giving an Account to God at the last day,
without using the utmost of their Endeavors to moderate the members of their
respective Communions toward those that differ from them, is a Mystery to me.
But this I know, and must lay it at their Doors, as I charge also my own Soul
with it, God requires Moderation, and Humility from us: For he is at hand who
will not spare to judge our Impatiency, if we have no Patience for one another.
The Eternal God rebuke (I beseech him) the wrath of man; and humble All under
the sense of the Evil of this day; and yet (unworthy as we are) give us Peace,
for his holy Name's sake.

It is now time to end this Letter; and I will do it without saying any more
than this. Thou see my Defense against popular Calumny; Thou see what my
thoughts are of our Condition, and the way to better it; and thou see my
hearty and humble Prayer to Almighty God to incline us to be wise, if it were
but for our own sakes. I shall only add, that I am extremely sensible of the
Kindness and Justice intended me by my Friends on this Occasion; and that I am
for that and many more reasons, with great Truth and Esteem,

TEDDINGTON, October the 24th. 1688. Thy obliged and affectionate Friend, W. P.

POSTSCRIPT.
ONe thing in reference to my self I forgot to mention, I have been by some
people with great art rendered powerful, that I might be made guilty, at least
obnoxious; which has often drawn from me this Expression to my Acquaintance: I
have all the Inconvenience of a man of Power and Interest, but nothing of the
reallity or advantage of that Character. One thing I will say, and end; I must
do as I would be done by, and cannot with fine Distinctions or popular Humor,
absolve my self from that Duty; for, I thank God, I am what I was, and will be
what I am, with his help, let the World say what it will, Farewell.

W. P.

FINIS.

