Quakerism The Mystery of INIQUITY Discovered: In a Brief DIALOGUE Between A
Christian and a Quaker: By way of Supplement To my former Papers Exhibited in
DVBLIN against them, in two of the most important particulars charged upon
them; Viz. The Holy Scriptures, and our Lord Jesus Christ; in which it does
most evidently appear, that both are denied by them, in a true, Christian, and
proper sense.

By John Plimpton.

DVBLIN, Printed School.

Reader,
I Shall here present thee with this ensuing Dialogue, between a Christian and
a Quaker; In which are faithfully represented, the Quakers Opinions concerning
the Holy Scriptures, and our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I doubt not
but it will be returned, as forgeries and fictions, upon my own head, the
common answer they have for all their Adversaries: But I am conscious to my
self that I have not wronged them in any thing, either by mis-reading,
curtailing, mis-construing, or mis-applying any passage I have quoted out of
their Books. I am willing therefore to appear in public, that so these things
may be more fully, clearly, and plainly discovered and laid open for common
benefit, and for examination of my charges, to see if I have wronged them or
not: But this you see they wholly decline; and their reason is, because I am an
ignorant, conceited, and empty person, and therefore they think themselves not
accountable for these things, unto a person under my circumstance, etc. but
certainly this is but a Quakers Quibble, as all men may plainly discern; for if
they think themselves not obliged to meet me in public, why do they so much
concern themselves in Printing, one Pamphlet after another, and to exhibit the
same up and down privately; is it not to cover over their deceit and
wickedness, and to insinuate upon peoples minds, that they are better in their
Opinions than really they are. Now, to the end I might not be burdensome to my
self in writing, nor to the Reader in reading, I shall only insist upon these
two things before mentioned: for if the true Christ be denied by them, then is
Satisfaction, Justification, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and all other
things clearly gone; the foundation being destroyed, the house must of
necessity fall. Now I do affirm, Christ and the Scriptures are divided by them;
and therefore all they say of them, is but mere Equivocations, and the Quakers
Ministry are but mere Imposters and Cheats.

Consider well what thou read, and the Lord give thee understanding. If God
shall have any glory, and thou shall receive any benefit, I have my end,

J. P.

A BRIEF DIALOGUE Between A CHRISTIAN and a Quaker.
Christian. Well met Neighbor, I would fain have some Discourse with you: for
I have read in several of your Adversaries Books, that you hold dangerous
Errors, asserting those things that are notoriously false, and denying those
things that are really true; and more particularly, the holy Scriptures, and
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. What say thou to this?


Quaker. I have told thee, strainings, perversions, and false inferences, are
the frequent practice of our Adversaries, the Qua. a Christian, p. 3.


Chr. I know this is your common answer, but whether it be true, I question.
What say thou therefore to the Scriptures?


Qu. I do declare to the whole world, that we believe the Scriptures to contain
a declaration of the mind and will of God, in and to those ages in which they
were written, ibid. p. 9.


Chr. What is this to the purpose; I know thou can use a thousand such
Equivocations: But tell me plainly, are the Scriptures the rule of Faith and
Practice, or not?


Qu. Because we deny the Scriptures to be the rule of Faith and Practice, in
honor to that divine light that gave them forth, ibid. p. 15.


Chr. Will thou confess my charges, and yet think to prove thy self a
Christian, and render my Impeachment as vain; certainly thou art infatuated, or
worse, otherwise thou would never talk at such a vain rate, and render thy
self such a ridiculous Scribler to all the world.


Qu. Thou have left out what follows, viz. which was the Author of them in the
holy Penmen; that we should therefore deny all those holy precepts,
commandments and rules relating to life and godliness that are therein
contained, -- If thou had cited this, thou had lost thy end; as not doing
it, shows thy malice and folly together, ibid.


Chr. Thou have absolutely denied them to be the rule of Faith and Practice;
and yet in the same breath would have me believe that thou do own those
holy precepts, commandments and rules relating to life and godliness therein
contained: Is not this to say, they are not to be believed nor practiced; and
yet to say they ought to be believed and practiced; and is not this heterodox:
or are we to own that for precepts, commandments, and rules, which we are not
to believe, which is absurd. But since you seem to own the Scriptures in some
sense, do you own them to be the true sayings of God?


Qu. Yea, so far as they agree to the Light within?


Chr. It Is evident what esteem you have of the Scriptures, since you own these
holy precepts, commandments and rules therein contained, no farther than the
Light within directs you.


Qu. I have told thee this is forgery, palpable forgery, Count. Christ. p. 11.


Chr. I know you are ready to accuse me of forgery: but pray tell me how far
you do own and receive them.


Qu. By what rule shall we be convinced, that the Scripture is the only rule of
Life, and has this eminency above the Spirit: we own the Spirit to be the only
rule and guide into all truth, -- and is the only rule now to understand the
Scriptures; G. W. Apol. p. 48.


Chr. Thou queriest here by what rule thou may be convinced that the
Scriptures are the only rule: Hence it is evident thou do not own them so to
be; and then say the Spirit is the only rule to guide into all truth, and to
understand the Scriptures by: is not (...) to grant what is charged upon you
viz. that you deny them to be the ^ule of Faith and Practice, and that you own
them no further man they agree with the Light within.


Qu. I would fain know of those of our present age, -- upon what foot they
receive them into this place and authority; is it by tradition, or revelation?
I mean the internal testimony of the Spirit, or the external award and
avouchment of men: if the former, they unavoidably come over to us; for then
the Spirit will, and must be both rule and judge, W. Pen Christian Quaker, p.
141.


Chr. Then the reason why men ought to live up to those holy rules laid down in
the Scriptures, is not from that divine authority that is imposed upon them:
men are no further obliged either to Faith or Obedience, than the Light within
moves them thereunto, etc. The Scriptures must be received upon the authority
of the Light within, or upon the authority of men, or upon their own authority:
both the latter are absurd in your eyes, therefore the former only is true. Not
from men, nor tradition, for thou say that is Popery, and believing as the
Church believes, ibid. p. 142. again thou queriest, p. 140, 141. How shall I be
assured the Scriptures came from God? I am bound to try all things, then them
among the rest. I would fain know what I must try them with? with the
Scriptures? then the Scriptures must be the rule of my examination, and Faith
concerning themselves; which is improper. W. Pen, have thou not here reprobated
the Scriptures with a witness! certainly you are the most prodigious Heretics
and Imposters that ever any age did produce.


Qu. Whether the first Penman of the Scriptures was Moses, or Hermes? or
whether both these are not one? or whether there are not many words contained
in the Scriptures, which were not spoken by inspiration of the holy Spirit?
whether some words were not spoken by the grand Imposter, some by wicked men,
some by wise men, ill applied; some by good men, ill expressed; some by false
Prophets, and yet true; some by true Prophets, and yet false? Quakers Refuge,
p. 17.


Chr. Well if it be thus, then whether it is not dangerous, to receive the
Scriptures any further then they agree with the Light within? and if Moses and
Hermes, be both one; then whether thy query be not frivolous? if not, then
whether the first, with all the rest of thy queries be not very mischievous?
having this natural tendency to prejudice the weak Reader. And so these things
being taken collectively: Whether 1st. thou would not throw aside a great
part of the holy Scripture as doubtful; particularly the Books of Moses. 2.
Whether thou would not have some part to be diabolical? 3. Some part false.
4. Some part foolish, both in expression and application. 5. And some part
little to be regarded though true, beeause spoken by Liars. 6. Some part spoken
by inspiration, and yet of no Authority, because false: and so no part of it
the true Record, or Declaration of God's Love for the Salvation of Mankind; for
that, or nothing, is the implication of thy distinctions: but what further have
thou to say.


Qu. Though we do say, men ought to live up to those holy rules contained in
the Scipture, yet the reason why, is that conviction they meet with from the
Light in their own Consciences: therefore the Light within is both our warrant
for says in, and obedience to them, Reason against rail. page 48.


Chr. Certainly, thou (W. Pen) art a shameless man, thou do not care what
thou do affirm, or deny, so it may serve for thy Interest: but if thou have
any shame in thee, I will make thee ashamed. Did thou not affirm, in page 47.
that the greatest reason of your belief concerning the Prophesies, and Promises
recorded in the Scriptures, was not from any outward thing, but that inward
testimony that you have received from the holy Light within you, to the truth
and faithfulness of those sayings. And now W. P. after thou had writ all
this, and much more, that might be minded; thou have charged T. H. with
forgery, because he charged the Quakers with the truth: certainly thou must be
an Athiest, or a Person given up to a reprobate mind, or else thou could not
remain Impenitent, as it is evident thou do, by those Papers thou have set
forth of late: Oh! W. Pen, repent if thy day of grace be not over. But since
thou have so much favor for the Scriptures, as to receive them so far as they
agree with the Light within, pray tell me whether you do not esteem your own
words (as spoken immediately by the Spirit) to be of greater authority then any
Chapter in the Bible.


Qu. That which was spoken from the Spirit of truth in any, is of as great
authority as the Scriptures, or Chapters are; and greater. G. W. Apol. page 49.


Chr. But how can that which is spoken by a Quaker (supposing though not
granting, to be from the Spirit of truth) be of greater authority then that
which the holy Spirit has spoken in the Scriptures? but since you exalt your
words to be above the Scriptures, pray what do you think of your writings.


Qu. Fox and Hubberth^rne, in a Book of theirs, called, Truths Defense, page 2.
in answer to Parson Comelford of Stavely Chapel; the Auth^^ ^aving sent some
queries to the P^, who instead of swering them, burned them: thereupon he tells
the Parson the said Book and page, that he might as well have condemned the
Scriptures to the fire to be burned, as his queries he sent him; or that he
might as well have said, the saying of Christ and his Apostles were absurd as
his queries, they (meaning his Queries) being given forth by the same Spirit,
etc.


Chr. Certainly, these are great swelling words of Vanity; if you propound
queries to any, they must be esteemed equal with the Scriptures: but if any
propound queries to you, they must be doomed, as conjured up in the black Art,
out of the bottomless pit: that they are the Language of a white devil,
propounded in the subtilty of unclean wisdom, only to carp, cavil, and to
ensnare the innocent, Certainly were you such innocent Persons, as you pretend
to be, you would never exalt your selves, and debase all others, nay you would
not exalt your own words, and writings, above, nor equal with the Scriptures.
But since you thus under-value the Scriptures, don't you believe them to be the
true sayings of God.


Qu. I have told thee before, that some were spoken by false Prophets, and yet
true, and some by true Prophets, and yet false. And Samuel Fisher in his
rustic alarm, to the Rabies, tells thee, that they are false, and falsified:
both Transcripts and Translations; yea, that none of them are right.


Chr. Certainly you are vile wretches, the very prodigy of the times we live
in, for should any wise man read, and consider well what you have written, he
must needs conclude, that you have conspired together to under-value the
Scriptures, and to expose them to the greatest scorn and contempt in the world.
But what says W. Pen to this.


Qu. If the Scriptures are the rule, they are so either in their Original or
Copies; if in their Original that is not extant, then no rule in being, for the
last of it that was extant. Was John's History at Ephesus not seen these
thousand years: if the Copies must be the rule, it were to be wished, we knew
which were the rightest to the Original, there being above thirty in number:
this is undetermined, and for ought we see indeterminable: and that which makes
good what I say, are the variety of readings among those Copies, amounting to
several thousands; and if the Copies cannot, how can the Translations be the
rule so d^ffering from the true sense of the Copies, in many things, and from
another: besides, I would fain know of those of our present age, who thus
contend for the Scriptures being the rule, etc. -- upon what foot they receive
them into this place and authority. W. P. Christian Quaker. page 141.


Chr. I perceive thou do not only deny the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith
and Practice, but do also question by what authority we do receive them, and
thy reasons for so doing is, 1st. Because the Original is lost. 2. Because the
Copies be above thirty in number. 3. Because there be several thousands of
different readings in those Copies. 4. Because the Translations are so
differing from the true sense of the Copies in many things. Thus, oh you
Quakers have represented the Scriptures, in a worse sense than ever I read or
heard any Jesuit, or Romanist ever did; for though they censure our Transl^tions
in some things, yet I never heard but they did speak well of the Copies. Thus
have you rendered the Scriptures altogether unprofitable: For if there be so
many thousands of Errors in them, how shall I know what is right. And so this
will make good what you formerly said, viz. That it was dangerous for ignorant
People to read them. Well, your opinions are so naucious, it makes my stomach
begin to wamble, it is almost time to leave it; however before we part, let me
ask you one question or two more. For since you pretend sometimes to own those
holy Precepts, and Commandment therein contained; I would know to whom they are
commanded.


Qu. That is no command from God to me, which he commands to another; neither
did any of the Saints, we read of in Scripture, act by the command which was to
another, etc. They obeyed every one their own command; and thou J. Turner, or
any other who goes to Duty, as you call it, by Imitation from the Letter
without, which were commands to others, in your own wills and time; your
Sacrifice is not accepted, but is an abomination to the Lord. Edw. Borrough's
Works. p. 47.


Chapter If it be an abomination to the Lord to do those commands which were given
to others, as Borrough's says. And Idolatry to call the Bible, a means of our
knowing God, as G. W. says Dip. plunged p. 13. Then whether we may not cast off
all commands in Scripture, until commanded anew by the Light within: And
whether this be not the reason why you cast off all duty? neglecting Prayer in
your Familles, not accounting your se^ves under that curse, Jer. 10.25. also
craving no blessing upon your victuals, before you eat, nor returning any
thanks after, but sit down, and rise up like hogs. Certainly these things are
very offensive, to all that are Christians indeed. If this be Quakerism, the
Lord deliver me from it. But can thou say no more.


Qu. By order and authority given me by the Spirit of the Living God, on the
31th day of the 10th month, 1655, about four a clock in the morning, the word
of the Lord came to me, saying, write my controversy with all the Inhabitants
of the earth. Hence I do say, that to take up a command from the Letter, and
say Christ commands it, that thus you are in the witchcraft, Edw. Burrough's
works, p. 96. compared with. p. 105.


Chr. Is it witchcraft to stand in awe of Christ's Commands, to reverence their
authority, to endeavor to our utmost an observance thereof? if it be so, I
have done with you; and I hope, if all sober Christians will consider these
things, they may easily see what esteem you have of the holy Scriptures: but I
will leave it, and proceed to another point.


Christian. Being well assured that you deny the Scriptures to be the rule of
Faith and Practice, any farther than they agree with the Light within: I would
fain know what your opinion is concerning Christ.


Qua. Some are not ashamed to tell the world in our name, that Christ was never
visible as to his bodily appearance, and consequently, that we deny his coming
in the flesh above sixteen hundred years ago, tho his coming is an article of
our Christian Belief, W. Pen, Truth further cleared, p. 37.


Chr. I am almost certain, that never any one accused you for denying Christ's
visible appearance: that we all accuse you of is, for denying that visible
appearance to be Christ, or part of Christ, to which you will not answer
directly, signifying hereby you are pinched.


Qu. We believe and confess Jesus Christ took our nature upon him, and was like
unto us in all things, sin excepted: that he was born of the Virgin Mary, and
suffered under Pontius Pilate, the Roman Governor, crucified, dead, and buried
in the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea; that he rose again the third day, and
ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God, in the power and
majesty of his Father, who will one day judge the world by him, even that
blessed man Christ Jesus, according to their works, ibid. p. 17, 18.


Chr. This Creed seems very plausible, as tho it were orthodox: but to the end,
neither I, nor any others may be deceived by it; I would ask thee these few
questions; and I prithee answer me directly: (1st.) Whether Christ was before
he took that body; or whether the taking that body did not constitute him
Christ?

(2.) Whether Christ was ever visible? or whether he was Christ only as God,
and so never seen with mortal eyes?

(3) Whether God is Christ, and Christ be the Light? and whether the Light in
it self be the Christ of God? and if so, whether the Light did suffer under
Pontius Pilate, was dead and buried, rose again the third day; and whether the
Light is ascended into Heaven, and whether it now sits on the right hand of
God? Answer me briefly, and directly hereunto, that so I may be satisfied: I
will therefore repeat it again.

(1st.) Whether Christ was before he took that body? or whether the taking that
body did not constitute him Christ?


Qua. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came,
who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen. Since here Christ is distinguished
from the body he took, and made one with that God, who is over all, blessed for
ever, Amen: As much as to say, of whose flesh Christ took, therefore Christ was
before he took it; or his taking it did not constitute him Christ, W. P. Christ
Qua. p. 97.


Chr. This is a direct answer, and it puts me out of all doubt, concerning your
opinion in this matter: But since you deny that body to be part of Christ, was
Christ ever visible.


Qua. Abraham saw my day, and rejoiced; they still harping upon that visible
body, not thirty three years old; rep^ied, thou art not yet fifty, and have
thou seen Abraham? taking that to be the Messiah, the Christ of God, and
Savior of the World he meant, which they saw with their carnal eyes, ibid. p.
96.


Chr. It Is believed among the Christians that the Godhead, and Manhood
conjoint, was the true Christ; but thou will have the Godhead only to be
Christ. Certainly, I think herein have thou denied the true Christ; but art
thou in good earnest, was Christ never seen with carnal eyes.


Qua. Christ was never seen with carnal eyes, nor heard with carnal ears;
Humphry Wolrich Declaration to the Baptist, page 13.


Chr. Do thou think any rational Man will conclude I have wronged you in
calling you Imposters and Cheats; surely you are no Ministers of Christ, but
false Prophets: because you testify contrary to the Scriptures; see Joh. 1.29
to the 42. and there you may read Christ was visible, contrary to the bo d
assertions of the Quakers: But it may be John's Testimony here agrees not with
the Light within, and therefore they receive it not; well it agrees with the
Light in me, and I had rather believe John who says, behold the Lamb of God
(for I suppose he was a Christian) then all the Quakers in the World: But what
say thou to this Lamb.


Qua. The Outward Lamb shows forth the Inward Lamb. Christ. Qua. p. 97.


Chr. I would fain know what thou meanest by outward and inward Lamb; if by the
outward you mean the bodily appearance crucified at Jerusalem, then you make
good that saying, Jesus Christ at Jesulalem, a type, a figure, a shadow: If you
mean the Paschal Lamb under the Law, then the Christ Christians believe in, who
was crucified at Jerusalem, was not the antitype; and so the true Christ is
denied by you. Well, but go on.


Qu. Nothing which was mortal was called Christ, J. W. Quakers Refuge, p 38.
For thy word visible, he is not, nor never was visible to thee, nor thy
generation; for those that did profess the Scriptures, as thou and thy
generation does, crucified him, Edw. Burrough's works, p. 34.


Chr. J. Whitehead says, nothing that was mortal was called Christ: and E. B.
says, the Queriest and his generation crucified him; how could they crucify
him that was immortal? except you mean metaphorically, as W. Pen says: if so,
then Christ was not crucified in a proper, but metaphorical sense! But since
you deny him to be outward in any sense, tell me what he is.


Qu. Christ is God, Christian Quaker, p. 97. He is the Seed, ibid.


Chr. What is God?


Qu. The Light within, G. Fox the younger.


Chr. Since we are upon this Point, I shall make a little digression from the
matter in hand: T. H. having brought the Quaker in; saying, the Light within
was God; he asks, did the Light within create all things? makes you answer,
yea: see this confirmed, G Fox, Gr. Mist. p. 185. the light which every man
that comes into the worid is enlightened withal, is Christ; by whom the world
was made. Again, he asks, is the Light within the object of divine worship? He
makes you answer, yea: that this is true, see a Pamphlet entitled, Damnable
Heresy discovered: where the Author says, it is damnable heresy to deny to
worship the measure of light in every man: thus you see the Light within is
God, is the Creator of all things, is the obj^ct of divine worship, etc. These
are therefore no forgeries, but real truths. Well, but you say Christ is the
seed, where is this seed?


Qu. It is inward and spi^itual, Christian Quaker. p 97.


Chr. I^ it not all one to say Christ is God, is the Seed, is the Light within:
if so, c^n the Light within be crucify?


Qu Ye have ^ondemn'd and ki^^'d the ^ust, James 5 5 6. that is, Christ Jesus
in their heart, him they crucified, G. Keith Immediate ^^velation, p 77.


Chr. Was the Light within, or Christ in the hearts, cruc^fi^d under Pontius
Pilate? certainly your c^nsessions to Christ's sufferings, are but mere
Equivocations. But go on.


Qu. If there be any other Christ but he that was crucified within, he is the
false Christ; and he that has not this Christ that was risen, and cr^cified
within, is a reprobate: though devils and reprobates may ta^k of him without,
G* Fox, Gr. My^t p. 206.


Chr. But since you have denied christ to be visible, and conc^uded, tha^ if
there be any Christ but he that was c^u^^fi^d within, he is the false Christ
(...) what do you think of those Min^sters that Preach Christ without?


Qu. They that are false Preach Christ without, and bid people be ieve in him,
as he is in Heaven above: but they that are true, Preach Christ within, Smith's
Primmer, p. 8.


Chr. This is a great difference in their Doctrine; for one to Preach without,
and another to Preach Christ within.


Qu Yea, it does m ke as great a difference, and has no more fellowship
together than the East has with the West, ibid. p. 9.


Chr. And is this an infallible trial of them?


Qu. Yea, it will not deceive thee, but will certainly give thee understanding,
ibid.


Chr. Thus you are in the Quakers esteem; (you, Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Independent, and Baptist,) false Preachers; and that which infallibly proves
you so, is your Preaching Christ without, and bidding people look to him in
Heaven above! But W. Pen, if this be false Doctrine, to Preach as thou say,
what do thou mean, when thou say Christ ascended into Heaven, and sits at
God's right hand?


Qu. He is at the right hand of God, but I cannot believe he has a personal
being at the right hand of God without all men, G. Whitehead, Christ ascended,
p. 18. Chist in person remote in a body of flesh, and not in men, is not
Scripture, but added, ibid. p. 69.


Chr. Is Christ no otherwise at God's right hand, than as he is in you?


Qu. It Is a false and lying imagination, to imagine either Christ or God, and
his right hand, to be so remote, as not to dwell in any man, G.W. ibid. p. 69.
I deny that Christ has now a body of flesh and bones, circumscribed (or
limited) in that Heaven which is above, and out of every man on earth, J.
Whitehead Quakers Refuge, p. 40.


Chr. Certainly you do but equivocate in all you say of Christ: hence it is
plain that all you own concerning Christ, Heaven, and God's right hand, is no
more then what is in you; but since you deny he has a body of flesh and bones,
now in heaven, and out of every man on earth, do you believe he has any body
now.


Qu. Yea, the Church is his body, Edw. Borough's Works. p. 150.


Chr. Has Christ no other body but his Church?


Qu. To say Christ has two bodies, one out of sight of the Saints; there is so
much wickedness and ignorange in the broachers of such a particular, that it
needs no answer, Burrough's, ibid. p. 151, 152. And now before he had accused
any for saying Christ has but one body, he should have produced plain
Scripture, that says he has two, or is the head of two bodies, a natural and a
spiritual, G. W. Apol. p. 33.


Chr. You say the Church is Christ's body, I suppose you understand that to be
his spiritual body; and then you deny he has two bodies: hence it is plain you
believe he has no other body but his Church. But do you believe he shall so
come, in like manner as he was seen go into heaven.


Qu. I deny he shall come visibly, and though it be said in like manner, yet
every like is not the same, G. Whitehead, Christ ascended. p. 22.


Chr. Is not this a plain denial of Christ's second personal coming?


Qu. They are like to be deceived, who are expecting Christ's second coming
will be a Personal coming, which word person you add to the Scriptures; not
minding the penalty, Revel. 22. G. W. ibid. p. 23.


Chr. It Is almost time to conclude, but before we part, let me tell thee that
from what has been said: I do gather, 1st. That you assert that Christ was
before he took that body, and that the taking that body did constitute him
Christ; nay, that it was no part of Christ. 2. That Christ was never visible,
nor seen with carnal eyes. 3. That Christ is God, and God is the Light within;
and that this Light in it self is the Christ of God; and that this Light was
all the Christ that was crucified, which was crucified only within. 4. That
Christ, Heaven, and God's right hand, is only within. 5. That Christ's second
coming will neither be visible nor personal; consequently, that he is come, as
much as he will come. I think by this time I may safely conclude, that both the
holy Scriptures, and the true Christ, is really denied by you, notwithstanding
your equivocations, and therefore Quakerism is the Mystery of iniquity; or in
it self but a mere mystical Romance.


Qu. Strainings, Perversions and false Inferences, being the frequent practice
of our Adversaries; at which rate the Scriptures may be made to prove there is
no God: if these words, the fool has said in his heart, be left out of the
Text, The Quaker a Christian. p. 3


Chr. If thou think fit I am willing to put it upon trial; In the mean time
I do affirm I have done ye no wrong, neither by curtailing, straining, or
misapplying of your principles. I have taken many things immediately from your
own Books: Some things indeed I have taken from Tho. Hick's Dialogues, I hope
that is no offense to thee.


Qu. Tho. Hicks is guilty of vile forgeries, Counterfeit Christian Title page.


Chr. I know you accuse Tho. Hicks of many things, which I know he is not
guilty of: but do thou indeed believe his quotations, in his Dialogues are
forgeries.


Qu. I never thought so, much less writ so, nor was that the question, taking
quotations for places cited, as to book and page; and if generally accepted by
him, Countefeit Chrian, p. 17.


Chr. Herein then do thou justify both him and me from forgeries in this
matter; however I have seen the most part of what I have here written, in your
own Books. I shall now take my leave of thee, (desiring thou may turn from
Quakerism to Christianity) I shall address my self to the Reader, whom I would
heartily desire he would seriously consider what is here written; I design it
for thy good: and now Reader, consider, the true Christ is really denied by the
Quakers; and if so, they are no Christians and so I hope thou will carefully
avoid them and then, (as I have said before) all other doctrines fall to the
ground. I might min^ many more of their gross errors which as yet I have no^
done; I shall mind but one, and that is the Resurrection of the Dead, which
though they pretend to own in some sense, I say they own it in no true sense. I
recommen^ all to the blessing of God, and rest thy Friend,


JOHN PLIMPTON.

POSTSCRIPT.
W. Pen tells you in his last Pamphlet, Entitled, Truth furth^^ cleared, p.
44, 45. Principle 15th. that frou our denying t^^ resurrection of the same
natural and corruptible body, we are made deny the Resurrection of any Body;
however spiritual and glorifi^^ and even of eternal Reward too. Now if the Body
rise not, and t^^ soul be part of God; ahen consequently all eternal Rewards
are de^^ed, the first is denied by W. Pen. The 2d is asserted by G. Fox, the
King and Prophet, Great Mystery p. 29. 68. 90. 100. in which pl^ces it is plain
from his words, that the soul being a spiritual substanc^ is part of God, and
God's Being, without beginning, and infinit^ consequently Angels and Devils are
Gods, being spiritual substanc^ or part of God's Being. Such horrid Blasphemy
is G. Fox and (...) Quakers Guilty of.

If any desire to have any of these Books, let the^ come to my Lodging at Mrs.
Bruntons in Great T^^mas-Court, where they may be supplied.

FINIS.

