AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST A Careless Indifferency in Matters of RELIGION.

Being a TREATISE In Opposition to those that believe, That all Religions are
Indifferent, and that it Imports not what Men Profess.

Done out of French.

With an INTRODUCTION by Anthony Horneck, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
Majesty's.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes at the Star, the Corner of Bride Lane in
Fleetstreet; and John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultry, 1694.

The Introduction.
WHile there is a City of God, and a City of the Devil, a Kingdom of Light, and
a Kingdom of Darkness, we must expect, that Truth and Virtue will be opposed by
Sin, and Falsehood; and the more important any Truth is, the greater opposition
it will meet with from, the instruments of Unrighteousness.

He that reads the History of the Church, will find how in every Age, one or
other has started up. to bark against the Light, and even then, when Miracles
shined, and Wonders were fresh, and Signs from Heaven accompanied the Doctrine;
false Apostles transformed sometimes into Angels of Light, have risen, to
undermine the Structure.

There is not an Article of our Faith, but what has been contradicted, and
there is nothing so Sacred, but the Enemy of Mankind, has found out persons to
serve him in the polluting it. Nor must we wonder, to find Truth assaulted, and
its Beauty in danger of being sullied. It would not look so Glorious if it were
not resisted, and its Brightness does in a great measure, rise, from the Quiver
that rattles against it, from the glittering Spear and the Shield, The Darts
thrown against it, show its worth, and the rage of Enemies discovers its
inestimable value; the price of the Treasure is enhanced by the practices of
Thieves, and that there are those, who attempt the stealing of it, raises an
appetite, and greediness in others, to embrace and keep it.

Indeed, Truth like a Tree, runs out into various Branches, some whereof may be
better spared, than others, and though, to cut the least sprig is dangerous,
and injurious, yet, as in Human Bodies, a wound in the Arm, is not so
pernicious as in the Bowels, and there is a vast difference between an
accidental Headache, and a Disease that incroaches upon the Vitals; so while
the lesser Boughs of Truth are marred, though it may be the cause of just
Grief, yet we can exercise that piece of Charity, which bears all things, but
it is enough to put us out of all patience, to see the heart of the ^ree
levelled at, and the Sap that feeds, and gives it life, in danger of being
dried up.

Such is the degeneracy of the Age we live in, that the very Fundamentals of
Religion are struck at, and though Modesty was never any quality of the Devil,
except it were in order to Deceive, yet his Boldness at this time seems to step
out of the common Road, and though Practical Atheism has ^een the stratagem,
he has made use of all along, yet, his grand endeavor now, and of late years,
is to lead Men into Speculative; And we see it has so far prevailed with
abundance of Men, that they are grown very Indifferent, whether they believe
any thing at all, concerning God or Religion.

As there is no error, but what Men pretend to give some reason for, so it is
like the Lukewarmness of some, the horrid Debauchery of others, the Divisions
that are among Christians, and the Animo-sities of one party against another,
and I will be bold to mention, the late Revolution too, or rather the
misconstruction of it, may be alleged, as causes of this Indifferency. But
where Men will not be at the pains of separating the Dross from the Gold, and
are loath to distinguish the ill Digestion, from the goodness of the Food, or
are for rejecting the use of things, because they are managed ill by persons,
who Idolize their Interest, or which is as bad, from the irregularity of
Practice, infer a falsity of Doctrine, they must necessarily run into strange
Conceits, and make that an Argument of unbelief, which should engage them to a
stricter Enquiry.

We may justly look upon it, as a special Act of God's Providence, as Weeds do
grow, still to raise up Men to root them up, and to oppose the spreading
Infection by suitable Antidotes. This he does, though few take notice of it,
that he may not leave himself without witness, and to render those, who are
willingly caught with these deceitful Baits, inexcusable. Indeed it is not
every excuse, will take with an All-intelligent Being, and for People to
pretend, that they cannot be satisfied in the great Principles of Religion,
which are to make them good, and serviceable to God and Man, either because of
the different Opinions about them, or because of the ill use, that some make of
them, or because it is hard to know the Truth, is a frivilous Plea when we see,
they are more inquisitive after things, which make against Religion, then after
that, which can be said for it, and wilfully neglect perusing, and considering
Books, which assert and vindicate the power of it, and greedily swallow the
froth of witty Men, spewed out against its force, and energy. Since Atheism and
Indifferency have made those incursions upon us, which to our Sorrow we behold,
many admirable Treatises have come forth to baffle its pretenses. But these are
very carefully shunned by the ^^oser sort, or if any such be put into their
hands, they are rejected with a Laugh, and a merry Jest takes with them more,
then the most judicious Reasonings.

So f^nd are Men of ruining themselves, and scrape together, what trash they
can, to fortify themselves against substantial Goodness. However, God is kind,
in affording them helps to free themselves from the Devil's snares, and if
those Helps be wilfully rejected, it is soon guessed, at whose door their
Destruction will lie.

Truth shall triumph at last, and all the profane Herd shall find, when it is
too late, it may be, they had a God to deal with, that will not be mocked.
Since nothing can satisfy them, but experience of God's Justice, they shall
find it to their cost, and by intolerable anguish of Mind, be convinced of that
which they would not be persuaded to believe, by the clearest Reason.

Good Lord! That there should be a necessity of taking pains to persuade Men,
that they are not Beasts, and that their Reason, Capacities, and Powers of
their Souls, require something more then Eating and Drinking, and Sleeping, and
minding their Business, and Pleasures in the World! This has been so fully
de^onstrated by Wise and Considerate Men, that one would think, there should be
no room left for* Subterfuges, and Evasions, and as such persons justly have
thought, they could not employ their Talen^s better, then in asserting the
strong foundations of Religion, so they deserve. Eternal Commendations, for
letting the World see, that whatever attempts have been made to ruin it, its
pillars, like that of the Earth, are unmovable, and its Notions so riveted
into our Natures, that we must first deny our Being, before we can deny its
Principles.

The same I may say of the Author of these Papers, who observing the strange
Indifferency, that is abroad in the World, has endeavored to dash that Child
against the stones. His Arguments are strong, and weighty, and his Answers to
the Cavils and Exceptions of Atheistical Men, short, but pithy, and such as may
satisfy Men, who have not totally abandoned the Dictates of right Reason.

Religion is a thing fitted to our Reason, and the more our Reason is employed
about it, the more its necessity and Beauty, and Glory will appear. That Men
are so Indifferent about it, the principal cause is, because rational
Consideration is excluded, and they are guided more by their Senses then their
Reason. They are for the most part brought up, and educated into sensuality,
and whatever gratifies their Senses, is made the darling Object of their Love,
and because Religion lays a restraint upon the sensual Appetite, they are very
willing to entertain prejudices against it, and any little exception serves as
an Argument against submitting to the Holy Laws of it. The de^per root this
sensuality takes, the more Religion is weakened, and thrust out, till in time
the common Principles of it are questioned, and at last, if it may be done with
safety, as to the Law of the Land, denied.

It Is love to Vice, that corrupts Men's Understandings, and if we examine and
search into the root of all, it will be found that this Indifferency in matters
of Religion proceeds from Men's being addicted to some Sin, or other, they are
loath to part with; and because the stricter Rules of Religion, are inconsistent
with their unbrideled Lusts, they think it their Interest to abandon it, or if
they retain any thing of it, it is only a shadow, and no more.

There is nothing so bad, but may be colored over with specious Arguments, and
unthinking Men are soon gravelled with such kind of Objections, especially, if
the byasse be toward evil; for then a very weak Argument will draw, and what it
wants in strength, is made up by the power of a vicious Inclination. This gives
it weight, and makes that conclusive, which at other times would scarce deserve
a moment of serious Consideration.

That I recommend the perusal of this Book, is not so much to gratify the
Bookseller, as to promote the public Good; The Work is useful, and may help
to reform the times, and put a stop to the growth of Licentiousness. The
meanest Reader may benefit himself by it, and it will furnish him with Answers
to the vulgar Objections of Libertines. The smallness of its Bulk will be an
encouragement to look it over, and the solid Reasons made use of, will by the
Blessing of God convince him, there is something more in Religion, then Fancy.

A. HORNECK.

The PREFACE.
THere are so many People now a days, who believe, that all Religions are
Indifferent, that it is not a thing to be wondered at, If something in
Opposition to such a growing Mischief should be written upon this subject. But
we cannot forbear to observe, that there are five sort of Persons who uphold
this Indifferency.

1. There are some who do it purely out of Affection to Libertinism, and
because that Naturally they love to be Independent. They will not acknowledge
any Master over 'em, to the end they may be able to say, believe, and do
whatever they please, without fearing to give an Account hereafter.

2. Others there are who do it out of Vanity; to the end they may be thought to
be Wits of the First Order, that disdain to herd with those that follow the
Common Opinion. And these People at first are but weakly convinced of what they
say; but by publishing continually their Singular Sentiments, they come to be
fully persuaded of the Truth of 'em at last, and haughtily set themselves in
the Rank of the People disabus'd, looking with pity upon the Rest of the World,
that are scared with the thoughts of Futurity.

3. There are some who do it out of Sloth; because they will not give
themselves the Trouble of Examining Religions. So that they suffer themselves
to be easily surprised by the Reasons of our Pretended Soaring Wits; finding
themselves by that means delivered from the care they ought to take in a more
diligent and laborious Scrutiny.

4. Others uphold this Opinion because they find it very convenient for
preserving their Estates and their Honors, which they prefer before Truth, and
love beyond all things in the World.

5. There are some who do it, not because they believe all Religions to be
Indifferent, but because they have peculiar Sentiments of Religion, which they
dare not sow abroad until they have Insinuated, that it is a very Indifferent
thing what Men believe, that they may not offend 'em with their Opinions.

That which is most to be Lamented is this, that these Wild Opinions very much
corrupt and taint Others, which they do with so much the less trouble, 1.
Because that naturally we love Liberty, and we would willingly be Independent.
2. Because we are pufft up with Pride, and that there is nothing that pleases
us so much as to be distinguished from others. 3. Because labor dislikes us,
and for that we love not that which puts us to any hardship. 4. Because we have
too great an Affection for our Wealth, and for that it is a great Trouble to us
to quit the Pleasures and Comfortable Conveniences of this Life. There is
nothing left unessay'd to surprise those Pious Souls that seek to work out
their Salvation. There is great care taken to make 'em understand that they
ought to make Christian Morality their Study, and that there is nothing but
Morality to be preached up. They tell us, that we have need to be corrected and
reproved; that the Greatest part of Men sufficiently knows the Will of God, but
that few practice it. This is agreed; but the Chief Aim of those who thus
discourse, is artificially to insinuate, that there is no necessity of
tormenting our selves, about what we ought to believe, only that we ought to
live well. And thus they prepare People insensibly to believe, that all
Religions are Indifferent. However, we must acknowledge, that they who are of
this Opinion are not all alike corrupt; but yet they are sufficiently erroneous
for us to deplore the Misfortune of this Age. It Is for the Faithful to fortify
themselves against those Delusions, that we have undertaken this Treatise, and
with and endeavor to recall those that are gone astray. This is the only aim
that we have proposed to our selves, and not to get the Reputation of an
Author. We conjure all those that read this Little Manual, to strive with
themselves and to read it with Application. We beseech 'em not to read it with
a Libertine's Humor that Scoffs at every thing, but with a desire to search
out the Truth, and with the same diligence that they study Human Sciences. Let
'em consider,

1. That the dispute is not here about a Thing of little Importance, since it
concerns their being Eternally Miserable if they are deceived, as we shall make
appear in this Treatise.

2. Let 'em not reject what we shall say, under pretense of meeting with
Reasons that are not fully convincing. For tho there were but one good Reason
in a Chapter, 'twere enough to oblige 'em to return from their Wanderings.

3. That they ought not to despise the Arguments, under pretense that they have
heard 'em several times; but let 'em carefully examine 'em, and lay aside their
Prejudices.

4. Lastly, That it is not enough to find some petty fault, to reject the
Reasons which are produced; for that there is nothing so easy as to oppose
some little Sophisms to good Arguments. But let 'em consult their own
Consciences: I most Heartily beseech Almighty God to give a Blessing to my weak
Endeavors.

ERRATA.
PAge 18. Line 18. for Sees, read Seems. page 30. l. 32. dele All. p. 31. l.
ult. for in, r. with. p. 34. l. 12. for no Confusion, r. nothing but Confusion.
pa. 42. l. 33. for King r. Kind. pa. 46. l. 22. for the first him, r. us. pa.
56. l. 31. for Proportions, r. Propositions. pa. 66. l. 19. for subscribe, r.
prescribe. pa. 69. l. 12. for wearing r. drawing. for upon r. from. pa. 71. l.
2. for of her, r. other. pa. 74. l. 6. for has, r. is. pa. 77. l. 8. Insert
Not. pa. 79. l. 18. for Animosity, r. Animality. pa. 89. Chap. XV. for they
make, r. they may make. pa. 90. l. 8. after strong, insert they. pa. 93. l. 4.
for long, r. come. pa. 94. l. 26. for the things of Consistence, r. Remorce of
Conscience. pa. 130. l. 32. for assert, r. asserts.

A TREATISE
Against those that believe that all Religions are Indifferent.
CHAP. I. Wherein, after we have supposed that there is a God, we show that God
is most perfect. That he is the Author of all the Good which is in the
Creatures, and that we ought to Fear and Honor him.
THE Being of a God is a Truth so Evident, that no Man can deny it without
combating his own Reason. There Is no necessity of straining our Endeavors to
believe it; for that Man must put a Violence upon himself, who dares to
contradict it. For proof of it, there is no need of rommaging for Metaphysical,
high-flown, far fetched Arguments, scarcely within the Reach of most Men's
Understanding. The Consideration of this same spacious Universe exposed to our
Eyes, and all the Creatures we behold within it, together with the
Correspondency, the Symmetry and Relation of the several Innumerable parts to
the Whole, is sufficient to convince all people that will listen to their
Reason. For as for those that are not struck with the sensible Marks which the
Author of Nature has imprinted on his Works, they will never submit to the
Force of Dispute. The most Eloquent, and most Learned of the Cicero l. 2. Not.
Deorum.
Romans was so overruled by this particular Proof, that he makes no scruple to
maintain, after a great Philosopher, that if Men should of a sudden, start up
from under the Earth, where they had remained in Darkness from the Time of
their Birth, and all at once behold the Land, the Sea, and Heavens; the Beauty,
the vast Body and wonderful Effects of the Sun, they would not fail to
acknowledge a Deity, and to confess that the whole which they contemplated was
the Workmanship of a God.

In short, either we must believe that the Matter is Eternal, or that the World
is the Effect of Chance; or else we must acknowledge that there is an
All-powerful Being which made both the one and the other. Now it cannot be
said, that a Dead and Insensible Mass, such as was the Matter, is an Eternal
Being, and without any Beginning, because it would be the Greatest of all
Absurdities, to ascribe to the Vilest of all Beings, the Chiefest of all
Perfections, which is to exist of it self. Besides, in regard that Motion is
not Essential to the Matter, though it should be supposed to be Eternal, we
should be still putting the Question, when it began to have Motion? Who it was
that gave it the first Impressions? Who it was that shaped it into so many
various Figures? Who made this Motion so just and Regular; and who it was that
produced such an Infinite variety of Creatures out of one and the same Matter?
So that when all is done, we must come to one Sovereign Being, which we call
GOD.

It cannot be said, that this Vast Universe is the Effect of Chance, or that it
was the Accidental Meeting of Certain little Bodies which produced it. The
Pagan Philosopher who maintained this Opinion, that Nature mustered together
all the Atoms of her Wisdom to compose it, seems to me no less Extravagant in
this particular then He, who, beholding several Pictures, wherein were to be
observed all the Rules of Exact and Elaborate Painting, and a great Number of
Figures curiously drawn, should say, that it was the Workmanship of Chance, or
that the Colors mixed so Artfully together of themselves.

What Man of sound Judgment can be so vain to think, that it was Chance that
made the Whole which we Contemplate, the Heavens, the Earth, the Sun, the
Stars, the Plants and Animals; That it was Chance, that in the Wombs of our
Mothers formed a Piece of Workmanship so perfect as that of our Bodies, whose
Structure, Figure, Organs, Members, their wonderful Symmetry and just
Proportion, is still the Admiration of Human Wisdom: that it was Chance. which
produced our Souls; that Soul which thinks, which raises it self above our
Senses, and which corrects and govern 'em; that searches after, invents and
finds out, those things that seemed impossible for Human Reach. Lastly, that it
was Chance, which united this Soul so perfectly with the Body, that such and
such motions of the Body stir up Thoughts in the Soul, and such and such
Thoughts of the Soul, which produce variety of Motions in the Body. Certainly
we must no longer pretend to make use of our Reason, if we once deny these to
be the Works of an All-powerful, most Wise, All-understanding, and most Perfect
Being.

So that I shall not undertake to refute those, who in defense of Epicurus,
adventure to bring some Examples of what Chance is able to perform. For there
is so little proportion between what they allege, and the Creatures which we
speak of, that it is a wonder that People who pretend to Wit, should employ it
in such feeble Proofs. I might as easily prove, that because it so happens,
that three or four Letters may be so thrown together by chance, as to form a
word; a Man might as easily make a Poem as accomplished as Virgil's Aeneads.
Nay, tho I should grant that Chance might form some one of those Creatures
which we every day admire; Shall we from thence infer, that it was Chance that
so well ordered all things, as to prescribe to every thing the particular Use
that is assigned it, or that so well joined and placed together all things, as
to be useful the one to the other, the Heavens to the Earth, the Earth to the
Plants, the Plants to the Creatures? Tho Chance might frame an Eye, how is it
possible for us to conceive, that Chance also made the Light, without which,
the Eyes would signify nothing?

Seeing then that matter is not Eternal, and that the World was not made of it
self, either by Chance or the concurrence of Atoms, according to Epicurus, of
necessity we must conclude, that there is an Almighty Being that made it, since
nothing but an infinite Power could draw the first Matter out of Nothing, or
give it so lovely a Form. And this All Powerful Being is that which we call God.

It may be objected perhaps, that Nature is the cause of all those Great
Effects; it is she, say they, that causes the Plants to sprout and shoot forth,
that gives Life to Men, etc. But all this while, what do they mean by Nature?
Is it an Intelligent Cause? or a Blind and Stupid Cause? If it be a Stupid
Cause, how comes it to act with so much Wisdom? If it be an Intelligent Cause,
endu'd with infinite Wisdom, is not this the calling of Nature that which we
call God? Or if they mean by Nature, that Order which appears in the
Production, Generation and Preservation of every Creature; then who established
that Order, but that sovereign Being which we all adore?

It Is then most certain that there is a God; and we have no design to enlarge
any farther upon the proof of it. All Sciences lead us to this Truth, and all
Nations in all Ages have acknowledged it, except some certain barbarous People
among whom Reason was almost extinguished; and in some, Travelers have not
observed any sentiments of a Deity, because they have not been so strictly nice
to inform themselves. But Man, who is naturally proud and high-minded, has
rather chosen to worship Wood and Stones, Beasts and Plants, Crocodils and
Trees, Rats and Onions, then to be without a God, and adore nothing at all.
However, we must confess, that there were formerly, and still are nowadays,
some People, who making an ill use of their Reason, attacque this Principle and
drawing off their Wit from every thing that might be able to prove a Deity,
merely to apply themselves to whatever may increase and harden 'em in their
Doubts, persuade themselves at length, that there is no God. But besides, that
they who arrive to this degree of Impiety, are not very numerous; and that
there is great reason to question, whither there be any real Atheists; I speak
of Atheists in Wit, if I may presume so to express my self, and not of Atheists
in Heart, there are very few who carry their incredulity to their Grave. The
greatest part confess in despite of their own Teeth, the Deity, whose Enemy
they declare themselves to be; nor can they forbear imploring his Aid in their
most pressing occasions, and upon unexpected Accidents; necessity and their
Conscience forcing 'em to acknowledge, what before out of malice and disdain of
Heaven they denied. Therefore the Impiety of some Libertines, who endeavor to
prove there is no God, because they could wish there were not, ought not be any
inducement for us to question a Verity so universally acknowledged.

But if it behooves our Reason as Haughty as it is, to confess a Deity, and that
Man has a Master, under whose Empire it becomes him to humble himself; it
becomes him also to acknowledge that this Sovereign Power possesses all
Perfections, and those in such a degree, as that there can be none conceived to
be greater or more accomplished.

This is the Idea which we naturally have of God; nor can we have any other, if
we follow the Illuminations of Right Reason. Nothing is to be conceived to be
better, or more perfect then the Deity; and this is agreed on by all the World.
For if he wanted some Perfection, or if he did not possess it in a Supreme
degree, then would something be conceived more perfect then He. Therefore it
must be owned, that whoever speaks of a God, speaks of the most perfect of all
Beings, that exist or can exist.

I will not undertake to describe all these Perfections; they are Infinite: nor
can the Angels themselves, those Blessed Existencies, who are always before
this Sovereign Being, but very imperfectly instruct us who he is. It Is
sufficient that we observe that no Man can have an Idea of a most perfect
Being, without conceiving at the same time, that he subsists of himself, and
necessarily exists; that he is an Eternal Being, and without any, Beginning:
that he is an Independent Being, but upon whom all things depend: an
All-seeing, All-knowing, All-foreseeing, and Omnipotent Existence. A Being
Sovereignly good, most Just, most Wise, and most Happy. Thus it behooves us to
conceive all these Perfections* in the Being which we adore, and who is our God.

This is a Truth beyond all Contest: But it is also no less certain, that this
most perfect Being, who created the Matter, the World, and whatever we behold
contained within it, is the Author of all the Good which is in the Creatures.
All the Creatures can expect no Good, but from him who gave 'em their Being,
and by whom they subsist. There is none but He who perfectly knows what is
convenient for 'em, because he knows all things; and He alone can only bestow
it upon 'em, by reason of his Omnipotency. The Pagans have acknowledged this,
in the midst of their Ignorance, as it would be easy for me to prove out of
the Works of their most celebrated Authors. They all agreed, that their Lives
and their good Fortune (for that was their manner of speaking) depended upon
God. This is the Opinion of all Men, said Cicero: for I mind not what Ajaz says
in Sophocles, and another no less impious in Eschylus, who upheld, that none
but Fools and faint-hearted People implored the Omnipotency of the Gods. But
there have been others who have added, that Wisdom and Virtue depended upon
this Supreme Being; that the Beginning and End, or the success of all Things
depended upon him: And the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus has those
sentiments upon this Subject, as put to shame several false Christians. For he
says, that there is an Effectual Virtue in God, which acts in us, and operates
all our good Actions, and all our good desires, and which removes from us all
Opportunities and Occasions of falling into Sin.

From all these Truths I draw this Consequence, which naturally flows from
these Principles; That it is absolutely our Duty to Honor this Infinite Being,
to endeavor from day to day to understand him more perfectly, continually to
admire his Virtues, to love and fear him, to make it our whole employment to
please him, and so to bear our selves, that whatever we are, what ever we do,
whatever we have, may be all ordered to his Glory. For let us but grant that
there is a God in the World, that this God is most perfect, that he is
Supreamly Good, and that he is the Author of all the Good which we enjoy, and
of all that we can hope for; certainly we cannot then forbear to admire his
Perfections, but must believe our selves engaged and bound to love him. Let us
but acknowledge that this God is Omnipotent, and that it is in his Power to
reduce all the Creatures he has made, into their Primitive Dust, and that he is
able Eternally to punish those who violate his Laws, we must be then assuredly
convinced, that he is to be feared, and we ought not to provoke his Wrath. Let
us be persuaded that this God is most Just, that he loves Justice, and that
whatever he exacts from us, tends only to make us happy, and is nothing but
what is most conformable to ou^ real Interests, it creates a Pleasure in us to
obey him, and be submissive to his Will. Let us once be sensible, that this God
is both able and willing to redress all our Complaints, to deliver us out of
all our Miseries, and that all things depend upon his Conduct and Direction, it
presently persuades us to a sole Reliance upon him. Lastly, Let us believe that
this God is most Wise, that he Created Man for those ends which are most worthy
of him, and we can never question, but that Men are bound to pursue those ends
to which they are appointed, in making a right use of that Reason which they
have received, and applying it to the Glory of him who gave it 'em. Now all
these Acts of Veneration, Respect, Fear, Submission, Adoration, Admiration,
Confidence, Obedience, and Love, are comprehended in the single Word Religion.
So that the Idea and Knowledge of God, imports the Necessity of a Religion.

CHAP. II. That Religion is not the Invention of Politicians.
THere are some People who maintain that Religion, as also the Opinion of a
God, is the Invention of certain Politicians, who, as they suppose, made the
People believe there is a Deity, on purpose to retain 'em in Submission and
Obedience; that there is a certain Worship to be paid him; and that this Deity
severely punishes the Treacherous, the Seditious, and Rebels.

But it will be no difficult thing to make out the absurdity of this Opinion to
those who have any Love and Veneration for Truth. For to prove, that there were
any Legislators, or any cunning Politicians, who made the People believe that
there is a God, and that there is a Necessity of a Religion, they must make it
appear to us,

1. That before the Birth of those Legislators, and Founders of States and
Dominions, the People were ignorant that there was a God, and that they never
paid him any Worship.

2. That those Legislators never had themselves any Fear or Sentiment of a
Deity.

Now this is that which they will never be able to prove; neither do I believe
they will ever presume to undertake it. Let 'em instance any time wherein
People lived without acknowledging a God. Let 'em tell us the Names of those
first Men, that were the Authors of that Opinion, that there is a Deity; at
least let 'em instruct us when those Ages were, that it first began to be
received in the World. It Is true, it cannot be denied but that there were some
Politicians who have made advantageous use of this First Notion, That there is
a Being who is far Superior to all those which we behold, or of which we have
any knowledge, as they have no less successfully made use of the Vanity of the
People, and that love which they naturally have for Liberty, their Lives, their
Children, or whatever else belongs to 'em: and of this Number were Jeroboam,
Minos, Lycurgus, Solon, Numa, Mahomet, and some others famous in History. I
must acknowledge likewise that these Legislators very much confirmed the People
in their Natural Propensity to a Religion; in regard they had too much Wit to
be Ignorant, that without Religion Society would degenerate into Common
Robbery, since every one would then do what he pleased; the most Crafty would
be the most Wise, and the most Powerful and strongest would be always Masters.
It Is most certain also, that these Lawgivers have made the People believe,
that the Deity would be Worshipped in such or such a Manner; and that they have
introduced such Ceremonies as they thought most proper for their Designs. Nor
will I scruple to agree, that there have been several who derided the Deities
which the People adored, and who have made 'em pay their Adoration to what
Deities they pleased. The thing was easy to be done in such Places, where the
People were ignorant of the True God whom they were to serve. But I aver, that
never any of those Legislators undertook to prove the Existence of a God. They
took that Truth for Granted, and built upon that Foundation. But they never
proved it; and I am assuredly convinced, that if they had not met with it
already engraved in the Hearts and Minds of all Men, they would never have
succeeded in their Great Designs.

Is it a thing to be believed, that two or three Men could deceive the whole
World, or that for the Establishment of their Authority, they could ever impose
their own Inventions upon People as Quick-sighted as themselves, that Laughed
at Popular Errors, such as Socrates, Plato, or Cicero? I^ it probable, that
they could have seduced and misled People who were not subjected to their
Dominion; nay, People that commanded over others, to believe the Flatteries of
those who would needs persuade 'em that their Lawgivers and Princes were Gods,
and whom indeed they Worshipped as so many Deities? Is it possible an Opinion,
Originally no more then the Invention of some Ambitious Persons, should be so
deeply rooted in the minds of all Men, that they could never Eradicate it
again, whatever efforts they made, when we find every day that Men renounce so
many Vulgar-Errors, though sucked in with their Infant Milk?

Lastly, Is there any Appearance or Likelihood, that after so many Ages, Men
should never be Convinced of an Opinion that disquiets and turmoiles their
Consciences with so many Terrors and Convulsions?

CHAP. III. Of the Indifference of Religions.
It Is clear then, that all Men have a Natural Inclination to Religion, in regard
that All have an Opinion that there is a God. Now if they all understood this
Deity after one and the same Manner, there would be but one Religion in the
World. But their Idea's are so various, that there are almost as many Religions
as there are People. From whence the Question has risen, Whether Men are
equally acceptable to God, whatever Religion they profess? And whether they may
be allowed, as an Indifferent Thing, to be of any Religion? There are some
People, and of these too many, God knows, who believe that all Religions are
Indifferent: that the Chief Religion, is to be Obedient to the Magistrates that
Govern us; that God is in truth the Center to which all our Devotion ought to
tend, but that it is of little Importance which way Men arrive at that Center,
provided they get thither; and that there are several ways to be happy. Vno
itinere non posse perveniri ad tam grande Secretum, according to Symmachus.
That we ought to be of the Religion of the People among whom we live, and not
to tie our selves to any one particular manner of serving God, but to be
initiated into all sorts of Religions, Esse totius Mundi Sacrorum Antistitem,
as a Pagan said. They who have given us Relations of the Belief of the Siamois,
or People of Siam, report, that they believe, That God does not preserve the
World, but only for the sake of that Divertisement and pleasure which he takes
in the Variety of Languages, Creatures, Habits, and Religions; that this same
Medley produces the same Effect as the Diversity of Flowers in a Garden, the
difference of Meats at a Banquet, or the Distinction of Offices in a Princes
Palace; for that in like manner God delights himself with inspiring into
Mortals several manners of Adoring and Serving him; and that we ought to
believe 'em all to be good, since they have all the same Object, and bring Man
home to his last End. It Is also said, That the King of Siam made Answer to the
Person who proposed to him, in the Name of an Ambassador from a Great Prince,
his turning Christian, That he wondered, the Prince should so much trouble
himself in a business relating to God, for which it did not appear that God did
any way concern himself, as having left it wholly to our Discretion. For, added
he, the True God, who Created Heaven and Earth and all the Creatures therein
contained, and who has given 'em Natures and Inclinations so different, had he
so pleased, at the same time, that he gave Men Bodies and Souls alike, could
have infused into 'em the same sentiments of the Religion which they were to
profess, and have United all Nations under one Law. But, continued he, it is
obvious that Providence permits diversity of Sects and Opinions, because that
God takes as much delight to be adored with different Forms of Worship and
Ceremonies, as to be glorified by the Prodigious Variety of Creatures, whose
sundry Beauties publish his Infinite Power.

Now in regard, there are too too many among those who call themselves
Christians, who with Banners displayed, appear in defense of this Opinion,
concerning the Indifferency of Religion, Our design is to Combat 'em in the
following Chapters. But first of all it behooves us to observe, that they who
are of this Opinion, do not all uphold it after one and the same manner. There
are some who deny Providence; others who will not have it to be concerned in
Matters of Religion. There are some who assert the Mortality of our Soul:
Others aver, that to speak properly, there is no such thing as True or False,
Just or Unjust; but that every thing depends upon the Will of Man. There are
some who believe, that Truth lies still in Darkness, and that God has not
revealed it; Others, that he has revealed it, but so obscurely, that there is
no Heresy which may not be proved by the Word of God. Others maintain that
Peace is to be preferred before Truth; and altogether cry up the great Good
which would redound to the World from the Opinion of Indifferency in Religion.
Were but this Opinion every where received, they say, there would be no more
Wars about Religion, nor any more Contentions about Mysteries of Faith. All Men
would live together in perfect Unity, and this Lower World would be a Little
Heaven. They extol the first Author of this Opinion as one that never can be
too Highly applauded, and erect Monuments and Statues to honor his Memory. All
Men, they Cry, ought to give God continual Thanks for sending such a Man into
the World, and at the same time are strangely troubled because he was not
Immortal. Let us now see whether this Opinion merits so many Elogies, or
rather, whether it deserve not public Execration. And to the end, that none
may have reason to complain, let us take all our Indifferents (for I beg the
favor that I may have leave to call 'em so) one after another, and let us
impartially examine what they hold forth.

CHAP. IV. Against those who deny a Providence.
I Shall begin with those, who, not daring to maintain that there is no God,
yet presume to deny his Providence, and assent with Epicurus, that the Supreme
Deity never concerns himself with what is acted upon Earth: That it is a thing
beneath the Grandeur of a Sovereign Being, to take cognizance of the Petty
Affairs of Mortals here below; and so it is very indifferent to Him of what
Religion they are.

True it is, that although the Love which it behooves us to have for Truth, should
always oblige us to ty^ our selves up to the Belief of that Opinion which is
most conformable to our received Idea's of God; nevertheless it must be
acknowledged, that if there were no Providence, we might conclude it needless
for Man to torment himself about Religion; and deem it lawful enough to make
choice of that which best agrees with our Interests, or with the Society with
which we converse. But it is no difficult thing to refute this Opinion, which,
with as good Reason might be called, The Sponge of all Religions, as a Persian
Author once said the same thing of the Fatality of the Stoics. Nor shall I
make use of any more then two or three Arguments to overthrow it, without
alleging any passages out of Scripture, because I dispute with People that
will not acknowledge it to be Divinely inspired.

First, it must be acknowledged, that they who deny a Providence, never
seriously considered what God is. The Idea which we naturally have of God,
instructs us, that he is the most perfect of all Beings that exist, or may
exist, as already has been said. Now can we believe, that a God, who should
neglect his own Works, and should shut himself up in Heaven, without taking any
care of what he has created, can be a perfect Being, seeing that among Men
themselves, those persons have been always looked upon with the Highest
contempt who neglect their own Affairs. Fathers, for example, who never mind
their own Children, and those slothful Princes, who like Sardanapalus, abandon
the care of their Dominions, and leave their Subjects at liberty to do whatever
sees good in their own Eyes. How can such a sluggish Remissness, a Negligence
so unbecoming an imperfect Creature, be thought to beseem the most perfect of
all Beings. At least it cannot be denied, but that if God takes no care of his
Creatures, there must be a Being more perfect then he. But this is that which
cannot be said of a God. Either me must deny (says Cicero, I. Nature. Deor.)
that there are Gods, or we must confess, that they act something Great and
Noble: Now there is nothing Greater or more Noble then the Conduct of the
World. Were it otherwise, we should be forced to say, that there is something
Better and more Perfect then the Deity.

Besides, it is not to be imagined, that a most Wife Being has created so many
Things which we admire, without proposing to himself some End or other. If he
have made all these Things to some End, can we believe that he takes no care to
see whether he have attained his End or no, and whether his Creatures do what
they ought to do. I know very well what Epicurus said, That it would be a
defect in the Felicity of God, should he be troubled with the management of the
World: But he was grossly mistaken, as having a False Idea of Felicity. For true
Beatitude consists not in doing nothing, but in doing things both Great and
Noble. A Being that is not perfect, cannot be happy in a high degree, more
especially, if you speak of a Being Supreamly Wise. Now it cannot be imagined,
that a Being, who neglects the looking after what he has taken pleasure to
create, can be a perfect Being. Therefore there-might be some ground for
Epicurus's Argument, if God might be thought to tire himself with Governing the
World. But how can he be weary who does all things by the only Act of his Will,
wherein his Almighty Hand, that never was tired in building the vast Structure,
where all Beings are enclosed, has not the least share of Pains or Trouble.

But if they who deny Providence, never consider what God is, neither did they
ever consider the nature of the Creatures. Certain it is, that as they were
created out of nothing, they would infallibly return to nothing again, if the
same hand that formed 'em, did not support and preserve 'em; for because they
Exist at this Instant, it does not follow that they shall Exist the next
moment. It Is requisite then, that he who preserved 'em the first moment, should
preserve 'em still; and this is so much the more necessary for him to do,
because there are a thousand Accidents that might every hour destroy 'em, were
there not a Supreme Being that preserves 'em. It is not the same thing with
them, as with God, whose Essence at the same time implies Existency: for we may
think of the Being of Creatures, yet not suppose that they Exist. Now if it be
true, that the Creatures cannot subsist without being sustained by the same
Hand that made 'em, we must of necessity conclude from their subsisting, that
there is a Providence.

We must be farther confirmed in this Opinion, if we consider the wonderful
Order which is observed in all parts of the Universe, that never alters, but
has subsisted for so many Ages in the midst of so many Changes and Revolutions:
The Harmony and Concord of so many Creatures of different Natures; the Regular
Motions of those Great Bodies, that roll Majestically over our Heads: their
Changes so constant, their Conjunctions so just, their Revolutions so well
ordered, together with a thousand things which are our continual wonder, yet,
which we can never admire enough. For it is impossible to revolve this Order in
our Minds, without acknowledging a Providence, unless we designed to be as
extravagant as He, who, observing a State well Governed, a Family well managed,
or an Army under good Conduct and Discipline, should deny that State or Kingdom
to be Governed by any Magistracy, that the Family had any body to look after
it, or that the Army had any General or Chieftain to Command it.

They who deny a Providence extol themselves in this Particular, very much, and
make some Objections. If it were true, say they, that all things were well
regulated, we should believe that God concerned himself with what is acted here
below; but we observe so many disorders in the World, that we cannot persuade
our selves that a Being altogether Wise and Omnipotent should govern the
Universe. Nay, 'twould be much better, add they, to affirm, that he takes no
heed of what happens upon Earth, then to assert that he beholds and suffers so
much Confusion. Whence comes it to pass that Thunder rattles in the Deserts,
that Hail and Thunderbolts fall upon Rocks, and that it Rains upon the Sea? To
what purpose serve Flies, Worms, and other Insects? Whence comes it to pass,
that Mountains Vomit forth Fire and Ashes? Wherefore are we pestered with
Monsters and Serpents? Were there a Providence, would it not hinder those
Inundations, those Earthquakes that overturn and swallow-up whole Cities; those
Pestilences that lay waste whole Kingdoms, and those Extraordinary Accidents
that seem to menace the Universe with utter Ruin? Or would that Providence
permit the Oppression of Virtue, and the Triumphs of Vice and Impiety?

But first I would fain know of those who make these Objections, whether they
are well assured that what they call Disorder, be really Disorder, and what
they say is badly Managed be truly the defect of Government? Did it never so
fall out that they deceived themselves, and have they not frequently blamed the
Conduct of Princes, while they were ignorant of the Reasons, but admired it
afterward when they understood the Grounds of their Proceedings. What a
Rashness is it in Mortal Men, whose Understandings are confined within such
Narrow Bounds, to determine so positively of what they know not in the least,
and to believe there is Disorder in all things, of which they cannot reach the
Causes? The Impiety of those People to me seems no less Arrogant then that of
the K. of Castille, who boasted that if God had called him to his Council, when
he framed the World, he could have give him better Advice. We know no more,
says one of the most Celebrated Writers of this Age, the Designs of God in the
Government of his Creatures, then an Infant, who having been bred up in a
Desert, and all of a sudden brought into some great and Populous City, could be
able to understand all the Changes that would happen, without Intermission,
before his Eyes. He would many times blame what was by no means to be censured,
because he could not understand the Reason of those Alterations.

The Cause why they so badly argue proceeds from this, that they consider those
things which appear to them so ill managed, did junctively from the other
Works of God, and for that they do not reflect with sufficient Attention upon
the Correspondency between those things, and others which they know. Wherein
they are no less ridiculous then they, who content themselves with only seeing
some Scenes of a Dramatic Poem, but never examine the Coherence and Unfolding,
or rather Winding up of the Whole; or they who in Pictures only fix their Eyes
upon the Shadows; orelse like those, who in a piece of Tapistry work, look only
upon the loose Bordering, which for the most part presents the Sight with only
monstrous and imperfect Figures.

In the Second place, I could wish, that they who find so many disorders, and
so much confusion upon the Earth, would tell me, Whether they meet with nothing
that is rightly ordered? and, Whether they never observed any characters of
Wisdom in the Conduct of the World? They would not presume to aver it. Let 'em
then tell me, by what means all those things which appear to Them to be in
decent Order, come to be so wisely managed? Certainly they must, at least in
that respect, acknowledge that there is a Providence; and as to other Things,
they ought to have as much Equity, as a Man of good Sense, when he judges of a
Book, that Treats of various Subjects, and which is written in several
Languages, of which he understands but one part. If that which he understands
pleases him, he imagins to himself, that what he understands not will be no
less satisfactory to him, could he but dive into the sense of it. God would not
conceal from Men, all the Ends for which he made all things: But some he has
not unveiled, on purpose to exercise and humble their Reason, and that they
might adore the Impenetrable depths of his Wisdom. We ought to extol him, says
St. Austin, as well for what we know to be wonderful in his Works, as for what
we cannot penetrate. For that our Life being of so short continuance, and we
our selves confined within so small a part of Time, and of the Universe; it is
impossible that we should comprehend the Order and Designs of that Eternal
Wisdom, that views the vast immensity of Time with one single Glance, and with
linking together that infinite variety of the Events of this Life, like to many
Rings clasped one within another, forms that long Chain of his Providence, that
shall extend it self to the farthest succession of all Ages.

After these General Remarks, let us enter into the examination of these
disorders which they speak of. They wonder, in the first place, why Thunder
rattles in uninhabited Deserts, that Hail falls upon Rocks; and why Lightning
levels with the Ground high and large Trees: not minding that these are but the
Consequences of the Laws which God has established. I am as much to seek
wherefore they do not likewise complain that the Sun shines upon, and warms
those Deserts, because the Heat of the Sun exhales the Vapors and Exhalations
which thick'n into those Clouds that generate both Tempests and Lightning. They
wonder why the Rain which serves to fertilize the Earth, falls not more
regularly upon only Lands Manured, and not upon Highway's; or upon the Sea,
which have no need of it. But do they think that Rain has no other Effects,
then only to render the Earth fruitful. Do they not know, that the Highways
would crack and gape through Drouth, were they not moistened by the Rain? And
that it is a great Refreshment to those that Travel in hot Countries. Should it
only Rain upon sown Lands, says that famous Author already cited. whence should
proceed the Springs that are so necessary to quench our own, and the Thirst of
all Creatures; and how should the Rivers retain that abundance of water which
renders 'em Navigable? It Rains upon the Sea: Who says that Rain is there
unprofitable to temper the saltness of it, and to make it more wholesome for the
nourishment of the Fish.

They wonder that there should be Mountains covered with Snow, and others that
vomit forth Fire, that there should be Deserts and steep Rocks. Not considering
that their variety of Objects it is, which makes the Beauty of the Universe,
and that God manifests his Wisdom more in that Diversity, then in a Uniformity,
tho grateful to the sight, yet still the same.

They wonder why there should be Insects, as if we could sufficiently admire
the Wisdom of God in those little Animals; for example, in the little Republic
of the Bees, which employed the Brains of an Ancient Philosopher, for above
Threescore years; and which at this day finds work enough for those that dive
into the secrets of Nature. Should we as diligently enquire into the Use of
these little Insects, as into the Benefit of Simples, we should doubtless
discover very profitable Secrets, I will not except the very Flies and Gnats,
which are said to be useful to purify the Air, in places where there are the
greatest number of 'em, and where they are most troublesome, and give the
greatest annoyance.

They admire there should be poisonous Serpents, and other venomous Beasts, but
never consider that there are many excellent Remedies extracted out of
Serpents; and that Sovereign Antidotes are frequently made of compounded
Poisons that serve to ease the Pains of Men; and that in general, all these
things which he believes to be either superfluous or hurtful, would afford us
matter of Admiration, if we considered 'em as we ought to do, and if we should
find that in the General harmony of the Creatures, they produce the same Effect
as Bases and Trebbles in a lovely Consort.

As for Monsters, most certain it is, that those petty Miscarriages and
Deviations of Nature ought not to lessen the esteem, which it becomes us to
have for Nature's Author: for that these Monsters no way render the World
imperfect. On the contrary, this variety of Creatures, of which some are more
perfect then others, contribute not a little to the Beauty of the Universe.
Monstrous Animals are less perfect then others of their kind, whose Proportions
are more just: but there are a thousand things which are to be admired in the
structure of deformed Bodies, which could only be the Handiwork of an Infinite
Power. It Is with Monsters as with Discords in Music, where oft-times a Discord
artfully intermixed with several Concords, makes the sweetest Harmony. Besides,
these Monsters are the Consequences of that Communication, which is between the
Imagination of the Mother, and the Fruits in her Womb; which Communication was
most wisely established for the forming of the Infant. True it is, that God
might have prevented this Communication from causing any disorder; but why may
we not say as well, that it was the pleasure of God to order it so sometimes
for the punishment of Men? Sometimes to set a greater value upon the Beauty of
his other Works; Sometimes for other Reasons which are in Truth, unknown to us;
which nevertheless we ought not to find fault with, in regard, that of all
those things that fall within our Knowledge, there is not any one that does not
afford us ample occasion to acknowledge the infinite Wisdom of their Creator.

They wonder that there should be Inundations, Earthquakes, Subterraneal
Conflagrations, and other Accidents which seem to threaten the World with utter
Ruin. But so far it is, that they from hence can prove there is not a
Providence, that it is rather a proof of the contrary. For I beseech ye, were
there not a Providence, how is it possible that the World should subsist in the
midst of such violent Concussions, or that it should have held out so long
time? A Ship abandoned to the Mercy of the Winds, without either Helm or Pilot
can never run a steady course, without dashing against the Rocks, or being
swallowed up by the Waves.

Whence comes it then, that these subterraneal Fires, these Earthquakes, and
these Inundations cause not that universal Havoc which they might do? By what
unexpected Power are the Effects of these dreadful Accidents, suspended or
limited? Who is it that corrects the distempers of a corrupted Air? What Virtue
purifies whole Cities and Regions infected with the Pestilence? Certainly he
must be very blind, who sees not that it is the same hand which made the
Universe that preserves it; and that after God has made use of these
Unundations, these Fires and Earthquakes for those ends, which to us are for
the most part unknown, he stops 'em from going any farther, and destroying the
vast Machine of the World.

Lastly, they are astonished, that Good Men should be so often oppressed, and
that the wicked should Triumph; That Impiety and Vice should Reign predominant,
and that Innocence and Virtue should be overwhelmed. This is one of their great
Objections, that has so much perplexed the Wise in all Ages. Claudian confesses
ingenuously, That he questions whether the World be Governed by a Wise,
Intelligent Providence, or by Blind Fortune, beholding Virtue under Oppression;
and Rufinus the most famous Criminal of his Age, flourishing in High
Advancement. And it is reported of a certain Philosopher, that he became an
Atheist, because he observed, that God did not inflict immediate Punishment
upon a perjured Person. And the Wise Cato, unfortunate in fighting for the
Liberty of his Country, could not forbear saying, That there was a great
Incertainty in the Government of the Gods. To which I may add what is related
of Domocritus, That he put out his I^yes with the Reverberation of a Glittering
Buckler, because he would not behold the Prosperity of the Wicked. Tho I must
confess, that this last Story seems to me very improbable. For what likely hood
is there that Domocritus, who only made it his Business to ridicule all the
World, should be troubled at the Prosperity of the Ungodly?

Now, though this Objection seems very plausible, nevertheless it is very easily
answered. First it is not always true, that Virtue is oppressed, and Vice
recompensed. Good Men are not alwas Afflicted, and the Wicked are frequently
punished; No Man will presume to deny it. Nor are there any Ages or Years that
do not furnish us with Examples. Thus the same Clandian, who was offended at
the Prosperity of Rufinus, says, That the Punishment which he received,
absolved the Gods, Abstulit hunc tandem Rufini Paena Tumultum, Absolvitque
Deos. In the Second Place, People who are not so, are many times thought to be
Virtuous and Good People, because they carry a fair Outside of Probity and
Piety. It Is needless to produce any Proofs of it; it is agreed upon by all the
World; there is no Person that has not been frequently deceived; and there are
an Infinite number who deceive themselves.

But to unfold this difficulty more clearly, I assert, that they most grossly
deceive themselves, when they imagine the Wicked to be happy, because they
appear to be so; because they are Rich; because they are advanced to vast
preferments, and wallow in pleasure and delights. How many are there that seem
to enjoy a Perfect Felicity, who are really most unfortunate, and tormented
with bitter Pangs of an accusing Conscience? How many wealthy People are there,
whose Condition is much more sad then that of the most Miserable Wretches? How
many great Men are there, who in their Elevated Stations enjoy no rest or quiet
Day or Night? I need no other Testimony then Tiberius, who could not forbear
declaring to the Roman Senate, that every Day he died a Cruel Death. Could you
but look into the Insides of those that you esteem Happy and Rich, said Seneca,
you would find 'em to be Miserable, to be Poor, to be Infamous, and that they
resemble those Walls which are only Painted without side. Such a Felicity is no
solid and true Felicity; it is only an Image and slight Appearance of it. For
which reason it is, that while they can stand upon their Legs, and make a vain
Bravado of Grandeur, they appear what they are not, and make People believe 'em
happy. But if any accident befalls 'em, that puts 'em out of Order, and
discovers 'em, then you come to see the Filth and Infamy that borrowed
Splendor conceals. And the Famous Historian Tacitus, speaking of Tyrants,
could we but see their Souls laid open, says He, we should behold 'em torn and
mangled by their own Crimes, like the Bodies of Criminals cut with the Lashes
of the Whip. We must not wonder then to see the Wicked Potent and Rich, in
Grandeur and Reputation; so far from thence concluding that there is no
Providence, that we have no reason to envy their Felicity.

I confess however, that there would be some reason to be astonished at their
appearing Prosperity, were there no other Life but this, and that we were not
then to come to Judgment. But before we blame the Conduct of the Almighty, or
before we deny a Providence, we ought to be assured there is no other Life to
be expected after this, and that God will never punish those whom he now
supports. Now I know not, whether there be any one to be met with who will
presume to assert, that he is clearly convinced, that there is nothing to be
thought of after this Life, that there is nothing to be hoped or feared after
Death, though there are several who endeavor to persuade themselves, that it is
certainly true, with whom we shall enter the Lists in the sequel of our
Discourse.

The Second Reflection is, That it is an Error to believe good Men Unhappy
because they are afflicted; seeing that Afflictions are so useful to those that
are exposed to 'em, whereby to make 'em sensible of the Emptiness of this
World, and the Vanities of it; to wean 'em from this Earth, and make 'em think
of a better Life; to tame their Pride; to reduce 'em from their Deviations and
Wanderings, and bring 'em back to their Duty. These are the Benefits of
Misfor-fortune, of which it would be easy to convince the most obstinate.

Now for a Man to be convinced, that Afflictions do not render the Sufferers
unhappy, he needs no more, but to consider the Tranquillity of mind which Good
Men enjoy when they are most Afflicted. One would think sometimes that he
suffers in the Body of another person, or that he is Insensible; or if it
happen that through the Violence of his Pain, he discovers some Motions of
Impatience, and lets fall some Murmurings, he recovers himself presently again.
You shall see Sereneness and Joy reseated in his Countenence: You shall hear
him bless God for Chastizing him so much Lenity; He acknowledges the Benefit of
his Afflictions, and that he stood in need of such Paternal Correction.

If they, against whom I dispute, did but acknowledge the Divinity of the
Scriptures, I could draw from thence an Infinite number of Proofs against 'em;
but I shall content my self with sending 'em to the School of a Pagan, I mean
Seneca, who has Composed a Treatise upon this Subject Why so many Calamities
befall good Men? And thus he argues;

When you see Good Men, and such as are acceptable to the Gods, in Pain, in
Trouble, in Adversity, Traveling through a difficult and Rugged Road; but on
the contrary, behold the Wicked in Joy, in Plenty, in Pleasure, take notice
that we are pleased with the Modesty of our Children, and the Liberty of our
Servants, that we keep the first under severe Discipline and that we sometimes
bear with the boldness of the other. You ought to believe the same thing of the
Gods. They do not nurture Good Men in Pleasures and Delights; they try 'em,
they harden 'em, they Train 'em up and Instruct 'em like Soldiers which they
intend to list under their Banners.

And because it might be objected against him, Is it then advantageous to be
Banished, to be reduced to Poverty, to behold the Death of Children, and a
dearly beloved Wife, to be branded with Infamy, to see a Man's self bereft of
every thing; He answers; "If you wonder that this should be advantageous to any
Body, you may as well admire that some People are Cured by Cutting and Burning,
and that Hunger and Drouth are made use of to the same Effect: But if you
consider with your self, that sometimes for Healths-sake the Surgeon is forced
to rifle the Veins, to scrape and pluck away the Bones, and cut off Members
which else would endanger the whole Body: You may as well permit us to tell ye,
that there are Calamities no less advantageous to those that endure 'em.

But some will say, if there be a Providence, how comes it to pass that Sin is
permitted? This is very near the same Argument, which a Pagan Philosopher made
use of, If there be a God, said He, whence proceeds Evil? But he as suddenly
recollects himself, If there be no God whence proceeds Good? This Difficulty
gave the Manichaeans an Occasion to set up two Principles, the one of Good, the
other of Evil; and Manes borrowed this Opinion from the Persians, who attribute
all their Blessings to their God Oromasdes, and all their Evils to Arimanius;
as the Egyptians made Typhon the Author of all their Calamities, while they
looked upon Isis and Osiris as the two Deities from which they received all
their Kindnesses. I confess, we know not the Reason why God permits Sin; yet
all that can be inferred from thence, is only this, that still we know not the
Designs of God; but this Ignorance ought not to make us deny a Truth which we
may clearly apprehend, and which is grounded upon the same Idea that we have of
a most perfect Being. This is merely want of the force of Wit, and to abandon
Evident Truths, for some Objections that are made us, which we cannot resolve,
though the same Objections have no other Ground, then the Ignorance and Weakness
of Human Understanding: So that those People, who are called soaring Wits, are
indeed but petty Wits, that have more of Pride in 'em then of Senfe and Reason,

What! must we presently deny a Providence, because we are Ignorant of the
Conduct of it? If there be a Providence, they Cry, there would be no Disorder;
but if there be no Providence, there would be no Confusion. Certainly, although
we could never yet discover, why God was pleased to permit Sin to enter into
the World, yet we ought to believe that he has done it for Reasons becoming
almost perfect Being. More especially since Sin has given us an Opportunity to
discover all the Properties of God, his Justice, his Holiness, his Mercy, his
Power, his Wisdom, not to speak of the Admirable Work of our Redemption,
wherein all the Virtues of a Deity have appeared with so much Luster; but which
God had never thought of, had there been no Sin.

Certain it is then, that there is a Providence; and this is that which it
behooved us to prove against the first Order of our Indifferent Men.

CHAP. V. Against those who believe, that Providence does not concern it self
in Affairs of Religion.
THere are some who dare not absolutely deny that there is a Providence; but
they believe that it only concerns it self in things of Highest Importance, as
Kingdoms, Empires, or Republics, but never examines what Belief the
Inhabitants of the World profess, as if it were indifferent to it what Men
professed.

'Twill be no difficult thing to refute this Opinion. For first, it is an Error
to believe that Providence has not the same share in the Government of Little
as of Great Affairs. For why should we not believe, that God both Manages and
Governs all that he preserves, and whatever he has made? Is it because it is
beneath a God to take care of the smallest Insects? But why should that be so,
when he has been pleased to produce 'em out of Nothing? Have we not rather
reason to admire a Sovereign Being, who having all Creatures within the Extent
of his Empire, causes 'em to subsist by his Word, and sustains 'em by his
Power? Think they that God would debase himself too much in doing it? But if
the Sun shines upon the most Contemptible Dunghils, yet cannot be said to
disgrace himself, why will they not admit that God should act upon the meanest
of his Creatures, without any diminution of his Grandeur and Majesty.

But they will say, That it is impossible that God should manage and govern all
things; as if they could be ignorant that the Knowledge and Power of God are
Infinite, and that if it be his will alone, there needs no more for him to do
in the Ruling and Ordering of all things. And therefore, the Reason why our
Indifferents argue so ill is this, because they have no other Idea of God then
of a Man, whose illuminations are narrowly confined, whose strength is but very
small, and who not being able to busy himself every where, is constrained to
employ himself upon a certain Number of Objects.

Moreover, they imagine, that because we despise all those little things that
are of no use to us, it is the same thing with God; never considering, that if
God took no care but only of those Creatures that are useful to him, or of
those only that bear some Proportion with him, all the Creatures, even those
only which we most esteem, not being able to add to or diminish any thing from
his Glory and Felicity; and being all infinitely below him, he might equally
disdain and neglect 'em all together.

But not to enter any farther into the Discussion of this Question, must not
they be willingly blind, who dare presume to number what concerns the Worship
which is due to the Deity, among things of little Importance? Is there any one
which is of greater Moment, then that which has a regard to the Sovereign
Being, which all Men ought to adore? And is it likely that God should Rule and
Govern Monarchies and Republics, and leave Men at their Liberty to serve him
according to their Fancies? As if it were a thing Indifferent to Him, to be
adored, for Example, under the shape of the most Vile and worthless Animals, as
the Pagans painted some of their Gods. Is it possible that Men can have such
extravagant thoughts of the most perfect of all Beings? Where is that King so
Negligent as to permit his Subjects the Liberty to act according to their own
humors in his Affairs, in his Armies, in his Exchequer, and leaves it to their
Discretion to Obey and Serve him as their Capricio's lead 'em? How then can
they who boast their Wit presume to say of God, the Wisest of all Beings, what
no Man would adventure to say of a Person merely Mortal?

Besides, were it true, that God took no care of things that concern Religion,
whence comes it to pass, that they who are of this Opinion pay some certain
Homage to the Deity? Wherefore do they sometimes pray to him, since God takes
no notice of what they do, and consequently never troubles himself about their
neglect of his Worship? Their Actions ill agree with their Belief, and cause
those that see 'em to believe that they are of another Opinion. Therefore it
was a good saying of one Diocles, who espying Epicurus in the Temple, cried
out, What a Feast, what a Spectacle is this for me, to see Epicurus in the
Temple? All my Suspicions are Vanished, Piety reassumes her Seat, and I never
more clearly beheld the Grandeur of Jupiter, then now, that I see Epicurus upon
his Knees. Certainly, if this Opinion, which we have refuted were true, there
would be never any more need of paying Worship to a Deity. 'Twas true, that
Epicurus confessed, that the Excellency of Divine Nature deserved of it self,
that some Honor should be given to Her, though she concerned her self no more
with the World, then if there were no share of her in it, and though there were
nothing to be expected by it from Her. But he only spoke thus in conformity to
the Common Sentiments. For, in short, the God of that Philosopher, according to
his System, was a Piece apart from the Workmanship, which a Man might well
suppose not to belong to it, and yet no change befall it. Otherwise it is
certain, that if he had acted and spoken conformably to his Real Opinions, he
would have said in plain Terms, that Piety was a fruitless thing, and he would
never have performed any act of Religion. Cicero therefore rightly understood
him, l. 1. de Not. Deor. There are some People, says he, and have been, before
now, who believe that the Gods never meddle with human Affairs. But if that
Opinion be true, what will become of Piety?

CHAP. VI. Of the Immortality of the Soul.
I Come to those who never much torment themselves, whither there be any
Providence or no, because they hold the Soul to be Mortal, that it perishes
with the Body, or at least, that there is no farther fear of any thing after
this Life; that there will be no Judgment; that all that has been said of
Paradise and Hell are mere Fables, such as the Pagan feigned of their Elisian
Fields, etc. And therefore that all Religions ought to be indifferent to Us;
since we shall be never the more Happy, nor the more Unfortunate, whatever
Religion we Embrace.

It Is a wonderful thing, that there should be found among Christians, Men that
dare deny what the Heathens have acknowledged, and what the most Barbarous of
Nations acknowledge to this Day, as we are given to understand by many
Relations. And this to such a degree, that far from believing that the Soul
perishes, they have rather chosen to hold, some of 'em, that the Soul was from
all Eternity. Others, that when the Soul took leave of one Body it
transmigrated into another, or else was reunited to God; or that it was
transformed into some Angel or Devil; or that it intermixed it self with the
Elements. And this Opinion of the Soul's being Immortal, infused that Courage
and Undauntedness into 'em, which they made appear in Fight, as Bartholinus
observes of the Danes, in his Book of the Antiquity of Denmark.

It Is a thing so much the more surprising, because there are an Infinite Number
of Reasons that convince us of the Immortality of the Soul. I might prove it by
the ardent Desires of Immortality, and by that Idea which we naturally have of
a future Life; an Idea which nothing can Eradicate: So that there is no person
who indepently from all Consideration, and from all Education, but either fears
or hopes something, according as he has either led a Virtuous or Vicious Life,
when he ponders upon that same darksom and gloomy Futurity, wherein the Present
Life sets from our Eyes. But to make out this Truth as clear as day, I argue
thus. If the Soul died, such a Death would happen, either because the parts of
it would come to separate, or because it would destroy it self; or because some
other created Substance would destroy it, or because that God himself would
annihilate it. There can be conceived no other Causes of the Soul's dying. But
it is certain, that there can nothing like this be said of our Soul.

1. It cannot be said, that the Parts of the Soul separate from one another;
because the Soul has no parts. It is a Spirit. And he must be blind that dares
deny it, and assert, that the Soul is no more then Matter, then Wind, or a
Vapor, then a Certain Agitation of subtle Spirits intermixed with the Blood.
It is impossible to conceive, that a Soul which knows it self, and all other
Beings that surround it, that reaches sublime Truths, that knows an Invisible
God, that reflects with it self upon its own thoughts, that measures the Stars,
the Earlh, and Seas, that corrects our Senses and Imagination; that penetrates
into Futurity, and discovers the deepest Secrets, should be nothing but
anagitated Matter; because that nothing is more incomprehensible then a Body
that thinks, that reasons, that deliberates and reflects upon it self. Which
way soever the Parts of a Body are changed, it can never be brought to that
pass by those various Changes or Rangings, that if it knew not it self before,
it should ever come to know it self; nor could it ever be made capable of
having one single thought. With all the Efforts of our Wit, we can never
comprehend what Epicurus said, That our Reasonings and our Idea's are no more
then the Agitation of certain Little Bodies, and that the Circular Motion of an
Atome, may be the Vast and Immense Idea of Infinity. It is also as absurd to
say that a Body knows, as to say that a thought is Red or Green; that the Act
of arguing is Hot or Cold, or that a Metaphisical Speculation is round or
square. It Is clear then, that the Soul is not Material, and that by Consequence
it has no parts; and therefore it cannot dye. No Sickness can destroy it,
because it has no blood, nor humor that can feed it. Neither Sword, nor Fire
can kill it, because it has no parts that Iron can divide, or Fire consume.

2. Neither can the Soul be said to destroy it self; for Right Reason teaches
us, that nothing tends of it self to its own Destruction and Ruin; that every
Being is desirous of it self to remain in the same Condition wherein it is; and
that every Change that happens to any subject proceeds from an Exterior Cause;
besides, that it can never be conceived how a Soul should destroy it self.

3. It cannot be said, that the Soul can be de^troy'd by other Created
Substances; because we ought not to assure our selves of what we cannot
conceive, unless God reveals it to us Now it is impossible to comprehend that a
Crea^ed and finite Substance, can destroy a Spiritual Nature; nor do we know it
to be otherwise by Revelation.

4. It cannot be said, that God destroys and annihilates our Souls. For besides
that the Annihilation of a Being, is one of those things of which there is not
any example in Nature; we have no Revelation that God designs the Annihilation
of Souls. On the contrary, if they with whom we contend, would acknowledge the
Divinity of Scripture, it would be easy for me to produce 'em proofs, which
invincibly make out this immortality which we assert.

This First Argument may be supported by a Second, which is this, That if the
Soul be not immortal, and that there be no other Life after this, we must then
conclude, that it was only given to Man to render him more miserable then the
Beasts, and to be a torment to him. For if Man had not a Rational Soul, the
Remembrance of what is passed, the Consideration of the Present, and the
Apprehension of Futurity would never afflict his Mind; but he would be like the
Beasts, which if we may believe the new Philosophers, feel no pain, or, if they
do feel any, it is only a present pain. If then the Soul be not immortal, it
would have been better that God had made us walking Machines, then to give us a
Soul only to make us Suffer.

It Is said, that Man being so like to Beasts, all dies with him, as it is with
other Creatures. But this Objection is unworthy a Rational Man. It Is true, that
there is some Conformity between a Man and a Beast. A Man is Born and is
subject to Death; he preserves his Life by nourishment, and his Kind by
Generation, and he is subject to the irregularities of Humors. All this is
common with the Beasts. I confess likewise that there is a Conformity which is
disgraceful to Man; and this is that which consists in the disorders of the
Body and Senses, and the Predominancy of the Passions. It Is a shame to Man,
that his Passions overruled him, where Reason ought to Command, and that he is
not the Master of his own Body, nor of all the Motions of it. Nevertheless, all
that can be concluded from hence, is, that Man is Mortal, so far as he has any
thing of Conformity with Beasts. But we must renounce our Reason, if we deny
that Man has not an infinite number of things that exalt him above Brutes; and
in that respect it is, that Man is Immortal.

Although they who believe the Soul to be Mortal, laugh at the Revelation, yet
there are some who make use of a Passage in Ecclesiastes, to confirm their
Opinion. It Is in the Chap. 13.19, 20, 21. The same thing befalls both Man and
Beasts, the death of the One is like the death of the other, both the one and
the other breathe the same Breath, and Man has no advantage above a Beast; for
all is vanity; All goes the same way; All was dust and to dust they shall
return. Who knows whether the breath of Man mounts upward, or whether the
breath of a Beast descends downward.

But if these People who borrow the Authority of Solomon to support their
Error, had read the Book from which they-fetcht their Argument, they would have
seen that that same Great and Wise Prince was far from believing the Soul to be
Mortal. His aim is there, only to withdraw the hearts of Men from the Love of
the World, from their extraordinary Propensity to the Creatures, and all things
that fall under the Senses. On purpose to incline and persuade 'em to Love, to
Fear, and Serve the Lord only. And this is the conclusion which he draws at the
end of his Book from all the Arguments which he produced before. The scope of
the whole Discourse is, Fear God and keep his Commandments; for this is the
whole Duty of Man. Now I leave it to Judgment, Whether if Solomon had thought
that the Soul did not subsist after death, he would have taken so much pains,
to excite Men to the exercises of Piety, for which there was no reward to be
expected, since the Belief of the Immortality of the Soul, is the Foundation of
Piety and Religion.

But for an absolute Conviction, that this Great King did not believe the Soul
to be mortal, there needs no more then to read his Tenth Chapter. From the very
beginning he threatens Men with a Judgment to come, and exhorts 'em to remember
God in the days of their youth, and not to delay their Turning to God till* the
last years of their Lives. A needless Exhortation if the Soul were to dye. For
what reason is there that Man should fear any thing after death, if All were to
dye with him. Afterward in the 9th Verse he tells us in express terms, That
the dust returns to the earth from whence it was taken, but that the Spirit
returns to God that gave it. Is not this an invincible Proof that he believed
the Immortality of our Souls. For how could it be said, that our Spirit should
return to God that gave it; if it subsisted no longer after it was departed
from the Body which it enlivened. Is it possible that a nothing of Soul and
Spirit should return to the Bosom of God?

The wise Solomon so little believed our Soul to be Mortal, that in the same
Chapter, ver. 17. he says, God shall judge the Just and the Unjust; and then
shall be the time for all things, and over all his Works. which he would never
have said, had he had the least Thought that our Soul died with the Body.

So that by the Passage which they allege, he meant no other thing, but that
in respect of the Body, the condition of the Beasts was equal to that of Men,
that the same thing befalls him, and that to judge by outward appearances, when
we see a Man dye, it seems as if he died like a Beast; and that there was no
difference between 'em. And this was the Judgment which the Profane Libertines
in Salomon's time made of it.

But what we have said, is certainly the precise sense of the words. For if
from the saying of Ecclesiastes, Who knows whether the breath of a Beast
ascends upward, and the breath of a Beast descends downward? We must conclude
that if Solomon was ignorant of that which was to happen, he would have spoken
against his own knowledge, seeing that in the 12th Chapter he says expressly,
That the Spirit returns to God. We must also believe, that he questions whether
or no the Breath of Beasts descended downward, since he makes use of the same
Expression, who knows whether the Breath of a Beast, etc. Now is this a thing
that so wise a Man as Solomon could doubt of, or could he be inclined to
observe an Error which few believe, that the Spirit of Beasts is immortal? Tho
we must confess there are some people that are of this Opinion, if we may
believe the Portuguese Relation of the Eastern Aethiopia.

It will be said, perhaps, that the Soul being strictly united with the Body,
it cannot be conceived how the Body should dye, and the Soul be Immortal. But
this Argument is absurd: for were the Soul and Body of the same Nature, there
were some room for this Objection. But in regard they are of a different
Nature, and that the motions of the Soul are absolutely independent from those
of the Body; As for example, when she meditates upon God; Why may we not say,
that it subsists without a Body like the Angels? And so much for this subject;
Let us now examine whether we ought to believe a day of Judgment?

Of the Judgment to come.
IT is impossible to reflect upon the Nature of God, without being convinced of
a Day of Judgment. The Idea which we have of God, obliges him to look upon him
as a Being Supreamly Wise, most Just, most Holy, and most Perfect, But we can
never consider him as a Being most Wise, Just, and Perfect, unless we
understand at the same time, that he is one day to call Men to Judgment, and to
reward or punish 'em, according as they have lived upon the Earth. In short,
How can it be conceived, that a God who made all things, who loves Order and
Holiness to the highest Degree, and who always acts conformably to his Virtues,
can let go unpunished the Contempts which his Creatures put upon his Laws, and
that he can look with the same Glances of his favor upon those that employ
themselves in his Praises, and they that Vomit forth Blasphemies against him;
those that confess his Holy Name, and those that abjure it; upon Virtuous Men,
and the most Infamous Debauchees; upon St. Peter and a Herod; upon St. Paul and
a Nero; a St. John and a Domitian; and yet this is that which we must say of
God, were it true that there would be no Day of Judgment. For that Person must
be very Ignorant of the Affairs and Transactions of this World, who understands
not, that Punishment does not always attend the Transgression, and that the
Wicked are not always Chastised; but that the Innocent are sometimes oppressed,
and the Guilty justified.

Now can we believe, that the Sanctity and Wisdom of God would suffer Virtue to
remain without Reward, or Vice without Punishment, had he not decreed a Day
wherein to render unto every Man according to his Works? No, doubtless, God has
not suffered the Wicked all to go Unpunished, that Men might not believe there
was no Providence; nor does he punish all, that Men might thence infer, there
will be a time of Judgment. The Invisible Hand of God collects together
whatever Man does, whatever he thinks, and whatever he says; all is hoarded up
in the Treasure of his Justice. But after God has gathered all his Magazine, he
will return all back again, and cause to Re-descend on Men, whatever Men sent
up to Heaven.

To this first Argument, in my Opinion, another may be added, which is taken
from the Remorse, the Troubles, and the Agitations of Conscience, when a Man
has committed any Crimes, though secret Transgressions, and such are not to be
discovered. For from whence proceed those Terrors, I beseech ye, if it be not
from an Apprehension of a Judgment, which there is no possibility of avoiding?

It may be objected perhaps, that there are none but the weaker sort that
labor under these Disquiets, these Turmoils and stings of Conscience; little
Children, poor Idiots, and silly Women. But where is that Man, who having sworn
a false Oath, committed a Murder, or any other Crying Act of Injustice, is not
sensible of the sharp Rebukes and Upbraidings of his Conscience? It Is not what
Women only or Children do; this is a question reaches all that have offended
against Heaven.

It may be also farther said, that it is the Apprehension of the Rigor of Human
Laws which causes all those Terrors, not the Dread of any Caelestial Tribunal.
But whence then comes it to pass, that those Monarchs, who set themselves above
the Reach of all Terrestial Justice, and boasted of their Abominations, were
not exempted from these Affrights and Convulsions of self-Conviction; such as
Nero, Tiberius, Caligula Caracalla, who were flattered every day, that they
might do what they pleased, and who never heard a word of the Law of God, of
the Severity of his Justice, or of a Judgment to come?

Others will allege, that these Commotions are the Effect of our Education.
But how comes it, that we neglect and contemn so many other things infused into
us by our Education, but never can deface these deep Impressions? Whence
proceeds it, that all Mankind, with their conjoined Efforts, could never calm
these Tempestuous Agitations, nor dissipate these Fears? Whence comes it to
pass, that upon the approach of Death, the Greatest Libertines, and most
Profane, tremble at the remembrance of their Impiety, and their Horrors still
augment, the nearer they draw toward their end? For, if nothing were to follow
but Annihilation, whence so much Agony.

Lastly, it will be said, that there are many People who feel none of these
Inward Stings. But besides that, it would be a difficult thing to name any of
those Persons whose Consciences are altogether dead and Insensible; and that
others might be thought to be void of all Fear, because they knew how to
conceal it; their Inconsiderable Number can by no means weak'n our Argument; as
it does not follow that the Existence of God is not a Truth beyond Control,
because there are some perhaps that do not believe it.

The Universal Consent, in reference to this Point, of all Nations that have
acknowledged a Deity, is a sufficiently convincing Proof of the Truth of what
we positively assert. For how comes it, that so many Men agree in this
particular, although they differ in so many other Things? Is it not a Proof that
this is one of those Truths of which we come to the knowledge as soon as we
begin to make use of our Reason, and which we cannot withstand without
renouncing the Light of our Intellects? It would be no difficult Thing for me
to prove this Universal Consent, would I but collect together what the Pagans
have written concerning the condition of Souls after Death; of the Judges
before whom they were to appear; of the Punishments and Rewards prepared for
Men in the other World; all that Plato believed upon this Subject; and
Particularly the Plat. de Repub. l. 11.
Recital which he causes one Amnenius to make in his Republic, whom he
introduces returned to Earth twelve Days after his Death, to make a Report of
all that is transacted in Hell, and giving an Account, that the Judges, before
whom the Souls of the Departed appear, place the Just upon the Right hand, and
the Wicked upon the Left, and cause the Virtuous to ascend to Heaven, while the
Latter are forced to descend.

I might add what Strabo relates of the Brachmans among the Indians; what is
recited to us by those who have Traveled into Asia, Africa, and America. And I
might add to all these Proofs, another, which might be drawn from the Opinion
of almost all Nations, that there was a necessary Duty incumbent upon 'em to
appease the Deity; which prevailed so far, tha^ many offered Human Sacrifices
for that purpose.

I add to all these Arguments this Reflection, That if there be no future
Judgment, Virtue is no more then a Fantom, and that it is a Folly to pursue her
Maxims: Men may give themselves over to all sorts of Crimes and Impieties,
without Reluctance; he may be a Traitor, Perjured Wretch, a Knave, a Faithless
Villain, an Adulterer; from this time forward he has no more to do but to make
himself most powerful in Society, and preserve his Life, since he has nothing
to fear after Death, no more then if he had led a Life the most Exact and
Virtuous that could be imagined. But where is that Man to be found that would
not abominate an Opinion, that favors, in this manner, the most Horrid of
Crimes, and most Impious Enormities? Or if it were received, what Man would be
willing to brook that the World should be no other then a wide Receptacle of
only Thieves and Robbers, a mere Chaos, where there was no Curb upon the
Conscience?

CHAP. VIII. Where it is proved, that although we had no certain Proofs of a
Judgment to come, yet we ought to live in such a manner, as if we were assured
of one.
LET us press a little closer upon those against whom we dispute, and put the
Question to 'em, whether they are well assured, that all that is said of the
Day of Judgment and Life to come, are Fables and Stories, as they loudly gave
out. Do they believe it to be a thing contrary to the Virtue of a most Perfect
Being, to punish those who have so often Violated his Laws, those that refused
to obey him, and whom he spared in this Life? Is it less becoming God to be
Just then to be Merciful? I question whether any Body will presume to uphold
it, though there are many who have doubted the Truth of the Day of Judgment; and
others, who upon their Deathbeds have said, That they were going to be
informed of three Things; whether there were a God? whether the Soul were
Immortal? and whether there were a Heaven or Hell? a very Edifying Confession.
I will grant that our Indifferent-Men may not be absolutely convinced by our
alleged Reasons, or by any others which we could produce; However, they must
confess, that there is some cause to Question, whether the Sentiment which they
have embraced be true or no. They believe, that all Remorse of Conscience
proceeds from the Prejudices of Education. But I believe they proceed from an
Apprehension of being punished for what we have committed, and from the fear of
a Judgment, which is not possible for us to avoid. They say, that I am
deceived; yet they ought at least to acknowledge, that it is not so clear that
I am in an Error; but that there may be some reason to doubt whether I am or
no. This then appears to be their Condition, that they know not certainly,
according to their own Confession, whether they shall be Eternally Miserable,
as it is requisite for 'em to acknowledge* that they have deserved to be by
their Transgressions, or whether they shall be annihilated. Good God! What an
Uncertainty is this! Would it not then be better, in the midst of this
uncertainty, to practice that which would gain 'em Eternal Felicity, if it be
true that there is a Paradise, then to do those things that are rewarded with
Eternal Pains, if there be a Judgment, or a Hell? In the choice of Opinions,
which Men know not certainly whether they be true or false, sound Judgment and
right Reason require, that Men should prefer that Steerage that leads 'em to
gain, if truth be on their side, and where there is nothing to lose, if they be
deceived; and on the other hand, reject that by which they can gain nothing,
though they were in the Right, but much to lose, should it prove their Misfortune
to be deluded. This is now our Case. A Man who lives as if he were to be
judged, has nothing to be afraid of, supposing he should be deceived, but every
thing to hope for, if he be not in an Error. He has nothing to be afraid of, if
he has been mistaken, unless it be, that after Death he finds no God, no
Paradise, nor meets any more with himself again. I confess, that this is to be
looked upon as a great Misfortune; but at least he ought no more to be afraid
of any suffering, or that he shall be more Miserable then he who has lived, as
if there were no Judgment to be expected. Both the one and the other must lose
their Being, and all the Consequences of Being, as Pain, Pleasure, Felicity,
and Misery. This is the greatest Mischief that can befall a Good Christian,
supposing him to be in an Error. But if he be not deceived, he may be sure of
enjoying Felicity Eternal, and Infinite Happiness. There is then great Gain
attends him, if he be not deluded; but there is nothing to lose in case he be,
by the Confession of the ungodly themselves. On the other side, a Man who
believes not a last Judgment, and who lives in the unbelief of it, has nothing
to hope for, if he be not deceived, because his greatest Felicity is to be
annihilated; but every thing to be afraid of, if he be under a mistake. For if
at his departure our of the World, he finds there is a God, that there is a
Judgment, or a Hell, there cannot be imagined a Creature more miserable.

Now let any Man judge, whether it be not the Accomplishment of Extravagance,
to make choice of an Opinion, whereby a Man runs the risk of being Eternally
Miserable, and hopes for nothing but Annihilation: And whether, tho there were
no certain proofs of a Judgment to come, it were not better for 'em always to
demean themselves, as if they were to be judged. I say no more; for this is
sufficient to show, that since our Indifferent Men are not assured that their
is no Judgment, they ought not to build upon this Opinion the Indifferency of
Religions.

CHAP. IX. Wherein is examined, whether there be any thing True or False, Just
or Unjust.
AMong those whom I call Indifferent Men, there are some who believe, that
there is nothing True or False, Just or Unjust, so that it is lawful to do
whatever a Man pleases, and to embrace that Religion that agrees most with
their Interests. Who could ever believe that in our Age there should be People
that should go about to introduce such Skepticism into Religion. There is
nothing True, say they: Yet at least, according to their Sentiments, it must be
true, that there is nothing True. Moreover, is it not True, that they who
maintain this Argument, have a Being, that they are Thinking Souls, and
extended Bodies; That it is impossible a Thing should be, and not be at the
same time, that Two and Two make Four, and that the Whole is bigger then the
Part? Certainly, there is no body so extravagant as to deny it. We do not
dispure of this matter, will the Indifferent Men say; but of things that
concern Religion, I grant it. It Is already very much; that they will confess
that there is something True; but still it is not true, that there is a God;
that this God is most Perfect, most Just, Omnipotent, etc. At least, it is no
more True, then to say, there is no God, or, that this God is an imperfect
Being and Unjust.

I do not believe that these Skepticks dare deny it, unless they will speak
against their own Consciences. For then there is nothing so easy as to deny
every thing, and to maintain at Noonday that the Sun is not risen, or that a
Circle is a Square. I am well assured, that if our Pyrrhonians would speak
sincerely, they would acknowledge, that it is also true, that God ought to be
served, and that, in such a manner as is agreeable to his Nature. They are
therefore most grossly mistaken, who assert, that there is nothing of Truth. In
short, every Proposition ought to be True or False. It is True, when it affirms
or denies nothing of a subject, but what we ought to affirm or deny. It is
False, when it affirms or denies what ought not to be affirmed or denied. But
is it not certain, will our Skepticks say, that upon every Subject we may find
out Reasons, pro and con, equally strong and convincing? I grant there are
several Subjects upon which Men may argue variously; insomuch that they shall
be at a great loss which side to take, before they have carefully weighed and
considered the Arguments on both sides. I confess also, that there are some
very evident Truths that have been disputed among Philosophers; among others,
some have denied Motion. Wit loves to sport sometimes, and endeavors to
obscure by Sophisms, Things the most plain and perspicuous: but I deny, that
what is said on both sides is equally solid, and that it is fit to compare
Sophisms with good Arguments. There are some propo^^tions to which we cannot
refuse our assent; and some that we cannot deny without acting against the
Light of our Understanding. There are some that are not so apparent, and others
that openly oppose Reason. All that our Skepticks say, does but teach us, that
we ought to stand upon our Guards, and not to hasten our Judgment with too much
precepitancy, but to suspend it, till Conviction, and our Understanding force
us from that Hesitation. So that I extremely approve the Rules set down by a
Philosopher of our Age, who would have us, when we propose any thing, not only
carefully to examine the Thing, and to determine nothing till after we have well
thought upon it, but also to see.

1. Whether it be not true, that we believe the thing in dispute for no other
Reason, but because our Masters have so taught us. 2. Whether it be not True,
that we believe the thing upon no other account, but only because it was
approved by a great number of Persons that have gained a Repute in the World.
3. Whether it be not True, that we believe the thing, by reason of long Use and
Custom; that is to say, Because we have such an Idea in our heads from our
Education and our Infancy, and for that we judge that several things were True,
because they were conformable to that Idea. 4. Whether it be not True, that we
conclude the Truth in Dispute, from a supposed Principle, and such a one which
we never examined. 5. Whether it be not True, that we believe the Thing, only
because it is a Novelty.
These are the Precautions which we ought to take; but it is an extravagancy, to
maintain that there is nothing True. We haturally all of us love Truth, and we
desire to find it out. Is it then to be thought that this Desire should be
Engrafted in all Men, if there were nothing True or False?

What I assert of Truth, I also speak of Justice or Injustice; that is to say,
that there is something of Just or Unjust, and that there is a necessary
distinction between Good and Evil, between that which is Honest, and that which
is not so.

In short, were there no reason for this distinction, it must be said, that
Paracides and Blasphemers, to speak Properly, Commit no Crime; that it is the
same thing whether we Hate or Love God; whether we Honor our Parents, or Cut
their Throats.

Now I beseech ye, Can such Sentiments enter our Thoughts without Horror? They
will say, perhaps, that this Horror proceeds from the Prejudices of Education.
But if it be so, How comes it to pass, that the same Horror is Universal among
all People, tho their Education be very different?

They will likewise object, that Legislators, and Governors of States and
Kingdoms have taken great Care to infuse into the People, that there is
something of Just and Unjust. But is it probable, that those Legislators could
have agreed so exactly without consulting together, to impose the same things
upon so many different People? That they were so sufficiently powerful, as to
engrave their Precepts in the bottom of the Peoples Hearts; or so politic and
cunning, as to inspire into 'em that niceness, as to make it a scruple of
Conscience to disobey 'em? Or how is it to be imagined, that so vast a number
of People would entertain and uphold Laws that recompense Virtue, and punish
Vice, but which are otherwise so very severe and irksom, unless there were a
Natural Light, which makes all Men agree in the point of their Justice.

Had not Man a Natural Idea, and a Natural Love of Duty, Men might be made
believe in that particular, whatever Imposture pleased; and they might be
persuaded, that Ingratitude, Persidiousness, and Blasphemy, are Virtues which
ought to be esteemed; Nevertheless, nothing is more Impossible.

It will be said, that several Nations have submitted to Bad Laws as well as
good. But certain it is, that never any Legislators could impose those Laws
which were altogether bad. The Lawgivers concerned, still intermixed 'em among
the good ones, and endeavor to support 'em with good Principles, already in
vogue among the People: They have also made use of Force to establish or
preserve 'em; so that submission to unjust Constitutions is a proof of the
Necessity of those which are just.

But let us press a little closer upon our Pyrrhenians. Either they are bound
to obey their Reason, or they are not. If they are not obliged, their Reason
stands 'em in no stead, and it is in Vain that Nature has made 'em Rational
Creatures. If they are bound, they do ill when they withdraw their Obedience
from it. Therefore there is a difference between Good and Evil. It will be
objected, no doubt, that Reason dictates to one Man that the Thing is Good, to
another, that it is Bad, so that it depends purely upon humor. But certain it
is, that there are some things good, and others bad, by the Consent of all
Mankind. So that in that respect, our Reason is beyond all Control. Moreover,
the Force of that Objection reaches no farther then to prove, that all Men have
not the same parts; and that they do not all distinguish Good and Evil as they
ought to do. But they are not able to prove from thence that there is nothing
Just or Unjust: On the other side, it is a certain proof, that Men have
naturally an Idea, that there is some thing Just, and some thing which is not
so.

Let us then put this Question to our Skeptics, whether the Creature owes
Nothing or Something to his Creator? No Man durst hitherto maintain, that the
Creature owes him. Nothing. If any thing, he is obliged to performances, and if
he do not pay what he owes, he does ill. There are some things, which are good
in themselves, and others which are not so; and therefore it is to build a Sandy
Foundation, to pretend to prove that Religions are Indifferent, because there
is nothing by Nature Good or Evil.

I shall add but one word more in Opposition to those who assert, that to speak
properly, there is nothing Just but what agrees with our Interest, or with the
Public Benefit. This Opinion is very absurd, 1. Because, that Right Reason
obliges us frequently to act against our own Interests, and Commands us to do
those things that prove mischievous and hurtful to us, as it prohibits us from
other things that might redound to our Benefit, yet after we have followed the
Dictates of Right Reason, receive a great deal of Comfort and Satisfaction for
so doing. 2. Because, that if Profit and Advantage were to be the Chief Rule of
our Actions, our first Beginning and last End, there would be no Truth nor
Sincerity between Man and Man, it would be in vain that Nature has made us
Sociable Creatures, and it would behove us rather to say, that Men were Created
to be Robbers and Poisoners, when their Interest required it; which is the most
Horrid thing in the World. 3. Because, that if Profit were to be the Rule of
all our Actions; and if the Idea of Honesty were a mere Illusion, all Men in
the World would never distinguish as they do between Profitable and Honest; and
Men the most Corrupt would never be sensible from time to time, of the Force of
that Idea. For this is a convincing Proof, that this Idea is one of the First
Establishments of Nature.

CHAP. X. Against those who believe, that the Truth is Concealed.
IN the Crowd of our Indifferent-Men, there are some who dare not positively
maintain, that there is nothing true; but they believe that Truth is plunged in
Democritus's Well, and that it is entirely Concealed from Men; and that
therefore, it is no great matter what Religion we Embrace, because we know not
where Truth resides.

But what we have already said in the foregoing Chapter, shows the Absurdity of
this Opinion. For we have sufficiently proved, that all these Truths are not
concealed from Men, but that there are a great Number, who are clearly
Convinced, that there is a God, that he is most Wise, Almighty, most Perfect,
that we ought to serve him, and that we ought to do as we would be done by.

In short, it would be a strange thing if there were no Truths; that God had
given us understanding capable to reach and apprehend 'em, and yet that he
should not have revealed 'em to us, or that he should not have fixed a kind of
Relation between those Truths and our Understandings, to know when they meet,
and when they do not meet, together. In like manner, it would be a surprising
thing, that God should have Created Light, and given Men Eyes to see it, yet
never produce it into the World. The Idea which we have of God, is, that he is
a Being both good and gracious by doing good. Now what Idea can we have of a
God that has made Creatures, and yet would conceal himself from 'em; who has
endu'd 'em with Reason to understand Truth, yet had not revealed to 'em those
Truths which it most concerned 'em to know?

If it be objected, that there are an infinite number of Truths which Man can
never dive into by the Light of Nature, we must be forced to grant it, because
we cannot deny it. It Is not to speak of the Mysteries of the Trinity and
Incarnation, etc. which the Christian Religion has taught us, and into which
the wit of Man can never penetrate; there are several other Truths less
difficult to apprehend; which Men however had been altogether ignorant of, had
it not been for Revelation. For Example, Men might naturally know, by the Light
of Reason only, that there is a God, and that this God ought to be adored, but
he knows not after what manner this Sovereign Being will be adored. He knows
that he is a Sinner, but he knows not by the Light of Nature, which way to make
his Peace with God. He may know that his Soul is Immortal; but he knows not
what will become of his Soul: nor had the Pagans in this Particular any other
then confused Idea, which may be well judged by what the Emperor Adrian said.
And it appears by the Discourses of Socrates, that Wise Philosopher, before his
Death, that he was no better informed upon this Subject then the Emperor.

It is certain then, that Revelation is necessary; but we assert also, that
this Revelation has been made; and that God has manifested to Men whatever is
requisite for 'em to know, to the end they may be happy; and this is that
Revelation which we meet with in the Old and New Testament.

CHAP. XI. Of the Divinity of the Scripture.
IN regard there are several Persons that will not acknowledge the Books of the
Old and New Testament to be Divinely inspired, it is necessary to settle the
Confirmation of this Truth before we go any farther; and this is that which we
shall succinctly undertake in this Chapter, until we shall have accomplished it
more at large, with God's permission, in another Treatise.

Nor do I believe it to be a thing so difficult to demonstrate the Divinity of
the Scriptures, as at first it seems to be. For either they must say, that God
has not made himself known, or that he has revealed himself, but that we know
not where this Revelation is: or else they must confess, that it is to be found
in the Scriptures. They cannot say, that God has not made himself known, for we
have proved in the foregoing Chapter, that they cannot maintain it, without
having a very unworthy Idea of God. They cannot say, that God has revealed
himself, but that they know not where this Revelation is. For wherefore should
God have revealed himself, if the Book be not known wherein he has declared his
Will to Men? Therefore they must confess, that God has made himself known in
the Books of the Old and New Testament. For they cannot tell us of any other;
because there is no other which has more the Characters of Divinity; and those
Characters are so visible, that he must willingly hoodwink his own Eyes that
cannot see 'em.

In short, what could be desired in a Book of which God was the Author, then
what is found in the Sacred Writings? Who is there that would not look upon it
as a Divine Work? A Book that teaches us Truths so Extraordinary, so Sublime,
that Men could never otherwise have been able to have invented; Yet such as
have a strict Coherence and Tie however with the Common Notions, which Nature,
or rather the God of Nature has imprinted in our Minds; and which teaches 'em
in a manner so lofty and so plain at the same time, that though there seem not to
appear in it any Ornaments of Vulgar Eloquence, yet there is all that human Art
can afford Us; a Sovereign Authority which Imprints respect in the Soul of him
that reads it, and a winning Facility, which attracts and captivates their
Attention.

A Book, that gives us a greater Idea of God, then can be conceived; that
describes him to us as a Spirit, that has no Communication with matter, an
Infinite Spirit that is every where, an Almighty Being, that does all things;
that Created the World, and sustains it by his Providence; who is the Ruler of
all Events, the absolute Master of all things, the Judge of Men and Angels.

A Book, which clearly Unfolds to us, what Human Reason would never have
discovered but very imperfectly, which never pronounces any Censures, nor gives
any Censures, but what the Conscience finds to be most just; that promises
nothing but what the Conscience desires; that threatens nothing but what the
Conscience dreads: and does it not thence appear, that the Author of the
Conscience is the Author of this Book.

A Book, that Humbles Man before God, by giving him to understand his
emptiness, his profound wretchedness, his natural Corruption and Sin: that
romages the very Secrets and Entrenchments of our Souls, to show us our
concealed Vices, our Vanity, our Pride, our Self-Love, our Love of the World,
our Love of Revenge, the Seeds of Incredulity and Profaneness.

A Book, that combats all sorts of Sins, not one excepted, not so much as the
slightest; and several that were unknown to the most austere Sects of
Philosophers; not so much as a Glance or a Thought escapes it; it assails all
the Motions of Concupiscence, and all Appearances of Evil.

A Book, that is not contented to s^bscribe us an exterior Holiness, but which
requires that our Souls should be as pure as our Bodies, and that we should
exalt our Virtue to an Heroic Degree, and be like God.

A Book, that requires that we should have no other Rule but the Law and Will
of God, and no other end but his Glory, and which exacts from us, that we
should principally, and above all things in the World, love the Author of our
Being, and that we should love our Neighbor as our Selves.

A Book, that has nothing of Contradiction in all the Parts of it; and which
presents to our Eyes the Idea of a Wisdom, like to that which is observed in
this vast Universe; tho they who wrote it, never had any commun^ication one
with another, but were separated by long Intervals of Ages, which shows that
they were all inspired with the same Spirit, and that they had a Sovereign
Master over 'em, who precided over the whole work.

A Book, which has foretold extraordinary Events before they happened; and with
so much certainty, that you would rather take it to be a recital of things
past, then a prediction of things to come: which shows us, that it springs from
a Spirit, before which all things are present, which sees all things, and which
clearly shines in the darkness of Futurity, in regard that nothing happens
which it has not ordained.

A Book, which having discovered to Man, that he is Criminal, and Guilty before
an Infinite Majesty, which must be atton'd, teaches him afterward the true
means by which he was reconciled to his Judge, and shows him a Divine Person,
that descends from Heaven to take upon him Human Nature like his own, who under
that Nature suffers a cruel Death; who by that Death satisfies the Justice of
God, extinguishes the Heat of his Wrath, and makes an Atonement for our sins,
which the Blood of Bulls and Goats, nor all the Purifications of the Law were
never able to expiate.

A Book, that appeases all the troubles of the Soul, which all the Books in the
World were never able to do; which secures us against all our Terrors, caused
by the Confideration of our Sins, the thoughts of Death, and of a Judgment to
come, and fills us with that Peace and Comfort, which neither can be expressed
nor conceived.

A Book, wherein the Doctrine contained supplies all the necessities of the
Soul, and satisfies all her desires; for there is no question to be made, but
that a Book, where our Soul, whose Desires are Infinite, finds plenary
satisfaction, must be the Production of a Deity, who being only able to know
what we would desire, is only able himself alone to content us.

A Book, the Doctrine of which produces such extraordinary Effects, that when
it is once received into our Hearts, there is nothing able to shake our
Constancy and our Faith; no, not the most cruel of Torments.

A Book, whose Doctrine has been received into the World, maugre all the
Efforts of the Devil, thoo it were only divulged by Fishermen and
Toll-gatherers, and for Enemies met with the most Eloquent Orators, the most
refined Philosophers, most potent Kings and Emperors, who persecuted, and put
to the most cruel of Torments, those that preached it.

A Book, that has been confirmed by an Infinite-number of Miracles, and by the
Blood of a vast number of Martyrs, of all Orders, of both Sexes, of all
Conditions, of all Ages.

Lastly, A Book, that to this very day preserves it is pristin Veneration, tho
no endeavors have been omitted to obliterate it, while so many Works have
perished, which one would have thought would have endured as long as the Sun.

If this be not the work of God, let 'em tell us, what is a Divine Book, or let
'em show us any others, wherein all these Characters meet together. But that is
more then ever they will be able to do.

It Is certain then, that God is revealed to Men and that this Revelation is
found in the Books of the Old and New Testament.

CHAP. XII. Of the Clearness of the Holy Scripture.
THere are some Men, who acknowledge the Divinity of the Scripture, but they
say, it is so obscure, that no Body can discover by it, which is the true
Religion; that there never was any Heretic but vaunted of the ^earing his
Paradoxes, upon the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles. So that no Man can
be confident from thence, what Religion to fix upon because all the Religions
in the World are not equally to be proved by the Holy Scripture. According to
which Opinion we may as well say, that the Oracles of God are like those of the
Sybills, and that it fares with the Holy Ghost as with the Apollo of the
Pagans, whose Answers were so obscure, that they might well be taken in two
opposite Senses.

I do not, however, believe that they who are of this Opinion, will presume to
maintain, that Paganism and Mahometism can be proved by Script^^^s, or that
Judaism is to be found in the Books of the New Testamon^. And therefore they
must acknowledge, that it ought not to be an indifferent Thing to 'em, whither
they be Turks, Pagans or Jews, but that they ought to embrace the Christian
Religion. It Is one point gained then, that we have brought 'em to be
Christians, but we must not stop there. Certainly they who assert the Scripture
to be so obscure, that they cannot thereby apprehend which is the true
Religion, have a strange Idea of God. For God has given us the Scriptures to
some end: this they cannot deny, unless they will doubt of the Wisdom of the
most perfect Being. This End he teaches us himself by his Servants. All things,
says St. Paul, Romans 15.4. were written for our Instruction, to the end, that
through Patience and Consolation in the Holy Scriptures, we might have hope.
And the same Apostle declares, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. That the whole Scripture is
Divinely inspired, and properly for Teaching, Convincing, Correcting and
Instructing according to Justice, to the end the Man of God may be
accomplished, and perfectly instructed in every good work. But I beseech ye,
what Instruction, what Consolation can a Man receive from a Book so obscure as
the Scripture, if what our Indifferent Men assert, be true? Or can a work of
that nature accomplish a Man of God? It Is the Pleasure of God that we should
have recourse to his Word, as to the Rule of our Faith and our Manners; the
Apostles Anathematize those that teach any other Doctrine, and command the
Faithful not to hold communication with such sort of People, and pronounce the
Peace of God upon all those that walk according to that Rule. But how is it
possible that this Book can s^rve for a Rule, if it be so extremely obscure?
and why should Anathema's be thundered out against all those that teach any of
her Doctrine then what is contained therein, if we cannot precisely know what
it is that it teaches?

Either God could not clearly reveal himself to Men, or else it was not his
Pleasure so to do. Can it be faid, that he could not? What is Impossible to the
Father and Author of Light? who himself has placed the Sun and the Stars in the
Firmament, to enlighten the whole World? Can it be said, that it was not his
Pleasure? How! Would not the Father of Mercy, whose Goodness is Infinite,
vouchsafe to make his Will clearly known to Men, to the end they may pay him
faithful Obedience? If so, wherefore does he threaten pains Eternal to those
that disobey him, and believe not in his Word?

I must confess, there are many things obscurely delivered in Holy Scripture.
It contains peculiar Depths and Mysteries. And it was the Pleasure of God it
should be so, to humble our Lofty Reason pufft up with Knowledge; to waken our
Minds, that fall asleep when we meet with no difficulty; to oblige us to Pray,
Meditate, and Labor; make us the more earnestly wish for that day when we
shall be filled with the knowledge of all things the most obscure. But if there
be things obscure and difficult in Scripture, there are others that are most
clear and easy. It proportions it self to all, and offers it self to all.
There is in it a Simplicity that debases it self to the most Simple, and a
Loftiness that exercises the most Learned. All indifferently drain from it; but
far from being able to empty it by filling our selves, we always leave behind
Abysses of Knowledge and Wisdom, which we adore, without being able to
comprehend 'em. Thus the Loftiness of it astonishes the Haughty; it awakes the
Sloathful by the Importance of the Matter concerning which it treats; The
Difficulties contained in it exercise the Industry, and it nourishes the Wise
with its Illuminations, according to the saying of St. Austin; which is that
which Saint Gregory very well explains in his Letter to the Archbishop of
Seville, when he sent him his Morals upon Job. As the word of God, says he,
encloses Mysteries able to exercise the Wits of the most clear-sighted, so it
also contains clear and evident Truths, proper to feed the simple and less
Learned. Outwardly it has wherewithal to give Milk to Babes, and within her
Secret Folds and Concealments sufficient to ravish with admiration the
sublimest of Human Wits; like a River so shallow in some places that a Lamb may
wade over, and in others deep enough for an Elephant to Swim. And in the
Preface to the 20th Book of his Morals, he thus expresses himself.

The Scripture is incomparably superior to all other Doctrine; not only for
that it brings us Tidings of nothing but certain Truths; not only because it
calls us to a Heavenly Country, because it changes the Hearts of those that
read it, by withdrawing 'em from Terrestrial Desires, and inflaming 'em with a
Desire of Heaven; but also for that at the same time that it exercises the more
Intelligent and perfect with Obscure Texts, it Caresses and Comforts the more
imperfect and feeble Understandings with the sweetness and easiness of its
precepts. It is neither so obscure as to scare Men from reading it, nor so
easy to be understood, as to incur Contempt. The more Familiar it is, the less
it disrelishes: the more Men Meditate upon it, the Higher Value they put upon
it. It assists our Souls by the Simplicity of Words, and the Sublimity of the
Sense which is therein contained; and seems to grow and exalt it self by
degrees, as they that read it raise themselves and grow in Understanding. So
that the most Ignorant, and they that have the meanest parts understand
something in it, and the Learned always meet with Novelty. To which we may add
what St. Austin says, That it proposes to us whatever is most necessary for the
Conduct of our Lives; that it explains and illustrates it self, by expounding
clearly to us in some parts, what it delivers but obscurely in others. This
pious Bishop every where insinuates, that the Scriptures manner of teaching is
proportionable to all sorts of Conditions, and to the Understanding of Readers
the most simple, and of meanest Capacities; that it invites all Men by a plain
and simple Discourse to seek therein, wherewith to nourish themselves with
apparent Truths, and wherewith to exercise themselves in the discovery of those
that are concealed; that if it puts to shame the Vanity of the Haughty, by
reason of the sublimity of it, to which they cannot reach; if the Depth of it
affrights and terrifies those that strive to penetrate into it; it nourishes by
Virtue of those Truths wherewith it is replenished, the most exalted Souls, and
affords Children that Food which is proper for 'em, through the Familiarity
wherewith it speaks.

To be convinced of the Clearness of the Scriptures, there needs no more then
to reflect upon what is taught us therein. Does it not clearly teach us to know
an Eternal God, sovereignly Good, most Wise, most Potent, and most Just, who
has expanded the Heavens, and laid the Foundations of the Earth by his Almighty
Power; who sustains all things by his Word, who has created Men and Angels, who
preserves 'em, and and is to judge 'em? Does it not clearly show us the
profound Misery of Man, his Corruption, his Sin, his inability to free himself
from the sad Condition he is in? Does it not clearly show us what Christ has
done for us, to deliver us out of this Inconvenience; how he came into the
World to put on our Nature; how he died for our Sins; how he rose for our
Justification; how he ascended Gloriously into Heaven, to prepare a Place for
us; and how he is to return to open our Tombs, and to raise us to his Eternal
Sanctuary? Does it not clearly tell us what Blessings this Divine Savior has
merited for us, Pardon for our Sins, our Peace with God, the Gift of his
Spirit, Salvation, Eternal Redemption, and Infinite Glory? Lastly, Does it not
clearly show us, what God requires from us, Faith, Repentance, Hope, Charity,
Patience, and all those Virtues which we ought to put in Practice, and all
those Vices from which we ought to abstain.

Lot Men judge after all this, whether they have any reason to accuse the Holy
Scriptures of Obscurity. Certainly, if there be any obscure Places, it ought to
be acknowledged, that whatever is necessary for our Knowledge is clearly
explained. So that it is the same thing with the Holy Scripture as with the Book
of Nature; both contain things which all the World may know; others require
Application and Study; others cannot be comprehended.

But is it not true, say our Indifferent Men, that all Heresies may be proved
by Scripture? I confess that the Heretics boast their drawing their Opinions
from Divine Sources; the more cunningly to deceive those that they have a mind
to seduce. Such were Arrius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Macedonius, Socinus, and an
Infinite Number of others. But though these Heretics vaunted their having
asserted nothing but what they extracted from Divine Writings; it is false that
their Proofs are solid; and that they have any reason to infer from thence that
the Scripture is so obscure, that all sorts of Opinions may be drawn from
thence. This only ought to engage us to take all the Care imaginable to
understand it aright; not to pursue our own Prejudices; not to expound the
Scripture according to our own Passions. Not to read it, on purpose to pick out
Opinions which we have already invented; but such as we ought to have; to
examine well the Meaning of the Holy Spirit, and the end which he proposes to
himself; to compare Scripture with Scripture; and not to study it with a design
to set up new Opinions to signalize our selves in the World, and gain
Disciples; but only with a prospect of advancing in the Knowledge of the
Mysteries of our Salvation, and in the Study of Piety.

CHAP. XIII. Against those who believe, that although the Truth be clearly
explained in Scripture, yet that it ought to be indifferent to us what Religion
we embrace.
WE have hitherto disputed against those that will not acknowledge the Divinity
of Scripture, or who would make it useless to us. Now our main Business is, to
contend with Those who agree, that the Truth is sufficiently explained in
Scripture; but still they believe that we have no occasion to torment our
selves about the Choice of a Religion; or at least, they live as if they
believed so. This sort of Indifferent Men is very numerous; so that it is but
just, that we should apply our selves a little to refute 'em.

I draw my first Argument against 'em from hence, that we ought always to
prefer Truth before a Lie; and that we ought always to embrace that Truth, when
we have once attained to the Knowledge of it. For if it be so, then it follows
of necessity, that all Religions ought not to be Indifferent.

It will be no difficult Thing to apprehend the Force of this Inference, if it
be but considered, that all Religions, being contrary the one to the other, and
still accusing each other of Falsehood, it must be necessarily concluded, that
Truth is one of these Religions, and Falsehood in the Rest. If then we ought to
prefer Truth before Falsehood, we ought to abide in that Religion where Truth
shall be found, and avoid all the rest as so many Sects.

This Proposition, that Truth is always to be preferred before Falsehood, and
that we ought to embrace the Truth when we have once attained to the Knowledge
of it, seems to have no need of Proofs. For where is that Man who will presume
to aver that Truth is to be preferred before Falsehood? Had God revealed to us
which Sect of Philosophers is the True one, there is no Person but would
willingly submit. It Is for the finding out these Philosophical Truths, that the
Learned read with so much Application what the Ancient Philosophers have
written, and what the Moderns have discovered, and it is with that design that
they make so many Experiments at this Day. Now then, if it be true in things
that concern Philosophy, and which are of no use in Reference to Salvation; How
much more ought we to lave Truth in matters of Religion, where our Sovereign
Good lies at Stake. More especially, since God has taught us what is true, what
is false, what pleases, and what offends him. The Love of Truth seems to be
born with us, so that even Children love it. 'Twas so highly esteemed among the
Pagans, that their Authors make no Scruple to assert, that it is the Richest
Present that God ever made Mankind; that it renders Mortals equal to God; and
that if a Soul and Body were to be attributed to the Deity, Truth must be
allowed him for the Soul, and Light for the Body. They also deemed themselves
so Happy, when they found it out, that they offered Hecatombs to their Gods, to
return 'em Thanks for the Discovery of so precious a Treasure. Who would not be
astonished then, that in the Christian World, there should be persons so daring
as to maintain, that in Religion Falsehood might be sometimes preferred before
Truth, though upon all other occasions of Life they prefer Truth before
Falsehood, and take no delight in being deceived. Their Crime is also so much
the Greater, for that God is the Author of Truth, and the Devil the Father of
Lies: so that no Man can prefer Falsehood before Truth, but he must prefer the
Devil before God; which is not a thing to be thought of without Horror.

Our Indifferent Men, that very well perceive the force of this Argument, make
use of all their Wit to answer it.

I. They say in the First place, that there is no Religion, which has not some
Truths; and therefore They, who upon some occasions, and as their Interests
require, embrace new Religions, cannot be said to embrace Falsehood before
Truth, because they always meet with the Choicest and most Essential Truths in
all sorts of Religious Societies.

This first Answer, or rather Evasion, is very absurd; for the preferring
Religions where there are some Truths, but withal very great and gross Errors,
before a Religion which is pure, and which teaches us all the most necessary
Truths, is a manifest preferring of a Lie before Truth; and this is that which
our Indifferent Men do.

Now that they may see how much they are deceived, I beseech 'em to consider,

1. That those Truths which are observed in all Religions, are stifled in
certain Sects, with an innumerable company of Errors, which are difficult to be
discovered.

2. That those General Truths, to speak properly, constitute no particular
Religion.

Every Religion, if I may be permitted to say so, has a Genus, and a
Difference. The Genus of all Religions are those principal Truths which are
known to all Men, but that which makes the distinction, is either the Teaching
of other Truths or Errors. So that the Principal Truths are not the Reason that
a Religion is such a Religion; but either Errors, and then the Religion is
false; or other Truths, which are not joined to the former, and then the
Religion is True. As that which makes a Man to be a Man, is not his Animosity,
or his being a Creature; that is his Genus: but it is his Reason which makes him
a Rational Creature. So they who prefer a false Religion before a True one,
cannot excuse themselves by saying, That that same very Religion has some
Truths; because those Truths, as I have said already, to speak properly,
constitute no Religion.

But our Indifferent Men will say, that if we ought always to prefer Truth
before a Lie, we ought then to quit a Religion wherein we find some Errors.

I answer First, That if there be any Religion purer then that which we
profess, we ought not to be ashamed of quitting our Religion, to embrace
another. But in the second place, I say, we ought to distinguish between the
Errors. There are some which are Capital and Mortal, which creep into our
Worship and our Manners; which discompose and overturn the very foundations of
Christianity; but there are others which are not altogether incompatible with
Piety; as there are likewise two sorts of Truths; the one which are of highest
importance, of which we cannot be ignorant and yet be Saved; others which are
not so necessary; so that without the knowledge thereof, we may one day obtain
Salvation. It Is certain, that we ought to abandon a Communion, which destroys
Essentially the Service of God, and which continues obstinare in Errors,
directly opposite to the Salvation of Mankind. But we may be steadfast to a
Religion wherein are only some scattered Errors of small Importance, contenting
our selves with not approving those Errors; as in civil Society we refrain from
Familiarity with those persons whom we find to be notoriously vicious, because
that a Correspondency with such persons would be a ^ain to those that make
Profession of Honor and Virtue. But with all mildness we bear with the defects
of those persons, who not being perversely wicked, retain the Tinctures only of
Human frailty.

2. In the second place they say, that we ought to prefer Truth before a Lie,
but that we ought to perfer Peace before Truth. This is an Evasion that meets
with no better luck then the former? It Is true that God loves Peace, but such a
Peace as is conjoined with Truth, because he is no less the God of Truth, then
the God of Peace, and for that Peace without Truth is a conspiracy against God;
so that War is to be preferred before a Peace that separates us from God. This
is no more then what the Pagans themselves acknowledged; and if they have said
that Peace is the most excellent. Thing in the World; they have likewise
asserted, that we ought never to commit an unjust or base Act for the enjoyment
of it. The love of Peace ought only to incline us to tolerate those
Correspondences that are not guilty of Capital Errors, and such as are
incompatible with our Salvation. And therefore we cannot consent with those
ancient Authors, who made such a noise about Innocent Opinions, as if they had
overturned all Christianity. As Philastius, who looked upon those as very great
Heretics, who attributed the Epistle to the Hebrews to St. Clement and St.
Barnahas, and not to St. Paul; and those who did not believe that David
composed the 150 Psalms. We cannot approve Pope Victor, who for a Petty
Question excommunicated the Churches of Asia, by that means dismembring the
Great and Glorious Body of Jesus Christ; which was very well represented to him
by Ireneus; and we believe, as that Bishop did, that for the sake of Peace it
is much better to bear with the petty defects of the Church, then to violate
the Peace of it by correcting the Church; in regard the Mischief of the Rupture
is incomparably much greator then the Fruit which is to be reaped from the
Censure of such an Error. But the love of Peace ought never to oblige us to
prefer Communions, full of Errors, before another which is much more pure;
because nothing ought to be dearer to us then Truth, and for that we ought
arwaps to remember what St. Paul says, that we never ought to do Evil that Good
may come of it. To which we may add, That Truth of it self is not contrary to
Peace, and that it is only by Accident, that it is the occasion of Wars and
Commotions. It Is not Truth, but the Corruption of Men, which causes War, and is
the Fuel of Discord.

3. They will say in the Third Place, that God always Pardons the Good
Intention, and therefore he will not deny Salvation to those who prefer Peace
before Truth, because they think they please God in doing so. This Third
Objection is refuted very easily by the same Scripture, which teaches us, that
a Good Intention is not sufficient to justify our Actions before God, when we
do that which he has forbid us to do. And to be convinced of this, there needs
no more then to read the History of Saul. God had commanded him to exterminate
the Amalekites in such a manner as he enjoined him: Nevertheless he spared the
best of the Oxen, and the best of the Sheep to Sacrifice to the Lord. One would
have thought there had been nothing blameworthy in this Action. Nevertheless,
Samuel gives him a terrible Reprimand. Has the Lord, said He, as great
delight-in Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord?
Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken, then the fat of Rams.
For Rebellion is the sin of witchcraft, and stubborness is as Iniquity and
Idolatry; because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejecte?
Thee from being King. Thus you see how his good Intention was rewarded. To this
we may add the History recited in the 1st of Kings chap. 13. A man of God was
sent to Bethel to prophecy against the Altar of Jeroboam; He performed exactly
the Command which had been given him; and because that God had forbid him to
eat and drink in that Country, he would not enter into Jeroboam's Palace. But
meeting an old Prophet in his return, who assured him that an Angel had
commanded him from the Eternal, to carry him back to his House, and to give him
to eat, the Man of God suffered himself to be overruled, and went and Dined
with the Prophet. He thought that that was no violation of the First Order he
had received, because he made no question of the Truth of what was told him:
His Intention was only to obey the Eternal. Nevertheless, God called this
Action Rebellion; and at the same moment caused the Old Prophet, that had
brought him back, to pronounce to him the Sentence of his Death, which was
afterward executed by a Lion. To teach us, not only that there is no Authority
which ought to oblige us to violate the Commands of God, but also, that our
Good Intentions are not sufficient for our Justification. The History of Vzzah
described, Sam. 2.6. confirms the same Truth. This Man, seeing that the Oxen
that drew the Ark, drew it all a one side, and fearing that August Symbol of
the Presence of God should fall, stretched forth his Hand to hold it. There is
no question to be made, but that his Intention was Good. Nevertheless God smote
him, and he died upon the spot, because that none but the Priests and Levites
were to touch the Ark. After all this, let our Indifferent Men flatter
themselves with their good Intentions. The Jews believed they offered a
pleasing sacrifice to God, in putting the Christians to Death. But can it be
imagined, that their good Intentions were acceptable to God? Saint Paul's
Intention was good when he persecuted the Church; but was that Intention
sufficient to justify him? He does not think so himself, since he acknowledges
his Sin, and Confesses that if God had given him Grace, 'twas the most
Illustrious Proof of his Clemency. 1 Timothy 1.

CHAP. XIV. Three Arguments against the Indifferent-Men.
I Draw a Second Argument against these who defend Indifferency of Religions
from hence, that the Scripture causes us to look upon it as a great Crime, for
a Man to abandon a Truth to the knowledge of which he has once attained; and as
a Crime that ought to be severely-punish'd. For it would never speak in that
manner if it were true, that it was lawful to Sacrifice Truth for Peace. There
needs no more then to read the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 6.
v. 4, 5.6. For is it possible for those who were once enlightened and have
tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
have tasted the Good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come; If they
shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance: Seeing they Cruoifie to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame. Can People be
painted out in blacker Colors then to compane 'em with those that Crucify the
Son of God? They are also much more to be blamed; for they who Nailed to the
Cross the Savior of the World, had no knowledge of him; but these Men Crucify
him, well knowing who he is. The first put him to Death in Mortal Flesh, but
the Second Crucify him in Glory and Immortality. The Apostle shows us yet more
clearly the Enormity of their Sin, and the punishment which they deserve in the
Tenth Chapter of the same Epistle. For if we Sin, says he, wilfully, after we
have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
Sins; but a certain fearful looking for Judgment, and fiery Indignation which
shall devour the Adversaries. He that despised Moses's Law died without Mercy,
under two or three Witnesses. Of how much surer punishment, suppose ye, shall
he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has
counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy Thing,
and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace? For we know him that has said,
Vengeance belongs unto Me, and I will recompense says the Lord. And again, The
Lord shall Judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of
the Living God. Is it possible that St. Paul should thus discourse, if there
were any Reasons to induce a Man to forsake the Truth, without stirring, and
without being afraid of the Judgments of God.

But because the Apostle speaks here of those that quit the Truth voluntarily,
and for that perhaps it may be thought, that he discourses not here of those
who forsake the Religion which they think most pure, to avoid the Mischiefs
they might suffer by it, but only of those who quit their Religion without any
Necessity, there needs no more then to read the following Verses, where he
exhorts the Faithful Hebrews to suffer as they had done, rather then renounce
the Truth; But call to remembrance the former days, in which after ye were
Illuminated ye endured a great sight of Afflictions; Partly while ye were made
a Gazing-Stock, both by reproaches and Afflictions, and partly while ye became
the Companions of them that were so used. Cast not away therefore your
Confidence, which has great Recompense of reward. For ye have need of Patience,
etc.

Which gives me an occasion to proceed to a Second proof which confirms what we
have said, and is taken from the Exhortations of Scripture to die for the
Truth. In a word, it would be a great piece of cruelty, to impose upon Men a
Yoke so heavy, without any necessity, and to engage 'em to suffer all sorts of
Cruelties rather then renounce the Truth, if it might be sometimes abandoned
without a Crime. The Life of Men who are made after the Image of God, and who
have been redeemed by the Blood of his Son, is it so meanly to be prized, that
they should be obliged to expose it without Compulsive Reasons? How comes it
then to pass, that Christ exhorts us so often to carry his Cross? Whence
proceeds it that it is the First Lesson that he gives his Disciples. If any one
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.
Mat. 16.24. And he that takes not his Cross, and follows after me, is not
worthy of me. He that finds his Life shall lose it; and he that loses his Life
for my sake, shall find it, Mat. 10. v. 38, 39. Whence comes it that the
Apostles so often repeat the same Exhortation? Wherefore do they command us to
bear the Reproach of Christ, and to follow the Examples of those that were
Stoned, Sawed, or slain by the Sword, who have wandered in Deserts, upon
Mountains, and lurked in Dens and Caverns of the Earth? Would Wise Men, and
inspired by God, speak thus, were it an Indifferent Thing what Religion a Man
professed?

To this Argument I shall add another which is taken from a Passage in St.
Paul, where that same Doctor of the Gentiles pronounces Anathema's upon all
those that should preach any other Gospel then that which he had preached
himself, though he should be another St. Paul descended from Heaven, and one of
those Blessed Spirits that continually behold the Face of God. But though We,
or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto ye, then that ye have
received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. Certainly, Light is not more opposite
to Darkness, then the words of St. Paul, are contrary to the Opinions of those
against whom we dispute. The Apostle anathematizes those those that preach any
other Gospel but that which he has taught. Yet they with whom we dispute, judge
it to be an Indifferent Thing, and of no Importance to embrace a Religion which
teaches another Doctrine, then that which St. Paul has taught. This Argument is
so much the stronger, because the Apostle thunders out his Curse against
people, who only went about to join the Religion of Christ to that of Moses.
Wherein they were far less Culpable then our Indifferent Men, who would not
only join Moses with Christ, but Jesus Christ with the World; the Religion of
Jesus Christ with other Religions, which are no more then Human Inventions, and
make it their business to serve God and Mammon.

Nor can I forbear to observe in this Place that this Passage absolutely
overturns the Opinion of those who imagine, that it is enough to believe that
Jesus Christ is the promised Messiah, and to admit of those Truths which are
common to all Religions; but that other Things are not of any great Importance;
and that there is no necessity of disputing upon that point. For they who are
rebuked by St. Paul acknowledged Jesus for the Messiah, they also confessed the
most Eminent Truths of the Gospel, but he could not persuade 'em altogether to
renounce Moses, and to lay aside Circumcision. Nevertheless, they are
Anathematized by St. Paul. Judge then what Anathema's that Great Apostle would
now thunder out, were he to descend from Heaven. Besides, that it might be
easy to prove, that should we grant, what is far from us to do, that it is
sufficient to believe that Christ is the Promised Messiah, whom the Prophets
call the Mighty God, the Father of Eternity, the Eternal of Justice, it would
follow from thence, that there are Religions which would be thought to be
Christians, which are False Religions, and which we cannot embrace without
offending God.

CHAP. XV. Against those who believe they make Profession of a Religion, though
they believe it to be false.
THE Greatest part of our Indifferent Men believe, that without committing any
Crime, they may observe the Ceremonies, and practice the Worship of a False
Religion; that the World may be brought to an Agreement with Jesus Christ, and
that both the one and the other may be served at the same Time; like that same
Emperor who had in his Closet the Images of Jesus Christ, Abraham, Orpheus, and
Apollonius: Or rather like those, (of whom Adrian speaks in a Letter to
Servianus, cited by Vopiscus) who called themselves Bishops of Jesus Christ,
and served the God Serapis. This Opinion is dangerous, tho easy to be refuted,
and no less easy to show that Diffimulation in Religion deserves Rebuke and
Censure; and that it is Condemned by all the Sacred Writers.

I. If it were Lawful to dissemble and conceal our thoughts concerning
Religion, how comes it to pass, that in the Reign of Ahab and Jezabel, God owns
none for his Servants, but such as had not bowed their Knee to Baal, tho there
be no question to be made, but that several of those who prostrated themselves
before that Idol, adored in their Hearts the True God of Israel?

II. Wherefore Jesus Christ declares expressly, that we cannot be of the Number
of his Sheep, and follow ^trangers, John 10.4, 5. And when he puts forth his
own Sheep, he goes before them, and the Sheep follow him; for they know his
Voice; But a Stranger will not follow, but fly from him; for they know not the
Voice of Strangers.

III. Whence it comes to pass, that this Divine Savior teaches us, Mat. 6.24.
That we cannot serve two Masters.

IV. Wherefore does he expressly forbid us to deny him before Men. Mat. 10.33.
Had it not been sufficient for him to have said, Who shall deny me in his
Heart? Why does he express himself so peremptorily, Whoever shall deny me
before Men, etc. Who shall be ashamed of Me, of him will I be ashamed. This is
one of those Passages that Avitus made use of against Gandebaud, who made
profession of Arrianism, tho he acknowledged Jesus Christ for a God.

V. Whence comes it to pass, that Jesus Christ, if we desire to be his
Disciples, requires of us that we should renounce and forsake our Worldly
Possessions, and break the strictest Ties of Nature that unite us with our
Nearest Relations Luke 14.26. If any one comes to me, and hate not his Father
and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own Life also,
he cannot be my Disciple. And v. 33. So likewise, whosoever he be of you, that
forsakes not all he has, he cannot be my Disciple.

VI. Wherefore St. Paul calls those Idolaters who committed any one of those
Acts which the Pagans practiced, 1. Corinthians. 10.

VII. If it be sufficient for a Man to believe in his Heart, without making
open Profession of the Truth, how comes it that the same Apostle Commands us,
to believe in our Hearts, and make Confession with our Mouths unto Salvation,
Romans 10.9, 10. And that St. Peter would have us Be ready always to give an
Answer to every Man that asks ye a Reason of the Hope that is in you. 1. Pet.
3.15.

VIII. If it be true that Man may be faithful and practice a False worship, and
observe the Ceremonies of a Corrupt Religion, then might He Drink the Cup of
the Lord, and the Cup of Devils, contrary to the saying of St. Paul, 1. Cor.
10. and have Communion with God, yet walk in Darkness, contrary to the Precepts
of St. John 1 Epist. C. 1. v. 6. And a Man may have received the Good Seed of
God into his Heart, and withdraw himself in time of Persecution, contrary to
the Doctrine of Christ, Mat. 13.

IX. A Man might be an Idolater and yet be Saved, contrary to what the Apostle
determins, 1 Cor. 6. that Idolaters shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

X. He may be registered in the Book of Life of the Lamb, and adore the Beast,
contrary to what is written by St. John, Apoc. 13.8. And all that shall Worship
the Beast, whose Names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb.

XI. If the Opinion of those, against whom we Combat, were true, would St. John
threaten Eternal Torments to the Adorers of the Beast? Apoc. 14. v. 9, 10, 11.
If any Man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his
Forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink the Wine of the wrath of God,
which is poured out without mixture, into the Cup of his indignation, and be
shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the Presence of the Holy Angels,
and in the Presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of their torment ascends up
for ever and ever, etc.

XII. The same beloved Disciple would have placed the Fearful at the head of
those for whom the Lake of Fire and Brimstone is reserved. Apoc. 21.8. Would
Jesus Christ threaten to spue the Lukewarm out of his Mouth, Apoc. 3.16. For
who are the Fearful and Lukewarm, but they who understand the Truth, yet
fearing the Hatred and Cruelty of the World, compose their outward Behavior in
such a manner, that they make a show of approving a Religion, of which they
acknowledge the Falsehood. Such as have an Orthodox Soul, and Lips of Infidels;
who will neither be altogether for Jesus Christ, not altogether for the World;
who divide themselves between the One and the Other, and would fain be
reconciled to Both: In a word, who do that which our Indifferent Men believe
may be done without a Crime.

XIII. Whence comes it to pass, that the Holy Ghost condemns those that halt on
both sides, 1 Kings 18.21. Zephan. 1.5. and those that worship and swear by the
Lord, yet swear by Maloham also.

XIV. Wherefore is it, that the Two Apostles St. Paul and St. John; of which
the one had been taken up into Heaven, the Other had seen in the Spirit the
Heavenly Jerusalem, Commands us to come out from among the Unfaithful, and from
Babylon, Apoc. 18.4. Long out of her my People, says the Lord by St. John, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that we receive not of her Plagues: and 2
Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. Be ye not unequally yoked with Unbelievers; for what
fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and what Communion has
Light with Darkness? What Concord has Christ with Behal? or what part has he
that believes with an Infidel? What Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?
For ye are the Temple of the Living God, etc. Wherefore come out from among
'em, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the Unclean thing, and I
will receive ye.

XV. Lastly, Wherefore is it, that we are commanded to suffer for Righteousness
sake, and that the Spirit of God makes such large Promises to those that suffer
Persecution, Matthew. 5.10. Heb. 12. James 5.10.11. Phil. 1.29. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.

I add to all these Proofs, those Passages of Scripture, where the Apostles
command us to offer to God not only our Souls but our Bodies also: and to
Glorify him in our Bodies and our Spirit. Romans 12.1. I beseech you therefore,
Brethren, that ye present your Bodies a living sacrifice holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service. and 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye are bought with
price, therefore Glorifis God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are Gods.
Is it not a great piece of Sacrilege to refuse the giving of that to God which
belongs to him. He created both our Bodies and Souls, he has redeemed 'em both,
the one in the other; Is it not then just, that we should consecrate both to
him? Wherefore should we separate what God has joined, and what he has given
us, to the end we should employ it to his Glory? How great a sin it is, how
great a piece of Impiety, to divide our selves between God, to whom we owe all
things, and the World to which we owe nothing? To deny our Tongues to God, to
whom we owe our Lives; and to be ashamed of calling our selves the Servants and
Disciples of Christ, who was not ashamed to call us his Brethren, and who for
our sakes has suffered a most cruel and ignominious death.

To demonstrate yet more clearly the Falsehood of this Opinion, which I labor
to destroy, I think it convenient to make these few Reflections.

The First is, That it is a strange thing, that there should be so many People
that make no scruple of Lying in Religion, which is a thing of the greatest
Importance, and the most Sacred in the World; in regard that Lying is a Vice
unworthy a Man of Honor. The greatest Debauchees become sensible of the things
of Conscience, if they happen to swear a Falsehood before a Judge; So true it
is, that we have a natural Aversion against telling a Lie. Who would not wonder
then, that Men who are desirous of Reputation, should not be ashamed to lie in
a thing that is most grave and serious in the World; the Concern of God
himself, of Truth and our own Salvation. If a Subject, who gives but the least
suspicion of an Intention to Revolt from his Prince, and who only lets fall
some words that will admit of a bad Construction, is handled with so much
severity, in regard that Royal Majesty is so Sacred, that it is not to be
injured in any manner whatever, without incurring the guilt of a heinous Crime;
What greater Transgression can a Man commit, then to make a show of being an
Enemy to God and his Truth? What Torments ought not they to expect, who are
guilty of such Impiety?

The Second Reflection is this, That they who dissemble in Religion, commit a
very great crime against their Brethren, for they incite 'em by their own
example to Apostasy, and make 'em believe, that the Religion which they profess
is the true Religion. So that if they who poison the Body, are looked upon as
the wicked'st People in the World; How much more criminal are they who poison
the Soul; who present their Brethren the Mortal Draught, and make a show of
Drinking it to the end, that others may not be afraid of swallowing it? And
what Torments ought not they to fear from Him who threatens to punish most
severely Liars, and such as give scandal to his little Children.

This Remark is so much the more necessary because there are several Persons
who believe, that a Man may abide in a false Religion, with a design to make
known the Truth to those who know it not, wherein they grossly abuse themselves.
For besides that, I would willingly ask 'em, whether they can speak it with a
safe Conscience, that they only stick to the false Religion which they profess,
on purpose to show the falsehood of it, and whether it be not merely because
they find it more advantageous for their Business, and for the enjoyment of the
Conveniences of Life; I would put this farther question to 'em, were the First
of these the real Motive that detains 'em, Who is he that has enjoined 'em to
extend their Charity so far as to expose themselves willingly to Damnation, out
of hopes to convert others? For where is it that God has promised to Save those
who shall turn Idolaters to Save their Brethren? Does not St. Paul expressly
say, That we ought not to do evil, that good may come of it? But so far are
they from Converting others by adhering to a false Religion, that quite the
contrary, they confirm 'em in their own Opinion, and corrupt many by their bad
Example. They may make good Hypocrites like themselves, but very rarely good
Christians.

The Third Reflection which I add to the two preceding is this, That if
Dissimulation in Religion be permitted, and that it be lawful to embrace that
which best agrees with our carnal Interests, we must confess, that the Martyrs
who have laid down their Lives with so much Courage, and suffered such cruel
Torments, were all Fools and Madmen, while they rather chose to lose their
Lives, when there was no necessity for it, and perish in the midst of consuming
Flames, then to condescend to the least compliance, tho but in outward show,
and buckle to their Persecutors. But God forbid we should deprive those
Christian Hero's of their merited Honor, and look upon as extravagant, the
wisest of all Mortals. Have we not more reason to call our Lukewarm, and our
fearful Christians Fools, who rather choose to preserve their Wealth and Worldly
Advantages, then one day to enjoy those Eternal Felicities which God prepares
for those that will be faithful to him; who are more afraid of the present then
the future; of that which can Kill the Body, then of that which precipitates
the Soul into Hell: who are more afraid of Death, then of the cruel Torments of
Hell; who prefer the World before God, and Time before Eternity.

To these Three Reflections I shall add a Fourth, which seems to me to be of
great Importance, that the Inside can never be good, when the Outside is evil.
And that it is not possible for a Man to deny God with his Lips, but he must
renounce him in his Heart, when he has had time to reflect upon what he has
done. I say, when he has had time to consider with himself, that I may not
oppose the Example of St. Peter, whose Fears so far disturbed his Mind, that,
quite transported beyond himself, and only studying which way to avoid the
danger that threatened him, he neither remembered Jesus Christ, nor the Promise
which he had made him.

'Twill be no difficult thing to understand this 4th Reflection, if we consider
that it is in the Heart that Men take that unhappy and cursed Resolution to
renounce Jesus Christ with their Lips, and that it is in their Hearts that they
meditate an Accommodation with the present Time. It Is therefore to no purpose
for 'em to say, that they reserve their Hearts for God, and that they surrender
'em entirely to him, tho they forsake his Truth; that they do not renounce him
with their Hearts, although they deny him with their Lips. To talk in this manner
is to deceive themselves; and they who discourse after this manner, are like a
Woman, that should say, she had bequeathed her Heart to her Husband, and only
made her Body common to her Lovers: Or to a Man that should rend the Reputation
of his Neighbor, or Murder him, yet pretend that in his Heart he abhorred
Murder, Backbiting and Calumny, and that he tenderly loved the Person whom he
had bereft of Life.

They who dissemble cannot deny but that the motions of Self-Love prevail over
the Impulses of the Love of God, because they will neither sacrifice their
Wealth, nor their Ease to his Glory. So that if they were always to be judged
by the Sentiments of their Hearts, they would always deserve no less then
Condemnation and Death.

CHAP. XVI. An Answer to some Objections.
IT IS but reasonable now to Answer some Objections which they make us.

The First is drawn from that which Jesus Christ says, John 4.24. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth.
Therefore, say they, God is satisfied with the Heart, and with the inside
Worship, not requiring exterior Adoration.

But if this be the Consequence which is to be drawn from the words of the
Savior of the World, Why does he exhort us to own him before Men, to bear his
Cross, and to suffer for him? Certainly, if he required no more then the Heart,
wherefore does he exact from us an outward Profession, which exposes us to a
Thousand Disgraces, and a Thousand Sufferings? Is our Life of so little value,
that he would have us to be so prodigal of it, when there is no occasion? But
what Man of Judgment is there, who does not perceive, that his meaning is only
to show us, what sort of Worship is most pleasing to God, and that it his
pleasure, that under the Gospel we should pay him a Spiritual Worship,
abstracted from Matter, and all those Observances which were only proper for
the Infancy of the Church; independent from Circumstances of Time, Persons and
Places? Whether it be, that God, filling all the World with the Immensity of
his Being, is no longer to be Adored at Jerusalem or Guerezin only; or whether
it be, that, being a Spirit, he is not rightly Honored by the Oblations of
Bulls and Goats. He neither eats their Flesh nor drinks their Blood; or whether
it be, that which way soever you look upon these sorts of Worship, they have no
Relation or Correspondence, nor any way suit with the nature of God; and to
speak properly, are no more then shadows or Types of the True Worship which God
requires. This is the Sense of these words; and there needs no more to be
convinced of it then to read what goes before. But we must not conclude from
thence that God is satisfied with the Adoration of the Heart, while the Body
lies prostrate at the Feet of a false Deity. This is not a Worshipping God in
Truth, but a Dividing his Adoration, by bequeathing the Inward worship to God,
and the outward Reverence to some other Object. For Truth is no other then the
Conformity of Outside and Inside. He that has the Outward Formality without the
Inward Sincerity is a Hypocrite; and he who says he has the Inward without the
Exterior Reality is a Liar.

The Second Objection is drawn from what St. Paul says in his Epistle to the
Romans, Chap. 14. v. 22. Have thou Faith, have it to thy self before God.

But there needs no more then to read that Passage with attention, and to
examine what obliged the Apostle to hold that Argument, for any Man to
apprehend, that he speaks, there, of the Belief and Faith of a Believer, that
Jesus Christ has set us at full Liberty; that he has abolished the distinction
of Days and Meats, that was observed under the Old Covenant. St. Paul therefore
means, that if we find our selves in Company with weak People, who would be
scandalized to see us take our full Liberty, it would be better to abstain from
the Use of those things which God has permitted us, to reserve our Faith to our
selves, then to give any Scandal: Because the Dispute was only concerning
Indifferent things; and for that whether we Eat or Eat not, we commit no Sin.
But are we thence to conclude, that the same Conduct is to be observed in
Things, the use of which is so far from being Indifferent, that it is
absolutely necessary; and such as Jesus Christ recommends to us with so much
Care; threatening us, withal, with Eternal Punishment if we neglect 'em. If
that Consequence were to be drawn from the words of St. Paul, how comes it to
pass that he exhorts us to make Confession with our Mouths unto Salvation, and
to lay down our Lives for the Gospel? Certainly if it were sufficient to have
faith in the heart, there would be no necessity of doing good Works. Contrary
to the saying of St. James, c. 2. v. 14. What does it profit, my Brethren,
though a Man say he has Faith, and has not Works? can faith save him? I can
hardly think it worth while to refute here the Argument which they draw from
another Passage of St. Paul, where he exhorts that Men should make
Supplications in all places. For he must be blind who understands not, that the
Aim of S. Paul is only to oppose those Persons, who thought the Virtue and
Efficacy of Prayers depended upon the Quality of the Place where they were
made. It was a general Error of the Pagans, and the People of Israel made a
Great Distinction between Places; in pursuance of what God had said, that he
would make choice of one certain place to fix his Name there. The design of St.
Paul therefore is to reach us, that Jesus Christ had abolished the Mosaic
Pedantism; that there was no longer any distinction to be made of Places for
Divine Worship, in regard there was no Corner of the World that was not filled
with the Presence of God, and where he did not favorably hear our Vows. But so
far was he from pretending that it should be inferred from thence, that he
forbids all Communion with Idolaters.

The third Objection is taken from the 6th Chapter of Baruch, v.5. and from a
Letter which they pretend that Jeremy wrote to those that were to be carried
away Captive to Babylon. When you shall be entered into Babylon, you shall
remain there several Years, and a long time, even till Seven Generations:
Nevertheless, after that, I will bring ye back in peace. Now you shall see at
Babylon Gods of Silver and Wood which shall be carried upon Men's Shoulders, and
which shall terrify the Nations. Take heed that ye become not in any manner
like those Strangers, and that ye be not seized with the tear of those Gods,
when you shall behold the People before and behind, that shall adore 'em; but
say in your hearts, Lord, it is thou alone that art to be adored.

In answer to this Argument, I will not examine whether the Book be Canonical
or no; tho all Men agree, that the Jews never looked upon it to be Authentic.
That Meliton, Origin, Sr. Hilary, Gregory Nazianzene, and Epiphanius, make no
mention of it, and that St. Jerome expressly rejects it, in his Preface upon
Jeremy. It Is not my business here to discuss that Question, any farther then as
it contributes to refute the Mistake of our Adversaries. For it says expressly,
Take heed of Conforming in any manner whatever to Strangers. Would he have
troubled himself with any such Exhortation, had it been lawful for the People
without offending God, to prostrate themselves before the Gods of Gold and
Silver, only saying in their Hearts, Lord, it is thou alone who art to be
adored? The enjoining us to say in our Hearts, that God is only to be adored,
is that a Permission to Worship any other but Him? And the Prostrating our
selves before an Idol, only saying what Jeremy commands us, is not that a
Perfect Condemnation of our selves? The Meaning therefore of that Holy Prophet
is only to instruct us, that when we behold Idolaters Worshipping a Counterfeit
Deity, if it be not convenient boldly to Rebuke their Idolatry, for fear of
raising Sedition, it behooves us at least to Condemn it in our Hearts, without
imitating their Conduct* or the practice or those who behold with delight the
Pomp and Magnificence of Idolatrous Worship.

Lastly, They make use of what St. Peter said to Cornelius, and which we read
in the 10th Chapter of the Acts. Of a Truth, I perceive that God is no
respecter of Persons; But in, every Nation he that fears him and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him. But that Man must very unfortunately
deceive himself, who sees not that St. Peter means no other Thing, but that he
perceived that Salvation was no longer peculiar to the Nation of the Jews; that
it was no longer Necessary to be of the Posterity of Jacob according to the
Flesh, for a Man to be accepted with God; and that there was no longer any
Distinction between the Jew and the Greek, the Scythian and the Barbarian.

This is the sense of those Words. But it is not to be thence inferred, that a
Man may be accepted with God, let him be of what Religion he pleases. Had St.
Peter had any such thought, would he have taken so much pains to Convert People
to Christianity? Or have exposed himself to the ill will of his whole Nation.
Saint Paul holds the same Argument as Saint Peter, Romans 10. v. 12, 13. but he
had said before, that with the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation.

CHAP. XVII. An Answer to the Examples brought from Nicodemus, Naaman, and St.
Paul.
WE have seen the Passages of which our Indifferent Men make use; now let us
examine the Examples which they bring.

1. They propose to us the Examples of Zachary, Elizabeth, Simeon, St. John
Baptist, the Blessed Virgin, and Christ himself, who often intermixed
themselves with the Congregations of the Jews, tho they were very Corrupt, and
observed the Ceremonies of the Law. But it is apparent that these Examples
prove nothing of what they pretend to. I confess, that Zachary, that Elizabeth,
etc. intermixed themselves with the Assemblies of the Jews, because it was the
will of God that they should pay him their Homage due in his Temple, and that
there was no command as yet to separate from the Communion of the Jews. They
observed the Ceremonies of the Law, because those Ceremonies were not then
abolished. Jesus Christ was not yet ascended into Heaven. Then wherefore should
they not intermix themselves in the Assemblies of the Jews? The Law of Moses
was there read every Sabbath Day; they read the Prophets; they offered the
Sacrifices which God had ordained; there was no Idolatry in the Worship; they
adored no other God there but the God of Israel. The Scrib^s and Pharisees
constrained no Body to believe their Expositions of the Law: They could
distinguish the wholesome true Doctrine from the Traditions of False Teachers,
and beware of their Leav'n, as Christ exhorted his Disciples. Let 'em now
examine what reason they have to bring these Examples.

2. They propose to us the Example of Nicodemus, who tho he were thoroughly
convinced of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ durst not give him a visit in
Public, for fear of being expelled the Synagogue; and the same thing is
reported of Joseph of Arimathea.

Now upon this Example I observe three things. The First is, that tho
Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea did not openly take the Part of Jesus
Christ, yet they never intermixed in any Society which God had forbid 'em.

The Second thing is, that Nicodemus, Joseph, and others, who did as they did,
are extremely blamed in Scripture, John 12.42. Nevertheless among the Chief
Rulers also many believed in him; but because of the Pharisees they did not
confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue; for they loved the
Praise of Men more then the Praise of God.

The Third thing is, that Nicodemus opposed the Resolution which the Pharisees
took against Jesus Christ; that Joseph would never give his consent; and that
both the one and the other, no longer dissembling their Thoughts, at a Time
when the Apostles themselves forsook Christ, and that the one denied him, the
other had betrayed him, openly demanded his Body, and caused it to be
honorably buried; having the Courage to confess him Dead, whom they durst not
confess when he was alive.

After these three Remarks, let us compare our Indifferent Men with those
Illustrious Jews. Nicodemus never intermixed with any forbidden Assembly. Our
Indifferent Men believe they may do it, and yet commit no Crime. Nicodemus and
Joseph bestowed a Public Funeral upon our Lord Jesus, and opposed the Counsels
which the Pharisees took together in Combination against him. But our
Indifferent Men are ashamed to speak for the Truth, or to uphold the Cause of
Jesus Christ.

So that if Nicodemus and Joseph are blamed by St. John, at a time when they
durst not openly confess Jesus Christ, judge how much more Criminal our false
Nicodemites are, whose knowledge is much greater then that of the Jews.

They Object in the Third Place, the Example of Naaman the Syrian, who
understanding the True God, forbore not however from entering into the Temple of
Rimmon, when his Master went thither to pay his Devotions; and they pretend
that Elisha the Prophet gave him leave to comply with the King's Worship in
Prostrating himself as he did.

In Answer to this Example, I make these Reflections following,

1. That Naaman never demanded of the Prophet that he might be permitted to
dissemble his Religion before the King of Syria. On the other side he vowed,
and promised that he would Sacrifice to no other Deity but the Eternal God, 2.
Kings, 5.17. Shall there not then, I pray thee, be given to thy Servant two
Mules Burden of Earth? For thy Servant will henceforth offer neither burn^^
Offering, nor Sacrifice unto any other Gods, but unto the Lord.

The Second Reflection is, that Naaman made but only one Request; not to enter
into the Temple of Rimmon when he pleased, for that had been a piece of
Impiety; but only that it might not be imputed to him for a Crime if he bowed
in the House of Rimmon, when his Master went to Worship there, and leaned on
his hand.

These two Reflections already show the Difference between the Conduct of our
Indifferent Men, and that of Naaman. Naaman openly declared, that he served the
God of Israel, and that he would serve none but him. And there is no doubt but
that he protested the same thing to his Master, when he related to him the
Miracle of his Cure. But our Indifferent Men believe, that for their better
Security, they may profess the same Religion with Idolaters; and by consequence
may have another Object of their Worship then God, when they are among People
who believe that another sort of Religions worship may be paid to any other
Deity. Naaman only desired that he might be permitted to serve his Master as he
was bound in duty to do; but our Indifferent Men require, that they may be
permitted to dissemble without any other reason then for their own Convenience
and Profit.

Naaman is extremely troubled in Conscience about paying this Civil Service to
his Master, and begs Pardon of God, as being afraid of committing a Sin. His
Conscience had such an Abhorrency of Idolatry, that he could not brook any
thing which had the least Affinity with it. But our Indifferent Men make no
scruple to give themselves that Liberty which he denied himself, and believe
they may do that without offending God, which Naaman never did; tho Naaman was
bred up in Idolatry, and had no other Instruction then what he received from
his Cure; whereas our Antagonists clearly know the will of God; which will not
permit us to doubt, but that Naaman will rise up in Judgment against 'em, and
that they will undergo severe Punishment.

But in regard our Indifferent Men insist very much upon Naaman's desiring that
God would pardon him, if he prostrated himself in the Temple of Rimmon, when
the King his Master leaned upon his Hand, and upon Elisha's answering him, go
in Peace; as if by those words he gave him leave to do as he desired, it is
necessary to observe in this Place,

1. That the Terms in the Original may be understood, as if Naaman, after he
had made a Vow, never from thence forward to Worship or serve any other then
the True God, had delivered himself in this manner. I beg of the Lord to pardon
this thy Servant, That when my Master entered into the House of Rimmon to
prostrate himself there, and that when he leaned upon my Hand, I also
prostrated my self; for that I say, let the Lord pardon me. Reading it in this
manner, there is nothing of Difficulty in the Story; in regard that according
to this Version, he begs Pardon for what is passed, but not for what is to come.

2. That Elisha by those Words, go in Peace, gave no Permission to Naaman; he
only dismissed him with that same Complemental Form of Speech which was then in
use among the Hebrews.

3. That tho those words of the Prophet should imply a Permission, it would
only relate to the Request that Naaman had made. The Syrian had only demanded
of Elisha, whether he could not give him two Mules lading of Earth of the Holy
Land; and after that, he had begged of God, that he would pardon him, if the
King leaning upon his Hand, he should happen to prostrate himself together with
him, in the Temple of Rimmon. Elisha therefore answers to the First demand, but
not to the Second.

4. That tho the Words should include the Prophets permission, we ought not to
conclude from thence, that a Man may be an Idolater, and yet reserve his Heart
immaculate for God. For that was not the Thing which Naaman desired of the
Prophet; and tho the Prophet had granted it, nevertheless we never ought to do
it. Because it is certain, that God has expressly forbid Idolatry, and whatever
has the least Relation to it; so that, if not only a Prophet, but all the
Angels of Heaven should say the contrary, we ought to look upon 'em as
Anathema's. All that we are to infer from thence is this, That they who serve
Princes are permitted to be present at the Ceremonies of their Masters
Religion, when the Duty of their Employment obliges 'em to pay 'em any Service.
And this is that which Valentinian did, in compliance with the Emperor Julian,
when he entered into the Temple of Fortune; and what in the last Age the Elect.
of Saxony did, in respect of the Emperor Charles the V.

I add to these Reflections,

1. That there is some Reason to doubt, whether we may be allowed to practice
under the new Covenant, what might be tolerated, under the Old, in a poor
Pagan, whose Knowledge was very small, and who had had no other Instruction,
but what the Prophet had given him in his Familiar Conversation. But we may be
thought to be obliged to greater Duties; We, that have been bred in the School
of Christ, and are environed with such a Cloud of Witnesses, who rather chose
to dye a thousand times, than to do any thing that might be ill interpreted.

2. That No Man ought to do that which Naaman did, in despite of his Conscience.

3. That if any one be obliged to do it, he ought not to give any occasion for
others to believe that he approves what is done in a false Religion. Quite the
contrary, he ought to let the World see, that he detests it, and abhors the
Errors, the Worship, the Mysteries and Ceremonies of it. This is that which
Valentinian did. For Theodoret observes, that one day as he was attending upon
Julian to the Temple of Fortune, he gave a good Cuff to the Verger that
sprinkled the Holy Water upon all that entered, because he observed that a drop
of Water had fallen upon himself; and cried out aloud, that he was contaminated
thereby, instead of being purified. Which so provoked the Emperor, that he
banished Valentinian: But he remained not long in exile; for within a year, and
some few Months afterward, he became Master of the Empire himself.

Lastly, I conclude, that it is much the safer way to renounce all those
Employments, then to engage our Selves in Actions contrary to our Belief; and
that it is better to quit 'em, then to scandalize our Brethren.

In the Fourth Place, the Example of St. Paul is objected, who as he teaches us
himself, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22, And unto the Jews I became a Jew, that I might
gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might
gain them that are under the Law; To them that are without Law, as without Law
(being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ) that I might gain
them that are without the Law. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain
the weak; I am made all things to all Men, that I might by all means save some.
After so fair an Example set, who is there, say they, who would scruple to
conform to the Times, to the Place where he lives, and the Persons with whom he
converses.

I Answer, that no Body denies, but that we ought to conform to Time, to Place,
and Persons; provided we do nothing against our Conscience, and that we acquit
our selves of these Duties which the True Religion exacts from us. We ought to
conform with Time and Place in betaking our selves to flight, when we are
persecuted; to quit our Country, and change our Habitations, till, like Joseph,
Mat. 2. we understand, that they who seek our Lives are dead. We ought to
comply with persons, to avoid the exposing of Holy things to the Profane, and
giving occasion of scandal to the weak. Thus St. Paul became a Jew to the Jews,
observing those Ceremonies among 'em, which were not contrary to the Christian
Faith, by circumcising Timothy, and causing himself to be shaved at Cenchreas.
He was under the Law to those that were under the Law, in abstaining from those
Ceremonies that might offend the Gentiles. Lastly, he became weak to the weak,
by complying with their Infirmities. Read upon this Subject, Romans 14.15, 1 Cor.
8. But that Holy Apostle never practiced any base or treacherous compliances
with any body, only he became all things to all Men, in things Permitted and
Indifferent; you may Judge by his manner of reproving St. Peter, who trod not
aright, but constrained the Gentiles to Judai^e. Gal. 2.14. What then can our
Antagonists prove from hence? Let 'em become all things to all Men, like St.
Paul, we will never blame 'em. But does it follow from thence, that we may
embrace all Religions, abandon the True one, and profess a False one? like that
same Ecebolus, who was sometimes Orthodox, sometimes Arrian, sometimes Pagan.
God preserve us from any such thoughts. Had St. Paul been of our Indifferent
Men's mind, would he have undergone so many Afflictions; exposed himself to so
many dangers; would he have suffered himself to be loaded with so many Chains;
or would he have died by the hand of the Common Executioner? No, without doubt,
There was nothing more easy for him then to have avoided those bitter and
continual Persecutions. He need have done no more, then to have extolled Moses
to the Jews; Jupiter, Mercury, and the rest of their Counterfeit Deities to the
Pagans; and thus he would have pleased all. But then he would not have taught
Jesus Christ. He preaches him up every where, tho they threaten him with a
thousand Torments, in the Areopagus at Rome, among the Jews and Gentiles; never
dissembling his Sentiments: So far from being ashamed of the Gospel of his
Divine Savior, that he Preached him both boldly and publicly, and made it his
chiefest Glory so to do.

CHAP. XVIII. An Answer to some Reasons which are brought by our Antagonists.
OUR Indifferent Men make some Objections also. In the first place they put the
Question, whether God cannot save People of all sorts of Religions; especially
such as confess Jesus Christ, and acknowledge him to be the Son of God, the
Promised Messiah, Crucified, Dead, and Risen from the Grave. This Question is
Ridiculous; for the Business in Dispute is not what God can do, nor shall we
undertake to set Bounds to his Infinite Mercy. But we cannot believe that he
will save those that depart from a Pure Communion; who abjure his Truth; who
make public Profession of doing Things which they do not believe, and who Die
unrepentant in that sad Condition. God has so clearly Explained himself in this
matter, that he must willingly seek his own Destruction, that flatters himself
to obtain Mercy, and follows the Footsteps of our Indifferent Men.

But say they in the Second Place, is it not a hard Case to be despoiled of our
Estates, to be deprived of our Honors, and Conveniences of Life, to be
Banished, to renounce our Pleasures, to live in a Comfortless and lonely
Desert, to be confined to a Dark and Loathsome Dungeon, and to die cruelly by
the hand of the Hangman? I grant that this is all unpleasing to the Flesh. But
do they not find that God sufficiently recompenses those who suffer for his
sake? That he gives 'em his Heaven, and gave 'em himself. Whatever the
Sufferings are to which the Lord Jesus exposes his Believers and his Members,
are they comparable to what he suffered himself to purchase our Salvation? Or
is there any Proportion between them and the Recompense which the Mercy of God
bestows upon us; between the Miseries of this Life, and those which we may
justly be afraid of after Death; between the Blessings which it is in his Power
to bereave us of, and those which he has prepared for us; between the false
Pleasures which we are required to renounce, and the solid Pleasures which we
hope to enjoy; between the Honors and Dignities which we quit in this World,
and those Eternal Glories to which we are designed? It Is a hard case to be
persecuted, cries the Flesh; but is it not a happy thing to be favored of God,
to be at peace in our Souls, to be assured of the Love of the Father of Heaven,
to be Heirs of an Eternal Inheritance, to wear one day a Crown of Life, and to
enjoy an endless Felicity? It Is a hard case to live in Adversity; but is it not
infinitely more tedious for a Man to bear about him his Accuser, his Witness,
his Judge, and his Executioner; to be gnawed by a Worm that never Dies, and to
enjoy no Repose? It is a terrible Thing to be reduced to the Condition of
Lazarus; but it is much more dreadful to be cast headlong into Hell with the
Wicked Rich Man, while Lazarus is received into Abraham's Bosom. It is a hard
Case for a Man to lay down his Life; but is it not a happiness to lose it for
Jesus Christ's sake, to the end we may live Eternally with him? What is it
which God requires of us, which the Devil does not exact from his Slaves, tho
they never can expect other from him then Eternal Misery; and what we do not
frequently do our selves upon wicked Impulses, and to satisfy our Passions? I
shall not extend this Discourse any farther: I only beseech God that our
Indifferent Men and Libertines may seriously reflect upon it.

CHAP. XIX. Against those who maintain, that we ought to believe what the
Magistrates will have us believe.
I Come now to those who hold, that the Sovereign Law, which is to be followed
as well in Sacred, as in Civil Matters, is the Law of Magistrates, and that
every Thing is to be subjected to their Commands. This was the Sentiment of an
Author famous once in England, and who has still but too many followers. He
believed that the Ifraelites were bound to receive for the Law of God, what
Abraham delivered to 'em for the Law of God; and that the Public Laws supply
the Place of Conscience to all Men. He said moreover, explaining those words of
Matt. 10.32. Who shall deny me before Men, etc. That a Subject was not to be
blamed for renouncing Christ, if he were thereto constrained by his Prince. I
compare the Author of this Opinion to that same wretched Flatterer, who
formerly proposed, in favor of his Prince, a Declaration importing, that
nothing should be looked upon as just, but what the King required.

Nor much unlike to this was the Practice of those Heretics which a certain
Philosopher upbraided, that they adored not God, but the Imperial Pomp,
changing Opinions according to the Sentiments of that Prince under whom they
lived. This is an Impious Opinion, and it is very easy to show the Falsehood of
it.

In a word, were there any Ground for this Opinion, there would be no longer
any other Deity to be acknowledged but the Magistrate, under whom we are born
Subjects, and we ought not to admit of any other Rule for the Conduct of our
Lives, and our Manners, then the Laws of Princes. There would be no need of
Informing our selves what God has revealed to Men, or what his Pleasure is; but
what the Magistrate commands us. We must expound the Scripture according to the
Sentiments of the Magistrates under whom we Live, and not as it expounds it
self; as that Emperor pretended, who by an Edict ordained that a certain
Passage of Scripture should be explained according to his Sense: We ought to
obey 'em in despite of our Consciences and the Light of Right Reason; and
Daniel is extremely to be blamed, who refused to obey the Impious Edicts of the
Prince under whom he lived. Who can hear such Discourses as this without
trembling. Besides, is it not ridiculous to think that Men are bereft of their
Reason, and the knowledge of Good and Evil, so soon as they list themselves in
a Society, while that same Knowledge resides only in Sovereigns; or that we
should be bound to do that, which we know to be a Sin.

But say they, does not the Scripture command us to obey the Magistrate? It Is
very true, nor does any Body deny it. We also farther believe, that we ought to
be obedient to higher Powers, tho they make profession of a Contrary Religion
to ours; according to the Example not only of the Apostles, but also of the
Fathers of the Church, and particularly of St. Cyprian, who being accused for
having conspired against Caesar, because he was a Christian, and the Emperor
was a Pagan, made Answer. We Christians are so far from Conspiring against our
Emperors, that we put up our Supplications every day for Caesar, because he is
our Prince, although he Worship other Deities then we do. But if we believe that
it behooves us to obey Magistrates, we add withal, that we are not bound to pay
our Obedience to 'em, but in things which are not contrary to the word of God.
We believe that we ought to give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, but withal,
that we ought to give to God that which is God's, as Jesus Christ instructs us.
When the Law of the Prince agrees with the Law of God, then we obey him without
Scruple; but when the Princes Law does not correspond with the Law of God, we
make no difficulty to assert, that it is a piece of Impiety to obey that Law,
because it is better to obey God then Man, as the Apostle enjoins us. What
greater Affront can be put upon God, then to obey Men rather then Him, to
observe Human Laws, and violate Divine Commands. He is the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; When he opens his Mouth, he alone ought to be hearkened to, and
we ought not then to heed what Men ordain, when it is contrary to the Command
of our Great Master. The Companions of Daniel were highly commended for
refusing to prostrate themselves before the Statue of Nebuchadnezzar, though
that haughty Prince had ordained it under severe Penalties; but the Israelites
are blamed for having followed Jeroboam, and for having abandoned the Temple of
the True God. This Doctrine has been almost Universally received by all
Christians, and I could cite upon this Subject Tertullian, St. Ambrose, St.
Chrysostom, St. Austin, etc. The Popes Decretals are in Express Terms. If the
Lord Commands Things which are not Contrary to the Scripture, let the Servant
be subject to his Lord; but if he Commands things contrary, let him obey the
Lord of the Soul, not the Lord of the Body. If the Emperor commands what is
good, execute the Command, if it be Evil, Answer, God is to be obeyed before
Man. This is that which was practiced by the Thebean Legion; if it be true, at
least what some Authors have written, all the Soldiers of that Legion were
Christians. Now after they had passed the Alps, and were approaching near
Maximian's Army, they Understood, that the Emperor, according to Custom, was
resolved to make all his Soldiers swear Allegiance to him, upon an Altar
Consecrated to a Counterfeit Deity, and that they were to take an Oath contrary
to the Impulses of their Conscience; which having obliged 'em to draw off in a
Body from the rest of the Camp, Maximian sent his Commands to 'em to come away
and sacrifice to the Gods; to which Mauricius, Chief of the Legion, Exuperus
and Candidus, answered, in the name of all the rest, That they were all ready
to fight against the Enemies of the Empire, but that they would never sacrifice
to false Gods, nor act against their Brethren. Maximian, incensed at this
Answer, caused the whole Legion to be twice decimated, and every Tenth Man to
be put to death; but seeing that would do no good, but that the Soldiers still
continued steadfast in their Profession of the Truth, he sent the whole Army
against that single Legion, which surrounding 'em on every side, put 'em all to
the Sword; And thus, with their Blood, they sealed to that Truth, That loss of
Life is to be preferred a thousand times before acting contrary to the Light of
a Man's Conscience.

But in regard the Truth of this History is called in question, I shall produce
another which is beyond all contradiction; which is the Story of Julian's
Soldiers. That Emperor had surpised 'em by ordaining that they should strew
some grains of Incense, before they received the Largess, which he was about
to bestow upon 'em. Some of 'em being informed of the Fraud, the rest did
innocently what was required from 'em, but being told of the fault which they
had committed, they were not contented to come and cry out in the public
Marketplace, We are Christians, Jesus Christ our Lord, we have not renounced
thee. If our Hand has committed a Crime, our Will has not consented; But they
came to the Emperor, and with exalted Voices, Reserve, said they, our Gifts for
the Soldiers; Sacrifice us to Jesus Christ who is our Monarch; Burn us in the
Place where we have strewn the Incense; Cut off our hands that have committed
so great a Crime, as to stretch themselves out upon your Altars. Distribute
your Gold to those who are not sorry for having received it: Jesus Christ is
sufficient for us, and supplies all our wants. After this, they patiently and
joyfully suffered death, every one of them, except one who was pardoned by the
Emperor, but who was very sorry that he had not the Honor to abrogate his
Crime by the same Martyrdom which his Companions had undergone.

But say they, Does not St. Paul Teach us, that we ought to submit our selves
to Princes, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. It Is very true;
but it does not follow from thence, that Princes or Magistrates have any right
over the Conscience, or that they have any Power to make us believe what they
please. No Body has any Right over the Conscience, but only he that infused it
into Men. This is that which has been acknowledged in all Ages. I could easily
prove it, would I but collect together, what has been written upon this
Subject. I could cite the Fathers of the Church, Tertullian, Lactantius, St
Hilarie, and St. Athanasius. I could also cite several Councils, as the Fourth
Council of Toledo, in the year 633. wherein there past a Decree in these words.
As for the Jews, The Synod has ordained that from henceforth, that no body
shall be forced to believe. For God has compassion upon whom he will have
mercy, and hardens whom he pleases; and People are not to be saved by force,
but willingly; for the better observance of the outward form of Justice, For as
Man lost himself by obeying the Serpent willingly, so is he also Saved by
believing, and turning to God, when he calls him by his Grace. Let Persuasion
therefore be made use of, and not violence, to incline 'em to turn freely, and
without any constraint. And the Archbishop of Seville loudly condemns that
Prince, who had constrained by his Power, those that ought to have been
converted by Reason. To which may be added that same Law, of which, mention is
made in the African Codex of Monsieur Justel, by which every one is left at his
liberty, whether he will embrace the Christian Religion, or not. I could also
quote several Emperors. For example, The Emperor Constantine, who had desired
that all his Subjects might be Christians, without constraining any body. The
Emperor Jovian, who is applauded, for that he gave every body leave to profess
what Religion he pleased. The Emperor Valentinian, who set forth Laws, by which
he gave Liberty to every body to profess the Religion wherein he was bred. The
Emperor Marcian, who in the Letter which he wrote to the Archimandrites, and
the Monks of Jerusalem, We will not hale, says he, or drag any Person, whoever
he be, into the way of Truth, either by T^reats, or by Violence: and the
Emperor Constant in Pogonatus, who in his Letter to the Bishop of Rome, upon
occasion of the Sixth Universal Council* which he called at Constantinople,
expressly says, We could invite and exhort all the W^rld, to amend themselves,
and unite with the Christians, but we will constrain no body. It Is true, that
Charlemaigne used violence toward the Saxons; but his Conduct is blamed be
Ale^n^ his Tutor; as was also that of King Chilperic, by Gregory the First; and
that of King Sisebut in Spain, by the Council of Toledo. Lastly, I could cite
the Pagans themselves, who have been of the same Opinion, That no body has
Right over the Conscience, and that the Will is not to be forced, as appears by
what was written by an Indian Philosopher to Alexander. Thy Friends advise thee
to offer violence to the Indian Philosophers: Thou may remove their Bodies
from one Place to another, but thou can never force their Minds, etc. There
is no Prince or King that can make us do any thing against our Will. This is a
most certain Truth, and they who are of another Opinion, talk against the Light
of their Understandings. Thus M. Le B^et, Counselor of State, in his Treatise
of the King's Sovereignty, discussing the Question, Whether it be Lawful
sometimes to disobey the King? Answers, That in matters of Religion there is no
wavering to be admitted, between the Fear of God and Man. And he also
maintains; That in austere and harsh Proceedings, the Minister of the Prince's
Cruelties participates of his Crime; and that a Judge who pronounces an unjust
Sentence, resolving upon Injustice, and condemns the Innocent upon privy Signet
Letters, transgresses in his Obedience; because that being a Messenger of
Justice, he never ought to abuse it, to color over the Fury and Iniquity of a
Prince, who borrows the Formalities of it. What think ye, was the meaning of
St. Paul, when he teaches us that we ought to submit to Princes, not only for
Wrath, but also for Conscience sake? No other, without question, but that we
ought to submit to the Higher Powers, in things which are not forbid by the Law
of God, not only for Wrath, that is to say, because there is no resisting 'em
without punishment, and without incurring their Indignation, but also for
Conscience sake; that is, because the word of God binds our Consciences to it.
For if we allow any greater Latitude to the words, it must be said, that St.
Paul meant, that we should sacrifice to false Gods, if we lived under a Prince
that should c^mmand it. Which is that which no Man dares presume to say; Since
no Man can be ignorant of the Opinion of that faithful Servant of God in this
particular. We say no more of it here, because we have already spoken
concerning it.

CHAP. XX. Against those who believe it sufficient to live, according to the
Rules of Moral Honesty.
THere are many People who believe it to be sufficient to live well, but that
'twas no great matter what they believed: that it was enough to reform their
Manners, but that there was no necessity of tormenting a Man's self about his
Belief, and that he may be Saved in all S^cts, provided he abstains from those
Vices which the Law of God and right Reason condemn. But they who are of this
Opinion, are grossly mistaken; nor will it be a difficult thing to evince 'em.

First, if it be sufficient to lead an Innocent Life, without ever troubling
our selves what we ought to believe, it is a wonderful thing that Faith should
be so often recommended to us, and that the Holy Men of God should declare,
that without it there is no Salvation. Amend your Lives, says Christ, but at
the same time, believe in the Gospel. If thou believ'st, said Philip to the
Eunuch, and he Answered, I believe that Jesus is the Son of God. If thou
confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that
God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. But without Faith it is
impossible to please him. Heb. 11.6. He that believes in him is not condemned;
but he that believes not is already condemned; because he has not believed in
the name of the only begotten of God. And this Faith is distinguished from good
Works, as you may find in the Epistles to the Roman^, the Glatians, and in
other Places. I confess, that Faith alone without Charity, is not sufficient to
Save. Tho I should speak with the Tongue; of Men and Angels, if I have not
Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or a Tinkling Cymb^l. And tho I have
the Gift of Prophecy, and Understand all Mysteries and all Knowledge, and tho I
have all Faith, that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am
nothing, 1 Cor. 13. I confess also, that without Sanctification we cannot see
God. Heb. 12. But I averr, in the First place, that there is no Sanctification,
where there is no Faith. It Is Faith that purifies the Heart. Secondly, That
Faith ought to have Charity for its foundation, it ought to proceed, says St.
Paul, 1 Timothy 1.5. From a good Conscience, a pure Heart, and a Faith unfeigned.
Faith is dead without Charity; but there is no true Charity without Faith.

II. If it be sufficient to live morally well, I cannot conceive wherefore St.
John 1 Epist. cap. 4. would have us try the Spirits with so much care, to avoid
the receiving all Doctrines that are Taught us, Beloved, says He, Believe not
every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God. And for fear lest
Men should think that examination of the Spirits was recommended to 'em, only
to try whether they taught a strict or loose Morality; the Apostle adds, That
every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not
of God; but this is that Spirit of Antichrist, etc. If no Man then can be of
God, unless he confess Christ come in the flesh, certainly it cannot be
sufficient to live morally well, to be saved; unless Men think they can obtain
Salvation without being of God. Moreover, whence comes it that the same Apostle
in his Second Epistle, forbids the Faithful to receive into their Houses, or to
bid good speed to those that bring not the Doctrine of Christ; for it appears
that he speaks of the same Seducers, who confessed not that Jesus Christ was
come in the Flesh. Wherefore is it that he would have us stand so strictly upon
our Guards, when the business in Dispute is about the receiving a Doctrine, or
not receiving it, if it were sufficient for a Man to correct his Manners to be
Saved.

III. I draw a Third Argument from hence, that the Doctor of the Gentiles
thunders out Anathema's against those that press the observation of the Mosaic
Ceremonies, tho they carefully enjoined the practice of the Moral Law. If it
were sufficient to observe the Decalogue; would Christian Charity have allowed
St. Paul to Anathematize People who believed in Christ, only that they were
zealous of the Law. Acts 21.20. and who were only for joining Moses to Jesus
Christ, the Ceremonies of the one, to the Gospel of the other.

IV. If this Opinion which we oppose were true, whence comes it that the
Scripture condemns the Unbelievers to Eternal Pains, Apoc. 21.8. and that it
excludes Idolaters out of the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10. There can be no
other Reason given, but only because that living Morally well, is not
sufficient for the obtaining of Eternal Salvation; but that it behooves us to
believe those Truths which are Taught us.

Fifthly, If Living according to the Rules of Moral Honesty, were sufficient to
bring a Man to Heaven, I would fain know the Reason why the Apostles take so
much pains to instruct People in the Truths of the Gospel; why do they keep
such a stir to prove that Christ is the Promised Messiah, that they speak of
his Divinity and his Cross, two things that equally stumbled both the Jews, and
the Gentiles? Had it not been sufficient to have taught 'em Good Morality?

Sixthly, Whence comes in to pass, that Christ and his Apostles so frequently
exhort us to suffer for their Truth; and that so many persons have suffered
Martyrdom in Defense of the Truth, of which they might have been ignorant, if
we may believe our Antagonists, without being deprived of Salvation. There
would have been but very few Confessors and Martyrs, had Moral Honesty been
sufficient to bring us to Eternal Felicity.

To all these Proofs I add this Important Reflection, that we draw from the
Truths of the Gospel, which are proposed to us to the end we should believe
'em, the most powerful Morives that are able to engage us to Holiness. There is
nothing more prevalent to incline Men to Sanctification, then to make known to
'em a God that loves Men, to that Degree, as to give 'em his only begotten Son:
a God that abhors and detests Sin to that degree that he rather chose to expose
to Death his only Son in whom he is well pleased, then to leave Sin Unpunished.
A God that takes upon him Human Nature, and under that Nature, suffers a most
Cruel Death to make an Atonement for the Sin of Men, and to satisfy Divine
Vengeance, justly provoked against 'em.

Lastly, A God that penetrates into the most secret Folds and Concealments of
the Heart, who is to raise the Dead, and bring 'em to appear before his Throne,
to give an Account of all their Actions. It behooves us therefore to believe, if
we will live well; and to believe and live well, if we intend to be Saved.

CHAP. XXI. That the Opinion of Indifferenay in Religions has displeased almost
all People.
THere remains nothing more for me, but only to Answer an Argument which is
attributed to the King of Siam, and which we have cited already in the Third
Chapter: The True God, said he, who Created the Heaven and the Earth, and all
the Creatures therein contained, and who has given 'em Natures and Inclinations
so different, had he so pleased, by giving Bodies and Souls alike to Men, could
have inspired into 'em the same Sentiments, as to what Religion it behooved 'em
to follow; and have caused all Nations to agree and unire under one and the
same Law. But it seems that Providence permits diversity of Sects, because God
takes as much delight to be honored with different sorts of Worship, and
various Ceremonies, as to be glorified by a Prodigious Number of Creatures, the
variety of whose Beauty's set forth and Magnifies his Infinite Power.

There are some People who suffer themselves to be dazzled with this Argument;
but I beseech 'em to consider, that it may be proved as well, that God takes
pleasure in the Sins which Men Commit. For it might be said, that had God so
pleased, by giving to Men Bodies and Souls alike, he might have infused into
'em the same Sentiments for Virtue; but that it seems as if he permitted the
one to be Wise and Virtuous, the other to be very Vicious, because he takes
delight in the variety of Humors and Inclinations. Now I am apt to believe
there are very few that would approve such a Method of Arguing.

To this first Answer I may add two more. The first is, That there might be
something Plausible in this first Argument of the King of Siam, if God had not
really made known to Men what it was that he required 'em to believe, and what
they were to do. But we have proved that he has revealed it to 'em, and that
they need no more then read the Scripture with attention, and without
prejudice, to understand which is the True Religion.

The Second Answer is, That this Argument is grounded upon a false Principle,
that God might have inspired into all Men the same Sentiments of Religion, had
he not taken delight in Variety. For God is not bound to make himself known
alike to all Men. He is absolutely at his own Liberty in all his Works. They to
whom he has revealed himself have no more cause to magnify themselves then
others; and they from whom he conceals himself, have no cause to complain.

Moreover, it is not to be imagined from the Opinion which the King of Siam
seems to have concerning Indifferency in Religions, that this Sentiment derives
it self naturally into the Thoughts of all Men. On the other side, it would be
easy to prove, that the greatest part of Religions have condemned it.

The thing is clear in respect of the Christian Religion, nor is there any need
of bringing farther Proofs. The Pagans were so fixed to their Old Opinions,
that one of the most Learned Interpreters of Virgil observes, that great Care
was taken both among the Athenians and the Romans, that no body introduced New
Religions. For that Reason it was, that Socrates was condemned at Athens, that
the Jews were expelled Rome, and that the Books of Numa were burnt.

Josephus reports, that the Athenians inflicted grievous punishments upon those
that introduced new Deities, and durst presume so much as to speak against
their Law. Dionisius of Halicarnassus asserts, that not only the Greeks, but
also the Barbarians carefully preserved the Religion of their Ancestors; and
the same thing is reported of the Scythians and Persians. Nevertheless we will
not deny, what Socrates said, that it was lawful for every Body to serve the
Deity, according to the Custom of the Country, and that Foreign Gods were often
transported to Rome and Athens. But give us leave to make these Three Remarks.
1. That the Testimony of Socrates is of no Weight, because he was Condemned at
Athens. 2. That the greatest Part of those Deities which were transported to
Rome, were removed out of the Cities which the Romans had Besieged, and were by
the Priest Invited, before the whole Army, to the Capital of all Italy, where
they should have, as they said, more Temples, more Sacrifices, and more
Adorers. To which we may add, that they were therefore removed, because it was
an Opinion among 'em, that all Places had their Tutelar Deities, and that they
could not take Cities, till after they had removed the Gods that protected 'em.
3. That those Gods which were carried to Rome, Athens, and other Places, and
those that were there Worshipped under the Character of unknown Gods, are
sufficient proofs, that some Accident fell out, of which they believed some
Deity, that was unknown to 'em, to be the Author; and make it appear, that the
Romans were of Opinion, that the more Gods they had in their Cities, the more
Protectors they had. But from thence it does not follow that the Athenians and
Romans believed, that all Religions were Indifferent. For had they so thought,
why did they persecute so Cruelly the Christians and the Jews. It is certain
also, that they derided those New Gods that were introduced, as appears by the
Comedies of Aristophanes. To which I may add, that the Bramiry among the
Indians, who are the Ancient Brachmans, believe that every Body may be saved in
his own Religion, provided he follow exactly the way that God has showed him;
but that he shall be Damned, if he pursues any other.

As for the Mahometans, it is very true, that Mahomet seems to favor
Indifferency in Religions, while he says in his Alcoran, that every Man who
lives well, who Worships the true God, and does good Works, whether Christian
or Jew, obtains the Favor of his God. Nevertheless, it is certain, that in
another place he asserts, that the Law is the only way of Salvation, and
ordains his Religion to be established in the World by force of Arms. Indeed it
would be a kind of Wonder, that the Mahometans should think, that the
Christians could be Saved, seeing that the Christians aver Mahomet to be an
Impostor, and daily beg of God, that that same false Prophet may have no more
followers, but that his Religion may be rooted from the Earth. Moreover, it is
well known, that the Turks openly condemn the Persians. Which they would never
do, if 'they thought all Religions were Indifferent.

As for the Jews, the Thing is so certain, that he who questions it, must never
have read their Writings: For they continually curse the Christians, and are so
obstinately persuaded of the Truth of their Religion, nay more, That it is the
only True Religion in the World, that there have been several who have rather
chosen to die, then Violate the meanest precept of their Law.

THE END.

