THE PRESENTIMENTS OF The Grand Jury for the County of NORTHAMPTON, AT
Lent-Assizes, Anno Tricesimo quinto Regis Caroli Secundi.
WE have seen the Presentiments of the Grand Jury Sworn for the Body of this
County at Easter-Sessions last past, in these words following: AD Generalem
Sessionem Pacis Domini Regis tent' apud Northampton pro Com' predict' die
Martis prox' post Festum Epiphan' Dom' Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi
Dei gratia Angl' Scoc' Franc' and Hiberniae Regis Fidei Defensor' etc.
Tricesimo quarte.

The Presentiments of the GRAND JURY of the County of Northampton.

WE present it as a necessary Duty upon all Magistrates, to put all the Laws in
Execution which are made to Suppress Unlawful Associations, Conventicles,
Clubbs and Cabals, because we find by daily Experience, that in those Nests
have been hatched all the Seditious Practices which of late have much
endangered the Peace of the Nation.

Item, More particularly we present all Unlicensed Coffee-houses or Places
wherein False and Seditious News are invented and spread abroad to delude and
poison the People.

Item, We present all Public Meetings of any considerable number of people
who may be suspected of disaffection to the Government, to be very Dangerous to
the Public Peace, and expedient to be Suppressed, Saving where there shall
appear any lawful warrantable occasion of such meeting.

Item, We present as a thing absolutely convenient and necessary, that all Laws
be duly put in execution against all Dissenters from the Church of England, as
it is by Law established, of what persuasion soever, it being impossible to
distinguish Papists from others, Both extremes being equally dangerous and
destructive to the Established Government; And seeing that several of them take
it upon themselves to Teach and Preach in Unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles and
Meetings, and there Seduce many of his Majesty's Subjects from their Duty and
Allegiance, We do therefore desire that the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
may be tendered and administered to them and to all the Persons before spoken of,
and to all other Persons of suspected Faith and Allegiance to his Majesty and
his Lawful Heirs and Successors, for the better Discovery of men ill-affected
to the King and the State of this Realm, and consequently for the Prevention
and Disappointment of their Evil Purposes.

And we do desire such further and effectual care may be taken for the
Preservation of the Public Peace and the Tranquillity of his Majesty's good
Subjects, as in your Judgments you shall think legal and meet.

Upon delivering the Presentiments above mentioned into the Court by the
Grand Jury sworn to enquire for the Body of the County, it was Ordered, That
they have the Hearty Thanks of the Court for their Loyal and Seasonable
Presentiments, and Sir Roger Norwich Baronet is desired to acquaint some of the
Ministers of State with the Contents, humbly to beseech his Majesty to grant
his Commission to certain Persons authorizing them to give the Oaths aforesaid,
and receive his further Command.

We do fully concur with them in Sense and Judgment, and are credibly
informed, that his Majesty has well approved the said Presentiments, and
thereupon has given Commission and Power to several Lords and Gentlemen to
tender and give the Oath accordingly.

Upon Consideration thereof, we think it our duty to present it as necessary
and expedient for the Good of the King and Kingdom in General, and this County
in particular, that it be forthwith tendered to all Persons suspected to be
Papists, or of Popish Principles, and to all and other Recusants and Dissenters
from the Church of England, of what persuasion soever. And whereas we find by
experience, that ill men for the supporting of Faction and the obstructing of
Justice, do endeavor to get themselves into public Offices, Trusts and
Employments, the better to compass their wicked Designs; For the prevention
thereof, and to the end that good and lawful men may be encouraged and
employed, We do therefore present it as a necessary and previous Test, That all
Officers whatsoever, and namely High-Constables, Petty-Constables, Bailiffs,
Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and other Officers and Ministers, before
they enter upon the Execution of their Authority, may take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and produce a Certificate under the hand of the
Minister of the Parish wherein they live, That they are persons conformable to
the Church Government, and have received the Sacrament according to the Rites
of the Church of England within Twelve Months last past.

And further, Whereas all Ale-house-keepers and Victuallers, and other Persons
keeping public houses, have a great advantage of spreading Seditious News in
respect all sorts of People frequent those places, and have a great temptation
likewise so to do in regard of the Custom it draws to them; We do therefore
present it as Expedient, that none be Licensed for the time to come but those
that shall take the aforesaid Oaths, and in all things testify their
conformity to the Government in Church and State.

And whereas several Robberies have been of late committed within this County,
to the great grievance and burden of his Majesty's good Subjects, and that the
said Robbers and Thieves are aided and encouraged by several Ale-house-keepers
and Victuallers who are Confederates with them and Setters for them, We
therefore desire for the future, That all Inns, Alehouses and other public
houses of Entertainment, do give notice to their Constables or other Officers,
of all suspicious Persons that shall come to their houses, to the End that
Account may be taken of them; And on fayler hereof they may be suppressed.

And whereas several good men who would willingly perform and execute their
Duties, yet for want of knowledge or information know not how to perform the
same, and others pretending ignorance, will not do it, We therefore present,
That it is convenient and necessary for the due execution of the Laws, that all
Officers at Assizes and Sessions of the Peace, have certain Articles
comprehending their Duties exhibited to them before they make their
Presentiments, and may be enjoined to answer upon Oath particularly to them.

Subscribed by the whole Grand Jury.


