The Speech of Sir George Pudsey Knight, at the time of his being sworn
RECORDER of the City of Oxford, in the Council Chamger of the same City, on
Tuesday the Eight day of January, 1683/4 where they agreed to the Sealing the
Instrument sent by His Majesty.
Ordered by Act of Council, that Sir George Pudsey Knight, be Disired to Print
his Speech. BAKER.

GENTLEMEN,
FO(...)s at last gratified me in that earnest Desire I have always had to
(...) You, And tho I despair of making due Acknowledgements, (...) believe that
I am very sensible of the Favor you have ^^^e me, in so unanimously choosing me
to be your Servant; for such a one your Recorder is: it is a place of Honor and
of Trust, and if I discharge it not as I ought, or at least as I am able, I am
the worst of Men: I value my self much upon it, but more upon your Friendship.
Perhaps few Recorders for many Ages have been so freely Elected. Therefore
Gratitude, as well as Oath obliges me to be faithful to you, Interest also (a
mighty Motive) prompts me to the same. I am your Neighbor as well as fellow
Citizen. The little Fortune that I have lies near you; if Oxford flourish,
Elsfield will not fare the worse. Gentlemen, I hope you will have a favorable
opinion of him you have made yours. It Is no inconsiderable disadvantage to
succeed a man of such great abilities as your last Recorder was: a Person who
lived long amongst you, and knew the secret of your Corporation; yet this I
vow, I Will pray the aid of all the Inns of Court rather than you shall suffer;
and indeed why should you in any thing? Have you not opportunities enough to be
happy? Does not the Great and Good Earl of Abingdon offer his assistance, ready
at all times upon his knees to beg His Majesty's Favor in your behalf? When
he appears, make room for Oxford, cries the Guards, the Town is Loyal grown:
when at another time (if I may speak it) A modest Oxford man dare hardly peep
in Court. Why then don't we by his vast Interest let in the Beams of Majesty
upon us? Who can live without the Sun? Have we not a famous University for our
Example? Let her great Loyalty (if it be possible) be outdone by us. Can we be
poisoned at the Fountain head? Where is Learning, Piety, and Obedience
practiced, if not in this our English Athens? Who so ignorant that does not
know how eminent this place has been for Loyalty? How proud it was when
Charles the First, that Glorious King, shut himself up within our Walls? Did
not our Citizens follow Bellon ^ Call, to defend His Sacred Person from Rebels
fury? Was not this the Seat of War? With what bravery and gallentry did this
City assert its Monarch's Right? Surely the stock of Loyalty is not worn out.
How many are there in this place now that lived in those days, and played the
Soldiers part, therefore I Will not think there is an ill man amongst us, however
it happens that for some miscarriages of ours we stand not right in Caesar's
favor. We promise largely, perform poorly, and that with grudging too. The
Widow's mite, what was it? yet being all, and freely given, had the largest
thanks. Gentlemen, let me advise you to redeem your selves again: His Majesty,
whom the Law styles Head of the Kingdom, Father of the Country, Master of the
whole Family of the Nation, Chief Justice of all England, and a kind of petty
God on Earth, who for the excellency of His Person, by way of resemblance, has
Divine Attributes, as Immortality, for as King he never dies, Sovereignty,
Majesty, Power, Verity, Justice, and the like: He is merciful, of a God-like
temper, as ready to forgive as we to ask: let us think nothing but good of Him
and His Government; for fears and jealousies have been of fatal consequence to
this Nation, and still are the greatest enemies to the peace and tranquillity of
it. Sometimes they cry Popery is breaking in upon us, when God knows (as it is
lately proved) the eight hundred man is not Papist, unless all are such that
are not Dissenters from the Church, for so indeed they call us. Did not His
Majesty for several years live in Popish Soil, yet came over to us as well in
Heart as Title, Defender of the Faith. His Royal Highness, Great Britains Mars,
its Heir and Glory, has upon all occasions expressed himself highly in favor of
our Church, has settled the Protestant Religion upon such sure foundations in
Scotland, that it is not to be shaken. Are not his Daughters, (after him the
present Heirs to the Imperial Crown,) Protestants, and married two such
Princes, on design purely for to secure our Religion, when France it self
courted that alliance for its Heir? Are not the Lords of the Romish Faith
excluded the House of Peers? The Laws strictly put in execution against the
Papists? Besides, What alteration can there be in Church or State, without a
National consent? If these are signs of Popery then indeed we are in danger.
What think ye Gentlemen? You are men of reason, live among the Muses, where
Learning is at the height; Though I must confess, if a Papist must not breath
Common Air, or tread his Native Earth because he is so, it is hard. Who does not
think his own opinion best? Sometimes again, how do the fears of Arbitrary
Power, or loss of Liberty and Property call Crowds together to consult, who
shake the head, look down, cry we are lost, sad times are coming? When that is
the only way to have them come; for if a People grow Rebel-ripe, why should not
we believe that Kings who sit at stern, that pick and cull the Nation for the
wisest Heads, should not endeavor to preserve their Empire, and Dominion, as
well as we quit shops and stalls and fly to Coffee-houses to examine every
Letter, to see how things are like to go with us. Gentlemen, be not seduced by
men of Seditious Spirits: The first sin of Men and Angels was Rebellion, Heaven
and Paradise were lost by it, believe, it is the Kings Interest, as well as
Royal Inclination to preserve us in our Rights and Liberties: For take away
Property, and Industry is quickly at an end: Where is the Crowns safety then?
The empty Traveller laughs at the Thief, who values his Countries defense, that
has nothing in it which he can call his own? In some of the Eastern parts,
(the Garden of the World by Nature) a man may ride some scores of Miles, and
scarcely see a Hut; because no man has any thing but at the Princes will; With
us the prosperity of the People is the Monarchs joy: He always esteems himself
Rich, if they are so.

Gentlemen, I am not altogether a stranger to History, I can give a reasonable
account of most Countries, amongst which England has not an equal. Let us see
how matters stood with the Jews in Righteous David's days? Thou and Ziba divide
the Land was David's Judgment: against his Masters Son before his offense was
proved. A Semeter or a Bowstring leaves breathless in a minute the greatest
Subject in three parts of the World, without a Judge and Jury. In our
Neighboring Countries, Racks and Wheels are thought gentle easy ways to find
out truth. The French Kings Sword is his Subjects Charter, The Spanish
Inquisition this Worlds Hell. In Holland it self, that famed Comon-wealth, a
Herring is Excis'd nine times before it is eat, yet in these places all hush,
and still: No Plots to murder Kings, or Magistrates. Gentlemen, you must pardon
me, if I tell ye, that many times the too great Indulgence of a Prince brings
speedy ruin to a Nation. Plutarch in the life of Lycurgus gives us a Relation
of one Eurytion a Spartan King, who took a course never practiced by his wise
Predecessors, which was to cajole his own Subjects by slacking the Reins of the
Royal Authority; but see what followed, in stead of gaining upon them, they
grew so insolent, that at last they brought the Government into contempt, and
soon after the whole Kingdom into Anarchy and Confusion, and were never
satisfied, till one of their best Princes was barbarously murdered in the
streets by the Rabble, as he was appeasing a Tumult; How near a parallel is
this to his late Majesty, who I Will boldly say has done more, except the present
King, to endear the Subject then all the Kings from the Norman to this time
besides; but what come on it? That Is a Melancholy consideration. Mercy and
Goodness in Princes are too often mistaken, and called necessity and easiness
of Nature: An yielding King shall always find a craving Subject. We are like
the Israelites never satisfied, desire to return back into Egypt into our old
Bondage. I have heard, that in the late Rebellion, a Captain and his Company
has made London, that haughty Mistress of our Isle, whom we so much delight to
imitate, all in tears, her Citizens Crouching like Spaniels at the frown of a
Traitor, when at the same time they bid defiance to their King.

Are not we turned madmen, and the Devil fool, His invention is lost. Must a
Nation be destroyed, 'twice in half an age by the very same methods: A Juglers
tricks if shown more than once or twice becomes Childrens sport. Popery was the
Topic amongst the Zealous e're since I remember, and is now the only Idol that
supports the Brethrens cause: if the word were but forgotten they were Dumb,
its the holding twig. Who would not have sworn three years since that the Popes
Bull was not broken in among us? No Popery, no Papist, were the Oxford Cries,
when, on my conscience, the promoters of the Noise are nearer that persuasion
than my self; the man they aimed at. Do they not say that Kings are the Peoples
Creatures, made by them, and when the Spirit moves, may be laid aside again?
Our Church abhores such Doctrine, lets hold to that. Julian that cunning arch
Enemy of our Religion encouraged all Opinions and Sects amongst the Christians,
that tended to the rooting out of our Faith. For shame let us grow wiser, we are
in safety (if there be such a thing on this side Heaven.) Let the most factious
fellow of them all tell me what is not done to secure the Subject? He is fenced
in on every side, the Star-Cbamber, Court of Wards, High Commission Court, and
every thing which the People had the least color to call grievous, are
willingly laid aside. What a noise has quartering of Soldiers made? How are
the Law Books filled with Cases of imprisonments? To ease us of these fears
too, there is not a Soldier looks into a private house, or enters any Inn, but
as a Traveller: The Landlord makes the Bill: what Offender is not bailed out of
Prison in such a time, if not prosecuted, though Treason throw him in? if such
Acts of Grace as these will not give us grateful souls, or at least keep us in
quiet, nothing but a rod of iron will. Will there be no peace till Shebah's
head is thrown over the wall. Gentlemen, I could waste a day upon this Subject,
and challenge all the world to show me such another Government; therefore if
these be signs of Arbitrary Power, of loss of Liberty and Property, speak,
Gentlemen, be not silent. Good men will be convinced by reason and bless their
Maker for their happiness; Ill men must be watched by those that are in Power.
He that grumbles at this Government, with Lucifer would quarrel Heaven,
therefore with him deserves his punishment. But suppose the worst, that our
fears were true, that Religion and Allegiance did no ways oblige us, that his
Majesty had as many vices as he has virtues, would Rebellion mend the matter?
No, that a Nation's Ruin is ready to attest. Has not that happened to us and
much more, which foolish Rehoboam threatened the ten Tribes with, that his
little finger should be heavier upon them than his Father's Loins: that if his
Father whipped them with rods, he would beat them with Scorpions? Gentlemen, a
Civil War is like a Gaming-house, where none gets at last but the Boxkeeper.
Not long after his Majesty's return I was at such a place at a time when a
great Lord had lost no little sum; to cheer his Heart, he calls for a glass of
Wine, and drinks a health to him that had gained by play; amongst fifty
Gentlemen there was not one would lay any title to it, at last in comes a
little creeping fellow, and claims the health, protesting that he had never
brought into the house more then half a Crown at any one time, seldom so much,
yet by his cunning and advantages had heaped up many a hundred pound; so in
Civil War the Beggar mounts a horse back, and all above him go a foot; Cobblers
and Tinkers turn Lords, and Lords turn nothing. If Rebellion has success, which
to the discouragement of all Treason (it has had but once this six hundred
years in England) to change it is Government, yet the leading Rebels very rarely
die in peace. If the Prince be victorious, which certainly he is, unless when
the Almighty intends to call the Nation to a reckoning for her sins, then the
People are at mercy. Which of us would willingly call an Equal or an Inferior,
Lord? Where were our English Liberty then? Therefore since all cannot be Kings,
let us be obedient to him that is the best of Kings, think Loyalty our greatest
Interest as well as Duty. Gentlemen, consider, we have watchful eyes over us:
Esteem not them good Citizens who advise us to wrestle too much with Majesty,
for we shall have the fall. Why then, all say with me, Long live the King,
we will grant him any thing that he will have, because we are sufficiently
assured, he will ask nothing but what we may freely, and safely give.

FINIS.

