THE PROCEEDINGS To EXECUTION of the Sentence awarded against Capt. Thomas
Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse. FOR High Treason.
Who were on Friday the 20th. of this Instant July Drawn, Hanged and Quartered
at Tyburn, for conspiring against the Life of the KING, and to raise War and
Rebellion, in order to Subvert the Government, etc. Containing a Relation of
what happened during their Imprisonment, and at the place of Execution. With
their Confessions at Tyburn.

THomas Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse, having been Accused to the Kings
most Honorable Council, by the Discoverers of the Plot against the Life of His
Majesty, of many Treasonable purposes and intentions, and upon Warrant Issued
out for that purpose. Apprehended, they were on the 12th. of this instant July
brought to the Sessions house in the Old-Bayly, and there Arraigned upon the
Indictments of High Treason found against them by the Grand Jury, for
Conspiring the Death of the King, and designing to raise War and Rebellion, and
in order thereto procuring Arms, as Blunderbusses, Muskets, Pistols and the
like, to which Indictments they Pleading not Guilty; whereupon Thomas Walcot
being ordered to look to his Challenges, in order to accepting against the
Preemptory number, which is 35. of the Jurors, he made exceptions against all
such as belonged to the Lieutenancy, but in the end a Jury of 12. Men being
Sworn, they were charged with, to try the Issue between the King and him, in
case of his Life and Death: Whereupon Colonel Rumsie, Mr. Well, Mr. Keeling,
Mr. Bourn and others, swore him present at diverse Treasonable Conspiracies,
Consults, and Traitorous Contrivancies, that he was to Command a Party to
destroy the Kings Guards, whilst others Assassinated the King and Duke, etc. in
February last, at what time they were to return from New Market, and that a
Consult was held to enquire into the day of their return, and that they
differed about the particular time, though afterward they came to a Result,
but that the Fire that happened at Newmarket frustrated the Intention etc. On
the Friday following being the 13th. instant, William Hone, and John Rouse were
tried for the like Treason in Conspiring against his Majesty, him to Death,
and final Destruction to put, etc. against whom the Kings Evidence deposed,
first, that Hone had agreed to be one of the Assassinates, and was to have a
Sum of Money to buy him Furniture for that purpose, as Horse and Arms, etc. and
that he had declared he was to be one that should seize the Captain and
Lieutenant, and that at another time he declared it would never be well till
the Blackbird and Goldfinch were knocked on the Head, and that both those
Mysterious Expressions, be explained himself to mean the King and Duke of York;
these and many more were the circumstances that occurred upon this and the
former Trial, under the like circumstances was John Rouse Indicted for High
Treason and Conspiracy against the Life of the King, tending to the subversion
of the Government, so that in the end after diverse Arguments they were found
Guilty, and the day following received Sentence to be Drawn, Hanged, and
Quartered, as the Law in case of Conviction for High Treason requires, when
desiring their Friends might visit them, and time for Repentance allowed, they
were remanded to Prison, where as Men sensible of the near approach of their
dissolution they continued, being often visited by their Friends and Relations
who came to condole their misfortunes, and to comfort them with seasonable
admonitions to prepare for a future state, seeing their Lives were forfeited by
the Law, and that Execution of the Sentence passed upon them would not be long
deferred forasmuch as all hopes of pardon was vanished, and whether a Reprieve
for longer Lase would be granted to them remained doubtful; the former and the
latter being at the pleasure of His Majesty, whom they had so highly offended;
whereupon they taking the cordial advice of those that regarded their
happiness as to the Life to come, seriously considering in what estate they
remain, and what a large account they were short lie to give before the
Dreadful Tribunal of all their Actions, insomuch that at times they were not
interrupted by Visitants, their serious thoughts were for the most part
employed in Confessing their Sins, and begging pardon of God for their
Offenses, during their abode in Newgate, the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex
came to visit them, in order to persuade them to an ingenious Confession, as
far as they were conscious of the Conspiracy of which they stood Convicted,
the same Arguments used diverse other Loyal Persons, but they seemed much
reserved, saying, they had been brought to disgrace, and consequent lie to an
untimelie end, by their too much credulity, and that it was now too late to
retrive what was past, but earnestly begged pardon of those they had Offended.

Captain Walcot seldom appeared publicly, but kept himself to his retirement,
either Reading or Conversing with particular Friends that came to take their
last farewell of him. John Rouse was often observed busy as is supposed writing
for the most part, but to what effect remains yet uncertain, unless a Petition
humbly to beseech His Majesty to bestow his dead Body on his Wife. William
Hone was most dejected of the three, the fear of death having in a manner
stupifyed him, insomuch that he was hardly induced to answer to the questions
demanded of him by such as came to Examine or Discourse him. This and such like
was their behavior, till they had notice that the Warrant was Signed for their
Execution, and that they must prepare to die as this day, which heavy tho
expected news they received with different passions, continuing as men that
devoted to the Grave till this Morning, at what time being put into a Sledg,
they were drawn to the place of Execution, attended by a strong Guard of the
Sheriffs Men, and Hamblet Warders.

About 10. in the Morning, Thomas Walcot, John Rouse, and William Hone were
brought to Tayburn, the former in a Sledge by himself, and the 2 latter in
another Sledge, when being unbound, they were helped into the Cart prepared for
that purpose, and there for a while Conversed with the Ministers, when were Dr.
C^rtwrite, and Mr. Ordinary, both of them persuading them to make an ingenious
Confession, according to the best of their Knowledge: Whereupon Captain Walcot
drew out two Papers, and showed them to the Ministers, and those that were in
the Cast, saying, that he had Written them to Read publicly, which when he
was ordered to do, he with a composed Countenance did it Audiblie, the first
was in Nature of a Confession of his Enormities to God, wherein he desired
forgiveness, declaring that he had been a great sinner, and for that cause, God
had suffered him to perpetrate those Crimes, that had rendered him worthy of
Death; desiring God of his Mercy to forgive him his manifold Offenses, and that
all the World would forgive him, whom he had offended, putting up diverse
Ejaculations, desiring that he might be an Example to warn others from daring
to attempt any Treasonable Design or Conspiracy against the Life of the King,
after which another Paper he held in his hand, sometimes looking on it, and
other times not while he was speaking or making his Confession to the People,
declaring, that he was guilty of the Conspiracy, as to the knowledge thereof,
and that he was drawn into the said Conspiracy by People that promised him
great things, but that now he plainly perceived there was no Faith in Man, as
to the matter of the Assassination, he confessed to have knowledge of it, and
that he had been Incited thereto by Evil-affected Persons, whom he desired God
to forgive, Praying that his, and his Fellows present, might be the last Blood
that might be shed upon the occasion of the Conspiracy, he confessed he had
been at diverse Consults, and that once and no more to his remembrance, he had
been in the Company of two Lords, naming diverse of the Persons fled upon the
Discovery of the Plot, and Conspiracy, saying, they had drawn him unexpectedly
into the mischief, he having not long before arrived in England, and that too
late, he was conscious of his too much credulity, which had brought him to his
deserved, though shameful and unexpected End, desiring of God to prosper, and
preserve the King, or to this purpose, he also said, that when the Conspiracy
was discovered, he was promised by some who had drawn him into it, to be safely
conveyed into Holland, and that when they had decoyed him, and were conveying
him to Prison-ward, they told him they designed to Ship him, etc. and so
continued with penitential Tears, to bewail his Crimes and unhappy End, but
would not own, that he was actually to kill the King. tho he was to be
assisting therein, desiring the People to obey, and in all Cordial sincerity
endeared themselves to His Majesty, who well deserved the love and tenderest
respect of His Subjects, this being the Substance of Walcots Speech.

John Rouse began to make his Confession, when having desired God to forgive
him his Sins, he confessed that he had been at diverse Consults, and that he was
to have Acted, but as to each particular he was Ignorant, but that he had been
privy to many Treasonable Discourses, tending to an Insurrection or the like,
desiring God to forgive him his many sins, which he said had been multiplied,
but that he was above all sorrowful for offending against such great Light,
saying, the cries of a Wife and Children, were the chiefest Instigations to
make him Engage in the Wicked Design of which he heartily repented, and for
which he had justly deserved to die, declaring, that he had been drawn into it
by the Earl of Shaftesbury and others, who were now fled, and that he did not,
when first he entered into it, think the design had any ways tended to the
touching the Life of His Majesty, or that the Conspiracy would have arrived to
the height it at last did, and continued to express his Sorrow and Repentance
for his being so long conscious of so Notorious a Wickedness, and not revealing
it, which he attributed to the fear of his own Safety, by reason he had for
some time past, been under Evil Circumstances, and been rendered obnoxious to
many Persons of known Loyalty: and in Fine, he confessed most of the Charge
Evidenced against him, at his Trial in the Old-Bayly, on the 13. Instant,
grievously complaining against those that had drawn him into the mischievous
Conspiracy, begging forgiveness of all he had offended in thought or deed,
desiring God to continue the Kings Life and long Reign, etc.

Hone spoke little as to particulars, but in all general confessed that he was
G^ty of the Conspiracy, and was to have been one of the number that was to have
^sasinated the King, in his return from New-mercat, and that Goodenough a^
others had by many Persuasions prevailed with him, to undertake what he did;
(...) likewise confessed he had told Mr. West, he had spoke with Goodenough,
and ^lated to him the measures that he was to take, saying, that he had agreed
to be o^ in the Assassination with diverse other Circumstances, of which these
are the most m^terial, tho indeed his Discourse was but short in respect to the
two former.

The Confessions thus made, or as near as could be taken, thus, or to this
effect the Ministers Prayed with them, and Sung a Psalm, after which, they
severally desired to say a Prayer of themselves, which was granted, Captain
Walcot beginning first, who Prayed fervently, as being thoroughly sensible of his
Offense, desiring the Prayers of all good Men, next Hone made a Prayer, and
afterward Rouse: Each of them conducing greatly to bewail the greatness of
their Offenses, asking forgiveness, especially of His Majesty, against whom
they had so highly offended, when being asked what further they had to say,
they only desired, that God would forgive them, and that all People would take
Example by them, and not be enticed or persuaded to enterprise so great a
Wickedness as had brought them to ruin, though as they hoped God would accept
of their late Repentance, and those that heard them, and beheld their untimelie
End would take warning thereby, and avoid the like Temptations.

These, or to this effect, they having confessed and declared, the Cart was
drawn away, and after they had hung 3. quarters of an hour, they were cut down
and Quartered one by one, their Bowels burnt, etc. according to the Sentence
pronunced against them.

Printed for Langley Curtis, at the sign of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's Head,
near Fleet-Bridge, the Phanatick Printer.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty. 1683.


