REPRESENTATION BY The Sherriff Depute of Ross, Commissioners of Justiciary and
Supply, and of the Justices of Peace within the District of Ardmanach.
TO THE Com^^^^^e of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council To whom the
Consideration of the Petition anent the Watches in the Parish of Kilernan was
Remitted.
(...) having ottered several Execrable ^xpr^s^^ons, ba^ (...) Popery was the
best of all Religions, And that the Devil did only Ordain Protestant Ministers,
etc. The Minister and Session of Kilernan, Ordained him to stand in Sackcloath,
and pay a Mulct to the Poor. Whereupon he (in presence of Reid Castle, his
Master, the Reader, and some of the Elders,) Declared, That some person shall
smart for that days work.

Mr. John Mackencie the Minister attested, all then present, That if he should
suffer, there was reason to suspect John Glass for it: And within a short time
thereafter, falls into Vehement Burnings, Entream Sweatings, and many other
pret^rnatural Torments, whereof the Physicians could give no Tolerable account.

But Donald Moir, a person under, the common repute of a Warlock, being
challenged as the Author, did distinctly confess, and persist therein till his
death, That John Glass employed him to put the Minister out of the way. In
order whereunto Donald assumes, his Confederates. And Agnes Dess (always,
bruited as a Witch,) has acknowledged, That She her self with Donald Moir,
Agnes Urich, Agnes Chisholm and Others, made an Effigies, etc. And that the
Devil in likeness of a Black Man, with cloven feet, and bigg hands, did assist
them in the Operation!

There was likewise found under the Ground, in Agnes Desses house, a Clew made
of Men's hair, A, dish bored in the side, and ^lifted, in the bottom, etc. And
Donald Moir confessed, that John Glass promised him a free house, gave him a
peck of Meal in hand; And thereafter enquired. if the Turn was done? etc. And
being interrogat, Where the Corpse was at the time? Answered. That he knew not,
unliss it were in the custody of John Glass, or Donald Mackwilkie his Father
in Law, a person always suspected of Witchcraft.

John Glass on notice of Donald Moirs Discovery, comes with his Son and Servant
to a Friend of the Minister, And, besides several unbeseeming expressions,
Threatened, that they would shoot him, if he should challeng them as Authors of
his decease. And likewise when the Sherriff and Commissioners had committed
Donald Moir to prison till a Commission from the Council should come up, he is
found strangled; which could not have been done by himself, seeing both his
hands and feet were tied, and the Shekels were found knocked off, And the rope
was fast (...) ^op of the h^ (...) Witnesses in the pris^^ with him at the
time, heard his last word, Viz: Let me alone in the Dev^^^ name, for ye have
done me too much mischief already: And it can be proven th^^ John Glass Sons
were absent from the house that night, etc. All which are vi^^lent
presumptions, that Donald Moir has been cut off by John Glass, for preve^ting a
Legal Testimony before an Assize, when the Commission for Trial we^^ arrived.

There are many other Evidences which were adduced before us, and her^upon we
sent instructions for obtaining a Commission from his Majesty's Pr^vie Council,
which the Vaccation did obstruct.

But in the mean time John Glass foreseeing what might follow, at last
presen^^^ a Bill of Advocation to the Lords of Justiciary, Craving, That his
Cause m^^ be Advocate, Not only from the Sherriff, and all other inferior
Judges; B^^ likewise from any Commission of Council that might come to be
obtained; But the A^vocation is only granted from the Sherriff, and other
inferior Judges.

It is now Humbly Represented,

1 mo. That a Commission ought to be granted, Because, otherwise, t^^
Criminals cannot miss to escape: in respect of the Distance of the place, so
tha^ multitudes of witnesses, (many of whom are Old,) and Assizers (who are
mo^^ fit to be of the Neighbourhead) cannot come up, Especially, considering
that thi^ would amount to a great Expense: And many both of the Criminals and
Wi^nesses, can only speak the Highland Language, which will difficult the Trial
(...) this place.

2 do: The Advocation can be no ground to hinder the Extension of this
Commission, even to John Glass, both in Respect, that its not doubted, But the
Lords of Justiciary will concur in the Remit: And because a Commission from
the Council is not precluded by the Advocation, seeing it only discharges, and
Advocates from inferior Judges.

Hence there needs no Answer to the Impertinency of the Reasons of Advocation,
and many Calumnies laid against us therein, As if we had not taken the Oaths,
etc. But it is known who is the Father of Lies; And we had nothing in our View
in all the pains and Expenses that we have been at, But the Glory of GOD, the
Safety of our Country, and the Exhonoration of our Consciencies, by a well
grounded Zeal against those Enemies of Heaven and Earth, who are numerous and
distinctly known in these parts; And the Inha^i^^nts since this late Discovery,
are in a great Con^, (...) bringing these Miscreants to Judgemen^^.

Besides, there was no process, and consequently, there could have been no
Advocation quoad John Glass; And he is so (...) a great Criminal by the common
belief of the Country, That if he should escape a Trial, (which c^^^^t miss, if
he be not in the Commission,) They will esteem (...) to his Revenge, and to all
the Instruments which he can be permi^^^^ to s^^r up by the Assistance of the
Devil.

In Respect whereof, etc.


