A Representation to the High Court of PARLIAMENT, of some of the most Palpable
Grievances in the COLLEGE of JUSTICE, (both as to its Constitution and
Administration) and several Members thereof.
IT is evident from the whole Tract and Current of our Statutes and Records,
that the King's Council were first Institut the Supreme Judges in all Civil
Causes, and that the Council was Nominat and appointed (for advising the King
in all matters of State and others) by His Great Court of Parliament: But by
the 65. Act, Par. 3. James 1. It is Statute that there be some Commissioners of
Parliament chosen per vices, who with the Chancellor shall sit at three times
in the year, for cognoscing and Determining of all Causes, that were formerly
cognosced by the King or his Council, and who were also called Lords of
Session, as is clear by the Act 61. par. 14. Ja. 2. Of which Judicature so
Constitute, there was small or no Alteration until the 36. Act, 5. par. Ja. 5.
Whereby in place of the said Committee of Parliament, there is a fixed College
of Justice Institute, to consist of Fourteen able Qualfied Persons, and a
President; And for declaring their Qualifications and prefixing Rules for
Administration of Justice, the whole subsequent Acts of that Parliament were
made; And by the 68. Act thereof, there is several Privileges and Immunities
granted to the said Lords as is at length therein contained, and by the 93.
Act of the 7. Parliament of the said King, these privileges are again
ratified, and the Popes Approbation and Confirmation thereof, and which is also
ratified by Queen Mary, Parliament 2. Cap. 1. and James the 6. Parliament 1.
Cap. 18. And by many other subsequent Acts of his, and all other Parliaments;
All which do still go on in the style of ratifying and approving of the
foresaids Privileges. But till this day never any Restrictions or Limitations
put either upon their Nominations or exercising the said Office, which has been
got waved by the Interest of these who were Nominat and in Office, and their
Sway and Power which they had in all Succeeding Councils and Parliaments,
whereof many of them were also ordinarily Members. So that their power is of a
long time come almost to be Arbitrary. Seeing they assume not only the Power of
making Acts of Sederunt, whereupon some of the greatest Estates and Securities
of the Nation are now founded, but also to expound clear Acts of Parliament,
expressly contrair the positive words thereof, which is in effect to repeal the
samen, thereby assuming the Legislative Power, since ejus est interpretare
cujus est tondere: And albeit they might pretend they could not otherwise
explicat their Jurisdiction, and whatever they might claim right to, during the
interval of Parliaments, yet after they are incited and sitting, all such Acts
and Interpretations ought to have a Parliamentary Sanction and Ratification,
other ways to have been looked upon, as deeds not Approveable by the States,
nor Wisdom and Justice of the Nation: And all this was predicted by the Learned
and Sagacious Buchannan, who in the 14. Book of his History near the end
thereof, does express himself in their Terms; Quo die collegium Judicum
Edinburgi constititum est ab its, cum ab initio multa utiliter essent ex
cogitata ut jus equabile Diceretur, tamen qui sperabatur eventus non est
confecutus. Nam cum in Scotia nullae pene sint Leges, praeter conventuum
decreta, eaque pleraque non in perpetuum, sed in tempus facta, judicesque, quod
in se est, lationem legum impediant, omnium ^^^ium bona Quindecim hominum
arbitrio sunt commissa quibus and perpetua est potestas, and Imperium plane
Tyrannicum: Quippe, quorum arbitria sola sunt pro legibus. I think it not fit
to Translate it in English, least the Vulgar should be tempted to look upon him
as a Prophet.

It may be therefore justly thought, that in this healing Juncture, there be a
slender Representation made of such things, as seem to be palpable grounds of
Grievance in that Court, in the right Constitution and Administration whereof,
all persons from highest to the lowest are, or may be eminently and dearly
concerned; Seeing their Lives and Fortunes, may become the Subject of their
consideration, and therefore there can be nothing more acceptable to the
People, or worthy the trouble of the Representatives of the Nation, nor to
redress what may be amiss therein, and seeing in many things the same is faulty
both as to its Constitution and Inhability of the Members, as also in the male
Administration though rightly constitute, their Points are offered as worthy
Consideration, Relative to the Lords, Advocats, and Kings Advocat, Lord
Register, and Clerks of Inner and Utter House; And also an hint of some
particular Grievances, of which in Order,

Primo, Seeing by the Laws of all Nations, and in special by the Act 134. Par.
12. Ja. 6. It is thereby Statute that to all Vacations in Session, none shall
be presented, but Men fearing GOD, of good Learning, Knowledge, and Practick of
the Laws, and having sufficient living of their own; and farther that none be
admitted, unless they be sufficiently tried and known by the King and Lords,
and have in yearly Rent an 1000. Merks, or 20. chalders of Victual; If in
Justice or Law any ought to be admitted to that Function but such as Quadrat
therewith, the samen never being yet repealled by any Act of Parliament,
whatever Violations or Subversions have been made thereof, by unjust streatches
and Court Recommendations, whereby persons have been thrust into that Office,
whose Inclinations not Education did never Level at the meanest Employment in
that Court. And it arrived to that height of Indifference, what persons were
admitted to that Office, that it was the ordinar Assurance to such as the Court
intended to gratify, that they should either be one of the Lords of Session,
or a Captain of Foot, (a pretty Alternative indeed) as was lately proposed to a
Gentleman, to move him to end a Bargan, with an then Eminent Statesman.

2do. Seeing that the putting of Persons in that Office not qualified as said
is, must inevitably occasion great purloining and delaying of Justice, to the
prejudice and ruin (if not all) at least of many who shall come to have
Dependencies before them. If it be not therefore the Concern of the States and
People, that not only the said Law be brought in Observance, but some new
Sanction superaded thereto, that may make the samen more effectual; And in
special, that seeing we are now come to that consistance, as to have many
Subtilities and Niceties both in our Statutes, Customs and Practicks, that
none be admitted to the said Offices, but such (beside what is above
mentioned) as have also been Legally admitted Advocats, according to the usual
forms of Trial; and have practiced several years therein Heartily, and with
that Integrity and Ability which ought to be Indispensably requisite in a
person to be promoted to the foresaid Station, and by this the Bench will as
well have a Natural, as a Legal Supperiotity to the Bar: For it cannot but be
thought that Men's Abilities are much misplaced, when the Reasons of these at
the Bar, are too strong for these who are to Judge of them. The Discovery
whereof, will force that Respect to be transferred to the Bar, which ought to
be paid to the Bench, and make Clients murmr when that which is proponed for
them, is not discust with Reasons suitable to these alleged in their Favors;
And tho at first Fifteen was a sufficient number, for all the matters that then
did occur, yet now seeing there is at least ten Causes for one, and Lawyers are
arived to that pitch of Debating, both with greater Accuratness and length; Nor
was at the Infancy of the said College, that it may seem rational that the
number of the Lords should be augmented, and that none of them should be Members
of any other Court, thereby to divert their Attendance; And if any thing occur
in other Courts, as in Council or Exchequer, that requires the opinion of
Lawyers, (which was the first pretenses for putting some of them there) that
the opinion of the whole Lords be taken thereanent, and not to be determined by
any particular one, that may chance to sit there.

3tio. These admitted to the said Office, being only Lawyers of known Ability
and Integrity, if it be not fit that they preside per vices, at the least, that
nine of them (which by our Law is declared to be the Quorum of the Session) may
be capable of that Office. Whereby there will great Advantage accress to the
Leiges, seeing there will be greater dispatch of Justice; (throw delay whereof
most persons are ruined) For none will deny considering the present throng of
Affairs,) but that it is impossible that one single person can digestedly
consider, not only all the Causes debate in presentia, but also twenty or
thirty Prolix Bills, and tedious Informations of causes to be reported in one
day, which must either be fully digested by him, or the matter will be only
Superficially scruified over, which gives als great ground of new Billing or
informing as if the matter had never been heard: And President Stair for
himself, in the Epistle Dedicatory to the first volume of his Practicks;
Declares that the uneasiness thereof made him to quite that Office, which he
observed to have sunk Sir John Gillmor his predecessor a man of great strength,
both of Body and Spirit: Likeas, albeit there were not the inconvenience
foresaid in the constancy thereof, which is sufficient to enforce an
Alteration; Yet the Leiges are not so fully secured in point of Justice,
because the fixing the Presidency in one, makes such an unequal Balance in
that Court, that what ever side he shall favor or incline to, is almost
certain to carry the cause; Whereas if it be lodged in a Plurality, or in them
all by turns, there will be no such hazard; And it is commonly received that
Plures Difficilius corumpuntur quam pautiores, and that plus vident oculi quam
oculus: From all which it is most consequential both from Reason, Justice and
the Practick of other Nations, that either the Office be Circulat among all, or
the Plurality thereof, as said is

4to. Seeing great inconveniencie and confusion does arise throw the advising
of Causes, receiving of Reports, and reading of Bills with closs doors, neither
Parties nor Advocats being allowed to be present, whereby there is great
mistakes at the time of adviseing Causes, where the Probation is by an great
number of Witnesses, or by many several Writs, which is only overly read by the
Clerk, which occasions great mistakes in the Lords, whom that part in the
Witnesses Depositions which evinces the Probandum have escaped, especially
where it may be Culled only out of two, of twenty: And the like may be also
said, where many writes are produced for proving; Whereas if matters were
advised with open doors, and Advocats present who have seriously consulted the
samen, it would be easy for them to point out to the Lords, the particular
Testimonies and Clauses of Writs; or the parts thereof that do evince what is
to be proven: And as for the taking in Reports of Causes debate in the utter
House, the inconveniencie is yet greater; seeing it is Notture (as having daily
occured) that where there are several points to be reported, some of them are
omitted, yea even where there is but one, yet if it be so far followed in the
Debate, as to come the length of Triples, or Quadruples, some of these, at
least the principal Reasons enforcing, the Relevancy thereof will also be
omitted, and which are the occasions of the many numerous Bills, which are
daily given into rectify such mistakes; And which would be altogether
needless, if things were done with open doors, in presence of Parties and
Procurators, as said is: And which is the known Practice of most (if not all)
other Nations.

5to. All the Premises being thus rectified; If it be not both Just and
expedient, that Extrajudicial Solistations be discharged, either by the
Clients, or any other person, who may be thought to have Interest in, or
Influence upon the Judge, and that under the Certification that it shall be
equal to Bribery, if the Judge shall willingly receive the samen, and if the
Party or any from him shall obtrude it, that either he shall cadere causa, or
at least the Judge shall be incapable to vote in that cause, which as it is
Just and Expedient: So it is Consonant to the Act of Sederunt, made against
Solistations, 6. November, 1677. And the Practice of all other Nations, where
Solisting is looked upon as equal to corrupting.

6to. That in regard the Sons and Brethren of the Judges, are ordinarily
employed upon the presumption of the supposed Influence, that they may have
upon or ready access to him. That therefore none be allowed to Judge, or singly
to Cognosce any cause, where such Dependents or Relations are employed as
Advocats or Agents; And that it shall be a sufficient Declinator of the Judge,
that any such was employed in it.

It may be also thought most improper, (if not Absurd) that the Clerk of
Register should be an ordinar Judge, as one of the Lords of Session; For it was
never heard, nor is it consistent with the Constitution of any Court, that one
person should both be Clerk and Judge therein, and the common Brocard of Law
is, that Judex and Clericus faciunt forum, which states them as clear distinct
Offices; and it is as incongruous as for one Man both to be Clerk and Advocat:
For the Clerk is truly the common Trusty of the Court, for writting and putting
in Record what is there Debate and decerned; And which after it is put in an
Act or Decree, can neither be recalled nor redargued (if fairly done) either
by the Judge or Advocat: So that he is Check to both, yea he thereby so fixes
himself, as that he can neither innovat nor alter what is Extracted and done;
And the Law expressly says, nec credendum Judici, nec clerico, nisi quatenus
constat ex actis; so that there can be nothing more gross, nor to lodge the two
Offices of being Clerk and Judge in one Person. Nor does his Greatness and
Multiplicity of Offices stop here, but he is Clerk of Parliaments and
Conventions, and upon him depends all the six Clerks of Session; Clerk of the
Bills, Clerks of the Register of Seasins, Clerk to the Register of Hornings,
Clerk of Chequer, Clerk to the Admission of the whole Nottars of the Kingdom,
together with many others which I here omit. And most of these being Offices
wherein things pass of Course, and have Emoluments that might gratify very
considerable persons; Yet are all swallowed up by this Leviathan, which
therefore ought to be divided, and these entrusted to depend immediately upon
his Majesty. Especially seeing there is now so many men, and yet few
employments, being absorbed by the exorbitant Extent of this, and some other
such Offices.

As to Advocats what and how Honorable that Office is, the Encomia given and
privileges granted by the Emperors thereto, does sufficiently demonstrat with
what respect it was looked upon by them: For Theodosius and Valentinian by a
Novel Constitution, expressed themselves to this purpose; Let those who deserves
to be Advocats be esteemed worthy of all Honor, for what Honor can we Judge
these unworthy of, who by their Life and Eloquence, preserves not only the
Republic, but the private Interest and lives of Persons. And the Emperor Leo,
farther adds, in their words, Suaeque defensionis viribus sepe publicis in
rebus, ac privatis lapsa erigunt fatigata reparant, non minus provident humano
generi, quam si preliis atque vulneribus patriam parentesque salvarent
clarissimis anumerantur militumque privilegiis frunutur. That therefore none be
admitted to that Office, but such as pass the ordinar Trial by public and
private Examinations and Lessons, and that it be declared not to be leisome for
the Lords to admit any upon Bills, under the pain of amitting an years Sallary.
Likeas that it shall be a sufficient Defense for any party against whom any
such Advocat shall be employed, that he was not Legally admitted, as said is.

It is evident to the World, how far this Nation has degenerat, not only from
the practice of the common Law, especially Imperial Roman Constitution; But
also from its own Customs and Statutes foresaid, made at the Institution of the
College of Justice, and the Custom and Practice of all other well governed
Nations; That by Court recommendations, or particular Favor or Interest in
some single Senator. These whose Education had never any tendency that way; but
on the contrare were educate for Soldiers, Merchants and other such Extranious
Employments, after they were discouraged in these, were admitted to the said
Office, summarly upon a Bill, without any previous Trial, either of their
Ability or Integrity. And seeing they had neither Art nor Merit, whereby to
promote their Interest by fair Means, and having undertaken the samen, of
purpose to reap Advantage thereby, it cannot be imagined how these Designs
should be effectuate, but by abusing that Trust, which some of the Ignorant
might repose in them, and by whom daily Clamours are made, that they are
cheated and abused by their Lawyers, which to undecerning Hearers is a
reflection, upon that Noble Office, whereas the Actors are such as never did
merit that Designation: And what can be imagined to have been the Design of
such Recommendations and Admissions, but that there might be pliable Men put in
to serve some State turn; That when those who were in Office refused to solve
according to their Inclination, what should be proposed, but that such as were
reastie should be turned out, and such put in their places as would give
opinions at their discretion, as these Judges in England had done, thereby to
give a Color of Law for their Proceedings, to the amusing of the undecerning
People.

What ever latitude might have been taken by the Lords in former times, yet it
ought not now to be assumed. Primo, Because by the 64. Act, Par. 5. Ja. 5.
Whereby the particular persons therein mentioned are ordained to be
Procurators, and the motive is said to be that they are men of best Name,
Knowledge and Experience, and thereafter is subjoyned that if any other Cunning
Men would desire to admitted to that Office, they should be received for
completing the said number, so that the Lords are there limited by that first
Fundamental Law, so that none be admitted, but such as are cunning, that is to
say, are Men of Art, Knowledge and Experience, 2do. Albeit there might have
been some Latitude, taken by the Lords in admitting of persons not qualified,
at the Infancy of the College, when few were educate for that Employment: Yet
now when the number of such is so incressed, far above what is necessar, and
these Men of Literature, Integrity and Quality, It is not only unjust and
unwarrantable in it self summarly, without Trial to admit others, as said is;
But is also Discouraging and Disadvantagious to those young Gentlemen, who has
spent their Time and Estates at home or abroad, in fitting themselves to serve
in that Employment.

3tio. Seeing there is so many Persons who have Prosecute that Study, so as that
upon Trial they may be justly admitted, yet seeing the number has so increased
and multiplied of late, that there can not be suitable Encouragments expected
for all, whereby some may be tempted to ungenerous Courses and Practices, such
as Instigating or buying of Pleas, or the like; That therefore the number be
retrinched to Forty or Fifty, and that none be admitted but upon their
Decease, and that these who are tried and ready to be admitted, serve as Agents
and Extrajudicial Managers of Process, and that all others be secluded, but
such as have studied the Laws, and are ready to be admitted upon Vacancie,
whereby also these who have assumed (without any previous trial) the name of
Agents will be secluded and rendered useless; And the Laws already made
discharging them, will thereby become effectual.

4to. Seeing the said Employment is dignified by the Encomia and privileges
foresaid, and that they differ from the Lords, not in Kind but Degree; That
therefore according to the Custom of France, England, and other Neighbor
Nations they be covered when they plead, and that the mutual Compellations be
such as is used there, seeing otherwise the most Eminent Advocats shall have no
Privilege, above what is allowed their Servants

It cannot be denied but the College of Justice was long Institute, before
there was any particular person appointed to be Kings Advocat; and the first
appointed was in Queen Mary's Minority, at which time there was but very few
Affairs that did occur, wherein her Majesty's Advocat might be concerned: So
that tho one was at that time sufficient, and the interest of the persons
Nominat, since has been always so great with the King and Court, that it has
been als easy to turn them out, as to procure the least Alteration thereof, but
now in this Age when Pleas are increased and multiplied, to Ten for One more nor
was at the said first Appointment; Especially such wherein his Majesty's
Advocat is principally concerned, as Riots, private crimes, open Rebellions,
besides many other Civil caises unheard of at that time. That therefore his
Majesty's interest, and of the State, (whereof he is an Officer) should now at
least be lodged in three or four, picked out by the States for that effect.
Primo, Because not only are matters multiplied as said is; So that it is
impossible for any single person to exercise the samen, but either with loss to
his Majesty by neglect of what ought to be done, or doing what ought not to be
done; as by intending Malicious and groundless Processes against Subjects;
Whereas if the Office were Collegiat in a number of fit and Qualified persons,
It were not to be feared but upon joint advising, they would discover what
Processes were groundless Vexations and State streaches, so as they would be
choked in the Bud. 2ly, It can be made appear that in the year 1683. and 1684.
when most of the Heretors and Inhabitants of the Western Shires, were either
cited in as Pannals or Witnesses, for proving Reset or Converse, and others the
like Crimes, who would have attended some twenty, some forty or sixty days,
before they could be got examined by the Advocat, who was otherwise taken up in
Session, Council, Exchequer, or other Courts, whereby these Shires are
conjectured to have been at the Expense in some few years, of upwards of
300000. Merks, in simple attending at Edinburgh, which was occasioned by the
being of one single Advocat as said is. 3tio, As the stating that Office in
more, would be Advantageous both to His Majesty and the Leiges for the Reason
foresaid, so also upon this ground, that thereby each of them might have their
proper Posts, viz. One for the Council and matters of State, an other for the
Exchequer and matters of Revenue, a third for the Justice Court, and the fourth
for the Session and Commission of the Kirk; yet not so to be posted as one of
them to exclude another, but that the persons concerned might Address equally
to them all, and this would also secure the Leidges, against the inconveniency
that attends the fixing this Office in one single Person, which makes them
frequently both Arbitrary and unaccessible; Besides that it has all the
Grievances which can accrue from a Monopoly, which is Reprobate in all Law.
4to, In Neighboring Sciences, such as Divines, Physicians, His Majesty has
always three of four at least; and there is greater ground for multiplying of
Persons in this Office. 5to, It will nothing add to the charge of his Majesty's
Expense, seeing their many years by past, the Sallarie and Pension allowed to
that Office, may be sufficient Competencie tho divided in four, seeing they
will also remain Advocats for the Leiges, and whose Employment will center to
them upon that account: In respect of all which there ought if not four to be
at least two, as has been in some former times, with two Solicitors.

As to the Clerks of the Inner and Utterhouse, as all Men in public office
ought not only by our Law, but by the rules of common prudence and Justice, to
be persons or known Ability and Integrity; It being impossible if they be
otherways, but that the Leidges must egregiously suffer either by their
Ignorance or fraud, considering how many occasions they have to trincket (if
they be base) they having the custody of the Securities of the Nation, and
thereby become Masters of many of the secrets of their Affairs, and who may add
or omit both in Interloquitors and Deliverances of Bills, which may chance to
be the ground of an extracted Decree, against which our Law has small or no
remed, unless the abuse of the Clerk and the injustice of the thing it self be
most gross and palpable, and even when it is such, Persons are put to a vast
charge, trouble and expense in clearing thereof and in being reponed against
the samen, so that means ought to be fallen upon, for crubbihg of such
intolerable Practices, which may so overawe, as that none may hereafter darr
to commit the like, and that whatever may be detected which may be gross and
willful, that thereupon Deprivation (at the least) be inflicted.

2do. That none be admitted per saltum to the said Office, unless they have
gradually ascended, from being some competent time Educat in Clerks Chambers,
or that they have been practicing Advocats, Writers to the Signet, or the like.

3tio. As to their Fies and Allowances the exorbitancie thereof, are so many
and Noture, especially since the Act of Regulation 1672. that it is fit there
be Commissions renewed for rectifying thereof; And albeit such have been
granted by several Parliaments since, yet so far have these in Office prevailed
for shifting thereof, that the persons were never yet condescended upon, to
have been insert in these Commissions, and the Acts were Printed blank contrair
to all former Laws and Practick of the Nation, whereby the persons Names are
always engrossed in the Acts and Printed, therewith, and particular dyets
appointed for that effect, to be kept under severe Penalties, else the Law is
only rendered redicule, as wanting Certification or Compulsorial.

These being some of the general Grievances, whereof the O^^dure and throng of
a Parliament can only be expected to judge (...) there are many others which
may truly and fitly be given (...) any Commission that shall be appointed for
the effect; Such (...) to make effectual Laws for discharging the Side Bar;
Item, To ^^viate the binding officious Compearances in Decreets, (by Advocates)
upon the Lieges whereby many of them have been high^^ prejudged, when Advocates
did either of themselves, or at the desire of Agents, or others, take days for
Defenders, to give th^^^ Oaths in ordinar Actions, or to produce Writes in
Improbatio^* And whereof the Client was never Advertised, but Sentence (...)
out against them, and which is irrevockable in our Law. T^^ therefore in these
and such like cases, the Compearer ought (...) have a Written Mandate, at the
least Papers in his hands, which (...) import the samen. Item, How far Clerks
shall be liable for (...) produced to them, and how long. Item, How long Writes
^^^duced be the Defenders in Reductions and Improbations, oug^^ to lie in the
Clerks hands, seeing many of them are miscart^^ by lying too long therein. Item,
If the Principals be once ^^duced, so that the Pursuers may either take
Doubles, or N^^^ thereof, if they ought to be again produced, until the Caus^^
Advised. Item, That the Money lying in the Clerk to the (...) Hands, as the
Expense modified at suspending inferior Decr^^ and Protestation Money, and
others of the like nature not ra^^^ up by the Parties, be given up for
advancing the Library of (...) Faculty. Item, That the Commissars and
Sheriff-Deputes be chosen of these Advocates, who will be laid aside upon the
Restriction of their number to forty or fifty, as said is: These and in^^^
numbers of others of the like nature, which may be both re^^^sented to, and
regulated by the Commission which may be ^^pointed for that effect I here
commit until the Parliament so think fit, to appoint the same, to consist
partly of Persons of (...) several Offices within the said Court, who best
knows what is to (...) Rectified therein, and may be the fittest mutual Checks
to other.

FINIS.

