Mr. John Petrige's, NEW PROPHECY OF This present Year 1684.
WHEREIN Are foretold the most considerable Events and Mutations in
Great Britain, France, Ireland, Holland, Germany, Italy, etc. According to the
Opinion of the best Astrologers.
THat the Superior have influence on the Inferior Bodies, no man that has not
given himself over to stupidity can deny; but that their Influence is so great
that their Effects are inevitable, is more then we affirm: For to what end do
we disturb and amuse the World with the unpleasant Rumors of horrid and
dreadful Calamities that seem approaching, but to warn and incite men to a use
of means for the preventing of severe Judgments, which otherwise will overtake
them.

We read in the Holy Scripture, that they were placed in the Heavens for Signs
of Seasons, of Night and Day, Winter and Summer, etc. Now if we, besides the
proper and natural meaning of the Words, do likewise use a Metaphorical
Interpretation of them, to wit, that they also are for Signs of the Night or
Winter of Adversity, and the Day or Summer of Prosperity; I humbly conceive, we
do not thereby pervert the true meaning of the Scriptures. And tho we are
forbid in the Holy Scriptures to be afraid or dismayed at the Signs of Heaven,
viz. To be possessed with such a Fear as is inconsistent with our confidence in
God, or as disturbs us in performing the Duties we owe, as Creatures, to our
great Creator, or so as to become Infatuate, that through the excess of Fear we
suffer our Reason to be so far Eclipsed that we cannot put it in exercise,
either for our Temporal or Eternal well-Being: Yet I do not see but we may
Lawfully so far be admonished by them, as to forsake an evil course, and to
deprecat that great Wrath that by our innumerable iniquities we have drawn down
upon us. I hope therefore that the candid Reader will concur with me in my
design in publishing this following Prediction on this present Year, in which I
shall be as brief as possible.

I shall begin my Judgment from the time that the Sun entered Capricorn; at
which time the Face of the Heavens in the Meridian of London, is thus: Aquarius
Nine Degrees Culminant, and Gemini 14. Ascending, the Moon 12. Degrees in
Aquarius, and Mars in Sixteen: the Sun 00 Degrees in Capricorn, and Venus in 8.
Degrees of Capricorn: Mercury 14 Degrees in Sagittary, and Saturn in 4 Degrees,
and Jupiter in 21 Degrees of Virgo. There is not one Planet well seated in the
whole Scheme; the Moon is applying to the body of Mars and square of Mercury;
these two Stars govern the Brain and the Faculties thence proceeding; the Moon
the substantial part, and Mercury the Actions of it. Now what may we expect,
when the two Governors of Reason are Afflicted by Mars, the great Corrosive
among the Stars? The effects thereof will be (according to the Opinion of most
famous Astrologers) strange Rumors, effusion of Blood, and much deceit and
lying. And this flows, either from the violence of the present impending
Affairs; or from the effects of such pernicious and wicked Counsels that shall
be contrived under the influence of this Ingress. But this is further
aggravated, if we consider the part of the Heaven where it falls, whether
Ecliptically or Mundanely; for the Ecliptical place of this Conjunction is
directly opposite to the place of the last Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
Leo: this does greatly increase its Malignity; but Mundanely, it happens in
this Figure and Meridian too, in the tenth House, the Angle of Honor.

The great Masters of this Science do agree, that the Moon in Conjunction with
Mars, threatens Mankind with all kinds of Calamities that belong to Mars; and
as they are so near Mid heaven, it shows its expedition, and that what depends
on this Ingress, will shortly appear.

In the beginning of this Year we meet with an opposition of Saturn and Mars in
cold Signs, Virgo and Pisces, after which follows an Eclipse of the Sun, which
has a very bad influence. That Epidemick Distemper of Itching after Novelties,
will be no less common now, than it has been these several Years past. Saturn
and Jupiter being got into Virgo, and Saturn being there in Reception with
Mercury, things will be Managed with great Secrecy and Policy. And the former
Opposition in a little time will discover it self in making strange Divisions
among the people; and to see one impeaching another will be no matter of
Admiration. Also not a few shall pay their last debts to Nature.

Saturn by his Retrograde motion returns into Leo, at which time many Pamphlets
are dispersed, for which the Authors and Printers are called to answer. Sol
opposes the 2 Superiors. Many forsake honest Callings and turn Highway-men: The
Popish Priests bestir their stumps, for their God is like to be taken away from
them. The Turk is busy in his Neighbor Countries, and many shortly may taste
his Mercy. Mercury is opposed again by Jupiter. Old Sores begin to pain. The
City is uneasy, and the Country little better. The Trine of Jupiter and Venus
may give some ease, but heals not the Wound. Mercuries weakness occasions decay
of Trade. Saturns Square to Venus will make Women wear Tears on their Faces
instead of Pearl. The Effects of the Comet 1680. will I fear ere long be
discovered. God preserve the Life and Health of all our great Ones, and our
City from Contagious Distempers. The Square of Sol and Saturn denotes Fears,
Anxieties and Imprisonment to great Ones, and that Rulers and Magistrates will
fall out among themselves; and the Conjunction of Mars and Mercury fills the
Nation with Thieves, and I fear the time is at hand, when no body can call any
thing their own save Tribulation and Affliction.

The Conjunction of the Sun and Mars will have a strange Effect in some
Countries in Europe, and some Prince perhaps East from England finds it true.
Let them therefore be wise betimes. Some Moneyed Men shall suffer loss, and
that from the breaking of some great Banker or Bankers, in or about the City of
London; some Clergy men may be frowned upon by his Prince, and several
belonging to the Law turned out.

The Eclipse of the Sun Jul. the 3d. is very considerable. Its happening in the
9th. and 8th. Houses, and Mars the principal Lord thereof, shows Wars,
Seditions, Captivities, Imprisonments, popular Tumults, displeasure of Princes;
also Death and detriment in Men's Bodies, burning Fevers, and Violent Deaths,
chiefly of young Men; in our Lives, Violences, Injuries, Burning of Houses, and
Towns, Manslaughter, Rapes and Robberies; In the Air, Pestilence and
Contagious Winds, Flashing Lightnings, and Whirlwinds, according to Ptolemies
Opinion. The same Author says, that its happening in a Tropic, signifies
mutation of Air, and in public Matters, a change of Laws and Customs; and that
an Eclipse in Cancer brings damnage to the Fruits of the Earth and Sea affairs.

Saturn threatens to give some Persons of Honor their Exit. The position of
Mars and Mercury denote some Sea Fights, or Piratical Invasions, many great
Robberies, with many other Adversities. Venus produces alterations in
Ceremonies, Religion, Institutions, and Laws. Orig. 460.

In a word, this Eclipse considered with that Jan. 1683. the great Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter, 1683. and the Commit in 1680. threaten the Overthrow of
the Roman Hierarchy, if Authors may be credited. Yet many other places besides
are concerned more or less;; as Armenia, Constantinople, Damascus, Cesena,
Bramberg, Bohemia, Brabant, Corduba, the West, and South-west of England,
Flanders, Holland, Hircadia, London, Lovain, Italy, Metz, Norimberg, Scotland,
Turkey, Cicily, etc. The events will begin to work from the first hour, but will
be more apparent the Year following, and will continue for several Years. I
will conclude what I say on this Eclipse with the predictions Cyprian
Leovitius. O ye Kings, and Princes, that are exalted either to Secular or
Spiritual Dignities, many Evils seem to threaten you, for dissentions shall
arise among you, which shall occasion Wars, Dangers and Mutations, whence the
common People will be discontented, and will be easiely stirred up to
Conspiracies and Factions, etc. Certainly some things of great concernment will
in few Years be brought about. Few Princes in Europe but will more or less be
liable to the effects thereof.

The next considerable. Appearance this Year is the Conjunction of Saturn and
Mars, in the beginning of October, in 13. Degrees of Virgo, the House and
Dignities of Mercury, which I shall a little unfold; for the more happy
performance of which, I shall consider the Lunation preceding. First then,
know that Saturn is really peregrine, and therefore the more malevolent; Mars
is out of all Dignities of his own, but in Sextile, and Reception with Mercury;
so that Mars must be allowed some fortitude, tho not much, yet enough to exceed
Saturn.

At the preventional new Moon we shall find all the Planets under the Earth,
and Saturn and Mars in the fifth House with Venus, which if well considered is
a strange Heterogeneous Mixture, just like an old decrepit Usurer, a bold true
bred Soldier, and a Luxurious Wench. But what the effects may be let us
Consider.

Haly says; When Mars shall be joined to Saturn in a humane Sign, it gives
Strife, Deceit, Fighting, Effusion of Blood, and that the King of that Country
subject to the sign of the Conjunction, shall be troubled and suffer Loss and
Labor from his Neighbors or Subjects. Morinus says, That the Conjunction of
Saturn and Mars gives Corruption of the Air, Plague, War, etc. And to this
purpose also Albumassar says; That there shall be Difference and Wars, in many
places. So that all Authors agree, that this Conjunction can presage nothing
but Evil to Mankind. But because Authors in this are only general, I shall
particularly give you my Judgment of it.

In the Figure we find Gemini ascending, and Mercury Lord of the Ascendant in
Scorpio, a fixed violent Sign, and all the seven Planets in the Fifth and Sixth
Houses of Heaven, and under the Earth. This shows some great Meeting or Council
conveened to consult about the affairs of Nations; the design is considerable
as well as Politic, for it is in the House of Mercury, and his greatest
Dignities too. The occasion of this Consultation is by reason of some defeat
either in Council or Arms some few weeks before this Conjunction; and it is so
general, that the whole Faction both Men and Women are engaged both for Council
and Action: but Debauchery will either prevent or Corrupt the Enterprise
designed: it is for some undertaking to confederate in Arms or some other
hostile Combination, in which several are Solicited to be engaged, as we may
see by so many in the fifth House, which signifies Ambassadors, Agents,
Messengers,, and such like Servants, to a Prince or State, these are sent to
engage some Prince or Princes into a League and Alliance, or to Treat or
Negotiate about a Peace, etc

In the close of this Year some Countries are threatened with persecution for
Religion, and that pretty sharp too: The old Adversary of man's Happiness will
not cease to stir up the Wicked against the Just: and this is like to happen in
some places in France, and it is to be feared many will be forced into other
Countries for Conscience sake: the great Whore will never be weary of her
Cruelties till the last Vials are poured out upon her, when the joyful tidings
shall come abroad, that, BABYLON THE GREAT IS FALLEN, IS FALLEN; Which all good
Christians earnestly long for, and which we hope ere long shall come to pass.

To conclude, we have reason to fear this Year may prove more Calamitous the
most we have yet seen, there being scare any Affliction incident to men, which
we are not more or less threatened with: But yet, as I said before, these
Judgments may be averted (if we be not obstinate) by our Repentance and
Amendment of our Lives. Let us not therefore any more be active in drawing
down Judgments upon our selves, but let us admire infinite Mercy that has
spared us so long and that shows how unwilling he is to destroy us by his
placing his Signs in the Heavens for our Admonition; let us deprecate that
great wrath we have incensed, by our continual Addresses to the Throne of
Grace; let us fear God, obey the King, and live in Peace, and Union together;
which if we do, we need not fear (notwithstanding the greatness of our Sins,
or Malice of our Enemies, or the Signs of Heaven) but we shall yet dwell safely
every man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree.

Entered according to Order.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty. Anno 1684.


