A Particular Relation of the raising of the Siege of Vienna, and the Defeat of
the Turkish Army on the 12th of September, 1683.
YOu have already had several Relations of the great Victory which the
Confederate Army obtained against the Turks the twelfth instant, but none so
exact and particular as that we now give you. The Turks after a Siege of nine
Weeks, had reduced this place to that extremity, that it could not have held
out 48. hours longer, for our Provisions failed, our Garrison which at first
was about 12000. men, was brought to 6000. having suffered more by sickness
than by the Enemy, and the Turks had three Mines ready to spring, which would
infallibly have blown up the last Retrenchment we had made for our security
within the Town, when the Christian Army with the Divine Assistance happily
relieved us: Which they would not so easily have done, had the Grand Vizier
secured the passages of the Wood and other Posts (which the Christians found
difficult enough to pass, even though they met with no opposition) but either
for want of Foot, or through a vain confidence of his own strength, having
still an Army of 120000. fighting men, he neglected these advantages.

The Christian Army, which consisted of between 70. and 80000. men, advancing
toward this place, a great Body of Horse and Dragoons was sent on the 11th to
seize the chief Passages and Avenues of the Wood, which the Army having
afterward passed, they posted themselves in the evening at the entrance of the
Wood, on the side toward the Enemy, and there being a hill at a small distance
from them, some Troops were sent to secure it, and all things were disposed for
the Battle the next day; the right Wing was given to the King of Poland, for
that he had the most Horse, and that the Country was on that side open; the
left to the Elector of Bavaria, and the Duke of Lorrain, because they were
strongest in Foot, and that it was an enclosed Country all along the Denube:
and the main Body to the Elector of Saxony, and Prince Waldecke. The next
morning by break of day, the Generals, according to appointment, met on the
Hill before mentioned, to give the last Orders, and were no sooner come
thither, but a Body of about 10000. Turks appeared, and advanced toward the
Christians, whereupon a Battalion was ordered to put themselves into a Vineyard
that was on a Hill hard by, being supported by three other Battalions, which
made the Turks stop, for not enduring the Fire of the said Battalions, and
being all Horse, and in a Ground where they could not well attack the Foot,
they contented themselves with making one Discharge, accompanied with a hideous
noise, and so retired. Hereupon the King of Poland and the other Princes having
observed the disposition of the Enemy, drew the Army in three Lines, all closed
without any Intervals, and Ordered them to march very slowly toward the Enemy,
and to stand when the Turks came to Charge them, to keep themselves very close,
and not to Fire till the Enemy had made their discharge, which was accordingly
done. The Enemy advanced toward them with a horrible cry, as if they meant to
break in upon them, hoping thereby to make them give w^^ or to put them into
disorder, but perceiving that the Christians stood firm, and expected them in a
very close order, they durst not push any farther, but made a halt, and finding
the Christians did not stir, but stood expecting them, they made their
discharge and wheeled off, upon which all the first Line of the Christians
fired, and that done, the whole Army advanced with a slow pace, and so gained
ground upon the Enemy, who returning, came up as before, the Christians
thereupon made a halt, and expected them, and the Turks having made their
Discharge, again retired, which they repeated several times without ever daring
to break in upon the Christians, who still gained Ground, and drove the Turks
before them like a flock of Sheep; Being come near the Enemies Camp, a Body of
Foot and Dragoons was detached to attack their Cannon, which they made
themselves Masters of without much Opposition, the Enemy having but a small
number of Foot to defend them, and even their Horse made no great resistance in
any place, though on the side of the right Wing, they endeavored to charge the
Christians in Flank, but the King of Poland mistrusting it, caused part of the
second Line to advance, and make a Front on that side, and charging the Enemy
in Person with the first Line, made them give way. During the hottest of the
Battle, the Turks attacked the Town, and pressed the Besieged so hard, that the
Count De Staremberg was forced to send to the Duke of Lorrain for assistance,
with the help whereof, all the Turks that were in the Attack were cut in
pieces. In conclusion, toward night the Enemy began to give way and to fly,
the Christians pursuing them beyond their Camp, and there they made a halt, the
Soldiers being commanded upon pain of death not to stir out of their Ranks,
and the whole Army remained all night in Battalia, as if the Enemy had been
still present. The next day the Camp was plundered, half of a Company going out
at a time, while the other half continued in Arms, and when they returned,
these went out in like manner. All the Enemies Baggage, Provisions, Tents, 50.
pieces of Cannon, two Horse-Tails, the Grand Seignior's Standard, and the
Visiers's own Horse were taken, and most of their Foot were cut in pieces,
which it is believed was not above 12. or 15000. they having lost an incredible
number during the Siege. This great Victory which was obtained at so cheap a
rate, that the Christians lost not a 1000. men, and very few Persons of Note,
(the Duke de Croy, and some others being wounded) must in great measure be
attributed to the great Conduct and Bravery of the King of Poland, who engaged
in Person among the thickest of the Enemy, having with him the Prince his
eldest Son, but 15. years old (...) who thus early signalized himself; the
Electors of Bavaria and Saxony, the Duke of Lorrain, and Prince Waldecke, have
likewise gained great Honor and Rep^utation, much of the success of this great
Day being due to them.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty. 1683.


