REPLIES FOR ALEXANDER MONRO of Bearcrofts; To the ANSWERS made to the PETITION
and INFORMATION presented by him to the COMMISSIOMER HIS GRACE, AND ESTATES OF
PARLIAMENT.
WHEREAS the Answerer in his Preface craves leave to represent the point of
Fact, thereby professing to clear the Parliament, how far Alexander Monro's
desire in the foresaid Petition was contrare to the Rules of Justice; and in
order to which clearing states the matter of Fact, so as thereby and in the
Answerers intention to demonstrate that there could be but three Clerks of
Session, viz. One for each Office; and that particularly in the year 1594 and
1621 Acts of Sederunt were made appointing only three principal Clerks, and
that no other Clerk should be joined but of consent of these Principalls for
the future, and that the said Act of Sederunt was ratified in Parliament, and
that there was no Legal Title for appointing two Clerks in each Office, till
Tarbat procured the same by a Letter from the KING ratified in Parliament Anno
1685, and upon all this Insinuating, that the Petitioner's Right to one of the
Offices of Clerkship in conjunction with Mr John Hay in the year 1669 was
Illegal, and therefore that the thrusting of him out by an impetrate Letter
from the KING was no Act of wrong, especially seeing that any color of Right
Sir Archibald Primrose then Register had by his Gift to present the Petitioner,
was a surrepticiously insert Clause into the said Sir Archibald his Gift,
relative unto his naming of Deputes one or more in each of the Offices, after
that Sir Archibald had abstracted the Records of the year 1621, which did bear
the Act of Sederunt anent three Clerks only recorded therein; and also that the
Petitioner became troublesome to the LORDS in the year 1674, which occasioned
the procuring the KING'S Letter for turning him out, and consequently, that the
Petitioner cannot in Justice be reponned to the Office of Clerkship, especially
seeing he accepted 7000 Merks as an adequate price modified therefore, and
thereupon renunced the Office.

Replied, That the Anwerer considering the mistake alsewell as the Irrevolancie
of these points of Fact accumulate by him had good reason to crave leave for
his adventuring by such an Ingenious Contexture of words to impose upon the
World in stead of clearing the Parliament of the Truth, and that all the
abovementioned Story ought to derogate nothing from the sufficiency of
Alexander Monro's Title to the Clerkship in point of Right, nor yet hinder him
from being restored in Justice to his said Office notwithstanding of his Recept
of the 7000 Merks, and Discharging his Office thereupon, is clearly evident
from the unanswerable Grounds following, viz.

1mo. That as to the pretended Act of Sederunt in the year 1621, the Answerer
confesses there is no such Act, and therefore he ought not to sound thereupon,
nor consequently upon the alleged Act of Parliament relative thereto, because
by the principle of Law Non creditur referenti nisi constiterit de relato,
especially when the said Act of Parliament is neither amongst the Printed Acts
nor in the index of the Imprinted Acts; nor can the Answerers alleged Cause
and occasion of abstracting of the said pretended Act of Sederunt be in the
least respected as being a most unjust reflection on Sir Archibald Primrose,
considering the World knows that Sir Archibald at the delivery up of the
Registers deponed he had abstracted none; besides that these Books of Sederunt
have been always in the Custody of the Clerks of Session; but which totally
takes off the said Reflection, Sir Archibald had no Temptation thereto, for the
whole six Clerks came in uniformly upon Recommendation to him, so that there
was no use for any indirect method.

2do. That the pretended Act of Sederunt in anno 1594, as the same is printed
by the Answerer bears, That the Clerk of the Process should be only present with
the LORDS at Voting, and Reasoning, etc. Alsewell as Mr Alexander Gibson Clerk
his Admission at that time to have been of consent of the other two principal
Clerks; yet all the World knows how far that of removing the Clerks the time of
advising, alsewell as the getting the incumbent Clerks consent to a Conjuncts
Admission has gone in desuetude, in so much as upon the contrare now about 70
years, six Clerks have always been in use to serve, and all of them allowed to
be present at advising, and this is demonstrated. 1mo. From the Books of
Sederunt as follows, viz. That in the year 1621 the Defenders acknowledge there
were six Clerks, and the first Admission of any Clerk thereafter, is found to
be on the 25 of July 1932, when Sir John Hamiltoun Clerk Register presented Mr
Alexander Gibson and John Gibson his Brother conjunctly and severally Clerks to
the Session in one Office, and upon the first of June 1636 Sir John Hay Clerk
Register presented Mr John Hay and Mr William Hay his Son conjunctly and
severally to one Clerkship, and upon the first of June 1649 Mr David and Mr
John Hayes were presented by the Register conjunctly and severly to one
Clerkship, and in the year 1661 at the settlement of the Government, two Clerks
were presented to each of the three Offices, who were every one of them
recommended by the KING to the Clerk Register, except Mr Lawrence Scot who came
in in the place of Mr James Mariland who was so recommended, and they and the
Petitioner Alexander Monro who succeeded to the said Mr Lawrence Scot,
continued in the peaceable possession of their Offices until the year 1676
after Arbitrary power began to exert it self.

2do. That in the special case of Alexander Monro the Petitioner his Admission
there was no possibility that Mr John Hay the incumbent Clerk for the time, his
consent could have contribute any thing, to the said Alexander his Right, the
said Mr John his own Right and Gift being from Sir Archibald Primrose in the
year 1661, upon the KING'S recommendation as said is, but to the half of the
Office only; nevertheless esto, that the said Mr John his consent would have
contribute anything, Alexander Monro and Mr Lawrence Scot his Predecessor had
the samen sufficiently testified to them by the said Mr John his Acquiescence
from the 1661 year of GOD, till the 1676 without ever reclaiming during their
Incumbency as indeed he could not, considering the established custom of two
Clerks in each Office at that time and long before as said is, and that he had
no Right to reclaim, and Mr Lawrence Scot and Alexander Monro were principal
Clerks as well as he.

3tio. That as Alexander Monro's Right was founded in the established custom
and consuetude of the Sessions, being served by six Clerks as said is, which is
sufficient per se to sustain his right custom in such Cases being equivalent to
a Law; nevertheless ex super abundante Sir Archibald Primrose then Lord
Register, and from whom the said Alexander his Right did flow, had an express
power in Gremio of his Patent anno 1661 to Name six Clerks, viz. One or more in
each Office as the same should seem good to him, or be profitable to the
Leidges, and which Clause is so far from being surreptiously engrossed by Sir
Archibald, as is injuriously suggested by the Answerer, that upon the contrare.
1mo. The Answerers cannot deny, but Sir Archibald's Patent was under the KING'S
great Seal, Read, and Ratified in Parliament anno 1661. and that Sir Archibald
at that time presented six Clerks to the Parliament, that their Gifts were Read
and Ratified, and they Sworn and Admitted Clerks to the Parliament, that they
were also Sworn and Admitted Clerks to the Session, and their Gifts recorded in
the Books of Sederunt; and that they were 15 or 16 years in possession before
the KINGS Letter to turn out three of them was impetrate, and which
Ratification not passing unvoted of Course, but in prosecution whereof six
Clerks being Admitted by the Parliament, and in possession serving the
Parliament it is sufficient for establisting two Clerks in every Chamber. 2do.
That the said Letter buir no other Cause for overturning the establishment and
recurring to an abolished and impracticable custom of restricting the Clerks to
three, and appointing their Nomination by the LORDS, but allanerly His
MAJESTY'S pleasure without respect to the convenience of the Leidges, which was
a part of the Fundation of Sir Archibalds Patent as to the point of Naming
Clerks. 3tio. That when the Contrivers of the said impetrate Letter their
design was served, and Alexander Monro turned out, within a short space
thereafter the whole number of six Clerks was restored by Tarbat's Gift in anno
1681, and by an Letter from the KING in anno 1682 in Favors of Tarbat. The
tenor of the Letter expressly relates to the power of constituting Deputs one or
more, as Sir Archibald Primrose per expressum, had and did the same; nor does
the said Letter in Favors of Tarbat, bear any thing of the incumbent Clerks
consent as is alleged by the Answerers, which is a Demonstration that the
power of the naming Substitutes in the way and manner mentioned in Sir
Archibalds Gift, is always held as the True and Legal Standart of subsequent
Registers their Patents. And 4to. as a farther evidence of this the LORDS of
Session in November the said year 1682 in the Books of Sederunt do declare,
that it was necessary there should be two Clerks for each of the three Offices,
or Clerkships of the Session in respect of the Multitudes of Process, that the
Leidges might be the better dispatched; and because that formerly there had
been two Clerks in each Chamber. Likeas 5to. in the year 1685 there is an Act
of Parliament which in effect is declaratory of the constitution of the Clerks
of Session, and ordains two to be in each Office or Chamber; so that it is
admired with what confidence the Answerers could adventure upon the
misrepresenting of the point of Fact, so far as to assert that Tarbat was the
first that procured an legal Warrant for two Clerks to officiate in each
Office, which, as the samen was past Memory of Man in use, and Sir Archibald
Primose Patent aforesaid to that purpose, not only ratified but put in
execution by the Parliament as said is, so it was made per expressum the
Standart of any alleged new Right purchased by Tarbat.

4to. As it is evident from what is abovesaid, That Alexander Monro's Right is
unquestionably well founded in Law, so is it on the other hand most groundless
and Irrelevant to pretend, That the said Alexander was trouble some to the
Lords, and that thereupon they were necessitate to impetrate the Letter for
turning him out. For 1mo. the said Alexander his carriage toward the LORDS and
all others, can be testified by hundreds to have been inculpable, and were it
otherwise, the LORDS no doubt might and ought to have turned him out upon a
fair Trial by order of Law, and needed not have taken such an extraordinary
course by an impetrate Letter, without allowing him an hearing. 2do. The
Petitioner must vindicate the generality of the Lords from the charge made
against them by the Answerer, in that it is notar that most of them were alse
much surprised by the KING's Letter, as the Clerks themselves: And why should
the LORDS have done such an Act of Injustice as to turn out three Clerks for
the alleged fault of one, and when the removing of that one, if guilty, by the
ordinary course of Law had been far more honorable and safe for their
Lordships.

5to. The acceptance of the 7000 Merks modified, can never debare the
Petitioner from being reponned in Justice to his Office. Because 1mo. The same
was far short of the adequate worth of the Place and Office, as is evident by
the great Compositions of 10 or 12000 pounds that are given for such Places by
Persons that intend no farther Advancement in their Life, and the good Estates
severals have made and daily makes. 2do. That both by Texts of common Law,
opinion of Doctors, and practice of our own and other Nations, (as in the
subsequent Replies shall be made appear.) A Person in the Petitioner's
circumstances the time of his taking the 7000 Merks, it is understood under
such impression by reason of the KING'S Authority, who in joined the
Transaction, and who was still on Life, and the Petitioner under his power that
as the compliance with the Kings Injunction would have been reckoned an Act of
contempt, so the not taking of any Money at all would have been reckoned an
insolent Aggravation of the same, and tended to the Petitioner's utter loss of
all, and that therefore in such Cases and Circumstances the Petitioner's taking
the Money and renuncing the Office is far from an Homologation of the unjust
and unequal imposed Price, or any absolute Acquiescence to the LORDS
determination, and is only a necessary and Lawful consulting of his own
Interest for saving something rather than lose all: Therefore Persons in such
Cases should be restored in Integrum ex capite metus and impressionis,
notwithstanding any such acceptance or Discharge, all which the Petitioner did
very well know the time of the Discharge, and so discharged because in those
circumstances he could not better do, and yet could not be thereby prejudged in
Law or reason whenever Justice could take place.

And whereas the Answerer after his mistated matter of Fact, alleages by way of
Preface to his Dilators, That the President of the meeting of the Estates
rejected the Petitioners Claim; And that by express Order of the Commissioners
Grace the same was Expunged in plain Parliament out of the Act for Fines and
Forefaulturs.

Replied, That these pretenses are of a piece with the rest of the Answerers
matter of Fact; for the President of the meeting of the Estates could not
hinder any thing that the Estates sand just. And so it is that the Estates did
find it just in the Claim of Right, to Ordain the loss of Offices to be
Redressed, upon which Claim of Right and common Justice and Equity of the
same, the Petitioner founds his pursuit; Likeas the Reason why the
Commissioners Grace expunged all Clauses out of the Act, but such as concerned
Fines and Forfaulters, was indeed because his Instructions mentioned only Fines
and Forefaulters, so that he could not consent to any more by way of Act of
Parliament and public Law; but His GRACE never intended to put any stop to the
Judicative power of the Parliament, as he declared to the Petitioner, and His
GRACE having read the Petition gave it to the President of the Parliament to be
remitted to the Commission, and which accordingly is remitted and Citationes
execute thereupon and several dyers of Court already past in the Commission
there anent.

Whereas the Answerer at length comes to his Dilators, and alleges 1mo. That
the Petition whereupon the reference to the Commission of Parliament is made,
was not read in Parliament. 2do. That the subject of the Petition being the
loss of Office, cannot be considered by the Commission because the clause
relative to that subject was expunged out of the general Act of Parliament as
said is. 3tio. That all Parties having Interest are not called, such as the
LORDS of Session the two late Registers and their Representatives, from whom
the Defenders derive their Rights to their Offices, and in course ought
therefore to be called, lest otherwise the Defenders may be excluded from
their Relief, if they propone Defenses their Authors not being called. 4to.
That the Defenders being in possession these seven years by past, by virtue of
a Title and Right to the Office cannot be removed until their said Right be
reduced, and that there is no ground of Reduction lybelled, nor Right called
for to be reduced, and therefore that no Process ought to be sustained.

Replied to the first, That the Petition was read in Parliament, tho not at the
instant when it past; But Esto, it had not been read, the Objection is most
frivolous, for it was very well known not only to the Defenders, but to all the
Members of Parliament, the same having been destribute in Print long before,
and that it was needless to have spent time in reading a matter which the
Parliament was not at that time to dipp into and discuss, and had determined
only to remit the samine as aforesaid; Likeas, the generality of the References
to the Commission are upon Petitions in course, without reading where the
matter is previously understood; And yet the Commission never rejects a
Reference upon that head. To the 2d: that what is formerly adduced anent the
difference of the Commissioner his Grace, his not admitting of Restoration of
loft Offices by a public Law and Act of Parliament, in a Legislative manner;
and his allowing of the Parliament to cognosce thereupon in a Judicative
capacity, is here repeated, beside that the Lords of the Commission have
already cognosced upon cases of lost Offices remitted to them by the
Parliament, in course; As particularly that of the Town Clerkship of Glasgow,
at the instance of Master Spruel. To the third, That the point of Law is here
grossly mistaken and misrepresented by the Answerer, for the Petitioners Claim
and Action is upon the Edict Quod metus causa; And upon these grounds in Law
that relate to impressions made by persons in Authority; And that therefore
this Claim and Action is competent contra quemcunque possessorem of the thing
extorted, as being ex equitate pretoria, a real Action and in rem scripta; So
that the Petitioner needs no more but to get the Causes and Occasions of the
Vis and Metus declared by the Judge, which is sufficient ad rem vindicandam
contra quemcunque possessorem; As is clear by the Testimony of all Lawyers,
according to the L: 9: 8. and the L: 14: 3: digest: quod metus causa, whereof
the words are to this purpose, Viz. In hae action non queritur utrum is qui
convenitur an alius metum fecit sufficit enim hoc docere metum sibi illatum
esse, etc. And the reason is rendered in the said L. 9. 8. Viz. Cum haec actio
in rem sit scripta nec personam vim facientis coerceat, sed adversus omnes
restitui debet id quod means causa gestum est, etc. And the Defenders may
intimate their Distress to their Authors and their Representatives in Order to
their Relief. To the 4th: That the immediate above Reply is repeated, whereby
it is evident that by the principles of Law, the Petitioners Claim and Action
proceeds upon special grounds, and is singularly sustained, upon the Pursuers
proving that the Office lybelled was his Right, and that he was turned out of
the same by Impression and Concussion; So that the Pursuer is no ways
concerned what Tittle the Defenders may have, or how long they possessed the
Office, for the Pursuer tanquam spoliatus est ante ominia restituendus,
according to the principles of Law abovementioned; And therefore the whole
Dilators ought to be Repelled, and Process sustained.

Whereas the Answerer comes at last to his peremptor Defenses, and states the
Petitioner's Claim as resolving into two Articles, viz. That the Petitioner
may be restored to his Office of Clerkship, and next that the Defenders may be
decerned to pay him the Emoluments of the Office since he did quite the same.
And 1mo. alleges absolvitor from the Lybel as to the bygone Emoluments, in
respect the Defenders were bonae Fidei Possessores, etc.

Replied, That the Pursuer pro loco and tempore insists only for being restored
to his Office and Place.

And whereas it is alleged against the Restoration of the Pursuer to his
Office. That 1mo. Esto, that the Pursuer had a sufficient Right and Title
thereto, the supreme Magistrate might for an public convenience have
suppressed the Pursuers Office and Place which was Erected for the public
good, especially where the Party has gotten a reasonable satisfaction, and that
in this Case the Pursuer got satisfaction, though his Office of conjunct
Clerkship was established by no Law; And that the Clause in Sir Archibald
Primrose his Gift which is the Fundation of the Pursuer's Right anent the
naming more Clerks than one was surreptious and with express condition that the
same should be found conducive to the Liedges benefit.

Replied, That the Allegiance is but a Recapitulation of the matter of Fact
above redargued, and proceeds upon gross mistakes. For 1mo. It is certain in
Law, and in the constitution of our Government, that private Rights cannot be
prejudged, even upon consideration of public good otherwise then by KING and
Parliament, and upon hearing the Parties and resounding all Damnages. 2do.
Esto, That the supreme Magistrate might for public utility, dispose on private
Men's Interests on reasonable satisfaction to the Party: Yet in this case there
was no point of Public Vtility condescended upon, as the cause of turning out
the Pursuer; but allennerly the KING'S pleasure as the Letter bears. Likeas on
the contrare the public Utility (after the private design was effectuate) was
found to be concerned in the re-establishment of the six Clerks, as the Act of
Sederunt made thereanent anno 1682, and the Act of Parliament ratifying the
Establishment of the Clerks by two in each Office can testify. 3to. The
acknowledgment modified to the Pursuer being but 7000 Merks, was vastly under
the worth of his Office as aforesaid. 4to. From what is above represented it is
evident, That the Pursuers Right to his Office, is unanswetably founded in Law,
both upon the account of the immemorial custom of six Clerks, and the positive
Faculty in his Author Sir Archibald Primose his Patent, and which Patent is the
very Foundation and Standart of all the Right that Tarbat or any Clerk Register
sensyne had to Name six Clerks, and who accordingly and conform thereto per
expressum, have named and joined Clerks in Offices ever since, as aforesaid; So
that it is admired with what confidence the Defenders can so nauseously repeat
these misrepresentations in point of Fact.

Whereas it is 2do. alleged against restoring the Pursuer to his Office, that
the Defenders are in no worse case as to the point of Right, then the Pursuer;
Besides, that the Defenders have the advantage by being in possession, and in
dubio potior est causa possidentis.

Replied, That the Alleagance is founded on a gross mistake, for the Pursuer is
beyond competition preferable in point of Right, which no deed extorted from
him by necessary compliance with the Kings Letter could in Law irrecoverablie
extinguish, so that as the Pursuer in point of Right was prior tempore to the
Defenders he is potior jure; and their possession can avail them nothing in
respect of the illegal and Violent way that the Pursuer desut possidere as
aforesaid.

Whereas it is 3tio: alleged against the Restoring of the Pursuer to his
Office, that the whole tract of the Affair and steps in the procedure of
turning out the Pursuer and installing the Defenders in the Office of Clerkship
are engrossed in the Public Records, as the Kings Letter to the Lords, and the
Lords sentence thereon, turning out the Pursuer, with the Defenders gift from
Tarbat, etc So that the Defenders having followed the public Faith, are in
perpetual secutitie; by the L: 6: cod: de re judicata, where it is said, that
gesta quae in publica monumenta translata sunt habere debent perpetuam
firmitatem.

Replied, That this Alleagiance is but a pitiful Quible, and the meaning of the
Law by the Gloss and Commentators on that Text; Is only of Testimonies and
Depositions of Parties and Witnesses, and such like being once made and
performed judicially, and recorded as such remain in Credit and Force;
Notwithstanding both Party and Judge afterward die, or would offer to retract
the same. And it is an absurd notion in the Defenders to think that any
Transaction or matter in it self defective, being once put in Record, supplies
its defects, or that the Recording the Kings Letter, etc. in the Books of
Sederunt, precludes the Pursuer from quarrelling the wrong done him by the said
Letter.

Whereas it is 4to. Alleged, That the Act of Sederunt made be the Lords upon
turning out the Pursuer conform to the King's Letter, being homologate by the
Pursuers accepting of the 7000 Merks therein modified, the Pursuer cannot be
heared to reclaim against the samen, because a Sentence tho unjust may be
homologate by the Party, and that no Lawyer that ever understood but the common
principles, could advise the Pursuer that his taking the 700 Merks could not
preclude him from craving to be reponed, because standum est rei judicatae nisi
a sententia appellatum fit, and that qui qualibet modo sententiae acquieverint
cannot reclaim be the L: 5. and L: 32: Digestorum de re judicata. and 5to.
That the Pursuer did not only homologate, but ex super abundante he freely
Renunced and Overgave from him and his Successors to Mr John Hay and his
Successors, his Right as one of the Clerks of Session, with power to him to
dispose upon the profits thereof, which as an ample dimission, ought to
exclude the Pursuer, albeit he had not got a Sixpence therefore; And that the
Pursuer cannot pretend any thing of Concussion for excusing his said Acceptance
of the 7000 Merks and voluntar Renunciation; especially when he never reclaimed
by Bill, nor proponed a Defense against his Removeal.

Replied, That the Pursuers grounds in Law whereupon to eleid those last and
seemingly greatest of the Defenders Arguments (and yet as empty as all the
rest) is indeed the Concussion, Impression and Irresistible, awe that was upon
him by the King's Letter, and which ground of Concussion that the Honorable
Lords of the Commission may perceive the nature of the samen from its Causes
and Effects in Law, and how far in the Case in hand the Pursuer should be
reponed against his accepting of the 7000 Merks, and renuncing of his Office as
Acts that can operate nothing against him in Law, considering the circumstances
he was in, the Pursuer is able to demonstrate the same beyond Contradiction,
and that not only by direct Consequences from positive Texts of common Law,
that he is in the Case of one whose Deeds aforesaid are Null, as being the
effects of Fear and Impression, but likewayes by the opinion of all Doctors,
and most Famous Practitioners that ever wrote upon the point of Restoring
against Deeds done per impressionem and metum, in so far as they adduce the
Pursuers Case in Terminis as the great example of their Practice and
Observation for illustrating the points following. viz. What infers just Fear?
a Fear that the firmest of Men may be subject to, and a Fear by Impression and
Concussion, and how far such a Fear may endure, so as to construct the Parties
subsequent Deeds to have been the effects and results of the Fear, and nowayes
acts of Freedom, or that might import the Fear to have been purged and Over.
Are all at length illustated by Tuschus in his Practical Conclus. Lit: M:
Conclus: 216: and Seqq.

And 1o. Quoad the Texts of Law, it is said L: 6: 9: 7. digest. deacqu:vel
amit:haered. Eum qui metu verborum vel aliquo timore coactus fallens adierit
haereditatem five liber sit haeredem nom fieri placet sive servus sit dominu
haeredem non facere. Item L: ij: Cod: de his quae vi vel metus causa gest.
Cavetur si per impressionem quis aliquem metuens saltem in mediocri officio
constitutum rei suae in eo loco ubi tale officium peregit venditionis titulo
fecerit cessionem quod emptum fuit raddatur. And ita est that in this Case of
the Pursuer's there was an aliquis metus and that per impressionem from an
person in summo officio constituto, whose command in His Letter could not have
been disobeyed by the Pursuer without hazard of being constructed a seditious
Contemner of Authority, so that his acquiescence by taking the 7000 M. imposed
upon him, was not in the least an Act of his voluntar E. lection but of mere
necessity, which therefore cannot hinder the restoring him to his Office.
Likeas,

2do. The great Example that is given by Baldus in his 142 cons. anent the
grounds and occasions of just Fear is that of over Lords of Cities their
injoyning the Citizens to a mutual Compromission, in which Case Compromissum
dicitur per metum factum eoquod teneantur parere domino. And sicklike
Anchoranus is his 299 cons. and Fulgos: in his 191 cons. upon the same subject
examplifies the matter thus, That a Person being ordered by the Prince to
discharge and exoner his Debtor such an Exoneration is revocable, Tanquam
justo metu facata, And that a Person at the Command of the Prince having
accepted the Prince's Precept and Order for making payment of an undue Debt,
and accordingly thereafter making Spontaneus payment; the said payment is
nevertheless Revockable mortuo Tiranico principe tanquam metu facta. And the
same Anchoranus in his 159 cons. number: 4: holds it as a principle, quo confessio
vel actus factus ex voluntate in casu in quo praecedebat jussus and coactio,
non dicatur ex voluntate sed ex necessitate, quia sufficit in principe jubente
nocendi potentia. And so it is, that in this case the Kings Letter preremptorly
enjoined the Pursuers submission to the Lords determination; And which
injunction being previous to his Acceptance of the sum determined; And the
King that did so injoyne, being still on Life, and jealous enough of the
Contemners of his Commands; The Pursuers Acceptance of the sum modified could
be no Act of voluntar Acquiescence, but the effect of his Majesty's awful
recommendation and order, against which he ought to be reponed: And

3tio. The instance that is given by Geminus in his 15 cons: number: 10 and 11:
and Angelus his 378 and 379 cons. per tot: as the most pregnant ground of
Terror to the most constant Spirited Man, is solum verbale imperium Regis quod
causet justum metum quando Rex consuevit male tractare non obedientes; And ita
est, that in this case the Kings positive Letter, is more nor a verbal Mandate,
and the severities that the Pursuer might have met with, had he not obeyed the
same, but had endeavored to keep his place without regard thereto, needs not
to be questioned; Likeas,

4to. Baldus in his foresaid 142 cons: and Angelus in his 215 and 218 cons:
adduces the Arguments following, for inferring an impression or Concussion,
viz: Quando dominus praecepit aliquid subditis ut faciant; Item, Quando fit
compromissum in judicem de re tanquam litigiosa, quae non est litigiosa; Item,
Quando compromittens protestatus fuit de impressione; Item, Quando laudum est
iniquum; And ita est, That in this case the Pursuer was enjoined by the Kings
Letter, to submit to the Lords, notwithstanding there was no contraversie or
doubt stated anent the matter of his Office: And upon which head the Pursuer
did openly and in presence of the Lords protest for a hearing. And that a
Representation might be made to his Majesty before further procedure;
Nevertheless his importunity is rejected, and he removed and debarred;
whereupon he did the next day offer and attempt to go in and take possession of
his place, till by the interposition of Friends, that feared the Event of such
a course, he was forcibly turned back. And the laudum or modification they made
being but 7000. Merks, which has been since raised by his Office in one Year
was highly unequal. Likeas, in the parallel case of a parties protesting, tho
but privately against the impression, and constraint put upon him, to acquiesce
to an unequal transaction, the Parliament of Paris did upon the 9 of August
1543 restore him against the said Transaction, as Papon in his Collection of
Arrests, l. 16: arti: 3: dec: 10: And [therefore a fortiori, the Pursuers
reclaiming, and Testification of his Dissent, and unjustice that was done to
him, having been made openly before the Lords, and yet all to no purpose, is an
unanswerable Argument of the impression and Concussion that induced him to
accept of the 7000 Merks, rather then lose all; And therefore in Justice, he
ought now to be reponed. Likeas,

5to. By all the Arguments adduced by Doctors and Practitioners, for
demonstrating the continuance and endurance of Impression and Concussion upon a
Man, it is evident that at the time of the Pursuers accepting of the 7000 m:
his just dread of the Kings displeasure and fear of utter loss, and a farther
mischief, if he had refused the Money, was not over; For, 1mo. Caldas in his
108* cons: Natta in his 450 cons: number: 17: Holds it as a principle, that the
Impression and Concussion endures quamdiu durat princeps and passus metum est
in loco ubi princeps Tiranidem potest exercere. And the reason rendered by
Alexander in his 144 con: number: 4. Is quia odium quando est irrationabile
presumitur continuare nedum in ipso genere sed etiam quoad alia And it a est,
That K: Ch: was yet on life the time of accepting of the 7006 Merks that was
unequally modified against the Pursuer's will as said is, and it is not to be
doubted if he had continued in an obstinate not taking of the 7000 Merks, but
the King at least those who did influence him, and impetrate the foresaid
Letter from him, might have prevailed with him to have done the Pursuer more
prejudice, 2do, Aretinus in his 14 cons: number. 17 and 18. Menochius 1 cons: number:
301. Ancheranus in his 299 and 159 cons: and Aretinus in his 96 con: number: 27
and sequent. Hold it as an principle, That in the Case of Impression and
Concussion no Deed done by the Party ex intervallo post impressionem factam, in
reference to the subject matter of the Concusion can import a purgation of the
Impression or Freedom of will in the Party, so long as the cause and occasion
of the Impression lasts, and the reason is rendered, Quia actus factus ex
voluntate dicitur ex necessitate factus quando praecedebat jussus a potente
nocendi, and executio contractus facta per eum qui passus est metum non purgat
metum durante causa metus, quia is qui vim possus est si ex intervallo
ratificaverit censetur potius id fecisse pro suo interesse quamquod voluerit
metum purgare and sic donare. As Bartol: also holds ad leg. 4 cod. de his quae
vi, etc. Where he states the acceptance of payment be him that sold throw fear
to be only quo minus perderet, and nowayes for purging or passing from the fear
-- Item quod quando alia causa subesse potest nunquam purgatur me^us quia nemo
presumitur velle jactare suum quod jactaret si exequendo contractum per
impressionem initum amitteret jus suum. And ita est, That the time of the
Pusuers taking the 7000 Merks the cause of the Impression and Concussion was
yet extant, which did Overawe him, and his own Interest did induce him to take
the 7000 Merks rather than loss all, so that he cannot be understood to have
gratified his Enemies, and past from his Right, and therefore that he ought to
be restored to his Office. Likeas,

6to, It is notourly known, That as by the common Law and custom of all
Nations, so likewayes by the special practice of Scotland, Transactions made
throw Force or Concussion are restored against, as in the late Case, at the
Lady Grays instance against Lauderdale, to whom she disponed an Interest she
had in the Earl of Dundces Estate within the value.

From all which arises this plain Reply to the Defenders said two last
Arguments, viz That, 1mo. The Answerer has labored of grievous mistakes in
point of Law, and as to the Opinion of Lawyers and Law and Custom of our own
and other Nations in reference to the Effects of Impression, and Forcible Awe
from those in Authority. And the meaning of those Texts in Law adduced by the
Defenders anent the Authority of a sentence or res judicata, is when the same
proceeded upon Lawful Citation and hearing of Parties, which cannot be subsumed
upon in the Pursuers case. 2do. That as by what is abovesaid the Pursuers
accepting of the 7000 Merks can import no homologation of the King's Letter and
sentence of the Lords thereupon, so neither can his renuncing of the Office
upon his getting the said 7000 Merks be any Ratification of the Lords their
proceedings of any Abdication of the Pursuers own Right, because the sentence
of the Lords forced him as well to renunce the Office, as to accept of the 7000
Merks, in respect that the 7000 Merks was decerned to be given him for his
Office, and it is not to be imagined that Haystoun would have paid the 7000 M.
but upon a Discharge relative to the Pursuer his quitting the Office for which
the 7000 Merks was to be the price, and therefore as the Pursuers accepting of
the 7000 Merks was in construction of Law as aforesaid; but for preventing of
his own greater loss of all, so likewise must his renuncing of the Office,
seeing without a Discharge in these Terms he could never have saved so much as
the 7000 Merks it self.

And whereas the Answerer adduces Arguments for evincing that there could be no
Concussion in the Pursuers Case. As 1mo. Because that no execution could have
followed against the Pursuer upon any Article of the Lords Interloquitor, and
Act turning out the Pursuer and the other two Clerks, so that the Pursuers not
reclaiming by Bill or otherwise, but accepting of the 7000 Merks, and removing
himself from the Office were Acts of his own voluntary choice, and therefore,
that there could be no Concussion.

Replied, That the forementioned Grounds in Law are opponed, By which the Kings
very written Order, with the Lords sentence thereupon, expressly Debarring the
Pursuer by appointing his Colleague to pay him 7000 merks; And that
notwithstanding all the Expostulations used by the Pursuer with the Lords, that
he might be heard, before they proceeded to any such Sentence, were too weighty
grounds of Awe and Necessity upon him to stay out, when once turned out as said
is. And in those days not to offer contemtuously to repossess himself after
such an Awful Letter from the King, and Sentence of the Lords; So that his
Acceptance of the Money, etc. were Acts of mere necessity, and nothing of free
Election.

Whereas, It is 2do: contended, That there can be do Concussion where the Lords
of Session pronouncers of the sentence had no interest, to Concuss, but acted
by Authority of the King, in a matter that was according to the standing Laws;
And that the Lords sentence was obeyed by the Party.

Replied, That the whole Alleagiance proceeds upon affected mistakes certainly,
for the Lords of Session were not the principal Concussors, what ever Accession
some of them might have had in bringing it about; But the Kings Letter complied
with by the Lords, was the chief mean of Impression, and Awe upon the Pursuer;
And which Letter commanded a matter which took away the Pursuers property, and
was downright contrary to the Law of the Nation, in reference to the number of
the Clerks, in sua far as inveterate custom and consuetude, the benefit of
the Lieges, express Concessions by Kings, and Ratified in Parliament, can make
a Law for any thing, especially when the six Clerkships in three Offices, as
then established, is made by an express Law the very Standard and Rule of the
Clerkships now and in all time coming; So that no Obedience was ever given to
that sentence of the Lords be the Pursuer, but by Force and Awe, and for saving
his own utter Loss, as said is.

Whereas it is 3tio. Alleged that esto, there had been a distinct and clear
Concussion; And that consequently, the Sentence of the Lords had been unjust;
That yet it was never heard, an unjust sentence did vitiat the subject whereon
it proceeded, so that it could not be bona fide acquired by a singular
Successor; And therefore, that the Defenders acquiring the Office bona fide,
must be assoizled from restoring it to the Pursuer.

Replied, That the point of Law is also every way mistaken here, and specially
in the Case of Concussion or Deeds done throw Awe and Force, as to which the
Action of Restitution competent to the Party laesed is in rem scripta, as
aforesaid; and goes directly for recovering the thing extorted from whatsomever
Possessor, so that the Defenders acquisition tho never so bona fide made,
cannot hinder the Pursuer from getting back his own Office. And 2do. there was
no formal sentence in this Case proceeding upon Citation or Debate, but an Act
of summar Arbitrary violence. Whereas it is 4to. alleged, That esto there had
been Concussion and a Right of recovering the Office thereupon competent to the
Pursuer; yet the Pursuer having resigned and transmitted all in favors of Mr
John Hay and his Successors, he can never be heard now to pretend to the said
Right of recovering his Office.

Replied, That this Argument proceeds likewayes upon a mistake, because
according to the principles in Law above adduced, The Pursuers Acceptance of
the 7000 Merks, and thereupon Discharging and Renuncing, being while the King
that overawed him by His Letter aforesaid, was on Life; and the Pursuer
aforesaid within His Reach and Jurisdiction all things done by him in pursuance
of that Arbitration of the Lords that was so Masterfully enjoined are deeds
that in construction of Law, are the effects of the same continued awe and
force as aforeiaid. And the same as if Robbers had plundered the Pursuer of
100: lib: and offered him back ten upon his Discharge of the whole, in which
case no Man can imagine that by accepting the ten pounds on these Terms he had
either prejudged himself, or excused the Robber from Restitution; So that the
Defenders say nothing, unless they could Allege and Prove, that after the
cause and Occasions of the Force and Aw that were upon the Pursuer were over;
And that he might had his Option to Retake his place, or Accept the 7000:
merks, he did notwithstanding transact and renounce his Right, which is
impossible they can Allege.

And as it is evident from the principles of Common Law, possitive Texts,
Opinions of Doctors, and practice of our Own, and other Nations, that the
Pursuers Claim is beyond contradiction Just; And its most Reasonable upon these
Grounds that he should be Reponed; So upon the other hand, and in point of
material Equitiy, and suitably to the proceedings of the Government, in Order
to the Redress of these manifold Wrongs that were committed in these Latter
Reigns. The Pursuers Case Merits special Consideration, as that which is not
only provided For by the same Claim of Right, mentioning loss of Offices, per
expressum, in Order to a Restoration and Redress of the Persons damnified
thereby; But likewayes, Equally Just, and Favorable with the most meritorious
of all those provided For by the general Act anent Fines and Forefautures. In
respect, That 1mo: The generality of the Parties therein mentioned, have made
Bargains by themselves or their Friends; whereas the Pursuer in this Case, nor
any Person for him, had not the least accession to the agreeing for, or
modifying the said 7000 Merks for his Place; but he resisted the same to the
utmost of his power, as said is. 2do. That by the said general Ah it is
provided that all compositions for Forefaulters and Fines thoug transacted by
the Forefaulted Persons, or in their Names may be repeated, etc. And that Wives
or Relics who themselves made Bargains for their Li^rents, and disponed the
same for Causes not adequate thereto, are nevertheless reponed against these
Bargains: And ita est, That the Pursuer is yet in a more favorable Case upon
the Grounds aforesaid, in order to the repeating and being reponed to his
Office, and whom therefore the very general Act it self seems to comprehend, by
declaring that it shall be effectual to all the Liedges Forefaulted, Fined or
otherwise le^ed, and to be interpreted in their Favors in the largest sense.

In respect of all which the Pursuer ought in Law, Justice, and Equity, to be
Reponed to his Office and Place.


