WALLOGRAPHY; OR The Britton Described: BEING A Pleasant Relation of a Journey
into Wales, wherein are set down several Remarkable Passages that occurred in
the way thither.

AND ALSO Many choice Observables, and notable Commemorations, concerning the
State and Condition, the Nature and Humor, Actions, Manners, Customs, etc. of
that Country and People.

By W. R. a mighty Lover of Welsh Travels.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Caudell Bookseller in Bath. 1682.

TO Sir Richard Wenman OF CASSWELL In the County of Oxford Baronet.
SIR!
HAving had the Honor to be employed in a Negotiation between an English
Gentleman and the Ancient Brittons, I was not only upon the Borders, and (as it
were) the Limbs of Wales, but have traveled through the very Bowels of the
Country; in which Journey there did salute me so many occurrences worthy of
observation, that I could not for be^^ a Description of them and from
presenting you with the (as I may say). Wallography of my Voyage.

I make bold to imitate one Alexander of Greece, who sti^^ as he went
dragooning abo^^ the World, described the wa^drings, and (as it were) the Tom
Coriat. was a (...) Travellor, who in King* James his time beat upon the hoof
abo^^ two or three thousand miles, and returned ho^^ as very a Cox-combe as he
went out. See (...) Travels called his Crudities.
Tom Coriatism of his Expeditions; only in this I shall differ from him,
whereas he gave only a bare Image and Portraicture of the Country, I shall draw
the Character of the Inhabitants, and shall not only express in a Map or Table
the mere Picture of the Place, and tell you that here stands one Town and
twenty Miles off stands another, but my Design is to give you a Narrative of
what I observed concerning the Nature of the (1) Soil, and of the (2)
Inhabitants, their Original, Persons, Diet, Apparel, Language, Laws, Customs,
Policy, etc.

But what need I go so fa^ as Macedonia for a Pattern seeing we have so many
Precedents at home? For one tell us in Octavo that he has been at
Constantinople; another that he has been at Vienna; a third that he has been
in Spain; and why may not I tell the World in a little Book that I have been in
Wales? When a Fellow has either a Maggot in his Pate or a Breeze in his Tail,
that he cannot fix long in a place; or perhaps when he has entitled himself by
some misdemeanors either to the Pillory or Gibbet, to disinherit himself of
his deserved Right, he flirts into Holland, or is transported into some
Foreign Country; where conversing a little while, he thrusts into the World
the History of his Adventures, he varnisheth over his Banishment with the Name
of Travel, and styles that his Recreation which was indeed his Punishment, and
so dignifies a Ramble by the name of Journey. He tells what Wonderments have
surpised him, what Fragments of Antiquity have amazed him, what Structures
have ravished him, what hills have tired him; in a word, he is big with
Descriptions, and obliges you with the Narrative of all his Observations and
Notices; seeing every one almost that has bu^ untruss'd in a Foreign Country,
will have his Voyage recorded, and every Letter-Carrier beyond Sea would be
thought a Drake or a Candish I thought with my self wh^ may not I have the
liberty o^ relating my Journey, and o^ communicating my Observations to
Mankind. I must confess my Pilgrimage was no^ far, but perhaps it was checkered
with as great variety both of Pleasure and Peril a^ a longer Progress; neither
are my Remarques very solemn and stately, but yet they were such as gratified
my curiosity, and pleased my humor as well as the Observations of longer
Journals.

Such as they are. (Sir!) I humbly crave leave to devote them to your Perusal,
as the most signal Testimony* of that venerable Esteem I have for you. I wave
your Panegyric, and forbear to Rhetoricate or to descant in your Praise. You
are too Copious a Subject even for the most Transcendent Oratory. I list not to
display your Personal Accomplishments, which are so eminent and conspicuous
already in the World. I kno^ an Attempt of that Nature would be too great a
Violence to your Modesty, and I am sure too hard a Task for my Capacity. My
present Business (Sir!) is to put this little Book into your Hand, and to
desire you to Honor the Author in accepting, and to Divert your self in
reading of it; for possibly you may find so much Comody in this Walk, as may
dispose you to smile away an hour in the perusal of it. The Relations are not
common and ordinary, and perhaps as pleasant as they are rare and unusual. I do
not know that any Travellor jogging in the same Road has given the same
Account of Things, or has made the same Descriptions which I here present you
with; so that my Remarques are spick and span new, and if they are ridiculous,
they are not unlike the Persons upon whom they are written. For the Welsh
People are a pretty odd sort of Mortals, and I hope I have given you a pretty
odd Character of them, and so I think I am pretty even with them for Oddness. A
Taphy is observed to be a Trickish Animal, that has a Vein of Jac^puddinis^
running throu^^ all his Actions, and therefore I thought it not improper
sprinble here and there some what of the Blew-jacket, a^^ to Merry-Andrew my
Pr^grass a little farther as I we with jocund Observations, th^^ the History
might be agreeab^^ to the Matter it Treats So that if a Welch-man is Jest, as
all the World (...) count him a Living Pun, (...) walking Conundrum, and
breathing Witticism; Th^^ have I made one Joke up another.

I am not unsensible that Pa^ers of another Nature and Complexion are more
agreeable (...) that Character you bear in ^he World; Machiavel and Malvezzi,
or some discourse of be Maxims of Policy, would ^e a more suitable Subject for
^ur Contemplation: But (Sir!) (...) pretend not to instruct you for ^he
Parliament House, but to ^irect you by the Fireside.

Now for the Conclusion of ^ll; If there are any Good Things in Wales, the
enjoyment whereof is worth the wishing you, I pray Heaven to ^rown you with the
Fruition of them: But possibly it may be a Province not much crowde with
Blessings; may you the^^fore Flourish in the Affluen of good English Mercies;
m^^ you always possess good Engli^^ Riches, Health and Honor and all other
Happinesses an^ Prosperities of our own N^tion!

I am, (Worthy Sir!) Your very Humble Servant W. R.
Helmdon, October. 24. 1681.
WALLOGRAPHY OR The Britton described, etc.
UPon the First of June 1673, having taken leave of my Friends, and received a
Message, a little tiny Errend to be uttered by word of mouth, together with a
Letter to ^e delivered into the hands of one of the most Reverend Taphies,
(...) began to have some thoughts ^f rigging my self out for mine ^^tended
Voyage; and to that and I spatterdash't my Legs with (...) pair of Cuckolds
boots, and either adorned or furnished my hand with battooning Cudgel, and
having entertained in my Retinue whole Distick of Spannels.

Upon the Fourth of June, turned one side upon London, an^ the other toward
Wales; the Country which was to be the Perio^ and Term of my Journey. W^
traveled all that day with much pleasure, being treated as w^ went, with the
Delicacies of Nature: the Air was kind and sof^ the Fields were trim and neat;
(...) Sun benign and cherishing; (...) whole Creation was obliging, and from
every thing we met, w^ received a Civility; so that the first day passed over
with mu^^ satisfaction. I do not remembe^ that we saw any thing remarkable
unless 'twas a Fellow driving (...) tired Cow, whose slow motion (...) now and
then quickn'd by wri^^ing the Pendulum of her Tail a^^ (as it were) curling it
into a scre^ he twisted her forward, and bored the Air with this Living Augre;
Me-thoughts a very pretty trick to make a wimble of his Beast, and a handsome
way to insinuate her along, and to improve her pace. 'Twas far beyond the
courtship of a wisp of hay, in regard Fear urges more than Flattery can allure,
and all Creatures are more ready to ease their Backs, than to fill their
Bellies; O how Scorpions pretty crabbedly applied will make a thing caper, and
increase his Career far beyond the temptation of Cake and Marmalade! and a Cat
of Nine-Tails will drive better than a dish of Sweet meats can invite and draw.
This was the Method the Bumpkin used to advance the progressive Motion of the
Animal; which indeed is far different from the Custom and Practice of the
Croatians; For whereas this man made his Beast proceed by thrusting at one en^
the Tail; They make their ty^^ Jades jog on by putting at the other, the
Fore-top. We began to subscribe to Cartesius's opinion that Animals were
Engines; F^^ it is like, the Clock-work of the Cow was somewhat disorder'^ and
the Machine (like a Jack^ was run down and stood still, (...) this Artist wound
it up, and (...) the movements a going.

Being indifferently refresht (...) the virtue of that Passage, (...) went
forward very couragiou^ and after a little time were p^^sented with the
prospect of anther Scene, which was laid in Meddow by a Riverside, wh^^ we
overtook a Rat-catcher and Fisherman disputing Preceden^^ and the Preheminency
of the Professions: The Rat-catcher (...) gu'd that his Calling was most
w^^thy, in regard the object of (...) Art was a vocal Creature, whereas that of
the Fisherman's was dumb and silent; besides Rats are educated in Courts and
Palaces, are more choicely bred, and have a more delicate diet, than Fish, to
seed on; Plentiful Reversions of Roast and Boiled, luxurious fragments, and the
magnificent ruins of Pudding and Pasty are their common dishes; only sometimes
they pop on a piece of Bread and Butter not of so wholesome a relish, that is, a
little Arsenick spread for 'um on the trencher of a Chip, these are the Viands
of this domestic Vermin; whereas Worms and Flies, and vile Insects, and
perhaps a hook to boot, are the best Fare that is eaten by Fishes. The
Fisherman replied, that Fish themselves were food for men, but it was never
known that Rats were in season, unless in the extremity of a Siege or Famine.

We left these Fellows very (...) in controversy, which could (...) be decided,
and passed on, till (...) length we arrived to a little kno^^ or Asterism of
houses standing, (...) rather lying on the Crump of a Hi^^rais'd somewhat
proudly above (...) ordinary level; and methough^ look^ down with somewhat
(...) Disdain upon the Humble V^^lies. Who was the Founder (...) this Hamlet is
not certainly know^ but we perceived the Thacker h^^ been a great Benefactor.
As (...) the Nativity of the Place, (...) Foundation was laid under an (...)
fortunate Configuration of the H^^vens: so that the Tinkers and Ca^^lers, and
the dregs of manki^^ that dwelt there; expected (...) Prosperity, nor hoped to
be (...) vanc'd and sublimated into (...) Flower of the People. The ma^^ stress
of Government lay upon (...) shoulder of a single man, who wa^ ^ear-ward by
Office, and being ^^e most substantial Person was ^hought fit to be invested
with ^^e sole Authority of the Town^^^p; A most proper Magistrate (...) such
wild Savages! We ob^^rv'd that this Village had as ma^y ways into it, as it had
ways (...) of it, which were equal in ^^mber to the Points of the Com^^ss. The
purling Brook that ^^wl'd by it, the reeking Dung^^ll that breathed within it,
the ^^ook-back'd Elm that stands cring^^g near it, and the Pack- saddle ^^eeple
that stood squinting over (...) made a pretty Draught of an and some Landscape.

The Inhabitants of this place ^ere much addicted to the vice of ^^ealing;
every thing sticks to ^^eir Pitchy Fingers, and they ^ave such an attractive
virtue, that, ^herever they come, all things ^ot after the Magnetism of their
Persons. A Fellow squotting ^^on a criket in a room we w^^^ in, and rising up
from his se^^ the stool on a sudden (as if ta^^^ to his A --) immediately
mar^^^ after him, to the great amazem^^^ of the woman of the house, w^^ did not
suspect that his Bum (...) hands, or that her Stool so n^^bly could have used
its legs. A^^ther espying a Cylinder of B^^^ pudding pretty thick in the (...)
lolling upon the table, whilst (...) Hostess turned her back, in (...) very
twinkling of her head, pocu^^^ it into Fob, and so shrow^^^ its Dimensions into
a sec^^^ Bag.

The approaching night and (...) wearied limbs compelled us (...) lodge among
these Teneme^^^ Having almost worn out our se^^^ by tedious Travel, we resol^^^
here to repair our breeches: (...) (alas!) this mending (I allud^ Taylourism)
was little better than mere Botching. For, whereas we thought to have renewed
nature, and to have recreated our Palates with the pleasant wholesomeness of
Rural Delicacies, we could scarce so much as even patch her up with the hurden
Accomodations of a red-lattic'd Inn; The foretop of a Carrot, and a few parcht
Pease were our choicest Provender, which filled our cavities so full of wind,
that we thought we had got the Four Quarters in our Bellys, which made such
Squibs of our Breeches, that (like the fifth of November) we were continually
discharging of Rockets and Crackers.

The next day dressed with Aurora, nay before she had put on her Indian gown,
we set out with the Sun, who bearing us company but a little while withdrew
into an apartment behind a cloud, at whose absence the Heavens frowning and
contracting their brows, did presently fall a crying and wept such plentiful
showers of tears, that they moistn'd our skin^ with the Deluge of their Grief.
But that which terrified us most of all, was water which we saw of several
colors, sometimes red, and sometimes black; which put us in mind of those
Prodigious Rains the Philosophers speak of, Blood and Ink; But overtaking a
Collier and Red-Oker man, we perceived 'twas the Distillations of their
Buggets. But that which gave wings to time, and made it fly merrily while we
were in the company of these Vagrants, were the frequent Quarrels that were
broacht between them, which at length were improved into severe Buffetings. The
Object of both their Occupations lies hid in the Earth, and they work like
Moles, whose Employ is underground, and (like a certain Fish) they take their
color from the place they converse in. The Collier thumpt with tincturing-fist
the Red-man, black; and the Red man died with Vermilion- blow the Blackman,
red; so that we never saw before such a party colored Courbat, such a
Fool's-coa^ed conflict^, wherein thelst out Champions were so mutually
disguised, that they seemed to be Amphituo'd, and to be wholly transformed into
each others Person.

After another days Travel in Dust and Sun, we saluted a good handsome Town,
not a little resembling in crookedness a middlesiz'd shooing horn; At the
entrance into it, the uncarpetness (as I may say) of the Floor, or (in other
words) the unevenness of the streets somewhat dislocating the position of our
almost tript up feet, had like to have demolish us, and to have thrown us dow^
backward, but to prevent the S^loecism of kissing the place at wron^ end, we
recovered our fall, an^ went bolt upright into the nave^ of the Coporation,
where the^^ was such an Assembly of Provisio^^ as represented a market, which
was unhappily disturbed by an u^fortunate accident; For a certai^ Bull of an
uncertain man havin^ mistaken his box, and taken peppe^ in the nose instead of
Snush, a^^ being enraged and heated by the virtue of the Spice, took a ris^
about the Cross, and emptied b^ his Ramble all Stalls and Panniers so that this
Brisk Customer made (...) scrambling kind of Dinner for the whole Country; who
was ridi^^ upon one another backs for V^^ands and Booty, and was tu^bling
among the ruins of Bake^ Victuallers, and Costermonge^ We were informed that
this Town was much infested with the unwelcome Visitants, Rats and Mice;
insomuch that the Inhabitants have a Rat-catcher at a certain Pension, as the
only Talis-man against such noxious Vermin.

Having left this Town behind us, we come to a Wood on our left hand, nigh unto
which was a discontented Fountain murmuring as it run (we did not enquire a
what) and bubling forth seemingly much Dissatisfaction. This wood was a
promiscuous Rabble of all vege^ables. A throng of trees of all ranks and
qualities; we refresht ourselves a little under this natural Arbor, and being
pretty and cheerful in this circumstance of Place; one of our Caravan began to
express his joy in some notes of Music, who as soon as he began to strike up
with his Pite (thinking he had but one) he presently preceiv'd it to be
multiplied into an Organ, and wondered (with the Bumpkin that pulled at the
Bellows) that he had so much Harmony in him* For you must know hereabout^ dwelt
a thing called an Eceho, who as soon as she heard but Sol, Fa^ whipped! she
improved the melody into a noise and consort: and presently increased those
single note into the whole Gamut; and mos^ neately played the wag with the tail
of his voice! being a ver^ pretty Songster, that sings well b^ the Ear. But
while Lug was so laced with the tatling Reverberation of voice, our eyes were
ravished with a most delicate Prospect; For here was a most pleasant champion
piece of ground which extending and roaming (...) self some Furlongs in length,
w^^ furnished with all the Excellen^ that ever commended the mo^^ transporting
Elisium; the Air w^^ lullaby'd as still and quiet as Dormant Infant; the Day
was Orient, bright and clear; the Earth (like a Forester) was clad in green.
The Figure of this Field was a Parallellogrammum, the Style was situate
South-East-by North, and consisted of a climax of three rails, over which we
conveyed our selves by Elevation of Leg; near the entrance into the Meadow, we
observed an hole or casement in the hedge, which we perceived the Hogs had
oftentimes threded; but the Hedger had glazed it with a pane of Furze.

Having ambled over some Furlongs on this (as it were) New Market Heath, we
perceived it to degenerate and to grow worse and worse, and (like an handsome
neck of Mutton) to determine in the unevenness of a Rock, or Scrag. A little
while after we winded a Cordwainer, who (as he told us) was newly recovered
from a sad mischance; For walking carelessly, one day he happened to have a
fall, and to squot his Breech upon an Hedg-hog, which he carried away as
cleverly, (it clinging to his Buttocks) as if he had sat upon a ball of his
wax; whether there is a simpathy between a Shoomakers tail, and the skin of an
Vrchin, or whether the bristles of the Creature entered the pores of his
Backside, we list not to decide that controversy now; but however the mortal
complained that it was an uneasy cushion, and that that Spinny of Awls had made
a cullender of his A --: But being not much concerned at the cerebrosity of his
seivy Bum; The Iletholes whereof being not very deep, we went together, till we
arrived to the roughness of the forementioned Downs, which did somewhat decline
into an uneven Praecipice, whose craggy stairs as soon as we had descended, we
stumbled upon an House, or a Dunghill modeled into the shape of a Cottage,
whose outward surface was so all to-be-negro'd with such swarthy plaster, that
it appeared not unlike a great blot of Cow-turd: This Structure stradled ^ver
about eight Else of ground, ^bove the surface whereof the ^ves were advanced
about two ^ards, and the Chimney peeped ^ut about a Foot above the Eves; ^he
light flowed in through the old ^ircumference of a bottomless Peck; which being
stuck in the Thatch, ^upply'd the place of an Orbicular Casement. The Door-way
was a ^reach in the wall toward one end, which being of a dwarfish size, i. e.
^wo Foot lower in stature than an ordinary Man, we were forced to a^ridge our
Dimensions, and to creep in. The Parlour, H^^ Kitchen, i. e. one Room which was
prettily adorned with the P^^try of Ballads; a crippled Pip^^ with a broken
shin, near allied a Dish of the same matter; a vo^ Spoon with a Whistle at the
en^ and a Tipsy Cradle reeling in t^^ corner, (methoughts) were a pr^^ty sort
of Goods, and not unhansome Furniture. A whole Lit^^^ of Children was strewn
upon t^^ Floor; only one Mopp-headed B^^ was Tripos'd on a Cricket, a^^ blew
the Fire; The carved Ma^^tle-tree seemed to be defended (...) a little wooden
Fellow furiou^ strutting in an Oaken Cloak; a^ we perceived the Window was
^^dors'd with the Picture of a (...) We observed that the Bulkie C^^board was a
Nuisance to the wh^^^ Family of Household Stuff, wh^^ it had mightily disobliged
by (...) trenching on their Liberties, they grutching it so much room; and
indeed the Table, Bed, and other Utensils have not suffered a little detriment
by its injurious Contiguity. We had a Prospect of whole Territories about this
Building, which though not large, yet were exceedingly well fortified; a little
Hedge being a Pallizado on one side, and a narrow Trench instead of a Bulwark
on the other: The Continuity of the Mound was violated by a Notch in the corner
to set a Style in; over which when we had passed, we espied a Bank like a
little Hybla, cap'd with a Hive of Bees, which this small Eden curiously
carved, and (as it were) Quincunx'd into a Knot, did feast with the moisture of
its delicious Flowers. Leaving the Phylacteries of this Yard, we met the
Good-Housewife of this little Tenement with her Tippet bristling, (...) Mouth
mumping, and her Han^ knitting; she had a Cade Lamb her Rere, attending upon
her, a^^ a Kitten in the Van, conducting (...) home.

We followed our Noses from hence, and were directed by (...) Clue of a long
Hedge; which af^^^ a great extent in length, we fou^^^ to be Tagg'd with a
rough La^^ turning from which a little towa^^^ the right, we overtook a Chur^^
standing (like an Ace) and m^^ping by it self, at some distan^^ from the Town;
which wheth^^ it run from the Parish, or the P^rish from it, we are not as yet
i^form'd; though we have most reason to suspect the latter; in rega^^ as to
outward appearance t^^ weak Constitution of the Fabric seemed not much to be
addicted run. It seemed to be very cra^^ and had a mussler of Ivy, which we
presume were instead of ^rutches; For whereas that feeble Vegetable is usually
upheld by the walls it clings to, we believe it was a Buttresse here to support
the Walls. But having sadden'd our Aspect with the melancholy looks of this
desolate Temple, we took our leave of it, and shot directly ^own a Balk upon
that profane Town to which it seemed to stand related. At our first salutation
whereof, we chanced to pop into a dapper Alehouse, mightily stufft with a huge
Hostess, whose moisture distilling through the Pores of her Body, and being
somewhat turned through excessive heat, struck our olfactive Nerves with so
great a sowrness, that we had quite been overcome with this Vessel of Vinegar,
had she not too much jog'd her self by an unhappy fall, and spilt a great
quantity o^ her unctuous Liquor.

The Shoemaker conjectured tha^ she had lost about five or six pound
(aver-du-pois) from her Rere behind, and presently concluded tha^ she was in
great danger of hanging all a-one-side, unless some charitable Person should
poize her with thrust of assisting Nose. We had scarce prim'd our Pipes, but in
comes a Law-jobber, accompanied with the Bum-brusher, or Schoolmaster of the
place, who after some time, took occasion to show their skill and breeding at
Fifty-cuffs, but (thanks to the Stars) without any danger to their Professions;
For they did not so much aim at the head, as level their fury at each others
heels, where their knowledge was supposed not to lie, though some hold that
they have as much Learning at one end as they have at the other. The most
remarkable thing in this Village was a Carrot-pate house at the Posteriours of
the Town; it was covered with Tile, and was curiously contrived after the
Italian Models. The Master that did animate, or the (...) of this Stone-carcass
(they told us) was lately dead: His Distemper was a Quarrel between his Belly
and his Back; the one being bursten took pet and run away from the other, so
that the poor Man being at a loss for a place to put his Victuals in, died with
a conceit.

S. Crispin's Disciple having a Mistress in this Lordship, and being almost
within the Atmosphere of her presence, began to wind her, and had a great
tendency to the place where she was; so that I might as soon expect that a
stone should fall beyond the center, as that this Gentle-crafts-man shou^^
budge further; wherefore nothi^^ was expected now but an imme^^ate Divorce from
each others company; but before we parted, (...) obliged me with the Prospect
bo^^ of her Person and Fortune. (...) for the first, as soon as I saw it, (...)
had greater reason to congratula^^ my Eyesight than I had before for she was
blessed with a most ravis^ing Aspect, and a snug Face, mo^^ prodigiously graced
with a dain^^ fine Nose, fastened in its middle which is not like some Snouts
tha^ look more upon one Cheek, tha^ they do upon the other, but shew^ equal
respect to both, not at al^ disobliging the right by fleering to^ much on the
left. And then for her Eyes, they are excellent a^^ twireing, and will be sure
to kee^ her Nose safe, (I Will warrant you (...) for one looks one way, and the
other another. The Woman had a Mouth too, which was somewhat bigger than that
of a Musket, though not twice as big as the capacious bore of a Blew Noggin.
This Mouth she put but to one use, and that is the same that we put ours to,
that is to eat three or four Meals in a day; for it seems whereas other Women
often use theirs in prating and twatling, we perceived that this saved her
Mouth and spoke through her Nose. As we have given you the Picture of her
Person, so now let us present you with a Landscape of her Fortune. As for her
Lands, that is, Pasture-ground, and Meadow, we could not discern, but that
(like a spot upon the Globe) they took but little room upon the surface of the
Earth, and (like the Possessions of Alcibiades) were but a little speck to the
World. A little Muck would dung her Fallow; one hig^ Table T -- (to speak in
the Oxford Dialect) will much enrich it and an Ear of Corn will go near to sow
it; it is like she has Grass enough for a couple of Rabbets Having surveyed the
Paramour and the Portion of this Nivelling Cobbler, after a single sip of fixe^
out of a Tin Pot, and a Trebl^ go-down out of a cup of Doubl^ after a
right-line scrape with lef^ Leg; and uncouth doffing of (...) bad Bonnet, after
slinking a Complement by way of thanks for hi^ Society, attended by his
Coblerhood to the confines of a Yard, a^^ the clasping together of two lowering
Gates in the presence of a Corpulent and Burly Elm, I solemnl^ took leave of
my Fellow-Trave^ler. After his departure I wa^ forced to beguile away the time
(...) the shady solitude of silent thought which before I spent in the brisker
Entertainments of Discourse and Dialogue: I had not long busied my faculties
with inward speculations, but I met with variety of Objects courting with their
Flatteries my almost distracted Contemplations. I saw Three Stones so
artificially set, that they represented the Figure of a convenient Style.
Methoughts the Architecture of it was very curious; for one stone about a Foot
square, being placed perpendiculary upright, its Northern Extremity was crossed
by another at right Angles; on the other side whereof was erected another
perpendicular correspondent to the former. The Position of these Materials made
a pretty Fabric, over which a Man might commodiously pass; its surface was
smooth, not tufted with snags, which are always catching and snarling at your
Clothes, (...) the great Disguize and Damage (...) your Breeches; about two
yard^ distant there was a Cross delv'd i^ the Earth, which seemed either a^
Argument of Popish Superstition or a Sign or Mark of the Paris^ Selvidge.

Departing from hence, w^ moved through a Close very pop^lous with Mutton;
there being (as it were) a whole Academy (...) Sheep sizeing on a Hay-rick, no^
botled out into Commons, bu^ Geometrically carved into goo^ Sexangular
Luncheons. 'Twa^ Foot-cloath'd (as it were) wit^ Straw near five yards about,
upon which were tumbling a Bag-piper^ and an Hocus, who wantoned s^ long till
(like Dogs) at last their Play determined in a sharp conflic^ The Man of Music
buffeted the Jugler to some tune, who addin^ two or three howls to the Notes of
his Drone-pipe, by cleanly conveyance did vanish from him. The Piper appeared
of a tawny Complexion, his Nose bending with an Arch upward; his Eyes being
somewhat hollow, seemed to increase the promontory of his jetting Forehead. In
a word, there was charm enough in his Aspect; He was well built, his whole
Frame and contexture was sweet and regular; I must needs say, I have seldom met
with any handsomer Model, or Platform of a Man. But though his Person was neat
and uniform, yet his habit and garb was full of deformity, and there were as
many Soloecisms and Incohoerencies on these, as there was Congrui^ies and
Beauty commendable in that. He wore a Mis^ellany of Apparel, a Gallimafry of
Clothes, as I humbly conceive, 'twas a Tyth Suit, composed of various and
s^veral sorts; such a Club of Ragg^ and Randesvouz of Fragments must needs be a
Collection (lik^ the Jerkin of the Jay) of sever^^ Feathers from diverse Birds.
H^^ Doublet (which indeed was b^^ one great Patch in Folio) was v^ry
heterogeneous from the rest (...) his Attire; he had worn his La^pets into
perfect Fringe, (so th^^ he seemed to be surrounded wi^^ the remnant of a
Curtain) a^^ had thin'd his Elbows into the first Principles. 'Twas of a Mou^^^
color hue, and (as near as could guess) it appeared to be t^^ Result of an old
Cloak; both (...) first Crop and Latter-Math too we^^ both worn off; and it was
(...) Threadbare, that it had alm^^^ foundered three or four of his (...)
Lice; wherefore we advised (...) to hang it no longer on a Kna^^ back, but to
condemn it to the Housewifery of a Shooe-clout. The Relics that were left of
his tattered Breeches were one Story pendulous below his Coat. His Instrument
(like a Gizzard) was tucked under his arm, which by shog of Elbow, he did hug
into harmony, and squeeze out of its Womb most ravishing Ditties. We made but
few Remarks on the Person of the Jugler, only we thought it appeared to be
somewhat sleathy; his Noddle was shrouded under the Patronage of a collop'd
Hat, whose indented Margin being somewhat frail, declined from the equality of
an Horizontal Position, and flapping inward on both sides, and hugging his
Ears, forced the poor Man to look as it were through a Spout. He had a bunch of
Ribbond in his hand, which possibly might be the effect of his last Vomit; for
we suppose having had a surfeit o^ Silkworms, and a Loom in hi^ Throat, he can
disgorge more at (...) cast, than an ordinary Weave^ can work in a weeks time.
Hi^ little pointing-stick and Tin Dishes with other Implements of his Art made
an horrible noise and comb^stion in his Pocket, even to the terror and
amazement of an Humble Be, who was rioting on the Luxuries, and was wantonly
basking on the Sunny Terrace of a magnificent Thistle. Nay, the jingling of his
Tackle did alarm an Army of Wasps and Hornets, which lay encamped hard by under
the roof of a shady Furz bush; These made such an onset on Hocus with their
Lansprizades, that making a Pin-cushion of his Body, they stuck it so full of
Needles, that the Pungency of their Weapons, and Artillery piercing to the
quick, made ^he poor fellow curvete and elevate himself nimbly into two or
^hree dancing Capreolls. He car^y'd on his back as thick a Quick^et of Stings
as a Hog of Bristles. He was swelled to a treble propor^ion beyond what he was;
his Hands were grown too big for his Pockets, and could have no re^eption into
those narrow Closets. ^he circumference of his head was ^ugely increased beyond
the Dia^eter of his Hat; so that the Con^exity of the former could not be
^ontain'd within the Concavity of ^he latter. In a word, being magni^y'd beyond
the fallacy of the best ^lass, his Clothes were too little ^or his enlarged
Dimensions; so that he burst through the confines ^f his scanty case. Means
pre^ently was used for the levelling of ^his Mountainous Vagrant, and
Hide-swoln; He was immedia^ly plunged into a Bath of Hone^ which though a
present cure (...) his Disease and Malady, yet w^^ as great a cause of an
inconvenience as bad; For a certain Be^^ not far off got his Medicine in the
wind, and came galloping for (...) lick of her admired Dainties; whi^^ when the
Jugler perceived, havi^^ lost through fear the retentive F^culty, he
adulterated her Dish (...) a mixture of somewhat that w^^ of the same color,
though not (...) sweet. The Jugler hooft it aw^^ with a winged speed; the Be^^
with a pair up and a pair dow^ most swiftly pursued him. W^staid not to see the
Issue of t^^ Race, but advanced forward in regular progressive motion, wh^^
after a little time were crossed (...) a Rivulet, which wrigled alo^^ with a
crooked current; ow^ which we conveyed our selves by saltation. On the other
side of the Bank was a little Arabia of Sand, enough (I suppose) to supply all
the Hour-glasses in the Country, nay perhaps and that of Time too till the last
minute; near this Mountain of Sand lay prostrate at length two Iron Wedges
contiguous to a Block in Folio, which we supposed was to be rent into collops,
and to become a Sacrifice to hungry Vulcan. There was a numerous Family of
chips about it, which were different in shape, color, and bigness, so that
they seemed not to be the offspring of the same Parent; they lay in a Chaos
without any order, amidst which confusion the unlucky Gibeonite that hewed them
lost the head of his Ax: The Decollation whereof seemed ominous to the Man, and
made him superstitiously leave his work: My (...) and a couple of Gadarens th^^
were driving Swine, made a di^^gent scrutiny for the Noddle (...) the Tool;
which after some ti^^ we perceived to lie entombed und the Mausoleum of a good
lus^ shaving. We did not percei^^ that it was much damnify'd by (...)
retirement, only the dampness (...) its Vrn did somewhat abate a^^ obscure the
eagerness of its edg^ and the Luster of its Aspect. (...) delivered it into the
hands of (...) Owner, who presently fastened (...) to the shoulders to which it
(...) belong.

After a small offering of tha^ for our careful search, the Swi^^ herds turned
to the left, and (...) wheeling to the right, after (...) had jog'd over some
few Acre^ a phlegmatic and cold constit^^on, most happily pop'd on (...)
warmer Turf of a pleasant Cornfield. 'Twas fringed about with a Mound of
Elder-trees, whose am^itious height, and luxurient Bran^hes gave impregnable
security to ^he nestling Birds. The Diameter ^f a Path run through the midst,
whose Poles were transverse or ^hwarted the hinges of the World. 'Twas
environed on both sides with (...) Sea of Corn, which being moved ^y the breath
of Aeolus, (that Bellows of the World) what a Flux and Re-flux was there of
^aves of Wheat! We passed through this Territory and Dominion of Ceres with the
most exalt^d delight. How did that Goddess (...) in Triumph there! What crowds
of Clients bowing their ears to her Commands and Dictates? Every ^and was
parted with the Isthmus of a Balk, on several of which ^y the Habiliments of
the Harvesters; An extended sleeve of a Red Wast-coat, embracing the collar of
a Leathern Jump, and touching the hem of a grafted Petticoat, presented us with
the Idea of a pretty Wardrobe. We went out of this Enclosure through the
western passage of a threeraild Gate: Upon which there did directly shoot the
aged Fragments of a decrepit wall; which over-topping our stature in height and
tallness, we were forced to add to our quantity a Nine-inchstone, that raising
our Dimensions we might peep over it. There was scarce any thing remarkable on
the other side, unless a vast Rolling-pin of humane ordure. 'Twas four Inches
Diameter, and probably discharged from a Musket bore, and that near upon the
confines of a tuft of Wormwood, whose bitter scent mixed with the unsavouryness
of Excrementitious Atoms breathed a medly kind of stink, and gave but ordinary
entertainment to our offended Nostrils. Among the Ruins of this Mound we
discovered the Snout and some other Limbs of a murdered Dial; It was not so
defaced, but that we could discover in its Physiognomy some martyred Figures,
that were yet legible, and there were some Relics of Lines, that were not
quite obliterated. Time I presume (being vexed perhaps that it should observe
its motions) has set its Grinders in it, and out of envy and malice has quite
devoured it. I am apt to think that this pile of Stones stood in its Native
Country, where 'twas first bred, as may be conjectured from an adjacent Pillar,
whose pregnancy (we fancy) produced this litter of Stones, it being the Mother
of these rockie Babes. We advanced to the Orifice of this Lapideous Womb, where
were hewing Mortals, by cruel Midwifery digging out the Offspring of teeming
Earth. 'Twas an unpolished spectacle, and the Workmen were a^ rough and uneven
as the Prospect* and the Artificers were as intractable and stubborn as the
Materials, or Object of their Art. Two of the most Brawny Paviers stood lolling
by the Mattock that picked them out, and a single one in a decumbent posture lay
prostrate at their feet, whose Northern Extremity performed the Office of a
Pedestal to the Embryo of a Statue, which was but newly hatched, and fashioned
in a bed of Sand* The Declivity of a corner near the entrance into the Pit gave
occasion to the water to stagnate into (...) Puddle; through which we did not
sail, though the trajection was very short, but fetching a circuit about its
shore, we went out at the passage through which we entered. But no sooner had
we conveyed our selves out of this hole, but after we had traced over some few
Furlongs of a grassy Pavement, a certain Moity of our Bodies pop'd into
another, and a few steps after some of our feet happened into a third; and a
little while after, falling down, our hands were buried in two more. We
wondered who had punch'd so many Eyelet-holes in the Earth's skin, till seeing
a Robin Run-a-hole sit mumping (like a Troglodite) in his house under ground,
we perceived the Enclosure we were in, was a well peopled Warren: We had a
frisk or two after the Inhabitants of the place; but their Heels prevented our
design on their Scuts, for the nimbleness of the one secured them from
imposition of Salt on the other. The Sanctuary of their Burrows defended them
from the violence of all Persecutions. Their Cells were contiguous, nay in some
place they had broken down the Partitions, and by a frequent Burglary did
invade the privacy of each others apartments. The Dragon that kept this Garden
of Coneys was a Zamzummin in stature, a second Goliath, whose hand was
Quarterstafft with a mighty Bea^. They told us of an Hercules or two that came
to encounter this Keeper, who ('it is said) did so out-club the Yermin, that
instead of an Auger hole, he made them earth themselves in the Asylum of a
Coney-hole. The Burrow of the Keeper stood near the center of his Dominions,
being the Metrop^litan Seat of that little Nation of Rabbets. The Architecture
of the Fabric was not contemptible, being stately in height, whose top was
crowned with the magnificence of Turrets, whose vigilant loftiness had an eye
to the security of the circumjacent Region: The biggest wonderment we beheld
about it, was, That its Head did not shoot so far upward into one Element, but
its Feet sunk as low downward into another, it standing knee-deep, nay almost
up to the Wast in Earth, having as many Stories under ground as it had above.
Whether the Bucks or Does were the Pioneers that dug those Cellars, or whether
the Architect designed them on purpose to prevent the underminings of those
notable Delvers, we are not so well able to determine. We espied in a corner a
wooden Stratagem or two, on purpose to entrap (we supposed) ensnaring Reynard,
so that that living Gin, so fatal to Pullen, died himself in a wile, and one
Trap was trapan'd by another. 'Twas a well contrived Ambush, and pretty
handsomely victual'd with a good lusty Temptation, which so wrought upon
Reynard, that he could not by any means resist its charms, though it is thought
he was as wise a Fox as any in Aesop, whom we never met with, without a piece
of Morality tackt to their Tails.

Having passed the Bounds of this Rabbet-Limbo, it was not long before we were
embraced within the confines of a spot of ground like an Orchard; For the
Ranges of Vegetables gave us a shrewd suspicion that Pomona had had her
residence in that place: Here Autumnus stood lolling under the pressure of a
Burden, being scarce able to bear so many wreaths of Fruit. His Head was
crowned so, that it bowed with Apples; so that shaking his ears as we passed
through, he did so pelt us with a shower, that the unlading of his Noddle made
fractures in our Pates, and raised Tumors in sinciput as big as Kentish
Pippins. The place was pretty populous with Trees, the squadrons whereof seemed
to be well disciplined, standing in their Ranks, and as it were in Battle-array
like a well ordered Army. Here were several degrees of Vegetables in wonderful
subordination one under another from the Commonalty of Shrubs to the Majesty of
a Cedar. Here were Inferior and Superior, and (as it were) Dignified
Fruit Trees; among whom there stood a Pear Tree, I suppose Lord Primate of the
Hierarchy. In a South-west corner we espied a few vermiculating Hops, wrigling
like worms up the Pyramid of a Pole; near which stood an Elm-Tree in the Arm^
of Ivy, which hugged it so close that it was almost incorporated in to it by
its clasping Embraces. The Posteriours of the Elm-Tree wen^ most barbarously
chastised by the Prinkles of a Bramble, which the Breath of Aeolus would often
mov^ with smart Jerks. One of ou^ company taking an occasion (...) pass by one
of these unseen Brian they presently had their Talon^ clawing upon his back,
and frighted the Man as much as the Bush di^ Demonsthenes, which catching his
by the Coat, made him (supposing it to be an Enemy) to cry ou^ for Quarter: But
the Fellow being cased in Leather, and the Buffu^^ of his Coat being
Armor-pro^^ against the Bristles and (as it were) Hedghogism of their Prickles,
they could not fasten their Fangs in his Garment, wherefore (thanks to his
Stars) the Man had no hurt, but was blessed with a great deliverance. Toward
the bottom of this Orchard lay prostrate the Trunk of a slain Myrtle, and that
not far from the verge or shadow of a Cops of Beans, pretty tall in stature,
and well branched; by the Coverlets we saw there should be Beds not far off, I
suppose they were the Lodgings of Carrots, Turnips, and of other Roots. There
were Cabbages grown to a commendable globosity, the roundness whereof tempted
us to a Game at Football; we banded them about sufficiently, and made some of
them caper over a Ten-foot wall. One of the Gamesters was his just in the
mouth, the bore whereof being too little for the Bullet, could not receive it
into its Orifice, but however it gelded and dampt its fury, so that it did not
retort with violence to the injury and detriment of any body else. We had sweat
longer at the Recreation and Olympic sport of Kick-Cabbage, had not the Breath
of Cloacina (her habitation being near) been so strong, and been a nuisance unto
us.

So that being stunk out of our Quarters, we turned our Quarters upon the
stink, and traveled over a Grate into a Churchyard: The Track of our path lay
between the Mansion house of the Levite on the left hand, and the Church on the
right; behind which toward the South there stood or lay (we cannot tell which)
a weather-beaten Tomb, which was Mouse-eaten at one end by that Vermind Time,
that nibbles all things: It seemed to be an inverted Hog-Trough turned
topsy-turvy with its muzzle downward; but whether it was or not, or whether it
was purposely erected as a Monument to preserve the memory of those Ashes that
lay under it, we cannot tell, tho we have some reason to suspect the Former, in
regard there were so many Swine a digging about, who with the natural Spades of
their noses, had almost made a Pit-hole for the Stone, and so had like to have
buried one grave in another. Here was a whole Herd of Swine a rooting as if
they had been turned in on purpose to root up Christians, as they are in the
Feilds in Italy to dig up Turffles. A little Wall lay sculking about this
Territory of the Dead, which we supposed was placed there as a Bulwark to their
Ashes but it proved but a feeble Fence against the intrusion of the Lambs who
made frequent Capreolls in to this adjacent Dormitory: The mound was raised a
little, and cap'd with Turf, and environed with the hollowness of a good
handsome Ditch; but yet, neither Cap nor Ditch could keep these Animals from
l^ap-frogging over them, from grazing in a Charnel house, and from turning a
Coemitery of Shades and Ghosts in to a Feeding Pasture of hungry Beasts.

We mounted this wall, an^ moved on toward the Westers period of our intended
Journey The bordering close was pimpled with mole-hills, which seemed bu^ young
Protuberances not blister'^ into the bigness of some neighboring Banks.
Leaving thi^ ground behind us, we descended the Declivity of an adjoining
Pasture pretty well bearded or ^ristled with Thorns and Bushes; and so passed
through a Farmers ^ard, where we saw an Alps of Straw, with Swine (instead of
Snow) a grovelling a- top on it; which put us in mind of the Ambition of Goats,
who are always clambering up the crags of Rocks. The Western Extremity of the
Wheat-Hovil shot directly up the Barn, an Appendix to which stood ^he Apartment
of the Hogs, over which was perch't a Roost for Poultry.

Not far from this Country Tusculum stood the Island of a house ^n the embraces
of a Moat, like Ticho's Vranoberg in the midst of the Sea; An ancient Pile, a
Reverend Nest of as Venerable a Bird, which having taken her Flight has left
it a solitude. The greatest Observables were a little silent Bell in Duodecimo,
which being utterly Disleepled, hung between the collops of an old wa^ or
rather a Mortar invers'd, which had lost its Pestle, so that it wi^^ not vocal
by stroke of intern^ Clapper, but by knocks and blow of external Hammer; within
the found of this Bell stood a lolli^^ washing-Block; being a woodd^^ kind of
Anvil, where the S^^ Vulcans were hammering out wit^ Battle-Door the Filth of
Linne^ whose unctuous Distillations we^^ the Nile that watered the litt^^ Egypt
of the adjacent garden.

Having moved from this Ma^sion about three or four Furlon^ we passed by the
skirts of a rota^^ Engine, in shape not unlike (...) House, being pack-sall'd
at T'^^ with a aridge: it seemed to sta^^ upon stilts, and to be a moving
Habitation like those of the Getes. 'Twas prefac'd with a Portico, into which
we ascended by a scale of Stairs. The whistling Wind breathed a Vertigo in its
Pate, whose giddyness communicating a motion to its Grinders, made it whirlegig
the grain into Flower. A little distant from hence beyond a small sandy Desert
stood a Village, whose Steeple was in its center, not unlike the Mast of a
Ship. This Tower as to outward appearance had a Portly Person: yet they told us
it had the imperfection of Dumbness; it having been Dis bell'd for some years.
They were alarmed to Church by the Report of a Musket, which the Clerk (being
an eminent Guner) did usually discharge at every man's Door. This Clerk was a
Weaver by Trade, and had relation to a Loom, where in he had been ambling for
several years with one Foot up an^ the other down, and with all (...) treading
has scarce got clo^^ enough to repair the Breaches (...) his tattered Elbows.
They to^^ us that his Trade and he had lat^ly been at Cuffs, and are just upon
parting, it being such a Lim^ wagging Profession, that he is no^able to endure
the Penance (...) it. This man had wonderful ski^^ in sweeping the Church, and
'ti^ thought could tell what a Clo^^ 'twas at the South Dial as well (...) most
Astronomers; He was also (...) pretty Man of his hands for singing; For when
the Tune one Su^day had ambled from him into the Chancel, and had almost caugh
a fall among the Non-songsters really they told us that this N^table Man gave
it such a ne^ jerk, as that he twitch it into the Church strangely. Now (I
say.) for the Clerk to have a rare knack of securing the Hymn from those that
would steal it, Oh! It Is an execllent thing! The most remarkable things in this
Town were an Ecclesiastical Wall made of Soecular Mud, which mounded in the
Introduction of the Parsonage: it afforded secure Harbor to Vagrant Bees, who
randevozing here, became a Colony; They made so many Cells in it, that it
appeared to be the Fragment a Reverend Honeycomb. Not far from this grew a Tree
in Folio, an huge, thick, squot Elm, pounded within the circumferences of 4
Benches, which we supposed to be seats made a purpose for the Posterns of
Spectators, when Whitsun-Ale is solemnized with Festivity of Fiddle, and
celebrated with Caper after Pipe and Tabour.

Immediately after our Depa^ture from this place, night ove^took us, whose
Sables eclipsing the Splendour of the Day, shortne^^ our course, and crooken'd
our Career aside to look for a Lodgin^ An happy Retrospect obliged (...) with
the Prospect of glimmerin^ Thatch, which the nearer we approacht, the more
visibly it a^pear'd in the shape of an House. (...) was called by way of Irony
a Cas^^^ whose Governor was a decay (...) Tailor, who having lost through an
unfortunate hole of his Pocken his Needles, Thimble, those Cha^tels of his
Breeches, and Implements of his Vocation, was reduced to poverty. The Man wa^
nimble of foot, though a Dwarf (...) bulk, so that nine of such mig^^ very well
club to the elementing (...) a Man. After a small Collation a Tripe and
Buttermilk, we tript (...) a Ladder to the apartments of our several Cabbins,
where with the Poppies of sleep we refresht our Noddles to the great comfort
and satisfaction of our wearied Carcasses. After Valediction to Pricklouse, the
next morning we set out with the Sun, and had not went above a mile or two, but
we heard the rumor of a sad disaster which had lately befaln a Country Corydon,
which was the loss of a whole pound of Candles, supposed to be stolen by some
highway Rat at one Robbery. The Relations were various as to the manner of the
theft; some say he carried them away behind him like a burden of sticks; others
say, that he hung them by his side like Bandileers, but most agree that he laid
them upon his shoulder one by one, and ran armed away with the Luminaries as
with so many Muskets. We were somewhat amaz^d at the horror of that sad story,
fearing lest we our selves should be a Prey to those bold Banditi, who being
pretty greasy, seemed to be a good handsome Bait, and so being mistaken for
Rats-bane might be pouch'd by the Vermin: But (thanks to the Stars) we escaped
the Fate of the Bishop (...) Mentz, and marched on upon the Forehead of a
smooth Mountain upon the summity whereof squo^ted another Hill; but it bore n^^
proportion to the seat it sat on being but a Pimple to it, as tha^ was but a
Molehill to the whol^ Globe; it put us in mind of P^^^lion clambering upon the
back (...) Ossa, that false Heraldry of the Giants, Hill upon Hill, by which
Bunches they thought to have scaled Heaven; the Crown of the uppermost was
somewhat depre^^ and sunk into the hollowness of a little Valley, about which
stood the natural Bannisters of some Thorn-bushes, whose folding Branches
weaved into a Lattice, which threaded by the Sunbeams dappled the ground with
a pleasant checquer-work, and yielded besides a good handsome shade to the
panting Sheep, whose Fleeces discovered them to have taken sanctuary here
against the Persecutions of the violent heat; for the Cattle feeding within the
covert, and rushing through the Brake, every Briar took Toll of their Coats,
and excis'd their Backs as fast as they filled their Bellies; on every spring
there hung a Fragment of their Liveries, and the whole hedge was clothed with
tattered Fleeces, as if Wool had been vegetable and had grown there. These
spoils were looked upon as excellent Booty to vagrant Youth, who went about
stripping, plundering, and (as it were Sheep shearing the hedges: W^ met a crew
of these Pickeerin^ Wool-gatherers, the very Emblem^ of Beggary, and but once
remov'^ from vilest Rascality; one Shoo^ a-piece, and half a Hat, a Remnant of
a Doublet, and a Moiety (...) a Sleeve, a pair of Dispocket Bre^ches, and a
jagged Jump, wen^ the flower of their Accoutrements except two or three locks
of Wo^^ tucked like Scuts under their Girdles as a Badge of their profession
and some crammed Stockins bobbin^ at their sides as Trophies of their Pyracies.

Some few Furlongs from hen^^ there was a mixed Assembly of Ki^^ and Goats at
dinner upon the Lawns; their Meal was interrup^ed by the unwelcome salutes
(...) troublesome Breeze, whose stim^lation of Rump did engender suc^ a
Frolic, that with curled Tail and toss'd-up Horn they run gadding and
bellowing, and with their vocal Friskings, with a pleasant kind of terror, did
at once both recreate and affright the astonished Beholders: The Magistrate or
Herds-man, that kept these Animals, was in the midst of the Tumult, who finding
himself miserably involved in a Hubbub, with furious Club chastised their
Gamesomness, and with mighty bussing becalmed the uproar. This Fellow was a
strange Creature, wonderfully Goth'd, and all-to-be-Vandall'd even to Barbarity
it self. A Clown in grain! An uncultivated Boor! A Beast of the Herd in humane
shape. We proposed a Quaery or two about the Genius of the Place; he told us
the Soil was cold, and big with clay, and would doubtless yield a good Harvest
of Tobacco-pipes: And as for the People, he said they were a Pan-pudding sort
of People, much addicted to that vile sort of Creature. A whole Table at a
Christening is spread with a Yard of Pudding, and a Balk of Beef, a Ridge of
one and a Furrow of the other, which did so wonderfully work upon their Chops,
and made their mouths so water, that two of the chiefest Grandees of the Town,
the Hogherd and the Heyward fell seriously to snouting for some few Morsels:
the two-ear'd Pitcher that stood upon the Bench was Mr. Prinn'd in the scuffle,
i. e. lost a Lug in the Fray; and we were informed afterward that the Distaff
lost a Lock or two of its Flaxen Periwig.

Among Rational wonders the most remarkable Miracle of this Place, was an
eminent Cot-quean, a mere Woman in the habit of a Man, a kind of Mal-cut-purs'd
Creature, an Epicaene Animal of a twisted Gender, who has a Petticoat Soul in
a Trunk-Breech'd Body, and scandalizeth Virility by skill in Housewifery. He
spins (they say) like a Spider, and makes his Wheel giddy by a swift Vertigo;
we observed him to be stately in his gate when he advances up to Spindle; and
indeed was retrograde again with no little Gravity. He is a learned Craftsman
in the making of Diet, a notable Food-Framer, who buffets the Cream till he
has frighted it unto a consistence, and knocked it unto Butter, and afterward
squeezes with dexterity of Fist. He was endowed with the gift of tossing of
Pan-cakes, and had a wonderful knack at tempering the Materials of a
Bag-pudding. He surpassed the Dairy-maids in Mil^-pan accomplishments, and was
e^cellently qualified for a Meal-Tu^ Office. He squeezed the Curd^ with
Cheese-press Bum, and knea^^ the Dough with fulch of Elbo^ He is a Critic at
sweeping, an^ manageth the Beesome with mig^ty skill. We could hardly disce^^
any more of dust, he having di^lodg'd from Crevis even the sma^lest Atoms; we
were dazzled wit^ the Sunshine of his radiant Brass which was exceedingly
enlighten'^ by modern cleansing, he being (...) singular scowrer, and very
knowing and able at Sand and Oiste^shel.

This Hen-Hous wife-Mortal liv'^ a monkish kind of Life, being cloistered up in
a desolate habit^tion of a certain Gentleman, who we suppose, does fee him to
dwe^^ there to affright the Mice, and (...) be a Bull-beggar to the Rats; and
also to terrify a worse kind of Vermin which we call Thieves, who are apt to
creep through the Mouse-hole of a window, and to ^ibble away the Furniture of a
dispossessed house: or possibly he might abide there to repair its ^reaches, and
to recover it from ^ts craziness, and by the whole^ome Physic of frequent
Fires to ^eep it in health, and to persuade ^t not to tumble, but to remain
till a Mansion to the Family that ^wns it.

We tasted here of the Hospita^^ty of this foemasculine wight, ^ho spread a
Joynt-stool with se^eral sorts of Viands; which ^^ough not very delicate, yet
the ^ariety might atone and make a^ends for their meanness. Here ^as the
Epidermis of a Hog, the ^utward skin called the Swerd of Bacon, which was
infected with the Jaundice, and looked yellow* here was the Hull of a Pesco^
plundered of its Pease, and corn'^ with Salt, some broken Fragmen^ of Sheeps
Trotters S. Lawrenc'^ on a Gridiron; the offal of (...) Lark, the minced Spurs
of a Boo^less Cock, a skim'd Quadrant (...) soft Cheese, well sawc'd with the
Butt-ends of forked Scallions, the moldy reversion of an Antiquate^ Loaf dipped
in the verdure of W^ter-cresse Pottage, afforded us the refreshment of a pretty
Collatio^ by the virtue whereof being some what recruited, we moved for ward
and crep up the Brisket of small Mountain, upon whose sloa^ing descent stood a
Quadrangula^ Sheep-pen, which we passed through and found pitched with Buttons,
(...) pretty sort of Floor and Mode^^ Mosaic. Not far from the mo^^ eastern
hurdle (as near as we could observe) leaned a ruinous Bridge, which gloried in
the passage but of one Arch, and that seemed rather Natural than Artificial;
for the Impetuosity of the Current having bored an hole through a heap of
stones, licked it into the shape of an indifferent Arch: At the Foot whereof
stood a Smiths Shop, about a Bay of watling; ^t seemed to be a pretty reverend
Seat as we gathered from the Mantle of Green Moss upon its back. Though it was
covered with stubble without, yet it was pretty to^erably furnished with Iron
within, ^s threadbare Horse-shooes, bits of Keys, some few semicircles of ^ron
Rings, odd Links of interru^ted Fetters, and a broken Series of a discontinued
Chain. The Vulcan was in his Den, and was ^ammering out Hob-nails for Country
hoof. His Forge w^^ raised from the ground like an A ^tar, upon which there did
bur^ (as it were) a Vestal Fire, whi^^ blast of Bellows made much (...) bubble
up in this little Mongib^^ What Cinders were belched from this flaming
Vesuvius, whose smo^^ and ashes besmutted the Pluto (...) this Infernal Region!
who havi^^ Primitive Apparel, i. e. bei^^ skinned over with a Case of Leath^^
and having a swarthy Complex^on, did with the grimness of (...) Aspect, and
with the horrib^^ russel of his Breeches, fright o^ of the Dogs of our company
i^ a fit of sickness; we imagined (...) Cur might mistake him for a T^^ker, who
is commonly a Dise^^ or at least a Nuisance to those Cr^^tures.

We saw nothing hereabouts v^^^ remarkable, only we met seve^^^ Mastiffs laden
with the Cargo of good lusty Bones in their mouths; they were ambling eastward;
a very fine spectacle to see a Regiment of Curs trooping along instead of
Bilboa, armed with Shoulder-blades. We wondered at first from whence such
plenty of Anatomy as to furnish them, till spying the Carcass of a dead Palfry,
we perceived they had been feasted with the Viands of his Flesh, and stole the
Skeleton Piecemeal. A Baker chanced to come by through a Gap near at hand,
mounted upon just such another Morsel, ripe for Collar-maker, which being
surpised with the spectacle of his Brother Carrion, took an occasion to start,
and to disburden himself of his Load; which sad misfortune proved a lucky
accident to the Dogs, whereby they were furnished with Bread to their Meat.

Not far from hence was a scu^^ Slough, most fatal (as is observ^^ to Millers,
whom it sups up i^ the Abyss of its profundity; (...) saw one moving a-tit-up,
a-tit-(...) till he flounc'd in, and by a m^^^ disastrous Pitch-pole into mud
a^^ dirt, discolored his Coat, th^^ was candy'd with the effluviums (...) his
mealy Bags. The Neck-lace (...) Bells about the crest of his Be^^^ ceased to be
sonorous, being qui^^^ choked. His Meal through frig^^ and moisture was
metamorpho^^^ into Pudding; and spunging (...) the Liquos, it grew so heav^
that it thrived into such unweil^ness, as that it was almost (...) moveable: we
cautelously wa^^ the danger of this dirt by dive^ing a little toward the
northe^^ parts of this Quagmire, and so (...) a dainty fine Path, and that
(...) meanly beautified with vari^^^ of Flowers, we continued our ^ourney very
prosperously, only ^ne of our company had a most calamitous fall over an
unhappy clod of the first magnitude, which undermining his Pedestals, gave him
a preposterous squob, his head saluting the ground first, to the great
detriment of the outward man. There run parallel with this Path a pitched Causey
(as we supposed) about ten Furlongs, we stepped into it, and followed its track
till it brought us into the desert of a Common, not so much as accommodated
with Horse, Tree, House, or Man, so that here we felt the rigor of somewhat
called harship, the Stomach barking, the Hoof galling, the Winds whistling, and
the Heavens dropping; all these conspired to make us miserable. At last
arriving to the borders of the Wilderness, we were courteously received into an
h^spitable Hamlet, where we enjoy (...) the blessing of an indifferent
r^freshment. We took up our Qua^ters here that night, and pass (...) away the
evening in some pert^nent Quaeries about observables (...) the Place. They
presented (...) with a pretty curiosity which seldo^ occurs, and that was the
Copy (...) a Brief containing the Losses of (...) distressed Virgin, which
beca^^ the form and style is somewhat (...) usual, we care not much if (...)
here insert.

The Copy of a BRIEF.
To all Ladies, Gentlewomen; whether Maids, Wives or Widows, or others of that
softer Sex, of what state and condition soever, whether Waiting-women,
Semstresses, Spinsters, Bawds, Punks, Doxies, and all other Petticoateers, from
those who through wantonness have naked Backs to those who through want have
naked Bums, Greeting.
WHereas we are credibly informed by our trusty and well-beloved Roger
Thwickwack of B. in the County of Salop Jumper, and Arthur Twitch-box, Smoaker,
Cadwallader Whipwhop, Wrestler, Anthony Snug, Fiddler, Giles Firker Bum-brusher,
and several others of the like Laudable Professions; Tha^ our beloved Subject
Mrs. A. C. (...) the Town and County aforesaid Damsel, has lately sustained a
great los^ by a most lamentable misfortune which on the fifth of this instan^
most miserably befell her after thi^ manner following.

There was a certain Glass-case (...) a Gad-fly color, i. e. a little
inclining to a Calf-dung Yellow, an^ somewhat of a dwarfish size, no^ much
exceeding the stature of (...) Cricket; it was supported by the strength of a
double Thong at the North-west Point of her Chambe^ where for sometime it had
continu^^ in a pendulous posture, and ha^ arrived to a great repute of civility
and meekness, whereby it did much exceed, and frequently put to the blu^^ the
other Vtensils of her Chamber.

Now this Poor Thing, by reason (...) the rudeness of two lusty Pusse^ whether
affrighted at their Caterwawling, or it being not able to bear them in the Acts
of Love, we cannot tell, but certain it is, it let go its hold, and after a
dismal manner came blundering down, attended with the ruin and desolation of
several Jiggumbobs and Jimcracks, to the great loss and detriment of our poor
distressed Subject. -- The Particulars whereof are as follow.

1. The Ivory Gums of a Toothless Comb. 2. A little Bottle-breecht Glass,
replenished with Love-Powder. 3. A Brace of blind Needles that lost their Eyes
in the tumble. 4. A Double Scut of an Hare tied up with a single Pack-thread.
5. The latter end of an old Broomstaff. 6. The Butt-end of an old Sugar Loaf.
7. The True-Lovers Knot made in wire. 8. A square bit of Tin. 9. The Margin of
a broad Hat. 10. One Finger-stall. 11. Two Tags. 12. A cracked Glass with a
club-foot. 13. The skin of an Onion stuff^^ with Arsenick. 14. One Whisker of a
Bearded Arrow. -- The loss of which Tackle and Implements amounting to a Sum of
great value, we do send our Letters Patents to beg the Charitable Benevolence
of all well-dispos'd Persons, hoping that they will be pleased to take the
deplorable condition of our unhappy Subject into their serious consideration:
-- For is it not (...) sad thing to lose so commodious (...) Place to lay
pretty things in, and al^ by the misdemeanour of two unmannerly Cats? For where
will this ou^ Subject lay her Gally-pots and Syrups, her Gums and Pomatum* Had
these Mount-hunters only eased Nature there, and then gingerly departed, they
had been very excusable; but first to come slyly into a Ladies Chamber, and
then to squobble and fall out there, and the midst of their Quarrel to pursue
one another to the top of a Shelf, and there to renew the Battle again, and to
box one another till themselves did fall, and to demolish that very thing which
supported them in their bickering; as the Fool in the Fable sawed off the Bough
he sat on. Oh! this is a sad thing.
Another Living observable we met with here was the Fragment of a Physician,
whose pretenses to Learning were very great, but by converse we found him to
have more Stomach than Brains, and therefore was like to have more consolation
in a Kitchen than in a Study; for there perhaps he may find a job of work for
his Grinders; whereas he knows no^ what to do with his Books, unless h^ should
act the Moth, and eat the^ One of our Company perceived hi^ Parts to lie more
toward the Powdering-tub, than his Pharmacopeia^ for whilst he is busy in the
former h^ may keep himself alive, but when h^ reads in the latter he kills his
Patients. We had some Rost-beef t^ Supper, and we commonly foun^ him within an
inch of the Dripping pan, with an Acre of Bread in hi^ hand, which he called a
Sop, wit^ which, when our backs were turned he usually spung'd up the Dripping
and cheated Sir-Loin, and robbed its Knighthood of its due moisture A Scholar
of our Company perceived him to be well read in Papers tha^ skreen the Back of
a Limb of Rost^ and that he found a great deal o^ matter in the Socks that are
on the Souls of Mince-pies.

After a days Journey from hence, we set our Feet upon Welsh Turf, and indeed
were strangely surpised at the uncouthness of many things that did salute us
here.

The Country is tuckt in on all sides with the Sea, except on the East, on
which part it was ditcht in from England by that notable Delver King Offa, King
of the Mercians: Over this Dike if any Welch-man chance to skip with his Sword
by his side, by King Harolds Law, he was to lose a Branch of his Body, i. e.
his right Arm was lopt off by the Kings Officers.

Some think it had its Name from its Godfather Idwallo Son to Cadwallader, who
with a small crew of Brittons at the arrival of the Saxons hid themselves in
this Corner. Others suppose them to be the Spawn of the Gauls, from whom they
seem to be but a few Aps removed; Ap Galloys Ap Gauls, Ap Wallois Ap Wales.

As for the Inhabitants, they are a pretty sort of Creatures, which when we
saw, we were so far from stroaking them with the Palms of Love, that we were
almost ready to buffet them with the Fist of Indignation. They are a rude
People, and want much Instruction. For when we consider the Soil from whence
they sprang, and the Deserts and Mountains wherein they wander, we cannot but
think that greater pains should be taken in cultivating and manuring, in
disciplining and taming them, in regard it is harder for a Bearnard to teach
civility to the Beasts of Africa, than to those that come from a more mannerly
Country: -- We do not say that when they are in their Country they do (like
Bears and Foxes) live in Woods and Forests, (for I presume they have more Sun
than Shade, and so more Fire than Wood) but if we agree with Geographers, and
are of an opinion that they are Inhabitants of a Wilderness, and are Landlords
of a Common, as I and every body else are owners of the Air, we must beg their
pardon for our conceit. We have been informed that they were dug from a Quarry,
and that they dwell in a stony Land; so that if we compare this Kingdom to a
Man; (as some do Italy to a Man's Leg) they inhabit the very Testicles of the
Nation. And I pray what are those but the vilest of Creatures that breed as
well in the Privities of the greater British World, as those that are hatched
in the Pudenda of the lesser? But whether Welch-men are the Al^ origines of
their Country, (...) Crab-lice are the Autocthones (...) theirs, and proceed
only (li^^ them) from the excrements (...) their Soil, we shall not here
d^spute. They are of a Bcorish behavior, of a Savage Physiogn^my; the
shabbiness of their B^dies, and the Baoticalness of the^^ Souls, and that,
which cannot a^^ otherwise be expressed, the Welchnes^ of both, will fright a Man
as fa^^^ from them, as the odness of the^^ Persons invites one to behol^ them.
Some of them are suc^ rude and indigested Lumps, so (...) from being Men, that
they (...) scarce be advanced into Livi^^ Creatures; nay they are such
u^manageable Materials that they (...) scarce be hewn into the shape (...)
Blocks; much Labor and Art (...) required therefore to make the^^ Statues.

They are not much given to fighting, as by a Speech it appears that was
uttered by hur nown Countryman, who when drawn out upon some Design, began to
pur and murmur after this manner.

Hur has worn out her Freez Preeches, and all hur Clothes; and now hur can get
no Money to keep hur, or to buy hur some Cows-baby, and hur could hear nothing
but Marsh, Marsh! and Drums beat, hur was therefore (once for all) now resolved
to fight no longer, but to go into hur nown Country. -- They are much inclined
to Choler; for hur Welsh Plood is soon moved, and then hur stamp and stare, and
scrat hur Pole, and vent hur fury in ud-plutter-a-nails, and will fight for hur
life in battle at Fisty-cuffs.

The whole Nation (like a German Family) is of one Quality; for as every Lords
Son is a Lord here, so every one is crowned will the Title of Gentleman there;
s^ that hur Country is a good Pasture for an Herald to bite in. Wh^^ cannot
choose but grow fat among such worshipful Genealogies. W^ were much surpised
at the thoughts of their Rank, and di^ not suspect so much Gentility among such
a People; when w^ saw so many Coats without Arms* we could not imagine they had
any with them, but fancied they had more need of a Tailor than o^ Clarentius,
and of a Prick-louse to stitch up and compose their Breaches, rather than an
Herald to bl^zen their Families. They appeared to us to be very ill accoutred
Gentry: But however vileness of Equipage is no blot in Scutcheon; a^ may be
easily made out from thi^ following Narrative. When King James commanded all
that were Gentlemen in an Army to pass by him, he observing a Rag-a muffin to
hobble in the Rear of the Train, commanded him to be stopped, because he looked
not like a Gentleman; but Taphy cried out that hur was as good a Shentleman as
the best, only hur Cattle was not so good. In their Travels they care not much
that their Horses should drink with a Tossed; as appears by the wrath which
Shenkin discovered, whom his quaffing Beast had pitch-pol'd into a River.
Vds-plutter-a-naits (quoth he) in great fury, what cannot hur drink without a
Tossed? He took it much in dudgeon, that that the Jade should be so bold as to
make a Sop of his Master.

They do not always observe the Rules of Justice in their Punishments;
oftentimes chastizing one Body for another, and so mispl^^ their rigor on the
undeserving as will be very evident from the following Instance. A certai^
Tailor ferrying over a River (...) their Country with a Diminuti^^ Nag; the
Steed never using (...) travel by Water, and wonderi^^ that he stood still and
moved, w^^ possessed with fear, and made son disturbance in the Boat, to the
great endangering of the Passe^gers: The Welch-man being i^ jeopardy, was fired
with ange^ and without any wings he flew (...) the Tailor, and revenged the
i^jury of the Palfry on poor Pri^^louse. The Stitcher swadled the scrupling
Horse, and Taphy be^^^ the Stitcher, to the great divers^^^ and grief of the
Spectators.

The Materials of his Appar^^ are usually a well shagg'd Fru^^ so that we
cannot call it sle^^ being fleeced with a Nap like any Sheep skin: It affords
excellent harbor to the Vermin of his Body, which whether it be stockt with
store of Joicements of them, he commonly signifies by the Symbol of a shrug.

His Fashion is generally a Pair of ^blong Trowzes made of a Brace of
Cloak-bags, supposed to be Twins; these tackt together are a perfect Emblem of
his crural At^ire. This Garment had conjugal Affinity to a thing called a
Doublet of the same Lineage; a copious Vestment, very roomthy and capacious,
able to comprehend both his Arms in the single Puddingbag of one Sleeve; its
uppermost confines were hemmed with the scanty dimensions of a contracted
Collar, but its lower extremity was bordered with the Paraphrase of ^mplify'd
Lappets. The Summity of his Head is commonly crown'^ with a Monmouth Cap, and
i^ Crown is commonly pinnacled wit^ the Battlement of a Button. Cuff^ are an
Innovation, things which their Ancestors were seldom guilty of; and indeed
Bands and clear Linen are an upstart Invention* being the modern effects of
the pride of their huge ones, wherea^ Primitive Brittishness was never
acquainted with the habiliment of (...) Shirt. Their Feet it seems are o^ an
hot Complexion, for they often air their distockin'd Pettitoes and if they had
any Hosen they were the offspring of their Drawers, to which they were fasten'^
by Leathern Ligaments. The Perf^ction of a Welch-mans Equipag^ the cream (as it
were) of his Accoutrements, and that which compleats even his most Festival
Attire, is (as the Story goes) (...) old Sword of hur nown breeding, which hur
has brought up from a Tagger: And this he can brandish with much valor
against the Tremendous onset of Dragooning Bees; a kind of Enemy which the
Taphy is much afraid of, in regard he is always armed with a Pike in's Rere,
which once upon a time being fastened in his Forehead, broacht such a Pore in
his Physiognomy, that he could never endure those hum-bazzing Shentlemen (as he
calls them) in Yellow Doublets.

The Country is mountainous, and yields pretty handsome clambering for Goats,
and has variety of Precipice to break ones neck; which a Man may sooner do
than fill his belly, the Soil being barren, and an excellent place to breed a
Famine in. It is reported of Campania, That it was the most noble Region in the
World, the Air pleasant, the Soil fertile* the Theater of Bacchus and Ceres,
where they were at Fisty-cuffs for the Pre-eminence; but we perceived no such
scuffle in Wales; for those Deities are so far from fighting there, that we
could not discern that they were so much as ever there; there being scarce
water and Oat-meal to give us being, we could not expect Egypt and the
Canaries, Butts and Granaries to give us a well-being: There is no Canaan to be
found in the Arms of a Desert.

The Commodities of the Nation are chiefly Woollen-cloaths, as Cottons, Bays,
etc. of which their tattered Backs are an ill sign of; for sure they are not so
silly to furnish other Countries with Raiment, and to go naked themselves.

As for the Diet of the Britton, it is not very delicate, neither is he curious
in it; for if he should, his Appetite perhaps might curse his nicety, and by
pleasing his Palate he may starve his Belly. A good mess of Flummery, a pair of
Eggs he rejoices at as a Feast, especially if he may close his Stomach with
tosted Cheese; a morsel for which he has a great kindness. You may see him
pictured sometimes with that crevis in his Head called a Mouth, charged at both
corners with a crescent of Cheese, and himself a cock-horse on a Red-herring,
and his Hat adorned with a Plume of Leeks: Good edible Equipage! which when
hunger pinches, he makes bold to nibble; he first eats his Chease and his Leeks
together, and for second course he devours his Horse. He never much cared for a
Sop, since once upon a time it drank up all his Drink, and would not club to
pay his Shot.

As for his Person, his stature is of the lowest size, not above a Stair or two
above one Story; and we found always a Cock-loft, and that usually empty. His
Face usually bubbles into Tumors and Pustles. Besides the natural Haut-goust of
Body that breaths from grain, he usually sends forth an artificial smell, which
you may wind as far as the Extreme Unction of twenty Funerals, only the scent
is not so sweet: he smells a^ rankly of the single stink of Brimstone, as a
Gold finder of a medly; for a scurvy Disease commonly called the Scrubado makes
frequently an Inroad into his Person, and invades his Body; so that he is
forced to choke his Enemy by stink of Sulphur. It Is a creeping Distemper, whose
progress is checked by mortification, so that when he leaves of his Shirt, that
is, when it leaves him, and can hang on no longer, it is excellent Furniture
for Tinderbox, as virtually containing in it. both Match and Tinder.

The Mustck he plays upon, is a Tool styled an Harp, that is, a Triangular
stick bed-corded with variety of extended Catlings; which he tickles with as
much dexterity, as if prentice to Amphion, and draws as many Boys after him, as
he did Stones; nay these we have seen in some places to trot after him; but not
so much to admire, as to pelt him for his Harmony. He puts his Instrument to
one use more than the Ancients did theirs, i. e. he purveys with it for
maintenance; so that when sustenance fails him, he strikes up for a Morsel, and
so lives by sounds, and (Camaeleon like) has Alimony from Air. He serenades
Victuals in every Village, as the Pide-piper did Rats at Hamel, and he allures
Luncheons after him, as much as the other did Vermin: Here a knob of Bacon wag^
after him, for one strain, and there a Crust follows him as the Reward of
another, one hits him in the Mouth with a payment of Pottage, another pops him
in the Pocket with the gratuity of a Carrot; he is laden sometime with such
plenty of Beverege* that he cannot jog for his Fraught; all which variety of
Fragment, is the most ample In-come, and wonderful Revenue of his skill in
Music. His usual Admirers are Country Milk maids, whom vibration of string
does move and stir into Jig and Measure; and whom Breez of Instrument (like
those in Tail) do chafe and tickle into Dance and Caper: By the wagging of his
Noddle, and the wrigling of his Limbs, he seem to be taken with the Accents, or
else to be bitten with the Tarantula o^ his own M^sick, which has infected him
into a Ga^liard, and caused him to fig about with a Frolic Motion.

We could not perceive that they were guilty of much Learning; of which the
lowest Degree is several notches above their most exalted capacity. We met with
one pretty proband in the Alphabet; but for the most part the knowledge of the
least jota is rare, and unusual. A Man skilled in Orthography is admired as a
Sophy, and a writer of his Name is termed a Rabbi. The Top-gallant of the
Parish possibly may be so wise in Hieroglyphick as to scrawl the Character of a
Mystic Mark; tho such deep Literature is not frequent amongst them. Some of
their Ancestry have smelt rank of Astrology; one whereof, Merlin by name, was
very notable at the Stars, and most intimate with the Planets; in so much that
sometimes he would fling at a Futurity, and venture at Prognostic concerning
the weath^^ It Is supposed he was bred up at t^^ Feet of some She-Gamaliel,
being (...) well versed in the Prophecies of (...) women's Corns, and who could
(...) cleverly fore-tel Rain, as the lear^ed Almanac of the most weather wise
Toe. -- The study of Wizza^dism has also been famous among^^ them; one Goodman
Druis was wel^ accomplished in that kind of Learning; hence formerly a Wizard
wa^ styled a Drue. This Fellow (they t^^^ us) was the Schoolmaster of
Pyth^goras, into whose Breech ('it is said) he infused by Birch the Opinion (...)
Transmigration. He was dextrous (...) a Fortune, and Old-Dog at Augury the only
thing we dislike in him, i^ he sacrificed Men, and so divine by Butchery.

To the Wisdom and Philosophy (...) this Sophy, his little Boy Bard^ added
Poetry; a Lad (it seems) notably inspired with Flames and Firebrands, with
Heats and Raptures, and such kind of Tackle that are used by Poets. The
Disciples of this Laureat were termed Bards, the great Embalmers of Heroic
Actions; who (I warrant you) will wrap up an Achievement so securely in a
Monument of a single Verse, that all the niblings in the world shall never be
able to devour the Immortality of a Name. They ballad-sung the Praises of
Renowned Heroes, and in lofty strains wire-draw'd their Fame, and ftretcht
their Glory to after-ages. They were in huge esteem, and had the Cap and Knee
of the greatest Commanders, in so much that if two Armies were even at Cuffs or
at Cudgels, and a venerable Bard had stepped in but with one Foot of his Poetry,
they would have held their hands, and have thrown down their Hilts, and have
hearkened to the advice of his learne^ Dactails, and not offer to snout it ti^
his Poetical worship had been out (...) danger. The most Famous of these
Meter-mongers were Robbin Plenidius, my Gaffer Glaskirion, and of late years
old Farmer Davy, and ou^ Neighbor David ap Williams.

The Champions of the Country* Men of celebrated Prowess, were Mr.
Cassibellane and Sir Nennius Knight, the former whereof was so Doubty a Blade,
that it is said he confronted Caesar, and bid him kiss his Backside with
undaunted Gallantry; the other grapling with the same Emperor, did diswhiniard
his hand by main strength, and sent the Man home laden with some stripes* and
with a naked Belt. A notable Instance of Welsh Valor! To these we may add that
Hector of Britain* the Renowned Arviragus, who was so great a Raw-head and
Bloody-bone^ to the Roman Soldiery, that 'ti^ thought he frighted them even to
the bewraying of their Breeches, and made them mightily stink of a filthy
discomfiture.

As for the Loves of the Brittons, the Intrigues of their Amors are not a
little remarkable; they being very pretty Animals when disguised with that
Passion: They are Tinder to such Flames, being quickly set on fire, even by the
least spark, which when it has caught the Match of their Souls, (for they
have Brimstone in them as well as in their Bodies) they are presently kindled
into Transport and Ecstasy; and these model them into the shapes of a thousand
Anticks, and make them show more tricks than Banks his Horse. Sometimes they
are shaking the Globules of their Noddle, and sometimes dancing some Geometry
with the Figures of their Feet; now they smite with clapper of Fist their
troubled Breasts, and anon sound out some Knells of dismal Groan^ being
variously affected accordin^ as the weather is in their Clorinda^ Faces; if
Aspect be clear, then i^ Taphy Serene; if Brow be cloudy then is Morgan Showry.
He commonly ore-flows in his prattle about the Princum prancumness of his
Mistress, and is witty even to a Jest on the Fineries of their Habiliments, in
describing of which he is pretty lucky at Similitude, and is happy in his
Comparisons about her Person. One having a glympse through the Keyhole of her
Saffron Body, burst out into a Panegyric of the Bees-waxness (as he phras'd
it) of her Tawny Complexion; and seeing her Tippet to bristle into the
erectness of a Turbant, he fell a laughing at the Cox-comb (as he termed it) of
her Coif and Head-gear. He seldom troubles his Madam with the salutation of a
Letter, but usually accosts her with the Missive (as I may say) of his nown
Person, which being broken up in her presence, out fly the Contents full of
flame and rapture.

Shentle Modest! when hur see
The Fair Looks her made at me,
Hur could not choose by what is above,
But be entangled by her Love.
Hur was not think it fit and meet,
To wrap hur Love within a Sheet;
But was think it great deal better,
To speak hur Loufe than write a Letter;
Hoping her not exception take
At hur for hur Countries sake.
What if hur Welch-man be? what then?
Taffies was all Shentlemen;
Born from Venus that fair Coddess,
And many other Shentle Bodies;
Part Humane and part Difine,
We are d^scended from Joves Line.
All this Truth her dare not mince,
Being the Issue of British Prince.
If should with Shenkin drink some Wine,
Her would think her Fortune fine,
And hur would tell such Tale in Ear
That all the World was never hear.
Then Shentle Modest let hur prove,
Honest Shenkin will hur love;
Though hur was very filthy fit,
That drives poor Welchman out of wit
And if hur will not pity hur pain,
Hur will never Loufe again.
We heard of one that went a wooing with a Gun upon his shoulder, being
resolved (it seems) if Love be a warfare, not to enter unarmed into the Camp of
Venus; still as his coy Daphne shifted from his presence, he marched
Musketeering about the Room, and most fiercely pursued her, till at last in the
brisk Encounter of a close Embrace, this warlike Instrument took an occasion
somewhat unmannerly to go off, and Blunderbuss'd the Mistress on her Breech on
one side of the house, and poor Taphy on his Nose on the other; so that being
much dismayed at this unhappy Accident, one scrabled one way, and the other
another, to the total separation of a pair of Lovers, and to the utter spilling
of a Mess of Love.

They are pretty devout in their worship, though the exercise of Religion is
somewhat scarce, and have a pretty glowing zeal, though their Churches are few,
and at a great distance. It Is almost incredible how far they are fain to trudge
for a little Homily, which when they have expected, have been mump'd with a
Sermon ten times worse. For on such Raw-bone Livings there cannot be expected
very plump Parts. The ordinary Revenue of a Spiritual Preferment may possibly
be about five Marks per Annum; a Bay of Watling for a dwelling, endowed with no
more Glebe than just what it stands upon, only perhaps it may be howe-stall'd
with as much ground as may hold a Sty for the Pig, and a Roost for the Pullen.
These Divine Cottages are usually situated some Leagues from the Temple; so
tha^ the Holy-man with Crab-tree Tru^cheon sets out with the Sun, an^
stretches his Legs with a goo^ handsome walk, before he arrives to Pulpit to
stretch his Lungs, and wea^ out much of his Soles before he can reach his Stall
to mend their Souls. Their Houses of Prayer are generally Thatcht Tabernacles,
which being steepled (as it were) with a Lover-hole, seem to be really that
what the Temple resembled when profaned by the Jews, I mean, rather the
Pictures of Pidgeon-houses, than holy Sanctuaries. They are wainscoted toward
the East with little Desks, like Pounds, where Levite imprisoned for about half
an hour, fodders the poor Taffies with some melancholy Tear-fetching Story
about a Grim Fellow called Death, who ambles Folks on his back into another
World; a thing which he heard from the Oracular Gums of of his edentulous old
Grannum, as she sat in the Settle in the Chimneycorner. Some of the most
Reverend Rectors are dignified with a stipend of six pounds a year, besides the
Perquisites of a Drum and Fiddle; which well managed on a Holy Day, make up a
very pretty Thing. Others have an Augmentation of a Bull or a Bear, which being
solemnly baited about twice in a Quarter, do pick pretty comfortable Tyth from
the Spectators Pockets, and makes the poor Parsons Purse to smile and mantle.

Their Recreations are various, but not much different from those in England;
you may see them sometimes smite a Ball at the Rebound, and to send it on an
errand to their Antagonists, which being retorted by way of Answer, is
rejoinder'd back again with much dexterity. They will bandy to and fro this
missile Globule, and shittle-cock it to each other with great celerity. Their
Lungs are pretty good at a Bubble in the Air, which Meteor arising from the
Womb of a Wallnut-shell, they will make fly through the Welkin on the Wings of
their Breaths, and for a considerable time, by the Blasts of their Mouths, will
support the Being of those Emblems of Mortality.

In the whity-brown Evening, or in the Twilight, they run hobling about their
Common with Kites at their heels, certain Comets of Paper, which they tow along
with a tall string, and make themselves merry with the length of their Tails,
which are a large Series of jaggd Tossels, raged with a Candle, as with the
twinkling of a Star. Happy is the Man amongst them that can most discreetly
manage this Artificial Planet; and he is presently dubbed the very Phaeton of
their Country, that can most swiftly career it with this little lanthern'd
Phoebus. The Scrubs want Candle on Earth, and yet they must needs be sticking
up Lights in the Socket of Heaven; there is scarce half a pound in a Lordship
either to scare away darkness or to work by, and yet these Rascals (forsooth)
will be studding the Sky with Luminaries to play by. -- As for true and real
Hunting, there is no such thing among them; only they have (as it were) the
Picture and some kind of resemblance of that Pastime; for their Principality
affording them but few Hares, they course a Lock of Hay in lieu thereof, and
Alloo the Puss of a good nimble wisp. The whim of it is this; when they have a
mind to refresh themselves with somewhat that is a kin to, or with an Idea of
Hunting, they make diligent search for a Furlong or two of smooth and champion
ground, which at last being found, they purchase a Bundle of the swiftest Hay,
(if Irish, it is the better, for there are the best Runners of all sorts) this
they expose to the Fans of Aeolus, which being presently started by force of
puff, it scuds away, and the Dogs pursue it with mighty speed. In rainy weather
they have also their In-door Divertisements as well as other Nations, such as
Rump-pressing, Hotcockles, Chap-smutting, Snap-apple, and the like. Some are
cunning at the Cockall, not so much for picking off the meat (though they are
good at that too) as at throwing it with accuracy, and checquering the sport
with variety of Tumble.

As far as we could perceive, they love Holy Day Fingers, and care not much for
encumbring them with that Inconvenience called work. They can (Shepherd like)
loll upon a crook pretty handsomely in the Field, and can discharge a
superintendency over the Goats. They are most accomplished Drov^rs, to which
laudable Function they are so naturally prone, that they are apt to arive
sometimes more than their own.

They are much addicted to the sin of Nastiness, wallowing in filthiness like
so many Swine; so that the whole Province seems to be but a general Sty. You
may swear they are made of Earth without a Metaphor; appearing like so many
Dirt-Images, or like that of Prometheus made of clay. The meaner sort of Women
are generally such Draggle-Tails, that the Cattle in their Bosoms are
quag-mir'd in the filth of their well-gleb'd Attire; so that the frisking Fleas
are so far from Levalto's, that we are verily persuaded they can scarce pull
out Proboscis, and their Feet from the Bogs.

The Tenements they live in are suitable to the Guests that possess them; for as
these seem to be Dirt molded into Men, so those are the same matter kneaded
into Houses (...) they are usually very Humble Cottages, and low in stature, so
that a Man may ride upon the Ridge, and yet have his Legs hang in the Dirt;
those that are so magnificent as to be crested with a Chimney, are mightily
valued, as most Cocking Fabrics. We were not so vain as to expect very
splendid Furniture in such contemptible Hutts; but we soon perceived what
Utensils were most necessary; a Dish-clout and a Bee^ some, and such cleansing
Implement^ are very proper to correct the filthiness of their Mansions; we
found no Apartments in these their Habitations, every Edifice being a Noah^
Ark, where a Promiscuous Family a Miscellaneous Heap of all kind o^ Creatures
did converse together in one Room; the Pigs and the Pulle^ and other Brutes
either truckling under, or lying at the Beds-feet o^ the little more refined,
yet their Brother Animals. The Country is fortified in some places with a
pretty sprinkling of Castles, which whether they naturally grew out of the
Rocks, or were artificially ingrafted there, may be a matter of dispute; some
fancied them to be Stone-pits shot up into the Air, which represent the Figure
of vast Buildings.

Wales is the most monstrous Limb in the whole Body of Geography, for it is
generally reported to be without a middle, or if it has a Navel it is yet a
Terra Incognita; for we never could find that ever any Man dwelt there, the
Natives confessing themselves to be only Borderers. Surely the reason why they
do so much affect the circumference of their Country, and abominate the
center, is, because they are ashamed of the Dominion; and indeed it is a sign
they have but a little kindness for their Nation, who (...) like unnatural
Sons) run from their Mother their Country, a^^ when out of her Embraces nev^^
return again. A Welch-man wh^ once abroad, has no more tende^cy home, than a
Stone an Inclinat^on to fall upward: He will trot o'^^ the Globe, and rather
endure the i^fliction of any Exile, than the cruepunishment of being banished
hom^ if he is once on this side Dee, neither Hunger nor Husks, nor any kin^ of
hardship shall drive him on the other.

We could not in our Travel wind very many Feasts amon^ them, the shabbyness of
their Soi^ being not able to nourish and po^^per Luxury, so that a Cook, unle^^
he exercise on himself, and dre^^ his own Fingers, he is immediatel^ starved
here for want of an E^ployment. They make some litt^^ Invitations perhaps to a
Kids-hea^ or so; and will junket with Hoptops with brisk alacrity. Such plai^
mean (and as I may say) Borough Food was even their Festival Entertainments;
but as for any Embroidered and (as it were) Metropolitan Mess, such as Bisks
and Og^io's, we never so much as heard of them in their Territories.

Their Mart for Law is a Parish Town called Ludlow, where there ^s a Court of
Judicature decked with (...) Judge, Counselors, Attorneys, Sollicitors, and
other Furniture which embellish the Law: Hither ^hey trudge for Decision of
Case, and here Red-coat Integrity dispen^es Equity. Most of their Indict^ents
are generally the Tragical effects of some dismal Counter^cuffle; where a
bloody Nose and (...) broken Shin is ample matter for ^he Commencement of a
Suit; for ^hey being of a fiery temper, some^imes chol^r is kindled by an
Antiperistasis with a Pot of Ale; and then they fall to biting and scratchin^
as hard as they can drive, and t^^ wounds of this Caterwauling an^ Bickering
affords stuff for an Act on the next day; which being onc^ got into the Pounces
of a Welsh A^torney, is dandled into a Business (...) no small aggravation. Oh!
Ho^ these Pettifoggers will hug a Buffe^ing, and improve a Squobble? They are
the very Bellows of Contention and will soon blow a Spark into (...) great
Combustion. They are a kin^ of Tinkers in the Law, who usuall^ make holes on
purpose that the^ may mend them; nay sometimes the^ will play at Loggerhead
themselves to set others together by the Ear^ and so (as if fighting was
conta^^ous) will infect the Taphies into Quarrels and Blows. One marchin^ along
the Streets advanced the Scolding of two Women into (...) huge Tumult, as Duels
swell into great Wars; and made the snarling of two Dogs thrive into an Action,
and the fighting of Mastiffs to end in the Court of the Common Pleas. They
commonly broach Quarrels, and incense the Shentlemen into knockings and
smitings, cracked Crowns, and black Eyes, into Assaults and Batteries, and all
for hopes of a Livelihood that may be skim'd from the benefit of such Wars: But
perhaps the Spoils from the Skirmishes of such Clients are as rare as Pillage
from a Scotch Army. The usual crime for which they stand generally convicted,
is that great transgression and sin of Mice, the nimming of Cheese, and the
filching of Oatmeal, and of the rest of the good Creatures that are Arkt in the
Cup-board; and as they offend like Vermin, so are ordinarily taken so too, that
is, not apprehended like Men, but entrap'd like Rats; after which they are
co^vented before the Sage Puss of the Law, which purring upon a T^^bunal
together with his Kitli^g Officers, does fasten on the Prey and does so suck
and claw it, t^^ it has mumbled out all its Blood that is, all the Money of
its Vein^ and then wholly devours it. Th^^ (I say) is one of their offence^
though not the only one; for some of them have been lasht for a^ attempt upon
Hen-Roosts, and have received condign punishment eve^ for stealing of Poultry
at the wrong end; for Taphy (it seems) having filch'd a Chicken by the Breech,
did disrump her by h^^ Theft; and therefore in resemblance to his Crime was
almost disrumpt. by punishment; so that for stealing the Birds Tail, he had
well-nigh lost his own: A pretty Circumstance observed in their Justice! and a
laudable way of proceeding according to Lex Talionis.

For several Crimes they have various Punishments. That grand Enormity of
Breaking wind is chastised there as it is in England, that is the hand of
Magistracy does usually inflict a pretty lusty Cobling, that is, for every
Report the loss of an Hair, though some that have been much addicted to that
Infirmity, and therefore have been very guilty of a stink, have endured the
cruelty of tormenting Faries, that is, have been pinched into manners, and a
better smell. Artificers when at work punish any unhandsome Action by a
particular severity peculiar to themselves, which they call Pursing. The
Execution whereof is after this manner: The Malefactor being prostrate on a
Block, two of the sa^^ occupation pull as discreetly as they can his Drawers as
close to Buttock as a Spaniards Breeches, so (...) not to be laid hold on by
the m^^^ curious Pinsers; the Pavement (...) Posteriours being levelled a^^
smoothed from any wrinkles, (...) third Artisan strikes it with a Rul^ whose
smart Application by Quick jerks makes some impression of pain, and so moves
the Blood (...) to raise and start a Tincture a^^ (as it were) the Flea-biting
of Blush. Some of the more obstinate Criminals are punished (...) suspension,
but not by the Neol as here in England, but by (...) wrists, Thumb-rop'd
together wi^^ a string of Hay, and so fasten^ to a Peg; well! this is but the
beginning (and as it were) the Hissing of the Punishment, do (...) mark, and
the Sting will follow* The offending Taphy thus dangling in the Air, the Beadle
approaches with a stick impt with a Feather at one end, and tickles his
Testicles; these softer Titillations engender some vibrations of Body, and
nimble Friskings, which are shrewdly chastised by a surly Cat-of-nine-tails.

The Cattle we saw most legible on their Mountains were Goats and Heifers; a
runtish sort of Animals, of a dwarfish size, but very hardy, of a flinty
Constitution calculated on purpose for the meridian of a Rock; on which (it
seems) they can as heartily feed, as an Ostrich on an Anvil. Great numbers of
these are often disembogu'd into adjacent Countries, which after some time
circulate home again in a stream of Money; which yields wonderful refreshment
to the fainting Dominion, almost sick for the comfor^ of such a Cordial. We
perceiv^^ their Herds to be frequently mingled with little Palfries; a stunted
sort of Horses, diminutive Brutes Shavals in shorthand. They a^^ lower in
stature than an Ass, (...) much swifter in Foot, and very strong, as it
appears from their Burdens, which are oftentimes the Fortune and Substance of a
whole Family; for when a Mortal breaks he mounts all he has on Welsh Nag, and
travels under the Character of a Scotch Pedlar. W^ chanced to see a Team of
th^^^ small Cattle, a rare Spectacle, ^^ing (as we supposed) the le^^ that ever
was heard of, unl^^^ that which was harnessed in Ven^^ her Chariot, which was a
Tea^ of Doves. These British Steed are so brisk and Mercurial, th^^ the People
would persuade (...) that a Taphy on a Tit would outstrip in travel an Arabian
on a Dromedary; a thing almost incredible, though the pricking up their Ears,
and the sticking up their Tails, is an Argument of their Metal, and may give
some color and ground for the Assertion.

That which we admired most of all amongst them, was the Virginity of their
Language, not deflowered by the mixture of any other Dialect: The purity of
Latin was debauched by the Vandals, and was Hun'd into corruption by that
barbarous People; but the sincerity of the British remains inviolable. It Is a
Tongue (it seems) not made for every Mouth; as appears by an Instance of one in
our Company, who having got a Welsh Polysyllable into his Throat, was almost
choked with Consonants, had we not by clapping him on the back made him
disgorge a Guttural or two, and so saved him. They usually liques^ the most
rugged Mutes, and soften 'um by Pronuntiation; melting the word Tug into Tudge
a^ is clear from this Distick.

Still he did Tudge hur Ear

In praise of the Tirteen Seer, i. e. did Tug hur Souses with Elogiums of hur
Country. Whether the Welsh Tongue be a Splinter of that universal one that was
shattered at Babel, we have some reason to doubt, in regard it is unlike the
Dialects that were crumbled there: However, whether (...) be kin or no to other
Country Speeches, it matters not; but this we are assured of, it is near and
dear to the Folk that utter it, who are so passionately fond of it, that they
will scarce admit another into the Embraces of their Lips, which sputter forth
a kind of loathing of our English Language; wherein, if a Question be asked
them, they will with somewhat of disdain and choler make answer Dim saissonick,
i. e. no English. Their Native Gibberish is usually pratled throughout the
whole Taphydome, except in their Market Towns, whose Inhabitants being a little
raised, and (as it were) pufft up into Bubbles above the ordinary Scum, do
begin to despise it. Some of these being elevated above the common Level, and
perhaps refined into the Quality of having two Suits, are apt to fancy
themselves above their Tongue, and when in their the other Clothes, are quite
ashamed on it. It Is usually cashiered out of Gentlemen's Houses, there being
scarcely to be heard even one single Welsh Tone in many Families; their
Children are instructed in the Anglican Ideom, and their Schools are
Paedagogu'd with Professors of the same; so that (if the Stars prove lucky)
there may be some glimmering hopes that the British Lingua may be quite
extinct, and may be Englished out of Wales, as Latin was barbarously Goth'd out
of Italy.

The Cambro-Brittons are great admirers of Heroic Actions, and much honor the
Memory of Famous Achievements; in so much that rather than a Dead-doing Man
shall perish in Oblivion, they will ^^ernize his Name by the Mon^ment of a
Straw, or some such (...) considerable trifle; as appears by that Famous
Example of that Saint of their Country, Bishop David, who being a pert fighter
and having soundly basted and swadled their Foes, is at this day consecrated to
Posterity by the Trophy of a Leek; and smells as rank of Renown from that
Vegetable Preservative that Embalms his Fame, as they do of a Scallion that
carry it about for his Glory. Their Hats are set with this Aniversary Badge and
Emblem of Honor, and triumph on the first of March; which Day has been
christened by his Name, and being Dubbed an Holy Day, has worn yearly in the
Almanac a Scarlet Letter.

There is one thing more also very observable among them, and that is, that of
all the main'd Persons that ever we read of, we find none comparable for
nimbleness to a Cambrian Cripple; a pregnant Proof whereof was presented to us
in this following Instance; A Fellow with Crutches moved by Protrusion in a
certain Wheel-barrow, espying a Bear near the Rere of the Thruster, was so
surpised with horror at this tremendom sight, that he packed up his Pedestals,
i. e. tucked his Oaken Shins to the Zodiac of his Girdle, and away he fled;
Bruin and the Protrusor in vain troop'd after him, who led them a risk with
such winged speed, that they could never over take him; He clearly out-stript
them, to the Eternal Glory and Renown of Welsh Lameness.

These are some of the choicest Observations we made when conversant among the
British Mountains; we might easily have added more, (the whole Nation indeed
being but one grand Remark) had not the suddenness of our Return preyented us.
If it should chance to be our Lot to set our Feet on that Soil a second time,
we shall venture to present another Show of it; for it is pity such a rare sight
as Wales should want a Trumpet, nay and a Fool too to proclaim and expose it to
the World.

After we had crammed our Budget with these few Notices, we jog'd on with our
Fraught to the Brink of the Sea, where mounted on a Pinnace we rode to Bristol,
from whence with all possible speed we trudged in a few days to the Metropolis
of the Nation called London.

FINIS.

