QUERIES RELATEING to the present state of England.
I. SINCE every person that takes the oath of allegiance, declares; that he
believes, and is resolved in his Conscience, that neither the Pope nor any
other person whatsoever can absolve him of that oath: Quaere, whether
Conventions and even Parliaments are not comprised under those words, any
other person whatsoever.

II. All persons that take it, declare that they detest and abjure as impious
and Haereticall this damnable doctrine and position, That Princes, which be
excommunicated or de prived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects or any other person whatsoever, Since it is not to be imagined that
the Pope will excommunicate or deprive any Princes but such as are contrary to
his religion and the interests of it. Quaere whether it be a doctrine less
Impious, less Haereticall, or less damnable to vest that power in the People
which is justly denied to the Pope, that they may deprive or depose any Prince
that is of a different Religion from theirs, vvhenever they shall fancy that
the interests of their Religion may miscarry in his hands. Or to say the same
thing in other words.

III. Whether it was not a strange confidence in Doctor Burnet in his sermon
preached 23. December. before the Prince of Orange, after he had with a just
indignation, asked, whether zeal for Holy Church could vvartant breach of
faith? yet in the very same discourse, to magnify the rebellion of the People
and the desertion of the Army, as the Lords Doing, and one of the wonders of
his Love and Mercy: though it was a complication of as much treason, perjury
and breach of faith, as ever was acted in the world: and Expressly
acknowledged by those that were Guilty of it that it would be so in any
other case but Zeal for their Religion.

IV. Since in all Parliaments as the Interest of the People is sufficiently
secured by their free Election of their representatives, so the interest of the
Crown is likewise secured in that all men are disabled to sit or act in
either of the Houses till they have qualified themselves by taking the oaths of
allegiance and supremacy; if the last of these qualifications be not observed
as well as the first in any Convention or pretended Parliament that shall be
called without the Kings Authority. Quaere, whether all their proceedings may
not justly be esteemed as partial, as their very being and Constitution is
illegal, by all indifferent persons.

V. Quaere, whether allegiance be local, or that it may cease as soon as a
king is out of his Dominions? For, since a subject beyond the seas may commit
treason against the King being in England: why the subjects in England may not
commit treason against the King when he is beyond the seas, will be a hard
strain to make the difference. But this has been solemnly adjudged by all the
Judges of England in the Case of Sir H. Vane, who was Indicted, condemned and
executed for High treason committed against King Charles the second at a time
when he was in France for the same reason that the King is there now, and
had no body then in Commission to act for him or by his authority in England.

VI. If a Kings going out of England (even though there had been no force)
were a forfeiture of his Crown; Quaere whether, not only all our Kings in
their Expeditions into the holy Land, France, etc. but the Emperor, who in
Henry the eights time, or the King of Denmark who in the Reign of King James
the first came into England, only, for ought appears, to make visits; or for
their pleasure; or at best to transact affairs that might have been done by
their ministers; whether by this they were thought to have forfeited their
Crowns by their Subjects or any body else?

VII. Since any force upon the meanest subject makes it impossible for him to
bar himself or part with any right of his, so long as he continues under that
force; Quaere whether a King not only overpovverd but imprisoned by a foreign
army can lose or forfeit any thing by using his utmost endeavors to regain his
liberty and by continuing in a place of safety till such force is removed?

VIII. Whether that Statute that indemnifies all such as shall fight for a King
de facto though he be not a King de Jure, which was only intended to quiet
men's minds in case of a doubtful title as often happened in the intricate
pedigree betvveen the Houses of Lancaster and York, can ever be applied to one
that usurps the Crown upon a King whose title is so clear and so universally
acknowledged.

IX. Since ignorance of the Law excuses no man, whether all those that shall
run into Rebellion, hoping for indemnity by that Statute, and shall afterward
come to be executed for it, may not justly lay their blood at the door of
those, who have misled them by disguising the law with such absurd and
malicious interpretations.

X. Whether an English or a foreign Army be the fitter instrument to set up
Arbitrary power in England; or whether a Lavvfull King, who can have no
temptation to it, or an usurper, who can never be safe without it, be the
likelier person to enslave the nation.

XI. Whether persons that are to be proceeded against in Parliament were ever
heretofore committed prisoners before the Parliament fate.

XII. This being now done by the Prince of Orange, whether it be not ane
evident sign that vvhenever he shall get any assembly of men together that he
shall think fit to style a Parliament, he resolves they shall be such as shall
fall upon any persons or do any thing that he shall think fit to chalk out to
them.

XIII. Whether the whole Course of his life abroad in the destruction of the
liberty of those Provinces with whose protection he was entrusted, Or his
many violent and illegal actions since his Landing, do give the more certain
warning to every English man of that oppression and Tyranny they must Ly under
during his usurpation.

XIV. If the Prince of Orange find any person honest enough to oppose his
unjust dessigns whether of destroying or enslaving the People and that he
finds no way by law to remove such persons: Quaere if he will not let loose
the People upon them as he did upon the De Wits in Holland and Roman
Catholics in England?

XV. Since the Prince of Orange has shovvn that his oath, though never so
solemnly given, is not to be regarded; as it appears by his having svvorn
solemnly to the States general of the United Provinces upon his admission to
the office of their General, that he never should ask, or tho offered accept
of the office of State-Holder, and yet both asked and is in actual possession
of the same: Quaere what security he can give that he vvil not treat England
if they make him their master as he has done Holland who made him their
servant?


