Mount Moriah: OR, A SERMON Preached at Carrick, By Mr. Riddale, August 5. 1679.
MAy not say to you, as Isaac said to his father, There is wood, and here is
the Fire, but where is the Lamb? Here is a goodly Company gathered together
from several places, and that with some outward presentation and appearance of
Zeal for the Cause of God, in case of necessity we most commend that sight; but
there is one thing wanting, a Communicating frame, yet here is condescendency
of our God, that has sent forth Messengers, who have opened the Windows of
Heaven. Sirs, what have you been doing to a Crucified Buried Christ, who has
been wrestling out of the Grave, many are striving to keep him farther in the
Grave, both by Friends and Foes, nothing wanting on their part: Many are
expecting that the Communicants of Carrick should help Christ out of the Grave;
these whose hearts are bleeding, who could not get here, are expecting that the
Communicants should help the Cause, and its lying upon your shoulders, and
therefore expect ye should lend them a lift in the day of their distress; but
for any thing I can say, there is a New Stone laid upon Christ's Grave; Oh Sirs!
do you think that Jesus who has so many Crucifying him this day, that ye should
come in among the rest; do you think that Jesus who has so many Crucifying him
this day, that ye should come in among the rest: do you think that all the
Prelates and Counselors are not able to do it? will you give him a blow, and
make him take his farewell? Its his friends who are now his Crucifyers; be
serious then that matters come not to that height as that ye spit upon Christ's
face. I wot well he has testified his good will to Communions hitherto, and
many a sweet manifestation of his Presence has been seen amongst them. Is God
then weary of entertaining, no, no, no, but the often budding upon us of the
new Wine of Heaven, has made it change its taste, and become loathsome, and
its just with God to send now a Famine, and spean us a Season.

Psalm. 81. and 10. at the close. Open thy Mouth wide, and I will fill it.


By the providence and good hand of our God, all that has been Preached yet,
has hitherto been much to this purpose, to set you on work for a Communion, to
receive a Feast at the hand of the Lord. It may be there has been such rich
offers already, that any offer that I can make at this time, may be but
loathsome to you. However, that is the thing that we purpose at present, that
Communicants should open their mouths wide. This was his Exhortation in these
words that we have read; and that it may be the more taking, he Prefaces this
to it, I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; both
that relation that is between you and me, should engage you to listen the
better to my offer, for as much as there is a standing Covenant between you and
me, should engage you to lissen the better to my offer, for as much as there is
a standing Covenant between you and me, Ye are my people, and I am your God.
And likewise the many courtesies and favors that I have done to you already,
the good turns that I have wrought for you when ye were in Bondage, and under
the Slavery of Satan, and under the power of your own Lusts; and ye might have
been swallowed up in the midst of your difficulties, when there was none to see
to you, nor to help you at all. I have compassion on you, and gave you relief;
this is expressed by his bringing them out of the Land of Egypt; it is a
Metaphorical expression borrowed from that signal deliverence that the Lord
gave to his Church when he brought them out of Egypt with a high hand, as it
was set down according to the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai, that it may
have weight to garr folk take heed to their way before God: Lord thy God that
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: Now I here make a rich offer of the
Gospel to you, and all that I desire at your hand is, but that ye will receive
that which I will give, and that on cheap and easy terms, and a large offer it
is, and I crave no more at your hands but this, open but ye your mouths, and
open them wide, and ye shall not want that that shall make you up for evermore.
I suppose it is evident to you all, that the Lord means not here the mouth of
the body, and it is to that that he purposes earthly privileges, and earthly
advantages, and that is the way that he takes with his Dogs, that he puts at
the back of the door, that is the Hypocrites Portion, and the portion of him
that has his allowance in the world; but that that he means, is the opening of
the mouth of the Soul, and the mouth of the Heart, to receive spiritual
blessings and spiritual allowances, that is all the purpose of this liberal
King, that gives liberally to all, and upbraids none; he does indeed require
the opening of the mouth to God in a Communion, to receive the Elements that he
purposes, but that is only to make way for the receiving of that that is more
worth, and that comes clad under that outward shape, that is the Sacrament, but
the thing signified is the main thing Christ himself, and the benefits of the
New Covenant, that is it the Lord fills the mouth of his people. Now then, your
duty that I require at your hands, is that ye open your mouths wide, and the
privileges that comes on the back of this duty is, I will fill these mouths of
yours if ye will open them never so wide; there shall not be a lirk in them
all, but they shall be filled up. Now I must first explain in this, what is the
import of the word, Open your Mouths wide; there is four things comprehended
under it. 1. There is comprehended one and great sense of Folks need and want
of the privileges of the Gospel; the mouth is half opened when a person wins
to travel in the exercise of his own wants and sense: Indeed they that want a
sense of the real necessity lying upon them, they are not the folk that shall
come speed at the Kings hand; but they that receive of him, is such as lays
this as the foundation stone of the works; I am a poor, indigent, and needy
creature, I am undone if I get not something, this is pointed out in the
exercise of the poor things that come to Christ when he traveled in the world;
some comes in the sense of their blindness, and some in the sense of their
lameness, and some came in the sense of their blindness, and some in the sense
of this, that the Devil behoved to be cast out of them, and that they were
undone, if they got not these things done: This made Bartimeus cry, this made
the Woman of Canaan cry, sense of need that they were within a hair-breadth of
Hell; if God had not Mercy on them, there is nothing for me, but I will perish
and be undone for even, and I will travel under the power of my lusts, a
stranger to the grace of God, if thou were never so far been in Religion, O
communicant, it sets thee to Travel in the sense of thy wants, for there is
none here but they stand in need of Christ.

2ly The opening of the mouth wide, Comprehends a right Sense of the excellency
and worth of these privileges that our Lord holds out such a sense of their
excellency, as does darken all earthly privileges, and all advantages, a sense
of their excellency that would cause you to cry with Paul the 3 of Philipians,
I count all things loss and dung, that I may win Christ, and with David in the
73 Psalm, whom have I in Heaven but thee, and on the earth that I desire beside
thee: and the poor thing is put to that with it, it is grace that I must have,
it is Christ that I must have; every drop of mercy is more sweet then the
Honey, and the Honeycomb: the word of God was sweet to David, that was the
opening of his Mouth, and he reckoned Gospel privileges so sweet, that he
could easily forgo all to be at it: he envyed the Sparrow and the Swallow that
bigged their Nests in the Tabernacle of God, and chooses rather to be a door
Keeper in the House of God, then to dwell in the Tents of wickeness, that is
the opening of the mouth; then the Soul cried none but Christ, none but Christ,
and give me all the pleasures is the World I will despise them, on this account
it is some that is excellent and precious that I must have.

3ly, The opening of the Mouth wide comprehends a large and insatiable desire
after the Lord; it is not enough that the person cry out under his want, and
that the man know the excellency of Christ; but there is this needful and
ardent desire to beat-it, such a resolution as is in the 132 Psalm. I swear to
the Lord, that I will not go to my Bed, that I will not give rest to mine Eyes,
nor slumber to mine Eyelids, till I prepare a place to the Lord: he will not
be tangled with other difficulties that is in the wav, but he must be at
Christ, and he resolves, that although he should break his Neck be the gate, he
shall have him: he has alonging for a sight of him, it is no strange thing when
David in the 12 Psalm, cries as the heart pants after the water Brooks, so my
heart pants after thee: my Soul thirsts for the Living God, and in the 63
Psalm, my heart and Flesh cried out for the Living God, such a desire after him
would be the opening of a mouth to God, on the back, of a Communion.

4ly, The opening of the mouth wide, comprehends a preparing and making ready
the Soul for Christ; the man that opens his mouth makes ready to receive his
Food; the man that opens his mouth makes all ready, and when Christ says, give
me thy Heart, he is willing to give him it, that is the equivalent of this, he
will have the heart in a suitable dress and ready for him; are ye suitable
Communicants, the day the heart must be in a right frame, and their is four
things requisite for the preparing of the heart that is comprehended under the
opening of the mouth to receive the privileges.

1. It is required for the preparing of the heart to have a suitable exercise,
a Traveling through matters between God and the Christian to see how they
stand, it is required of a communicant that he must examine himself, and so let
him eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup; he that comes with a suitable
Frame, his Mouth is opened; thus says the Lord, consider your ways, consider
your ways: you most Travel through matters between God and you, and you must
know in what Terms ye stand with him, what Length have ye won, how is your
Spirits disposed for such work on the Lords day; how stand ye affected to your
King and Husband, that you are to shake hands with, what think ye of the
bargain between him and you, that he will be a husband to you, that he should
see to you, and have a desire of you, that ye shall trust your case to him,
and that ye shall wait on him in Death and in Life, and that death it self
shall not part you and him, if ye should go to a Burning Fire with him, ye
will not part with him, if ye should Travel to the Mountains with him, ye
will not part with him, if ye should go Traveling out of Scotland with him,
ye will not part with him: once be clear, for you must not come and make a
blind bargain.

2ly, A second thing that is requisite for the preparing of the heart for
Christ, is to get all these evils and abominations to the door that uses to
take up his room, and that hinders his heartsome entertainment and dwelling
there, there is a task for a Communicant to sweep the house, and open the
everlasting door, and to cast wide the Gate that the King of Glory may come in,
that is the opening of the mouth to God to put strangers to the door thou that
has entertained Christ, he being in thy bosom, thou must give a farewell to
all drunkards, and to whore-mastering the old trade, thou must take farewell of
it, ye that loved the World and ease better than Christ; ye must bid farewell
to them, and ye must say as Ephraim says in the last of Hosea, What have I any
more to do with Idols? Thou that loved thy self better than Christ, thou must
say, shall I put my self in his room? nay, thou must take thy self and thy
right hand that has offended thee, and thy eye that his offended thee, and thou
must tread under foot, if it were even thy most precious enjoyments and
delights; you must take your farewell of them, for Christ cannot take
possession of the heart, nor can ye open the mouth, till these things get a
farewell, that must be your exercise the day: O communicants, ye must go
through your pride, and your vanity, and your looseness, and your own
unrighteousness, and self love, ye must go through them one after another, and
put them to the door, and say, what have I to do with thee any more? that is,
to prepare thy heart for Christ.

3dly, A third thing required in preparing the heart for Jesus Christ, is this,
there must be a working up the heart to a heavenly frame; it is not every frame
that will please him for a Communion frame, it must be a Heavenly frame, that
is, a frame that will please him, and that is a frame that is made up of many
frames; tenderness is required here, sense of sin is required here, and
self-denial is required here, self-loathing is required here, that a heavenly
frame comprehends; the fear of God must be there, to come trembling and quaking
to the Ordinances of Christ, to have love burning as a coal within thy breast,
to be content to do any thing, that Christ may be glorified and magnified;
these things is required to a heavenly frame, and that must be to make the
house ready, and the mouth opened wide for the Son of God.

4ly, A fourth thing required in the preparing of the heart, is a cheerful
welcoming, and a cheerful embracing of any offer that Christ give you of any
meat that he brings with him; indeed, the Christian that opens his mouth wide,
that is squeamish stomaked, he will not take every thing for the Worship of
God, but will be tender there, and he will not take every thing for Ordinance,
but if it be a dry morfel.

I resolve for a dry Morsel if it come out of Christ's hand that will be sweet,
a right relishing of what ever he has that comes from Christ, though it should
be bitter and displeasing to Flesh and Blood, it may be the Lord will fill the
Communicants of Carrick. with nothing but reproof, and he will say that is all
I have to give you, the day I am angry at your wickedness, and I am angry at
your baseness, and ye must welcome such a dinner if it were but a reproof, if
it were but a Frown, and if it were but an affliction that is bitter to the
Spirit ye must welcome it, if it were a cross, and if it were to tell you the
day ye must cr'e long suffer, ye must Seal these Truths with your Blood, if
it were to resolve to see your Husbands Head, hap for this work, resolve to
hear the news that your Husbands Carcass shall fall on the Top of the Mountains
to be meat for Dogs, and the Fowls, and if it were to tell you that ye must
go to the Prison the next day, and that is all ye will get; but if ice be
right, ye must welcome all Christ's allowances, be it sweet or be it sour; it
may be some of you shall not have the promise the day of clearing of your
Interest, but it may be ye will get that will cause you to go home weeping and
Mourning, you must welcome it if your hearts be right oppened this day, ye
will be made to see, let Christ give me what he will, if it be his allowance, I
desire to welcome him and it both; as to the privilege I need not stand upon
it, I will fill it, there is no great task, as if he had said, that I do
require at your hand, it cost your Master another thing; it put your blessed
Lord to Swim the Sea of wrath, and it put him to Travel through the Fire of
Gods anger, and it put him before the Axe and Hammer of the Justice of God, and
to let Justice lay on what strokes he pleased, but as for you, you come easily
by it, it is only to open the mouth, O that he purchased at such a rate, he
comes to you for nothing, but open your mouths wide and receive it, it is true,
ye will may be Travel for it, and it is true ye will suffer for it, but what is
that being weighted in the balance of the Sanctuary, it is open, it as wide as
ye will, and the more wide it be, the more acceptable to me: there is two
things that I shall speak of here.

1. Ye see the holy Ghost does suppose there is some Folks that does not open
the mouth to these Gospel privileges, does all the World receive them now?
does all the world open their mouths? no, no, their would not need such
entreaty to open their mouths, if it were but so read a little further in the
Psalm, and you will see that entertainment ye give him, the next word is, my
People would not hearken to my voice; Israel would have none of me, oft-times
he brings his rich, rare, precious Privileges, but not received. Two
considerations to clear this, 1. The many different complaints made by our Lord
in offering them, as when tears came over his cheeks when looking to Jerusalem.
2. What means so many running to the Alehouses, and so many sleeping at
Communions.

Preface before the Tables.

Do ye know this day, that our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, is King of Sion? do
ye know that it is he that ye have to do with this day, not only a Jealous God,
but it is the same Lord Jesus that has helped many a poor creature that has
Triumphed in the world, and has carried in many a Fleece to Glory, that some
time a day was as far aback from Heaven as ye are, that has rejoiced in
bringing in poor sinners to himself, and making way for their welfare; and its
that same Lord Jesus that is this day treading upon the necks of Devils, that
is this day tormenting many a Man or Woman in Hell; it is that same Lord Jesus
that has stained his Raiment with the Blood of his Enemies, and has refused
Salvation to many a Countrey-side, and has refused the offers of mercy to many
Men and Women up and down the world; it is he that is come to Carrick this day;
it is he that is traveling among you, and behold he comes bringing Salvation
with him, and we must say it, behold he comes meek and lowly, riding on an Ass,
and a Coalt the Foal of an Ass, and his bowels this day are yearning on you
that are here; it is he that has prepared a Feast a Feast of Fat things, of
Wine on the Lees well refined; and O but he shows bowels, and O but he shows
much tenderness, and O but he shows much kindness in the day he provides a
Feast for poor sinners, for his poor afflicted people; he knew very well that
we could not live without him, he knew we had perished, if he had not once
exposed himself to Death on our behalf; and he knew very well, that we had but
starved, if he had not been given now and then a Feast: Now, that Scotland may
not Starve amidst all the sad designs of our Enemies, not to have us starved
out of hand, and that we may not perish in the midst of the sad designs and
contrivances of our Enemies; he has this day prepared this allowance for you,
and it is you that he is calling to open your mouths wide, that he may fill
them in sign and token, that he will be as good as his word, in satisfying the
necessities of the hungry; he has given us this Ordinance that is of his own
appointment. And now Sirs, you must not think in the beginning of the work,
that our blessed Lord Jesus allows these holy things to be casten to Dogs, and
that he allows such Pearls to be casten before Swine; it is every one that will
get them this day, that he will admit to be partaker of the inheritance above;
many are called, but few are chosen.

Now more particularly, I serve an Inhibition this day against all Atheists
that is here, that owns another God besides the true God, and against all
Idolaters, that turn the Worship of God into a superstitious form, or takes
another Savior besides Christ, or that worships God in away that he has never
prescribed nor appointed.

I must serve inhibition against all Cursers and Swearers, and such as take the
name of God in vain in their months, and all gross Oaths, not only these that
have horrid Curses and execrations, or that will Curse the People of God, and
Work of God, but they that come out with minch't Oaths, were they never so
small, I serve an Inhibition upon all Sabbath breakers this day, such as make
not conscience of Sanctifing all Gods ordinances, such as make not conscience
of keeping Gods day, that dare bourd with any work upon Gods day, that Folk
should only do on an ordinary day, if it were but to look needlessly on the
Cattle and Corn upon a Sabbath day.

Particularly, I serve inhibition this day on the Table of our Lord, against
all the Men and Women in Scotland, that wittingly and willingly are Enemies to
the persecuted and distressed Cause, and work of God this day, what ever it be,
be it Prelacy, be it Snpremacy, or be it arbitrary Government, be it any thing
that the People of God are suffering for this day, for it is sad since the
business is come to such a length in Scotland, that their is a stated quarrel
between Christ's and Antichrists backing, and that this controversy has come to
that length, we have so many Heads standing on Poles on the account of it in
Air and in other places of Scotland, when there are so many in Prison upon this
account, and the Enemies have imbrued their hands so dreadfully in the Blood of
the Saints of God; you must now side your selves, you must List your selves,
either on Christ's Side, or the Devils, now any of you that have complied with
the Enemy, to strengthen their hands, either by taking the Declaration or the
Oath of Supremacy, or any the black bands, that have gone up and down the Land,
any that has been troublers of the People of God, and complyers with the
Prelates and Curates, if ye resolve to go on longer in these courses, go to
their Camp and seek your Food, and come not Enemies in heart to this persecuted
Table of the Lord in the Wilderness. In the name of the great God, I discharge
you as ye would not incurr the damnation of your Souls, and as ye would not be
crucifiers of the Son of God, and bring that upon your selves which you cannot
easily take off. But now upon the other hand, least that some poor thing should
be kept back, least they should hold back, and that their should be a scaring
of such, that the Bowels of Christ are yearning on this day, therefore we have
this to say, be who ye will that is here, that desired this day to bid adue to
your Lusts, and will Sin no more, that is grieved in your hearts for the Evils
ye have done to Christ, and that is resolving to live to him, and to be for him
hereafter; that is, resolving to espouse his cause, and to bide by him upon all
hazards over all difficulties; be what you will, we invite you here to be
sharers of this Feast of Fat things, and Wine on the Leas well refined, if thy
Fingers were reeking with the Blood of the Saints, if that now be thy exercise,
if thou resolve to be so no more, come away; if thou had been a Witch, and had
made an actual Portion with the Devil, and would break the bargain now with the
Devil, and would make a new bargain with our King Christ, come away if thou
has been guilty of Theft and Murder, and never so many abominations, if now
thou be reforming, and if this be thy exercise this day woes me, I have so long
dwelt in Sin and sojourned in the Tents of wickedness; our Lords Bowels yearns
on you this day, and in the name of our Lord, we invite you all to come
forward; come away poor thing, what ever has been thy sad miscarriage before,
come away, and thy Burden on thy Back to the Table of the Lord, that before
witnesses thou may give up thy name to the Son of God; and here we are to take
thee as a bond-servant, and to welcome thee in his name: now dear Friends, lay
ye the business to heart, and think not that you must come and Mock him, think
not that you must come and profane the Table of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ,
but let all your debates be at an end; now, O let all your confusions be at an
end, now, but if thou should come with confusion in thy Spirit, come as thou
art, only let this be between Christ and you, that henceforth ye are rosolved
to be the Lords for better and worse. Look on him, now tell me how would ye
look on him, if ye saw him the day, would ye have a Sight of him; O Men and
Women, then he took up a piece of Bread in the one hand, and the Cup of Wine in
the other, and said, come, come, Sirs, see ye him, now behold your King,
behold him that was dead and is alive; behold him that died at Jerusalem,
behold him that is now up above the Clouds, sitting at the thrown of grace,
pleading on your behalf; there is a sight, the greater ye will not get in the
kind of it in the World, ye will not get the like of it till ye come to
Heaven, and see him in another manner of way, how see ye him the day his Body
all peirced, his Body in one place, and his Blood in another; when ye are sound
in Limb and Lith, he is all tattered, and he is drawn a sunder, and your Blood
is in your Veins; behold Christ's Blood is one way, and his Body another: O! how
comes it to pass that our Blessed Lord and Mediator was seen in such away? it
was not because enemies was able to Master him, but it was that ye might get
good of him the day, and ye could not have fed on him, except he had been
wounded; now, now, would ye know how this comes to pass, that our blessed Lord
has gotten such wounds, and that his wounds appears in two places, the day
would ye know how he has gotten these two wounds, the day Justice gave him one
blow for the Sin of the Jews, because they had sinned, Justice says, they must
die, Christ says rather, give me a blow on the Cheek, though it should ding all
the Flesh from the Bones, well says Justice, must it be so, then Justice gives
him one wound, know ye how he has gotten another wound? he has gotten it for
the Sin of the Gentiles, and among the rest, for the Communicants of Carrick;
this day it is for you, Justice says, they must die, wrath must be upon
Carrick, and wrath must be upon the professors of Scotland, except the Son of
God take a blow and wound on the behalf, it is on this account he suffers, and
for your sake he takes it, ye see now his Body one way, and his Blood another;
and if ye had looked on him in the Garden, when every drop of Sweat was like a
drop of Blood; think ye that he come easily by the bargain, indeed ye have
come easily by the bargain: O professors of Carrick, ye may Sing the Victory
is purchased to your hand, that the great King procured, is brought to your
hand, and let me ask one question of you, when ye saw your Mediator so
wounded, and in such a case, what would ye think of them? the day that would
call you, that ye will give him a wound, the day to all that he has gotten,
and that ye will give him a wound that shall be sorer, and be sadder to him,
then all the wounds he suffered; he is content to be tattered for your sakes,
but he is not content to be tattered by you; he is not content when he is
pauncing his wounds for you, that ye should give him a wound more; do ye suffer
in your hearts to crucify him a fresh? I confess ye may think on us as Fools
and distracted Persons, and say, what need we present a cup of Wine, and a
piece of bread, could it not be done in another way? indeed, if our Lord had
not appointed it himself, we had been in the dark, and had carried as
distracted persons, woe to them that comes in with their Surpluse, and corner
Caps, and Oil and Salt, and all the rest of their Ceremonies, and these things
that Christ Jesus never warranted nor appointed, but that ye may see, and be
convinced, that those things is not our devices, but the appointment of God
himself, we shall read the institution to you, and let you see the warrant that
he himself has given, that he has set down in the Evangelists, but we shall
read that which is set down in the 1 Corinthians 11 chap. 2 ver. For I have
received of the Lord, that which also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus
in the same night: wherein he was betrayed took bread.

After he had given thanks.

Now Sirs, ye see that he can set apart what Elements he pleases, and can make
them indeed significant ceremonies and pleadges to purpose, to be clear
symptoms and remembrances of a bargain between him and us, and to be the
evidences that we shall not want what we stand in need of coming to him in the
right manner. Now then, know ye when this was, it was in the Night wherein he
was Betrayed; he cast a copy to us, and according to that Pattern that he gave
us, that is, the thing we have to do, the day to take and distribute these
Elements to you, to be the Pledges Carrick is espoused to Christ, and that it
may be a Covenant that shall not be broken: indeed there is a difference
between Christ's work and your work, well could he handle it, and well could he
go about the work, but we amble the business, he could make it effectual by his
own power, we cannot do that, but we must come as far benn as we can, and we
must put it over the Masters hand, that he will give the Blessing, and that he
will fit us, and that he will fit the work; and O if you had one heart the day
you would concur and wrestle for a Blessing on the Ordinance, that it may be
for our advantage the day, let us go and seek the Lord.

Tabe First.

Now Sirs, are you right, is there any thing yet to do, he is ready for you,
his bowels yearns after you, his arms are open, the day ye have seen him, we
cannot tell what that sight has produced on your Souls. O! have ye not bleed at
the sight of such a one; could ye not be content to have born some of the blows
that were laid on him; think ye not but ye could have given your cheek to the
smiter; when they took the hair of his cheek, could ye not have been content to
have taken a share of it, that is not all, it is not only a sight of Christ,
crying, Behold me, behold me, but a sight that ye may come and see; and here it
is, Eat O Friends, drink ye drink abundantly. O beloved only, if ye be ready
only, if ye be ready, tell us your answer, are ye ready or not? is there any
that would rise from the Table and would spare a while: yet if ye be not ready,
we cannot help it, for he is ready. In that Night that he was betrayed, he took
bread and brake it, and gave his Disciples, and said, Take ye eat ye, this is
my Body which is broke for you, do this in remembrance of me. Now, we give it
you on your Peril, and as ye shall answer to that God, so carry in the
business, but in part we desire to be free of your Blood, and we pronounce our
being free of your Blood, and he has dealt honestly with you, see that ye deal
not deceitfully and treacherously with him, but it is not a dry morsel that he
prepares, there is more, it is not meat that he entertains his Guests with, but
drink also in like manner; after Supper he took the Cup, and when he had given
thanks, he gave it to his Disciples, and said, Drink ye all of it, and divide
it among you, etc. Here, here have your thoughts above, and be taken up with
Meditation, ye must remember it is one qualification of Communicants, and in
the time that ye are about the work, apprehend ye see him hanging on the Cross,
and ye keeping the Blood that drops from him, that that Blood may wash away all
your Iniquities, that ye nay be cleansed.

Thirdly, for there is no other way whereby ye can be presented spotless and
blameless before the Lord; there is virtue here to Cure all your distempers,
and to make you perfectly clean if thou were as filthy as Lazarus, it is he
that will do your turn; now, now ye have him among your hands, see how ye will
guide him once again; think with your selves what is your opinion of your noble
Husband; now what think you of a Marriage day now? what think ye of it to be
shaking hands with such a Prince, and with such a Captain, or now would ye be
content to quit your part of him before ye rise from the Table, or will ye take
your old Trade? will the Drunkard go to the Alehouse? will the Swearer Swear?
will the Unclean person continue Unclean? will ye prefer the world to him? what
if a new Host of Highlanders should come in among you, and should press you to
take the Bond, what would ye do? know in that Night Peter took the Communion,
he bant and Swore he knew not Christ; what if some of you that sits at the
Table shall lift up the heel against the Son of God before the Son go down, ye
should eat this Bread with carefulness, and drink this Drink with astonishment,
for it is hard to say, what a Plague and Curse goes down with it; what shall I
tell you Sirs, the ground is holy, the Master of the Feast is holy, but all the
Guests is unholy, a beatifical Captain, a beautiful Master, beautiful
Privileges, and beautiful Ordinances, but O a black Bride, a black Bride for
him to take by the hand; but how comes this to pass, that some of you, yea all
of you, that were a few days ago shaking hands with the Devil, that a few days
ago had your Necks in the Devils yoke; how comes it that ye quit that bargain,
and come to kiss the Son of God? what has allured you to come from your own
Camp? what has made you to quit the world? might nor the sweet world that ye
were in, have allured you to stay with it? what has come on Scotland this day
to fleighter after an unseen and unknown Christ? what means the Husband to come
away and quit the Wife? what means the Wife to come away and quit the Husband?
and what means the Barnes to leave the Parents, and the Parents to leave the
Barnes? and what means the Husbandman to give the Cow, and the Barneyeards
their leave, and they are come to the Fields to embrace the Son of God; but it
may be some thinks this is not their Errand, but since ye are come out of the
World, and has turned your back on it, that that I would say is not only to
welcome you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, but to tell you, that the
broad blessing of Abraham hangs over your head, the day the broad blessing of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, hangs over your heads the day, and ye shall not
loose your reward, your Master is able to do your turn, and to bear your
expdnces; it may be after this, ye shall meet with the Cross, but ye shall have
that that shall make the Cross sweet to you, that ye shall not ill will your
Enemies in the midst of it. Now even your hearts be right with him, as his
heart is right with you, at least as long as ye make the bargain, and give him
the hand, and say, I take Christ for my Savior, O be not dealing deceitfully.
Now Christ is yours, and Heaven is yours, come after what will, come death,
come life, it shall never part you and him, even much joy may ye have of your
new Husband.

Conclusion after the Tables.

Because the day wears to one end, and for some other reasons we are
necessitate to break off, we hope there is none that has prepared themselves
for this that need offend, that they have not been admitted to this Table, this
is a great privilege, but folk may win to Heaven though they do not formally
partake of this ordinance, and where is a faltable appetite and desire, he
accepts of the will for the deed; but now my friends, ye have been witnesses
this day of, and exalted Christ after his Death and Burial, ye are they before
whose eyes he has been set out Crucified among you, ye are they among whom he
has done great things, and has lifted up his Banner, and I hope there is some
here that will reckon such a day as this well worth a Prison, well worth a
Cross, and it may garr Carrick, and the places about forget that misery that
the Host of the Highlanders did to see God undermine them, and to see God
disappoint the designs of Enemies, while they thought by these Savages, to make
us turn our back on this cause, and to make the Countrey-side rid of that work
that they call Conventicles, God has dispersed them, and covered a Table over
again, and has brought together an Assembly greater then any that has been here
before. O what shall we say of the bounty and condescendency of our God, it is
like some will be angry at us for this days work? we will be charged with
Rebellion and Sedition, but such a Feast as this is worth the suffering
Reproach, as well as other things to suffer; but now this day the three Persons
in the Trinity is witness, Angels is witness, and that Son is a witness, that
there is a Bargain drawn up between God and you, the Contract has been fairly
laid out before you, you need not now come and say, if ye meet with a Trouble,
and if ye meet with a Cross, that ye have met with a disappointment in this
business, the best and the worst has been laid out before you, it has been told
you, the Cross waits on you, and it has been (...)


