Imprimatur.

Jo. Battely.
Aug. 21. 1686.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING PRAYER: Especially of frequenting the Daily Public
Prayers.

In Two PARTS.

By SIMON PATRICK, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Ely.

LONDON, Printed for Luke Meredith, at the Star, and Sold by R. Wilkin, at the
King's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

THE INTRODUCTION.
The Design of this BOOK.
PRAYER is so considerable a part of a Godly Life, and so great a means both to
work, ^^d to preserve, and increase all man^r of Godliness and Virtue in us,
^at the ancient Christi^s doubted not to call it, (...), etc. St. Chrysostom. L.
i. (...).
the very top of all ^od things; the foun^ation, and the root of an useful ^e;
the fountain, and the parent ^innumerable benefits.

Whence it is, that they have left ^so many Treatises upon this sub^t; and that
we find it so often re^ted in their Sermons: Which they tell us they did on
purpose; that the Souls of their people might receiv^ not merely a light
tincture of this Doctrine, but as St. Chrysostom's Hom. (...).
phrase i^ be deeply dyed with i^ Unto whose pious labors which go^ men have
imitated in all succeedin^ ages, if mine be now added in a sm^ Book upon the
same Argument, I ho^ it will not be found altogether unpr^fitable: but
contribute something the growth of Christian piety; by st^ring up this present
Generation to ^ serious practice of this part of it.

Which is commonly distinguish into secret Prayer, alone by (...) selves;
private with our Familie^ and public with the whole Cong^^gation of Christian
people, am^ whom we live. The last of which (...) first in my design, when I
began think of writing about this matt^ because Common Prayer, which (...) make
all together in one Body, (...) God, is the most necessary, and the ^ost
prevalent, and yet, alas! the ^ost neglected of all other. But con^^dering that
men would be the better ^isposed to attend upon the public ^^rvice, if they
could be persuaded to ^ustom their minds, unto devout ^^ughts of God, and
affections to^rds him, alone by themselves; I solved to premise a short
Discourse, ^^ncerning Prayer in general; with special respect unto such secret
incourse with the Divine Majesty. As for that which is called private ^^ayer in
our several Families, ^^e needs no particular Discourse out it; but it may be
sufficiently un^stood by what I have to say of the ^er two; especially of
public ^^^yer: whose place it is to supply, ^n we cannot have the benefit of
it. Now this Duty of secret converse ^^h God, by humble Prayer to him,
^vidently enjoined in those words ^ur Blessed Savior, Matthew. vi. 6. But thou
when thou prayest, ^^ter into thy Closet, etc. In wh^^ he does not exclude
pub^^ Prayer; but only forbids ostent^ in it: And commands us out of (...) to
God, not out of love to popula^ plause; that we may be truly (...) and not
merely thought so, to (...) our hearts to Him, when no body us, but He alone.

That Is the thing I inten^ evince; that it is the duty of e^ Christian to
retire himself (...) business, and from Company (...) he may pray to God. In
tre^ of which, I think it will be u^^ if I distinctly show, First, The^ ture of
this Duty; Secondly, (...) Necessity of it; Thirdly, (...) great Benefits we
may derive^ its serious performance.

A Discourse CONCERNING ^RAYER, etc.
PART I.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of this Duty.
PRAYER, in the strict use of the word, signifies the Petitions we make to God,
either for the bestowing on us good ^gs, or the averting from us evil. ^d thus
it is distinguished from Prai^^ of his Divine Perfections, from ^om those
benefits we ask are deri^^; and from Thanksgivings for them, ^en they are
conferred on us, accor^^^g to our desires. Which, though ^y ought to accompany
all our ^yers, and it is impossible to pray aright, without such acknowledgme^^
of God's incomparable Perfections (...) thankfulness to him for his benef^ yet
they are not the things which (...) strictly and properly meant by Pr^^ Which
is taken sometimes in a stri^ sense still; merely for petitioning^ good things:
and so is distingui^ by St. Paul (1 Timothy ii. 1.) from ^^^plications; which are
petitions for (...) averting evil things from us.

In which restrained senses I do^ intend to treat of it; But by Pr^ understand,
an Address of our So^ God, the Author and Fountain o^ Good, to request of him
those this which we feel we want, and of which are desirous.

1. It supposes therefore, First, (...) we are in want: For if we were (...) we
should long for nothing. We (...) Wisdom, and Gods Holy Spirit, (...) the
Graces and Comforts thereof; ^^gether with his pardoning and spa^ Mercy; his
gracious protection (...) safeguard; provision for all the ^^cessities of our
outward man; be^ all the needs of others, especially God's Church, and of that
Church Kingdom in particular, whereof we are now immediate Members. A supply of
all which we would either receive, or have them preserved to us, if we already
enjoy these Blessings. That is, We either want the things themselves, or their
continuance; and therefore we ask them.

2. But further, It necessarily supposes also that we have a sense and feeling
of our wants. For if a man be sick or empty, yet if he think himself well, or
feel no hunger, he will neither call for his Physician, nor for Food. Though
men be in the very jaws of Hell; though they lie under the power of the Devil,
and be led captive by him at his will; though their Lusts and Passi^ns
tyrannize and insult over them; though sin as the Apostle speaks, has the
Dominion in their hearts, and they are so governed and ruled by vi^ious
Affections and Desires, that they ^re no better than Slaves to them; yet ^f
they think this a state of Liberty, and Ease, and Pleasure, if they have no
apprehension of present or future danger, they will never be at the pains so
much as to pray heartily for deliverance.

And therefore, if we will pr^ aright, we must be possessed with (...) great a
sense of our Spiritual wants, (...) we have of our Bodily, when we a^ pincht
and pressed with them. W^ must make our Souls feel that there is God, and that
he is our chiefest good and that in conjunction with him co^sists our felicity,
and that it cannot (...) any way attained but by conformity (...) him, in
obedience to his blessed Will And perceiving how short we a^ of this, nay how
far perhaps we a^ from God and Goodness, how ve^ negligent we have been in our
duty (...) him, it ought to humble and abase (...) to bring us down upon our
knees to (...) for mercy; and excite in us earn^ desires after him, and after
Righteo^ness and true Holiness, as that alo^ which can bring us into his favor.

In short, Our Souls must acquaint^ as thoroughly with their state and
condition, as our Bodies tell us when the are ill, or in pain; or hungry a^
thirsty; or laboring under any oth^ burden.

3. And then there is supposed a ^^sire to have these wants supplied, as (...)
have already said. Emptiness is troublesome to us, when we feel it; and it ^s
impossible we should not long to be ^ased, by getting it filled. If we do ^ut
fancy we are in need, there is no ^est till we find some satisfaction. We must
be either satisfied that we do not ^eed it, or we must have what we are
^tisfied is needful.

And in this consists Internal Prayer; the desire or longing of the Soul to be
^lled with all the fullness of God; to be satisfied with his likeness; to be
reconciled to him; and to be made daily more conformable to his Will and
Pleasure in every thing.

4 Which desires we are strongly in^ined, even by Nature it self, to ex^ess in
Words, which are the inter^reters of our minds, and declare that is in our
hearts. For all sensible Creatures we see make their moans by ^^dible Cries, of
several sorts, when their needs are great: And therefore ^an cannot be the only
silent thing; ^^t is formed by God to implore his ^elp, and beg his relief on
all occasi^ns, in such words as are apt signi^cations of his inward desires.
And that is the last thing observable.

5. Prayer is an expression of our inward desires unto God, the Author an^
Fountain of all good. For when w^ are desirous to receive an Alms from any
person, we always ask it of suc^ as we believe are able, and we hop^ are
willing to bestow it: But never make our applications to those, wh^ are as
beggarly as our selves. Now (...) is God only, who is able to supply a^ our
needs, and has revealed himself (...) be willing to bestow what we ask (...)
him; nay has invited us to come (...) him, and assured us he will grant o^
desires: And who alone knows o^ needs, and can hear the desires of a^ men; and
likewise is the only Judg^ whether that be fit for us which we as (...) or
there be not something better tha^ our own wishes.

Upon which account Saints and A^gels are not to be invocated. For (...) we
know not whether they hear u^ nay, it seems impossible to us, the they should
be able to hear such gre^ numbers of Supplicants, as, in seve^ and very distant
places, call upon the same Saint or Angel: So we know (...) what power they
have to help us, nor what they can do for us, if they could hear us; but we
know they cannot be in so many places at once, as they have Suitors to give
them their succor and assistance. And besides they have made no promises to
us, that they will so much as prefer our petitions to God, or do all they can
for us: Nor are they wise enough to judge what Petitions are fit to be
preferred, and what not; that is, what is most behoveful for us in all
conditions and states of Life, and in all the particular passages and
circumstances thereof.

It might be added, that all these Petitions must be put up in the Name, and
through the Mediation of our Blessed Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, who is our
only Advocate with the Father: But that belongs rather to the manner of
addressing our Prayers unto God; and therefore I here omit it. And shall only
observe, for the further explication of it, that there are several parts of
Prayer to God: As may be gathered even from that remark, at the conclusion of
the lxxii Psalm, The Prayers of David the Son of Jesse are ended: Where the
foregoi^^ Psalms are all called Prayers; thoug^ some of them be doleful
complaints (...) the sadness of his condition; others (...) them confessions of
sin which h^^ brought him into that doleful estate others acknowledgments of
his inti^^ dependence on God; others magni^^^ his powerful and wise Goodness,
an^ render thanks for benefits receive^ and promise dutiful obedience, as we as
petition for pardon and deliveranc^ By which we learn, that Prayer un^^ God is
made up of all these; and the in a sense of his Greatness and Goo^ness, of our
absolute dependence upon him, and all the benefits we have r^ceived from him,
we ought to addre^ our selves to him; confessing how w^ have offended him,
bewailing the ^^serable estate into which we have ther^ by brought our selves,
begging h^^ pardon, imploring the Grace of h^^ Holy Spirit; and in the
sincerity an^ uprightness of our hearts resolving t^^ be wholly his, and to
serve him in newness of life all our days.

And the truth is, every one of the^^ is vertually a petition to him. Whe^^ther
we heartily acknowledge what he ^s, or adore him, or praise him, or give him
thanks, or confess our unworthiness, or profess our dependence on him, or
promise fidelity to him, etc. they all bespeak his grace and favor toward us,
and move him to bestow his mercy upon us.

This is a short explication of the Nature of Prayer; which will be something
better understood, by what follows concerning the Necessity of it; though when
I have said all that I can, I am sensible it will be defective. For Prayer is
so sublime a thing, that the noblest Wits have acknowledged, we stand in need
of the Father to inlighten, of his first-begotten Word to teach, and of the
Spirit to operate in us (as Origen's (...), N. 8.
words are) That we may be able to think and speak worthily in so great an
Argument.

CHAP. II. Of the Necessity of Prayer.
WE shall be the more strongly moved to study this high and excellent Duty, and
to labor to perform it aright; when we are made sensible it is so
indispensable a part of a^ godly Life, that we cannot so much a pretend to the
profession of Christianity, if we do not practice it. Of which there is this
general demonstration which cannot be gainsaid.

That which is founded in our Nature, and to which we are bound b^ virtue of
our being Creatures; to tha^ every Christian is indispensably tied it being the
intention of our Lord Christ his coming, not to loosen those obligations we
have upon us, as men^ but to strengthen them, and bind them harder upon us; to
heighten all natural Duties, and to make us more deeply sensible of the Laws
that are written in our very being.

Now such an one is this of Prayer; which does not stand upon a mere positive
command, as Baptism, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper do. That is, it is
not our Duty merely because our Lord by his Authority has made it so; but he
has made it so, because we are made to it (as I may speak) and formed by God
to acknowledge him in this manner. For it is as natural a thing to Pray, as it
is to Believe there is a God; and to be persuaded that we were made by him, and
not by our selves.

Hence it is, That you shall not find in the whole Law of Moses, any precept
for Prayer: Of which what reason can we give but this, that it was so
sufficiently known to be a Duty by the common Light of Nature, that there
needed no Instruction about it: Nor can I observe hitherto any Command in the
Gospel of Christ, barely for Prayer; but only for the manner of Prayer. As, in
the place first mentioned, When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and pray
to thy Father which is in secret: And in other places, Watch and Pray; Pray
continually; Pray with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit Pray in the
Holy Ghost; Pray alway^ and not faint; Pray in the Name of the Lord Jesus. All
which suppose the Duty of Prayer; and only direct how it is to be performed.

For the further clearing of which general observation, let these following
particulars be considered.

I. That it is Natural to ever^ living sensible Creature, to look back to its
beginning; and to own its dependence upon that, from whence it derives its
being. Thus we see the young ones of all sorts of Animals open their Mouths,
and wait, as it were, for provision from the old ones, while they remain weak
and tender (...) running also to them for shelter an^ protection, while they
are unable t^ defend themselves. Upon which score Prayer is as necessary for
us, and as natural to us, as it is natural to an Infant to cry for its Mothers
Breast, or something else equivalent thereunto, that may satisfy its craving
desires. Because it is an acknowledgement and owning of God; as the Original
from whom we come, and as the Author of all good; in whom we live, and move,
and have our being; and a confession of our own weakness, and helpless
condition, without his care of us.

The very Heathens had this notion in them, that Mankind being (...), the
Offspring of God, brought forth by him into the World, out of the Womb of his
Almighty Goodness, they ought to resort unto him; even as the Chicken runs
under the Wing of the Hen, by whom it was hatched; or the Lamb runs to the Teats
of her that yeaned it. Proclus l. 2. in Timaeum.
And this (say they) we do by Prayer; which ^s nothing else but (...) the
^eturn of the Soul back to God, from whence it sprung: (...) ^ur looking back
to him from whom we come; a reflection upon the Foun^ain of our being, and of
all good: (...) our turning about to ^he cause of our being; a circling, as ^t
were to that point from whence we ^ook our beginning; that we may be fast knit
and united unto God, and never be divided from him.

1. And therefore (to explain thi^ more particularly) Prayer is, First An high
Acknowledgment, that Go^ is the first cause of all things. W^ magnify him
hereby as the Root, the Spring, the Fountain of whatsoever w^ or any other
Creatures are or have And without Prayer, we do as bad a^ say, We owe nothing
to any high^ Being than our selves.

2. Secondly, We acknowledge all the Sovereignty which he therefore hat^ over
us, and over all things; in th^^ we ascribe unto him a power to command them
all, and to help, and relieve, and supply both us and them according to our
various necessities.

3. The Independency also of (...) Being is herein acknowledged; (...) that we
ask of him alone, as having f^^ and absolute power within himself (...) giving
us help and comfort, without craving it of any else.

4. His Liberty and Freedom a^ so; in that it wholly resides, w^ confess, in
his Will and Choice wha^ we shall have, and how much, an^ when: all as he
pleases.

5. His All Sufficiency likewise, to enrich us without impoverishing himself.

6. Together with his infinite Greatness and Immensity; which is present to all
places, and ready to supply the needs of all Supplicants.

7. And it is no less an acknowledgment of his Omniscience: which can not only
give audience to all Petitioners every where; but exactly know both their
necessities, and their sense of them, and the sincerity of their desires; and
also what is convenient for him to bestow upon them, and will do them most good.

8. His inexhausted Goodness and bounty likewise; which is still ready and
willing to pour out it self to us without any emptiness, in the same Blessings
that he has bestowed, for so many past ages. And

Lastly, His Eternity and immutability; in that after so many successions of
Men in the World, He is still the same unchangeable fullness: unto whom we
resort with the same confidence, that good Men have ever done.

In short, It arises out of a sense of all Gods Glorious Attributes and
Perfections: which are every one acknowledged in some part of Prayer or other;
though we should not expressly name them. For in confession of sin, we
acknowledge his unspotted holiness, and that he is of purer eyes than to
behold, that is, approve, iniquity. In deprecation of his anger, we confess his
Justice; in petitioning for pardon we proclaim his clemency; in our request for
Grace and Help, we give him the Glory of his Power; and when we recount his
gracious Providence over us, we acknowledge his incomparable Goodness and
Bounty. And therefore, unless we will disclaim God, and have nothing to do with
Him, we must perform this Duty of Prayer to Him. This is the first
Consideration.

II. To which add further, That it is natural for every thing that is in want
to desire supply from him that has ability to fill it. Now such is the state
of every Man in the World: We are at the best, weak and feeble, beggarly, and
indigent beings, pressed with many and great necessities; which we have no
power to make up, but only by going unto God.

Whatsoever is from the first Being, wants something that it has. Every
Creature therefore is imperfect; and if any of them could be supposed to want
nothing, yet it would necessarily want the continuance of its being, which it
has received from its Creator: And therefore it is a true observation of one
of the ancient Philosophers Theodorus apud Proclum. Ib.
, that all Beings pray, (...) except only the first Being, which is God: who
has none to pray unto; but has all of himself.

Prayer is a confession of the true state of our own Souls and Bodies, as well
as of Gods most excellent Perfections. A declaration that we are poor and
needy; that we are crazy and insufficient of our selves; that we are dependent
and holden up by another. So that we quite forget our selves, if we do not pray
to God: We renounce all care about our own greatest concernments, if we take no
notice of Him, on whom our present and future welfare, both here and for ever
entirely depends.

III. As it is natural unto every one in want to ask, so it is natural unto
every one that asks, to put himself in to a fitting posture and disposition to
receive: that he may appear unto him that gives, to be a real object of hi^
Charity. Now this we do by Prayer (...) which is a natural expression both o^
our Poverty, and of our Humility (which very much move compassion) and of the
sense we have that we are Creatures; who have nothing of our selves which we
can properly call our own: and therefore are naturally le^ hereby to think what
submission and obedience we ought to pay unto him whose is all that we are and
have.

Upon this account, as much as any other, Prayer is necessary; that we may be
put into a temper of Love, and Gratitude, and Obedience unto Him (...) who is
the Donor of all good things; and who expects that we should acknowledge the
propriety He has i^ all the Gifts which his Bounty bestows upon us. Which we
do by Prayer: thereby we are constantly put in mind, in what tenor we hold all
the Blessings we receive from his hands; which we may not therefore use as we
please, out as He allows and directs. And if we do at any time use them
otherwise, ^^d thereby give just offense to God, ^^eir Owner and ours, Prayer
both ^turally calls such offenses to mind; ^^d makes us more fearful hereafter
to ^ffend.

For no man comes to ask a benefit of ^other (as Mr. Hooker, if I forget ^t,
very pertinently observes) but if (...) have given him any offense, he will
^hen unavoidably remember it; and (...) the very first place cast himself ^own
at his feet, and beg pardon, with (...) resolution not willingly to offend ^m
again. Which resolution is mainained and supported by the very same ^ing, which
constrained us to make (...); that is, the constant necessity we (...) in to
ask for new benefits. For (...) men are naturally afraid to offend those, into
whose presence they must requently come to sue for favors. This keeps them in
awe, and makes them careful how they behave the selves; that their suits may
not be jected.

We are not fit then to receive, o^ enjoy any thing from God, with devout
Prayer to Him. And there we ought constantly to perform (...) duty; because
otherwise, we (...) things by stealth, and lay hold on^ Blessings of Heaven,
without as^ him leave: and we ought to perf^^ it seriously; because it will not
ot^ wise have the forementioned effect^ making us afraid to offend Him, (...)
out which our Prayers are not^ worth, and can obtain nothing (...) Him.

To end this, let us consider, (...) we do not pray, that we may alter mind of
God; who is always same, unchangeable Goodness, (...) to give unto those who
are qualifi^ receive his favors: but that we (...) alter and change our own
mind for^ better; and thereby become disp^ for the good things of which we^
desirous. And nothing alters (...) much as serious Prayer; which (...) new mind
into us; and for the (...) ^t, makes us quite another sort of ^eatures.

We are forgetful of God; lovers of (...) selves; confident in our own ^ength;
doters upon this present ^orld; too much wedded to our own (...) and pleasure;
complainers, mur^rers, envious, wavering, and in^stant in our good purposes;
un^dful of other men's miseries; re^geful and implacable, which are all (...) to
the obtaining of God's mercy. (...) therefore Prayer is absolutely ne^^ry to
remove them; that is, to ^ember us of God; to keep Him in ^embrance, and to
maintain an ac^ntance with him; to fill us with (...) to Him; to humble and
abase us ^ur own thoughts; to draw our (...) off from this vain World, and
^ttle our trust in Him alone; to fix dependence on Him, and subdue wills to
his; to give us a taste of ^itual pleasures; to make us thank^^contented and
well satisfied; to ^^e our compassion toward others, ^stand in need of our
help, as we of the help of God; to incline us ^^e pitiful, and to do good, and
forgive; without which we confess, our very Prayers, that we cannot ^^pect
forgiveness from God.

This consideration shows, (...) prayer is so necessary, that there (...) be no
goodness nor virtue in the W^ without it: But Mankind will g^ strangers unto
God, and He unto the^ which will bring all things to (...) fusion.

CHAP. III. The sense of all Mankind about matter; especially of our B^ Savior.
IV. IT is truly therefore obs^ by Origin (in his Boo^ Prayer, newly come to
light,) th^^ people in the World pray, who o^ Providence, and set a ^^vernour
over the (...) verse Sect. 13. (...).
: The con^ opinion, that there (...) need of Prayer, being the Doctri^ those
only, Who are either altog^ Atheistical and deny the being of God; or (...)
those who own a God in name, but take ^ay his Providence. Which is mani^t from
hence; that all Nations by a ^ange consent have ever thought it ^cessary to
offer up some sacrifices; as (...) acknowledgment of the Sovereign^^ of God,
and of the interest he has ^all that we enjoy; and as an humble ^oplication of
his continued favor ^to those who own Him to be the ^ssessor of Heaven and
Earth, by re^ning Him some part of those good ^ings which he has bountifully
be^wed upon Mankind. This was the ^ture and meaning of Sacrifices from (...)
beginning: which being all now ^lished by the Sacrifice of Christ, (...) yet it
being natural to Mankind, to ^^er something to God, it remains ^^t we present
him continually with (...) Sacrifice of Prayer, together with ^^t of Praise and
Thanksgiving: ^ich are a part or concomitant of ^^yer, as we learn from many
places (...) Holy Scripture; where they are ^^rce distinguished, but used as
words (...) the same signification. They are ^^th joined together in the
Fiftieth Psalm, ver. 14, 15. Offer unto God Th^^ giving, and pay thy vows unto
the (...) high. And Call upon me in the day trouble: I will deliver thee, and
(...) shall glorify me. These Prayers (...) these Thanksgivings, being prese^
by worthy persons, as Justin M^^ tells Trypho the Jew, an^ only perfect, and
well ple^^ Sacrifices unto God (...). Dialog. cum Tryph.
. (...) whom the Sacrifice of B^^ were never acceptable^ not when by himself
(...) pointed; unless they (...) significations of pious and de^ minds, begging
pardon, implo^ mercy, and rendering thanks for (...) fits received.

Alms indeed are also called a Sacri^^ but they then only are truly so, w^ we
give them as an acknowledg^ of God's bounty unto us, with hu^ Prayer to him
that he would be ple^^ graciously to accept them. They often therefore joined
together; (...) ticularly in the story of Corneli^^ whom the Angel said, Thy
Pray and thy Alms are come up, for a me^ al before God. First his Prayers,
(...) ^hen his Alms: Which are an Offering (...) Sacrifice, when they attend
upon ^rayer and Thanksgiving; whereby ^e are naturally put in mind of the ^or
and needy, and stirred up, even (...) the feeling we have of our own
ne^^ssities, to relieve and succor ^^em.

We pay no homage to God then, if (...) omit this Duty; we live wholly ^^thout
God in the World; and give (...) token, no signification, that we own (...)
being. We rank our selves among ^heists, or Epicuraeans; who are (...) only in
Name, having lost the ^mmon sense of all Mankind: Which ^^th ever led them to
acknowledge (...) by solemn Supplications and ^hanksgivings to Him.

V. Which is a Duty so necessary, (...) so essentially flowing (if I may so
^eak) from Humane Nature, that ^rist our Lord, it may be in the next ^ce
observed, lived in the constant ^rformance of it.

Christ I say, in whom dwelt all the ful^ss of the Godhead bodily; nay, who as
God blessed for ever; who in that respect, needed nothing, and was (...) to
effect all things; yet, as he (...) man, prayed, and made supplica^ for those
things, which as he was (...) he already possessed, and could pre^^ly
communicate to the Humane Na^^ by his immediate conjunction and (...) mate
union therewith. Notwithst^ing this, he asked them of God, (...) beseeched him
to bestow them: (...) cause it was necessary and natural (...) do; because it
became a Creature own its dependence on an higher (...) to give to the Creator
the Honor unto his Name, and to testify by (...) action his Submission and
Obedi^^ his Humility and Love, and that (...) highly soever advanced (as the
Hu^^ Nature of Christ was to the (...) degree of honor) due acknowl^^ment
ought to be made by it unto Most High, who is the Founta^ Glory and Honor.

And here I take it to be very re^ kable, that there is no kind of Pr^^ whereof
we have not an Example i^ Lord Christ. Of Secret Prayer we^ v. Luke 6. where it
is said, He (...) drew himself into the Wilderness, prayed: Spent that
retirement from ^ompany and other employments, in ^oughts of God, and
acknowledgements of the honor He had done him, and in Prayer for his constant
presence ^ith him. Of Private Prayer with his ^isciples that passage seems to
be ^eant ix. Luke 18. And it came to pass, (...) he was alone praying, his
Disciples were ^ith him: and he asked them, saying, Whom ^y the people that I
am? i. e. in his re^ement from the multitude, attended ^ly by his Disciples, he
first prayed, ^^d then began, by way of enquiry and ^^king questions, to
instruct them in ^^s Religion. As for Public Prayer, ^^e read often of his
going into the ^emple, the house of Prayer at Jeru^lem, and of his frequenting
the Syna^gues, which were places for Religious Assemblies all over the Country.

We read also how he prayed for others, as well as for himself. For Peter,
^xii. Luke 31. that his faith might not ^il: For all his Apostles, that his joy
^ight be fulfilled in them, and that God would keep them from the evil of the
World, and that they might be sanctified through the truth. xvii. Joh. 13, 15,
19. For his whole Church, That they (...) all be one, as he and the Father are
(...) etc. ver. 21. And on the Cross prayed for his bitterest Enemies, before
for his Friends xxiii. Luke (...) And after all we read, that it was custom
thus to pray to God. xxii. L^ 39, etc. And he came out, and went he was wont,
to the Mount of Olives, (...) his Disciples also followed him: and (...) he was
at the place, he said unto the Pray, that ye enter not into temptati^ And he
was withdrawn from about stones cast, and kneeled down and pray saying, Father,
if thou be willing, (...)

And as he prayed, so he gave than^ particularly at the raising of Laza^ out of
his Grave. xi. Joh. 41. And acknowledged and praised God, (...) revealing his
will, not to the Wise a^ Prudent, but unto Babes; whom (...) employed to be the
Ministers of (...) Gospel of his Kingdom. xi. Matthew. ^

And as we have examples in him (...) all sorts of Prayer, so it is further
(...) servable, that he has left us the li^^ examples of the times and of the
^^ner of Prayer.

For times of Prayer; we read (...) i. Mark 35. of his Morning Prayer. And in
the morning, rising up a great ^chile before day, he went out, and de^arted
into a solitary place, and prayed. And in the vi. Mark, we read of his Evening
Prayer: for when the day was ^ar spent, ( ver. 35.) he fed a great multitude
miraculously, and then contrained his Disciples to go into the ship, while he
sent away the people; which being done, he departed into a Mountain to pray,
ver. 46, 47. He prayed also at Meals, as we find ver. 41. of that Chapter: When
he had taken ^he Loaves and Fishes, He looked up to Heaven, and blessed, (or
gave thanks ^i. Joh. 11.) for those good things which the bounty of God bestows
for the food of Mankind. And lastly, we ^ead of extraordinary Prayer, where a
^pecial occasion required it: for just before he ordained his xii. Apostles, he
^ent into a Mountain to pray, and conti^ued all Night in Prayer to God vi. ^uk.
^2, 13.

As for the manner, we find he did it with all fervor, with strong cries,
says ^he Apostle v. Heb. 7. where he adds ^ears also, as an argument of his
great piety. Secondly, With perfect sub^^ sion; as we find when he prayed (...)
the removal of the bitter Cup; whi^^ Nature very much desired, but he a^ with
this humble resignation of himself to God, Nevertheless, not my will, (...)
thine be done xxii. Luke 42. Not wh^^ will, but what thou will. xiv. Mark;
Thirdly, With all due reverence (...) devotion; for we read there, that kneeled
down and prayed, xxii Luke ^ and being in an agony, he prayed (...) earnestly,
ver. 44. and with greater^ pressions of reverence, for he fell^ his face, as
the manner was in great^ stresses xxvi. Matthew. 39. And last^ With frequent and
repeated import^^ ties: for he prayed three times for (...) same thing, with
the same submiss^^ and in the very same words also. (...) more than all this,
he prayed even (...) that, which he was sure God wo^^ bestow upon him, because
he ha^^ always possessed it as he was God, (...) knew it was designed for him,
as (...) was Man, in Gods Eternal (...) cree: I mean, his glorious pr^^ment
into the Heavens, to sit down^^^ the right hand of the Majesty (...) high. For
which he lift up his eyes unto Heaven, and said, Father, the hour is ^ome;
glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee, xvii. Joh. 1. and again, ver.
5. And now, O Father, glorify thou me, with thy own self; with the glory which
I had with thee before the World was.

Lay all these things together, and they will teach those that consider them,
both the weightiness, and the great dignity, as well as necessity of this Duty.
Unto which, who can ^huse but be awakened, when he sees the Son of God so
industrious, so unwearied in it? For if Jesus prayed, as Origin ^^gues (...)
Number. 39.
, and prayed ^ot in vain, but obtained what he asked, and without prayer ^ould
not, we may well think, obtain ^t, which of us can be so negligent as ^ot to
pray?

For to what end can we think was ^ll this done by him, but to show us ^he
obligations of Humane Nature; and to make us sensible of our depen^ance on God;
and that we can have nothing without his Will, and that is absolutely necessary
our wills sh^^ be wholly regulated by his? He (...) not all this barely to give
us an example; but to demonstrate and make know, that no man, though never
perfect, can live to God, with praying to him.

CHAP. IV. Other Arguments of the great N^^sity of Prayer.
VI. IT may be useful to us, furt^ to consider that God has (...) pointed his
Holy Spirit to assist us this Duty: which is a convincing (...) monstration of
its great necessity; we will judge of things, according the account which God
makes of the^ Who lest this Duty should not be w^ done, lends us his power to
perform acceptably unto Him. And shall (...) suffer the Holy Spirit to wait
upon ^o no purpose? Nay, shall it follow us ^ontinually, and urge us to have
re^ourse to God; inspiring us with good ^houghts, and exciting pious desires,
and we refuse to be led and conducted ^y its holy motions? This is as
unna^^ral, as for a man to have a Soul, and ^ever think; to have a Tongue, and
never speak; Eyes and a power to see, and never open them.

VII. It is as considerable also, that ^e has appointed his Son to be our
Mediator and Intercessor with Him in ^he Heavens. Which supposes both that we
will do this, and that it is most necessary to be done. For otherwise, we make
void this new Office of our Blessed Saviors, which God the Father, in his
infinite Wisdom, and ten^erest compassion, has created. We make him an
Advocate, without Clients; an Intercessor, who has nothing to do: but waits in
vain for our Petitions.

Good Lord! That Men should be so ignorant, or presumptuous, as to account
themselves Christians, and never, or seldom lift up their minds (...) hearts
unto him in the Heavens; (...) feel any need of his Patronage; (...) make use
of his most powerful inter^ for the obtaining any Blessings (...) them: which
they cannot have, un^^ they address themselves to God them in his prevailing
Name; and alone.

VIII. The Necessity also of this (...) be understood by the frequent
inj^ctions we meet withal in Holy Scritures, for praying always, praying
w^^out ceasing, and with all Prayer and S^plication, in the Spirit; as I have
be^^noted. Which declare it to be a ^^ness of such importance, that we cannot
subsist without it; but must use^ as constantly as we do our Meat a^ Drink: or
rather more constantly, being of such great concernment, the it is as necessary
as our very breath.

The Incense in the Temple, as (...) John teaches us viii. Revel. 3.
rep^^sented the Prayers of the Saints. No^ it may not be unworthy our observa^
on to note, that whereas the Shew-bre^ (whereby an acknowledgment w^ made, as
some think, that they recei^ed all their food from God) was re^ewed and set
upon the Holy Table in ^he Sanctuary, but once every Week; and the Lamp in the
Temple (which ^^gnified perhaps the Light of God's Word) was dressed once every
day: The Incense (which certainly signified their Prayers) was renewed, by
God's order, twice every day, and offered upon the Altar Morning and Evening.
Which may suggest unto us, that we ^^ght to be more sensible of the need ^e
have of the Word of God and ^rayer; than of the need of our daily ^ood: but
especially of Prayer. Though we read often; yet we stand in need to ^ray oftener.

IX. For it is our main security, our ^reat safeguard, our refuge and place ^f
retreat, in all the dangers unto which we are exposed in this present World:
and therefore is not only mentioned by the Apostle as a part of the Christian
Armor; but set also in the last place, as that which compleats all the rest of
the whole Armor of God vi. Ephesians. 18. (...), as St. Chrysostom o^^ speaks,
(...). Hom. xxx. in Genesis CAP. xi.
for Prayer (...) mighty Weapon, a powerful defense, w^^ out which no man^ be
able to stand ^maintain his groun^ against the Assaults temptations, nor o^ come
his spiritual Enemies: but which we lay hold upon the Arm of Almighty for our
defense and succo^ and engage the power of God to with us, and assure our
selves, if rightly manage it, of a certain (...) ctory.

For herein we employ all the oth^^ parts of the whole Armor of God, wh^ the
Apostle there requires us to (...) unto us, and to put on us. We our knowledge
of the Truth; and our Faith, our Love, and our H^ and have recourse to the Word
of G^^ particularly to his precious promise and declare our sincere affection
to Righteousness, and our upright into tions to persist and continue there^ by
the help of God which we implo^ So that it is the more necessary, because by
Prayer all the graces of God's Holy Spirit are continually exercised and kept
in ure; the whole Armor of God is girt closer to us; and we are made more
expedite and ready, on all occasions, to encounter with the Enemies of our
Salvation.

X. Whence it was, you may observe in the last place, that Holy Men, who lived
the Life of God in this World, could never be persuaded to omit it. I will give
but one instance of this, in the Prophet Daniel: who when he had received the
command of a great King to forbear praying to his God, for the space of 30
days, durst not consent to a compliance with his will and pleasure. And yet
Daniel was a good Subject, as well as a wise Man; who was very sensible what
ready obedience ought to be paid to Kings, and how necessary this Obedience
was; where a contrary, antecedent necessity did not ^e upon him, to obey God:
Especially when the thing was enjoined under the penalty of Death, and when his
Sovereign did not require a total forbearance of this Duty, but only for a
li^^ted time. And yet so it was, he c^^ rather to lose the favor of his Prin^^
who had been very kind to him, nay^ lose his Life, as well as his Hono^ and
more than that, to be thrown in the Den of Lions, there to be torn pieces and
devoured by those raven^ Beasts; than to omit his constant ^^votions to the
Supreme Lord and ^^veraign of Heaven and Earth. (...) says the History of his
admirable ^^ty vi. Dan. 10. When Daniel knew (...) this decree was signed,
(mark that) went into his house, and his Window (...) open toward Jerusalem, he
kneeled (...) his knees, three times a day, and pray and gave thanks before his
God, (...) did before time.

Which shows that, in his opini^^ it is more necessary to pray and (...) thanks
to God, than it is to live: (...) that there is a necessity also of the ^^quent
returns of this Duty. For the times a day (as often as he did eat drink) he
continued, notwithstand^ the great hazard he run therein, pray and give thanks
before his God.

CHAP. V. Some Reflections upon the foregoing Considerations.
BEfore I proceed to lay before you the great advantages we have, by the
serious performance of this part of our Christian Duty; it may be useful ^ere
to rest a while, and only look back upon what has been already discoursed.
Which if the Reader will please ^o do with a composed Mind and at^entive
Thoughts, he may soon know what to think of his condition, if he ^ever set
himself to this Holy Employment, or rather Heavenly Privilege, of making
devout Addresses to God, ^y Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving for all
the benefits of which we are desirous, or he has already conferred on us.

Such men are without God in the World; estranged from the Father of their
being; contemners of His Most Excellent Majesty; Usurpers upon his Sovereignty;
that set up for themselves, and live as if they were the O^^ginal of all
things; who stand in (...) need to be beholden to any one hi^er and greater
than themselves. Gu^ they are of the highest Treason, (...) cause they refuse
to pay the most na^ral and necessary acknowledgment (...) to the most High.
They will not o^ him as their Lord; nor make any ^nifications of their
dependence on hi^ but use him as if He were only a Na^^ to whom we owe a slight
respect, (...) no solemn, constant reverence and (...) vice.

Lay this to heart, I beseech yo^ whosoever you be, that do not (...) it, one
of the most serious businesse^ your Life, to pray unto God. Co^der what you
are; in what relation ^^stand to him; and what a bold diso^ing of him, this is:
That you may humbled for it, and come and (...) down your selves, and kneel
before Lord your Maker; to beg his part for this contempt, to beseech (...)
Grace, and assure him hereafter your faithful service.

2. And that you may so do, le^^ from the foregoing Instructions, (...) pray to
God; not merely because you think he will have this acknowledgment or else be
very angry: but because He ^^ght to have it, as we are his Crea^^es; who cannot
be happy, without ^^due respect to the Father of our being, the Fountain of all
bliss. If you think this Duty might have been left ^^done, had not God exacted
it by ^^me positive Law, it may make you less forwardly inclined unto it; nay
apt, perhaps, to grumble sometime at the burden (as you may be prone to account
it) and too willing to find pre^^nces, that may seem equitable and fit (...) be
allowed for the omitting it. But (...) you look upon it as enacted in the very
Laws of our Nature; as standing upon no weaker ground than our very beings;
which we deriving from God, ^^e bound thereby to acknowledge Him: you will not
desire to be excused from it, nor be backward to it; but please your selves, as
well as Him, in ^his most delightful employment.

Remember, You ought to look up unto God in Prayer and Praises, because it is a
natural Duty; and that your Nature strongly inclines you to it, because you are
weak, and in wa^ and that you should make it y^^ choice, because it is a most
noble ^^^viledge to be admitted into God's p^^sence: and that you should choose
to it frequently, because you will be much the more happy; by having (...) often
in your thoughts, and by be much in his Blessed presence; wh^able to impart
everlasting felicity his devout and faithful Worshippen.

3. Of which happiness let us not (...) prive our selves, by forgetting ^^^our
Maker; but be moved by the ^^ny Arguments whereby I have ens^ced it, to the
solemn practice of t^^ Duty: unto which we are formed Nature, and mightily
excited and sisted by Grace.

Never rise out of your Bed, but (...) fore you go about any thing else, m^^ a
tendry of your most hearty ser^^ unto God; implore his Blessing; (...) him know
that you intend to be fai^^ful to him all that day; that you^ member your
Obligations to him, a are resolved to make good your P^^mises: and so beseech
him to go al^^ with you, and to prevent you in all y^^ doings with his most
gracious favor, and further you with his continual help; ^^at in all your
works begun, continued, ^^d ended in him, you may glorify his ^^ly Name, and
finally by his mercy atain Eternal Life, etc.

And do not offer to put a bit of ^^ad into your mouths till you have
acknowledged God who spreads your ^able for you, and beseeched him to less the
gifts of his goodness to you, and to give you Grace to use the ^^^ength you
receive from them in his service.

In like manner, rise not from your Meat without a renewal of your thankful
acknowledgments for your refreshment: with such seriousness that it may be
truly a Grace, and not merely (...) called. That is, an hearty expression of
your gratitude to him; and of your desires to have Grace, to be as dutiful to
him, as he is bountiful to you, in these and all other benefits He constantly
bestows upon you.

And never think of putting off your Clothes to go to sleep, before you have
commended your selves and all yours unto his merciful Protection; and reflected
on his Goodness, and thank^ (...) for his mercies past; and expressed (...)
humble confidence in him, for time to come; and beseeched him make you fit, and
willing to die, (...) to be for ever with him.

Business I know is the pretended pediment to all this. But is there business
of such moment, as that w^ we have with God? Or can any o^ business be likely
to succeed with his Blessing? Or have we the fo^^ confidence, to expect his
Blessing, (...) never ask it? Who is there that (...) say, his Affairs in this
World have ^^fered, by spending some time, in ^^mending himself and them unto
G^ Nay, what business is there that (...) not go on, the more cheerfully, (...)
prosperously; when we have reason think that God is with us? Accord^^^ to that
wholesome saying, Robbery ^ver inriches; Alms never impover^ and Prayer hinders
no work. Obse^ it; As no Man has the more in (...) World, for what he gets
dishonest by Theft, or Cheating; nor any (...) the less, for what he gives
away, (...) of love to God and his poor Brethren ^o no man gains time for his
business, ^y that which he robs God of, in not ^^aying to him; nor loses he any
time ^y that, which he spends with God in his Holy Duty.

Therefore let none of us, upon any ^ccount, neglect it: but think we do ^ur
selves right, as well as God, by the ^^ious and solemn performance of it. (...)
own wants, one would think, ^ould stimulate us sufficiently unto it. ^r, if we
could be supposed to want ^^thing yet, the sense we have that we ^old all we
call ours by the mere mercy (...) God, should powerfully move us to acknowledge
him, and to pay him our ^^mage of Thanks and Praise, and ^^ble our selves
before his Majesty, as ^^^hing without him. Yea, it is an ^^nour, and singular
Favor, we should ^^^k, to be admitted into his Sacred ^^sence: as I am sure,
we should ^eem it, did we enjoy the same pri^^^edge with earthly Princes. Into
^^ose presence, we should not think ^e could come too often, if they would ^^^mit
it: but we should be ambitious ways to stand in their sight; and ^^^k upon our
selves as highly dignified, if they would be pleased to ma^^ us their
familiars. Let us not then b^ perverse, as to live, as we thought (...) Lord of
Heaven and Earth does us injury, or lays an heavy burden o^ when he requires
us to attend hi^ that is, when he bids us come to him; (...) first ask, and
then receive his Bless^^^.

Look upon our Blessed Savior, (...) observe how constant and unwea^ he was in
this Holy Duty: how ^^^quently he went alone by himself, (...) give thanks to
God, and to imp^^ his continued presence with him: (...) diligently he went to
the Temple (...) he was at Jerusalem; and to the Sy^^gogues, when he was in the
Count^ how he acknowledged God in the (...) common benefits: how much tim^
spent publicly and privately in^ company: With what strong crie^ called upon
him in the days o^ Flesh: with what submission; (...) what reverence; with
what repe^^ importunities: and then think (...) your selves; are you in less
want o^ help of God, than our Blessed Sav^^^^ was? Can you live well enough
w^^^out praying to him, when his only (...) ten Son could not? Why do you not
(...) go to Him, with fervent desires? ^y do you not imitate the Son of God,
the frequency of your Addresses? To what purpose has God given (...) his Holy
Spirit, if you will not ^y its motions? To what end is the ^^d Jesus appointed
to be your Inter^or; if you will send up no Prayers, ^e presented by him in the
Court of ^^ven? Why does he call upon you ^ray always; if you need not pray at
(...)? Consider all these Arguments (...) again; how naked you are with^^ this
Divine Armor to defend you; (...) all Gods Graces languish and dye, ^his do
not continually maintain (...); how good Men have thought it ^^er not to live,
than not to pray and (...) Thanks to the God of their life: (...) they will
prevail with you not to be ^^gers unto this Heavenly imploy^t. An employment,
wherein you will (...) much comfort and no less success: ^^u do not negligently
discharge it. (...) God has a love to souls; and great^esires their
improvement. He would ^e them advance even unto his like^^; in Righteousness
and Goodness, and true Holiness; Else he would (...) invite them and call upon
them, (...) does, to fix their eyes upon him^ would not have given them such^
and assistance, and discovered s^ wonderful love unto them, as he (...)
manifested in the Son of his L^ Christ Jesus.

The Heathen thought it sufficie^ desire God to hear them; out of love he bears
to immortal Spirits (...) they cry unto him. So I find one (...) ing, in an
Ancient Greek Poet: ^ words are these, (...)
(...) --
Hearken unto me O Father, thou (...) wonder of Mankind: who take a s^ care
of an ever-living Soul.

But we have a great deal mo^ build our hopes upon; and may (...) Hear us, O
Father of our Lord (...) Christ; who have astonished us wit^ wonders of thy
love in him: Hear us of the love thou bear unto the Son (...) love: Hear us,
for his sake; who^ down his life, to redeem our im^^ Souls; who lives for ever
to make (...) ^ession for us. Thou who have bestowed al^^ady so surprising a
gift without our ask^ng; hear us, and give us what we ask of ^ee, when we ask
it in his name, who gave himself for us, and has assured us, that, ^ith him,
thou will give us all things.

CHAP. VI. The Honor God does us in admitting us into his presence.
AMong other false conceits which men have of this Duty of Pray^^o God, these
two are very prejudi^al to its performance.

First, They look upon it only as a ^y laid upon them by God's mere ^ill and
Pleasure: which might be ^^red, there being no real need of it, it were not for
this; that God will we it, and has ordained it.

Secondly, They imagine thereupon, ^^t he is beholden to them for what ^ey do;
and that they have perfor^ed such a great piece of service to ^m, when they
have prayed a while, ^^t they thereby obtain a dispensation to do their own
Will, when (...) have satisfied his.

To rectify the first of these^ stakes, I have shown this to be a (...) ral
Duty, and not merely bound (...) us by a positive Law: A Duty s^ sed by our
Lord and Savior, (...) than commanded: for it arises (...) our being God's
Creatures; wh^ therefore bound to acknowledge (...) and to wait upon him
continuall^ the supply of our necessities, from bounty. And now I shall proce^
correct the second mistake; and (...) by also further confirm what (...) said
concerning the necessity o^ Duty: by showing that this is (...) from being a
burden laid upon (...) his mere will and pleasure, or an^ service whereby we
oblige him, o^ cure an indulgence, or connivan^ what we do contrary to his W^
other things; that in truth the (...) is done entirely to our selves, (...)
Righteousness cannot profit Him. (...) intends hereby to make us really (...)
nay, excellent Creatures: whose (...) it is to look upon our selves as inf^ ly
beholden to him, that he will (...) us to come into his presence, upon all
occasions, and call him Our Father.

This I shall demonstrate, by representing first how honorable and excellent
an employment this is: Secondly, How comfortable and truly delightful, when
performed as it ought: Thirdly, How beneficial, both to make and preserve us,
such as we ought to desire above all things to be.

Of the first of these I shall give a brief account in this Chapter: wherein I
shall endeavor to make the Reader sensible, that this Duty which our own
necessities call for and exact of us, is in it self a most Noble and Excellent
Employment. For it is the Ascent of our mind to God (as the Ancient Christians
describe it) a familiar con^erse, (...), etc.
an holy discourse with the Lord of all: the withdrawing of our minds from this
World, and all things in it; above which it raises our thoughts, and lifts them
up unto the first and chiefest Good: into whose company it brings us, and sets
us in his Blessed presence; that he may lift up the light of his countenance
upon us. For though it be the expressio^ our deepest humility; yet thereby^ are
lifted up above the highest top of H^ ven, and passing by Angels, present (...)
selves before the Royal Throne it self: St. Chrysostom's words are upon (...)
Subject. From whence we may le^ by the way, that they little thought those
days of addressing themselves any of the Ministers in the Heaven Court, though
never so high; wh^ they passed by, and went directly to (...) Divine Majesty,
as we now may ^ ought to do.

This he represents in an excell^ Discourse of his upon another Subje^ as the
high dignity of Christians, (...) which the Angels themselves are S^^ ctators,
and very much ^ mire the honor that is do^ us. (...). Tom. 1. p. 372.
For, as if in t^ presence of a great Arm^ before the Captains, and great O^
cers, and Consuls, an ordinary person be admitted to the speech of the King^ it
fixes all eyes upon him, and rende^ him the more illustrious, and ven^ rabble:
so it is with those that pray (...) God. For think with thy self, wha^ a great
thing it is, for thee who art but a man, in the presence of the Angels, the
Archangels, the Seraphim, the Cherubim, and all the rest of the Heavenly Host
standing by, to be permitted to approach with much confidence, and to speak
with the King of those Powers. What honor is there, that can equal this?

Nor were the better sort of Pagans without this notion of Prayer; that it is
our Conducter unto God, brings us into his Divine light; sets us in his
presence; draws him to us by a Divine persuasive Rhetoric, and powerful
sympathy with him: nay, Proclus in Plat. Timaeum. L. 2. (...), etc.
knits and unites us unto the first Being; and moves his bountiful goodness to
communicate all good things to us: it being the opening of our Souls to God,
that he may fill us. To this effect Proclus discourses.

And is not this the most incomparable honor that can be done us, to be made
thus familiar with God? The higher any persons are, the more we think our
selves enabled, when we are admitted into their society; especi^ if we may at
all times have reco^ unto them, and be kindly received (...) them. By which we
may judge (...) account to make of the honor which we are preferred, by be
brought into the company of (...) who is higher than the highest. W^ whose most
excellent Nature to (...) true Communion; is the greatest^ fection whereof we
are capable; ei^ in this World, or in the next.

And how is it possible to have^ ous thoughts of him; and not in (...) measure
be assimulated to him? (...) while he is in our mind, we are, the present,
necessarily made su^^ he is: Holy and Pure; Gracious, Merciful, Tender, and
Kind; Sa^^ ed, and well-Pleased in all thi^ That is, we cannot think of him,
(...) out some transformation of our (...) into his blessed likeness, while we
think of him: Of which more ano^

By which you may understand, (...) it is not merely an external Hon^^ which is
hereby done us: but by (...) vout Prayer we are naturally ind^ with true
Greatness, and Noblene^ mind; raised above these little things ^ere, (how great
soever they seem in vulgar account) by having a sight and feeling of an
infinite good. Unto which if it fasten us by Faith and by Love, we are made the
Friends of God: who have no reason to envy the greatest persons in this World;
but rather to look down with pity upon them, if they be strangers unto God.

By conversing with whom, you may further consider, our minds are both refined
and spiritualized; and also much widened and enlarged: which are two most
excellent qualities, wherein Devout Prayer improves us, by the constant
exercise thereof.

1. Our Souls indeed are Spiritual things: But, being tied to these Bodies, and
thereby engaged in worldly affairs, and fleshly concerns, they grow earthly and
sensual, dull, and heavy, if we take not care to keep up their familiarity,
with their Spiritual Acquaintance and Kindred in the other World. This we do by
Prayer; which is a continual exercise of our most spiritual Powers; a daily
conversation with Spiritual things, even with the Father of Spirits himself,
and his (...) vine perfections; and with the (...) and condition of our own
Souls, b^ as they are now at present, whet^^ they lie in sin and wickedness or
be^^ dued with true Holiness and Goodne^ and as they will be in the other Wor^
either in the blessedness of Heaven, in the torments of Hell: and with (...)
Lord and Savior, the great Ju^^ of all, who will sentence us either the one,
or the other; when he (...) come in his own Glory, and in his (...) there is; and
in the Glory of all the (...) ly Angels: and with the Holy Spi^^ the Inspirer
of all good thoughts, (...) fervor in our desires; who toget^ with the Father
and the Son, is W^ shipped and Glorified.

All which things being percei^ only by our minds and by no oth^^ means, do
very little affect the hea^ of those, who never lift up the thoughts above this
World, in pray to God: but appear most real a weighty things to those that do.
(...) ticularly God's most glorious perfe^ ons, and the incomparable Gl^^
wherein our Blessed Savior shines^ the Heavens at God's right hand, appear the
most lovely, the most beautiful, and every way the most excellent Objects unto
those that have their minds and hearts fixed on them: as we have, when
withdrawing our thoughts from sensible enjoyments, we apply them wholly to
converse with God, in praises of him and Thanksgivings to him, and earnest
desires after him. By which also we are made to understand, of what consequence
it is to our happiness to be acquainted with him, and with our Blessed Savior,
and with the Holy Ghost the Comforter; and we also daily improve that
acquaintance, and are made more conformable to him, as the only way to that
happiness.

Which is excellently expressed by Origin, (...). Sect. 29.
upon those words of the Psalmist, Unto thee, O Lord, I lift up my Soul. The
fancy of all earthly things being discharged, and the eyes of the mind lifted
up, to think of God alone, and to converse with Him, (who listens to us) in a
solemn and becoming manner; how can they choose but be very much improved,
beholding (...) open face the Glory of the Lord, and ^ing transformed into the
same I^ from Glory to Glory. For they (...) take at that time (...) of a
certain diviner fort intellectual influence, derived to the from God: according
to that, L^ imprint the light of thy countenance (...) us. (iv. Psalm. 6.) The
Soul also be lifted up aloft, both follows the S^rit, and is also separated
from (...) Body: Nay, it not only follow^ the Spirit, but being in it, why sho^
we not say that it is carried above self, and ceasing to be a mere S^ becomes
Spiritual.

Of such things, Men that ne^ pray to God, or are seldom serio^ conversant in
this Duty, have no (...) prehension at all: but are perfe^^ blind, and stupidly
senseless of invi^ ble and spiritual enjoyments. Wh^ by their minds are
straightened and ^rowed; having no thoughts bey^ their own poor selves, and that
only this present World: when they t^ set their minds to an holy conve^ with
God, in this Spiritual Duty this means mightily widen and enlarge them (which
is the other advantage I mentioned,) extending their desires and cares so far,
as to make them solicitous for the welfare of the whole World, both now and for
ever.

This is one of the greatest Excellencies of Holy Prayer, that it inlarges our
Spirits so far, as to enable them to extend their Charity to all Men: which it
is not in our power by any other means to do. We approach unto infinity, and
immensity; in our desires, and wishes; and in our good will and readiness to
benefit all the World: Every part of which, though never so far distant from
us, we may help this way, and express our affection to it: though we are so
contracted and limited in all other abilities but this, that we know not how to
serve them in any thing else. Our Prayers alone can reach them; and there is no
Country, nor people out of their reach: but in these holy desires we may
stretch forth our souls to the furthermost parts of the Earth, and looking up
to Heaven, draw down the blessing of God upon them.

By which we may learn the nece^ty, as well as the excellency of Pra^ Without
which we grow strangers to God and our Heavenly Count^dull, earthy, poor
spirited and def^cable things; minding only our sely and looking no further
than this (...) sent World; and our particular ^cerns therein: but by the
practice which, we maintain our acquainta^ with God, and with the Spirit^
World; nay become Friends of G^ and grow great minded, Heavenly, S^ritual, able
to look beyond our li^selves, nay beyond all things visibl^large,
comprehensive, full of hi^ thoughts, and lofty designs; posse^ with Divine
Affections; moved truly Noble Ends, fraught with Ge^rous Desires, and
Transcendent Hope^ which fill our hearts with proport^nable comfort and
satisfaction.

I conclude this with the words of (...) Chrysostom, (...). 1.
As the S^ gives light to the Body, Prayer does to the So^ and therefore if
this be the great calam^ of a blind man, that he sees not the S^^ what a loss
is it to a Christian not to pr^ ^^tinually, and by that means bring the ^ight
of Christ into his Soul?

CHAP. VII. The Pleasure which springs from the ^serious performance of this
Duty.
THE great Man just now named, would have us when we pray, to think our selves,
(...) 2.
to be (...) in the midst of the Holy Angels; and that we are performing their
service. For though we are far removed from them, in other things, in their
Nature, Diet, Wisdom, and understanding, yet, Prayer is the common Employment
and business of Angels as well as men. By which we being segregated from
Beasts, and knit to the Angels, shall shortly be translated into their Polity,
their manner of Life, Honor, Nobility, Wisdom, and Understanding: spending all
our Life in the service of God. Which is a very leasant Contemplation, and a
fit Introduction to the second thing, (...) dertook to demonstrate; how (...)
fortable and truly delightful it i^ approach unto God, in such (...) thoughts
of him, and Devout Aff^^ons to him, as we are supposed to (...) when we make
our Prayers, with ^ses and thanksgivings unto him.

And here it may be sufficie^ consider only these two things.

First. This must needs be a deli^ful employment, because therei^ draw nigh to
God, as I have al^ saidl which is the description, th^ly Scriptures give us of
it.

Secondly, In so doing, we com^ our selves and all our concerns, (...) the care
of infinite Wisdom, P^ and Goodness: which is a great^ of the business of
Prayer to God.

1. The former of these may ^^fily understood, by considering, to draw nigh to
God, is to fix our (...) on him, and lay open our Souls he^ him, in whose
presence is fulne^ Joy, and everflowing pleasure.

That which produces pleasure is is the application of our Faculties ^sutable
objects, with suitable ope^ons about them. And the nobler the faculties are,
and the higher the objects; the greater must the pleasure needs be, which
arises from their conjunction. Now our minds and understandings are the highest
powers which we have; and God is the highest object on which our minds can fix:
and therefore the application of our Souls to him, by the thoughts and
affections of our minds (which are their operations) cannot but produce the
highest pleasure; as much above all bodily pleasure, as our Souls are above our
Bodies, and God above all worldly things.

If we feel no such pleasure in our approaches to him, it is because our
thoughts of God, and our affections toward him, are dull and liveless. We do
not stir up our Souls to think seriously of him, when we fall down to worship
him: but suffer our hearts to be far off from him, when with our lips we draw
nigh to him. For were our minds possessed with settled thoughts of his Almighty
Power, All-seeing Wisdom, Boundless Goodness, tender Mercy, and careful
Providence; in compassing us and all Creatures, bestow^ great benefits on us
now, and inte^ing greater; they would unspeaka^ delight us. The smallest glance
have of any of these infinite perfe^ons, (which we acknowledge in (...)
beginning of all our public Pray touches us, if we mind what we (...) with a
singular pleasure: though cannot at that time, have more tha^ short thought of
them. And the fore what joy may we not receive ^^hence, in our secret and
retired De^tions; when we may stay and look long as we please upon any of the
Divine Attributes, which affect (...) hearts: delighting our selves in (...)
thoughts either of his Power, wh^ nothing can control; or of his kn^ledge,
from which nothing can be hi^den; or of his wonderful love, whi^ thinks nothing
too great to give; of his overruling Providence, whi^ makes all things work
together (...) good to those that love him; or of (...) impartial Justice,
which in due seas^ will not fail to render to all men, bo^^ good and bad,
according to their d^ings.

And when these pious thoughts stir up in us the passions of love, and hope,
and longings to be more filled with such delightful thoughts of him, and
affections toward him; the pleasure must needs be exceedingly increased: As
every one may be convinced, who are not so ill-natured, as to have no body,
that they love in this World. For they that have a faithful, especially if it
be also a powerful, Friend, find nothing so sweet and delightful, as to love
him sincerely, and to be sincerely beloved by him. And therefore to feel in our
hearts an ardent love to God, which naturally makes us hope we are beloved by
him; cannot but give us a taste of the most excellent of all other pleasure.
And proportionable to the degree unto which our love arises, will be the
comfort and satisfaction that it yields.

Now, how can we choose but have this passion excited in us, and that to an high
degree; when we set our selves to Pray to God, and to praise his Holy Name? For
it is some degree of Love, which is supposed to carry us to him: and when we
are come into his presence, and look upon him, as L^ it self, who is good to
all, and (...) been extraordinary kind to us; cannot fail (if we act in this,
as we in all other Affairs) to feel an hig^ degree of it; proportionable to
sense we have of his goodness (...) us in particular, and of his Unive^
Goodness unto all Creatures in ge^ral, according unto their several ne^ and
capacities. Of which Unive^ Goodness we should more sensible (as an e^lent
person Dr. Bright 's Treatise of Prayer.
has obved) if we did accush our selves to look upon his kindness to us, but
as one single instance (...) example of it: and, by what he (...) done for us,
conceive what he (...) and has done for all in their sev^^ kinds. Which could
not but raise in our minds the highest admiration^ him, and such an ardent love
to hi^ as would make us rejoice in him (...) the present, and repose an entire
(...) fidence in him for the future.

2. And that is the second thing; commending our selves to the love (...) care
of God's Almighty Good^ which is one great business of Prayer) a give our minds
the sweetest and ^st solid satisfaction. For having trusted our selves and all
our con^^us with him, in an assured confi^nce of his Fatherly kindness to us,
(...) faithful care of us; we may com^rtably look upon every thing that falls
us, as certainly intended for (...) good and happiness. And what a ^lightful
thought is this, even in the ^idst of all the troubles of this Life, at any
time they surround us? ^ow pleasantly may we look upon all ^ings, even those
which look sowrely ^on us, and threaten mischief to us; ^^en we can look upon
them, as pro^eding from the wise orders of him, whom we have cast all our care,
in ^all belief that he cares for us?

And thus we may and ought to be^^ve, because he has told us as much. ^^d, if
he had not, we might have ^^rnt it from our selves: Who are at (...) and
trouble our selves no farther, ^hen we have commended our selves ^^to a
powerful Friend, and left all (...) concerns in his hands; with an ^doubted
confidence in him, that he will do that which is best, as fa^ knows and is
able; that is, far than we could any ways do (...) selves. Now we are
absolute^ that God knows and can do all t^^ being no more liable to any m^ than
he is defective in his Power what he judges most conducing (...) good: which is
more than can (...) of the highest Creature in this W^ or in the other. And
therefore, can make him our Friend, as w^ by commending our selves and (...)
have unto him, with a pious t^^ his Mercy, and entire Devotion (...) selves to
his service; why should our heart be more at ease, freet all care and fear, and
trouble, the are when a powerful Friend has (...) us into his protection? In
as much there is no Friend like to God, can give us such certain security (...)
does; that all things shall go with us.

Let us try, and not deny our (...) this high satisfaction; by givin^ our
selves to God, and putting (...) have into his hands: beseeching to dispose of
every thing belong^ (...) as he in his wise Goodness sees ^^^t meet; and to
dispense himself to (...) according to the most just rules and ^^sures of his
unerring Providence. (...) then whatsoever is cross to our na^^l desires, we
may most cheerfully (...) comfortably receive, because it ^^es from him: and
whatsoever is ^^^eable to them, we may as certain^^ and comfortably expect, if
it be ^olesome for us. That is, we may freed hereby from all grief, and trou^e,
and from all cares and fears: and (...) only so, but be able to rejoice in the
(...) always; as St. Paul exhorts with ^^peated earnestness iv. Philip. 4. ^^ce
in the Lord always: and again I ^^joyce: and then adds the means ^^of in the
next verses but one; ^areful for nothing: but in everything ^rayer and
Supplication with Thanks^ng, let your request be made known (...) God And the
peace of God which ^^h all understanding, shall keep your ^^s and minds through
Christ Jesus. ^^t the greatest comfort of all will when we quit these Bodies,
to think (...) we shall lose nothing very conside^^^ thereby; much less lose
our Souls: but having fast hold of (...) be only closer knit unto Him, in (...)
love toward him, and delight i^ love toward us, which we have ^^^tinually
exercised in Prayer to (...) Which, as the better sort of Pa^^ could say, is a
familiar conference (...) God, wherein we discourse with (...) about our
Translation from he and return unto Him. Conce^^ which if we never here confer
(...) him, we shall be miserably to see the other World; when we find we have
lost our acquaintance (...) Him, which we ought by cont(...) Prayer, to have
kept up and mai^ed. And then our hearts would (...) been wonderfully full of
satisfacti^^ our departure, to think that we (...) going only to be better
acqua^^^^^ with Him, and to perfect the Fr^^^^ship we had here begun, by nearer
^^^munion with him in Heaven.

This is the Notion which Po^^ had of it; we are here, says (...) (...)
enclosed in this Body as in a^ son; like Children, separated, at a great
distance from their Part who ought to pray to the God ^^eir Language was) who
are their ^^^e Parents, about their turn to them. Apud Procl^ in Tim. L. 2.
And ^^osoever they are, that (...) not thus pray to them, ^ll find that they
are no better than (...) Fatherless and Mo^^erless Children: who will have none
take care of them, and be kind to ^^em, when they are loosned from these ^^dies
to which they are now chained. A lamentable condition this: ^ereby we may
understand the com^^t of going to God as an ancient ac^^aintance, when we go
out of this ^^dy. How joyfully may we go to (...), with whom we have held a
con^^^t good correspondence; nay, ^^intained a sweet familiarity, by ^^ly
Prayer to him? which will not (...) us doubt of a kind reception from (...), in
whose company we have de^^ted much to be, while we were in (...) World; and
have long desired to (...) nearer unto him, and to be for ever ^^^h him.

This is some of the pleasure of their ^^e, who have a continual intercourse
^^^h Heaven, in serious Prayer to God. Who communicates also, by his (...)
immediate influences upon Holy So^ who look up unto him, such Heave joy in this
Duty, as I am not able describe. For who can doubt, that frequently illuminates
their minds, (...) strengthens their thoughts, to un^^ stand and perceive his
Divine p^^ ctions, more clearly and lively, (...) they could of themselves: and
the by raises up their Love, and (...) Hope, and their Joy, to a gre^^ height
of satisfaction? Which increases also by secret touches (...) their hearts;
exciting all these bey^ the Pitch to which our highest thou^^ would advance
them.

But omitting this, I shall con^^ this Head with the w^^ of St. (...).
Chrysostom: w^^ will serve also for a^^ troduction to the (...)

Prayer is the Employment of (...) gels; and much exceeds even (...) dignity:
as appears by this, that (...) approach with great reverence (...) the Divine
presence; teaching (...) address our selves to God, with (...) likefear mixed
with joy. With (...) lest we should prove unworthy of this favor; with joy, at
the greatness of the Honor that is done us Mortals, in permitting us to
converse continually with God. By which we get out of this mortal and temporary
stare, and pass over to immortal Life: for he that converses with God, must
necessarily get the better of Death and Corruption. Just as those things that
are always enlightened with the rays of the Sun, cannot remain in darkness: so
it is impossible that they who enjoy familiarity with God, should continue
mortal. For if they who are taken into the society of a King, and advanced to
honor by him, cannot be poor; how much more impossible is it that they who by
Prayer have familiarity with God, should have mortal Souls. Ungodliness and an
irregular Life is the Death of the Soul: therefore the Worship of God, and a
Conversation suitable to it, is its Life. Now Prayer leads us to an Holy Life,
becoming the Worship of God: nay, it marvellously stores our souls with the
most precious Treasures. Whether a man be a lover of Virginity study purity in
a Married E^^^ whether he would suppress anger purge himself from envy; or do^
other good thing: Prayer is his (...) ductor, and smoothing the way him, makes
the course of Veready and easy. For it cannot that they who ask of God
Te^rance, Righteousness, Meekness, Goodness, should not obtain (...) petition.

CHAP. VIII. The great benefits we receive by ous Prayer to God.
WHat force there is in Pr^^ both to make us and pre^ us, such as we ought to
desire to may be understood in great part what has been already discourse^ the
two foregoing Heads. When I have represented, how it raises, ritualizes, widens,
and greatens minds: filling us with high thoughts; possessing us with Heavenly
Affections; satisfying us in the Love of God; putting us into the Divine
protection; ^^curing us against all Events; and drawing down upon us the Divine
^lessing. In short, it is a vast improvement of our minds, by lifting them up
above themselves, as well as above this World: and that not only for the
present; but tying us fast to God by a constant sense of him, which it is apt
to leave upon our minds, it puts us into a pious temper, and constantly
disposes us both to do aright, and to judge might also.

For if we would know whether a thing be good for us to have, we need but
consider whether we dare pray for it or no: and whether a thing be lawful to be
done we understand; by considering whether we dare recommend it to the Divine
Blessing, and beg his presence and concurrence with us in it. This is commonly
a good Direction; and will put a stop to us in all bad proceedings. Nay, so
great a power there is in Prayer, that we perceive the good it does us, even
before we receive, that which we come to ask. For no ^^ner does a man lif^ his
hands to Heaven, St. Chrysostom's (...). Hom. 32.
w^^ are, and call upon G^^ but he is snatched from this Wo^^ and translated
into the other, if pray with care and diligence, so (...) if anger boiled in
him, it is prese^^ quieted; if lust burnt, it is quench^ if envy gnawed, it is
easily expel for as the Psalmist observes that w^^ the Sun arises, all the
Beasts of (...) Forest lay them down in their De^^ who in the Night had crept
forth: when Prayer goes forth out of Mouth, the Mind is enlightened, with a
certain beam of Light, and unreasonable and brutish pass^^ steal away, and dare
not appe^^ Nay, if the Devil himself was the he is driven away; if a Demon,
he^ parts: provided we pray with att^tive and wakeing minds.

But I will sum up what I have (...) say on this Argument, in this sin^
Consideration. If it be highly bene^cial to be truly good, and God-li^^ we are
highly beholden to Devo^^ Prayer; which is a Blessed Instrument thereof. Now
all Mankind cannot but agree in this, that it is our highest perfection, and
therefore nothing ought to be more desired by us, than, to be made like to God
in Righteousness, Goodness, and true Holiness: Unto which it is easy to show,
we are formed by every part of Prayer. Whether we acknowledge the Divine
perfections (which it is senseless to praise, and not to make our pattern) or
confess our own guiltiness (which is a disowning and condemning all evil
courses) or make an Oblation of our selves to him, that made us (whereby we
deliver up our wills to his) or give him thanks for his benefits (whereby we
^onfess the Obligations we have to be wholly his) but especially when we
pe^ition him for pardon (which supposes we resolve to be better) or for his
Di^ine Grace to assist us to perform our Duty faithfully: of which if we have a
serious desire, it will incline us and dispose us thereunto (for all Creatures
^ndeavour to accomplish their own desires) Nay, it will powerfully move ^s to
pursue what we would have, by such means, as God, to whom we p^^ directs us to
use for the obtain^ thereof.

Nay, The very thought we form our mind, when we set our selves (...) pray,
that we are going to God, (...) place our selves in his presence w^ sees all
things, even the most hid^ motions in the secret recesses of (...) Soul; which
accordingly frames it (...) to please him, as present to it, and (...) specting
it, and penetrating to (...) bottom of it; searching the Hear^ and trying the
Reins: This thoug^ say, and the alteration it works in (...) is of such great
advantage to us, tha^ we should suppose him who praye^ God to be a gainer,
(...) otherwise; he ought Origin L. (...) Ev^ (...) Sect. 26, 27.
observes) to thought to have recei^^ no common benefit, who thus revere^ly and
piously disposes and frames (...) mind, at the very time of Prayer. (...) which
how many sins are banishe^ and how many good deeds are pro^ced, they can tell
who apply the^ selves continually to pray unto G^ with such serious thoughts of
him. F^ (...) the remembrance, and especially the ^resence of an excellent man,
stirrs us ^p to imitate him, and oft-times stops ^ur inclinations to that which
is bad: How much more profitable will the ^emembrance of God the Father of all,
with Prayer to him, be to those who ^erswade themselves that they stand before
him and speak to him from whom nothing can be hidden? This ^e confirms by many
places of the Ho^y Scripture; and con^ludes that if we got nothing else by
Prayer, Ib. Sect. 31.
we should be sufficient gainers, by putting ^ur minds into a posture, to pray
as we ^ught.

This may be further demonstrated. ^y glanceing briefly upon every part of ^he
Lord's Prayer: which no man can ^ut up to God with understanding, with
seriousness, and with fervent desires; and not be thereby made better.

For how can we call God Our Father, and not reverence him; and be filled both
with a filial Fear of him, and with Love to him: together with Hope and Joy in
him?

How is it possible to desire his Na^ may be hallowed by all; and we o^ selves
continue to dishonor it?

We do not sure desire his Kingdom should come, and exempt our selve from his
Government, and deny hi^ our Obedience.

Nor pray that his Will may be done resolving to do as we will our selves.

We cannot beg of God our day^ bread, and not rest contented there with: much
less be insensible of hi^ bounty, if he give us more than daily bread, and
bestow upon us, perhaps great plenty and abundance.

When we pray him to for give us on trespasses, we are at the same tim^ taught
to forgive others; or to hop^ for no pardon our selves: and this (...) one of
the hardest, though a most reasonable and noble part of Christian Virtue.

When we pray God not to lead us in to Temptation; with what face can we think
fit to run into it?

And when we beseech him to delive^ us from evil, especially from the ev^^ one;
we are strangely forgetful and careless, if we run into those sins which throw
us into the very mouth of that roaring Lion; who goes about, seeking whom he
may devour.

And, in the conclusion, who can acknowledge that his is the Kingdom; that is,
he rules over all; and yet not stand in awe of him, and honor him more than
any Earthly Majesty? And that his is the Power; and not depend on him and trust
him in well doing; but expect that he will subvert us in evil courses? And that
his is the Glory, and not give him thanks for all his benefits, and use them to
his Honor and Glory, and the doing him service in the World?

That is, who can think seriously of all his incomparable perfections, which
are expressed in those words, thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory,
and not have some suitable affections in his heart, disposing him to do that
which is well-pleasing in God's sight; who has it in his Power to make us,
either happy, or miserable, for ever and ever?

This is so plain a Truth, that we cannot so much as say a short Grace before
and after Meat; but it will dispose us, if we mind what we say, to the practice
of such Christian Virtues, a^ are proper at that season. We sha^^ not easily,
that is, drink too much, o^ play the Glutton (as St. Chrysostom^ observes upon
those words 1 Samuel 1.9, 10.) Hom. 2. de Anna, Tom. 2.
but the remembrance that we must pray to God, when we have done eating and
drinking (...) will be a restraint upon us, and make us use his good gifts, in
a convenient measure. For a Table begun with Prayer, and ending in Prayer,
cannot want any thing that is good: and therefore let us not neglect so great
again. For is it not absurd, that when our servants, who wait upon us, bow^ and
give thanks, if we reach to them any portion of that which is set before us; we
our selves, who enjoy so many good things should not pay^ this honor unto God:
Especially, since by that, we shall dispose our selves for greater blessings?
For where Prayer is and giving o^ Thanks, there is the Grace of the Holy
Spirit; and the Demons and all the adverse Powers fly away. He that is about
to pray, dare not speak any absurd thing; no not in the midst of the Meal: or
if he do, he will presently repent of it, when he comes to speak to God. And
therefore in the beginning, and in the conclusion of our Meals we ought to give
thanks to God; for this cause especially: that we shall not (as was said
before) easily fall into Drunkenness, if we be settled in this pious custom.
Which we ought not to omit, though we should chance to be overtaken, and to
rise up from the Table with our Heads heavy, by too much eating and drinking:
for though we offend now; we shall correct this shameful practice, the next
time.

Thus that excellent man presses Prayer and giving of Thanks, upon such
occasions: as a means to restrain us from those sins, which are then too
common; when a sense of God does not govern our Appetites, and preserve us in a
Holy fear of offending so great a Benefactor, as he is continually to us. Whose
Grace the more earnestly we desire, the more certain we are to obtain it. For
what can we suppose the Good God to love more than Soul that hungers and
thirsts after t^ Righteousness: which it expresses (...) constant and hearty
cries for it u^^ Him; who has promised it shall (...) satisfied therewith?
Neither Religi^ nor common Reason will let us dou^^ that he does most willingly
commu^ cate himself to such thirsty Souls; a^ bestow this incomparable Blessing
u^ on every one that importunately see^ it at his hands. Let us but show hi^ in
our Prayers, that we are sincere L^ verse of him, and of all Goodness; the we
unfeignedly long to be better o^ selves, and to see all the World amended; that
to be pure and undefiled, (...) desire more than any Earthly pleasure that we
would have the peace of G^ rule in our hearts; and all our things d^ with
Charity; in short, that we wou^ be filled with all the fullness of God; b^ as
for all other things, we refer o^ selves wholly to him, and desire the^ only so
far as they may conduce to o^ being, or our doing good: and (...) may assure
our selves of his gracio^ acceptance; there being nothing i^ Heaven or Earth
more pleasing t^ God, than this holy temper of Mind and Spirit. Which therefore
he will cherish, promote, and increase (if our desires and endeavors after it
continue earnest and constant) till he has brought it to perfection. For, as
St. Romanus told his Persecutors, St. Chrysostom. Hom. 48. Tom. 1.
the Sacrifice wherein God delights, is a Soul that looks up unto him; his only
food, is the Salvation of those that believe.

CHAP. IX. The Three foregoing Chapters improved.
BEfore I proceed to that which I further intend, it may be fit to consider
these two things.

First, That we want no incitement or encouragement to the serious performance
of this Duty frequently.

Secondly, That we have a clear Direction, in what has been said, to make a
right judgment of our selv^^ whether we perform it as we oug^^ or no.

1. As to the former, Let us consid^^ how we will answer it to God, if (...) be
not mightily excited by what I ha^^ represented, to be frequent and ferv^^^ in
this Holy Duty; whereby we (...) receive such great Be^efits, such (...)
Comfort, and such high Honor (...) Preferment, as to be admitted into (...)
Divine Presence, and to have soci^^ with the Almighty Goodness; (...) alone can
fill our Souls, and (...) thoughts of whom do really fill th^^ and give them
satisfaction. Espec^^^ly, when we have any reason to (...) ^^lieve that he
loves us; which we ha^^ just cause to conclude, when we (...) that we heartily
love him: one pr^^ of which is, our loving to be m^^^ with him, and delighting
in his Company. From which we can never dep^^ unsatisfied; but, carrying away a
comfortable belief that he is with us, a^^ will prosper and bless us, may pass
(...) time delightfully here in this Wor^ and cheerfully receive all events
whi^^ at any time befall us, and rest perfectly contented in every issue of his
wise and good Providence: unto which we have commended our selves with a full
trust and confidence, that it will dispose all things to our advantage.

This the very Heathen saw in some measure, to be every man's interest as well
as Duty; which made Plato most judiciously resolve in Timaeo.
, that all men who have the least degree of Wisdom, and Sobriety call upon God
(...), etc. when they begin to move toward any undertaking, whether it be
great, or whether it be small. And to the same purpose is Porphyry his
observation ^ong after; Proclus L. 2. in Timaeum.
that all wise men, in all Nations, (...), etc. have been very diligent and
frequent in Prayers; as a thing of mighty importance.

Which we Christians better understand than they could do; and therefore should
think it most advisable upon all occasions to apply our selves to God, about
every thing both small and great: because we believe him to be the Governor
and Disposer of things; who can make them ins^^^ments of our grief and sorrow,
or our joy and comfort, as he thi^ good: and because (it appears fr^^ what has
been said on this subje^^ that so much of our life in this World Celestial and
Divine, as we spend this exercise of Prayer to God.

Unto which therefore let both h^^ and low, rich, and poor betake the^ selves;
as to the great Instrument their happiness, here and Eternally.

Let the poor pray that they may contented; and the rich, that the may be truly
thankful.

Let the low and the mean pray, (...) their Spirits may be raised and i^^bled,
enriched and well satisfied: (...) let the great and noble pray, that the minds
may be humbled and abase^ their hearts emptied of self-confide^^^ pride, and
contempt of others.

Let all pray that they may ackno^ledge God, and maintain a sense of h^^ in
their minds, and give up themsel^^ to his service, and beseech his Gr^^ and
favor suitable to their condition

Let those who are still bad, pray to be made good: and they that are good, to
be made better. And if they really and heartily desire, what they ask, they
will be more and more successful in their desires. If they be not, they may
conclude their hearts were not right with God; or they did not with becoming
earnestness and fervency apply themselves unto him (with a sense of their own
great unworthiness) for his Mercy and Grace toward them.

2. For hereby, as I said, we may take a measure of our selves, whether we
perform this Duty as we ought, or ^o. By which I have shown we may ^eap the
greatest Spiritual benefits and comforts: and therefore, if we find that our
minds are more composed and ^etled; if our hearts be more conten^ed; if we be
better satisfied in our condition; if we be more resolved in our duty, more
steadfast in well-doing, more patient in suffering; if we can more cheerfully
submit our selves to God, after we have commended our selves to him; if we be
more in love with all that is good, and more averse to every thing that is
evil: it is a sign that we have prayed aright, bee^ our Prayers have done us
good.

Let all that read this Treatise, (...) amine themselves upon this point. (...)
your minds made more spiritual^ your Prayers to God, the Father Spirits? Have
you a greater sense him remaining in your minds; a^^ more lively sense of the
other Wo^^ and all the concerns thereof? Are (...) raised above the petty
concerns this? Do you feel your Souls inla^^ in universal Love and Charity?
(...) you trust God more confidently? (...) you less disturbed with fears and
ca^^ and such like passions? Do (...) Prayers make you more just and m^^ful,
more compassionate and char^^ble, more candid and favorable others, more ready
to do good, and forgive, forward to contribute (...) you can to the comfort and
happi^ of every one?

Are your inordinate passions (...) Appetites not only curbed and rest^ned
thereby, but more subdued a mortified? Do your Prayers give yo^ taste of such
pleasure in God, and Holiness and Goodness, as makes (...) desire to be better
acquainted with them, and to prefer them above Riches and Honors, and all
manner of sensual pleasure? Is Pride, Ambition, and vain Glory, is Malice,
Hatred and Revenge, is Anger and Wrath, Covetousness and Care for the things of
this World, daily suppressed and deadned?

In short, Do we find that our thoughts are at rest in God and in his Love? Are
our hearts well-pleased and satisfied in his Favor and Grace cowards us? Is
this the highest boon we can beg of God, that we may be thoroughly and
universally good? And when we find our selves improving herein, and making any
advancement toward that perfection to which we aspire, is it the greatest
pleasure to us of all other? Are we abundantly satisfied in this thought, that
by God's Grace and Goodness to us, every thing shall do us good? Are our hearts
set upon rectifying all disorders in our Souls, and provided we can but feel an
amendment, are we quiet and in peace, and less concerned about external things,
which we cannot rectify according to our desires? Then it is certain our
Prayers have been truly ^^vout, and highly acceptable to G^^ as we may perceive
by this Ble^^ change in our hearts.

Which if we do not yet feel, le^^ not quite discourage us; but (...) quicken
our Spirits to more freq^^ and fervent Prayer: with greater ^^tention of mind,
and due consider^ on what it is, we ought most to de^ in our Prayers to God.
And if we not content our selves barely with many Prayers; but long and lab^^
till they have their Effect, in such (...) alteration, as I have mentioned, in
(...) hearts: they will at last procure (...) Blessing, if we be restless and
earnest our desires after it.

And therefore let us not slacken (...) endeavors herein; but setting (...)
hearts upon those Graces which we (...) of him, let us pray to him among oth^^
things, that he would enable us eve^ day to pray better, and to more p^^pose;
with stronger affections, (...) more eager desires: such as will w^^^ our
hearts into a more exact conformity with himself, and with our Blessed Savior;
and both make us m^^ pure, and more in love with purity of Mind and Body; more
Heavenly-minded, and entirely satisfied in our Heavenly Acquaintance with him
and with our Lord, and in the hope we have at last to come unto him, in that
happy place where there will be nothing left for us to desire; but all our
Prayers be turned into Praises of him, and Thanksgiving to him; who has
accomplished our wishes and fulfilled our Petitions, by bringing us into his
Celestial Palace, and there providing Mansions for us, wherein we ^^all
attend upon him for ever.

Thus I have given a brief Account, of the efficacy of Prayer to make us truly
good. Which is so evident a ^^uth, that St. Chrysostom ^^nfidently says,
(...). 1. (...).
When (...) see a man neglect this Duty of Prayer, or that ^^e has no love to
it, no fervor in it; it is manifest to me that he is owner of nothing worthy
or excellent: But when I behold a man unwearied in the service of God, and that
does not reckon constant attendance upon God in Prayer, among his greatest
losses, I make acc^^ he is a steadfast practiser of all ve^^ and the very Temple
of God. For it ^^^pels all vile and base thoughts o^^ the mind; it persuades us
to re^^rence God, and the dignity to w^^ he advances us; it teaches us to^pel
all the Enchantments of the (...) one; and raises our mind so hi^ that we look
down with despisal^ scorn upon pleasure: For this is (...) only Pride that
becomes the W^^shippers of Christ, not to submi^ the service of any filthiness;
b^^ preserve the freedom and liberty their souls in a pure Life. Whi^^ is
impossible to do without Pray^ For who can exercise any Virtue, (...) does not
come and fall down be^^ him frequently, who is the giv^ it? Who can so much as
desire (...) sober or just, that does not de^^ to converse with him, who re^^^
these, and far greater things from

A Discourse CONCERNING PRAYER, etc.
PART II.
CHAP. X. Of Public Prayer, the most necessary of all other.
IT is confessed by all, who have a sense of God the Author of their being,
that they were made to ^^rifie him. Which, in the Scripture ^^nguage, is
another word, for God's Worship and Service: consisting in those Praises,
Thanksgivings, and Petitions, which make up the body of our ^ayers. By the
first of which we acknowledge God to be what he is in himself, every way most
excellently ^^^fect: By the Second, We acknowle^^^ the benefits he has done
unto us: (...) by the third, We acknowledge^ continual dependence upon hi^
which, by humble Prayer, we co^^ to be so entire, that we cannot (...) without
him. From which I have monstrated, that thus to acknowle^ God and our
dependence on him a natural Duty; unto which we (...) bound as we are Men, and
much to as we are Christians; who are ma^^ know the great Love of God in (...)
Blessed Savior; by whom St. Pa^^ sires, Glory may be given unto H^^ the
Church, throughout all Ages, W^ without end. iii. Ephesians. ult.

I shall now proceed to show, tha^ ought not to content our selves (...) the
addresses we make unto God (...) cret, or at home: but look upon (...) selves
as bound to assemble and (...) together, for this end; that we (...) publicly
acknowledge him by (...) Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgiv^^^ Which I take to be
contained in t^^ words of St. Paul now mention wherein he expresses his desire
(...) Glory should be given to the Divine Majesty, in the Church, that is, in
the Assemblies of Christian people (as I shall show hereafter) and that not
only in his days, but in all succeeding times, as long as the Sun and Moon
in^^ure.

Unto this, we ought all to subscribe, and say, Amen, as the Apostle there
^oth; and accordingly join together, with one consent, thus to glorify God
(...) this Age, as Christians have done in all the preceding: that we may
trans^^it the same practice unto those who ^^me after us, in the future
Genera^^on.

Which is a Duty, I shall show as I ^^ss along, much more necessary, and ^ore
highly acceptable unto God, than ^^y private action of this kind, which ^e
perform to his Divine Majesty. unto whom we ought to resort in our ^ost secret
retirements, as our Savi^^r instructs us in those words, When ^ou prayest,
enter into thy Closet. But (...) this does not exclude, I have alrea^^ said,
the public Worship of God: (...) we ought not to think it is equal ^^ereunto;
but rather much inferior to that Divine Service, which we (...) form in our
solemn Assemblies.

I am sensible how cross this is many men's conceits, and how much contrary
opinion has prevailed, to great detriment of Religion: (...) therefore I shall
take the more pain make this good, that the public Se^ of God, ought, above
all other, (...) carefully attended: or, that we o^ not to satisfy our selves
with the dresses we make to God at home; make a Conscience also, and chiefly
join in Common Prayers and Supp^tions to His Majesty.

And if the advantages and com^^ of Prayer be so great as I have resented, I
doubt not to work in the^ fidering Reader, the greatest estee^ and affection
for, the public Pray. Whereby those advantages and ^^^forts may be reaped far
more pl^ fully, than by our private Devoti^^ alone. This I shall prove from^
heads of Arguments; under wh^^ shall comprize all that need be said on this
subject.

First, I shall make it apparent, considering the Nature of Prayer.

Secondly, By considering the Nature of Man;

Thirdly, The Nature of a Church; in which Christian Men are joined together,
to have fellowship with God, and one with another.

CHAP. XI. God is most honored by Public Prayers.
IN confidering the first of these, viz. the Nature of Prayer, we may either
look upon it as an act whereby we honor God; or as an act, whereby we seek our
own good. And either way the Public Prayers, which many offer to God with
joint consent, will appear to have the pre-eminence above all other.

First, I say, if we have respect to God in what we perform in this Holy Duty,
it is evident He is much more Honored by our public addresses to him, than he
can be by any thing we do in private: There indeed we may Worship him very
acceptably, and find the Blessed Effects of it, in God's gracious
Communications of himself unto us, suitable to our necessities: provided we do
not neglect his public Worship; which the private ought not to hinder, but
promote, because in truth, it is defective without the public; being only
Worship, but not Honor, Glory, or Service.

We read of all these four frequently in the Holy Scriptures, Worship, Honor,
Glory, and Service. The first of which may be performed in the most secret
place; but the other three have respect to what is done in Public. In our
mind, indeed, we Honor God, wheresoever we Worship him; if we have an high
esteem of his Excellencies: but we do him no Honor, unless others see by
outward Signs and Tokens the inward regard we have to Him; or we make the voice
of his praise to be heard among them. Then we give him the Honor due unto his
Name, when others are Witnesses of the esteem we have of his Divine
perfections, by such actions as naturally declare it; viz. by our solemn
Reverend acknowledgement of him, in his public Worship. Upon which if we do
not attend, men have reason to think we are void of all sense of him, and have
no respect to him.

For the Honor that is done to any one among men, is always a public thing;
as those words of Saul to Samuel testify 1 Samuel xv. 30. Honor me before the
Elders of my people, and before Israel. Thus Haman understood the word Honor,
when Abasuerus said What shall be done unto the man, whom the King delights
to Honor? For thinking with himself there was none in whom the King delighted
so much as himself, he answered, Let the Royal Apparel be brought forth, and
the Horse on which the King is wont to ride, etc. and set the man thereon, and
let it be proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King
delights to honor, vi. Esth. 6, 7, etc. For he knew, that unless something
was done in public, it would be no honor to him that received it. For who can
tell what is in another mind (in which Honor lies) without such external
signs, as are real testimonies of his inward thoughts, opinion, esteem, and
affection?

Thus the Angel instructs Tobias and his Son about the Worship of God: Bless
God, praise him, magnify him, bless him for the things he has done unto you,
in the sight of all that live. It is good to praise God and exalt his Name, and
honorably, (or with honor as the words are in the Greek) to show forth the
works of God. Therefore be not slack to praise him: it is good to keep close
the secrets of a King; but it is honor able to reveal, or to publish the works
of God. xii. Tob. 6, 7. Which is the sense of the Psalmist, cxlv. Psalm. 4, 5.
One Generation shall praise thy Works to another, and shall declare thy mighty
acts. I will speak of the glorious Honor of thy Majesty; and of thy wondrous
works.

And what has been said concerning honoring God, may, in like manner be
affirmed of giving him Glory; that it is done by public actions: it being
nothing else, but the publishing and spreading the fame of his Divine
Perfections, or of his wondrous Works. This we learn, as from many passages in
the Psalmist, so from our Blessed Savior himself. Who a little before his
departure from this World, lift up his eyes to Heaven, and said, Father, I have
glorified thee on Earth: that is, xvii. Joh. 4.
made him known to be what he is, published his whole Will and Pleasure, and
done whatsoever he commanded him. And in like manner told his Apostles, Herein
is my Father glorified, if ye bear much fruit: xv. Joh. 8.
in publishing, that is, his Holy Gospel, and bringing many to the belief of
it. Which is sufficient to show, that if we do not honor God by what we do in
private; much less do we glorify him, which wholly refers to proclaiming his
Name, and setting forth his Praise.

And from all this it follows that we cannot be said to do him any service, by
our private addresses to him: whereby we only serve our selves. For then we
serve him by our Worship, when we openly acknowledge him, and own him to be
what indeed he is, the great Creator, and most wise Governor of the World: who
therefore (we hereby testify and declare) ought in our opinion, to be
Worshipped by all men, with the same reverend regard which we pay unto him.

In brief, we do him Honor, when we openly declare with that Blessed company
we read of in the Revelation, iv. ult. that he is worthy to receive Glory, and
Honor, and Power: for thou, O Lord (say they) have created all things, and for
thy pleasure they are, and were created.

Then we also glorify him, when we declare his greatness, and goodness; and
speak of the Glory of his Kingdom, and talk of his power. Worshipping the Lord
in the beauty of Holiness, or in his glorious Sanctuary; as the Psalmist speaks
xxix. 2. cxlv. 6, 11, etc.

And hereby we serve him very much, and do something, which promotes his
Interest in the World: whereas all that we do in private, only promotes our own.

This I shall explain in three particulars.

I. The Public Worship of God does him great service, by maintaining a sense
of God in the World, and preserving the notion of him: which would be in danger
to be lost, if his Worship were only in secret, or among a few persons
privately; where no body knew what they did, but they themselves. Such close
and retired Devotion would have no power to uphold and keep up a Religious
regard, to the Almighty Creator of all things, among his Creatures. All that it
could do, must be upon those particular men themselves who secretly Worshipped
him; but upon others it could do nothing at all: for how could that preserve
the knowledge of God, which was not it self known? And how prone would men be
to conclude, that the being of God was only a dark fancy in some men's minds;
whose single opinion could have no Authority at all: but rather be despised; as
being ashamed to own it self, or having no public approbation? Which the
Public Worship of God gives it; and not only supports the belief of God's
being in men's minds, as the common sense of Mankind: but is apt to strike men
with some awe of him, when they see a great many, with humble Devotion and
reverence, with bended knees, and eyes lifted up to Heaven, paying their solemn
acknowledgments to His Majesty. Especially when they see him thus adored, by
men of the greatest place, and in the highest reputation for Wisdom and
Knowledge: who will have an heavy account to give unto the Supreme Lord and
Judge of all, if they do not contribute to the upholding his Authority among
Men; by frequenting the public Assemblies, and by their reverend deportment
there.

II. Whereby not only a sense of him in general is preserved; but a sense also
of his Greatness and Magnificence (as I may call it) is also bred and nourished
in men's minds. Who joining as one Man in the same service, are taught not only
that God is, but what he is; infinite in all perfections. For when a multitude
of people meet together, even as many as a spacious place can contain, to
Worship the same Being; it does most naturally signify and declare, that He is
exceeding great and glorious, whom so many own for their Lord; upon whom they
depend for all they have or can have: which is not signified, nor represented,
when only one or two, or a few pray to Him.

Therefore this is a reason, both that we should hold public Assemblies; and
that they should be as full, as is possible, and all, who belong to them,
should crowd unto them: to testify that they look upon him, who is there
Worshipped, to be the great King over all the Earth, as the Psalmist speaks,
xlvii. 2. For great numbers meeting together to do their Homage to him, it is
the most natural sign that can be contrived (which private Worship is not) that
we take him to be the Sovereign of the World, the Lord of all, above all; good
unto all, in one word, the common Parent of us all; to whom we resort for his
Blessing.

This is a demonstration that Public Worship is to be preferred before all
other, because most suitable to his most excellent Majesty; the best token of
the high thoughts we have of him; the utmost we are able to do, to testify how
great and how good we believe him to be, how able and willing to help us all,
as being equally related unto all.

And the more meet together for this end, the better this is declared; that he
cannot be honored and glorified enough: but we stand in need of the united
thoughts and affections of all Mankind, could they be assembled at once, to
magnify his incomparable perfections.

Nay, If all Creatures in Heaven and in Earth (as a very worthy Person
observes) could meet together in one Body, to Worship Him, at the same time and
in the same place, it would still be much better: because more suitable to His
Most Excellent Majesty; being still a better signification of his Infinite
perfections, and of his vast Dominions, which he governs with inconceiveable
Wisdom, and takes care of with a most provident goodness.

And though no one place here on Earth, is big enough to contain so much as one
Nation, or Country, or great City; yet we meeting in several places of the same
kind, and set apart for the same purpose to Worship God, at one and the same
time, it approaches something near unto this: all the people that are under one
and the same Government, hereby setting forth God's praise together, at the
very same moment, and in the like, though not the very same individual place;
where they uniformly acknowledge him with joint consent to be their common
Preserver and Benefactor. Which is far more agreeable to the perfection of his
most excellent Nature, than the single or private Applications that are made to
him: in which there is no sensible Declaration made what he is able to do for
all; but only what he is able to do for one, or for a few.

For which reason the Universal Church anciently observed, certain set hours of
Prayers; that all Christians throughout the World might at the same time join
together to glorify God: and some of them Origin (...). N. 33, 35.
were of opinion, that the Angelical Host, being acquainted with those hours,
took that time to join their Prayers and Praises with those of the Church. For
common reason led them to this thought, that those noble Creatures are highly
concerned to set forth, to the utmost of their Power, the glorious Honor of
God's Majesty: who as he is exalted above all Blessing and Praise, so has the
utmost pitch of Praise, to which Creatures can reach, given unto Him; when the
whole Family of Heaven and Earth combine together at once, to Worship Him.

Thence it was that the Psalms of David, though many of them particularly
concerned himself, were directed to the Chief Musician, for the Public
Service: as the way to make his Praise glorious. So the Psalmist speaks in
lxvi. Psalm; which begins with a desire that all Lands would make a joyful
noise unto God, and sing forth the honor of his Name, and make his Praise
glorious. That is, this was the way to do something suitable to the surpassing
Glory of his Majesty. For great (says he elsewhere) is the Lord, and therefore
greatly to be praised in the City of our God. xlviii Psalm. 1. He was not
greatly praised, sutably to his greatness; unless it were in that place, where
they all met together to praise him. No, the very private Blessings bestowed on
David, he would have publicly celebrated by all the people. And therefore does
not only say, I will bless the Lord, at all times, his praise shall be
continually in my mouth. My Soul shall make her boast of the Lord, etc. but
adds, O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. xxxiv.
Psalm. 1, 2, 3. And therefore much more were the common Blessings poured on them
all, to be thus acknowledged: and his praise sung in the Congregation of
Saints, as the words are cxlix. Psalm. 1. that is, by all the people of the
Jews. Nay, by all the people on the face of the Earth, as he speaks cxvii.
Psalm. O praise the Lord, all ye Nations; praise him all ye people, etc. Which
St. Paul shows, in the xv. Romans 11. was accomplished; when the Gentiles
submitted themselves to Christ, and became Members of his Church: therein to
praise him continually in their public Assemblies.

III. In which the sense of God will not only be preserved, suitable to his most
excellent greatness and goodness: but preserved pure and sincere; free from
those dangerous mixtures which may sooner creep into it, to corrupt and embase
it, if he should be Worshipped only in private. Where every man may frame
conceits of the Divine Majesty, agreeable to his own inclinations: and there is
no such way to prevent or correct them, as by attending upon the public
Offices of Religion. Into which Errors are not so easily admitted; because men
are naturally careful about that which they expose to the public view: not
being willing themselves to appear before others with such neglect, as they are
sometimes found in when they are alone. Or if there be any thing dangerous
admitted there, it will soon be discovered; and if not redressed, yet opposed
by good men: as all corruptions have been at their first appearance, though in
process of time they have prevailed.

They began in private; and from thence, by degrees adventurnd to appear in
public: where they would have appeared sooner, if the common sense of Mankind,
or of Christian people had not been against them.

There is nothing so sound, but in time it may be tainted: yet it is likely the
longer to remain sound, when there is a public care about it. And, besides,
when it is corrupted, it is not in so many things, as it would have been; had
the service of God been left only to every man's private management: for then
there may be as many false imaginations as there are men, and the whole Body of
Religion entirely depraved.

As it is an Act therefore whereby we do honor unto God, Prayer ought to be
public: that it may be seen we own him, and honor him; and that he may be
honored sutably to his transcendent greatness, and his Universal goodness.
Which require that he be universally acknowledged, as not merely a particular
Benefactor, but as the common Father of us all: whose Munificence is declared
to be the greater, when he has a number of Clients, and as many thankful
Servants; who come together upon the same business to proclaim his praise, and
show forth the wonderful works he has done for them.

In sum, As a great multitude of poor people constantly waiting at the Gates
of an house, speak him that dwells in it, to be far more liberal and bountiful,
than he would be believed, if few or none were seen expecting there: even so do
the Assemblies of pious Supplicants and devout Worshippers spread the fame of
God's inexhausted goodness far and near; of which there is no notice at all
when few or none tread in the Courts of his house, but content themselves with
a private attendance on him. This very much damps the sense of God; at least of
his infinite greatness and goodness: and as it represents him after a poor and
mean fashion; so indangers the propagation of such notions of him, as will
disparage and dishonor him.

For which reason, there is no serious Christian, who lays things to heart,
but must needs be grieved and sigh, to see such stately structures, as our
Cathedral Churches (which were built to contain a multitude of Worshippers, and
to represent the inconceivable greatness of him who is there Worshipped) so
very empty and void of people, in our daily Assemblies: as if we had forsaken
God, or had lost all sense of the honor that is due unto him. This is a thing
very much to be lamented, and speedily amended; lest God forsake us, and make
us a reproach, saying, as the Prophet speaks, that he has no delight in us:
because we have dishonored his Holy Name, and take no delight in his Divine
Service.

CHAP. XII. Public Prayers most advantageous unto us.
LET us now proceed to consider the second part of this Argument; which has
respect unto Prayer as an act, whereby we seek our own good: And it will appear
as plainly, that the public Prayers contribute most unto it. If we had no
other reason to assert this, but that now named, it were sufficient, that God
is hereby most honored. For whatsoever does him most Honor, will certainly do
us most good: according to his own Maxim; Him that honors me, I will
honor: but he that despises me, shall be highly esteemed, 1 Samuel ii. 30. But
we have other reasons also, to demonstrate that if we have respect to our
selves in our Prayers, and the good we derive thereby upon our Souls and
Bodies, and all our concerns; it leads us to the Public Prayers, as likely to
be most prevalent.

I. For first, We may pray there with much more confidence, than we can in
those private Petitions we put up to God: both because the things we ask
publicly are approved as needful and good in the judgment of all; and are also
sought for and desired by a common consent. And therefore we may be the more
assured, they are good for us; and being so, shall be bestowed upon us.

This is a thing of very great moment in Prayer, to have a confidence of being
heard. Which we cannot have, as St. John teaches us, unless we not only keep
God's Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight (1 John
iii. 22) but also ask according to his will, ver. 14. Now the matter of our
Prayers cannot be so well warranted to be according to God's will, when they
are only of private conception, as it is, when they have the stamp of public
Authority: and therefore in our single Devotions, we must needs fall short of
that degree of confidence, which we may have, when we join in Prayer with all
our Christian Brethren; who agree to ask the same thing, with a settled belief
that it is agreeable to his will.

Common Reason, and much more Christian Humility teaches us to suspect our own
private understanding: which cannot give us such assurance that a thing is
good, and wholesome, and necessary for us, as the Universal opinion of all our
Brethren about it, does work in us. Which is one advantage of joining in
public Prayers, wherein all agree: as being formed by the public judgment of
the Governors of the Church, and accepted by the generality of God's people,
and found by long observation, to contain nothing; but what is fit to be asked
of the Almighty Goodness.

II. There are some things indeed, which every one may be assured, are
undoubtedly according to God's will; and there are those who fancy that
Authorized Prayers may as well be put up to God at home, as in the Church. But
it is further to be considered, that the united force of a great many persons,
who join in a Petition, is far stronger and more prevalent, than the address of
a single Supplicant. All Mankind are of this opinion, in the Addresses they
make to Earthly Princes; from whom they hope more easily to obtain their suit,
when they come in a body, and present the petition of a multitude; than when
one o^ two make the same request unto them. An example of which, I remember St.
Chrysostom presses his people withal while it was fresh in their memories: to
make them understand the might^ power of that Prayer which is made (...), with
the common consent of all. About ten year ago, says he (...). 3.
, you know there were several person apprehended, who affected Empire, and
conspired to subve^ the present Government. One of whom, who was of great
eminence, being led forth to execution, with a Rope in his mouth, the whole
City ran into the Circus where the Emperor then was, and by their common cries
pacified his anger, and obtained a pardon for him, who deserved none. And if to
appease the wrath of an Earthly Prince, you all run forth with Wives and
Children to deprecate his displeasure; why do you not all concur to obtain
mercy of the King of Heaven, not for one (as in the case now named) or two, or
three, or an hundred, but for a World of Sinners? That God having a respect to
your common Prayers offered with joint consent, may release to them their
punishment, and absolve you from your sins?

Such Petitions the Ancient Christians thought so powerful, that they supposed
they could obtain any thing of God; by combining, as it were, together to seek
his favor, in the Common Prayers of the whole Assembly. Apolog. cap. 39.
Coimus ad De^um, ut quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus, etc. says
Tertullian; We come by Troops to make our Prayers to God; that being banded, as
it were, together, we may with a strong hand sue to him for his favor. Haec
vis Deo grata est: This violence is grateful unto God. It is a force which he
loves: and such pressing Supplicants are welcome to His Majesty.

To the same purpose St. Ambrose speaks in his Book of Repentance, as Mr.
Hooker has observed: Many of the meanest being gathered together unanimously,
become great. And it is impossible the Prayers of many should be contemned.
Which was a Notion so much rooted in the Jewish Nation, that they have an
opinion, the Prayers of the Congregation were always heard; Rel. Assembl. p.
173.
but not so the Prayers of particular persons in private; as Mr. Thorndike
observes out of Maimonides.

But we have no neeed of their opinion, or any ones else to justify this, that
there is the greatest force in the Public Prayers, of many joining their
desire in the same Petitions. For St. Paul, (who might presume to have as much
power with God, upon his own single interest in him, as any man whatsoever; yet
thought the Prayers of a great number of Christians, would do him more service.
And therefore frequently begs of the Churches, that they would assist him with
their earnest Prayers to God for him. Thus he writes to the Romans xv. 30, 31.
Now I beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the Love
of the Spirit (observe how passionately he desires this) That ye strive
together with me (it is such a kind of phrase, as that I mentioned of
Tertullians) in your Prayers to God for me: that I may be delivered from them
that do not believe in Judaea: and that my service, which I have for Jerusalem,
may be accepted of the Saints. And to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. i. 11. You also
helping together by Prayer for us, that for the gift bestowed upon us, by the
means of many persons, thanks may be given by many on our behalf. Where he
plainly acknowledges, it would be much to his advantage; if many did contribute
their help, both in Prayers, and in Thanksgivings on his behalf. Nay, he should
be able he thought to preac^ the Gospel better, and with more Authority as well
as freedom; if the common Prayers of Christian people were not wanting on his
behalf. iv. Colo^^ 2, 3, 4. Continue in Prayer, and watch in the same with
thanksgiving; With^^ praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am i^ bonds: that I may
make it manifest, as ought to speak. Behold how solicitou^ St. Paul was to have
the benefit of the Churches Common Prayer. And ho^ great a man was he?
Inferior to none but rather as St. Chrysosto^ describes him Hom. xxxiii. Tom.
1. de petitione filiorum Zebed.
, the (...) best of men; the teacher (...) the World; who speedily passed, as
if he had had Win^^ over Sea and Land; that chosen Vessel the Spokes-man of
Christ, to espouse S^^ to him; the Planter of Churches; the wise
Master Builder; the Preacher, (...) Racer, etc. who left monuments of (...)
virtue all the World over; who (...) snatched into the third Heaven, before
(...) Resurrection; who was taken up into Paradise; whom God made partaker of
i^ effable mysteries; who received a more abundant Grace; and labored more
abundantly than they all: This man begs for the Public Prayers; and could not
be satisfied, unless he was commended by them to the Grace of God. A sign, that
he looked upon them as most efficacious: for though God (as Grotius excellently
observes, upon xviii Matthew. 19. Oft-times grants to one man's Prayers, that
which he asks: yet to many who unanimously join in the same Petitions, He
gives, both more willingly, and more largely, and more speedily.

Which, by the way, is an unanswerable Reason, why the Public Prayers ought to
be in a known Tongue, that all may join in desiring the same thing: and by
their united desires prevail for the greater Blessing. Hear St. Chrysostom;
whose words upon the 2 Cor. viii. 24. Hom. xviii. in 2 Cor.
marvellously illustrate this, and all that I have said. Where the Apostle
exhorting them to show to those, whom he had sent, a proof of their love before
the Churches; he interprets it, in the public Assemblies. And then adds; and
this is no small matter: for great is the power of an Assembly, or of the
Churches. Behold What their Prayer can do: it loosed the bonds of Peter; and it
opened the mouth of Paul. They that are about to be ordained therefore beg the
Prayers of the Congregation; in like manner for those who are possessed, and
for those that are in penance, Prayers are made by the whole Church; and not by
the Priest only. They all say one and the same Prayer; a Prayer full of
compassion. For in this the people are concerned as well as the Priest; they
praying for him, as he for them. He says, the Lord be with you; and they
answer, and with thy Spirit. And what wonder is it, if they pray with the
Priest; when they send up the Holy Hymns of the Church, in common with the
Cherubims, and the Powers above?

This that good Father repeats very often, and I wish it were imprinted in all
our minds, and did sink down into all our hearts, (...), Hom. iii. ad pop.
Antioch.
etc. The Common Prayer of the Church can do much; when we offer up those
Prayers with an afflicted Soul, and with a broken and contrite heart. L. viii.
p. 424. Edit. Cant.
The same Origin tells Celsus, in words worthy to be remembered. If when two of
us on Earth agree together to ask any thing, Matthew. xviii. 19.
it is granted by the Father of the just, who is in Heaven (for God delights in
the symphony and agreement of rational Creatures, and is displeased with their
discord and disagreement) what might we not expect, if not only, as now, a very
few, but the whole Roman Empire agreed together to sue for the Divine favor?
They might pray to him that said heretofore to the Hebrews, when the Egyptians
pursued them, THE LORD SHALL FIGHT FOR YOU, AND YE SHALL HOLD YOUR PEACE (Exodus
xiv. 14.) And praying most unanimously, obtain greater Victories than Moses
then did by his Prayer to God for help.

III. But further we are to consider, how much our Zeal and Devotion is
naturally inflamed, by Public Assemblies: which is a thing of great power in
Prayer. For it is that which the Apostle calls praying in the Spirit, and
praying in the Holy Ghost: with fervent, that is, and inflamed desires; such as
the Holy Ghost excites, when it is pleased to breath upon our souls.

Now this, as I said, is even naturally stirred up, by the fervor of those
Devout Worshippers, with whom we join our Petitions. For who can see a great
many good people fall down together, and kneel before the Lord their Maker,
with hands and eyes lifted up to Heaven, imploring his Grace and Mercy (which
are things supposed in Christian Assemblies) and not be thereby put in mind,
that it is a matter of great concernment, about which they are so earnest? Nay,
be mightily moved to prostrate himself in like manner, to Worship the great
Lord of all, and to make him the same acknowedgments; which are as much due
from him as from any body else in the World?

Were a man never so dull, or backward to Religious Worship, it is impossible
but he should be in some measure affected; when he comes among a multitude
whose reverend and ferious behavior in the Divine service, testifies the
inward respect they have in their minds, unto that Almighty Being whom they so
devoutly Worship. It would certainly not only put him in mind of his Duty; but
incline him, with the like signs of humble and hearty Devotion, to cast down
himself, in his Blessed Presence.

And the greater signs of ardency of desire, and warmth of affection, there
appears in those with whom we are assembled, the more feeling we shall
naturally have of it our selves: it being impossible to be quite cold by the
fire side; and to have no touch of Zeal, when we are in the company of those,
who manifest a vigorous flame of Divine Love in their hearts.

Besides, It is a comfortable sight barely to behold a great company gathered
together, to own one and the same Father; who therefore cannot but look upon
one another as Brethren. This is St. Hierome's observation, in iv. Galat.
Major laetitiaex mutuo conspectu oritur, the greater joy arises in every
heart, by the very mutual sight of each other. For so it is when Friends meet
together; they rejoice to see the Faces one of another; they bless the occasion
that brought them into one and the same place: and the more there are of them,
the greater rejoicing is there among them.

Now joy inlarges the heart, and dilates our Spirits; it makes them spread so
much, that sometime we can scarce contain them, but are transported beyond our
selves. As on the contrary, sorrow and sadness contracts and shrinks up the
Spirits; flats and deadens them so much, that we have scarce any life left in
us. Upon which account the Spiritual joy and gladness I spoke of, arising from
the sight of so many Christian Neighbors and Friends, is a very great help to
us in our Devotion; making us to pour out our Souls, as the Psalmist speaks,
with the more enlarged desire. It is but a dull and melancholy thing to be
alone; in comparison with the cheerfulness, which a great company, of the same
mind and Spirit, naturally excite in each others Breasts.

By which we may understand also the advantage of full Assemblies, in our
Churches: which look more lovely, and therefore quicken more than a thin,
scattered Congregation. Which is a damp to Christian Spirits; because it is a
very sad sight to behold the Divine Service neglected: as it is, where there
are but few that come together, to do God honor.

The sum of this Argument is, That as no man is so warm alone, as in a crowd:
So our Spiritual fervor is more quickened in an Assembly of pious Worshippers,
than it is apt to be, when we are retired by our selves. Where we ought indeed
to awaken our Thoughts, and stir up our affections; but it must be acknowledged
that we want then a great help and spurr thereunto; which is the Holy Zeal of
those who join with us in the same Petitions, in the Public Assemblies:
especially the seriousness, the gravity, and earnestness of him, who ministers
the service of God there: Which together with the Authority of his Office, the
Sacredness and Majestickness sometime of the place, set apart entirely for such
services, is apt to raise in us more ardent Devotion, than we can easily raise
in our selves alone.

IV. But if we had the same advantages of this kind when we are alone (which we
have not) yet there is one more, which wholly arises from our frequenting the
Public Assemblies. And that is the good example we give to others; who may be
hereby moved to become Religious.

What we do alone, no body sees; nor is it intended that they should: but
rather that it should be kept secret. And therefore it can be no inducement
unto others to do their Duty; but is the bare discharge of our own. For which
cause it is the less valuable, because it does less good: for that is the best
thing, which does the most universal good. By which measure, if we judge of
Prayer, we must prefer the public; whereby others are put in mind of their
Duty; nay attracted to it by our example: whereas we our selves alone are
profited by what we do alone.

It may be said indeed that we do good to others by praying for them. But this
is a very small good in comparison; because it is more than they know: and
while we neglect the public service, we do them more mischief, than we can be
supposed to do them good, by our private Prayers. For we bring Religion into
contempt, when it has few or none that attend the public Offices of it: and
we let them want, as I said, the force of Example, to awaken them out of that
careless neglect of God, which is too common in the World.

This is an Argument that should prevail very much with all good minds, both to
frequent the Public Service of God, and to behave themselves with an awful
reverence therein. Which will have some effect upon the looser sort; who now
are hardened in their impiety, by the emptiness of our Churches at the time of
solemn Worship, or by the negligence of their behavior, who vouchsafe to
attend upon it. A multitude swayes very much either way; to incline men to be
good, as well as to be bad. It is hard to resist numerous examples. They are
able to bring Devotion, as well as other things in fashion.

But if our example have not this effect on others, we have notwithstanding
done the best we could to advance the service of God in the World: which will
be a great comfort to us at present, and turn to our good account hereafter. We
have let our light shine before men; we have testified openly to the truth of
Religion; we have expressed our affection to it, and reproved the impiety of
those who regard not God: Yea, we put a stop to the progress of this impiety;
we hinder its growth and increase, by wresting a great Argument out of their
hands against Religion: which is, that there are few who are Religious.

If that then be good for us, whereby we do the most good to others, which is
an undoubted truth, we ought to be most in love with the public Prayers. That
we may invite others, by our constant attendance on them, to join with us in
giving God the Honor that is due unto him, and free our selves from the guilt
of other men's sins, which we draw upon our selves, when by giving little or no
public sign of our Devotion, we tempt them to become or continue irreligious.
For, as by performing our Duty alone by our selves, we do only ourselves good;
but profit not others; who receive great benefit by our Public Devotion: so,
if we should at any time neglect our Duty alone, we thereby hurt only our
selves; but by neglecting the Public Service of God, we hurt all that are near
us by our pernicious Example: tempting them to think that Religion is only a
private fancy, which some men have taken up, without any reason: for were it a
reality, all men would be concerned to maintain and uphold it, the best they
can, in the World.

Thus I have given an Account of the first Argument for the necessity of
Public Prayers; taken from the Nature of Prayer it self: both as it respects
God, and our selves. By which it appears, that all those motives which I used
in the first part of this Book to persuade us to Prayer in general; are most
efficacious to draw us to the Public Worship of God. There being no greater
Honor, than to be known to be the Servants of the most High: by attending upon
whose Public Service our minds are enlarged, unto great and worthy thoughts of
God; and our affections stirred up to the highest admiration of him, and love
to him, who provides for so many as there wait upon him, nay, dispenses his
Blessings to the whole Universe, which we commend unto him. Whereby our hope
and confidence in him is also exceedingly advanced, though we had never such
great things to ask of him: having the united force also of a great many
Petitioners to strengthen it; who join together to solicit his favor. Which
there likewise we are naturally inclined to seek in the most serious, and the
most composed manner; it being a shame not to frame our selves, when we appear
publicly upon such a weighty business; unto the most reverend deportment:
which I have shown, is of it self alone a singular benefit we receive by Prayer
to God. The sense of whom, is the guide of our Life, and the stay of our heart:
which is both upheld, and raised to the highest degree by his Public Worship.
Whereby, if we do not prevail for all those, whose welfare and happiness we
seek; we maintain and increase notwithstanding in our own minds a lively sense,
an high esteem of those Graces and Blessings, which we earnestly desire and ask
for all Mankind. For whose good as we ought to be concerned; so we are made
more sensible of it, more affected with it, and solicitous for it by the
public Service of God, than we are inclined to be in our private Devotions.
This will appear in the management of the second general argument, propounded
in the beginning of this Discourse: for which I design the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. Public Prayers most suitable to the Nature of Man.
I Proceed now to consider the Nature of Man, as I have done the Nature of
Prayer; from whence we shall more fully learn the necessity of God's Public
service; and that it is to be preferred before all other.

Prayer being a natural Duty (as I have proved in the beginning) arising from
the necessity of our own being, which is precarious and dependent on another;
who ought therefore to be continually acknowledged by us: it will easily appear
from thence, that it ought to be public, and not only alone by our selves;
because Nature has formed us to society, without which we cannot be preserved
in safety. From whence innumerable Arguments may be deduced for our public
Assembling together, constantly to Worship that Almighty Being: who has thus,
by the very Laws of our Creation, disposed us to join together for our common
preservation. For,

I. We cannot but see, at the very first mention of this, that we being made to
have society one with another, should above all things, have society in Prayer
to him that made us; and continually maintains and preserves us.

For what can be more absurd than to have society in the lowect actions of
humane Life; and not in the highest: which are of principal concern to us, for
our conservation? It is such an absurdity, as if we should join together to
save one another houses: but not to save one another lives. And yet there is
far less difference between a building of Wood or Stone, and this excellent
structure of our Body; than there is between our worldly affairs, and those of
our immortal Souls. Which teach us, at the first thought of such things, that
if we were made to live together in society, and not alone; it is a just reason
that God should be acknowledged by us all together, who is the founder of
society: and as we transact all our common concerns together, by meeting in a
Body; so the business of Religion especially (which is the cement of Society,
and the Fountain of all Justice and Charity) should be thus transacted, and we
should with a common consent meet together in one place, to adore and
acknowledge Him: which is the greatest concern we have in this World, even for
this reason; because it supports, as you have heard, a sense of him, without
which all society will be dissolved.

II. And there is the greater reason for this, because men are the only
Creatures here, that are endued with a sense of God and of Religion: and
therefore should above all things join in that, and study to promote it, which
is most proper to them, and distinguishes them more than any thing else, from
the Brutes. In whom we see some faint imitation of Reason and Discourse, but
not the least sign of Religion. Which may well be looked upon as the
discriminating property in man; and make us think that he may be better
defined, a Religious, than a Rational Creature. This, at least, should be
joined with the other, and he defined; a rational Religious Creature. For all
definitions are taken from that, which most peculiarly belongs to every Being:
and there is nothing so peculiar to us, as a sense of Religion. Which if we do
not exercise together, we do not act like men; who in all reason, should join
to maintain and promote that which is most proper to them ( viz. Religion) more
than any thing else in the World.

For which end God has given to us alone the gift of Speech, which no other
Creatures have besides our selves; that we should proclaim his Praises, and
make it known that we honor him, and excite one another to the love of him,
the Supreme Being. Who needs no words to tell him our thoughts; but is
acquainted with the very beginning of them, before they are formed: and
therefore has bestowed upon us the faculty of speaking, that we may tell our
thoughts unto others, and make them understand that we are Religiously affected
toward him. Who, if he had intended Religion should be only a private
business, might have made us without Tongues, because he needs no Language to
acquaint him with our desires; but hears our very thoughts, and perceives the
most inward motions of our Souls. Which we have power to express in words, not
that he may understand us; but for the benefit of others, that they may
understand our sense, and know that we are lovers of God, and be stirred up by
our Prayers, and Praises, and Thanksgivings, to the same Devotion toward him.
Whence David calls his Tongue his glory (lvii. Psalm. 8.) because therewith he
glorified God: and, as it there follows, ver. 9. Praised God among the people,
and sung unto him among the Nations

This St Paul supposes, when he says Prayers ought not to be made in an
unknown Tongue, because if they were, he that was not learned in that Tongue,
would not be able to say Amen, 1 Corinthians. xiv. 16. which word, Amen, was then
it seems pronounced, at the end of every Prayer, by the whole company: for
whom, the public Minister spoke to God, and was as it were, their mouth, in
what he said. But though it was thus ordered to avoid confusion, and that it
might be distinctly known by every body, what was said in the Church (which had
been impossible, if they had all spoken together) yet they thought themselves
bound to signify and declare that he spoke their sense; by saying, Amen, at
the conclusion of the Prayer he made. Which was as much in effect, as if they
had said every word of it themselves: for it was as much as to say, they
approved of, and consented to the whole. And this every one did so audibly;
that a great multitude being gathered together in a Church, it imitated the
voice of Thunder; as St. Hierom tells us.

And, verily, it is a great fault that we do not all thus join in the Public
Prayers at this day; not only by our bodily presence, but with our tongues:
which ought to express our consent to those Petitions and Thanksgivings, which
are offered up to God in the name of us all.

III. And there is a further reason for common Prayer; be^^^^ the Blessings we
enjoy in common together, are far greater than those we enjoy singly and
distinct one from another. We all breath in one common Air; and enjoy the
comfort of one common Light: The Heavens drop their fatness in common upon
every man's Fields and Pastures: And, which is more than all the rest, the great
Blessings of order and Government, (the benefits of which we all enjoy; by
being knit in the same Society, under the same Governor) make it high^
reasonable, that we should join or selves together, as one man, to acknowledge
these common Blessings which make us all happy. For being made for society, and
enjoying innumerable benefits thereby (which this is not a place to mention
particularly we have lost all sense of what we are and what we have, if we do
not thi^^ our selves bound to give God than^ for them in one Body; begging
(...) pardon for their abuse, and beseeching their continuance.

I name not now the greatest Blesing of all, which is the Redemption^ mankind
by Jesus Christ, (in whi^^ not a few particular persons, but a^^ in general are
concerned, it being the common Salvation, as St. Jude calls (...) because it
belongs to the next head where we shall consider mankind, a^ Church, bound to
bless God above a things for his Grace in the Lord Jes^

Let us look at present only to the visible Heavens, which incircle us a^^ and
proclaim aloud, as the Psal^^ speaks, the Glory of God throughout the World.
Behold the Sun, that great Minister of God, which preaches, as I may say, every
where; and publishes, not to one place or Country, but to the whole Earth the
Praises of the Lord. It is not a private Whisper, but a public Cry, which the
Heavenly Bodies make: there is neither Speech nor Language, but their voices
are heard among them. Their sound is gone out into all Lands, and their words
into the ends of the World: which tell us what we should do; and call upon us
to make the voice of his Praise to be heard, as much and as far as we are able;
who has appointed such illustrious Creatures, to do us perpetual service.

Which is the meaning of the Holy Pslamist, when he calls upon all Creatures in
Heaven and in Earth, both visible and invisible, to praise the Lord. Psalm.
cxlviii. That is, he excites himself and others, to give God Thanks for them;
and to acknowledge the Praises which they continually give him: His most
Glorious perfections, that is, which they declare and set forth, in the most
public manner. For they speak to all, as much as they do to one, the most
excellent, immense greatness, and goodness of the Lord; who in Wisdom also has
made them all: and this we ought as publicly to declare; it being all that we
can do for the Honor of his Name, but only live accordingly: which this also
teaches us, and makes absolutely necessary, that we may eternally praise him.

There is an excellent Discourse (...) remember, in St. Chrysostom to this
purpose, in his ix. Homily upon Genesis: where, showing how God has preferred
Mankind above all other Creatures, he concludes with this exhortation. Let us
therefore give him Thanks for all these benefits, he has heaped on us. This is
no grievous, no burdensome thing which he expects from us: for what trouble is
there in testifying our sense of his loving kindness, in confessing out
obligations, in returning our thankful acknowledgments for them (...) Which He,
who is all-sufficient i^ himself stands in no need of; but we ought to learn
thereby to love the Author of all good, and not to be ungrateful: but study to
live suitable to such a careful Providence over us.

Let us not, I beseech you, be negligent in this; but think with our selves
continually, both what the common benefits are we all enjoy, and the private
ones which he has conferred upon any of us: both those which are manifest and
confessed by all; and those which are concealed perhaps, and proper to our
selves alone. And by all let us excite our selves to give him Thanks; which is
the greatest Sacrifice, the most perfect Oblation: Especially when we all join
together (I may add) to confess his Goodness, and declare the Wonders he does
for the Children of Men.

And whosoever he is, that has these things continually in mind, and reflects
upon his own meanness, as well as the immenseness of the Divine Mercy; how he
governs us, and dispenses his Blessings to us, not regarding what our sins
deserve, but what is becoming his Divine Goodness: it is impossible, but he
should humble himself before God, and have a broken and contrite heart. This
takes down all pride; this lays all arrogance low; this teaches us to be
modest, and behave our selves with all humility of mind; contemning the Glory
of this present Life, and designing the future good of that Life which is
immortal. Thus he.

And we may understand how much more grateful it is to the Divine Majesty, to
have all this done in public than only alone by our selves; by that passage
among others in the Psalmist Psalm. xxii. 22. I will declare thy Na^^ among my
Brethren; in the midst of the Congregation will I praise thee. Which the
Apostle applies to our Lord Christ, and interprets the words as if they were
spoken by him Heb. ii. 12. where he proves that Christ is not ashamed to call
us Brethren, saying; (...) will declare thy Name unto my Brethren in the midst
of the Church will I sing praise unto thee. Behold here, how (...) makes this
the voice of Christ himself: who taught us by his own example how acceptable it
will be to God the Father, and how profitable to ou^ selves to praise the Name
of the Lord with the rest of our Brethren, in the Public Assemblies; and
proclaim both the benefits we have received from him, and the Duty which we owe
unto him.

IV. Unto which that we may be the more strongly excited, let us consider
further, that the Blessings we most want, as we are sociable Creatures, being
public Blessings; they ought, in all reason, to be sought in our Common
Prayers, as most generally needful for us all. For so you may observe that the
Apostle directing the Service of the Church, in 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2. requires in
the very first place, That Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, and
Thanksgivings be made for all Men, for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and
Honesty. Nothing he knew was of greater concernment to the good of the World,
than to have Governors, whom he elsewhere calls the Ministers of God,
preserved in their just Authority: especially to be blessed with good
Governors, who might be conservators of Peace and Quietness, punishers of Vice
and Wickedness, a terror to evil doers, and incouragers of those that do well.
And therefore he ordains that this great thing should be asked of God, by
Public Prayers: because it was of universal concernment, and of highest moment
to every man's happiness; which ought to be preferred before any particular
respects, unto which their Petitions might be directed.

Agreeable to this I find in Josephus; that the Ancient Jews looked upon it as
their Duty, when they offered Sacrifice unto God, to pray in the first place,
L. 2. contr. Apionem.
(...), for the common safety, or Salvation: And then (...), for their own
private concerns. For we are born, says he, (...), for communion and society
one with another: and therefore he who prefers the common concerns before his
own private advantage, (...), must needs be, above all others, very acceptable,
and dear to God. This passage among others is cited by Eusebius, and we may add
to it, L. viii. de praepar. Evang. Sect. 8.
what the Hebrew Doctors now tell us in their Books; that the last thing, the
High Priest prayed for on the great day of Expiation, just before he came out
of the Holy Place, was this: That God would not hear the Prayers of those, P.
Fagius in Levit. xvi. 17.
who were in a Journey: that is, Prayers made for men's own private benefit,
against the Public Interest; such as the Prayers of those in a Journey are
wont to be, who desire fair Weather, when all the Country prays for Rain.

But howsoever this was; it is plain by the Apostles words, that he would have
those things principally asked of God, which related to the community: which
ought therefore to be sought by their common Prayers and Supplications. And so
they were Anciently in the Christian Church, as we find in Tertullian; (to name
no other Author) who describing the Christian Assemblies, says, We pray there
for the Emperors, and for their Ministers, and for Powers, and for the State of
the World, for the quiet of things, Apolog. Cap. 39.
and for the delay of the end of the World. Which he had declared before more
largely, We pray to the Eternal God, for the health and safety of the Emperors,
to the true God, the living God, who made them Emperors, and whom it concerns
the Emperors, above all things, to have propitious to them, etc. To him we
look up, Ib. Cap. 30.
and all of us pray always for them, that they may have a long Life, a secure
Empire, a safe Family, a valiant Army, a faithful Senate, etc.

This was so known a practice, and it was so firmly believed in those days,
that the Peace and Safety, the Honor, and Prosperity of Kings and Kingdoms,
depended very much upon the due performance of this daily Service; that there
are examples of Heathen Princes, who had so much Faith, as to desire to have
their safety commended unto God in the Prayers of the Church. Which were
instituted with such a peculiar respect, (it appears by St. Paul) to the
welfare of Princes, the support of their Government, and the prosperity of
their people; that they cannot be neglected, without indangering the good
estate of the World. And may possibly be one reason, why the World has been so
full of disorder and confusion; because Christian people have not applied
themselves earnestly enough, in daily Public Prayers (which are generally
disregarded) to beseech God for the public good and tranquillity, but are
wholly bent to the fulfilling of their own private desires.

V. And as we ought thus to join in Prayer, that we may recommend our common
concerns, to the care of Almighty Wisdom and Goodness; so likewise, that we
may, by the common Offices of Religion, keep our selves the closer knit
together, in firm Love and Unity; in the same society. For nothing combines men
so strongly, as Religion: and the purer it is, the greater effect it has for
the stay and support of the Commonwealth. Which has made all Lawgivers (as
Aristotle observes in his Politics) to exercise their first care about
Religion: because it is that which qualifies all sorts of men to be serviceable
to the Public; making Governors (as Mr. Hooker I think speaks) apter to rule
with Conscience; and Inferiors, for Conscience sake, willingly to obey their
Governors.

It was an admirable saying of Plutarch, in his Discourse against an Epicurean;
Advers. Coloten.
That a City may as well be built in the Air, without any Earth to stand upon;
as a Commonwealth or Kingdom be either constituted or conserved, without the
support of Religion. Take this away, and you take away the Foundation on which
the Kingdom is laid: and it can neither be erected, or being erected cannot
stand, when this is gone. Now as Religion is necessary to uphold States and
Kingdoms, so the Public exercise of it, is as necessary to uphold Religion.
Let the Public Assemblies cease, and Religion will not long stand. But we
shall soon lose it, if we do not meet together to join in the common Offices of
it: and we shall soon be tempted to have the less concern for one another
safety and happiness, when we are not tied together by the bond of one and the
same Religion. In which when we heartily join to serve God, it makes us look
upon one another as Brethren; dear to the same God and Father of us all, and
therefore dear to one another.

This the Psalmist represents, when he cries out in the beginning of cxxxiii.
Psalm. Behold, how good, and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together
in unity. He would have all the Israelites to look upon themselves as Brethren;
being all descended from one and the same stock, and having also the same God
for their Father. And then they dwelt together in unity, not merely when they
lived lovingly, and unanimously pursued the same common Interest, for the
common good; but then especially when they all met in one and the same place,
to Worship God together, with one heart, and with one Soul: which linkt them
closer than any other bond could do, and provided best for their common
security. For it appears by what follows, he chiefly aims at this assembling
themselves unanimously together; as the words are in the Hebrew, O how good and
pleasant is it, for Brethren to dwell, even together: i. e. to meet all at
God's house, as common to them all. Nothing more delightful, than to behold
such a general Assembly: which he illustrates by two similitudes. First, Of the
precious Ointment which ran down from the Head of the High Priest, to the very
skirt of his Garment: And then by the Dew of Heaven, which made the Hill of
Hermon, and the Mountain of Zion (nigh to which the Temple stood) exceeding
fruitful. And then in conclusion he adds the reason, why this was so joyful a
sight, and so beneficial: for there the Lord commanded the Blessing, even Life
for ever more. He pours down his Blessings of all sorts, (as the Heavens do the
Dew, and as the precious Ointment ran down from Aaron's head) upon a people
that are thus unanimously joined together, in the Worship and Service of God:
who only can make them happy (that is meant by Life) and can make them so for
evermore

In order to which, He took care his Divine Service should be perpetually
performed in the Temple; whither they were to resort, to do their Duty to him,
and to implore his Grace and Favor toward them. And I cannot think it fell
out by chance, that next to the Psalm now mentioned, is immediately placed a
solemn Exhortation (in the cxxxiv. Ps.) unto the Ministers of God, to attend
constantly upon their Duty in the Sanctuary; there to praise the Lord, who made
Heaven and Earth: and to give a Blessing to his people, and pray for their
prosperity, out of Sion, as that Psalm concludes.

I end this with the observation of a wise man; that we being Members of a
public Body, ought to serve it the best we can. Now all the Service we do, as
Members of it, is public Service: which is far more worthy, than what we act
for our selves privately and distinctly; as much as a whole Society exceeds the
worth of any one Man in it. And what service is there we can do it, like to
that, of maintaining God's true Religion; by serious attendance, with due care
and frequency, upon the public Offices thereof. whereby we shall exceedingly
promote the common good of all; and maintain Society it self: by which we are
kept and preserved in safety and prosperity.

For by doing public honor to God, we shall draw down public Blessings upon
our selves. God himself will bless us, as the Psalmist speaks, He will bless
them that fear the Lord, both small and great. The Lord shall increase you more
and more, you and your Children: Ye are the Blessed of the Lord, that made
Heaven and Earth CXV. Psalm. 13, 14, 15. Observe the Title he gives himself, The
Lord that made Heaven and Earth; and you will not think it suitable to his
super-excellent and transcendent Majesty, to have his Worship confined to your
Closets, or to your private Houses; but make it as public as the Heaven and
the Earth are, which are exposed to the view of all. In that spacious Temple of
his (as the Ancients were wont to call the World, of which the Temple at
Jerusalem was an imitation) he is to be magnified, and praised as openly, and
with as great multitudes, as can possibly meet together: that we may not seem
to Worship some little, petty Deity, but the Universal Lord of all.

Thus I am fallen upon the Argument wherewith I begun, which cannot be too often
pressed: and has a close connection with this other, which I have now handled.
For he having formed us to live together in Society, and to keep closely United
in one Body, for our common safety and preservation; teaches us thereby to own
Him as the common Parent of us all: and to contrive the best ways we can,
whereby we may acknowledge him so to be. And there is no way like this, of
meeting together in the greatest multitude that can assemble, to magnify and
praise Him with one voice for his Goodness; and declaring the Wonders he does
for the Children of Men, commend our selves and all our concerns, unto his most
powerful protection. By whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice: and
therefore he ought to be sought for their Guidance and Direction, Protection
and Safety; and to be acknowledged, as it is in the Collect for our King, to be
the High and Mighty, King of kings, Lord of lords, the only Ruler of Princes;
who from his Throne beholds all that dwell on the Earth. And they are all (as
the Prophet most admirably expresses it) as Nothing, less than Nothing and
Vanity; in comparison with his incomprehensible Greatness: Who, as that great
King Nebuchadnezzar publicly acknowledged, and desired all Nations and
Kingdoms should take notice of it, is, the High God whose Kingdom is an
Everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion is from Generation to Generation.

So he begins the Proclamation he caused to be made, of his humble Devotion to
the Divine Majesty: by whom he had been abased, as low as the Beasts of the
Earth Dan. iv. 2, 3. After which he tells all the World, I Blessed the Most
High, and I Praised and Honored Him that lives for ever, whose Dominion is an
Everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom is from Generation to Generation. And all
the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as Nothing: and he does according to
his Will, in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth: and
none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou? ver. 34, 35. And then
concludes his Declaration in this manner; Now I Nebuchadnezzar Praise, and
Extol, and Honor the King of Heaven: all whose works are Truth, and his ways
Judgment; and those that walk in Pride, he is able to abase.

A Voice worthy of a King; and worthy to be published throughout all the World:
and therefore he made the Declaration, wherein it was contained, to be sent to
all People, Nations, and Languages, that dwelt on all the Earth, ver. 1. that
is, throughout all his wide Empire; to all the parts of the Earth where his
Authority reached, and his words would be reverenced; that they might magnify
this great King of Heaven and Earth, together with him.

That was the end of it; and it is one of the most public pieces of Devotition
that we ever read was performed by any man; arising out of this sense, with
which he was possessed in those Ancient times, that God is to be Honored,
Blessed, and Extolled publicly, among, and by all People: to whom he thought
himself bound to show, the Signs and the Wonders, which the most High God had
wrought toward him. And, How great, (says he) are his Signs, and how mighty
are his Wonders? ver. 3. He was not able to tell; but made the best, and the
most ample Declaration of them, that he could; in this Imperial Decree, which
he caused to be proclaimed every where.

By all which we may easily be convinced, in what gross Errors two sorts of
people live.

First, They who imagine, that God may be served as well at home, as at the
Church. Such men neither understand the Nature of God, nor the Nature of
Religion, nor their own Nature: which teach them quite otherwise. And instruct
them also to frequent the Public Assemblies, where they have opportunity so to
do.

Secondly, For that is another palpable Error, to think that it is sufficient
if we come on the Lord's Day to testify that we do not forget God: though all
the Week beside, we take no notice of him; but constantly neglect his Public
Service, when we are invited to it, and have leisure to attend it. We forget
the many public, common Blessings we daily need, and daily receive; which
ought to be as publicly every day implored and acknowledged, in our Common
Prayers.

Let the foregoing considerations be duly pondered, and they will persuade you,
both out of Love to God's Honor, and out of love to your own good, to join, as
often as you can, your Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings, with the whole
Church of God: and to make our Assemblies as full as you can, both on the
Lord's Day, and every Day of the Week. Whereby you would declare your constant
dependence on God, and acknowledge how he daily (...) you with his Benefits;
and draw (...) Public Blessings, in abundance, upon the Church and Kingdom
where you live; and do credit to our Holy Religion (which alas, now looks in
many places as if it were despised) and not only do credit to it, but both help
to support it, and also promote and propagate it: to the Honor and Praise of
the Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth, unto whom be Glory in the Church by
Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without end. Amen.

CHAP. XIV. The Nature of a Church requires there should be Public Prayers.
I Proceed now to the Third Head of Arguments, whereby a Christian should be
most of all moved to his Duty: and that is, to consider the Nature of the
Church; which both requires Public Assemblies, and makes the Service performed
in them far more acceptable than Private Prayers can be.

And here let it be considered in general, that the very word we translate
Church, in the Holy Scriptures, signifies in the Greek Language, an Assembly; a
company of persons met together, and that publicly, upon the public business,
or occasions. The first time but one, we meet with this Word in the New
Testament, it is used in opposition to a single person, alone by himself; or to
one or two more beside him. Matthew. xviii. 15, 16, 17. If thy Brother trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault, between thee and him alone, and if he
will not hear thee, take one or two more, etc. and if he neglect to hear them,
tell it to the Church: that is, to that solemn Assembly which sat to judge
causes, and unto which was the last resort: so that, if he did not hear them,
he was to be looked upon as an Heathen Man and a Publican. And, the truth is, it
signifies any sort of Assembly or concourse of People; which was among the
Gentiles, as well as the Jews. For in the xix. of the Acts; when all the City
of Ephesus was in an uproar, and ran together into the Theater, crying up
Diana, this general concourse is thrice called their (...) or Assembly. ver.
32. Some cried one thing, some another, for the Assembly ((...)) was confused,
etc. and ver. 39. If you inquire of other matters it shall be determined, in a
lawful Assembly: and ver. 41. having thus spoken, he dismissed the Assembly.

Now this being the very Notion of the word Church; the Christian Church, which
Christ has called, is an Assembly of Men and Women met together to Worship God
by him, to give him Thanks for all his Benefits, and to implore his Grace and
Mercy to them and to all the World. It is an Assembly or Company of Men, as
much as any other; but our Savior's Kingdom being not of this World, the
Assembly which he appoints, is not to meet for Civil Ends and Purposes, but for
Religious. And the great thing in all Religion, is the Devout Worship of God,
and giving Him the Honor due unto his Name: for which the Church, i.e.
Christian Assemblies being founded, it is a clear demonstration that this
Worship, is not so well performed alone by our selves, as in these Assemblies.
For here we act most like Christians; that is, like Members of the Body of
Christ, which is his Church. With which whosoever does not join, he is no
longer a Christian, because he is not a Member of the Body of Christ: which is
a Company joined together, to have Fellowship with God and one with another, in
all Holy Duties; of which Prayer, Thanksgiving, and Praises are the chief. For
though there they receive Christian Instruction; yet that is not the principal
business for which they assemble; as appears by St. Paul's words to Timothy
beforementioned, 1 Timothy ii. 1.

If we could make Christian people sensible of this, they would immediately
yield the Public Worship of God, to be that, which of all other, he most
designs to have continued in the World; and consequently be most affected
toward it, and constantly frequent it. And how should they remain insensible
of it, if they would but consider duly, that it is implied in their being
Christians, Members of Christ's Body, which is his Church. Which being nothing
else but an Assembly of Men, devoted unto Christ, met together for Religious
Worship; they are not a part of it, if they do not assemble with it. That is,
they are not Christians; nor will any of their privat^ Devotions be acceptable
unto God, being set in opposition to the Public: because they go about to
destroy the very Body of Christ, which is his Church; whose very being consists
i^ Assemblies, and not in separated Worship alone by our selves. Which Private
Worship is then acceptable unto God, when performed by a true Member of
Christ's Body: that is, by on^ who attends upon the Public Assemblies; by
which he procures acceptance for his secret and private Services. Which are so
far from being mo^^ acceptable, that we cannot reasonable think, they are
acceptable at all: when they are set in opposition to the other^ or when the
other is constantly neglected.

If I knew how to make this plaine^ I would do it: because it is a matter (...)
great importance; that we may not (...) guilty of neglecting the Public W^^
ship of God, where it may be injoye^ For so far as we neglect this, we (...)
our selves off from the Church; which is the Body of Christ. That is, we cease
to be Christians, and become bare Natural Men and Women: for Christians are
made to Worship God together in a Body; of which every particular person is a
part, which cannot subsist but in Conjunction with the rest of the Members of
that Body.

Perhaps this will be better understood by considering how we come to be
Christians. Which is not barely by belief in Christ, but by receiving Baptism:
where, professing Faith in him, we are admitted into the Christian Society and
Communion; to par^ake of those Blessings, which are bestowed by Christ upon the
Christian Fellowship. But then, we must continue therein, by living like
Christi^ns; and particularly by assembling together continually for Christian
Worship: Otherwise we renounce our Baptism; which admitted us into a Society,
and not to act separately by our selves alone. In which Society, if any man
behave himself so scanda^ously, that he is thrust out of it; he ^s denied to
have Communion with them in their Prayers, all the times (...) remains so cut
off from the Church Which is a demonstration, that to ha^ communion with the
faithful in Pray^ is the very thing unto which we are a^mitted by being made
Christians: (...) being the thing of which men are (...) barred, when they are
turned out (...) the Christian Society.

For the further manifestation (...) which great truth, which I have the
explained in general, I shall in the (...) lowing Chapters offer several
pa^^^cular considerations, which deserve^ be seriously pondered in every C^
stians thoughts.

CHAP. XV. Our Blessed Savior, the Founder the Church, teaches us this
Doctrine.
I. AND first of all I desire it (...) be considered, that our B^^^sed Lord,
does plainly suppose (...) Notion of a Church, that is, of R^^^gious
Assemblies, in the very Prayer ^he taught his Disciples. The first words of
which being, Our Father, not my Father; are an indication, it was not made for
a single person only: but for a company of men, joining together in their
Petitions to God. Who are put in mind by this expression, when any of them
says this Prayer alone by himself, that his Prayer is at that time acceptable;
because he is a Member of the Church of Christ, and ^olds communion with the
rest of his Christian Brethren. There can be no other reason given, why we say,
Our Father, even in our Closets; but that we pray as part of a Body, and hope
to be heard, because we are in union therewith, and not divided from it: and
therefore stand bound, as often as we have opportunity, to communicate with it in
Prayer, and all other Holy Offices, when it meets together for that purpose.

II And therefore we may further observe that, Christ most especially promises
his Blessed Presence in such Public Assemblies, Matthew. xviii. 20. For where
two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in (...) midst of
them. That he speaks of the being assembled in his Name for Prayer, appears
from the foregoin^ verse, where he says, if two of y^^ agree on Earth as
touching any thi^ they shall ask, it shall be done, etc. A^ the word gathered
together, shows (...) speaks of Public Prayer; such as use to be in the
Synagogues; unto whi^^ the word, in the Greek, alludes. A^ two or three so
gathered together, a^^ put for any number whatsoever: b^^ rather mentioned than
any other gre^ter number, that Christians might (...) be discouraged, though
they cou^^ meet but in very small Companies, (...) reason of the difficulties
and distres^ they labored under, in the beginni^^ of our Religion.

The Rules of the Synagogue was (a^ Dr. Lightfoot and other have observed) that
(...) less the number of (...) persons, Temple-Service C. vii. Sect. 3.
who were (...) Years, were gathered together, it w^ no Assembly, nor could
there be a^ Prayer. But our Lord would not have his Church thus abridged, in
this high privilege of Prayer: knowing (as Mr. Thorndike observes) it might so
fall out, that such a number of his Disciples could not get together: either
because of the persecutions, which scattered them abroad; or because there were
but few (suppose only two or three) as yet converted in a place where the
Gospel was preached. Who if they did unanimously agree in common Petitions, our
Savior promises, should find, notwithstanding their small number, that he
would be present among them.

That Is the Blessing promised to their consent and agreement in common Prayer.
Which is not to be understood, as if he would not be present with a good
Christian, when he prays alone: but the meaning is, that then, when they joined
in common Prayer, he would be more especially present. For if our Lord Christ
have a love to every Christian Soul, and delights to have its company: then is
he much more pleased with a great number of them, who present themselves
together to seek his Grace and Favor. They are more welcome to him; their
company is more lovely, the sight of them more amiable; and they are more
beloved of him, and prevail for greater Tokens of his love.

And thus all wise Christians, Ancient and Modern, have understood it. I will
name one of later times: for there is no doubt of the Ancient. Conventus vero
Sacros ad loca condicta and deputata, etc. But as for Sacred Assemblies, in
places appointed and deputed for that purpose, we have a very great veneration;
and highly approve and love them, cum nobis conjunctis, Christum magis adesse
existimamus: for we believe Christ to be more present with us, when we are met
in conjunction together. They are the words of Peter Martyr upon Genesis xxviii.
12.

And here it may not be unfit to note, for a fuller explication of this matter;
that the greatest Blessings have then been bestowed, when God's people were at
their Public Prayers: which is a mighty Argument to frequent them, in hope
then to prevail far more, than we can in our private addresses to him. In the
Old Testament the examples of it are many; particularly in 2 Kings iii. 9, 10.
where you read that the Hosts of three Kings being ready to perish, both Man
and Beast, for want of Water, and the Prophet Elisha undertaking to furnish
them therewith, it came to pass in the morning, when the meat offering was
offered (which was the time when all the people were at their Prayers in the
Temple) there came Water by the way of Edom, and the Country was filled with
Water, ver. 20. Why did it come at this time rather than any other, but to
honor the Public Prayers and Sacrifices; and to let them know what great
benefits they might receive thereby, if devoutly attended.

And when there could be no Assemblies at the Temple, in the time of their
captivity, yet they praying then, privately with respect to it, as Members of
that Church; God was pleased to answer their Petitions, at that very hour, when
Public Prayers had been wont to be made at that place. For it was about the
time of the Evening Oblation, that the Angel Gabriel was caused to fly swiftly
to Daniel, as he was, Speaking, and Praying, and Confessing his Sin, and the
Sin of the People Israel and presenting his Supplication before the Lord his
God. Dan. ix. 20, 21. And the tidings he brought him, were the most joyful that
ever had been heard; for they were the very same, which the same Angel
afterward brought to the Blessed Virgin, concerning the Birth of our Lord
Christ, to lay down his Life for us.

And in the New Testament, you may observe, God sent his Angel to bring St.
Peter out of Prison, after a miraculous manner, delivering him out of the hand
of Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews; while many
were gathered together praying, Act. xii. 12. We read in the 5. ver. that
prayer was made without ceasing (or instant and earnest Prayer was made) of the
Church unto God for him: and in the very time when many, that is, the whole
Church were gathered together, that is, in the time of Common Prayer, God sent
Salvation to him. Upon which words St. Chrysostom occasionally reflecting,
cries out; if the Prayer of the Church was so available for Peter; if it
rescued him out of Prison who was a Pillar of the Church; how comes it about,
that thou have no sense of its Power, but despisest it, and set it at
naught by thy neglect of it? What excuse can thou make for this? especially,
Hom. iii. (...).
when if there be a Sermon, we see a crowd of people, and the Church as full as
it can hold? O says one, I can pray at home; but I can hear Sermons no where
but in the Church. Vain Man! thou deceivest thy self. Thou can indeed pray at
home; but thou can not pray so, as thou do in the Church: where there is
such a multitude of Fathers; where a cry is sent up to God with one accord.
Thou will not have such audience, when thou beseechest the Lord, by thy self;
as when thou prayest with thy Brethren. For there is (...) something more in
this; viz. the Concord, the Conspiration, and Harmony of many in the same
Petition; the Bond of Charity; and the Prayers of the Priests: for therefore
the Priests preside in those Assemblies, that the Prayers of the Multitude
which are weaker, may by the help of theirs which are stronger, go together
with them into Heaven. Add to this; what good does a Sermon do, when Prayer is
not yoked with it? First Prayer, and then the Word, as the Apostles say, Act.
vi. 4. We will give our selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of
the Word. Thus St. Paul does, praying in the Preface to his Epistles, that the
light of Prayer, like a torch, may usher in the Word. And if thou did
accustom thy self to pray with exact diligence, thou would less need the
Instructions of thy fellow Servant, God himself illuminating thy mind, without
his assistance. And if thou think thy Prayer alone to be of such force; how
powerful must it be, when joined with a multitude? This is far more nervous;
and there is greater confidence and assurance in it, than in that which is made
at home, and in private. So St. Paul thought, when he said, he who has
delivered, and does deliver, we trust, will yet deliver us: You also helping
together by Prayer for us, 2 Corinthians. i. 10, 11. So St. Peter also got out of
Prison; for earnest Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for
him.

CHAP. XVI. Which is further confirmed by the practice of the Apostles, and the
first Christians.
III. THE next thing I observe is, that according to the Direction of our
Savior, and the encouragement he had given them, to expect his Blessed
Presence among them; the Apostles and the rest of Christ's Disciples,
immediately upon their Masters ascension unto Heaven, assemled themselves
together, for common Prayer and Supplication. For so we read in the Act. i. 12,
etc. that as soon as he was gone out of their sight, and the Angels had told
them whither he was gone, They returned unto Jerusalem; and when they were come
in, they went up into an upper Room (the place, as shall be shown presently, of
Christian Worship) and all continued with one accord in Prayer and
Supplication, with the Women, and Mary, the Mother of Jesus, and with his
Brethren.

It was in their Assemblies, we read in St. John, where our Savior often
appeared to them, presently after his Resurrection, Joh. xx. 19.26. and we may
well think it was for Devotion that they assembled; for it was on the first day
of the Week. But here we read expressly, after he was ascended into Heaven, what
they did in those Assemblies. In which there being, one day, an hundred and
twenty met together; they made solemn Prayer to God for direction in the choice
of a new Apostle, to succeed in the room of Judas, Act. i. 15.24 But that which
is most remarkable, you find in the beginning of the next Chapter; that when
the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord, in one
place, and suddenly they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to
speak with Tongues, etc. This great gift, whereby they were to gather a Church
in all Nations, as they had began to do at Jerusalem and thereabouts, came down
upon them, when they were all met together, for the Service of God. The one
place here spoken of, being no other, than that mentioned before: where they
continued with one accord, in Prayer and Supplication. The place where they
assembled immediately after his Resurrection, as I said just now; and in all
likelihood, the place where our Lord eat his last Supper with them before his
Passion. They did not look for this promise of our Savior in their Closets;
but expected he would be in the midst of them, by the power of the Holy Ghost,
when they were met together, to wait upon him for the fulfilling of his Word.

IV. And accordingly you may further note, that all they who were converted by
them, to own Christ Jesus for their Lord and Master, immediately joined
themselves to them, to Worship God in communion with them. Thus you read, how
upon that very day, when they received the Holy Ghost, and preached thereupon
unto all they could meet withal, the Resurrection of Christ in their own
Language, as many as received the Word (that is, believed on Christ) were
Baptized (that was the first thing, they were admitted into the Church) and the
effect of it was this. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, ver. 41, 42. which is
repeated again, ver. 46. they continued daily, with one accord, in the Temple
(Worshipping God with the Jews) and then received the Eucharist at home: which
was the proper Christian Worship, wherein they joined together in their own
Assemblies.

And here it is very remarkable, that when their numbers were increased from
three to five thousand, and there was a new descent of the Holy Ghost, to
enable more besides those on whom it fell at first, to preach the Word; this
descent was at the time of Prayer, when they were assembled together for that
purpose. Read Act. iv. where you find, that the Apostles being let go, from
their imprisonment, they went unto their own Company ( ver. 23.) and reported
all that the Chief Priests and Elders had said unto them. Which when the
Company heard, they lift up their voice to God, with one accord, and said,
Lord, Thou art God which have made Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and all that
in them is, etc. grant unto thy Servants, that with all boldness they may speak
thy Word, etc. ver. 24, 25, etc. And when they had prayed (ver. 31.) the place
was shaken where they were assembled together, (for Prayer you plainly see) and
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the Word of God with
boldness.

And as it was at Jerusalem; so in all other places where they settled a Church,
it was for this purpose, that they should assemble to Worship God together, by
Christ Jesus. This was the very first or principal thing they ordained in such
Churches; as those words to Timothy, which I have often named, sufficiently
testify 1 Timothy ii 1. I will therefore that first of all, Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all Men, etc. Which
Assemblies the Apostles required Christians not to forsake, no not in times of
danger, Heb. x. 25. For that (you may note as I pass along) was to fall off
from Christianity, as appears by the following Words, ver 26. For as to become
a Christian was to join themselves, to the Christian Society, in such actions
of Religion (according to that you read of St. Paul, who being converted,
assayed to join himself to the Brethren, that is, to the Assemblies of
Christians, Act. ix. 26.) So to cease to be thus joined in Christian Communion,
was to cease to be a Christian; and, in effect, to deny Jesus Christ to be
their Lord and Savior: who has made all that belong unto him, to be a Church;
that is, as I have often said, a Company of Men and Women, assembling
themselves together for Divine Offices.

V. And that they might so do, there was, it may further be observed, a certain
place appointed for their Assemblies: because there could be no Assemblies, but
they must be held somewhere or other; and they could not be held with any
certainty, unless the place were determined, and known to be designed for that
purpose. Of this we read so frequently in the Holy Writings of the New
Testament; that it is a wonder any should make a question of it. I mentioned
before the upper room, Act. i. 11. where the Apostles assembled, immediately
after our Saviors Ascension: which Mr. Mede Book ii. p. 408, etc.
has abundantly proved to be the settled place of their Holy Assemblies. Where,
as I said, they were assembled again on the day of Pentecost, Act. ii. 1. and
the next day after, iv. 31. and was the House, where they are said to have
continued daily breaking Bread at home, Act. ii. 46.

Nor was this peculiar to Jerusalem, but in other Cities they had the like. For
at Troas also the Church was gathered together in an upper Chamber, Act. xx. 8.
And at Corinth, 1 Cor. xi, 18, 20. the Apostle speaks of their coming together,
in the Church, and into one place: which he distinguishes from their own home,
ver. 34. And again xiv. 23. he speaks of the whole Church coming together into
one place: Which was no other, but that place where they commonly assembled for
Divine Worship. And so those words of St. Paul to Timothy are to be understood
1 Timothy ii. 8. I will therefore, that Men pray every where, etc. Which is
spoken, says Beza, in opposition to assembling only at God's House at
Jerusalem: unto which men were no longer confined, but might assemble in any
place, where there was a House appointed for that purpose. So he expounds those
words every where, omnem locum sacris coetibus destinatum every place
appointed, or set apart for Holy Assemblies to meet in: for St. Paul, says he,
speaks of Public Prayer, in the common Meeting.

Thus St. Basil many Ages before him explained the Apostles words, L. 2. de
Baptismo Resp. ad Q. viii.
in answer to those who urged them to prove that Prayer was not as well
performed any where as the Church. No such matter, these words, in every place,
do not comprehend such places as are employed in common uses, and in profane,
or perhaps filthy affairs, (...), etc. but inlarges the Service of God beyond
the Compass of Jerusalem, unto any place in the World, which (according to the
Prophecy about Sacrifice) is reverently devoted unto God, for the Sacred
performance of the Glorious Mystery.

And that these places thus designed for Holy Assemblies, were separated from
common use, and set apart only for this; was never doubted till this last Age
of fancy and vain conceit. Which has imagined the separation of places to
Divine Service only, to be a mere legal Institution: that is, ordained merely
by the Law of Moses; which made the Tabernacle, and afterward the Temple, such
an Holy Place. Whereas they were so made, in conformity to the common Notions
of Humane Nature: and only made more Holy and Separate than any other place, by
the residence of a visible Majesty and Glory there. Otherwise there were Holy,
that is, separated places, before that time (though not so Separate or Holy as
the Temple was) and will be always to the end of the World: unless we suppose
that men will lose all Reverence to God, and let him have nothing among us,
which may be peculiarly called his own.

Now this thing alone, is an Argument for Public Worship, that there has
always been a place appointed for Divine Service: which would have been
needless, if Men were not bound to assemble together to Worship God; for then
it might have been left to every ones liberty, where they would please to do it
themselves.

And this also shows the advantage, which Public Worship has of all other.
For being performed in a place set a part for it, where nothing else is done,
at our very entrance into it we are naturally put in mind of God, and of our
business there; which is only with him: and so shall be more apt to be composed
there, than in any other place; which we are wont to employ about other things,
besides the Worship of God. Especially, since all Wise Men have ever
endeavored, that the Service of God should be there performed, with the most
Solemnity and Majesty that could be contrived; nay that the place it self
should not be mean, but rather stately, and gravely adorned. For it is not with
Public Prayer, as it is with Private. In Private (as Mr. Hooker judiciously
observes) secrecy is commended, rather than outward show: whereas Public
Prayer, being the act of the whole Society, requires accordingly more care to
be had of external Appearance. And therefore the very assembling of Men unto
this Service, has ever been very solemn; and the very outward Form of the
place of Public Prayer, has been ever thought a Circumstance of great moment
to help Devotion.

VI To this may be further added, from one of the Texts now mentioned, that the
Apostle directs how they should exercise their Spiritual Gifts, in the Holy
place where they met together; and particularly the Gift of Prayer, 1 Corinthians
xiv. 23. There were a great many extraordinary Gifts then bestowed upon the
Corinthian Church: every one of which the Apostle informs them, was bestowed by
one and the same Spirit; and bestowed by him to profit withal xii. 7. that is,
for the public benefit of the Church. And among the rest, there was a Gi^^ of
Prayer, which was upon some occasions afforded by a particular inspiration of
the Holy Ghost: and designed, as every one beside were, for the common good of
all the faithful.

For if any Man wanted the faculty of expressing those pious thoughts, which
the Spirit suggested to him, i^ the common Language, which every Body
understood, the Apostle show^ his Gift was of small value; and directs such a
Man to pray that he might be able to interpret, xiv. 13. into a Language, that
is, which was commonly understood. The reason o^ which was, because then his
Gift o^ Prayer would be of general use i^ the Public Assemblies: The advantage
of which was to be preferred before any Man's private benefit. S^ he tells them
in the verse foregoing, ver. 12. that they who were zealous of Spiritual Gifts,
should seek tha^ they might excel to the edifying of the Church. And in the
verses following, ver. 14, 15. he says, that if he himself should pray in an
unknown Tongue, ^his Spirit indeed prayed (that is, the Spiritual Gift which he
had, was there^n exercised) but his understanding was ^nfruitful: that is,
others received no ^enefit by it, because they understood ^ot what he said. And
therefore he ^uts this question, What is it then? That is, what is it that we
should de^^re in this business of Prayer? Which ^e resolves thus, I will pray
with the spirit, and I will pray with the Vnder^^anding also. That is, this is
most (...) be desired, when I, or any other, ^ath a Prayer suggested to him by
the spirit, that we may be able, not only (...) utter what it inspires, but to
under^^and it also our selves so far, as to ^ake others understand it; by
putting (...) into known and intelligible words. ^his is certainly best, not
merely to ^^ve conceptions formed in us by the ^irit; but to utter those
concepti^s in such familiar and common ex^essions, that others may be profited
(...) them. Else, says he, When thou shall ^^ss with the Spirit, how shall he
that is unlearned, say, Amen? ver. 18. That is, how shall he that understands
not what thou say, because it is uttered in a strange Language, give his
consent and join with thee, in those Petitions, and Thanksgivings; though i^
themselves never so Holy and Good? Which the people did at the end (...) the
Prayers, by saying Amen, So be it.

Which words are a demonstration he speaks of Prayer in Public, o^ Common
Prayer. Which from hen^^ it is evident was then in greate^ esteem; because, in
comparison wit^ this, the Apostle undervalues even a^ extraordinary Gift of
Prayer, which private Person had, whereby he alo^^ was profited. He prayed
well; b^ others not being edified thereby, because they understood not what
(...) said; it was a great diminution of i^ worth, and made it of less price in
the Apostles account. And we all agre^ he had the Spirit of God; and co^^ as
well judge what was best, as wh^ was good. Now this was best in (...) judgment,
to have the Prayer ma^^ public; that all might join in it, a^^ not remain
merely a private good.

And indeed that Spirit (it may be noted under this head) which inlivens the
whole Body of the Church, moves every Member of it unto this, to join in its
common Offices, for the Service of the whole. Which it is the very scope of the
Apostle to demonstrate, in those three Chapters xii, xiii, xiv. of the First
Epistle to the Corinthians, that they ought in every thing to act as Members of
a Body; seeking the improvement one of another, by the exercise of all their
Gifts, not separately, but conjunctly, so that all might partake of the
benefit. And whosoever he is, that has any sense of such a thing, as the Body
of Christ, whereof he is one Member; he will never think that what he does
alone is as good as what he performs in Fellowship, with the rest of the
Members. No, if he say the same Prayers, and offer the same Praises in private,
which the Church offers in public; he cannot reasonably think there is no
difference, nor imagine that both alike are God's Service: because what he does
in conjunction with the rest of the Body, is most agreeable to God's Holy
Spirit; by which this Body is linkt together, and every part of it moved to act
for the good of the whole.

I conclude this with the words of Mr. Thorndike; to imagine that Prayers at
home will be as acceptable to God, Relig. Assembl. p. 173.
as those made in the Church with our Brethren; is as if one should have
fancied that the incense of the Temple, spoken of Psalm. cxli. 1. (which was a
compound of several precious Gums) made no other perfume, than the Spices would
have done, had they been burnt one by one.

CHAP. XVII. Other Considerations to strengthen this Argument.
VII. GOD has also appointed a public order of Men, to Direct and Govern
Christian Assemblies, and to Minister therein: both by giving Christian
Instruction, and by offering up the Common Prayers of the Church to God, and
Blessing the people in his Name.

This is another convincing Argument, both that Christ designed public
Assemblies, because he has appointed public Ministers to officiate there; and
that the Prayers made there, are to be preferred before private Devotions,
because there we partake of the Service of God's Ministers: the benefit whereof
we lose, if we content our selves with what we do at home.

There is nothing more apparent in the Holy Writings, than that our Lord would
have such an order of men set apart, for his Divine Service in the Church.
Whose ordination by his special appointment and designation, is an assurance
that their Ministry therein is acceptable to God; as well when they offer the
peoples Prayers to him, and bless them in his Name; as when they deliver his
Word to the people, and teach them both how to pray, and to perform all other
Duties of a Christian Life. Both of these are necessary, and their Office is
designed for both: But especially for the first; to minister the Divine Service
of the Church. The principal of which is the Eucharist; wherein they dispense
the most precious Tokens of Christ's Love to his Body, the Church: by Prayers
and by Thanksgivings to God for the Redemption of the World, by that Death of
Christ upon the Cross Which ought to be publicly celebrated, because it is an
Annunciation o^ the Lord's Death, wherein we publish and show it forth, till he
come: an^ never was administered, nor can be, b^ any other persons, but those
whom o^ Lord has entrusted to be Stewards (...) his Mysteries.

For whose Prayers, and Public Se^vice in the Church, if Men have not great
esteem; it is because they have no Religion, or no true Knowledge thereof. For
if they believed tha^ God has any Ministers (as he has, i^ there be any such
thing as Religion) who are peculiarly sanctified, that is set apart for his
Service; they would believe that God conveys some Ble^sings by their Ministry:
and look upon their Ordination as a Seal, that He wh^ has thereby appointed
them to be Instruments of his for the Salvation of Men's Souls, will by these
Instruments effect the thing whereunto he has ordained them: and particularly
give Men his Blessing by their means; and accept those Prayers which these
Servants of his offer up unto him, for them, and in their Name.

For that praying for the People is a special part of their Work, we may learn
from St. James v. 14. where he directs those to whom he writes, when any Man
was sick, to send for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him.
Which no less belonged to their Office, we may be sure, when Men were well,
than when they were sick: being a part of their daily ministration, for the
whole Body of the Church. Whose weaker Prayers, as I noted before out of St.
Chrysostom, being helped by the stronger Prayers of God's Ministers, go up to
Heaven together with them.

All Christians indeed are called, A Holy and a Royal Priesthood, to offer up
Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. ii. 5, 9. but
it is manifest by these very words, that they are not so singly, but in a Body:
when they Pray and give Thanks, together with him that Ministers the Divine
Service in the Church, the Spiritual House, of which the Apostle there speaks;
in which Spiritual Sacrifices were offered up to God. And since Sacrifices were
offered only in Public, in the place God appointed for them; we may thence, I
think, conclude, that our Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings are then only
Sacrifices, when made in our Assemblies: and that then we act as Priests unto
God, and not at other times.

The principal Sacrifice of Christians, I am sure, is in its own Nature a
Public Service; and is to be so esteemed, even when it is administered to the
Sick in Private; who receive it as part of that Body, which is supposed
continually to offer this Sacrifice. I mean the Holy Communion, wherein we
offer to God, with Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings, a commemoration of the
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross for us. For this we ought all to meet as
frequently as we can; that we may conjunctly and openly acknowledge this
benefit: because, though this be the principal and immediate intention of this
action, it has respect also to that communion, which we have one with another,
as mutual Members; and with Christ our Head, as his Body. So the Apostle
teaches us when he says, The Cup of Blessing, which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, it is not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many are one Bread, and one Body:
for we are all partakers of that one Bread. 1 Cor. x. 16, 17. And therefore
since we are not Members of the same Body, unless we be knit together in one;
and we are not knit together in one, but by the Communion of the Body and Blood
of Christ; and we cannot have that communion but by Assembling together, to eat
of one Bread, and drink of one Cup: it is manifest to all that there is the
greatest necessity of Public Assemblies, where this is the chief business, for
which Christians should meet together in one Body as often as is possible; and at
all other times, beseech God to accept their Sacrifices for the sake of that
perfect Sacrifice, Oblation, and Satisfaction, which Christ has made, and
which we commemorate.

Here also, in the Public Assemblies, censures were inflicted upon public
Offenders, as we learn from the Apostle 1 Corinthians. v. 4. as well as from
Tertullian in his Apology: cap. xxxix.
and many such like things I might add to the same purpose, if I had room for
them; and had not other material considerations to press, which ought not to be
omitted.

VIII. Among which, this is not inconsiderable, that the Public Service of the
Church, by them ministered, is so acceptable unto God; that the Angels, God's
Heavenly Ministers, attend in such Holy Assemblies, and make a part of them.
For this is the Reason St. Paul gives 1 Corinthians. xi. 10. why a Woman should
cover her Head in time of Prayer, that is, be in a humble and reverend posture:
because of the Angels. Whose presence in the Assemblies of Christians, is a
Token of Christ's Blessed Presence, in the midst of them: according to his own
promise beforementioned, Matthew. xviii. 20. For where the Angels are said to
be, there God is present; as the Hebrews observe: and not without good ground
for what they say. For when Jacob saw Angels in a vision, ascending and
descending upon a Ladder, which stood on the Earth, and reached unto Heaven, he
said, as soon as he was awake; how dreadful is this place? (that is, with what
reverence should I behave my self here?) this is no other but the House of God,
and this is the Gate of Heaven. He concludes God to be present, because the
Angels were; who are his Ministers and Attendants. And accordingly we are to
understand these words of the Apostle, as intended to signify a Divine
presence among us; when we are reverently assembled together to Worship God, in
his Holy places.

Which the Ancient Christians looked upon, as a singular encouragement to attend
upon the Public Prayers: because then a Christian prays with the Angels, (...)
(they are the words of Clemens Alexandrinus) as already, L. vii. Strom. p. 746.
especially at that time, equal even to an Angel: and will not be out of the
precinct of those Holy Guardians, when he prays alone; but then also have
their Company. Of which Origin has a set Discourse, in his Book of Prayer
lately published; Part. 2da, Number. 20.
where mentioning the words of the Psalmist, among others, The Angel of the
Lord incampeth round about them that fear him, etc. He thus proceeds; it is
probable that when many are assembled together sincerely to the Glory of
Christ, the Angel of every one of them, there pitcheth his Tent, together with
him that is committed to his Charge and Custody; so as to make (...) a double
Church, where the Saints are gathered together; one Church of Men, and another
Church of Angels.

IX. But if there were nothing of this in it, yet the Communion of Saints here
on Earth (which is an Article of our Creed) should invite us unto the Public
Service. For how do we maintain communion with them, if we join not with those,
among whom we live, in the Assemblies of the Saints? That is, of Christians;
who are all a Holy people to the Lord; by their solemn dedication to him in
their Baptism; and by their Holy profession, and meeting together continually
for Holy Offices. Which if any Man forsake, he is no longer Holy, but Profane;
renouncing so far, the Christian Faith: which teaches him to keep the Communion
of Saints; by having Fellowship with them in Prayer, especially in the
Eucharist, which is the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood. By partaking of
which, we have the nearest Communion also one with another: being made one
Body, as I have said already, by partaking all of that one Bread, 1 Cor. x. 17.

Communion indeed, or Fellowship, is in one place, made a thing distinct, from
breaking of Bread, and Prayers, Act. ii. 42. and signifies, some think,
communicating to each others necessities. Which Notion of Communion, if we
understand to be meant in the Creed; it makes no less to my purpose than the
other. For we must consider that this was done in their Public Assemblies:
whereby their communicating to the needs of their Brethren, became an
acceptable Offering unto God, together with their Prayers. This we learn from
the 1 Cor. xvi. 1, 2. Where St. Paul speaks of the Collections for the Saints,
as a part of the business of the first day of the Week; both there and in the
Churches of Galatia. When they did not forget this well-pleasing Sacrifice (as
it is called Heb. xiii. 16.) but acknowledged God's bounty to themselves, by
the relief they sent to others: and by such a public contribution, maintained
also a sense and fellow-feeling of one another condition; and made a
profession that they all belonged to one and the same Body, though never so far
distant one from another. The Sense of which we are apt to lose; when we join
not together in such actions of piety. Whereby Brotherly Love and Kindnese is
likewise nourished, and we are knit together in the tenderest Affection: while
we look upon one another, not only as Children of the same common Father; but
as Limbs of the same Body. Who naturally have the same care one for another:
and whether one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it: or one Member be
honored, all the Members rejoice with it. 1 Corinthians. xii. 25, 26.

In this Brotherly Love, and in the same Faith, some think the Unity of the
Body of Christ entirely consists. But they should consider that this Brotherly
Love and Care flows from the Unity of Christ's Body: which consists therefore,
in the conjunction of every Member with the rest, and keeping communion one
with another, in all the common Offices of Religion, in Christian Assemblies.
From which whosoever departs, or refuses to join therein, he breaks the Unity
of the Body of Christ, which is his Church. And though he do the same thing
alone, which is done in those Assemblies, yet it is not the same thing in the
account of Christ: who looks upon such a Man as gone from him, by going from
his Body, the Church.

X. I will add one thing more; which is, that the Service of God, in the Church
triumphant in Heaven, is a Public Service: and they do not Worship God
separately, there, but join together in his Praises. This we are taught by St.
John, Rev. vii. 11. where after a great multitude had been represented to him,
which no Man could number, of all Nations and Kindreds and Tongues; who stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb, crying with a loud voice, and saying,
Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb (whereby,
no doubt, is signified the Service of the Christian Church) then it follows,
that All the Angels also stood round about the Throne, and about the Elders,
and the four Beasts, and fell before the Throne on their Faces, and Worshipped
God, saying, Amen. Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and
Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto our God, for ever and ever. They said,
that is, Amen to the Christian Service; and also added their own: giving Glory
to God in one Body (for it is the voice of all Angels) as the Christian Church
did.

Let this be seriously pondered, and we shall endeavor to approach as near
unto them as we can; by joining, as they do, in one Society of the Church, to
Worship God. For so doing, we join our selves to the Society also of the Holy
Angels: as the Angels, St. John here informs us, do to the Society of Christian
Worshippers. They and we make but one Body in Christ; in whom God has gathered
together in one all things; both which are in Heaven, and which are on Earth;
And this Unity consists, it is manifest by this Vision of St. John, in their
communion one with another, in Holy Offices: which the Church in Heaven (where
it is become most perfectly one) does most sacredly keep and preserve.

CHAP. XVIII. A Recapitulation of the four foregoing Chapters, with some
Inferences from thence.
LAY now all these things together; that the Church in the very notion of it is
an Assembly of Men and Women called to meet together; and therefore the
Christian Church is such an Assembly, called to join together in Worshipping
God by Christ Jesus; who himself has supposed this, in the Prayer he gave his
Disciples; and has promised his special Presence, in such Assemblies; which
the Apostles constantly held, and there received the first and best Fruits of
his Love, in the descent of the Holy Ghost; which drew all Converts every
where, into the same Blessed conjunction; for which Holy Places were appointed,
where they constantly Assembled; and where the extraordinary Gift of Prayer,
was to be made common, or else looked upon as of little value; where God has
appointed his Ministers to attend, and there offer up the Prayers of his
people, and bless them in his Name; where the Angels also are present, and
delight to see us assembled; that we may maintain the Communion of Saints here
on Earth, and be fitted for the company of the Blessed in Heaven: who all join
together in giving Blessing, and Praise, and Honor unto him, whom we Worship;
who is far Exalted above all Blessing, and Praise, either of ours on Earth, or
of theirs in Heaven: Consider I say all this, and then think what an error
they live in, who make little or no account of the Public Assemblies; but
imagine they can pray and serve God, as well by themselves alone. This is a
most unchristian thought, directly contrary to the very frame of our Holy
Religion: which therefore ought, with all diligence, to be exploded out of
every one of our minds.

As for those who do not barely neglect the Public Service, but refuse to join
in it, they are still in a far worse condition: having broken themselves off
from the Body of Christ; which the Ancient Church thought so heinous a crime,
that they looked upon their Prayers as an abomination. For so I find in the
Council of Antioch Canon. 2.
, that such Christians were condemned, as going into any private House, prayed
together with those who would not join in the Prayers of the Church. None of
the Church were to join in their Prayers: if any did, they thought it equal to
the crime of communicating with Excommunicated Persons. The like I find in the
Council of Laodicea: And the Canons ascribed to the Apostles speak to the same
purpose. Can. 33. Can. 10.
And this Sentence of those Councils, is very conformable to the sense of the
Ancient Jews, whose Maxim this was (as Mr. Thorndike Relig. Assembl. p. 173.
observes) He that dwells in a City where there is a Synagogue, and prays not
there with the Congregation, this is he who is called a BAD NEIGHBOVR. And well
may he be called bad, who will have no Society in the best things; who cuts
himself off, by his own act, from the Congregation of the Lord; who will not
afford his Neighbors the help of his Prayers; who lives as if the World could
be Governed, without taking any notice of God the Supreme Governor; who
directly overthrows the Christian Religion, and destroys the very notion of a
Church; who has no regard to Holy places, and slights God's Ministers; who
withdraws himself from God's special presence and protection, and defies all
the Blessed company of Heaven. Among whom he can never hope to find any
entertainment, nor to be received into the Celestial Habitations: having shut
himself here out of the Society of Saints, and the place where God's Honor
dwells.

Would to God such things as these were seriously and deeply considered by us
all, that our minds might be awaked to a diligent and constant attendance upon
the Public Assemblies. Which our Lord has taken the greatest care to
establish; and unto which he has also granted very high Privileges: lest they
should fall into contempt or neglect, through Men's Idleness, or Covetousness,
or Conceitedness, or by any other means whatsoever. Certain it is, if we had an
hearty Love to our Religion and understood it, we could not but be so in Love
with the Public Exercises of it; as every day, if it lay in our power, to go
into God's house, and there recommend our selves, and his whole Church to his
Grace and Mercy. For there is no way, it is evident from what has been said,
to uphold and support the Church like to this: we being a Church, by meeting
together, to have communion in the same Prayers. Which the oftener we have, the
more we look like a Church, and act like Members of the Body of Christ: who are
combined and knit together, for mutual preservation. As on the contrary the
seldomer we meet, the less there is of the face of a Church among us: which
cannot be preserved from ruin, when the Public Assemblies are generally
neglected, because the Church falls to decay, by that very neglect.

Let us therefore set our selves to maintain the Church of which we are
Members, by maintaining Public Assemblies; and suffering no day to pass
without a solemn meeting in as full a Body as we can make, for the duties of
our Religion. This would be both an Ornament, and a Strength and Establishment
to our Religion. The Truth which we profess, would hereby be both honored and
confirmed: and appear with greater Authority, as well as Beauty in the Eyes of
all its Adversaries; when they beheld the Multitude, the Unanimity, and the
Order and Constancy of those that assert it. The better and gentler sort of
them would be the more easily won to join with us; and they whose hearts are
alienated from us, would be the less inclined to set themselves against us.

And, for the Grace and Favor of God, which is the chief thing of all,
Christians may promise it to themselves for their protection against all their
Adversaries, when they constantly and earnestly seek it, with their joint
Prayers and Supplications. Which will be powerful also for the settling such, as
are wavering in their Religion: whom the constant Authority likewise of a great
Number of faithful people, cannot but be of much moment to contain in their
Duty; for Men are ashamed to forsake a multitude, when they easily desert small
Numbers.

The Ancient Christians were so possessed with this sense, that they looked upon
their Prayers, as the impregnable Bulwark of the Church, an unshaken Garrison;
terrible to the Devils, and salutary to God's pious Worshipppers (...), etc.
Chrysostom Tom. 1. p. 757. Edit. Fr. D.
. In so much that St. Basil speaking of God's gathering the Waters together,
which he called Seas, and saw it was good, Genesis i. 16. falls into a pious
Meditation, how much more acceptable to him, such a Collection, or gathering
together of the Church, must needs be, in Hexameron. Hom. iv. sub. fin.
in which the mixed sound of Men, Women and Children, making a noise like the
Waves dashing against the Shore, is sent up to God in Prayers. A profound Calm
and Tranquillity shall preserve such a Church unmovable. The Spirit of
Wickedness shall have no power to trouble it, with heretical Doctrines. By
which passage we learn, both how full their Assemblies were wont to be, and
that the Prayers were understood by all the people, who with one voice said the
same that the Priest did (as we now do in our general confession) and that they
hoped for great security from their common Supplications to God, for his
watchful Providence over them.

And thus our own Church, in the second Collect for Morning Prayer, by teaching
us to look upon our Eternal Life as standing in the knowledge of God, and to
esteem his service to be perfect freedom, inforces our resort unto him
continually for our defense in that Service and Knowledge, in all assaults of
our Enemies: The Effect of which it instructs us to hope will be this, that we
surely trusting in his defense, may not fear the power of any Adversaries,
through the might of Jesus Christ our Lord. This St. Chrysostom admirably
represents, Hom. in S. Lucianum. Tom. 1.
as his manner is, in a Sermon upon an Ancient Martyr. As a Man that always
stands upon a Rock, laughs the Waves to scorn: so he that enjoys the daily
Prayers, and is moistened with the Divine Words, having seated himself as upon
the Rock of a right Judgment of things; will be carried away with nothing here;
being raised alost, out of the reach of all the Affairs of this Life. And that
not only from the go^^ admonitions he daily receives, but fr^^^ the Prayers,
and from the Paternal Be^diction, and from the common conventi^^^ and from the
Love of the Brethren, and from abundance of other things, reaping much Benefit
and Spiritual Consolati^^ he goes home laden with a thousand B^^sings, Insomuch
that a Bride, in (...) opinion, is not so beautiful and amia^^^ when she sits
in her Bridal Chamber, (...) a Soul is wonderful and glorious wh^^ it appears
in the Church, breathing forth Spiritual Graces: which he compar^^ to fragrant
Ointments. For he that i^ conversant there with Faith, and Diligence, carries
away innumerable Tre^sures: and though never so many dreadful things befall
him, he will bear them aleasily; being sufficiently furnished, out o^ the Holy
Scriptures, with Patience and Philosophy. He means the wise thoughts, which the
belief of the Gospel puts into us.

For which reason it was, that the Enemies of our Religion, bent their Forces
not so much against particular persons, as against their Assemblies: which they
endeavored with all their might to destroy, as the Nurseries of the Christian
Faith. Which being dispersed, they doubted not but the Faith it self would be
lost, in that disorder. They no longer looked upon Christians as a Church, when
they did not meet together: but as so many scattered Limbs of a Body, which no
longer subsists, when the Members are distracted, and torn asunder. Against
these strong holds therefore they laid their Batteries; hoping when they were
beaten down, they should presently triumph over their Religion. Which they knew
it was hard to overcome; whilst a great Body of Men remained, knit together
continually for its support, by many Bonds, and Holy Mysteries, and the
strictest Sacraments.

For which cause likewise it was, that Christian people could not be persuaded
to omit their Assemblies; no not in time of Persecution, when there was the
greatest danger, if they held them. We learn so much from their very
Persecutors; particularly from the Famous Letter which Pliny wrote to the
Emperor Trajan about this matter: wherein we are informed, that, when it was
not safe in the day time, they met before the Morning Light to sing Hymns to
Christ, as their God. To what shall we impute this Zeal? Might they not have
served God as well alone? No, they understood their Religion better, than to be
of that Opinion; and knew it could not stand, if they did not thus join
together to uphold it. Their Enemies, they knew, wished for nothing more, than
that these Assemblies might be broken: which, whilst they continued, were the
Pillar and Stay of the Christian Truth.

And do we pretend to be Christians, and to love our Religion, and to desire,
nay hope for its safety and prosperity, and make so little Account of these
Holy Assemblies, that the smallest matter will hinder our attendance on them?
Let us not, against the clearest demonstrations, persist in such a stupid
error. But awaken, or rather inflame our selves unto such a degree of Zeal, as
to meet together daily, where we have opportunity for it; to give Glory to God
in his Church by Christ Jesus; and to commend his Church, as well as our selves
and Families, to the protection of his good Providence, saying, O Lord, save
thy People, and bless thine Inheritance. It cannot be imagined what
satisfaction we should find herein; did we make this our most serious business:
and, instead of the excuses we now make for our negligence, give all diligence
thus to adorn, confirm, and secure our most Holy Religion.

It cannot be denied indeed, that this has been an Error of long standing: For
when the Church had rest from Persecution, her Children began, by degrees, to
grow remiss and wanton. Prosperity and ease corrupted them; and they cooled so
much in their first love, that many of them came but seldom, to do their Duty
unto God their Savior. But this was an extreme great grief to their Pastors:
and brought the heaviest calamities upon Christian people. Hear how the often
named Father bewails this, That the Church having brought forth many Children,
she could not enjoy their Company, S. Chrysostom. de Baptism. Christi. Hom. xxiv.
Tom. 1.
every time they assembled to remember our Savior, but only upon a Festival
When you are all full of joy to day, I alone am full of sorrow, and grieved at
heart; to think that the Church which now has such multitudes in it, will to
morrow be empty. O how great Spiritual Exultation, how great Joy, how great
Glory to God, how great Profit to Souls would there be, if every time we
assemble, we could behold the Church as full, as it is at this solemn time? Do
you not see how the Mariners and Pilots, when they are upon the Sea, labor all
they can, to get into their Port? And we, on the contrary, love to be tossed up
and down in the Sea of this World: ingagein^ our selves in innumerable Secular
Affairs, which so take up all our thoughts and our time, that here we appear
scarce once, or twice in the whole year. Are ye ignorant, that as God made
Havens in the Sea, so he has made Churches in Cities: that flying from the
tumult, or tempest rather of secular Affairs, we may here enjoy the greatest
Tranquillity? And for this I may appeal to all your own Consciences, whether
you find not here such quiet and peace, that you may truly call the Church, the
Spiritual Haven of the Soul. For anger here gives no disturbance (the storms of
Passion cease) Lust does not inflame; Envy does not gnaw; Pride puffs not up;
nor does the Love of vain Glory corrupt: but all these Wild Beasts are tamed,
as by a Divine Charm, as soon as the hearing of the Holy Scriptures, enters, at
every Man's Ears, into his Soul, and lays all these unreasonable Passions
asleep. Who then will not judge them to be miserable Wretches, that when they
might be partakers of such great Wisdom and Grace, will not gather themselves
together continually, and come to the common Mother of us all, I mean the
Church? For what more necessary business can thou pretend? What more gainful
Meeting? Or what should hinder thee from letting us here have thy company?

This is a Lesson he repeats very often particularly in a Sermon he preached a
little after Whitsuntide, Where he complains that he had in vain persuaded
them, Hom. v. de Anna Tom. 2.
at the last solemn Assembly, to continue in their Fathers House, not merely
appear there on a Festival, and then leave it. And therefore desires his
constant Auditors, that they would try to reduce their Neighbors, by
representing to them, that though Pentecost were gone, yet the Festival was not
gone therewith. For every Holy Meeting, says he, is a Feast: as appears from
the Words of Christ himself; Where two or three are gathered together in my
Name, there am I in the mist of them. When Christ is in the midst of those who
are assembled, what other demonstration, greater than this, would we have of a
Festival? Where there is the Sacred Doctrine and Prayer, where the Benedictions
of Fathers, and the hearing of the Holy Laws, where the meeting together of
Brethren, and the Bond of sincere Love and Charity, where converse with God,
and God speaking to men, how can there choose but be a Festival, and a day of
public rejoicing? For not the Multitude, but the Virtue of those that are
gathered together, makes a Festival; not the fine Clothes, but the Ornaments of
Piety; not a rich Table, but careful provision for the Soul. The greatest Feast
is a good Conscience. And therefore we may keep a Feast every day; if we will
exercise Virtue, if we will purify the Conscience. For in what does the late
great Festival differ from this day, but only in Tumult and Noise, and in
nothing else? For to day you may enjoy the Holy Mysteries, and partake of other
Spiritual benefits, viz. Prayer, Hearing, Blessings, Charity, and all other
things, and therefore it is as good a day as any.

CHAP. XIX. Of Daily Public Assemblies, and of Hours, and Gestures of Prayer.
IT may be thought, perhaps, by some, that I go too far, in pressing a daily
attendance upon the Public Prayers; which they imagine is but a superfluous
piece of Devotion, a great deal more than needs: But if they would lay a very
few things together, and consider them seriously they would alter their Opinion.

First, Let it be considered that there was Anciently, a Morning and an Evening
Sacrifice, every day publicly offered to God at the Temple: which was called
the Continual Burnt-Offering, ordained by him on Mount Si^^, Numb. xxviii. 3,
6. Exodus xxix. 42. Secondly, That such Sacrifices were Atknowledgments to God,
and Praye^ for the obtaining his Favor, as appear^ by the 1 Samuel xiii. 12.
Thirdly, Tha^ the re-iterated Precepts of the Gospel, which require us to pray
always, and to pray without ceasing, were never thought by any Christian to
signify less, than praying as often as, the Jews offered Sacrifice; that is
Morning, and Evening, which may, with propriety enough, be called, praying
continually, or, without ceasing; as those Morning and Evening Sacrifices at
the Temple, were called the Continual Burnt-Offering: And Fourthly, That no
reason can be given, why those Sacrifices were publicly offered, which will
not make it as necessary that we should have Public Prayers: which are most
for the Honor of God, I have proved before, and every way most advantageous to
us: And then we can make no other conclusion but this, that Morning and Evening
Prayer ought every day to be offered to God in our Public Assemblies; and that
we ought to be glad of the opportunity to join therein, as the People did with
the Priest, who ministered in the Temple. For when he was in the Sanctuary at
the Altar of Incense, praying, The whole multitude of the people were praying
without, at the time of Incense, Luke i. 10, 11, 13.

All the people of the Land indeed could not possibly come thither every day to
Worship: But they had their Synagogues in the Country, where at the time of
Morning and Evening Sacrifice, they met together to pray, and hear the Law of
God read to them. And a certain number of Men were likewise appointed from
among them, Dr. Lightf. Temple-Service c. vii. Sect. 3.
whom they called Stationary Men, to attend constantly in their courses at the
Temple; in the Name of the rest, whom they represented. Which things
considered, we cannot think it fit to have no Assemblies, but only on the
Lord's Day: especially when we observe that the Ancient Prophets expressly say,
there should be as frequent Devotion in the Days of Christ, as there had been
in former times. So we read in that famous Prophecy Psalm. lxxii 15. Prayer
shall be made for him (or to him) continually (a plain allusion to the
Continual Burnt-Offering), and daily shall he be praised Which that it is meant
of Public Prayers and Praises is e^ident, from the Offerings which it is there
said shall be brought to him; and from the effect hereof in the 17 ver. His
Name shall be continued for ever: and Men shall be blessed in him; all Nations
shall call him blessed. Thus the Chaldee Paraphrast understood those words,
ver. 5. They shall fear thee, as long as the Sun and Moon endure throughout all
Generations; that is, says he, they shall in all ages, pray before thee (which
is comprehended in the fear of God, whereby is often meant his Worship and
Service) with the Sun, and before, or in the presence of the Moon. As much as
to say, in the Morning when the Sun arises, and again at Night, when the Moon
shines, they shall by Devout Prayers express their Reverence to him, the King
of the World.

Where people, indeed, in Country Villages lie scattered one from another, and
have abundance of business which call them several ways, it cannot be expected
that there should be every day such Assemblies. But in Cities, and in Market
Towns, where they live nearer together, and have, on most days, a great deal
of leisure (which to my knowledge is spent by many people there, in mere
idleness or pleasure) it is of absolute necessity, if we will do our Duty
completely to God our Savior, that Assemblies should be maintained and
frequented, as they Anciently were, and still are in most parts of the
Christian World. For the Apostles of Christ immediately upon his Ascension unto
Heaven, persisted in the Ancient Practice of Public Devotion, being
continually (i. e. at Morning and Evening Prayer) in the Temple, Praising, and
Blessing God, Luke xxiv. 53. And after, by the power of the Holy Ghost coming
on them, they had settled Churches, we read the four living Creatures, and the
twenty four Elders (by which are certainly meant the Governors of the
Christian Church) rested not Day and Night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, etc. that is, Morning and Evening they fell down before God, and
Worshipped him that lives for ever and ever. Which Practice has ever since
continued in the Church; which, in that Heavenly Hymn, commonly ascribed to St.
Ambrose, has constantly said, Day by day we magnify thy Name.

For which end certain hours, as well as a certain place, have been always
appointed, that Men might so order their other Affairs, as to be able to mind
this great business; of giving Thanks and Praise to God, the Creator of all,
and imploring his Blessing on them in their several Callings and Conditions,
and on their Church and Country, and finally on the whole World. It is so sure
that the Jews had such set hours of Prayer, that I do not think fit to say much
of a matter so well known. I will only note that they were the 3d hour, the
6th, and the 9th. Which the Christian Church afterward observed, and that from
the Example of the Apostles themselves. For St. Peter even when he was not at
Jerusalem, went up to the housetop to pray, about the sixth hour, i. e. Twelve
a Clock. Which we cannot doubt was his usual custom: and as little doubt that
it was the custom of the other Apostles; and by them every where propagated,
throughout all the Churches. Which, the Ancient Writers of Christianity tell us
observed those very set hours of Prayer: So Clemens in his Constitutions, vii.
24. and Clemens Alexandrinus in L. vii. of his Stromata, where he calls them
(...) the set, appointed hours. And Tertullian in his Book of Fasting, chap.
10. Origin also in his Book of Prayer, proves from several Scripture Examples,
that it ought not to be made less than three times every day. N. 38. And such
was the Practice in St. Chrysostomes days, I shall have occasion to show, in
the end of this Chapter: which is still continued in our great Churches every
where. I will here only transcribe the Words of St. Hierom upon the vi. Dan.
10. There are three times, in which our knees ought to be bowed to God, at the
third hour, the sixth, and the ninth, as the Ecclesiastical Tradition instructs
us. At the third hour the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles: At the sixth
Peter went up to pray in the upper Chamber: And at the ninth, Peter and John
went up together into the Temple.

Whether the Public Service of God was every where celebrated three times a
day; or only upon the Lord's Day, and in great Cities every Day, may justly be
questioned. And I incline to think it was not every day, in all places,
celebrated more than twice: because the Constitutions, ascribed to the Apostles
(which are undoubtedly very Ancient) enjoin no more, but Morning and Evening
Prayer. The words are very remarkable, directed to the Bishop; to whom they
say, L. 2. Constit. 58.
Command and Exhort the people, to come continually to Church, Morning and
Evening every day; and not to fail at all: and then, they mention in the same
place, three Services upon the Lord's Day, as more solemn than all the rest.
Which is exactly suitable to God's appointment among the Jews, who had daily the
Morning and Evening Offering: And on the Sabbath day, another Offering, beside
the Continual Burnt-Offering, as we read expressly, Numb. xxviii. 9, 10. They
had indeed at the Temple, other Offerings every day, about 12 a Clock: but they
were not the Sacrifices of the whole Congregation of Israel, as the Morning and
Evening Sacrifices were, but the Sacrifices of particular Persons, on
particular Occasions. And accordingly all Christians prayed publicly twice
every day, Morning and Evening: and had another hour also for Private Prayers,
which was about Noon: conformable to that of the Psalmist, Evening and Morning,
and at Noon will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall hear my voice, Psalm. lv.
17.

It must not here be forgotten, there were likewise two of the Week days more
solemnly observed than the rest for Public Prayers, viz. Wednesdayes, and
Fridays, as has been elsewhere proved Treatise of Repentance page 112.
. On which days there were three Services, in some places, as on the Lord's
Day: And in all places, they took special care that nothing should keep them
then from the Public Assemblies, how negligent soever they were at other
times. And the devouter sort also fasted, on those two days; that they might
have more time for Prayer, and be excited to greater fervor in it, by a deep
sense of their own unworthiness, of the least of God's Blessings.

And do we now think to please God, and to preserve our Religion, without any
of this care, either on those days, or on others, but only the Lord's Day?
Then the Christian Church in all ages, till these later times, has been too
officious, though it followed the plain Instructions, and the best patterns of
the Holy Scriptures. Which have been so universally understood to enjoin a
daily public Service of God, that there is no Christian Country, that I can
find at this day, by whom this Tribute is not paid unto him. All the Eastern
Christians (as a Learned Divine and great Traveller has informed us Dr. Basire
's Funer. Sermon for the Bishop of Durham, page 95. and see Chemnitius Exam.
Council. Trident. pars quarta p. 160, and 162.
) Greek, Armenian, and others constantly perform it: in the West, the Church of
Rome still observes this practice: and in Germany both the Lutherans and the
Calvinists have their daily public Offices and full Congregations. So we have
in these Islands, and in many places, full Congregations also: though in others
alas! either no public Assemblies, or scandalously empty. Which is a very
great shame, as the forementioned Dr. speaks, that when now under the Gospel,
God does not require our Lambs (which were offered publicly twice every day by
the Jews) we should not daily give him the Calves of our Lips, as the Prophets
phrase is: that is, Pray to him, and Praise him, and give him Thanks in the
public Congregation.

Why the Reformed Churches in France did not thus constantly Assemble, as they
do in Germany, it is not my business to enquire. Mr. Calvin I am sure both
approved of this Practice, and wished it were restored, in more places of his
Works than one: by noteing which, what I have said will be confirmed, and some
reason also given of this Omission. For having observed, that God appointed a
Comment. in iii. Act. 1.
Morning and Evening Sacrifice to be offered among the Jews, and thereby taught
them to begin and close the day with Invocation and the Worship of God; and (a
little after) that he also appointed stated hours for these Sacrifices, to
teach us that the Church cannot be without a certain Discipline; he then
concludes, Ac hodie, nisi obstaret nimius torpor, utile esset quotidie haberi
tales conventus, and at this day, if too much sluggishness did not hinder, it
would be useful every day to hold such Assemblies. And in his Discourse upon
the fourth Commandment, L. 2. Institutionum Cap. viii. Sect. 32.
he not only asserts, that Ecclesiastical Assemblies are enjoined by God's
words, and that experience sufficiently shows their necessity; and that the
days and times must be stated and set, or else they cannot be at all, etc.
but, in answer to those who objected [Why do we not rather meet every day, that
distinction of days may be taken away?] He thus replies; Vtinam illud quidem
daretur, etc. Would to God we were able so to do: For certainly it was a worthy
Spiritual Wisdom, which spared a little portion of time every day from other
business, for God's Service. But if we cannot obtain from the infirmity of
many, that daily Assemblies may be held, and respect to Charity does not permit
us to exact more of them; Why do we not yield Obedience to that which we see by
the Will of God is imposed upon us? And he thus concludes his Explication of
that Commandment. This general Doctrine is especially to be held: That Holy
Meetings be diligently and Religiously observed, and such external helps
constantly used, as may serve to support and cherish the Worship of God; lest
Religion either fall to the Ground, or languish among us.

To which I think fit to add, what his opinion was concerning set times of
Prayer; for his Words are very instructive. Upon Psalm. lv. 17. his note is,
That from the mention there, of Morning, Evening, and Noon, we may gather that
pious Men had stat as h^ras, set hours for Prayer in those times. Which good
Men observed in their private Devotions, because then the public Service of
the Temple was performed by God's appointment. For the daily Sacrifice was
offered every Morning and Evening: And the Midday, says he, was appointed for
other Sacrifices. The reason of which, he gives upon the 18th ver. Because we
are backward to this Duty, therefore God in fixing certain hours of Prayer,
intended to cure this infirmity. Which same reason ought to be extended to
private Prayer; as appears by this place; with which the Example of Daniel
agrees.

And upon that practice of Daniel, he thus writes in his notes on Dan. vi. 10.
This Example is worth the noting, of praying three times a day; because, nisi
quisque nostrum praefigat sibi certas horas ad precandum, facile nobis excidet
memoria: We easily forget this Duty, unless every one of us, prescribe to our
selves certain hours for Prayer. From all which it is apparent, that he looked
upon set hours for public Divine Service, as appointed by God; and that he
also thought the reason of it to be perpetual: Because, if we be left to our
liberty, we shall easily forget our Duty; and perform that at no time, which we
imagine may be done at any time, as well as at that which is appointed.

The benefit of which is this among others; that where there are no public
Assemblies, or Men cannot, by reason of sickness, or other urgent cause, attend
them, they may at those set times offer some short Prayer to God in private,
and desire the public Prayers of the Church, where they are continually made,
may be accepted with him. By which means they are in some sort present there,
and the Prayers they make in private become a part of the public: they praying
as Members of that Body, which is then met together in the House of God. Thus
St. Peter prayed privately, as I observed above, at the sixth hour, when they
were praying at the Temple, and in Christian Assemblies: and though alone at
that time, yet he chose the same hours with theirs; that his Prayers might be
joined with the rest, and not be single, but united desires.

Thus St. Chrysostom directs his people, in answer to those who objected unto
his pressing Arguments for attending the public Prayers, how is it possible
for a Secular Man engaged in business, (...), etc. to pray at the three hours
every day, Hom. iv. de Anna. Tom. 2.
and run to Church? To which he replies in this manner; though it be not easy
for every Man to run to the Church so often, yet it is easy for him, even when
he is in public business to pray to God: unto which not so much the voice is
requisite, as the mind. And therefore let no Man excuse himself by saying,
(...), the House of Prayer is not near to mine: for if we be watchful, the
Grace of the Holy Spirit, will make every one of us a Temple of God. She that
sits at the Spindle, may look up to Heaven in her thoughts, and call upon God
with fervent desires; and so may he that is in the Market, or in a Journey, or
in his Shop, making Shoes; in like manner a Servant, he that buys Meat, he
that dresses it, and all the rest: when it is not possible for them to come to
Church, they may notwithstanding make fervent and lively Prayers to God; who
does not despise the place where they are made, but desires alone warm
Affections, and a serious, composed Mind. And he concludes thus: My meaning in
all that I have said is this; That we should go to Church as often as is
possible; and when we cannot, pray at home in great quietness and tranquillity.

Which counsel if we would all follow; that is, if as many as can would come to
the House of God every day, and if they that cannot would let their hearts be
there; what Blessings might we not expect from God? What a flourishing Church,
and happy Kingdom might we hope to see? And there are a great many people, I am
sure, have leisure enough in all Cities and Towns, to fill the Churches, where
there are public Prayers: Nothing but that sluggish dullness Mr. Calvi^ speaks
of, is the hinderance: Which if men would shake off, and awake^ themselves to
serious thoughts of God and the need they have of him, and (...) constant
Prayer to him, and such like things as I have represented; the^^ would be
public Prayers, where no^ there are none; and Men would crow^ every day into
the House of Go^ (where there are) to Worship him and give him Thanks, and
beseech hi^ to be gracious to them. As for th^^ whose condition and business is
such that they cannot possibly attend them nothing can hinder them but their
own Wills, from going thither in their Wills, from going thither in their
minds, with serious Thoughts, and hearty Affections: entreating the Father of
Mercies, to hear the Prayers of those who are there assembled, and to pour down
his Blessings on such, as cannot, but would be with them.

And all this it becomes us to do in the humblest manner; according to the
invitation and direction of the Psalmist, which is recited every day at Morning
Prayer, O come, let us Worship, and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our
Maker.

The Christian Church has never been acquainted with any other posture but
this of kneeling, in their Prayers to God: saving only between Easter and
Whitsuntide, when in memory of Christ's Resurrection they were wont to stand.
Which was the common posture of Prayer among the Jews, except in time of
trouble and distress; when they also fell upon their knees, Dan. ix. 20. Nay,
when they would express the greatest Submission, Lowliness, Reverence, and
Fear, they fell upon their Faces, as our Savior did, just before his Agony,
Matthew. xxvi. 39. A posture far more remote from theirs, who sit at their
Prayers: which no man dare do, who is possessed with an awful sense of his
distance from God, and considers how mean a Creature he is, and how unworthy to
receive the smallest favor from his hands. In short, we may say to such Men as
Malachi does to those, who brought vile Offerings unto the Altar, with a little
alteration, Go now to thy Governor and petition him in this posture, Will he
be pleased with thee, or accept of thy person? No Man has the face to present
himself unto his Prince in this saucy manner; especially when he comes to beg
Mercy of him, and pray him to spare his Life, which he has forfeited to him.
And therefore let none of us venture to approach thus, into the presence of the
Great King over all the Earth, the Sovereign of the World: But cast down our
selves with such lowly Reverence before him, as may testify that we Worship
the Most High. It is not to be expected indeed that a Man should bow his knees
to God, when he is lame of the Gout, or lies sick of a Feavour, or some other
Disease, etc. but setting such cases aside, bending of the knees is necessary,
says Origin (...) 2. pars N 20.
(whose words these are) when a Man comes to accuse himself of his sins to God,
and humbly to ask pardon for them, and to desire to be cured of them. Nature
inclines us to it, if we have any sense of our condition; though we had no
instructions about it, no Examples to move us to it. And therefore I may truly
say, that we divest our selves even of Humanity; when we are so rude, as to sit
at Prayer: unless we be in such a condition, as not to be able either to fall
on our knees, or stand before the Divine Majesty. Then indeed we may be
confident he will not reject our Prayers, whatsoever the posture of our Body
be: but hear them as he did St. Paul, when he prayed and praised God in Prison,
with his feet in the stocks; and Hezekiah, who lay on his Bed by reason of his
infirmity, and cried to him; and the Thief, who prayed as he hung on the Cross,
and found favor with him. They are the words of St. Chrysostom in the place
now named.

I will conclude this Chapter with the judgment of Mr. Calvin, who expressly
determines, That the Precepts of Praying always, and without ceasing, have not
respect to our own private Prayers only; L. iii. Instit. cap. xx. Sect. 29.
but to the public Prayers of the Church also. With which he that refuses to
join, we may conclude him, not to know what it is to pray alone, either
secretly or at home. As on the other side, he that neglects to pray alone and
privately, may be thought to put up vain Prayers, though he frequent the
public Assemblies: because he respects more the Opinion of Men, than the
secret Judgment of God. In the mean time, lest the Common Prayers of the Church
should fall into contempt, God has adorned them with splendid Elogies:
especially when he calls the Temple, an house of Prayer, Isa. lvi. 7. For by
this Speech he instructs us that the principal part of his Worship, is the
Office of Prayer: in which that the faithful might exercise themselves with one
consent, the Temple was erected and lifted up to them like a Banner, that they
might all resort unto it, Psalm. lxv. 2. Where there is also a famous promise
added, ver. 1. Praise expects thee, O God in Sion: and unto thee shall the
Vow be performed in Jerusalem. In which words the Prophet admonishes, That the
Prayers of the Church are never in vain: because God perpetually administers to
his people matter of singing his Praise with joy.

Which things if they were well weighed, they would be sufficient to stir up
the zeal of those who now languish, and have no concern at all for the public
exercise of our Religion. Especially if they would observe and mark, First,
With what earnest Longings Holy Men desired to come to the Public Assemblies,
when by any impediment they were kept from them; (read Psalm. lxxxiv. 1, 2. etc.
and David's passionate breathings, xxvii. 4. One thing have I desired of the
Lord, etc.) And Secondly, With what joyful hearts, they received all
invitations to them; Psalm. cxxii. 1, 2. I was glad when they said unto me, Let
us go into the House of the Lord. Our feet shall stand within thy Gates, O
Jerusalem.

CHAP. XX. Some Objections removed.
WHen I reflect upon the conclusion of the foregoing Chapter, I cannot but fear
that they are void of the love of God, or very defective in it; who have so
little regard to his Honor, as not to love the place where his Honor
dwells, and where Praise waits for him; as the Psalmist speaks, in the
place now named: that is, where his Glorious Majesty is extolled, his wonderful
Works are magnified; his Benefits acknowledged; and Psalms sung in Honor of
him; which is the greatest business of our solemn Assemblies. For Men hear
nothing more willingly than the Praises of their Parents: There they delight to
be, and are never weary of their attendance there; where the noble acts of
their Ancestors are recited, with Songs or Speeches in their Commendation. And
therefore with much more diligence should we run thither, without ceasing;
where Men speak of the glorious Honor of his Majesty, and of the wondrous
Works of our Heavenly Father: and declare the love of our Blessed Savior,
making known his mighty Acts, and the Glorious Majesty of his Kingdom; uttering
abundantly the Memory of his great Goodness, and singing of his Righteousness.
Though alas! Who can utter the mighty Acts of the Lord? Who can show forth all
his Praise? As the Psalmist speaks elsewhere. His benefits toward us are
immensely great, and cannot worthily be praised by us: But it is our Duty to do
what we can; that we may pursue what we ought. And therefore, if we have any
respect to God, let us say and sing again, with the Psalmist, nay, with our
Savior Christ, as I have before observed. I will declare thy Name unto my
Brethren: in the midst of the Congregation will I praise thee. Ye that fear the
Lord, praise him; all ye Seed of Jacob glorify him; and fear him all ye Seed
of Israel. My praise shall be of thee in the great Congregation: I will pay my
Vows before them that fear him. Psalm. xxii. 22, 23, 25. I will praise thee, O
God, among the People: I will sing unto thee among the Nations. For thy Merey
is great unto the Heavens, and thy Truth unto the Clouds, Psalm. lvii. 9, 10.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy House: they will be still praising thee.
Psalm. lxxxiv. 4. The Dead praise not the Lord; neither any that go down into
silence. But we will bless the Lord, from this time forth, and for evermore.
Praise the Lord. Psalm. cxv. 17, 18.

Which last words teach us, that this is a piece of public Service we do to
God in this World: which we are incapable to perform, when we are gone from
hence. Then the time is past of honoring God among Men, by dec^^ring the sense
we have of his Greatness, and speaking good of his Name. For though the dead
are not quite silent; yet what they say or do, signifies nothi^^ to us in this
World: where we mu^^ serve God while we live, or else no^ at all.

Which is a new consideration to quicken us to this Duty, and to silence all
those Objections which are apt to rise in our hearts against it.

Yes, may some say, We like the thing you press: but are against the way of
doing it, in this Church. In which some are distasted at all Forms of Prayer:
and others at that Form, wherein we Worship God, and him alone.

Unto the first of these, I have this to say; That when there were no Forms of
Prayer left in this Church, they that destroyed them did not daily hold public
Assemblies: Nor do they now make it their constant practice. Which gives us too
much cause to think, they have not such a sense, as is to be wished, of their
necessity. But, to let that pass, supposing some have, and that they only
dislike a Form of Prayer; it is something strange, that the same Arguments
which make them think daily public Assemblies to be needful, should not also
reconcile them to a Form of Prayer. Which was constantly used by the Ancient
Jews in their Assemblies, as has been undeniably proved by many of our
Writers; and was prescribed by our Blessed Lord and Master, who made his
Prayer, I have shown, for the public Service: in which he joined with the Jews
when he was at the Temple in Jerusalem; and when he was in the Country, went to
the Synagogues; which the Chaldee Paraphrast calls Houses of Praise. in Isa.
vii. 19.
And so did his Apostles; who themselves used a constant Form of Praise: For
they rested not Day and Night saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come, Rev. iv. 8. This, as I showed before, was
their continual Hymn, which they offered to God: and it appears by St. Paul's
usual way of recommending the Churches to whom he wrote, unto the Grace of God,
that they had their Forms of Prayer also. For he himself constantly used these
words, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all. 2 Thessalonians. iii. 17,
18.

The same Power every Bishop had in his Church, to compose Prayers for the
necessities of it: as we may gather from 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2. Which Exhortation is
directed not to the people, but to Timothy: who was to take care to have all
Men recommended unto God in the public Offices, by Prayers and Supplications,
with Intercessions and Thanksgivings: for Kings especially, and for all in
Authority, etc. This could not be done orderly (as all things were to be in the
Christian Church) without a set Form of Words; which Timothy, we may well
think, composed. For those words (...), that Prayers be made, signify as
literally the Apostle would have Prayers and Supplications composed, as that he
would have them put up to God. And I doubt not they signify both; First That
they should be composed; and then put up to God by the Church.

For you may observe further that the Apostles speak of this as their work,
Act. vi. 4. where having bidden the Church look out some Men to be appointed to
attend the business, of providing for the poor, they add; but we will give our
selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word. They made the
Prayers where they were present, as much as they ministered the Word. Which is
further manifest from hence, that the Prayers of the Church of Jerusalem are
called the Apostles Prayers: Act. ii. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.
Observe here how all the faithful steadfastly continued in Prayers, as well as
hearing the Word: And that they are, First, called Prayers, in the Plural
number; not one but many Prayers: and then, that they are called the Apostles
Prayers; Prayers made by them. For the word Apostles in the beginning belongs
to all the three things that follow, as well as to the first: To the Apostles
Fellowship, and their breaking of Bread, and their Prayers, as well as to their
Doctrine.

To be brief, as John Baptist, being a public Minister sent of God, taught his
Disciples how to pray; and our Blessed Lord, taught his Apostles: So his
Apostles in like manner taught those whom they Converted, according to the
pattern Christ had left them; and, no question, delivered the same power to
those that should have the Supreme Guidance, Direction, and Government of the
Church, to compose Prayers suitable to Men's necessities, in the several Nations
where they lived, and over whom they presided.

It may be thought indeed that the Extraordinary Gift they had in those days
supplied all. But it is manifest both that every one had not that Extraordinary
Gift of Prayer; and that they also who had, were to be so ordered and regulated
in the exercise of it, by the Governors of the Church, that it might serve its
Edification. And nothing tended more to the Edification of the Church, than
that it should have a standing known Form of Prayers and Praises (without which
it could not be known how they Worshipped God) and not depend merely upon that
extraordinary Gift: which was not constant, but vouchsafed only on some special
occasion, according as God pleased to impart it. Which is not said arbitrarily
by me, but it appears by a convincing Argument, that this extraordinary Gift
was not intended to serve the constant necessities of the Church, but only some
particular purposes: for they who had it could not make others understand it;
and are therefore directed by the Apostle to pray they might be able to
interpret; that others might reap some benefit thereby, and be able to say Amen
thereunto. 1 Corinthians. xiv. 13, 14, 15, 16. Upon which words St. Chrysostom
supposes they ended then their Blessing in the Spirit, with the very same Form
of words wherewith we now conclude our Doxologies, or giving Glory to God, viz.
(...) for ever and ever; or throughout all Ages, World without end, as we
translate the Apostles words, Ephesians. iii. 21. And Peter Martyr thought he had
reason to acknowledge as much. For upon the forenamed place 1 Cor. xiv. 16. he
has this observation. From hence we learn, that even in those first times the
public Prayers were wont to be concluded, with these words, secula seculorum,
World without end.

And this place of the Apostle puts me in mind of another undeniable Argument
for prescribed Forms of Worship in the Christian Church: which is, that singing
Psalms and Hymns made up a great part of that Worship, and could not possibly
be performed by the whole Congregation, unless they had before them that which
was to be sung. Therefore singing by the Spirit, that is, by a Spiritual Gift,
the Apostle makes small account of, unless what was sung were put into such
words, that all the people might understand it, and sing God's Praises together
with him that was inspired. This is the Apostles meaning, when he bids them
speak among themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing and
making melody in their heart to the Lord. Ephesians. v. 19. Where by Psalms I think
all agree are meant the Psalms of David; which were a constant set Form of
Praise: Hymns and Spiritual Songs were the compositions, its like, of inspired
persons then in the Church; which could not be sung by all, unless they were
communicated to the whole Company: And then they were a Form also; and we may
well think were sung more than once; it being very reasonable to conceive, that
they had not, every time they met, a new Hymn, no more than a new Psalm. For
St. Paul blames it as a confused, unedifying thing, that when they came
together (met, that is, in the public Assemblies) every one had his particular
Psalm, etc. 1 Cor. xiv. 26. and commands all things should be done to edifying:
by making the Psalm common, that is; so that all might be the better for it.
Such, I persuade my self, were the Prayers and Hymns which St. Paul and Silas
sung in Prison: not each of them their own Private Prayer, and Hymn, but some
Common Prayer, and Form of Praise, which they were wont to use. Act. xvi. 25.

Such Hymns it is certain there were in the Church, which were sung every
Morning in praise of our Blessed Savior; as Pliny himself testifies: And
Eusebius produces an Ancient Writer asserting the Divinity of our Savior, out
of the Hymns that had been of old used in the Church acknowledging his
Divinity. L. v. Eccles. Hist. chap. 28.
And that Writer calls them Psalms and Hymns (...) written by the faithful from
the beginning: which celebrated Christ the Word of God, as God indeed. The most
Ancient of all which, was the Doxology we still use, Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, together with the Holy Ghost: as St. Basil ad Amphilochium.
cap. 27, 29.
, (or whosoever was the Author of the Book concerning the Holy Spirit) reports.
Where he says, that thus it run before the Arian times: After which, to show
that the Church meant in those words to ascribe equal Glory unto the Holy
Ghost, with the Father and the Son, it was altered into that Form wherein it
now continues; not with the Holy Ghost, but to the Holy Ghost. Which is the
very same, as to the sense; there being no real difference whether we say,
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, or Glory be to
them, with the Holy Ghost: But to avoid all suspicion of any distinction, which
the Church made between them, the Form, as it is now, was thought better. And,
so Ancient and Universal was this Form of Doxology, that the Arians themselves
used one very like to it: giving Honor and Glory to the Father, by his only
begotten Son, in the Holy Ghost; as the same Writer informs us Cap. 25.
. Which Originally had the same meaning with the other, till they perverted it:
signifying as much as we say now (in our Communion Service) when we pray for
the pardon of our Offenses, through Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom, and with
whom, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, all Honor and Glory be unto thee, O
Father Almighty, World without end. I will not trouble the Reader with any more
of the Ancient Hymns: but only note, that even in the Book of the Revelation we
read not only of the Song of Moses, but of the Song of the Lamb: the latter of
which was as much a set Form, as the former, and is there recorded. Revel. xv.
3, 4. Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are
thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who would not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify
thy Name? For thou only art Holy, etc.

And what has been said of Hymns, may be as truly said of Prayers; that the
Church had from the beginning a Form of Divine Service: which Justin Martyr
calls (...) Common Prayers; and in Ignatius (nearer to the Apostles time) is
called (...), the common Supplication: which we cannot well think was any
other, than such as he or some other Apostolical Man prescribed. In Origin they
are called (...) the prescribed or ordained Prayers; regular Petitions, which
they who used, were safe, he says, from all the power of the Devil. And as the
Hymn they sung to Christ, was so celebrated, that the Pagans took notice of it
(as I observed before) so these Forms of Prayer were now so well known to them,
that they got some scraps of them. For we find these words, (...) Lord have
mercy upon us, in Epictetum.
in Arrianus, a Pagan Philosopher; who lived about the same time with Justin
Martyr, the next Age to the Apostles.

It is superfluous to add, that the Emperor Constantine was wont to say with
his whole Court, (...) (as Eusebius L. iv. de vita Constant. c. 17.
calls them) the appointed Prayers: And delivered a Form of Prayer to his Army
to be constantly used by the Soldiers: which Eusebius also has set down in
his Life Ib. cap. 20.
Let me only note, by the way, to quicken the Reader to this Holy Duty, that as
this Religious Prince had daily Prayers in his Palace, which he frequented with
his Courtiers; making it an House of God: So he had likewise certain Ib. cap.
22.
hours, wherein he constantly retired to pray by himself.

As for following Ages, we find frequent mention of Liturgies formed by the
Apostles themselves; particularly by St. James: Unto which though some
Additions perhaps had been then made, as there have been more since, yet it is
hard to think that a great number of Bishops would have owned a Liturgy, as
composed by St. James, if there had not been a constant tradition among them,
that the Apostles left some stated Form of Prayer and Praise, in the Churches
which they governed.

But what need I trouble my self with a long proof of this matter, when we have
the Confession of the most Learned and Best Men among those, whom they that
dissent from us have been wont to reverence, that there has been no time
wherein there was not a prescribed Form of Divine Service? Let Dr. Preston
speak for all, in a Book of his much prized in former times Saints daily
Exercise, p. 80.
: where after he had owned that Christ prescribed a Form, etc. he adds; And in
the Church, at all times, both in the Primitive times, and all along to the
beginning of the Reformed times, to Luther and Calvin 's time, still in all
times the Church had set Forms they used, and I know no Objection of weight
against it.

And in Answer to that common Objection, which he calls the main one, that in
stinted Prayer the Spirit is straightened; and limited, etc. He answers as we do
now; That even those Men that use this reason, do the same daily in the
Congregation: for when another prays; that is a set Form to him that hears it:
And therefore if that were a sufficient reason (that a Man might not use a set
Form, because the Spirit is straightened) he should not hear another pray at all
(though it be a conceived Prayer) because, in that case, his Spirit is limited
to what that Man says. And very judiciously adds, That it is not a bond or
restraint of the Spirit, because there is a tie of Words: For the largeness of
the heart stands not so much in the multitude and variety of Expressions, as
in the extent of Affection. And at last concludes, That a set Form of Prayer
must be used.

Would to God they that scruple it would weigh such things as these: it would
not be long then, before they liked, nay loved that Form of Prayer which is
used in this Church. For it is so exactly conformable to the Rule of the Holy
Apostle, which I have often mentioned 1 Timothy ii. 1. consisting of
unexceptionable Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings, that
one cannot but think the Composers of it laid that Rule before them, when they
framed it. It would be too long to give an Account of the whole Book: which it
is easy to show is made up of those four parts of Divine Service. Look only
into the Letany, which is a word signifying properly a Supplication for the
turning away of evil things, with which it begins, and then proceeds to
Prayers, and to Intercessions, having, in the end, a general Form of
Thanksgiving. And observe the admirable Method of it.

It directs our Prayers to the ever Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost: the only Object of Worship; and Fountain of Mercy. Of whom we first
deprecate evil things: and that in the right order; first desiring to be
delivered from the evil of Sin, both of the Spirit and of the flesh; and then
from the evil of punishment, whether in outward, or in inward judgments. All
this we pray to be delivered from, by what Christ has done and suffered for
us; and by that alone: which is the most prevalent way of suing for Mercy. And
by the way observe, that what some, through misunderstanding I hope, have been
pleased to make the Subject of their Mirth and Sport, is really, and ought to
be esteemed, the most serious and effectual Supplication that can be made to
our Lord. By whose Holy Nativity and Circumcision, by his Baptism, Fasting, and
Temptation: by his Agony and bloody Sweat, by his Cross and Passion, by his
Precious Death and Burial, by his Glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by
the Coming of the Holy Ghost, we pray to be delivered. For thus it is, Our Lord
having humbled himself to be a Man for our sakes, nay to take on him the form
of a Servant, and, after all his other Sufferings, at last to dye the Death of
the Cross for us; is gone, with that Blood which was there shed, into the
Heavens, and is exalted at God's Right Hand in the High and Holy Place: where
he represents all that he did and suffered, from his coming into the World till
his going out of it, before God; and in the virtue of his bloody Sacrifice,
which he made of himself, pleads to have every thing from God, which he has
promised, and cannot be denied. Now for us to beseech him, that through the
force of his Sufferings of all sorts, especially of his cruel Death, and the
Glory that followed, we may be delivered and saved from all evil, is the most
pathetical, the most powerful way of entreaty, and the most prevailing
importunity, that can be used. It is as if we should say, Lord show unto the
Father what thou have endured for us: represent unto him thy obedience unto
Death; which he promised to reward with all power in Heaven and in Earth.
Exercise thy Royal Power which thou have obtained, by that humble Obedience,
for our Deliverance and Salvation. As thou have received the Gift of the Holy
Ghost, and imparted it to thy Apostles, so pour it down more and more upon us
also; who believe the Gospel which they preached and testified to be the truth.

Then follow Petitions for all good things: First, For the Universal Church;
then for our own in particular. For the King, and Royal Family: For all in
Authority under him: For all sorts of Persons: and for all sorts of Blessings,
both for Soul and Body. Be at the pains, I beseech you, to read and consider
it, with such Observations as these: and it alone will be sufficient to make
you in love with the rest of the Book of Common Prayer. A Book so fully
perfected according to the Rules of our Christian Religion, Dr. Tailor Rector
of Hadley.
in every behalf; that no Christian Conscience (in the opinion of a famous
Martyr in Queen Mary's Days, whose words these are) could be offended with any
thing therein contained.

And therefore I conclude that as it would have been a great Sin in the Church
of Ephesus, if they had dislike^ and rejected that way of Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions and Thanksgiving^ wherein Timothy led them to serve God:
so it will be still in us, if we refuse those Directions which are given us in
the Divine Service, by our Spiritual Governors; when it is manifest they guide
us by the Word of God, and the Apostolical practice according to it.

If they had composed a Divine Service, wherein they required us to pr^^ to
Angels, or to Saints departed t^^ Life; or to supplicate God by the^^ Merits,
and their Intercession, we should have had reason, therein not to have followed
their guidance: because we and they have a superior Direction, God's Holy
Word; which forbids such Worship. But when no such Prayers are appointed,
nothing ordered to be offered unto God, but what is perfectly agreeable to his
Holy Word; we can make no Apology for our selves, if we reject them merely
because they are a prescribed Form; or because every direction about them, is
not expressly required in the Word of God. This is to affront the whole
Christian Church from the beginning: This is to throw off all subjection to
Spiritual Pastors; whom the Holy Ghost has commanded us to obey.

Not indeed with an illimited Obedience, with an absolute assent to whatsoever
they shall propose, without any Examination of their injunctions: or any
appeal: for this were to take away all the Authority of God's Word, and to
erect the present Authority of the Church above it; which is the Extreme into
which they of the Church of Rome are run. But we ought to take care that out of
eagerness to avoid that Extreme, we do not fall into another; as they do who
affirm that Spiritual Pastors must only then be obeyed when they determine and
give Direction out of the express Laws of God. For as the former take away all
Authority from God's Word: so this takes away all Authority from God's
Ministers, and deprives them of that Obedience, which by God's Word is due unto
them.

An excellent Dr. Jackson upon the Creed. Book 2. chap. 4, etc.
Divine of our Church has largely treated of this, long ago: showing that
since God in his Holy Word gives them in express terms, some Spiritual
Authority, and Right, to exact some Obedience, peculiarly due to them from
their Flock; it must be in things not enjoined by the express Word of God, but
only not forbidden thereby. For if they be then only to be obeyed when they
produce the express Command of God in Scripture, for that particular thing,
unto which they require Obedience: there is no more Obedience performed unto
them, than unto any other Man whatsoever. For there is no Man so mean, but if
he can show us the express Command of God for what he says, it must be obeyed
of all. But when it is thus obeyed, it is that Command of God only, not he that
showed it to us, which is obeyed. And if this be all the Obedience we owe to
our Governors, they are as much bound to obey us, as we to obey them. The
people owe no more Obedience to their Pastors, than those Pastors owe to their
people.

If neither of these Extremes then be true; it remains that we owe, though not
an absolute, unlimited, yet a conditional and cautionary Obedience unto
Spiritual Pastors: Who have a general Warrant, expressly contained in Scripture,
to require Obedience from their people: and therefore ought to be obeyed,
though their people see not an express Word of Scripture to Authorize every
particular, wherein they require Obedience; provided, they require Obedience to
nothing expressly condemned in Scripture. Disobedience to them in such things is
as dangerous; as blind Obedience is in matters plainly unlawful. For as the
latter is the Mother of Superstition and Idolatry: so the former is the Mother
of Schisms, Presumption, Carnal Security, and Infidelity.

Which Rocks cannot be avoided, but by a due submission to the Guides of Souls,
in things wherein God has not plainly ordered the contrary. And therefore, if
any have been so unhappy as by their Education, to have imbibed a dislike to
such a way of Worship as they prescribe, and to be possessed with Fears, it may
not be the right way, though they cannot say wherein it contradicts God's Holy
Word: These fears, and all such like things, are to be overballanced and
weighed down by the Authority of Spiritual Guides and Governors. Which is good
for little if it cannot settle such doubts and scruples; over which it will
prevail, if Men consider that God commands us to obey them: And therefore their
Commandments are but particular Branches of God's General Commandment, to give
Obedience to them. Insomuch that they who disobey them, disobey God: unless
their Commands be contrary to some other of the Divine Commandments, as plain
as that which says, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, etc. Heb. xiii. 17.

Which Truths, if they were rooted in our hearts, and Men had a just sense of
such a thing, as Spiritual Obedience to Spiritual Governors: They would rather
like well of the things prescribed by them, for the sake of their Authority, by
whom they are prescribed; than disobey their Authority, upon the account of any
private dislike, which they have to such prescriptions.

Make application of all this (which I have represented out of the forenamed
Author, in fewer words) to our own Church, and its Worship, and Governors: who
have framed a Divine Service for us exactly conformable to the most Ancient and
Pure Patterns; with such care, with such circumspection, and conscientious
regard to the Directions the Apostles have left us, that none of its Enemies
can find any thing in it, as to the substance, which is not theirs. And
therefore this may be justly called, in that regard as well as others, a truly
Apostolical, Catholic Church. From which let no Man withdraw himself; but
dread the guilt of such a crime. That is, let him fear to withdraw himself from
its Public Assemblies, from the Common Prayers, and from Obedience to its
Governors. For if any Man be led from these, under the pretense of purer
Worship, unto separate Meetings, managed by those who own not the Authority of
this Churches Governors; it is most certain he is not guided by the Spirit of
Christ herein, but by the Spirit of Error and Delusion.

Of which a very Reverend Person Praeface to Paralipom. Prophetica.
has lately given this plain demonstration; that if Men had such a measure of
the Spirit as makes them living Members of the Body of Christ, they could not
but feel, what sensibly hurts that Body; what palpably hinders the growth of
it; what disgraces and reproaches it; what wounds it, nay hazzards the very
Life and Being of it. They that want this necessary sympathy, and sense of the
common good of the Body of Christ, and the interest of his Kingdom, cannot
justly pretend to any competent portion of his Spirit. For what is more
necessary for our preservation, than that we keep together in one Body, under
the same Guides and Governors; that we keep in the way, which the Church of
Christ has always trod, and be not hurried into Opinions and Practices so
unlike the truly Ancient and Apostolical Church, that we bear no resemblance to
it? For that Church had Ministers superior to the rest (as indeed the Jewish
Church had) who governed, and ruled them, and the people; it had forms of
Divine Service, such as we now have: The rejection of which is to expose us to
contempt and loathing; to harden Men's hearts against a just Reformation; to
make those who are reformed, grow sick and weary and ashamed of the distracted
unsetledness, and ungovernableness of such people: Who like nothing, but what
is unlike to all the Churches of Christ that have been in the World, till this
last unhappy Age.

This cannot proceed from the Blessed Spirit of Grace; which cannot lead Men to
destroy the Church which Christ has purchased by his Blood. Which, it is
evident, cannot be preserved, much less promoted, but by a due regard to those
who are over us in the Lord; and by adhering closely to such an Authentic
Constitution, as that of this Church: which is the genuine Offspring of the
Apostles; declaring nothing to the people, but the true sense of the Ancient
Apostolic Church throughout the World. Which always had such Governors, of a
superior Order and Degree to other Ministers, as we have: such Prayers; such
Hymns; in a word, such a Face of Religion, as is here seen in this our Church
of England.

And may be seen, Blessed be God, in other Reformed Churches: particularly in
those called Lutheran, who, as Chemnitius tells us, have had solemn Prayers
every day; and much after the same Order, that is observed in ours. His words
are these, Populus singulis diebus bis, certa hora, etc. The people assemble
every Day twice, at a certain hour, Exam. Council. Trident. Pars iv. cap. ult.
Morning and Evening, and after the singing of some Psalms, Lessons are read in
order, partly out of the Old Testament, partly out of the New: And the Assembly
concludes always with Common Prayers, and some Hymn of Thanksgiving. And
besides the people come together every Week, on some certain Day, in greater
Multitudes; to make Public and Solemn Supplications, which are called
Letanies. And so he proceeds to relate how they Worship God, with the greatest
Solemnity on the Lord's Days; and upon special Festivals, in memory of the
great Benefits we have received, on the Nativity, Circumcision, etc. in short,
on all the Days, now observed by our Church.

O that there were such an heart in us, as, instead of Wrangling and Disputing,
seriously to set our selves to make the best use we can, of such Blessed
Opportunities, as God still affords unto us of meeting together every Day for
his Worship and Service: Especially upon Letany Days, when there ought to be a
fuller Congregation, and more than ordinary Devotion. One of those Days, at
least, I should think every Devout Christian may easily see, there is great
cause to set apart every Week for Fasting and Humiliation; together with
Supplication and Prayer to the Divine Majesty, that he would turn away his
Anger from us.

Men are naturally too backward, I know, to such Holy Employments, and satisfy
themselves that they have an Excellent Religion, which they highly value:
without considering, that they have so much the greater Obligation upon them,
to join frequently in the Holy Offices thereof. Let that therefore, for a
conclusion, be added to all the motives I have used in this Book, to stir you
up to the constant performance of this Duty; that it will be the greatest shame
to us, if, when they whose Religion is a false Worship have their constant
Daily Service, and attend upon it; we who have the truest Notions of God, and
the most Excellent Religion, have less regard unto it: by which means their
Religion, how corrupt soever it be, is upheld and maintained; and for want of
this, ours, though never so pure, must needs fall to decay. For they that love
the Religion they profess, though it be not so sincere and perfect as it ought
to be, yet never fail to reap all the Benefits, which it is able to afford: and
this among the rest, that they keep their Religion, by their unfeigned Love to
it, and Diligence in it. Whereas the best and soundest Religion professed by
those who bear not the like Affection to it, yields those who thus retain it,
little or no benefit (as Mr. Hooker has observed) and by degrees is lost, for
want of a due regard, and earnest Affection to it. We see this verified, in
Pagans, Turks, and Heretics: Who zealously attend upon the Public Offices of
their Religion; and so continue their Sect.

How comes their Religion to lead them to have frequent Assemblies, and ours to
make us neglect them: But that they keep up their Love to their Religion, such
as it is; and we have lost our first Love and so endanger the loss of our
Religion? For had we a sincere love to it, we should be led, by the Natural
Dictates of it, to attend upon its public Offices (that being the very first
thing to which Religion inclines us) and there to attend with all seriousness,
both to the Prayers and Hymns, and to the Holy Scriptures which are then read
unto us. And therefore our Religion has gone to decay, because we have not
minded public Assemblies daily: but where they are kept up, they are empty and
thin; or when they are full, there are none of these Natural signs of Devotion,
in too many people, which are among all Nations, (bended Knees, Hands, and Eyes
lifted up to Heaven) nay, they do not attend to the Word of God there read, but
pass it by, as a Tale that is told; fancying, I suppose, it is never the Word
of God, but when it is preached, that is, spoken without Book.

These are not the Faults of all, nor I hope of most among us: But I have
observed some of them (especially the last, of Whispering together all the time
the Scriptures are read, as if they were nothing but an empty sound) in so many
Persons, from whose Understanding one would expect better things, that I could
not but take notice of such unbecoming Behavior in the House of God. Where I
beseech. God to awaken all his Ministers, to perform their Duty with careful
Diligence: And all his People to Accompany them reverently in continual Prayers
and Supplications: to the Glory of His Great Name, the Credit of our Holy
Religion, the Honor of this Church, the Increase of all true Godliness and
Virtue among us; and the furtherance thereby of our Joyful Account, and Happy
Meeting in the Day of the Lord Jesus. Amen.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 30. l. 24. d. he. p. 33. l. 20. for created r. erected. p. 53. l. ult for
enabled r. enobled. p. 59. l. 7. r. 2dly, This. p. 65. l. 11. for it r. he. p.
106. l. 17. d. also. p. 121. l. 3. after yet, add) p. 123. l. 9. after 19 add)
p. 168. l. 1. for times r. time. p. 170. l. 22. for Rules r. Rule. p. 184. l.
25. r. was as well performed any where, as in the Church. p. 185. l. 3. r.
enlarge.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. PART I. CHAP. I. OF the Nature of Prayer. Page 1 CHAP. II.
Of the Necessity of Prayer. Page 10 CHAP. III. The sense of all Mankind about
this matter, especially of our Blessed Savior. Page 22 CHAP. IV. Other
Arguments of the great Necessity of Prayer. Page 32 CHAP. V. Some Reflections
upon the foregoing Considerations. Page 39 CHAP. VI. The Honor God does us in
admitting us into his Presence. Page 49 CHAP. VII. The Pleasure which springs
from the serious performance of this Duty. Page 61 CHAP. VIII. The great
Benefits we receive by serious Prayer to God. 74 CHAP. IX. The Three foregoing
Chapters improved. Page 85
PART II. CHAP. X. Public Prayer the most necessary of all other. Page 95
CHAP. XI. God is most honored by Public Prayers. Page 99 CHAP. XII. Public
Prayers most advantageous unto us. Page 115 CHAP. XIII. Public Prayers most
suitable to the Nature of Man. Page 135 CHAP. XIV. The Nature of a Church
requires there should be Public Prayers. Page 162 CHAP. XV. Our Blessed
Savior, the Founder of the Church, teaches us this Doctrine. Page 168 CHAP.
XVI. Which is further confirmed by the Practice of the Apostles, and the first
Christians. Page 177 CHAP. XVII. Other Considerations to strengthen this
Argument. Page 192 CHAP. XVIII. A Recapitulation of the four foreing Chapters,
with some Inferences from thence. Page 206 CHAP. XIX. Of Daily Public
Assemblies, and of Hours and Gestures of Prayer. Page 222 CHAP. XX. Some
Objections removed. Page 244

THE END.

