A PARTICULAR OF THE Ninety five thousand ACRES Of Fenny and low surrounded
grounds, lying within the Great LEVEL of the FENS.

Which, by an ACT of PARLIAMENT of the 29 of May, 1649. were allotted to
WILLIAM Earl of Bedford, HIS Participants and Adventurers for Dreyning of the
same

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baddeley within the middle Temple-gate. 1653.

THE PRINTER TO THE Reader.
THAT the occasion of Printing the particular parcels of grounds ensuing, may
be the better understood, the Reader may please to take notice, that this great
Level of the Fennes containing near 400000. Acres, was sometimes accounted the
Paradise of England, if we may believe History, and the undertaking of
recovering the same by Francis late Earl of Bedford; was a Work so famous and
public, that Hondius a Netherlander, who set forth Mercatours Geography of the
World, called the New Atlas, printed at Amsterdam, in the year, 1636. makes
particular mention of that undertaking, declaring what the said Fennes were in
the year 1200 after Christ, and of their surrounding, and of the many attempts
to recover them by John of Gaunt, Margaret, Countess of Richmond, King James,
and others, and all in vain; (which, who so please to take the pains,) may
see more largely in the 67, p. of that Book, where the Fennes are delineated in
a Map. And because good men have seldom any other reward for works of public
concernment, then the memory of them. It is not impertinent to mention how that
Noble Earl, upon the desire of the Gentlemen of those Counties, wherein those
Fens lay, being Commissioners of Sewers, 47. in number, and Lords of Manors,
and Land-owners (within the Level,) was persuaded to undertake that Work, and
for 95000a. parcel of those Fens, to dreyne the whole, and maintain them at his
own charge, which will further appear to such as will peruse the Law of Sewers,
made for that purpose at Lynne, in the 6th year of the late King Charles, how
vigorously that Noble Earl, and such as after became participants with him in
that undertaking, prosecuted that Work with the expense of above 100000 li. is
known to many who are yet the living Witnesses of the truth thereof; and yet
after the Work was effected, and the 95000 Acres, set forth for their
recompense. In October, in the 13. year of the late King, by the means of some
busy men; The very next year following, there was a company of
Court-Commissioners of Sewers, sent to Huntington, who under pretense that the
Work was not done, outed the good Earl and his participants of all the 95000
Acres for the late K. and 57000 Acres more to be taken from the Country, but
there went no blessing with that enterprise. In stead of making new Works to
preserve the Level, the old were suffered to decay, and the whole Level in
great danger to be utterly lost again, had not the late Parliament encouraged
William, now Earl of Bedford, the Son and Heir of his Noble Father,) and his
participants, to undertake the recovering and regaining so vast a quantity of
rich grounds of so much advantage to this Commonwealth, for the old proportion
of the 95000 Acres, as he that will but read the Act of Parliament, of the 29,
of May, 1649. for dreyning the said Level, may see more at large; by which
means the Country saved the 57000a. And the Work has been so effectually
prosecuted, that in three years after the expense of 300000.li.) the blessing
of God going along with it,) the Work is completed; and by the judgment of
ten honorable and worthy Commissioners, appointed for that purpose, upon their
view and hearing witnesses upon Oath, a final Judgment given for the said
dreyning, and the 95000 Acres divided into the hands of several purchasers,
wherein there are many Families concerned, most of the old Participants being
ruined in their estates by the great charge of the Work: (a fate usually
attending the first undertakers of public Works,) that there want not some
unsatisfied with the Work, and yet thought it too much trouble to come so far
as London to complain to the Commissioners appointed by the Act. And therefore
the Honorable Council of State in the interval of Parliament, for the ease of
the Country, named 24. Commissioners of worth and integrity, residing upon the
place, to hear the complaints of the Country; and when the business came to a
full examination before them, and it appeared what charge had been expended,
and what recompense allowed; the most indifferent hearers thought the
recompense scarce worth the undertaking, which is too apparent; for I have
heard some of the Participants offer to sell all their adventure Land for the
bare money they are out of purse, now the hazard is past; b^t in regard there
was some pretense before the said Commissioners, that the undertakers had taken
above 95000 Acres according to the Law of Sewers at Lyn, which the undertakers
did with confidence deny. The Commissioners according to Justice, and for the
Countries satisfation, did make the aforesaid Order, whereby all the
particulars of the 95000 Acres, will appear.

A Particular of the ninety five thousand Acres of Fenny and low-surrounded
grounds, lying within the great Level of the Fennes, within the Counties of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, and the Isle of
Elie, which by an Act of Parliament of May 29. 1649. were allotted to William
Earl of Bedford, his Participants and Adventurers for dreyning of the same;
and formerly set forth by a Law of Sewers at St. Ives in October, in the
thirteenth year of the late King Charles, with the particular towns and places
where they lie; printed by order of the Commissioners, authorized by the Right
Honorable the Council of State, to hear and determine several matters and
things, concerning the work of dreyning the great Level of the Fennes; which
order follows, viz.

At the Meeting or Session by Adjournment at the sign of the Bear in
Cambridge, upon Tuesday, Septem. the 20. and there continued by adjournment 21.
and 22. of the same month, before Talbot Pepis Esquire, John Claypoole
Esquire, Robert Vinter Gent. Dr. Richard Staynes, Henry Farrer Gent. Mr.
Richard Tymbes, Dr. Symcotts, Mr. Robert Robson, Mr. Edward Barker of Denver,
and Mr. William Life of Downham, Commissioners amongst others empowered to hear
and determine several matters and things concerning the work of dreyning the
great Level of the Fennes, by virtue of an Order and Declaration of the Council
of State, June 28. 1653.

It is ordered, that the Right Honorable, William Earl of Bedford, and his
Participants the Adventurers for dreyning the great Level of the Fennes, do
cause to be printed a book, setting forth the particular towns and places,
wherein every several lot and part of the 95000 Acres of the said Adventurers
do lie, for satisfaction of the Country, that no more then 95000 Acres are
taken by the said Adventurers, which hereafter follows.

COM. NORF.
Denver. OUt of the common Fenne-grounds, of, or belonging to Denver in the
said County of Norfolk, lying on the West Side of the river Ouse, three hundred
and fourscore Acres, (that is to say,) one hundred twenty four Acres out of
that part of the Fenne near Salters Lode, abutting Eastward upon the said
river, and Northward upon the river called Bedford river. And the residue being
two hundred fifty six Acres out of that part of the said Fenne that lies next
Salters Lode upon the North-side of the said new river, abutting upon the said
new river, and Well-Creek. 0380 0 00

Out of a several Fenne-ground in Denver aforesaid abutting Westward upon the
grounds of Well, four Acres at the South-end thereof next Denver Fenne. 0004 0
00

Helgay. Out of the common Fennes of, or belonging to Helgay, in the said
County of Norfolk, one thousand three hundred Acres, (that is to say) one
entire Fenne, lying between Sir Henry Willoughbies dreyne and Southerey Common,
containing nine hundred eighty two Acres, and the residue being three hundred
and eighteen Acres, out of that part of the said Fenne abutting Northward upon
the imbanked grounds of Edmund Skipwith Esquire, and adjoining to the said
river Ouse. 1300 0 00

Out of the several Fenne-grounds, of, or belonging to Sir Henry Willoughbie
Knight, called Reads Fenne, three hundred and sixty Acres, at the North-end of
the said grounds, abutting upon Maid Lode. 0360 0 00

Southerey. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Southerey in the
said County of Norfolk, eight hundred Acres out of the common Fen called
Adymore, abutting upon Helgay common Fenne, and the river Ouse. 0800 0 00

Out of the several Fenne-grounds in Southerey aforesaid, of, or belonging to
Sir Henry Willoughby aforesaid, lying on the East Side of the river Ouse,
seventy and six Acres at the South-end thereof, near to Modney-house. 0076 0 00

Out of one other several Fenne ground in Southerey aforesaid, of, or belonging
to the said Sir Henry Willoughbie Knight, lying on the West Side of the river
Ouse, seventy six Acres at the West End of the same grounds. 0076 0 00

Out of one other several Fenne ground, lying in Southerey or Helgay, or one of
them, of, or belonging to Thomas Gibbon Esquire, twenty Acres at the Western
end thereof, near Priests houses. 0020 0 00

Roxham. Out of the common Fenne-grounds, of, or belonging to Roxham in the
said County of Norfolk, ninety four Acres at the South-east part of the same
Fenne, abutting upon Dereham Coat Fenne, and the river Wissey. 0094 0 00

Dereham. Out of the common Fenne grounds, of, or belonging to Dereham in the
said County of Norfolk, two hundred Acres, (that is to say) ninety five Acres
out of the Fenne called Dereham Coat Fenne, abutting upon Roxham Fenne, and the
river Wissey, and the residue being one hundred and five Acres out of the
common Fenne, at the parts thereof, abutting upon the said river Wissey and
Wereham. 0200 0 00

Woreham, Wretton and Stoke. Out of the common Fennes, of, or belonging to
Wereham, Wretton and Stoke in the said County of Norfolk, five hundred, thirty
and six Acres in one piece, next the said river Wissey, extending along the
said river, from the North-side of Tokeshill to Weredike. 0536 0 00

Norwold. Out of the common Fenne grounds, of, or belonging to Norwold, in the
said County of Norfolk, four hundred twenty and nine Acres, (that is to say)
the entire common Fenne lying on the North-side of the river Wissey, containing
twenty nine Acres, and the residue being four hundred Acres, out of the common
Fennes, lying on the South Side of the said river, abutting upon the said
river, and lying between Howhill and Whittington Causey, and between the said
river and the hard lands of Norwold. 0429 0 00

Methwold. Out of the common Fennes, of, or belonging to Methwold in the said
County of Norfolk, one thousand six hundred forty and eight Acres, out of the
Fennes called Southmore and Twinne Lodes, abutting Northwestward, upon part of
the said Common called Southmore, wherein Southerey does inter-common
North-Eastward upon the several Fenne grounds of Sir Edmund Mundford Knight,
and Southward upon the common Fenne of Feltwel, called North Fenne. 1648 0 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds of Methwold aforesaid, three hundred fifty
seven Acres at the west end of two of the said severals next Southerey. 0357 0
00

Feltwell. Out of the common Fenne-grounds, of, or belonging to Feltwel in the
said County of Norfolk, one thousand six hundred ninety seven Acres, (that is
to say) eight hundred and forty Acres out of the Fenne called North-Fen, at
the North-East part thereof, abutting upon the common Fenne of Methwold called
Southmore. Out of the Fen called the Mowe-Fen, eighty Acres at the West-part of
the same Fen next Brandon river. And the residue being seven hundred seventy
and seven Acres out of the Fen called the South-Fen, at the Southwest part
thereof, abutting upon the said Mowe-Fen, and the several Fen ground belonging
to Sir Thomas Woodhouse. 1697 0 00

Out of the several Fen grounds of, or, belonging to Feltwel aforesaid, seven
hundred fifty and one Acres, (that is to say) out of the several Fen ground,
now, or late of Sir Thomas Woodhouse Knight, abutting upon Feltwel South-Fen,
and a several belonging to Sir Edmund Mundford, two hundred and six Acres out
of the middle part of the said several Fen, from North to South. Out of the
several Fen ground of Sir Edmund Mundford aforesaid, abutting upon the said
several of Sir Thomas Woodhouse aforesaid, one hundred ninety and seven Acres
out of the middle part of the said Fenne, from North to South. Out of the
several Fen-ground belonging to Christ's College, abutting upon the said
several Fen-ground of Sir Edm. Mundford aforesaid, one hundred twenty six acres
out of the middle part of the said ground from North to South. Out of the
several fen-ground late of Robert Wace Gent. abutting upon the said several
ground of Christ's College, and the river of Brandon, one hundred seventy two
acres out of the middle of the said ground from North to South. Out of the
several Fen-ground, lying between the Fen-grounds of Christ's College
aforesaid, and the river of Brandon fourteen acres, abutting Northward upon the
several Fen-ground of Thomas Gibbon Esquire. Out of the several Fen-grounds,
of, or belonging to Thomas Tyrel Gent. lying between the aforesaid
Fenne-grounds of Sir Edmund Mundford Knight, and the river of Brandon, thirteen
Acres, and twenty Perches at the South-East end of the same ground. Out of the
several Fen-ground lying between the several Fen of Sir Thomas Woodhouse
aforesaid, and the river of Brandon, ten Acres and three Roods, at the
South-part thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground late of Robert Wace Gent.
abutting upon the hard lands of Feltwel aforesaid six Acres and ten Perches at
the North-west-end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen-ground lying
between Feltwel Mowe-Fen, and the river of Brandon, six Acres and ten Perches
at the North-west end thereof. 0751 0 00

Hocwold and Wilton. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to
Hockwold and Wilton, in the said County of Norfolk, nine hundred and fifty
Acres out of the common Fenne, adjoining to the common Fennes, and the hard
lands of Feltwel, and abutting upon the said hard lands of Feltwel. 0950 0 00

Out Of the several Fen-grounds of William Heveningham Esquire, two hundred
Acres (that is to say) out of the several ground called Poolings, one hundred
Acres at the North-side thereof, abutting upon Feltwel Mowe-Fen, and the river
of Brandon, and out of one other several ground lying on the South-west side of
the said river of Brandon, one hundred Acres abutting upon the Fenne called
Redmore grounds, and the said river of Brandon. 0200 0 00

Out of the several Fen-ground of Osbert Pratt Gent. lying next the Fen called
Sea-Fen, ten Acres at the North-end of the same ground. 0010 0 00


COM. SVFF.
Brandon. OUt of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging unto Brandon in the
County of Suffolk, three hundred and fifty Acres, (that is to say) one entire
Fen abutting upon the East-part of the Common Fen of Lackingheath called
Stallard, one hundred and ninety Acres, and the residue being one hundred and
sixty Acres out of a Common Fen abutting upon the said entire Fen, at the
West End of the said Common Fen. 0350 0 00

Lackingheath. Out of the Common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Lackingheath,
in the said County of Suffolk, one thousand and eight hundred Acres (that is to
say) the moiety or one half of the common Fen, called Little-shell of
East-more, being ninety two Acres at the Eastern part thereof, next the common
Fen called Archingstal. The said entire common Fen called Archingstal,
containing one hundred seventy four Acres. One entire common Fen, abutting
upon the river of Brandon. Audry Love, and j the several Fen ground of William
Heveningham Esquire, containing forty seven Acres. One entire common Fen lying
on the North-side of Brandon river, between the common Fen of Hockwold and
Wilton, called Sea Fen, and the several Fen of William Heveningham aforesaid,
containing fifty eight Acres and a half. The entire common Fen, called
Town-more, containing five hundred seventy nine Acres; And the residue being
eight hundred forty nine Acres and a half, out of the great common Fen,
abutting upon Plant Lode, and the said Fen called Town-moore, at the North-west
part thereof. 1800 0 00

Lackingheath. Severals. Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to
Lackingheath aforesaid, two hundred and fourscore Acres (that is to say) out
of the several Fen grounds of Unley-Farme, lying between the common Fen grounds
of Lackingheath aforesaid, and the Sedge-Fens of Milden-hall, one hundred
twenty three Acres and two Roods at the West End of the same ground. Out of the
several Fen ground, now, or late of William Steward Gent. lying at the West End
of the common Fen called Stallard, three Acres and one Rood at the West End of
the same ground. Out of one other several Fen ground, now, or late of the said
William Steward, lying on the North-side of Brandon river, six Acres and one
Rood at the North-west end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen ground
abutting upon the said common Fen called Stallard, and the high Lode, four
Acres at the North-end of the same ground. Out of a triangular several Fen
ground, abutting upon the said common Fen called Stallard, and the high Lode,
one Acre, three Roods and twenty Perches, at the South-end of the same ground.
Out of the several Fen ground, lying between Winter Lode and Crosse-water, at
the meeting of the same Lodes, one Acre, three Roods, and twenty Perches, at
the North-west end thereof. Out of a several Fen ground, lying near
Willow-Lode, encompassed on all sides with the common Fen of Lackingheath
aforesaid, two Acres at the West-part of the same ground. Out of the several
Fen ground, lying on the East-part of the last mentioned several ground four
Acres and one Rood at the North-west end thereof. Out of one other several Fen
ground, lying on the East-part of the several ground last mentioned, and
abutting upon Crosse-water, eight Acres at the North-west side of the same
ground, next unto Crosse-water aforesaid. Out of the several Fen ground, lying
between the last mentioned several ground and Willow Lode; two Acres and three
Roods at the West End of the same ground Out of the several Fen ground,
abutting upon the West Side of Winter-Lode, and high Lode aforesaid, fifteen
Acres and two Roods at the North-west end thereof, abutting upon high-Lode. Out
of the several Fen ground, abutting upon the common Fen called East-moore, and
the several Fenne called the Boats-gangs, two Acres at the North-west end
thereof next to Delfe Dyke. Out of the several Fen grounds called the Boats
gangs, sixty seven Acres and a half at the West End hereof, a butting upon
Plant load and Delfe Dyke. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late of John
Crane, abutting upon High-load, and the several ground now, or late of William
Barn Gent. eight Acres and two Roods, adjoining upon the said several ground
of William Barn, and the said High-load. Out of the said several fen-ground
now, or late of William Barn aforesaid, ten Acres adjoining upon the said
several ground of John Crane. Out of one other several Fen ground now, or late
of the said John Crane, lying near the said several ground of William Barn
aforesaid, six Acres and two Roods at the North-west side of the same ground,
abutting upon High-load aforesaid, Out of the greater of the two several Fen
grounds, lying between Delfe Dyke and Brandon river, eight Acres and two Roods
at the North-west side thereof. And out of the other smaller several, lying
between Delfe-dyke and Brandon river, three Acres and three Roods, at the
North-end of the same ground. 0280 0 00

Millden-hall. Out of the common Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Milden-hall,
in the said County of Suffolk, two thousand nine hundred and twenty Acres,
(that is to say,) one entire common Fen called Burnt Fen, containing one
thousand seven hundred and thirty seven Acres. Two entire Fen grounds called
Sedge Fens, lying between Burnt-Fen and Town-Moore in Lackingheath aforesaid,
containing eight hundred and forty Acres. And the residue being three hundred
forty and three Acres out of the common Fen, lying between the several
Fen-grounds of Unly Farm, and Baldwins Load, at the West-part of the same
Fen. 2920 0 00


COM. CANTABR.
I^^^ham. OUt of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Isleham in the
County of Cambridge, nine hundred and thirty Acres, (that is to say,) one
entire common Fen, abutting upon the common Fens of Soham, called great Metlam
and little Metlam, and the river of Milden-hall, containing three hundred and
eight Acres. Out of the Mow Fen of Isleham, abutting upon the forementioned
common Fen of Isleham, and the said river of Milden-hall, four hundred thirty
two Acres at the North-part thereof. And out of the common Fen of Isleham,
called West-Fen, abutting upon the common Fens of Soham, called little Metlam
and the Hasse, one hundred and ninety Acres at the North-end of the same Fen.
0930 0 00

Soham. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Soham and Barway, in
the said County of Cambridge, one thousand and eight hundred Acres, (that is to
say) the entire common Fen, abutting upon Wickin high Fen, called Fordey,
containing one hundred fifty six Acres and a half. Out of the common Fen called
Barway middle, seventy four Acres and a half at the North-east part thereof,
abutting upon Sea Load, and the river Ouse. The two entire common Fens called
great Metlam and little Metlam, containing one thousand two hundred and ten
Acres. And out of the common Fen called the Hasse, three hundred fifty nine
Acres at the North-part thereof, abutting upon little Metlam aforesaid. 1800 0
00

Out of the several Fen ground in Soham aforesaid, of, or belonging to Sir
Robert Heath Knight, four hundred and twenty Acres. Out of the several Fen
ground called great Metlam, abutting upon the Common called great Metlam, and
the river of Milden-hall, at the East-part of the said several Fen. 0420 0 00

Out of the several Fen ground in Soham aforesaid, lying between the fens,
called East Fen and Calf Ten, eight Acres at the East End thereof. 0008 0 00

Out of the several Fen-ground in Soham, called Bugbeach, one Acre at the
West End thereof. 0001 0 00

Fordbam. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Fordham in the
said County of Cambridge, lying between the Fen grounds of Burwel, and the hard
lands near Wickin, twenty seven Acres at the West End of the same Fen. 0027 0 00

Wickin. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Wickin, in the said
County of Cambridge, four hundred and fifty Acres, (that is to say,) out of
the common Fen called the Sedge-Fen, or broad meddow, three hundred Acres at
the Western end thereof, abutting upon Reach Load, the hard lands of Wickin,
and the imbanked several grounds of Isaac Barrow Esquire. And the residue being
one hundred and fifty Acres out of the common Fen called high Fen, at the
North-east part thereof, adjoining upon the several ground of Thetford, called
the Bots gangs, and the river Grant. 0450 0 00

Out of the Fen-grounds of Wickin aforesaid, being Mow Fens, or Lamas grounds,
consisting of the lots or doles of diverse persons. One hundred Acres, (that is
to say) out of the mowing ground lying on the West Side of the river Grant,
fifty five Acres, and three Roods, at the West End of the same lots or doles,
abutting upon the common Fen of Water-beach, called Joyst Fen. Out of the
mowing grounds, lying between the hard lands of Wickin aforesaid, the river
Grant, the several Fen grounds of Upmeere farm. And the way leading from the
hard lands of Wickin, unto Dimockes Coat, twenty three Acres and one Rood, at
the middle part of the said Mow Fen, where the said doles or lots do abutt one
upon another, extending from the said hard lands of Wickin, to the said way
leading to Dimockes Coat. And out of the Mow Fen ground lying between the said
way, leading to Dimockes Coat, the river Grant, the high Fen of Wickin, and the
hard lands of Wickin, twenty one Acres at the middle part of the said Mow Fen,
where the said doles or lots do abutt one upon another, extending from the said
way leading to Dimockes Coat, unto the way leading to Wickin high Fen
aforesaid. 0100 0 00

Out of a several Sedge Fen of Isaac Barrow Esquire, lying in Wickin aforesaid,
twenty one Acres at the North-west part thereof. 0021 0 00

Out of a several Sedge Fen, of, or belonging to Sir Edward Payton, Knight and
Baronet, fourteen Acres at the West End thereof. 0014 0 00

Out of other several Fen-grounds lying in Wickin aforesaid, twenty Acres,
(that is to say) out of the imbanked several Fen-ground of Isaac Barrow
aforesaid, seven Acres at the West End thereof, abutting upon the hard lands of
Wickin aforesaid. Out of the several Fen grounds belonging to Upmeer farm,
five Acres at the North-east end of the same grounds, abutting upon the Mow
Fen of Wickin and the river Grant. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late
of Sir Edward Payton aforesaid, lying upon the West Side of the river Grant,
five Acres at the South-west end thereof, abutting upon the river Grant. And
out of the several Fen-ground of (...) Dalton Gent. adjoining to the said
several Fen of Sir Edward Payton and the river Grant, three Acres at the
South-west part of the same several ground. 0020 0 00

Burwel and Reach. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Burwel,
and Reach in the said County of Cambridge, seven hundred Acres at the
North-west part of the same Fens, abutting upon Wickin Load and Reach Load.
0700 0 00

Swafham. Out of the intercommon Fens, of, or belonging to Swafham, Prior
Swafham, Bulbeck Botsam, and Reach in the said County of Cambridge, or to some
or one of them, one thousand four hundred Acres, (that is to say) out of the
common Fen called white Fen, four hundred and eleven Acres, abutting upon
Swaffham Load and White Fen lake. Out of the common Fen called the Croyle,
four hundred and four Acres, abutting Eastward upon the common Fen, called
great Sedge Fen, Southward and Westward, upon the residue of the same common
Fen, called the Croyle, and Northward upon the common Fen called the high Fen.
Out of the said common Fen called the high Fen, four hundred and five Acres at
the North-east part thereof, abutting upon Reach Load and the river Grant. And
out of the common Fen, called great Sedge Fen, one hundred and eighty Acres at
the North-end thereof, abutting upon the high Fenne and Reach Load. 1400 0 00

Botsam. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Botsam in the said
County of Cambridge, lying between White-Fen Lake and the river Grant, one
hundred and forty Acres at the North-east end of the same Fen-ground, abutting
upon Swaffham high Fen, and the river Grant. 0140 0 00

Horningsey, Qui and Ditton. Out of the intercommon Fen-grounds, of, or
belonging to Botsam-Horningsey, Qui and Ditton in the said County of Cambridge,
or to some or one of them four hundred Acres, (that is to say) out of the
common Fen called High Fen, one hundred Acres at the Eastern end thereof,
abutting upon the common Fen called the Rough. And out of the said common Fen
called the Rough, three hundred Acres at the western part thereof, abutting
upon the said high Fen. 0400 0 00

Water-beach. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Water-beach in
the said County of Cambridge, seven hundred and fifty Acres, (that is to say)
out of the Fen called the Joyst Fen, six hundred thirty eight Acres at the
North-end thereof, abutting upon the several Fen grounds of Stretham and
Wickin. And out of one other Fen, lying between the said Fen, called Joyst Fen,
the river Grant, and the hard lands of Water-beach, one hundred and twelve
Acres at the North-east end thereof, abutting upon the said Fen called Joyst
Fen, and the river Grant. 0750 0 00

Cottenham. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Cottenham, in
the said County of Cambridge, two hundred and forty Acres at the East End of
the common Fen, lying between the common Fens, called Sech-hill ^ens and the
lots. 0240 0 00

Rampton. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Rampton in the
said County of Cambridge, sixteen Acres, (that is to say) out of the Mow Fen
called Hempsal, thirteen Acres at the North-east end thereof, abutting upon
Smithy Fen in Cottenham. And out of the common Fen-ground called Iram, three
Acres at the East-corner thereof, abutting upon Hempsal aforesaid. 0016 0 00

Wivelingham. Out of the common Fens, of, or belonging to Wivelingham in the
said County of Cambridge, one hundred eighty three Acres and one Rood, (that is
to say) out of the common Fen ground called Hempsal, fifty three Acres at the
North-part thereof, adjoining upon Smithy Fen and Audrey Causey. Out of the
common Fen called Middle-ditch Fen, seventy seven Acres and one rood at the
South-east part thereof, abutting upon the several Fen ground called Babies
Hurne, and the river Ouse. And out of the common Fen called Clattox or
Langrige, fifty three Acres at the North-end thereof, abutting upon the several
Fen-grounds of Over, and the several Fen-grounds in Wivelingham, called the
Meere-grounds. 0183 1 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds of, or belonging to Wivelingham aforesaid,
forty Acres and three Roods (that is to say) out of the several ground called
Shelfold, consisting of the lots or doles of diverse persons, twelve Acres and
three Roods at the South-west end of the said lots, next unto the Fens of Over.
Out of the several Fen called Babies Hurne, thirteen Acres and three Roods at
the North-end thereof, abutting upon the river Ouse. Out of the several
Fen-ground now, or late of James Pascall Gent. called Stacks, seven Acres at
the North-east end thereof, abutting upon Andrey Causey. And out of the several
Fen of John Crane Esquire, called little Shelfould, seven Acres and one Rood at
the North-East corner thereof, near Erith-Sluce. 0040 3 00

Over. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Over in the said
County of Cambridge, one hundred seventy one Acres; Out of the Fen called the
Marish at the East End thereof, abutting North-westward upon the East End of
the lots or doles of diverse persons, extending from the place called the
Haywards Swath, unto the bank of the river Ouse Eastward, upon the several, or
the late enclosed grounds of Over aforesaid, called Blunts Mere, and Southward
upon the residue of the said Fen called the Marish. 0171 0 00


INSVLA ELIEVM IN COM. CANTAB.
Haddenham. OUt of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Haddenham in the
said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, three hundred seventy eight Acres,
(that is to say) out of the Fen called Gaul Fen, three hundred and nine Acres
at the East-part thereof, abutting upon Berry Fen. And the residue being sixty
nine Acres, out of the common Fen called Berry Fen aforesaid, at the West Side
thereof, abutting upon Gaul Fen aforesaid. 0378 0 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Haddenham aforesaid, one
hundred thirty and eight Acres, (that is to say) out of the several Fen ground,
called Ewell Fen, thirty six Acres and two Roods at the West-part thereof,
abutting upon Gaul Fen, and the Delfes in Haddenham. Out of the Mow Fen
called Lindon-doles, nine Acres at the South Side thereof, abutting upon the
river Ouse. Out of the several Fen called Priests Crossed, one Acre at the
South-end thereof next the river Ouse. Out of the greater Fen-ground, called
Hill-doles, twelve Acres and twenty Perches at the North-side thereof, next
Haddenham small Fen. Out of the lesser Fen-ground, called Hill-doles three
Acres, one Rood and twenty Perches at the North-end thereof, next Sutton-Mead
lands. Out of the several Fen-grounds called Ovtr-delfes and Pingles, being
eighteen in number, lying on the South Side of Erith-Causey, between the
several Fen-grounds of Edward Carter and Henry White, forty two Acres, as the
same is already by Lockspits or small trenches, droportionably divided and set
out at South-end of every of the said eighteen several Fen-grounds abutting
upon the river Ouse. Out of the several Fen-grounds called Nether-delfes lying
between Erith-Causey and the said Fen, called Gaule-Fen, being fifteen in
number, twenty nine Acres, three Roods, and twenty two Perches, as the same is
already also set out proportionably, and by Lockspits or small trenches,
severed and divided from every of the said fifteen several Fen-grounds. Out of
the several Fen-ground now, or late in the tenure or occupation of Henry White,
lying next Ewell Fen, one Acre and ten Perches at the North-end thereof,
abutting upon the bank of Ewell Fen aforesaid. Out of the several Fen ground
now, or late in the tenure or occupation of Thomas Pamplin Gent. lying on the
North-side of Erith Causey, two Roods at the East End thereof, abutting upon
the Angle of the said Causey. Out of the several Fen-ground called Calley
Crossed, lying on the North-side of Erith Causey, two Roods and eight Perches at
the West End thereof, abutting upon the said Causey. Out of the several
Fen-ground of Humberston March Esquire, lying on the North-side of Erith
Causey, one Acre at the West End thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or
late of Richard Wine Gent. lying on the North-side of Erith Causey, near Erith
Bridge, one Rood and ten Perches at the East-part thereof, abutting upon the
said ground of Humberston March aforesaid. And out of the several Fen-ground,
lying between Andrey Causey and Ewell Fen aforesaid, two Roods and thirty
Perches at the South-end thereof. 0138 0 00

Wilburton. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Wilburton in the
said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, one hundred, seventeen Acres and
two Roods. Out of the Fens called Skeg Fen and Rush ^en, at the West-sides of
the said Fens, abutting upon the common Fens of Haddenham, the river Ouse, and
the hard lands of Wilburton aforesaid. 0117 0 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Wilburton aforesaid, six
Acres and two Roods, (that is to say,) out of the several Fen-ground of Sir
Miles Sandys Knight, fifteen Perches, abutting upon Skeg Fen. Out of the
several ground now, or late of (...) Ware Yeoman, thirty Perches abutting also
upon Skeg Fen. Out of the several Fen-ground now or late of (...) Sanders
Yeoman, fifteen Perches, abutting also upon Skeg Fen. And out of the several
Fen-ground of Thomas Towers Gent. six Acres and twenty Perches at the West-part
thereof, abutting also upon Skeg Fen, and the bank of the river Ouse. 0006 2 00

Stretham and Thetford. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to
Stretham and Thetford in the said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, one
hundred seventy two Acres and two Roods, out of the Mow Fen of Stretham
aforesaid, called Chair-Fen Plain, at the East Side thereof, abutting upon
Chittring Dyke, and the river Ouse. 0172 2 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Stretham and Thetford
aforesaid, seventy seven Acres and two Roods, (that is to say) out of the
several Fen-grounds of Sir Miles Sandys Knight, sixty Acres. Out of the several
Fen-ground called Fidwell Fen, at the South-east end thereof, abutting upon the
Severals of Wickin, and the Joyst Fen in Water-beach. Out of the several
Fen-ground called Langmore, two Acres and one Rood at the North-west end
thereof, next the common Fen called Goulds Moore. And out of the several Fen
grounds of Thetford aforesaid, called the Boats Gangs, fifteen Acres and one
Rood, (viz.) the entire several Fen-ground, called the long Roods, abutting
upon Wickin Fen, containing nine Acres, one Rood and ten Perches. The entire
Fen-ground called the short Roods, abutting upon Soham Fen, containing two
Acres, and five and twenty Perches Out of the several ground of Oliver Cromwell
Gent. called Moonshell, thirty five Perches at the South Side thereof, abutting
upon the said Fen called Short Roods. Out of the several fen of Gislingham
Gent. called the lot, thirty five Perches at the East End thereof, abutting
upon the common lots: The entire Fen-ground called common lots, abutting upon
the long Roods aforesaid, containing two Acres and three Roods. And the entire
common lot, lying near Harrimore house, between the rivers Ouse and Grant,
containing two Roods and fifteen Perches. 0138 0 00

Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to the Town and City of Elie,
in the said Isle of Elie and County of Cambridge, one thousand three hundred
and forty Acres, (that is to say) out of the common Fen, called Little-shell
or East-more, ninety two Acres at the West Side thereof, abutting upon the
common Fen called Great-shell. And the said entire common Fen called
Great-shell, containing one thousand two hundred and forty eight Acres. 1340 0
00

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging unto the Town and City of
Elie aforesaid, two hundred twenty and four Acres, (that is to say) out of the
several Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Shippy Farm, forty Acres at the
South-part thereof, abutting upon the common Fen called Great-shell. Out of the
several Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Quanie Farm near Stuntnie, one entire
Fen ground called the Bye, encompassed with the common Fens of Elie, containing
twelve Acres. Out of the several Fen-ground of William March Esquire, called
Spain-Delfe, lying near unto Shippy Farm, eight Acres at the North-east end
thereof. Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Thorney-Farme,
forty seven Acres at the South-east part thereof, abutting upon the several
Fen-grounds of Norney Farm, and the several Fen-ground of Sir Robert Heath
Knight, in Soham, called great Metlam. Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or
belonging to Norney Farm, seventy nine Acres, abutting Westward upon the black
bank Northward, upon the grounds of Thorney Farm, and Southward and Eastward
upon the residue of the same Fen-ground of Norney. Out of the several
Fen-grounds late of, or belonging to Sir Simon Steward Knight, lying in
Stuntney Farm, two and twenty Acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon
the grounds of Norney-Farme. Out of eight several Fen-grounds, lying between
the common Fens called Dunstal, the several grounds of Thorney-Farme and
Stock-load, twelve Acres, as the same is lockspitted and set out, at the
North-east ends of the same grounds, abutting upon Stock-Load aforesaid, and
the grounds of Thorney-Farm aforesaid. And out of the several Fen-grounds of
Breame Farm, four Acres at the South-east end thereof, next the river Ouse.
0224 0 00

Out of the common Fens of, or belonging to Stuntney, thirty two Acres,
abutting Eastward upon Soham Causey, and Southward upon the common Fens of
Soham, called the Borders. 0032 0 00

Little Port Out of the intercommon Fen grounds of, or belonging to Elie
Downham, and Little-Port in the said Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, or
to some or one of them four thousand two hundred and ninety Acres, (that is to
say) one entire common Fen called Lowell Moore, containing one hundred seventy
four Acres; and the residue being four thousand one hundred and sixteen
Acres, out of the great common Fen called Whelpmoore, abutting North-eastward
upon part of the same Fen, lying near Priests houses, the several Fen grounds
of Thomas Gibbon Esquire, the several Fen grounds called Redmore grounds, and
the several ^en grounds of William Heaveningham Esquire, and Southward upon the
said common Fen, called Lowel Moore. The common Fen of Elie, called Great
Shell, and the several fen grounds of Shippy Farm, and Spain Delfe, and
toward the North-west upon the river Ouse.4290 0 00

Out of the several Fen grounds of, or belonging to Little-Port aforesaid,
seven hundred Acres, (that is to say) out of the several imbanked Fen-ground
of, or belonging to Sir Miles Sandys, Knight and Baronet, three hundred Acres
at the North-east end thereof, abutting North-westward upon the several
Fen-ground of Thomas Towers Gent. North-eastward upon the several Fen-ground of
Sir Henry Willoughbie Knight, and Thomas Tyrel Gent, and South-Eastward upon a
Close, parcel of the same imbanked grounds, and the Bank of the said grounds,
near unto the house called the Chain house near the river Ouse. Out of the
several Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Thomas Towers Gent. called Crouchmore,
seventy Acres abutting upon the several fen-grounds of Sir Henry Willoughby
Knight, and the said imbanked grounds of Sir Miles Sandys aforesaid Out of the
several fen-ground, of, or belonging to William Hawkins Gent. called also
Crouchmore, fifty five Acres at the North part of the same Fen, abutting upon
the common Fen, called Hale Fen. And the several Fen-ground of Sir Henry
Willoughby Knight. Out of the several Fen-ground of Thomas Tyrell Gent. lying
near Priests houses, twenty seven Acres at the West End of the same ground. Out
of the several Fen-ground, late of Nicholas Milsop, lying near Apeshall, called
the Wood-ground, fourteen Acres at the North-West part of the same ground,
abutting upon Westmoore, and the several grounds of Apeshall Farm aforesaid.
Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Apeshall farm aforesaid
thirty Acres. Out of the several fen called Garnars, abutting upon the common
fen called Westmoore, and the river of Wellney. Out of the several fen-grounds,
now, or late of Henry Milsop Gent. twenty Acres. Out of the several fen called
Archdeacon Crossed, at the West-part thereof, abutting upon the said several
fen-ground of Thomas Milsop, and the said river of Wellney. Out of the several
fen-ground called Cades Crossed, five Acres, two Roods and twelve Perches, at the
North-west side of the same ground. Out of the several fen-ground of Thomas
Crab, five Acres, two Roods, and twelve Perches at the North-west side thereof.
Out of the several Fen-ground of Roger Collin, three acres, one Rood and ten
Perches at the South-east-side thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of John
Smith, adjoining to the Vicarage Crossed, one Acre, three Roods, and twenty five
Perches, at the North-west side of the same ground. Out of the adjoining
several fen-ground, now, or late of John Horn, one Acre, three Roods, and
twenty five Perches at the South-east side of the same ground. Out of the
several fen-ground of John Hand, four Acres, one Rood, and thirty Perches, at
the North-west side thereof. Out of the adjoining several fen-ground of Widow
Alderton, four Acres, one Rood, and thirty Perches at the South-east side
thereof. Out of the adjoining several fen-ground of William Cook, three Acres
and twenty Perches, at the North-west side thereof. Out of the several
Fen-ground now, or late of Thomas Wadley, three Roods, and twenty Perches at
the East Side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of William Goats, lying
near Cambridge Croft, one Acre and thirty two Perches at the North-end thereof.
Out of the adjoining several ground of Andrew Neale, three Roods and twenty
Perches at the North end thereof. Out of the adjoining several ground of Thomas
Crabbe, one Acre and twenty Perches at the West end thereof, next VVellney
river. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Vernell, one Acre and fifteen
Perches at the North-side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Day
adjoining unto Bell Croft, five Acres, three Roods, and twenty five Perches at
the South Side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground late of Jane Chambers,
two Acres, two Roods, and thirty Perches at the Eastern corner thereof. Out of
the adjoining several Fen-ground of William Smith, one Acre, three Roods, and
fifteen Perches at the South Side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of
George Wilson, one Acre, three Roods and fifteen Perches at the North-side
thereof. Out of the adjoining several Fen-ground now or late of John Pain, one
Acre, two Roods, and thirty Perches at the South Side of the same ground. Out
of the several Fen-ground of John Goats lying near the grounds of Apshall
Farm, three Acres, one Rood and thirty Perches, at the North-west side
thereof. Out of the adjoining several Fen-ground of Robert Aspland, one Acre,
two Roods, and twenty five Perches at the South-east side thereof. Out of the
adjoining several Fen-ground now, or late of Thomas Milsop, one Acre two Roods,
and twenty five Perches at the North-west side thereof. Out of the several
Fen-ground now, or late of Robert Groom, two Acres, one Rood, and twenty five
Perches, at the South-east side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of Sir
Miles Sandys Knight and Baronet, six acres and fifteen perches at the North end
of the ground adjoining to New-dike. Out of the several Fen-ground of John
Milsop, six acres, one rood, and ten perches at the South-East side thereof,
abutting upon New-dike. Out of the several Fen-ground of Henry Meadows, seven
acres, two roods, and thirty perches at the West Side of the same ground. Out
of the several fen ground now or late of Robert Alexander, one acre, two roods
and twenty perches at the East Side thereof. Out of the adjoining several
fen-ground of William Haukins, two acres and ten perches at the West Side
thereof. Out of the several fen-ground, now, or late of John Crabbe, adjoining
to the ground called the Common Acre, three acres at the North end thereof. Out
of the several Fen-ground, now, or late of Thomas Milsop the elder, adjoining
to Archdeacon Croft, three acres, and one rood at the South-end of the same
ground, abutting upon Wellney river. Out of the several fen-ground now, or late
of Richard White, adjoining to the forementioned ground of Thomas Milsop, one
acre, one rood and fifteen perches, at the South-east corner of the same ground
next Wellney river. Out of the several fen-ground now, or late of William
Wright, three acres and three roods on the West Side thereof, adjoining to the
ground belonging to Wellney Chapel. Out of the said several fen-ground
belonging to Wellney Chapel, one acre at the East-corner thereof. Out of the
adjoining several Fen-ground of Christopher Clark, two acres and three roods at
the West Side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or late of Nicholas
Veres, one acre, two roods and twenty perches at the South-east side of the
same ground. Out of the several Fen-ground now, or late of Richard Mares, one
acre, one rood, and twenty perches at the West Side thereof. Out of the several
Fen-ground now, or late of Thomas Sharp, three acres two roods, and twenty
perches, at the West Side thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of Thomas
Wilson, near adjoining to the Fen-ground, called the hundred acres, three acres
and one rood at the East Side rhereof. Out of the adjoining Fen-ground now, or
late of Thomas Milsop, nine acres, one rood, and twelve perches at the
West Side thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of Richard Ward, three acres
at the East-part thereof. Out of the several ground of Robert Lukin Esquire,
being part of the ground called the hundred acres, fourteen acres at the
West Side thereof. Out of the several ground of Widow Crab, being also part of
the ground called the hundred acres sixteen acres and three roods at the
west side thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of John Cole Gent. adjoining
to the ground called Garners, seven acres two roods, and ten perches at the
East-part thereof, abutting upon Wellney river. Out of the several fen-ground
now, or late of William Johnson, four acres and two roods, at the North-west
corner thereof, abutting upon Wellney-river. Out of the several Fen-ground of
(...) Goats Yeoman, adjoining to the common acre, three roods, and ten perches
at the North-west side thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Day,
adjoining to the common acre, one acre, two roods and twenty perches, at the
South-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Plimme and
Thomas Clarke, one acre and ten perches at the South-end thereof, next the Wood
grounds of Apshall Farm. Out of the several ground of Samuel Kinswick, at the
South-end thereof, one acre one rood, and ten perches. Out of the several
ground now, or late of Thomas Paynter, one acre, two roods, and twelve perches
at the South-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of John Hand,
adjoining unto the Fen-ground called Apshall aforesaid, one acre one rood, and
twenty perches at the South-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground
now, or late of Thomas Boughton, three roods and twenty perches, at the
North-west part of the same ground. Out of the several fen ground now, or late
of John Glasier, one acre and thirty five perches, at the North-west end
thereof. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late of Thomas Milsop, called
Whinne-bush Croft, three acres and twenty perches at the North-west part
thereof. And out of the several ground, called Cambridge-Crofts, eight acres,
two roods, and ten perches at the West Side thereof, abutting upon
Wellney-river* and the Mare Fen.0700 0 00

Out of the several Fen ground, of, or belonging to Thomas Gibbon Esquire,
lying between the common Fen called Whelpmoore, and the river of Brandon, one
hundred and ninety Acres at the South-end thereof, abutting upon the fenne
grounds called Redmore grounds. 0190 0 00

Redmore grounds. Out of the several fen grounds called Redmore grounds, lying
between the said common fen, called Whelpmoore and the river of Brandon, one
hundred twenty six acres at the South-part of the same grounds, abutting upon
the several fen ground of William Heveningham Esquire, and the said river of
Brandon.0126 0 00

Downham in the Isle. Out of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to
Downham in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, called west-fen,
three hundred eighty eight acres and two roods, abutting South-westward upon
the common fen grounds called Pyemoore, and Ashwell-Moore. 0388 2 00

Out of the several fen ground of John Carter, lying near Downham Hive, one
acre and two roods at the North-east corner thereof. 0001 2 00

Westmoore. Out of the great intercommon Fen, called Westmoore and Cranmoore,
in the said Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, five thousand Acres, (that is
to say) three thousand acres on the South Side of Bedford river, bounded
North-westward with the same river Eastward, with Wellney river, and the
several fen grounds of Littleport and VVellney, adjoining to the said river of
VVelney, and westward with Oxewillow Load and the residue being two thousand
acres out of that part of the said Fen, that lies on the North side of Bedford
river aforesaid, abutting upon the said river and Oxewillow Load aforesaid.
5000 0 00

Coveney. Out of the common fen ground called Hale fen, lying in or near
Coveney in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, one hundred and
eighty acres, abutting Eastward upon the hard lands of Coveney, and the
gravel-way leading to Coveney, and on all other patts, upon the residue of the
same fen. 0180 0 00

Out of one other common fen ground, lying in or near Coveney aforesaid, called
Ashwell-Moore or Sedge fen, four hundred twenty three acres, abutting Eastward
upon Pye-Moore VVestward, upon the several fen ground of Coveney, called Hale
fen, and Northward upon VVest-fen in Downham aforesaid. 0423 0 00

Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to Coveney aforesaid, called
the great Dams, one hundred fifty seven acres, three roods and ten perches,
(that is to say,) out of the several fen ground of John Davis three acres, two
roods and ten perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen
ground of Thomas VVhine Junior, three acres, one rood, and twenty four perches
at the South-east end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of William Smith,
two acres, three roods and thirty six perches at the South-west side thereof.
Out of the several ground now, or late of Thomas Watson, three acres, three
roods and twenty perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen
ground now, or late of John Watson, two acres, three roods, and thirty perches
at the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen ground of Joane Pope
Widow* ten acres, two roods, and ten perches at the North-west end thereof. Out
of the several fen ground of John Linwood, eighte^^ ^^es and fifteen perches at
the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen ground of Richard Gooday,
seventeen acres, three roods and ten perches at the North-west end thereof. Out
of the several fen ground of Thomas Smith, three acres and one rood at the
East-corner thereof. Out of the several fen ground of John Smith, three acres
and thirty five perches at the South-east corner thereof. Out of the several
fen ground of Thomas Winter, adjoining to Coveney Load, nine acres at the
North-east side thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Robert Matthewes,
eight acres, three roods and ten perc^^ at the North-side thereof. Out of the
several fen ground of Humberston March Esquire, abutting upon Coveney Load, and
the way leading unto Biall Fen, eighteen acres and twenty perches at the
South-east end thereof. One entire fen ground of William Sharp Gent. lying
between Biall Fen, and the way leading from Biall Fen to Coveney, containing
sixteen acres and two roods. Out of the several Fen ground of Peter Rider, one
acre and thirty perches at the South-west end thereof. Out of the several Fen
ground of John VVhinne, three acres, two roods and ten perches at the East End
thereof. One entire several Fen ground, lying between Bial Fen, and the ground
of Robert Andrews, containing fourteen acres and two roods. And out of the
several Fen ground of Peter Andrews, sixteen acres, one rood, and thirty
perches at the East End thereof.0157 3 10

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Coveney aforesaid, called
the New dams, fifty five acres, two roods, and fifteen perches, (that is to
say) out of the several fen-ground of Francis Sanderson, two acres and one Rood
at the North end thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of Mary Rusden, one
acre, one rood, and fifteen perches at the North end thereof. One entire
several fen-ground of Robert Matthewes abutting Westward upon the hard lands of
Coveney, containing fourteen acres. Out of the several Fen-ground of John
Cock, three acres at the East end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground
called the Town-damme, three acres at the East end thereof. And three entire
several Fen-grounds of William Sharp Gent. lying together, and abutting upon
Ashwell Moore, and the hard lands of Coveney, containing thirty two acres. 0055
2 15

Out of the several Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Coveney aforesaid, called
Hall fen, thirty Acres, three roods, and thirty perches at the East Side
thereof, abutting upon Ashwell Moore. 0030 3 30

Out of the several fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Coveney aforesaid, called
Block-moores, nineteen acres, one rood, and five perches (that is to say) out
of the three several fen-grounds of John Watson, Agnes Watson, and Hellen
Watson, one rood apiece at the North ends of the same grounds. Out of the
several fen-ground of Moses VVhitecake three roods and thirty four perches at
the North-west end thereof. Out of the several fen-ground of John Gavestock,
three roods and thirty perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the
several fen-ground of Mary Allen, three roods and thirty five perches at the
South-west side thereof. Out of the two several fen-grounds of John Kaye and
John Hill Clerk, one rood, and thirty eight perches apiece at the North-west
ends of the same grounds. Out of the several fen-ground of Robert Andrews, one
acre and two roods at the No^^^^^st end thereof. Out of the several fen-ground
of Henry Biddle, one acre, two roods, and ten perches at the North-end thereof.
Out of the several fen-ground of Katherine VVinter, five acres and thirty
perches at the west side thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Elizabeth
Barber, three acres, three roods and ten perches at the west side thereof. Out
of the several Fen ground of Richard Gunton, one rood and thirty four perches
at the North-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Meakes, one
rood, and twenty six perches at the North-end thereof. And one entire Fen of
William Sharp Gent. adjoining Eastward upon the hard lands of Coveney,
containing one acre and three roods.0019 1 05

Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Coveney aforesaid, called
the Pingles, thirteen acres, one rood, and twenty perches, (that is to say) one
entire several Fen ground of Thomas Winter, lying between the hard lands of
Coveney and Coveney Load, containing eleven acres. And out of the several Fen
grounds now, or late of Thomas Hobbie and Francis Sanderson, two acres, one
rood, and twenty perches at the North-west end thereof. 0013 1 20

Biall Fen. Out of the great intercommon Fen ground, called Biall Fen, in the
said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, two thousand and two hundred acres,
(that is to say) two thousand acres, abutting upon the North-west side of
Bedford river, and westward upon Langwood Fen, and Wicham Mead lands. And
South-westward upon Gaul Fen in Mepall; and two hundred acres, abutting upon
the South-east side of Bedford river, and Oxwillow Load. 2200 0 00

Maney. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Maney in the said
Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, called the Dams, abutting upon Stoney
Fen, two hundred and thirty acres at the west side thereof, abutting upon
Twisle Load. 0230 0 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Maney aforesaid, twenty
acres, (that is to say) out of the several Fen grounds of Robert Neale,
adjoining to the Dams of Maney aforesaid, ten acres, abutting upon Twisle Load,
and Stoney Fen in Dodington, Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Sisson,
lying next Cranmoore, three acres at the East Side thereof. Out of the several
Fen ground of Richard Wellbie, thirty six perches at the North-end thereof. Out
of the several Fen ground of George Wright, one rood and six perches at the
North-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Nathaniel Thin, two Roods
at the North-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of John Sisson, two
roods and twenty perches at the South-corner thereof. Out of the several Fen
ground of William Jenes, one rood and thirty perches at the East-corner
thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Oliver Galloway, two roods and thirty
perches at the South-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Jeremy
Freeman, one rood and thirty four perches at the West end thereof. Out of the
several Holt Fen grounds of John Goulden, two roods and twenty perches at the
South-end thereof. Out of the several Holt Fen ground of John Hill, twenty
perches at the South-end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of William
Harrison, two roods at the South-end thereof. And out of the several Fen ground
of William Free man, two acres, two roods, and four perches, at the
South-east side thereof. 0020 0 00

Wichford. Out of the common Fen ground, called Pyemoore near Wichford, in the
said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, one hundred fifty two acres,
abutting upon Downham west fen, and Ashwell Moore. 0152 0 00

Gruntey-Fen. Out of the common Fen ground called Gruntey Fen in the said Isle
of Elie, and County of Cambridge, four hundred twenty six acres, abutting
North-westward upon the hard lands, and on all other parts, encompassed with
the residue of the said Fen. 0426 0 00

Out of the common Fen ground, of. or belonging to Wicham in the said Isle of
Elie, and County of Cambridge, called Widdon, ten acres, abutting westward upon
the several Fen-grounds of Mepall, called Widdon, and Northward upon the
several Fen-grounds of Wicham, called Cawcroft. 0010 0 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds of Wicham called Cawcroft, consisting of the
Lots or Doles of diverse persons, twenty nine Acres and two Roods, as the same
is Lockspitted and set out at the North end of the same Lots next Biall Fen.
0029 2 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds of Wicham aforesaid, called Wicham-Mead-lands,
thirty Acres and two Roods (that is to say) out of the several Fen-grounds of
George Peacock, Thomas Gooday, and John Merell, three Acres and one Rood, as
the same is Lockspitted, divided, and set out at the West End of the same
grounds abutting upon Mepall Gaul-Fen. Out of the Lots or Doles lying between
the last mentioned grounds, and the Lot or Dole of John Belwood, belonging to
diverse persons, twelve acres, three roods, and ten perches, at the
North-west-end thereof, abutting upon Block-Fen. Out of the Lots or Doles lying
between the great lot of George Peacock, and the old Darie-house of John
Merrell, belonging unto diverse persons, seven acres, one rood, and thirty
perches at the South-end thereof, abutting upon Biall Fen. Out of the two lots
of the said John Merell and of (...) Chapman Gent. called North doles, seven
acres, as the same is lock-spitted, divided, and set out, at the North-ends of
the same doles, abutting upon Langwood Fen. 0030 2 00

Mepall. Out of the common Fen ground, of, or belonging to Mepall, in the said
Isle of Elie, and County of Cambridge, called Gaul Fen, fifty three acres,
abutting upon the North-side of Bedford river, and upon Biall Fen. 0053 0 00

Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Mepall aforesaid, called
Widdon, eight acres (that is to say) out of the several Fen ground of Robert
Brown, two roods and two perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the several
Fen ground of (...) Clinch, lying next but one to the said ground of Robert
Brown, three roods and eighteen perches at the North-east end thereof, next
Wicham Severals. Out of the adjoining several Fen ground of Thomas Whinne,
three roods and seventeen perches at the North-east end thereof. Out of the
several fen ground of (...) Bradford Gent, one rood and thirty five perches at
the East end thereof. Out of the several fen ground of William Smith, two roods
and twelve perches at the Eastern end thereof, Out of the adjoining several
fen ground of Thomas Aspland, one acre at the Eastern end thereof. Out of the
several fen grouod of John Phippe, two Roods and two Perches at the Eastern
end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of George Aspland, one Rood, and
thirty four Perches at the East End thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground in
the occupation of widow Smith, one Rood and thirty Perches at the East End
thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of Edmund Aspland, one Rood and thirty
Perches at the East end thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground of John Addams,
three Roods and eight Perches at the East end thereof. Out of the several
Fen-ground of John Whiting, two Roods and eight perches at the East End
thereof. And out of the several Fen-ground of William Whinne, two Roods and
four Perches at the East End thereof. 0008 0 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds of Mercy Carter Widow, belonging to Mepall
aforesaid, twenty five Acres at the North-end of the ground called the Holts.
0025 0 00

Out of the several Fen-ground in Mepall aforesaid, called Fur-fen, twelve
Acres, three roods, and four Perches at the South Side thereof, abutting upon
Bedford river. 0012 3 04

Out of the several Fen-ground of (...) Gederel Gent. lying between Gaul-Fen
and Wicham-Mead-lands, six Acres and two Roods at the North-west end thereof.
0006 2 00

Out of the several Fen-ground of John Phippe lying in Mepall aforesaid,
abutting upon Block-Fen, one Acre, and twenty two Perches at the South-end
thereof. 0001 0 22

Out of the several Fen-ground of (...) Wigmore Gent. lying in Mepall
aforesaid, and joining unto Block-Fen, one Acre, two Roods, and thirty Perches
at the North-east end thereof. 0001 2 30

Out of the several Fen-ground of Thomas Aspland, lying in Mepall aforesaid,
adjoining also unto Block-Fen, one Acre, and one Rood, and twenty four Perches
at the North end thereof. 0001 1 24

Mepall severals. Out of the several or late enclosed Fen grounds of Mepall
aforesaid, called Block Fen, or Block Moore, lying on the North-side of Bedford
river, one hundred thirty nine acres and two roods, (that is to say) out of the
grounds of Thomas Whinne, and diverse others, lying together undivided,
adjoining unto North Fen in Sutton, fourteen acres, three roods and five
perches, abutting upon Bedford river aforesaid. One entire Fen ground of John
Whinne, abutting upon Sutton North-Fen, containing one acre and two roods. Out
of the several Fen grounds of Thomas Aspland, John Adams, James Adcroft,
Richard Holding, William Bird, and Widow Ratham, adjoining unto Sutton
North-Fen, eleven acres, three roods and ten perches, as the same is
proportionally set out and lockspitted, at the West-ends of the same grounds,
next Sutton North-Fen aforesaid. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas
Aspland the elder, adjoining to Sutton North Fen, three acres, and thirty
perches at the North-side thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Widow
Brown, adjoining upon Sutton North-Fen, two acres, two roods, and ten perches
at the West End thereof. Out of the several Fen grounds, lying between the said
ground of Widow Brown, North Fen in Sutton, the grounds of Chatteresse, and
the way in Mepall block Fen, sixty acres, three roods, and thirty four
perches, proportionally set out, lockspitted and divided from every of the said
grounds. Out of the several Fen ground of (...) Wigmore Gent. abutting upon
Bedford river, and the way in block Fen, one acre abutting upon Bedford river
aforesaid. Out of the several Fen ground of Mercy Carter Widow, lying between
Fur Fen, and the way in block Fen. eighteen acres and fifteen perches at the
North-end of the same grounds. Out of the several Fen ground of George Wabie,
adjoining unto Fur Fen, three acres at the East End thereof. Out of the several
Fen ground of George Aspland, adjoining upon two Fen grounds of Widow Ratham,
two acres, three roods and thirty two perches. Out of the several Fen ground of
Thomas Whinne, lying between the grounds of Richard Cooper and John Adams,
three acres at the west end of the same ground. Out of the several Fen ground
of John Adams, lying between the grounds of Thomas Whinne and William Whinne,
three acres and ten perches at the North-side thereof. Out of the next
adjoining several Fen ground, now, or late of William Whinne, three acres and
one Rood at the East End thereof. Out of the next adjoining several Fen ground
now, or late of Th mas Whinne, three acres, two roods and eighteen perches. And
out of the several Fen grounds now, or late of Richard Cooper, adjoining upon
block Fen in Chateresse, six acres, two roods, and thirty six perches at the
North-side thereof. 0139 2 00

Sutton in the Isle. Out of the several Fen-ground called Middle-Moore, lying
in Sutton in the said Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, thirty seven Acres
abutting upon the South Side of Bedford river. 0037 0 00

Out of the Fen-grounds in Sutton aforesaid, called North-Mead-lands and
South-Mead-lands, one hundred seventy five Acres abutting upon Middle-Moore
aforesaid, and upon the North-side of the said New-river, called Bedford river.
0175 0 00

Out of the several Fen ground of Perrey Jederel Gent. lying in Sutton
aforesaid, near the place called Sutton Gravel, and encompassed with diverse
Osier Holts, one acre, and one rood at the East End thereof. 0001 1 00

Out of four other ancient several Fen grounds in Sutton aforesaid, lying near
Erith Causey, called Cocks nests, four acres and three roods, (that is to say)
out of the grounds belonging to the Deane and Chapter of Elie, one acre, two
roods, and twenty perches at the South Side thereof. Out of the ground of (...)
Drury Gent. one acre, two roods and ten perches at the South Side thereof. Out
of the ground of (...) Carter Gent. three roods and twenty perches at the
Southside thereof. And out of the grounds of John Taylour, two roods and thirty
perches at the South Side thereof. 0004 3 00

Out of the several or late enclosed Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Sutton
aforesaid, lying on both sides of the said new-River, called Bedford river,
eight hundred sixty and two Acres (that is to say) Out of the several and late
enclosed Fen-grounds lying on the North-side of the said New-river, six hundred
Acres (viz.) out of the several Fen-grounds called little Halwood, forty three
Acres, one Rood, and fifteen Perches at the South part of the same ground,
abutting upon the Fen-ground called North-Mead-lands, and the West-water. Out
of the several and late enclosed Fen-grounds lying in West-Fen, on the
North-side of Bedford river, being one hundred and sixteen in number, two
hundred fifty eight Acres, three Roods, and eleven Perches, as the same is
alretdy by Lockspits or small Trenches proportionally set out and divided from
every of the said hundred and sixteen several Fen-grounds. Out of the several
and late enclosed Fen-grounds lying in Middle-Fen, on the North-side of the
said river, being eleven in number, twenty three acres and eleven perches, as
the same is also already by lockspits or small trenches proportionally set out
and divided from every of the said eleven several Fen grounds. Out of the
several and late enclosed Fen grounds, lying in North Fen, on the North side of
the said river, being ninety four in number, two hundred seventy four acres,
three roods and three perches, as the same is also already by lock-spits or
small trenches proportionally set out and divided, from every of the said
ninety four several Fen grounds. 0600 0 00

Sutton South of Bedford river. Out of the several or late enclosed Fen
grounds, of, or belonging to Sutton aforesaid, lying on the South Side of
Bedford river, being one hundred twenty two in number, two hundred sixty two
acres, as the same is already by lockspits or small trenches proportionally set
out, severed and divided from every of the said one hundred twenty two enclosed
grounds, (that is to say) out of the enclosed Fen grounds called Tween ditches,
being eight in number, fourteen acres, as the same is proportionally set out as
aforesaid. Out of the late enclosed grounds, called Many-mans doles, lying
between Sutton-Causey, and the way leading to South- Mead lands, on the
South Side of Bedford river, being four in number, five acres, two roods, and
twenty four perches, as the same is also set out and divided as aforesaid. Out
of the late enclosed Fen grounds, lying between South- Mead lands, the said
grounds called Tween ditches, the said grounds called Many-mens doles, Sutton,
Gravel, the hard lands of Sutton, the grounds of diverse men in South Fen,
lying undivided, the ground of Robert Gunton, abutting upon Haddenham Fen, and
the common Fen ground of Haddenham, called small Fen, being fifty seven in
number, ninety one acres, one rood, and thirteen perches, as the same is also
set out and divided as aforesaid. Out of the late enclosed Fen grounds, lying
between the Fen ground of Robert Peacock, abutting upon Hadd lenham Common
aforesaid. The several Fen ground of (...) Jederell Gent. lying in South-Fen
aforesaid, the hard lands of Sutton, the common Fen grounds of Wentworth, and
the said common Fen of Haddenham, called small Fen, being twelve in number,
seventy two acres and ten perches, as the same is also set out and divided as
aforesaid. Out of the late enclosed Fen grounds, lying between Sutton, Gravel,
North- Mead lands, and the grounds in West Fen, and called also Many-mans
doles, being nine in number, thirteen acres, two roods and sixteen perches, as
the same is also set out and divided as aforesaid. Out of the late enclosed Fen
ground called the Berry lot, fourteen acres and seventeen perches, as the same
is set out and divided as aforesaid, at the South-west part thereof. Out of the
late enclosed Fen grounds, lying in West Fen, on the said South Side of Bedford
river, being fourteen in number, twenty two acres, as the same is also set out
and divided as aforesaid. Out of the late enclosed Fen grounds, lying between
West-Fen aforesaid, the Gaultway. and the hard lands of Sutton, being four in
number, six acres and twenty perches, as the same is also set out and divided
as aforesaid. And out of the late enclosed Fen grounds, lying between the said
Gaultway, the said new river called Bedford river, the grounds of Mepall and
the hard lands of Sutton, being thirteen in number, twenty three acres and
twenty perches, as the same is also divided and set out as aforesaid. 0262 0 00

Chartresse. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Chartresse, in
the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, three thousand eight hundred
twenty six acres, (that is to say) out of the common Fen called Normore, one
thousand six hundred and ten acres, abutting upon Dodington Hame, and the hard
lands of Honey. Out of the common Fen, called Langwood Fen, nine hundred and
twenty acres, adjoining upon Block Fen and the Fen called Wenney or Whinney
Fen, and the Mead-lands of Wicham. Out of the said common Fen ground, called
Wenney or Whinney Fen, three hundred Acres abutting upon Langwood-Fenne and
Block-Fen aforesaid. Out of the common Fen-ground called Rough-West-moore, five
hundred ninety six Acres at the North part of the same Fen, abutting upon the
Common Fen called Beeselings, and the hard lands called VVilly-Heath. And out
of the Common Fen-grounds called Curfe and Gore, four hundred Acres, abutting
upon Dodington Leame, and the Gravel way near the old Eaw, leading unto
Dodington. 3826 0 00

Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging unto (...) Wendy Esquire,
lying in Chartresse aforesaid, being parcel of the several Fen, called Abbots
Holwood, two hundred thirty four acres, abutting upon the several grounds in
Chartresse aforesaid, called the old Haues, and upon the west-water. 0234 0 00

Out of the Fen ground in the several possession of Besteney Betts Esquire
called block Fen, eighty nine acres and a half, abutting upon Wicham
Mead-lands, and Langwood Fen aforesaid. 0089 2 00

Out of the several Fen grounds in Chartresse aforesaid, called the old Haues,
one hundred and five acres, one rood and twenty perches as the same is already
proportionally by lockspits or small trenches, divided and set out, (that is to
say) out of the ground called the Town Meddow, two acres, two roods, and thirty
three perches at the South-east part thereof. Out of the ground of Besteney
Bruce, three acres, one rood, and thirty perches, at the North-east part
thereof. Out of the ground of Widow Matthewes, four acres, two roods and
thirty perches at the South-end thereof. Out of the ground of (...) Trice Gent.
called Pickerells Fen, four acres and one rood at the South-end thereof. Out
of the ground of Thomas Keete, two acres, two roods and five perches at the
North-west end thereof. Out of the ground of John Legerton, two acres, three
roods, and thirty two perches at the North-west end thereof. Out of the ground
of William Dring, four acres, and six perches at the North-east part thereof.
Out of the ground of Richard Read and William Dring, two acres, three roods
and ten perches at the North-East part thereof. The entire Fen ground of Robert
Vintner Gent. lying between the grounds of Besteney Bruce aforesaid, and
Richard Camp, containing eleven acres, three roods and twenty perches, Out of
the said ground of Thomas Camp, one acre and two roods at the East End
thereof. Out of the ground of John Tie, one acre and two roods at the East-part
thereof. Out of the ground of Robert Rash, Reynold Walsham and Thomas Curde,
five acres, two roods, and fifteen perches, set out as aforesaid, at the
East-part of the same ground. Out of the ground of Widow Duke, two acres at the
North-part thereof. Out of the ground of Thomas Tie, two acres, two roods and
twelve perches at the North-west part thereof. Out of the grounds of Robert
Bruce, Robert Read, William Dring and Robert Edges, seven acres and one rood
set out, as aforesaid, at the East-ends of the said grounds. Out of the
adjoining grounds of Martin Bend and Richard Cooper four acres and one rood,
set out, as aforesaid, at the East-ends of the said grounds. Out of the grounds
of Richard Lamb, John Rea^e, Thomas Wright, Thomas Rose, and John Reason,
seven acres and ten perches set out, as aforesaid, at the East-ends of the said
grounds. Out of the ground of (...) Castle Gent. lying next the several ground
of (...) Wendye Esquire in Abbots Holwood aforesaid, nine acres, two roods and
ten perches at the North-east corner thereof. Out of the ground of Thomas
Read, one acre, three roods, and thirty two perches at the west-part thereof.
One entire Fen ground of Richard Dring, lying between the last mentioned
grounds of Thomas Read, and the ground of Thomas Camp, abutting upon the said
several ground of (...) Wendye aforesaid, containing seven acres, two roods and
ten perches. Out of the ground of John Rutter, six acres, two roods and five
perches at the East Side thereof, abutting upon the ground of Thomas Camp. And
out of the said ground of Thomas Camp, lying next the several Fen grounds of
Sutton, called the Middle, eight acres and three roods, abutting upon the said
grounds in Sutton. 0105 1 20

Out of the several Fen grounds in Chartrisse aforesaid, called Honey-Fen,
forty acres at the South-part of the same grounds, abutting upon Langwood Fen
and Bial Fen. 0040 0 00

Out of the several Fen grounds in Chartresse aforesaid, called the Restiges,
forty acres and twenty perches, (that is to say) one entire several Fen ground
of Besteney Betts Esquire, abutting upon Beeselings Fen in Dodington,
containing twenty seven acres. Out of the ground of the said Besteney Betts,
called the Mile, four acres and sixteen perches at the North-end thereof. Out
of the ground late of Sir Thomas Hedley Knight, two acres, two roods, and
thirty four perches at the East End thereof. Out of the ground of William
Reeve, three acres and twenty perches at the East End thereof. And out of the
ground of Robert Peyton Esquire, three acres and thirty perches at the
East-part thereof. 0040 0 20

Dodington, Wimblington, March and Benwick. Out of the common Fen grounds, of,
or belonging to Dodington, March, Benwick and Wimblington, in the said Isle of
Ely, and County of Cambridge, or to some or one of them, seven thousand seven
hundred ninety seven acres, (that is to say) out of the common Fen called
Pulver Fen, and Turfe Fen, one thousand three hundred acres at the East-part
thereof, abutting upon the Fen called Beeselings Fen. Out of the said common
Fen called Beeselings Fen, three hundred forty four acres at the South-end
thereof, abutting upon west-water. Out of the common Fen called Dikamoore,
seven hundred fifty six acres, abutting upon the west-water, and the bank
called Copalder bank. Out of the common Fen grounds called Stoney Fen and block
Fen, one thousand and seven hundred acres at the East-part thereof next unto
Maney. Out of the common Fen ground called Borough Moore, five hundred acres,
abutting upon Ransom Mo re, and the river Neane. Out of the common Fen called
Whitemoore, one thousand acres at the North-west part thereof, abutring upon
Plant-water, and the common Fens of Wisbich. Out of the common Fen called Which
Fen, two hundred acres at the South-part thereof, abutting upon Dodington
Leame, and the common Fen called St^we Fen. Out of the common fen called the
Middle, two hundred acres, abutting upon Plant-water and the river Neane. Out
of the common fen called great Binnie Moore, four hundred and fifty acres at
the East-part thereof, abutting upon the fen called Grayes Fen, and the lake
called the old Chair. Out of the common fen called Creek fen, four hundred
and sixty acres at the North-east part thereof, abutting Northward upon the
common fen called Ladus Fen, and upon the several fen grounds of Robert Peyton
Esquire. And out of the common fens called Horse Moore, and little Binnie
Moore, eight hundred eighty seven acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon
the imbanked several ground called Horse Moore. 7797 0 00

Out of the fen called west-fen, lying between the river Neane, Plant-water,
Stern, Ea, or South-lake, the new Dyke made from Stern, Ea, or South-lake
aforesaid unto West-fen Close, the said ground called West-fen Close, Whoredom
lake, and Witlesea Dyke, two thousand four hundred eighty three acres at the
South part of the same ground, abutting Eastward upon Plant-water, and the
river Neane Southward upon Witlesea Dyke, called at that place Saddle-bowe
mile, and westward upon Whoredom Lake, West-fen Close, and the new Dyke
aforesaid. 2483 0 00

Out of the imbanked several Fen ground late of Robert Peyton Esquire, one
thousand five hundred and fifty acres, (that is to say) out of the several
imbanked fen ground called Stoney fen, one thousand three hundred twenty five
acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon the fen called Chafer fen, the
fens of Maney called the dams, and the common fen called Stoney fen. And out of
the imbanked several fen ground now, or late in the occupation of William
Sames, Doctor of the law, called Horse Moore, two hundred twenty five acres at
the North-east part thereof abutting upon the fens called Grayes fen and great
Binnie Moore. 1550 0 00

Out of the other several fen grounds, of, or belonging to Dodington March,
Benwick and VVimblington aforesaid, nine hundred and nineteen acres, (that is
to say) out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to Robert Peyton
Esquire, one hundred thirty three acres and twenty perches, (viz,) one entire
fen, lying in Norwood severals, abutting upon the several fen ground of
William VVrag, containing one hundred and three acres. One other entire fen
ground, abutting upon the bank of VValdersey, and a several ground belonging to
Henry Finimore, containing eighteen acres and three roods. And out of a several
fen ground adjoining to the part of VVhitemoore, called Mary's Hurne, and the
several fen ground of Thomas Tyrell Gent. eleven acres, one rood, and twenty
perches at the South-part thereof, next VVhite-moore aforesaid. 0133 0 00

Out of the several Fen-ground, of, or belonging to Robert Balam Esquire, lying
near Waldersey Banck, sixty nine Acres, one Rood, and five Perches (viz.) one
entire Fen-ground abutting upon Soapers drove and Waldersey bank, containing
forty nine Acres, and one Rood, and five Perches; and out of the several
Fen-ground lying on the East side of Norwood Causey, twenty Acres at the West
end of the same ground abutting upon the several Fen-ground, now, or late of
Widow South-well. 0069 05

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Henry Finimoore Gent.
lying in March aforesaid, forty two Acres, and two Roods at the North-east
side of the grounds called Otter Holts, lying near Plant-water, abutting upon
Plant-water, and the several Fen-ground of Thomas Shepherd. 0042 2 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Thomas Tyrell Gent. forty
five Acres, one Rood, and ten Perches. (viz.) one entire several Fen-ground
abutting upon Plant-water and West-Fen, containing thirty five Acres and two
Roods. And out of his several ground lying in Norwood Severals, betwixt two
several grounds of Robert Peyton aforesaid, nine Acres, three Roods, and ten
Perches at the West Side thereof. 0045 1 10

Out of the several Fen-ground called the hundred Acres, lying near unto Maney,
twenty five Acres at the South-end thereof, next the several grounds of Maney
aforesaid. 0025 0 00

Out of the several Fen ground called Grayes-Fen, forty four Acres at the
North-end thereof, abutting upon great Binnie-Moore. 0044 0 00

Out of the several Fen-ground called Reads-Fen, thirty Acres abutting upon
Well-Pingle and the river Neane. 0030 0 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Robert Pierson, twenty one
Acres, one Rood, and thirty five Perches, (viz.) out of the ground lying near
unto Hobbs-dike, eight Acres, three Roods, and ten Perches at the South end
thereof, abutting upon the old Drove-way. And out of a several Fen-ground of
him the said Robert Pierson, lying in the Fen called Edmunds Severals, twelve
Acres, two Roods, and twenty five Perches at the East End thereof, abutting
upon the several Fenne-ground of Thomas Tyrell aforesaid. 0021 1 35

Out of the several Fen-ground of William VVragge, lying near unto Grainford,
nine Acres, and three Roods, and twenty eight Perches at the East Side thereof.
0009 3 20

Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Peter Williams, thirty
four Acres, two Roods and ten Perches (viz.) one entire several Fen-ground
lying within a several Fen-ground of Robert Peyton aforesaid, in Norwood
Severals, containing eleven Acres. And out of one other ground of him the said
Peter Williams, lying in the Fen called Norwood Severals aforesaid, abutting
upon the old Drove way, twenty three Acres two Roods, and ten Perches at the
East part thereof, abutting upon the last mentioned ground of Robert Peyton
aforesaid. 0034 2 10

Out of the several fen ground of John Mobbe, abutting upon VValdersey bank,
ten acres and three roods at the North-end thereof, next the said bank. 0010 3
00

Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to John Pierson, twenty seven
acres and two roods, (viz.) out of the several fen ground, lying near unto
great Cross, five acres and two roods at the North part thereof. And out of
one other several fen ground, in the occupation of him the said John Pierson,
abutting upon Plant-water, and the several fen ground of Henry Finnimore,
twenty two acres at the west side thereof, next the fen called west-fen. 0027 2
00

Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Shepherd Gent. abutting upon
Plant-water, and the last mentioned several ground of Henry Finimore, fifteen
acres at the west side thereof, next west-fen aforesaid. 0015 0 00

Out of the several Fen ground called west-Fen Close, twenty five acres at the
East-part thereof next west-fen. 0025 0 00

Out of the several Fen ground called great Bradney moore, abutting upon
Bishops Dyke, and the river Neane, one hundred sixty two acres and two roods at
the North-end thereof, abutting upon Witlesea Dyke. 0162 2 00

Out of the several Fen ground called Whites Fen, one hundred and nineteen
acres, and one rood at the west-part thereof, abutting upon Glass lake and
Brownes Fen. 0119 1 00

Out of the several Fen-ground, in the tenure or occupation of William Sames,
Doctor of the Law, called Brownes fen or Cooks Fen, fifty acres and twenty
perches at the North-west part thereof, abutting upon Glass lake aforesaid.
0050 0 03

Dodington small Severals. Out of nineteen other small Severals, belonging to
Dodington, March, and Benwick aforesaid, fifty three acres two roods, and
thirty two perches as the same is already proportionally by lockspits or small
trenches, divided and set out from every of the said nineteen several fen
grounds, (that is to say) out of the ground of Widow Cattle, lying near
Grainford, one acre at the South-end thereof. Out of the ground of (...) Barret
Gent. called Mundfords lands, two acres, one rood, and thirteen perches at the
South Side thereof. Out of the ground of Thomas Walsam, called also Mundfords
lands, three acres, two roods, and five perches at the East-part thereof, next
unto the drove-way. Out of the ground of Thomas Emerson, one acre, three roods,
and fifteen perches at the South Side thereof. Out of the ground of John Neale,
two acres, one rood, and twenty perches at the North-part thereof. Out of the
ground of Widow Southwald, adjoining unto Norwood Causey, five acres and twenty
perches at the North-part thereof, abutting upon Waldersea bank. Out of the
ground of William Shepherd, lying in the several Fen called Edmunds Severals,
three acres and twenty perches at the South-end thereof. Out of the ground late
of (...) Death Yeoman, lying in the Fen called Joane Sadds hole two acres, one
rood, and six perches at the East-part thereof. Out of the ground of John
Shereman, lying near Borough moore, six acres, three roods and fifteen perches
at the East End thereof. Out of the ground of Everard Buckworth Esquire, lying
near Nuses green, three acres, one rood, and eight perches at the west side
thereof. Out of the ground of Thomas South-wold, abutting upon Norwood green,
two roods at the South-corner thereof. Out of the several ground of Thomas
Walsame, lying near Norwood green aforesaid, three acres, three roods and ten
perches at the East Side thereof. Out of the ground of Reynold VValsame, lying
near Norwood green aforesaid, two acres, three roods and eight perches at the
west-part thereof, next unto the Common. Out of the ground called VVisamouth,
four acres, three roods, and thirty eight perches, at the North-west end
thereof, abutting upon the river Neane. Out of a ground near Benwick, called
Pagdole, two acres, three roods, and twenty four perches, at the North-west
end thereof. Out of the ground of William Smith in Dikemoore, abutting upon
Beeselings load, and the west-water four acres at the East End thereof. Out of
the ground of Samuel Wright, Doctor of Divinity, lying in Dikemoore aforesaid,
three roods and ten perches at the North-east end thereof. Out of the ground of
Widow Cole, lying near Benwick mere, one acre at the North-end thereof, next
west-water. And out of the ground of Robert Burroughes, lying near Benwick, one
acre and twenty perches at the North-east side thereof, abutting upon the river
Neane 0053 2 32

Witlesey. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Witlesey, in the
said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, five thousand five hundred twenty
seven acres, (that is to say) the entire common Fen called North-Fen,
containing one thousand seventy eight acres, abutting westward upon the Mow
Fens of VVitlesey, called Northey, Northward upon the several Fen grounds
called Priors Fens, Eastward upon Delfe-Dyke, and Southward upon Mortons Leame.
The entire common Fen, lying between the new drain, or way extending from
Witlesey to the hard lands of Upwood, Witlesey Dyke, and the new cut or drain
called Bevels Leame, containing two thousand seventy eight acres, abutting
westward upon the said new drain, or way Northward upon Witlesey Dyke, and
South-eastward upon the said new drain called Bevels Leame. The entire common
Fen called South- Pingle, containing fifty nine acres, abutting westward upon
the hard lands of Lipney Northward upon the Causey leading unto Eldernel, and
the several grounds of Eldernel, and South-eastward upon Eastrea Lake or
South-lake. The entire common Fen called the Middle, containing seven hundred
thirty four acres, abutting westward upon the several grounds of Eldernel, and
upon Lords Dyke, Southward upon South-lake, or Stern Ea, Eastward upon the
Dyke, extending from Mortons Leame, near mid Fen tree, unto South-lake or
Stern Ea aforesaid, and Northward upon Mortons Leame aforesaid. Out of the
common Fen grounds lying near unto Estrea called Eastrea Fen, or the Wipe,
nine hundred thirty and two acres, abutting westward upon Beggars Dyke,
Southward upon the new drain called Bevels Leame, Eastward upon the new Dyke,
extending from West-fen Close unto South-lake or Stern Ea, and Northward upon
South-lake or Stern Ea aforesaid. And out of the common fen ground called the
Moore, six hundred forty six acres at the North-west part thereof, abutting
westward upon Steds Dyke, and Northward upon the said new drain called Bevels
Leame.

Witlesey Severals. Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to
VVitlesey aforesaid, called Priors Fens, one hundred eighty nine acres as the
same is already divided and enclosed from the residue of the said Fens (that is
to say) out of the ground of Richard Auldfield, fifty acres at the South-east
part thereof. Out of the ground of Widow Penny, two acres, one rood, and
twenty eight perches at the South-part thereof. Out of the grounds of Henry
Prat Gent. adjoining to the grounds of Richard Auldfield aforesaid, called Ash
Fen, forty seven acres, three roods, and twenty perches at the South-west end
thereof, abutting upon North Fen. Out of the grounds of John Elkin Gent. forty
four acres, three roods, and two perches at the South-east part of the same
grounds. Out of the ground of (...) Darson Gent. three acres, one rood, and
fifteen perches at the west end thereof. Out of the ground of 0189 0 00

Summer Gent. three acres, one rood and fifteen perches at the East End
thereof. Out of the ground of (...) Armested Gent. eleven acres, three roods,
and thirty perches at the west end thereof. Out of one other ground of the said
Henry Prat called Cawcroft, nineteen acres, three roods, and thirty five
perches at the South-west corner thereof. And out of the ground of (...) Rose
Gent. five acres, one rood, and fifteen perches at the South-east corner
thereof. 0189 0 00

Stanground Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Stanground in
the County of Hunt, called Flegge-Fen, and White-Fen Close lying in the said
Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, one hundred twenty seven Acres, abutting
Northward upon Mortons Leame, and Eastward, and Southward upon the several
grounds of Witlesey. 0127 0 00

Out of the mowing Fen-ground belonging to Stanground aforesaid, called
Northea, lying in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, sixty four
Acres, as the same is already divided, and enclosed at the South-east part of
the same ground. 0064 0 00

Thorney. Out of the Demean Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to the Lordship of
Thorney, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, four thousand Acres
abutting Eastward upon the Common-Fen of Wisbich, called high Fenne, and the
Common Fen-grounds of Sutton in Holland, Southward upon the Fen-grounds of
Witlesey, called Bassen-hall-moore and Northward upon the South Ea bank. 4000 0
00

Sutton in Holland. Out of the Common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Sutton
in Holland, in the County of Lincoln, lying in the said Isle of Ely, and
County of Cambridge, four hundred and forty Acres, abutting Eastward upon the
common Fen of Wisbech, Southward upon the lake called the Wride, and westward
upon the Fen ground of Thorney, called Knarre Fen. 0440 0 00

Wisbich. Out of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to Wisbich, in the
said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, two thousand six hundred forty
eight acres, (that is to say) one entire fen ground, lying near Guy Hurne,
between Mortons Leame, the new drain called Bevels Leame, Stern ea or
South-lake, and the common fens in Witlesea, calted the middle, containing
four hundred ninety one acres and two roods. One other entire fen ground,
lying between Mortons Leame aforesaid, the fen grounds of Witlesea, called
Bassen hall Moore, and the drain called the five and twenty foot-drain,
containing four hundred twenty four acres, and two roods. And one other
entire fen ground containing one thousand seven hundred thirty two acres, lying
between the said five and twenty foot draine, Knarre lake, and the drain or way
leading from Pekirke meddow unto Guy Hurne. 2648 0 00

Out of the several Fen ground, belonging to Wisbich aforesaid, called Throcken
Holt, fourscore acres at the west end of the same ground, abutting Northward
upon South- Ea bank. 0080 0 00

Elm. Out of the common Fen ground, of, or belonging to Elm in the said Isle
of Ely, and County of Cambridge, lying between Coldham bank, and Elm Leame,
fifty acres at the South-west part thereof, abutting Elm Leame, and a several
fen ground of Robert Peyton Esquire, called great Sedge Fen.

Out of the several Fen ground in Elm aforesaid, belonging unto the Bishop of
Ely, lying between Elm Leame, and the old Ea, thirty acres, abutting upon the
South-east end of the common Fen ground of Elm aforesaid, and the said several
ground of Robert Peyton aforesaid. 0030 0 00

Out of the several Fen ground of Robert Peyton aforesaid, called great Sedge
Fen, adjoining unto Elm Common aforesaid, one hundred and seventy acres,
abutting upon Coldham bank, the said ground of the Lord Bishop of Ely, and the
said common Fen of Elm. 0170 0 00

Ladus Fen. Out of the common Fen ground called Ladus Fen, and Lake Fen, lying
within the hundred of Wisbich, in the said Isle of Ely, and County of
Cambridge, six hundred and fourscore acres at the South-west end thereof,
abutting upon part of the common Fen of Dodington and March, called Creek Fen,
lying between Elm Leame, and the river Neane. 0680 0 00

Eausie-Moor. Out of the common Fen ground called Eausy Moore, lying within the
said hundred of Wisbich in the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge,
bounded with the river Neane, Wellney river, Darcie Load, and the Lake called
the old Chair, one thousand nine hundred sixty four acres at the North-west
part thereof abutting upon the said Lake called the old Chair, the river
Neane, and the Dyke called the new Dyke. 1964 0 00

Out of the common Fen ground, called Tucks Moore Hurne, or Well-Pingle, lying
within the said Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, between the said Lake
called the old Chair, and Reads Fen in March, thirty six acres, abutting upon
the old Chair aforesaid, and upon the river Neane. 0036 0 00

Upwell, Outwel and Wellney. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to
Upwell, Outwell and Wellney in the County of Norfolk, and in the said Isle of
Ely, and County of Cambridge, or some or one of them, one thousand five hundred
and forty acres, (that is to say) out of the common Fen grounds called Neat
Moore, and the lots, seven hundred and fifty acres at the East End of the same
ground, next unto Well Creek, abutting Southward upon the Fens called Londoners
Fens, Northward upon London Load, the Fen ground in the occupation of Tristram
Diamond Gent. and the common Fen called Outwell Pingle. Out of the common Fen
grounds called Shevens, two hundred acres at the East Side thereof, abutting
upon Causey Dyke, and Hacket way. Out of the common Fen grounds called Common
piece and Hale Fen, five hundred and ninety acres, (viz.) the said entire fen
called the Common piece. And the residue being four hundred fifty six acres,
out of the said common Fen cailed Hale Fen, at the North-east part thereof,
abutting upon Bedford river, and the several ground belonging unto Wellney
Chapel, called Sedge Fen. 1540 0 00

Out of the several fen grounds called Londoners Fens, being late parcel of the
common fens of Upwell and Wellney aforesaid, 800 acres, as the same is already
set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and divided from the
residue of the said fens, in manner and form following, (that is to say,) one
entire fen ground belonging to Sir Robert Bell Knight, called Lilly-pooles,
containing five acres. One other entire fen ground, belonging to the said Sir
Robert Bell, lying between Lilly-pooles aforesaid, the fen ground called Cades
fen, the several fen grounds belonging to Wellney Chapel, called Knobbals, and
the several fen ground of Thomas Fincham Gent. containing eighty eight acres,
and three roods. Out of one other ground of him the said Sir Robert Bell, lying
between Cadys fen and London load aforesaid, forty two acres and three roods
at the west end thereof. Out of the several fen ground now, or late of Sir
Lewis Tresham Knight, lying between Cadys fen and Wick fen, ninety three acres
and one rood at the South-end thereof, abutting upon the several fen ground,
late of (...) Fincham Gent. in the occupation of him the said Sir Lewis
Tresham. Out of the several fen ground, late in the tenure or occupation of Sir
William Cokayne Knight, adjoining unto Cadys fen aforesaid, and the several
grounds now, or late of Sir John Wats Knight, one hundred seventy one acres at
the South-part thereof, abutting upon the ground of Thomas Parlet. Out of the
several grounds now, or late of Sir John Wats Knight, three hundred fifty two
acres and one rood, abutting upon Maid load, the forementioned ground, late of
Sir William Cokayne, and the drove-way leading through the middle of the said
grounds of him the said Sir John Wats. Out of the several fen ground of Thomas
Fincham Gent. lying between Cadys fen and Wick fen, eleven acres and three
roods, abutting on both sides of Bedford river. Out of the several fen ground,
late of (...) Fincham Gent. now in the occupation of the said Sir Lewis
Tresham, thirteen acres and one rood at the west side thereof, abutting upon
Cadis Fen. Out of the several Fen ground now, or late of Haman le Strange
Esquire, abutting upon Cadis Fen and Maid Load, twelve acres at the East Side
thereof, next Bedford river. And out of the several Fen ground called
Hen-middle, abutting upon Maid Load, on the North-side of Bedford river, ten
acres, adjoining to the Fen grounds now, or late of Sir John Wats aforesaid,
and upon the several grounds of Thomas Parlet Yeoman. 0800 0 00

Out of the several fen grounds belonging to the Chapel of Wellney, one
hundred seventy eight acres, as the same is already set out, and by lockspits
or small trenches severed and divided from the residue of the said Fens, in
manner and form following, (that is to say) out of the Fen ground called
Knobbals, twenty eight acres. (viz.) one entire piece thereof, lying on the
North-side of Bedford river, containing nine acres. Out of the ground late in
the occupation of Edward Lechland Esquire, or his Assigns, lying on the
South Side of Bedford river, ten acres, abutting upon the said river. And out
of the residue of the said ground called Knobbals, nine acres at the East End
thereof, abutting upon Wick Fen and Reads Fen. Out of the several fen ground
called Sedge Fen, one hundred and fifty acres, (viz.) one entire piece thereof
lying on the North-side of Bedford river, containing eleven acres. And out of
the residue of the said Fen one hundred thirty nine acres at the South-west
part thereof, abutting upon Hale fen and Bedford river aforesaid. 0178 0 00

Out of the several Fen grounds belonging to Outwell aforesaid, lying between
Popham Eau, and new dyke, 65 acres, as the same is already proportionally set
out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and divided from every of the
said three several fen grounds, in manner and form following, (that is to say)
out of the several fen ground, belonging to the Deane and Chapter of Norwich,
thirty five acres at the East End thereof, abutting upon Neat-Moore and Popham
Eau aforesaid. Out of the grounds of Tristram Diamond Gent. twenty five acres
at the South-east part thereof, abutting upon Neat-Moore aforesaid. And out of
the ground of Sinolphus Bell Esquire, five acres at the East End thereof,
abutting upon the said grounds of the said Tristram Diamond Gent. 0065 0 00

Out of three several fen grounds lying in Ladus Fen, fifty two acres and two
roods, as the same is already proportionally set out, and by lockspits or small
trenches severed and divided from every of the said three fen grounds in manner
and form followieg, (that is to say) Out of the ground called Langbeech, on
the South-west side of Bishops Dyke, seven acres and two roods at the East End
thereof. Out of the ground called Marmond, twenty seven acres and one rood at
the South-part thereof. And out of the ground now, or late of Sir William Read
Knight, lying near News Cote, seventeen acres and three roods at the North end
thereof. 0052 2 00

Out of the several fen ground called Farmers fen, forty eight acres at the
East Side thereof, abutting upon the common fen, called Eausie Moore. 0048 0 00

Out of the several fen ground called Loveokes, twenty one acres at the
North-end thereof, abutting upon the fen called the common piece. 0021 0 00

Out of nineteen several fen grounds, belonging to Upwell and Wellney
aforesaid, or to one of them lying on the west side of Wellney river, between
Pophams Eau, and Darcie Load, two hundred fifty two acres, and thirteen
perches, as the same is already proportionally set out, and by lockspits or
small trenches severed and divided from every of the said nineteen several fen
grounds, in manner and form following, (that is to say) out of the imbanked
several fen ground of John Moyse Gent. one hundred and five acres, and thirty
six perches at the South-west part thereof, abutting upon Eause Moore. Out of
the imbanked ground now or late of (...) Tailor Gent, forty six acres, two
roods and twenty perches at the South-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or
late of William Bellamie, two acres and two roods at the South-part thereof.
Out of the next adjoining ground now, or late of John Bellamie, two acres, one
rood and twenty perches at the west-part thereof, Out of the ground now, or
late of (...) Fiske Gent. called Rollingham, fifteen acres, two roods, and
twenty two perches at the west-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of
(...) Calverley, Doctor of Divinity, eight acres, three roods, and ten perches
at the South-corner thereof. Out of the ground called Town-land, abutting upon
the several ground of William Drue, one acre and thirty four perches at the
North-end thereof. Out of the said ground of William Drue, two acres and two
roods at the North-end thereof. One entire fen ground of John Dixon Gent.
abutting upon Maggs Lake, containing six acres, rwo roods, and thirty six
perches. Out of the ground now, or late of Edmund Man, abutting upon Maggs lake
aforesaid, one acre and twenty perches at the North-west corner thereof, One
entire ground now, or late of Thomas Blithe, adjoining to the said ground of
Edmund Man, containing five acres, three roods, and thirty six perches. One
other entire fen ground now, or late of John Bellamie and Matthew Bellamie,
abutting upon Friday lake, containing four acres and two roods. One other
entire fen ground now, or late of Sir William Read aforesaid, abutting also
upon Friday lake containing seven acres and ten perches. Out of the next
adjoining ground now, or late of Haman le Strange Esquire, nine acres, one rood
and twenty two perches at the East-part thereof. One entire fen ground now, or
late of Thomas Fincham, adjoining to the last mentioned ground of Haman le
Strange aforesaid, containing thirteen acres and two roods. Out of the next
adjoining ground now, or late of Roger Prat Esquire, seven acres and two roods
at the South-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of John Gray, one
acre, two roods and twenty five perches, at the North-part thereof. Out of the
ground now, or late of (...) Reve Cler. three roods and twelve perches at the
South-west part thereof. And out of the ground of Thomas Cross, abutting upon
the North-side of Darcie load, eight acres, three roods and thirty perches at
the west end thereof. 0252 0 13

Out of fifteen other several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Upwell and
Welney, lying also on the West Side of VVelney River aforesaid, between Darcie
Load aforesaid, and the several grounds of Little-port, lying upon the same
River, seventy three Acres, one Rood, and twenty Perches, as the same is
already proportionally set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and
divided from every of the said fifteen several Fen-grounds in manner and form
following, (that is to say) out of the ground of Thomas Cross, abutting upon
the South side of Darcie Load, eleven Acres, three Roods, and ten Perches at
the West End thereof. Out of the next adjoining ground of Robert Webster, two
Acres, one Rood, and twenty eight Perches at the South corner thereof. Out of
the several Fen-ground called Lewis Meadow, seven Acres, and twelve Perches at
the South-west end thereof. Out of the next adjoining ground, now or late of
Simon Hudson, eight Acres, three Roods and thirty eight Perches at the
South-part thereof. Out of the next adjoining ground, now or late of John
Stanbridge, five Acres, one Rood, and thirty Perches at the East Side thereof.
Out of the next adjoining ground, now or late of Robert Goulden, three Acres,
one Rood, and eighteen Perches at the East corner thereof. Out of the ground of
Everard Buckworth Esquire, eight Acres at the West part thereof. Out of the
next adjoining ground late of William Bond, one Acre, three Roods, and ten
Perches at the South corner thereof. Out of the next adjoining ground, now or
late of Thomas Birt, four Acres, two Roods and six Perches at the West corner
thereof. Out of the ground, now, or late of Edward Bond, one Acre, two Roods,
and ten Perches at the South-west end thereof. Out of the next adjoining
ground, now or late of Francis Waters Gent. five Acres, one Rood, and eighteen
Perches, at the South-west part thereof. Out of the ground now or late of
Rich^rd James lying near VVellney, two Acres, three Roods, and thirty two
Perches at the North-west corner thereof. Out of the ground now or late of
William Gabie and John Gabie, lying on the South side of Bedford river, one
Acre, and two Roods at the West End thereof. Out of the ground belonging to the
Deanary of Peterborough, abutting upon Marmond Meadow, three Acres, two Roods
and eight Perches at the West part thereof. And out of the said ground called
Marmond meadow, five Acres at the North-west part thereof. 0037 1 20

Out of twenty three several Fen-grounds belonging to Upwell and VVellney
aforesaid, or to the one of them lying on the East side of VVellney river,
between Pophams Eau and the several Fen-grounds belonging to Little-port, one
hundred and fifty Acres, and seven Perches, as the same is already
proportionally set out, and by lockspits or small trenches severed and divided
from every of the said twenty three several Fen-grounds in manner and form
following, (that is to say) out of the ground now or late of Sir John Watts
Knight lying near Popham Eau aforesaid, ten Acres, one Rood, and twenty six
Perches at the East part thereof. Out of the ground of Henry Gouldwell
adjoining unto the Common Fen called Sheuens, extending unto the said River of
VVellney, one Acre, and twelve Perches at the East corner thereof. Out of the
ground, now or late of Sir Robert Bell Knight, abutting upon VVellney River and
the ground belonging to the Deane and Chapter of Norwich, eight Acres, and one
Rood, and thirty Perches at the North-east part thereof. Out of the ground now
or late of William Drue, abutting also upon the said ground of the Deane and
Chapter of Norwich, fourteen Acres, one Rood, and twenty Perches at the
East End thereof. Out of the ground of Haman Le Strange Esquire, called great
Greenes, twenty six Acres, three Roods and ten Perches at the South part
thereof. Out of the next adjoining ground, now or late of John Bellamie and
Matthew Bellamie, four Acres, three Roods and thirty eight Perches at the East
end thereof. Out of the next adjoining ground of John Goddard, one Acre and two
Roods at the North side thereof. Out of the ground, now or late of William
Gabie, three Acres, three Roods, and ten Perches at the North-east part
thereof. Out of the next adjoining ground, now or late of Tristram Diamond
Gent. three Acres, one Rood, and thirty Perches at the East corner thereof. Out
of the ground, now or late of Edmund Man, adjoining unto the ground now or late
of John Dixon, two Acres, two Roods, and twenty eight Perches at the South-east
corner thereof. One entire Fen-ground, now or late of John Dixon aforesaid,
bounded with the Common Fen called Sheuens, and the River of Wellney,
containing seven Acres, and two Roods. Out of one other ground, now or late of
him the said John Dixon, abutting upon the aforesaid ground of Edmund Man,
eight Acres and two Roods at the North-side thereof. Out of the ground, now or
late of William Parlet Gent. abutting upon the ground of the Deane and Chapter
of Norwich, lying near Darcie Load, four Acres, two Roods, and ten Perches at
the South Side thereof. One entire several Fen-ground belonging to the Deane
and Chapter of Norwich, lying near Dar^^e Load aforesaid, containing thirteen
Acres, and thirty Perches. Out of the ground, now or late of John Bloome,
abutting upon the ground of John Marshall Gent. two Acres, three Roods, and
thirty three Perches at the South-east side thereof. Out of the said ground,
now or late of John Marshall aforesaid, ten Acres, three Roods, and ten Perches
at the North end thereof. Out of the ground, now or late of Thomas Cross,
abutting upon Causey dike, four Acres, two Roods, and ten Perches at the
West End thereof. Out of the ground, now, or late of Sir William Read
aforesaid, abutting upon Causey Dyke near Wellney, three roods and ten perches
at the North-end thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of Sir John Wats
Knight, abutting upon Maid load, three acres at the East-part thereof. Out of
the ground now, or late of John Stanbridge, lying near Wellney, one acre at the
East-part thereof. Out of the ground now, or late of James Ravens, one acre at
the North-east part thereof, abutting upon Bedford river. Out of the ground
now, or late of Francis Waters, lying on the South Side of Bedford river,
abutting upon Hale Fen, and Wellney river, eleven acres and two roods at the
South-east end thereof. And out of the ground now, or late of Richard Ward,
lying near Pralls were three acres and twenty perches at the North-side
thereof. 0155 0 00


COM. HVNTINGDON.
Somersham. OUt of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to the Soake of
Somersham, in the said County of Huntingdon, one thousand six hundred and five
acres, (viz.) out of the common Fen, called Erith Fen, two acres adjoining to
Bedford river, on the South Side of the same river, near to Erith sluice. Out of
the Mow Fen, called Croll load, seventy acres at the west-part thereof,
abutting upon High Fen. And out of the said common Fens called High Fen and
North Fen, one thousand five hundred thirty three acres, abutting upon the said
Fen called Croll load, and adjoining Southward upon the low Fen of Somersham
and the hard lands. And Northward upon the common Fens of Warbois and Fenton
load. 1605 0 00

Out of a several Fen ground in Somersham, called Rowey, eleven acres at the
North-part thereof. 0011 0 00

Warbois. Out of the common Fen grounds of VVarbois or Ramsey, in the County of
Huntingdon, lying between the west-water from St. Bennets Cross unto Fenton
load, and along the said load unto the hard lands of Warbois, and by a straight
line, extrnded from Wistowe stone in the Fen, unto St. Bennets Cross
aforesaid, one thousand eight hundred sixty eight acres at the North-west part
of the same ground. on both sides of the new drain, extending from the hard
lands of Warbois, unto the west-water, abutting upon the said west-water. The
Commons of Ramsey called East-moore, and the common Fen called Wistow Fen. 1868
0 00

Wistowe. Out of the common Fen-grounds called Wistowe Fen, in the said County
of Huntingdon, belonging to Ramsey, Wistow and Berry, or to some or one of
them, and bounded with the said common Fens of Warbois or Ramsey, the hard
lands of Wistowe and Berry, the Mow Fenne of Berry, and the lake called
Sallaries Raft, three hundred eighty six acres at the North-east part of the
said Fen, abutting upon the said common Fen of Warbois or Ramsey, and the said
lake called Sallaries Raft. 0386 0 00

Out of the common fen ground belonging to Berry in the said County of
Huntingdon, called Berry Mow Fen, forty five acres at the South-part of the
said Fen. 0045 0 00

R^^sey. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Warbois or Ramsey
in the said County of Huntingdon, or to the one of them called East-moore,
bounded with the said lake called Sallaries Raft, the forementioned line
extended from Wistowe Stone, in the fen unto St. Bennets Cross, the common
Fens of Dodington and Benwick, called Pulver fen and Turfe fen, Ramsey Mere,
and the enclosed grounds of Sir Oliver Cromwell Knight of the Honorable Order
of the Bath, one thousand four hundred ninety and six acres. Out of the
South-east part of the said Fen, or both sides of the said new drain, extending
from the hard lands of Warbois unto the west-water, and adjoining upon Pulver
Fen and Sallaries Raft aforesaid. 1496 0 00

Out of one other common Fen ground of Ramsey aforesaid, called Middle-Moore,
one thousand, eight hundred, seventy and five acres, abutting westward upon the
new drain, or way leading from the hard lands of Upwood unto Witlesey,
Southward upon the river Neane, and North-eastward upon Delfe Dyke, and the
several grounds called the Steds. 1875 0 00

Out of one other Fen ground, of, or belonging to Ramsey, Upwood, and Raveley,
or to some or one of them, lying near unto Raveley in the said County of
Huntingdon, two hundred twenty nine acres, abutting upon the hard lands of
Raveley, near unto a place called Raveleyes nook, and upon the Fen grounds
claimed as parcel of the Manor of Wood-walton. 0229 0 00

Out of one other common Fen ground, of, or belonging unto Ramsey or Upwood, in
the said County of Huntingdon, or to the one of them, lying between the hard
lands of Upwood, and the river Neane, eight bundred fifty six acres, abutting
westward upon the drain, or way leading from the hard lands of Upwood, unto
Witlesea aforesaid, Northward upon the river Neane, and Eastward and Southward
upon Bill load, and the hard land of Upwood aforesaid. 0856 0 00

Out of one other common Fen ground, of, or belonging to Ramsey aforesaid,
lying between Ramsey Mere and Delfe Dyke, one hundred and eight acres,
abutting upon Delfe Dyke, and the river Neane. 0108 0 00

Out of the several Fen grounds of Sir Oliver Cromwell Knight of the honorable
order of the Bathe, lying and situate in Ramsey aforesaid, called Abbots
Pingle, Wigin Moore, Ramsey Park and Asbech, one hundred seventy seven acres,
(viz.) the said entire Fen ground called Abbots Pingle, containing eighty
acres, the said entire Fen ground called Ashbeech, containing seventy six
acres, and the residue being twenty one acres. Out of the said Fen ground
called Wigin Moore, at the South-east part thereof, abutting upon Abbots Pingle
aforesaid. 0177 0 00

Severals of Ramsey. Out of the other several fen grounds, of, or belonging to
Ramsey aforesaid, in the said County of Huntingdon, one hundred fifty five
acres, (that is to say,) out of the Fen ground called Upper Steds, five acres,
two roods and twenty perches at the North-east end thereof. Out of the several
Fen grounds called Nether Steds, eighteen acres and one rood at the North-west
end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground now or late of (...) Beale Gent.
lying near Witlesey Mere, three Acres, one Rood, and ten Perches at the
North-east part of the same ground. Out of the several Fen-grounds of Thomas
Cromwell Gent. called Dantree and Bagdole, thirty three Acres, one Rood, and
ten Perches at the North-east end of the said ground called Bagdole. Out of the
several Fen-ground of (...) Houson, called also Bagdole, twelve Acres and two
Roods at the South-west part thereof, abutting upon Witlesey Mere. Out of a
several Fen-ground belonging to Sir Oliver Cromwell aforesaid, lying on the
South Side of Ugg Mere, six Acres at the South-west part of the same ground.
Out of the several Fen-grounds called Beaupre Closes, eight Acres and one Rood,
abutting upon Delfe-dike and the River Neane. Out of the several Fen-grounds
called great Hilkes, twenty eight Acres and one Rood at the East part thereof,
abutting upon Ramsey Mere and the river Neane. Out of the several Fen-grounds
called little Hilkes, two Acres and two Roods at the 0073 1 20

part thereof, next unto the mouth of Ramsey Mere. Out of the several
Fen-ground called Pollins, two Acres, and two Roods at the East part thereof.
Out of the greater Close called Bears-arse, lying near Hilkes on the North side
of the river Neane, two Acres, three roods, and ten Perches at the North-east
end of the said ground. Out of the lesser ground called also Beares-arse, one
Acre and twenty Perches at the South-west-side thereof. Out of the several
Fen-grounds adjoining upon the hard lands of Wistowe, or Warbois called Vicars
Closes, six Acres and ten Perches at the West part of the said Closes. Out of
the several Fen-ground, now or late of Anne Netleton, lying near Ramsey Town,
one Acre at the South part thereof. Out of the several Fen-ground now or late
of Thomas Cock, one acre and three roods at the North end thereof. Out of the
several Fen-ground of (...) Crockston, one acre and one rood at the North end
thereof. Out of the several fen ground now, or late of John Bateman, two acres,
and twenty eight perches at the North-end of the same ground. Out of the
several Fen ground now, or late of John Lavender, one acre one rood, and four
perches at the North-part thereof. Out of the several fen ground now, or late
of John Leeders, one acre, two roods and four perches at the North part
thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of Thomas Williamson, two acres, two
roods, and twenty eight perches at the North-end thereof. Out of the several
Fen grounds of Widow Holmes, two acres, two roods and sixteen perches at the
South-end of the greater ground belonging unto her, abutting upon the load. Out
of the several Fen ground ot Thomas Barnes, two acres and ten perches at the
East-part thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of John Knight, three acres,
three roods, and thirty perches at the west-part thereof, abutting upon the
ground of William Cakebread. Out of the several Fen ground of Richard Allen,
lying near High Northey, two roods at the North-side thereof. Out of the
several fen ground of Robert Booth, two roods at the South Side thereof. Out of
the several Fen ground of Thomas Howson, one acre at the North-end thereof. Out
of the several Fen ground of (...) Farmer Gent. three roods at the East Side
thereof. And out of the several Fen ground, lying on the East-part of
Stocking-Fen, in the occupation of Ralph Allen, one Acre and two Roods on the
North side of the same ground. 0155 0 00

Wood-walton. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to VVood-walton
in the said County of Huntingdon, nine hundred thirty seven Acres (that is to
say) three hundred ninety three Acres out of the North end of the same ground,
abutting upon the several Fen-grounds of Hignie Farm and Brick-Meere, claimed
by John Marshall Gent. And the residue being five hundred forty and four Acres
out of the North part of the said Fen, abutting upon Ugg-Meere and the common
Fen-grounds of Ramsey and Upwood, late in the possession of and claimed by
(...) Lawrence Gent. 0937 0 00

Out of the two several Fen-grounds of the said John Marshall lying in
Wood-walton aforesaid, next unto the Fen and hard lands of Santrey, thirty six
Acres at the North end of the said grounds, abutting upon Santrey Fen and the
hard lands of Hignie Farm. 0036 0 00

Out of the one other Fen-ground in VVood-walton aforesaid, lying between the
hard lands of VVood-walton and Hignie Farm and the said Fen of VVood-walton,
claimed as Several by the said John Marshall, fifteen Acres, abutting upon the
hard lands of Wood-walton at the South-east part of the said ground. 0015 0 00

Hignie. Out of the several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Hignie Farm in
the said County of Huntingdon, one hundred Acres at the North-end of the said
grounds, abutting upon the several Fen-grounds of Conington, and upon the
common fen grounds of Holme and Wood-walton aforesaid. 0100 0 00

Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Santrey, in the said County
of Huntingdon, two hundred and six acres at the South-east part of the same
Fen, abutting upon the several fen grounds of Santrey and Woodwalton aforesaid,
and upon the hard lands of Santrey. 0206 0 00

Out of two several Fen grounds in Santrey aforesaid, lying near unto
Woodwalton aforesaid, nineteen acres at the North-east part of the greater of
the said several fen grounds, abutting Eastward upon the several Fen grounds of
John Marshall aforesaid. 0019 0 00

Conington. Out of the several Fen grounds of Conington in the said County of
Huntingdon, two hundred eighty and one acres, abutting Southward upon the
common Fen grounds of Santrey aforesaid, Eastward upon the Fen grounds of
Higney Farm, and Northward upon the common Fen called Holme Fen. 0281 0 00

Holme and Glatton, Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Holme
and Glatton in the said County of Huntingdon, one thousand and twelve acres
abutting Eastward upon the river Neane, and Ugg Mere, Southward upon Brick
Mere, and the said several Fen grounds of Higney Farm and Conington, and
westward upon the hard lands. 1012 0 00

Denton. Out of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to Denton in the said
County of Huntingdon, one hundred fifty six acres at the South-east part of the
said Fen, abutting upon Holme load, and the hard lands of Holme. 0156 0 00

Caldecott. Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Caldecott in
the said County of Huntingdon, fifty six acres, (that is to say) out of the
Moss Fen, belonging to the Right Honorable Edward Lord Montacute, eighteen
acres at the South-west part of the same ground, abutting upon the ground
called the Turfe lots. Out of the said ground called the Turfe lots, four
acres, three roods, and twenty perches, at the North-end of the same ground,
abutting upon Caldecot Dyke. Out of the ground called the Mowing lots, eight
acres and three roods at the west end of the same ground. Out of one other
several Fen ground of the said Lord Montacute, fourteen acres, one rood, and
three perches, abutting upon part of the aforesaid Mowing lots, and upon Denton
Fen. Out of three several Fen grounds now, or late in the occupation of Thomas
Hall, three acres, three roods, and twenty five perches at the North-part of
the same grounds. Out of five several Fen grounds, in the tenure or occupation
of Sir Thomas Cotton Baronet, (...) Williamson Gent. (...) Fuller Gent. Thomas
Hall aforesaid, and William Ashton, lying between the aforesaid Fen ground of
the said Lord Montacute, Denton Fen, and the drove-way leading to the same
grounds, four Acres at the West-ends of the said five several Grounds. Out of
five other several Fen-grounds, of, or belonging unto the said Sir Thomas
Cotton, the said (...) Williamson Gent. the said (...) Fuller Gent. the said
Thomas Hall and William Ashton, lying between the before mentioned Drove-way,
and the hard lands, two Acres and two Perches at the Fast part of the same
ground. 0056 0 00

Stilton. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Stilton in the
said County of Huntingdon, one hundred and sixty Acres, abutting upon Caldecott
dike, the Turfe Fen of Stilton, and the Common and Several Fens of Yaxley.
0160 0 00

Yaxley. Out of the common Fen-grounds, of, or belonging to Yaxley in the said
County of Huntingdon, six hundred, thirty and two Acres at the North-east part
of the same Fens, abutting upon Pigge-water, VVitlesey Mere, and Trundle
Mere. 0632 0 00

Out of the several Fen-grounds of Yaxley aforesaid, twenty nine Acres, (that
is to say) out of the Mowe-Fen called Western Meadow, eight Acres and two
Roods at the North-east side of the same ground, abutting upon the River Neane.
Out of a Holt belonging to Thomas Gentill, lying near the town of Yaxley, three
roods and five perches at the South-end of the said Holt. Out of a Holt
belonging to John Isop, one rood and five perches at the South-end of the same
Holt. Out of the Holt belonging to Widow Pierson, one rood at the South-end of
the said Holt. Out of the Holt belonging to Pinchbeck Pierson, one rood and
twenty perches at the South-end of the same Holt. Out of the several Fen ground
of Bartholomew Brown, abutting upon Witlesea Mere, one acre and one rood at the
part of the said ground next Trundle Mere. Out of the several Fen ground of
Thomas Wats, lying near Yaxley town, five perches at the South-west part of the
same ground. Out of the several Fen ground of Emmanuel Probie Gent. lying near
Yaxley town, one rood and thirty perches at the South-west part of the saidt
ground. Out of two several Fe^ grounds, belonging to the said Pinchbeck Pie
son, lying near Yaxley town, two acres and twenty five perches at the
South-east end thereof. Out of the several Fen ground of George Hopkins, two
roods and twenty perches at the South-west part of the same ground. Out of the
several fen ground, belonging to the said Emmanuel Probie, abutting upon
Stilton Fen, eight acres and two roods at the North-east end of the same
ground. Out of a several Fen ground, lying between Witlesey Mere and Trundle
Mere, three acres and three roods at the East-part thereof. Out of another fen
ground, lying also between Witlesey Mere and Trundle Mere, one acre and one
rood at the Bast-part thereof. And out of the several Fen ground, lying at the
end of Conquest load by Witlesey Mere, three roods, abutting upon Witlesey
Mere aforesaid. 0029 0 00

Fasset. Out of the common Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Fasset in the said
County of Huntingdon, nine hundred and forty acres, abutting Eastward upon the
Fen called Middle-moore in Ramsey, and Southward upon Witlesey Mere. And upon
two several Fen grounds, belonging to Fasset aforesaid, adjoining to the said
Mere. 0940 0 00

Out of the several Fen grounds of Fasset aforesaid, one hundred sixty and two
acres, being two entire fen grounds, abutting upon the aforesaid common fen
grounds of Fasset aforesaid, and upon Witlesey Mere. 0162 0 00


COM. NORTHAMPTON.
Peterborough. OUt of the common fen ground, of, or belonging to the Soake of
Peterborough, in the said County of Northampton, called Borough great fen, two
thousand six hundred twenty and two acres, abutting Eastward upon part of the
said common fen, lying near Einshed Cross, and the grounds of single sole
Farm, Southward upon the drain or way leading from Peakirk meddow to Guy Hurne
Northward, on the new bank of the river Welland, and upon the common fen
ground, called the four hundred acres. 2622 0 00

Out of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to Peterborough, or Crowland,
or to the one of them, called the four hundred acres or Alder Holt, lying in
the County of Lincoln, two hundred and ninety acres at the west end thereof,
abutting upon the said fen called Borough great fen, and the common fens of
Crowland. 0290 0 00

Out of one other common fen ground, of, or belonging to Peterborough
aforesaid, in the said County of Northampton, called Borough little Fen, eighty
eight acres at the East-part thereof, abutting upon Muscot water, and Oxney
load. 0088 0 00

Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging unto single sole Farm in the
said County of Northampton, forty five acres, abutting Eastward upon Catwater,
Southward upon the several fen grounds of Northam Farm, and westward upon
Peterborough great fen. 0045 0 00

Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to the said Northam Farm, in
the said County of Northampton, eighty acres, (that is to say,) forty acres in
one parcel, adjoining Eastward upon Catwater, Northward upon the said several
Fen grounds of single sole Farm aforesaid. And the residue being four acres,
out of the several Fen called Cranmoore, out of the South-east part thereof,
abutting upon the Fen called the Harp, and upon the hard lands of Eye. 0080 0
00

Eye. Out of the Fen called the mowing Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Eye, in
the said County of Northampton, fifteen acres, three roods, and thirty perches,
out of the said mow fen, called small acre furlong, and Chillham tree furlong,
(that is to say) out of the ground called small acre furlong, twelve acres, one
rood, and thirty perches at the East Side of the same ground, abutting upon
Catwater, and the residue being three acres and two roods, out of the said
ground called Chillam tree furlong, at the North-side thereof, abutting upon
the several ground of Northam Farm called the Reaches. 0015 3 30

Out of the several Fen grounds of Richard Darbie, lying between the said
grounds called Chillam tree furlong, and small acre furlong, one acre and ten
perches, abutting upon Catwater. 000 0 0

Out of the several Fen grounds, of, or belonging to Ta^holt ^arme in the said
County of Northampton, thirty acres and three roods, being one entire Fen,
called Newthred, abutting upon Catwater. 00 0

Out of the several Fen grounds* of, or belonging to Oxney ^^me, in the said
County of Northampton, twenty six acres, abutting Northward upon the old
Engine, and the hardlands of Eyberry, and the Fen grounds of Tanholt Farm
aforesaid, and South-eastward upon Catwater, the bank near Borough little Fen,
and the other grounds of the same Farm. 0026 0 00

Out of the several fen grounds, of, or belonging to the Right Honorable
Francis Earl of Bedford, lying in Eyberry, in the said County of Northampton,
eleven acres out of the ground called Alder fen, abutting upon high Edgerley
Common. 0011 0 00

Out of the lot fen ground, belonging to Eye aforesaid, called the Harp, four
acres and two roods at the East End of the same, abutting upon the hard lands
of Eye aforesaid. 0004 2 00

Out of the several fen grounds of John Troughton, lying in Newwark Edgerley,
three roods at the East-part of the same ground. 0000 3 00

Out of the several fen ground of Widow Bucher, and the Heirs of Giles
Borough, five acres, in two parcels lying together in the fens, called the
Holts, abutting upon Peterborough great fen. 0005 0 00


COM. LINCOLN.
Crowland. OUt of the common fen grounds, of, or belonging to Crowland in the
said County of Lincoln fens, four hundred acres at the East part of the same
fens, abutting Eastward upon St. Guthlakes Cross and Catwater, Southward upon
the common fen called the four hundred acres, or Alderholt, and Northward upon
the fen grounds of Crowland aforesaid, called Porsand fen. 0400 0 00


FINIS.

