HIS HIGHNESS Prince Rupert's LETTER TO THE Earl of Arlington HIS MAJESTY'S
Principal Secretary of State. From on Board the SOVEREIGN Now, under Sail, June
5. About Seven Leagues off Lastoff, at Nine in the Morning, the Wind at E. N. E,

Published by Authority.

Reprinted at Dublin by Benjamin Took, Printer to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street. 1673.

His Highness Prince Rupert's Letter to the Earl of Arlington, His Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State, from on Board the Sovereign, now under Sail, June
5. about Seven Leagues off Lastoff, at Nine in the Morning the Wind E. N. E.
IN My Last I gave an Account that the Enemy lay in the Schonevelt and that we
were at an Ankor, seven Leagues from East Capel, which bore S. b. E. from us;
Now I have to tell you of a Second Engagement with them, which happened upon
June the fourth. The Enemy having had the Opportunity by lying so Near their own
Coast, to Refit and Furnish themselves with all things they wanted, and knowing
very well, that as the Wind has stood of late, we could not do the like, were
Encouraged to come out upon us, as they did that day afternoon, having the
Advantage of a strong Gale at N. E. which we quickly perceived, and got under
Sail, standing N. N. W. having Our Larboard tacks on Board; and as close haled
upon the Wind as we could lie, stood to Receive them. About four in the
Afternoon, Van Trump with the Amsterdam Squadron bore down, and began to Engage
with the Blew, According to their usual Custom, Beginning to Fire at a great
distance; About five de Ruyter with his Squadron Engaged with me, And the
Zealand Squadron with the White; At his first coming de Ruyter made a show as
if he would have come very near me, but before he was within Musket shot, He
sprung his Luff, And closed his Wind as much as possibly he could, Going off on
a sudden for good and all, which made us suppose, He had either some
Extraordinary Damage in his ship, Or that himself was hurt* Their whole Fleet
continued Pelting at us, at a great distance till dark night, We keeping our
Ground not withstanding their Fireships. About Midnight part of the Dutch Fleet
Tacked, Standing toward the E. Southerly, And quickly after the rest did the
like, As we guessed by an impefect sight we had of them; And at some distance.

At Two in the Morning we Tacked also, And stood after them; At Six, Seeing no
likelihood of reaching them before they would get within their Sands, we
thought it to no purpose to pursue them any farther; so we Tacked again, And
stood for our own Coast. All we can say more of the Enemy, is That they went
off in great disorder, leaving us ignorant of what loss they have sustained. On
our side we lost never a Ship, and very few men; of our Commanders, Captain
White of the Warspit, and Captain Sadlington of the Crown, were killed; of the
Foot-Officers, Captain Henshaw, and Lieutenant Fitzgerald were killed, and
Lieutenant ^ufton was wounded.

FINIS.

