A SERMON Prerched by Mr. James Row, sometime Minister at Strowan, in St.
Geilles Kirk at Edinburgh, which has been commonly known by the Name of
Pockmanty Preaching.
Jeremiah Chap. 30. Verse 17. For I will restore health to thee, and I will
heal thee of thy wounds, says the LORD, because they called thee an Outcast,
saying, This is Zion whom no Man seeks after.
I Need not trouble you much who is meant by Zion here, ye all ken it, it is
the poor Kirk of Scotland, for the Kirk of Scotland is wounde^ (...) her Head,
in her Hands, in her Feet, and in her Heart.

First in her Head in the Government. 2dly. In her Hands, in the Discipline.
3dly. In her Heart, as in the Doctrine. 4thly. In her Feet, as in the Worship.

First, The Kirk of Scotland is wounded in her Head, she has gotten sik a Clash
in her Head, as has gart all her Harns jaap, and her Senses, that is, her Sense
of Seeing; for the Kirk of Scotland wald a seen als well as any C^ristian Kirk
in the wyd World, but now she cannot distinguish between whyt and black; For
bring but Pepery before her, and she cannot discern between that and the true
Religion.

Secondly, She is wounded in her Hearing: The Kirk of Scotland could a Heard
and Distinguished, out sen the Organs were brought in, she has grown as Deaff
as a Door-Nail.

Thirdly, The Kirk of Scotland coud a sin^ as well as any Kirk in the World,
but the (...) is of Rome smelt so strangly, that she could a ta^^ you, she
smelled of the Whore of Babel; Bu^ now bring the stinkenest Pepery to the Kirk
(...) Scotland, and it will smell to her as sweet as a^ Apple: Now poor
Spectacle! ye have seen he^ Hands, and her sare Legs; A woeful Object pity her
if ye will: What say ye to the Cureing of her Senses; but some will tell, she
is in as good a Case as ever she was. I Will tell you how sae,

First, The Kirk of Scotland sees better than ever she did before; the Kirk of
Scotland say her Ministers in good little short Cloaks, wi^^ black Velvet
Necks, and their little Cloa^ turned mae Saul's to God, nor ever the Ia^^ Gowns
did; but ye shall see the Prydful Prelates harled up and down the Town in Co^s,
as in as many muck Carts; that is a bra sight indeed.

Secondly, The Kirk of Scotland Tastes better then ever she did, and how sae?
I Will tell you, a good Minister wald a been content of a Dish of plain Milk and
Bread, humble Meat indeed, but our Prelates now, will have a Lick of the best o^
it: So ye see the Kirk of Scotland Tastes better then ever she did, and I have
done with h^^ Senses.

Now, I Will tell you, how she is wounded in he^ Hands, and that I call the
Discipline of the Kirk. For,

First, They fflichtered the Kirk of Scotland ye ken well they use to flighter
Theives and Runaways; the Kirk of Scotland was both.

1st. She was a Runaway, and that was the Glorious time of Reformation, when
she came ^lear awa fra Rome, and hard did they follow ^er, and fain wald they
been at her, but and they had gotten their will, she wald a been sure of her
Ladetties, or to speak more plainly of her Dichells, but God be thanked they
did not oretake her.

2dly. The Kirk of Scotland is a Theif, alas she has gane to Rome, and has
stown awa the Trash and Trumpery, as the Books of Common Prayer and Cannons,
wallawa! But what trou ye she is flichterd with, but with a Silken Thread and a
Cannonical Obedience to their Ordinary, and wow but we have taken great delight
to be bound: We had once a bonny Kirk, but after they got us fast, they made
the silken Thread a Cable-Tow, with which they girded us so fast that we could
not sae much as fidge, but either we must run into the Danger of blind
Obedience on the one side, to accept of all Idolatry and Superstitious
Ceremonies they imposed on us, or on the the other hand, be Mensworn Men; Na,
the Kirk of Scotland is sae wounded in her Hands, that their Twenty Years
bygane, she coud not make her Hummock in a called day, for the Kirk of Scotland
their Twenty Years bygane, coud not have a Meeting in a Lawful Assembly; and so
I have done with her Hands: Now I come to tell you how, how she is wounded in
her Feet; and that I call the Worship of the Kirk of Scotland.

The Kirk of Scotland was a bonny trotting Naig, but then she ttotted sae hard,
that never a Man durst rid her, but the Bishops, wha after they gat on on her
Back, Corss langed her and Hapshackled her, and when she became a bonny pacing
Beast, they took great pleasure to Ride on her, but their Cadging her up and
down from Edinburgh to London, and it may be from Rome too, gave her sik a het
Coat, that we have these Twelve Months bygane been stirring her up and down to
keep her faae foundying; Yea, tha^ made not only a Horse but an Ass of the Kirk
(...) Scotland: How sae quo ye? what mean ye b^ this? I Will tell you how, they
made Balaams A^ of her, ye ken well enough, Balaam was go^^ an unluckie gait,
and first the Angel met (...) in a broad way, and then the Ass bogled (...)
startled, but Balaam got by the Angel, and (...) her and Battand her
sufficiently, that was wh^ Episcopacy came in, and then they gave the Kirk of
Scotland her Paiks; Afterward Bala^^ met the Angel in a strait gait, and then
she star^led more then before; but Balaam till her (...) gain and whaked her
soundly, that, was when the five Articles of Perth were brought in (...)* The
third time the Angel met Balaam in fa^ strait a gait, that the Ass could not
win by; and then it pleased the LORD to open blind Balaams Eyes, and that is
this happy days wark: Now GOD has opened all our Eyes, we were like blind
Balaam, ganging an unluckie gait and Riding post to Rome, and what was gotten
behind him upon the Ass, wat ye? I Will tell you, there was a Pockmanty; And what
was in it trou ye? but the Book of Cannons and of Common Prayer, and the High
Commission; But as soon as the Ass sees the Angel, she falls a flinging and a
plunging, and oregangs the Pockmanty, and it hings by the string on the one
side, and aff-gaes blind Balaam, and he hings by the Hough on the other side;
and fain wald the Carle been on the Sadle again, and been content to leave his
Pockmanty. But Beloved, let not the false Swingour get on again, for if he get
on agai^^^ he will be sure to get on his Pock manty also.

The 4th Wound the Kirk of Scotland got was in her Heart, and that I tald you
was the Doctrine of the Kirk of Scotland, and that is Peperie and Arinianism,
whilk is sae ryfe in our Schools and Kirks; ney, are there not some of you that
are siting here and hears me, wha wald not a wished your selves a Hundred times
to a been out of the Kirk, when ye heard the Peltrie Stuff that came frae them.
Ye have heard many times Brethren (Compared together) the Kirk and our Lord
Jesus, for he is the Head, and the Kirk is the Body, and that our Savior ere
he entered the Ministry he was carried by Luciter (God save us) to the
Wilderness where he was Tempted of the Meikle Devil, then he was Rejected and
let light of by all; But as soon as he began to work his Miracles, he was
carried up to Jerusalem in Triumph, there was nothing in their Mouths then, but
Hosanna's, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, but the next News
that they heard, in they came with Halbarts and Jothard Stalves frac the High
Priest to apprehend him; just sae is it with the Poor Kirk of Scotland, for
this year bygain she has sitten Desolate and in the Wilderness cotemned,
nothing cared for by man, and now is the Glorious Day, she is Rydding in
Triumph to Jerusalem, now there is nothing in all Mouths but Hosanna's, but
take heed when they come with Swords and Stalves frae the Hight Priest, that
some do not with Peter shaw a pair of Heels and forsake her.

They have not only made an Ass of the Kirk of Scotland but they have betrayed
her, ye h^^^ wha betrayed our Savior, they betrayed hi^ that were silent in
sae good a Cause, they b^trayed him that accused him, that Judged him they
betrayed him that forsook him; but when will ye find the false Judas all the
while? an^ now I Will tell you a Tale, I dar not say it is tru^ but ye shall have
it as I have it; When I w^^ (...) little Boy at the School, there was a Hop^
Theologue, wha is now na small Man in (...) Land, and being to Preach the very
same Wor^ of Judas, What will ye give me and I will betr^^ him? The young Man
Learned his Text sae w^^^ that he could a tald it both in Latin and Sc^^^
Quid mihi dabitis and ego Tradum illum? what w^^^ ye give me and I will betray
him? There was (...) Good Man Sitting at the Foot of the Poupit, was standing
up looking in his Face, said, Marie (...) give you a good Fat Bishopric, and
then I a^sure ye will betray him, say ye sae; Wha ha^ Betrayed the Kirk of
Scotland? I need not te^^ you, but the Kirk of Scotland was once an Bo^nie Kirk
and a Bonnie Gramar School, and well (...) wat, she had Skill in Regimen and
Concordenti^ and could a made a piece of Bonnie Latin, an^ for every thing she
was forced to da Regula^^ and when she offended she was sure of pan^ Manum; But
afterward when she went to the College she had mair Liberty, and first of all
she began to Rhetoric, but instead of proper speaking she Learned nothing but
Hyperboles and Allegories, then she came into the Logic, and in stead of true
Demonstrations she Learned nothing but Homonimaes and Captious Sylogisms,
afterward she came to Aethicks, but she did not trouble her self meikle with
them, but Studied the Politics, and that sae well, that she turned all
Religion into Mere flat Policy: for Metaphysics she kens they are Ens, and
that must be unum, verum, bonum, and that all these three must be in true
Religious, but this was too high a Theme for her, wherefore she studied more
the Physics and turned all into Materia prima, and made it self Capable of any
Form they pleased to Impose upon us.

After he had done with Sermon and Prayer, then stood he up to give the
Blessing, and thereafter said as follows. I ken well enough it is not the
Fashion of this place to Speak any thing after Prayer, but because I had meikle
to say, and one thing dang another out of my ^ead, wherefore I must beg Leave
to add a Word or two.

AND first of all, I will speak to you who are the Members of the College of
Justice, and why I pray you, will not ye Subscrive the Covenant? ye will say to
me, ye are Employed by His Majesty in some special Affairs, and you cannot with
your Honor Subscrive the Covenant; This is a bra Answer indeed, there is not
the Meanest Man that gathers up Twenty Merks for the King per Annum, but may
have this Hole to go out at, then we shall have a bra Subscriving, yea, yea,
there is but one Man between God and you, get by that Man, and get to God.

And in the second place, Why do not ye Noblemen Subscrive the Covenant? ye
will say noli me tangere, Howsoever I Will give you a Touch, It may be you will
be put to it, ye will fay, we must Ride in Parliament Order, the meanest man
must go foremost and Subscrive the C^venant, and then we will come after, that
i^ bra Answer indeed, you have a Fashion in t^^ S^uth part of Scotland, that
when ye come to (...) Foord, the Jackman must venture over first upon his weak
weary Naig, and if he can go an^ come back again, then up comes the Lord
mounted on his Stately Steed and over goes (...) this is no Right, But we that
are Highlanders have a better Fashon, for we usually come ^n Foot, and when we
come to the Foord we ar^ loath to leave a Man; therefore we join Oxst^^ to
Oxster, and Arm to Arm, and Loups al^^gether in the Foord, and if one Drown all
Drowns even so here, set your Hands to the Covenant, and if an perish, let all
perish.

Now, I Will speak a word to you of the Town of Edinburgh; and albeit I see two
of your Chief Chayrs empty, yet have at you; And why do you not subscrive the
Covenant? It may be you will say, ye are in Office now, stay till the next Year
till your Office be out, then ye will subscrive the Covenant; That is a bra
Answer indeed, it may be God will get this wark done ere the next Year: What
will your Thanks be then? get your Clerk Register and look over your Rolls, and
see if ever the Town of Edinburg suffered for joining with the Kirk of Scotland.

Last of all, I have a mind to Speak a Word to you who are Strangers, and then
Turning himself about to the place where the Proveist and Baillies of Aberdeen
Sat; And what is the reason ye subscrive not the Covenant? It may be ye will
say, ^e came here about your Civil Affairs; and when ye came out ^e resolved
not to Subscrive the Covenant, will re take my Advice. I say Abvrdeens-men will
you take your Word again, and go home and Drink the Cup of Bon ^ccord, and join
to the Kirk of S^otland and subscrive the Covenant, and so farewell.

FINIS.

