THE Accepted TIME, AND DAY of Salvation, etc. OR, SINNERS Flee from the Wrath
to come.

2 Cor. 6. part of Verse 2. -- Behold, now is the Accepted Time; behold, now is
the Day of Salvation.

By Robert Russel.

(...), Printed by Robert Sanders, One of His Majesty's Printers. Printed for
John Crosby. ANNO DOM. 1700.

THE Accepted Time, AND Day of Salvation, etc.
2 Cor 6. part of Ver. 2. -- Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is
the Day of Salvation.


THE Occasion of these Words may be taken from the Words immediately before the
Text, which were the ^ord's own Words spoken by the Mouth of the Prophet
Isaiah, 49.8. Saying, I have heard th^e in a time accepted, and in a Day of
^alvation have I helped thee: O^ as it is in he words before the Text, in a Day
of Salvation have I succored thee. And from then^ the Apostle takes occasion
to show the^ when that Accepted Time and Day of Salvation is, wherein God hears
us, and accepts us and that he does here, in the words of m^^ Text, Behold, now
is the accepted time; behold, now is the Day of Salvation.

From these words I shall gather this general Observation:

That the only Time to make our Peac^ with God, and thereby to obtain Me^cy and
Salvation, is now, this preser Season of Grace; or the time present the only
Acceptable Time: For, B^^ hold, now is the accepted Time; Behold now is the Day
of Salvation.

The Text affords us these two General Parts:

First, Here is a double Note of Attention Behold! Behold! Secondly, Here is
the Subject matter to Behold; that is, Now is the accepted Time; and now is the
Day of Salvation.
First, Here is a double Note of Attention Behold! Behold! Now to behold a
thing, is take great notice of it, to observe it, and mind it; and we may be
sure, that whenever we are called upon to behold a thin^ it must be something
of very great Concer^ there are many things that are not wor^ beholding: For if
you mind it, you may and in the Scriptures, that when any thing is mentioned
that is of greater Concernment than others, it is always brought in with this
Note, Behold: As James 3.12. Behold, and see, if there be any Sorrow like unto
my Sorrow. A Matter of very great Concernment. So John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of
GOD, that takes away the sins of the World: And many others. Now there cannot
be a Matter of greater Concernment, than this in my Text, That now is the
accepted Time, and now is the Day of Salvation. A thing which concerns our
winning, or losing of Heaven for ever; ^ thing which concerns our everlasting
Peace, ^r our everlasting Woe; that now is the Time, that if we in earnest seek
for Mercy, we may have it: Now is the Time, that if we ^eek and defire Grace,
Pardon, and Salvation, we shall be accepted; but afterward, ^^ll our praying
crying, and entreating, will ^e in vain: Now what can be more worth our
beholding than this? This is a Matter which concerns our selves, and it is of
the greatest Concernment in the World, therefore this requires a double Note
of Attention, to put us in mind of it; Behold! behold!

And so I pass, Secondly, from the Note Behold, to the second General Head, the
Subject: Matter to be behold; and that also is double: Behold, now it the
accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation. Now the^ the Accepted Time,
and the Day of Salvation are two several Words, yet in Sense the are one and
the same: For the Accepted Time is our Day of Salvation, and our Day of
Salvation is the Accepted Time; wherein, if w^ unfeignedly seek the LORD, and
turn t^^ him, by true Repentance, we shall be sur^^^ ^o be accepted, pardoned,
and saved: For Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, no^ is the day of
salvation.

Now in my further Prosecution of the Subject, I shall proceed after this
manner:

First, I shall show you, That with us, ther^ is such a Time, as an Accepted
Time, and D^^ of Salvation. Secondly, I shall show you the Season, when this
Accepted Time, and Day of Salvation is. Thirdly, The Reason of it. And, Lastly,
The Application.
I shall begin with the First, and show you That with us, there is such a Time,
and Day of Salvation: And that, First, in respect ^^ the fallen Angels, who
never had such Season allocced them: Alas! they committed but one sin against
God, and that but on^^ in Thought, and yet for that one sin, the were thrust
out of Heaven, and reserved under Chains of Darkness, unto the dread fu^^
Judgment of the Great Day; they being once sallen, had never a Day of
Salvation afforded them; they never had one Moment of Time allotted them, upon
the improvement of which, they might have been reserved to Mercy; therefore if
they should pray, and cry, and entreat the Lord never so earnestly, that he
would forgive them that one sin, and restore them once more to Mercy; yet they
shall never be regarded: Christ suffered not for them, there was not one Drop
of Blood shed to wash away their sin: For he took not upon him the nature of
Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 6.16.

Secondly, There is with us such a Time as an Accepted Time, and Day of
Salvation, in opposition to those damned Souls that are already in Hell: It Is
true, the De^ils being once fallen, never had Mercy offered them, they never
had one Minute of Time afforded them to work out their Salvation, whereas these
damned VVretches once had Mercy offered them, but they despised it; they once
had a Day of Salvation a Time wherein they might have been accepted: Alas! They
had many a Call from God, Time after Time, many a secret motion from his
Spirit; They once heard many a Sermon, and enjoyed many a Sabbath, many an
Ordinance; GOD waited upon them Time after Time, Year after Year, whilst they
continued in their R^^ bellion against him: But alas! alas! they sinned away
all these precious Opportunities; all this Time they might have bee^ accepted,
if they had turned to God in earnest: But lo! Now the Day of Grace is
concluded, the Door of Hope is for ever sha^^ against them; now they are left
in a fa^^ more miserable Condition than the fallen Angels are in; for they once
had a Golde^^ Season of Grace put into their Hands, b^^ they wilfully lost it,
and trifled it away long did God wait, and call upon them, from one Time to
another, by his Spirit, and b^^ his Messengers; but they wearied out hi^
Patience, grieved his Spirit, despised h^^ Messengers, abused all his Goodness:
Ala^ the Devils will never have such Consideratious as these to torment them,
as these damned Souls now have.

Thirdly, There is with us such a Time an Accepted Time, and Day of Salvation,
Opposition to what shall be with us here after, if we let it slip; when we come
to He^ we shall be in the same miserable Condition that those damned Souls are
in, that are already there: Consider, that Man being created in a hely and
righteous Estare, and w^ being fallen, if God had not found out Way for our
Recovery, we had been lest miserable a Condition as the fallen Angels ^ere; but
God of his unspeakable Mercy, ^^oked in tender Love upon lost Mankind, ^^at he
gave his dearly beloved Son, to suffer and die for us; and for his sake he has
^fforded every one of us a Day of Grace, which if we duly improve in turning to
God, ^n receiving of this his Son, as he is offered, ^^ve shall be accepted,
pardoned and saved; ^ut if we squander away this precious Sea^^on, in following
Vanity and Foolery, in sa^^fying our Lusts, and pleasing our selves, ^ntill the
Door of Mercy be shut; our Dam^ation will be far more greater, than if we never
had had such an Opportunity put into ^^ur Hands: That Is the First; there is
with (...) such a Time as an Accepted Time, and Day of Salvation.

Secondly, I shall next show, when this Accepted Time, and Day of Salvation is;
that is, at is now; Now is the accepted time, and now is the day of salvation.
The Apostle does not speak it in the future Tense, that soon after will be an
Accepted Time, though you contioue in your sins for a while in rebelling
against God, grieving of his Spirit, and pro^oking him to Wrath; yet if you
turn to God hereafter, you shall be accepted; no, out he speaks in the Present
Tense, Behold, ^ow is the accepted time; now is the Opportunity of Grace put
into your Hands, when in Heaven is to be won or lost for ever; a^^ according as
you improve this present S^^^ son of Grace, so must your Everlasting Esta^^ be
in another World: All Mankind are a miserable Est^ce by Nature; and it is no
that the Terms of Marcy are offered you, a^^ an Opportunity of Grace put into
your hand O! for the Lords sake do not ruin your So^^ for ever, by neglecting
so precious an O^portunity: Mark what our Savior sai^ Mat. 5.25. Agree now
with thy Adve^^ sary quickly, whilst thou art in the way wi^^ him, lest at any
time the Adversary deliver^^ thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliv^^ thee to
the Officer, and thou be cast (...) Prison: Verily I say unto thee, thou shall
(...) come out thence till thou have paid the u^^ most Farthing. Now God is
your Adve^^ sary, for we are all by Nature Enemies God, by reason of sin; but,
yet God of (...) tender Love has given us Terms of Reco^^ ciliation; agree
therefore with him quick^^ before his Justice has seized upon thee, thou be
delivered to the Officer, the Dev^^ and then thou shall b^ him be cast into
th^^ Prison of Hell, and there thou must^ly in e^^ tream and intolerable
Torments, until th^^ have paid the utmost Farthing of Gods Ju^tice, which can
never be to all Eternity: therefore agree and make your Peace with ^ur God
quickly, whilst thou art in the way ^^ith him; for now you are in a fair way
^^ith him to be reconciled for he offers you ^^erms of Mercy; he has showed
you in his ^Vord by what Means you may come to ^^ake an Agreement with him; he
calls u^^on you by his Messengers; he entreats you (...) Christ's stead, to be
reconciled to him, 2 ^or. 20. And if God so earnestly desire our (...)
conciliation with him, in what a sair way ^^re we then with God to be
reconciled? But ^^ontinue in your unconverted Estate, and in ^^our Enmity
against God a little longer, un^^^il the season of Grace be at an end^ and God
^^ath shut against you the Door of Mercy, then ^^od and you will be
unreconciliable for e^^er; then ail your Prayers, and Tears, and ^^ndeavours
shall never be accepted; then ^^othing remains, but to the Prisen of Hell ^^ou
must be cast; there to remain for ever ^^nd ever: Therefore as Eliph^^ said to
Job, ^^o say I to you, Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy ^^^elf with him and be at
peace, thereby good shall ^^vieme unto thee; For, behold, now is the time ^^hat
thou may be accepted; but more ^ar^cular, to show you when this Accepted
Time, ^^^d Day of Salvation is; it is now in this ^^^fe; for there is no making
our Peace with God after Death; therefore, says Solomon, Eccles. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand find to do, do it with all thy might; for the is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, n^^ wisdom in the Grave, whither thou goe^^

Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, whither it be to repent, to close savingly
wi^^ Christ, to get Grace, or to strengthen t^^ Graces, or to secure thy Title
toward He^ven: O! set about it with all thy might a^^ main, for there is none
of this to be do^^ in the Grave, whether we are all haste^ing; then Praying
Opportunities, Serm^^ Opportunities, Sacrament Opportunitie^^ Sabbath
Opportunities, will all be at an en^^ Now, if yet; you are in your unconverted
(...) state, and yet, under the wrath of God, no^^ through Gods Grace you may
be converted if yet, you are Enemies to God, you may (...) reconciled; if yet,
you are in your sins, y^^^ may be pardoned; if yet, you are in the (...) state
of Damnation, you may be brought (...) an Estate of Salvation: But when once
Dea^^ has sh^t your Eyes, then your condition w^^^ be unalterable for ever^: I
must work the wo^^ of him that sent me, whilst it is to day; I for (...) night
comes, when no Man can work.

But yet, though the Time of this Life (...) the Accepted Time, and Day of
Salvation, (...) every time of a Man's Life may not be an a^cepted Time with
him; for with some Me^^ (...) Day of Salvation lasts all their Life ^^ng, and
with some it does not: Therefore ^^ell may the Prophet cry out, Isa. 55.6. ^^ek
ye the Lord whilst he may be found; call ^^on him whilst he is near; for there
may come time even in the time of this Life, that the ^^^rd will not be found,
though he be sought ever so diligently: As Esau, because he ne^ected the Season
of his Repentance, he af^rwards sought Repentance carefully with ^^ears, even
long before the Day of his Death, ^^ut he could not find it, Heb. 12.17.

It Is true, as long as there is Life, there is ^ope; there is Hope so long as a
Man is on ^^is side Hell; and the time of life is com^only called the Day of
Grace; not because ^^e Day of Grace continues all a man's Life ^^ng, but because
it is bounded within the ^ompass of a man's Life: Now, because every time of a
man's Life may not be an accepted ^^me; I shall therefore show you some cer^ain
Seasons of a man's Life, which if he have ^ut wildom to know them, and grace to
im^rove them, he shall be sure to be accepted: shall but little more than name
them.

First, The time of Youth is the accepted ^me; Remember now thy Creator in the
days of ^^y Youth, says Solomon, Eccles 12.1. O Friends! you turn to God, and
in time close with christ, and seek for Pardon, and Mercy, now whilst you are
Young, you shall surely be ^^ cepted: For says God to his People Isra^ Jer.
2.2. I have expected the kindness of (...) Youth. Some young People I have
sometime looked upon, as the happiest People in t^^ World, because we may be
sure their seas^^ of Grace is not gone; the present time the Day of Salvation;
the Lord give the^ Grace to improve it: To see young B^^ and Girls give
themselves to studying (...) Scripture, to Praying, and crying after Christ
Grace, and Mercy: Oh! it is the rarest sig^^ in the world, whoever the door of
Mercy^^ shut against, it shall certainly be open to the (...)

Secondly, The Time of Health and Streng is the accepted time: In the old Law,
th^^ which was offered up in Sacrifice, which w^^ torn, bliod, or lame, was not
accepted: T^^ shows, that those who spend the best of the days, and strength,
in the work of the Dev^^ and then thinks to give up themselves to Go^ when
sickness, lameness, and feeble old A^^ comes, must never look to be accepted,
G^^ will not be turned off with the Devils leaving

Thirdly, The Time of the Gospel is the (...) cepted time, Praying
Opportunities, Se^m^^ Opportunities, Sacrament Opportunities Sabbath
Opportunities; these are seasons Salvation, for we know not how soon G^^ may
remove our Candleftick our of his pla^^^ and take from us the Means of Grace;
and ^^en the Opportunities of Grace will be also (...) an end.

Fourthly, and Lastly, The Time of Gods ^pirits working, and striving in the
hearts of ^^icked Men, is the accepted time; and they ^^at obey the Calls of
Gods Spirit, when it ^^rives, shall be sure to be accepted, let it be (...)
what time soever, whether it be in Youth, (...) old Age; though the Spirit has
its Go^^gs and Comings, yet some it does not give ^^ver to their old Age, or to
their Dying day; ^^nd some it does: Gods Spirit is compared ^^^o Noah's Dove,
which Noah sent out of the ^^rk, and it returned to him again; and then ^gain:
But when he sent the Dove out the ^^ird time, the Dove never returned to him
^^ore; so the Spirit of God has its Goings ^^nd Comings; it comes a one time
into the ^^eart of a sinner, and secretly calls upon him ^^o repent, and become
a new Creature: But ^his sinner, it may be, stifles these good mo^^ons,
quenches the Spirit, and continues still ^^n his sinful course of Life; then
it may be, ^he Spirit departs, and after a while comes ^gain; and finding the
sinner the same still, ^^e departs, and then comes again, and again; ^^nd at
last the Spirit being often resisted, ^^nd grieved, he is provoked finally to
depart, ^^nd never to trouble him more; and then Grace is departed, and he is
immedily delivered up to a hard Heart, and a rep^bate Mind, that shall never
repent: And wh^^ once he is brought to that pass, then all ^^ Sermons, and all
the Prayers in the VVor^ will never do him any good. O! therefore have a care
of quenching and grieving ^^ Holy Spirit of God, when it secretly stirs, a^^
works in your Hearts; but be careful to (...) bey its motions, lest the Spirit
being grieve withdraw it self finally, and never retu^^ more; and then your
accepted time, and ^^ of salvation will be at an end. Now consid^ all this, if
you are yet in your Youth, a^^ strength, and enjoy the Ordinances of Go^^ and
the Means of Grace, and the secret O^^ rations of Gods Spirit; and then behold,
a^^ again, Behold, that now is the accepted time, a^^ now is the day of
salvation. Now with us, the is such a time as an accepted time, and da^
salvation; and that for these two Reasons will but just name them.

First, That thereby the Saints might ha^ occasion for ever to magnify the
free Gra^^ of God, that he has not left them to per^ in their miserable
Estate, but has offter them Terms of Mercy, and has put an (...) portunity of
Salvation into their Hands, a^^ has given them Grace to improve it.

Secondly, That thereby the wicked may be left without Excuse; for there is
never a dam^ed Soul in Hell, that can plead this, that they never had a Day of
Grace: O it would be a great lessening of their Torments, if they ^ould plead
so. Alas! there was never a man, ^or woman, since the creation of the world,
^ut has had a Season of Grace; there was ^ever none yet ever lived, be their
lives short ^^r long, but before they die, they have Mercy ^ffered them, and an
acceptable Time to ^eek it in; therefore the Wicked shall be ^eft without
Excuse; nay, 'twill add much ^^ their Torments, to consider, that they once ^ad
a Season of Grace and Salvation, and yet ^ilfully lost it. O let every one
therefore, ^oth small and great, behold, and cousider, that now is the Accepted
Time, and now is the ^ay of Salvation.

THE APPLICATION.
THE first Use that I shall make of this, shall be a Use of Terror, to all such
as under and trisle away this Precious Season Grace, and Salvation: Friends,
you have ^ard that God's Spirit will not always strive ^^th Man; God is not
bound to wait all a ^^s Life long; if God continue waiting from time to
another, from one Year to another, from one Sabbath to another, and ye^ you
turn a deaf Ear to his Calls, and slight all his Warnings, and will go on
resolutely and presumptuously in your sins; consider God will at last be weary
of waiting, his Patience will be at last tired out; and the^ just as you have
served God in your Day (...) Grace, so God will serve you, when his D^^ of
Wrath and Vengeance comes: O read, a^^ tremble, in that dreadful place of
Scripture Prove. 1.2. to the end: Mark there how lo^ingly GOD expostulates with
wicked Me^ saying, How long ye simple ones, will ye love si^plicity? and ye
scorners delight in scorning? a^^ ye sools hate knowledge? And then see his
loing Call and Invitation, ver. 23. Turn you^ my reproof: And also his gracious
Promise, behold, I will pour out my Spirit into you; I ^^ make known my words
unto you: But yet all ^^ loving Expostulation, Invitation, and Prom^ would
prevail nothing with them, they wo^^ run on in their evil courses for all that;
the fore see what GOD says to them now, 24. Because I have called, and ye
refused, I h^^^ stretched out my hand, and no Man regarded; ye have set at
naught my counsels, and would of my reproo^s: I who will laugh at your cala^ty,
and will mock when your fear comes, (...) fear comes as a whirlwind, when
destru^^ and anguish comes upon them, then shall all upon me, but I will not
answer, then shall they ^eek me early, but they shall not find me, in that they
hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear ^f the Lord. A most dreadful Text
this is, if ^t be rightly considered; in the Day of their ^isitation, GOD
called upon them to turn ^om their evil ways, and they turned a deaf ^ar, and
would not regard; but afterward, when their Day of Israel was past, and the
Day ^f their Extremity was come, then they called upon God for Mercy, and God
would not ^egard them; it is a common Proverb amongst ^s, He that will not
whilst he may, when he ^ould he shall have may; This was the very ^ase of Esau,
he was a Hunting, and following is fleshly Deltghts, when God was a calling ^im
to Repentance; and then afterward, when ^e would have repented, he was
rejected; for ^e found no place for Repentance, though ^e sought it carefully
with Tears, Heb. 12.27. low God may call long upon wicked Men to ^rn, and be
saved, both by his Word, and by is Spirit, but they will not regard; but when
^is their Day of Salvation is ended, and they ^ome toly upon their Deathbeds,
O! how they will then cry out, Lord pardon me, Lord ^^ve me; Mercy Lord, Mercy
Lord, some Merey ^r Christ's sake: But God may justly answer ^^em, No Sinner,
no Mercy to be had; I once fered thee Mercy, but thou abusest it: and seeing
thou would not accept of Mercy whilst it wa^ offered thee, therefore now the
Door of Mercy (...) shut against thee for ever.

Secondly, My second Use, shall be for Ma^ter of Encouragement, to such who are
willing to come in, and accept of the Terms o^ Mercy, but yet keep off, through
many Doub^ and Fears.

O says one, I am afraid my Day of Salvation is past already; and if so, all my
endeavors w^^^ be in vain, do what I can, I shall never be accepted.

Answ. To answer this, I will give you th^^ one Mark, whereby you may know
wheth^^ your Day of Salvation be past or no: Yo^^ say, you are afraid that your
Day of Salvation is past: If so, that is a good Sign, that it (...) not past;
for those with whom their Day (...) Grace is past, they grow senseless of any
su^^ Matter. Again: Do not you find sometime godly Motions stirring in you by
the Spirit Do not you find in you sometimes a sorrow for sin, after it is
committed; and a desi^^ to leave sin? Does not your Heart some times melt, when
you hear ye Word preache^ Have you not some Desire to become a N^^ Creature? if
so, then your day of Salvation is not yet past; for those with whom the D^^ of
Grace is past they are given over to (...) sonfless, hard, and o^durate Heart,
that is n^^ there moved with Mercies nor terrisied wi^^ Judgments; and being
given over to themselves, they run into all kind of wickedness, with reediness;
and as it seems, this is not thy ^ase, as yet; so now, up, and close with the
terms of Mercy, whilst thy Day of Salvation (...) lengthned out.

O, but says another, it may be I am none of God's Elect; and if so, then all
my Endeavors ^ill be to no purpose.

Answ. Whether a Man be Elected or not, that is not in his Power to know, and
therefore ^e ought not to meddle with it; but you must understand, that God
deerees aright, for those whom God has Elected, he has absolutely Decreed,
that they shall be Justified, Sancti^ed, and Saved; but those whom God has
Reprobated, he has not absolutely Decreed, that they shall be Damned, but has
left them to their own Choice, as Adam and Eve was; and therefore their
Damnation is wilful, of themselves; but whether you are Elected or not, if I
may so speak, if you repent, and be converted, you shall be saved; if not, you
shall be damned: As many as do perish, do not perish because they were not
Elected, but because they would not use the Means in order to their Salvation.

O but, you will say, it may be, God will not give me Grace to Repent, and
without his Grace I can do nothing.

Answ. Know for your Encouragement, both you and every one else enjoys a Day
Salvation; and this Day of Salvation is Time of Assistance, as well as a Time
of A^ ceptance: Mark the Promise of Christ, Man. 7.7. Ask, and ye shall have;
seek, and ye sh^^ find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: F^^ every one
that asks, receives; and he th^^ seeks finds; and to him that knocket it
shall be opened.

Mark, Christ speaks there nothing conce ning Election, but every one, whoever
he b^ that asks, seeks, and knocks for Grace Pardon, and Mercy, and that
in Season, whill it may be had, shall certainly be heard an^ accepted: But then
you must be sure to see in Season, for seeking out of Season, never y^^ found
Success. Now if Esau had but sought Repentance in earnest, when God called hi^
to repent, then GOD would have strengt^ned and assisted him, and also accepted
hi^ but he sought for Repentance when the Season of Repentance was gone, and
that ruin him for ever. Now mark this, whatever th^^ Decrees of Heaven be
concerning you, yet you are but willing to leave your sins, and d^^ heartily
desire Grace and Mercy, and earnestly seek it by Prayer and Supplication, an^
that in the Season of Grace, whilst it is offer^^ you; theu, though you ean do
nothing of ^ur selves, yet you shall have strength and as^ance enough, for God
will help you, Christ ^^ll help you, and the Spirit will help you; ^^u shall
have help from Heaven, and through ^e Spirit of Christ's Strengthing, you shall
be ^abled to go through with this great Work, ^^d then you shall not only be
assisted, but al^^ accepted and rewarded: But then you must ^e sure to seek out
in Season, in your Day of Salvation; for if you seek out of Season, all ^our
seeking and striving will be in vain.

Lastly, To conclude all with a Word or ^wo of Exhortation: Be exhorted, as you
desire the Salvation of your Souls, to consider and improve this precious
Season of Grace and Salvation, in working out your Salvation, before it be too
late: O it is most dreadful to consider, that GOD has allotted us but one small
Portion of Time, to do all that ever must be done for Eternity, and yet it
should be squandered away in Vanity and Foolery: But Friends, whatever you see
others do, do you in earnest lay hold on this your Day of Salvation, before it
is gone: Seek ye the Lord now, whilst he may be found, and call upon him whilst
he is near. And whilst others spend their precious Time in Feasting, Ri^ting,
and in the Pleasures of the Flesh, do you spend your Time in Fasting, Praying,
Rep^^ting, and Suing out the Pardon of your Si^^ and making your Peace with
GOD. And (...) you thus do, then at last, when Time sh^^ cease, and be no
longer; you shall hear th^^ blessed Welcome proceed from the Mouth^^ Christ,
Well done, thou good and faithful Se^vant, enter into the Joy of thy Lord.
Whi^^ the Lord of his infinite Mercy grant to us a^^ Amen.

FINIS.

