A MODEST ANSWER TO Dr. STILLINGFLEET'S IRENICUM:

By a Learned Pen.

Sed hoc quidem affirmare non vereor, quod heu nimium tristis Experientia
jampridem docuit, sensim inter eodem and pari munere sacro fungentes, ordinem
Divinum, in gradum humanum, and hunc gradum, ruptis verorum purorum Canonum
vinculis, in tyrannidem manifestam, and, si restitutam Ecclesiam malumus,
abolendam evasisse.

Theod. Bezae Resp. ad Sarav. de Ministr. Evang. grad. cap. 15. a calce.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row,
1680.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Reader is desired to Correct the Mistake of the Printer, in calling so
Reverend an Antagonist by the name of Mr. Stillingfleet, instead of Dr.
Stillingfleet, in so great a part of the Book. And as for an Epistle, though
there was one provided by another hand, yet an accident preventing its
Publishing with the Book, the Writer thereof is much better satisfied, on
second thoughts, with its suppression: finding it no easy matter to say any
thing worthy of the renowned Author; and so Learned a Work, that has had the
perusal and approbation of as worthy and skilful Divines in the Controversy of
Church Government, as are of their Age. Judicium sit penes lectorem.

Animadversions on Dr. Stillingfleet's Irenicum, etc.
CHAP. I.
THIS Book, though set off with the specious Title of an Irenicum, and carrying
in its Face the pretense of a Laudable Design, viz. the healing of the
dangerous Wounds and sad Divisions of the Church at this time prevailing, will,
upon due Examination, I suppose, be found an unsuitable Salve for these Sores,
and to mend our rents, as they say Tinkers do, by making a greater rent instead
of mending a lesser. For instead of a Debate about particular Forms of
Government, it brings in another Debate, whether there be any Form instituted
of Christ, whether we must search the will of Christ about managing
Church-Affaires in his Word, or be content with what is the will of man? Which
Controversy is like to be harder in determining, and more stiffly agitated
than the other; for sure it is harder to persuade them, who would take the word
of God for their rule, that Christ has not appointed any one Form of
Government in his House, than that he has not appointed this or that. By this
device we are cast loose of all hold where we may fix, and there shall be no
end of Contention, at least among them, who consult so as to determine some one
Form of all these, which are thought to be lawful; and when they have
determined, the People, on whom they impose it, have a very unsure bottom to
settle their Consciences upon in this matter, that does so nearly concern
Religion, to wit, nothing but the Judgment and Will of man, which is often
wrong, and led by Interest, and at best is fallible and cannot guide us
certainly in that, which pleases God. Wherefore this Authors Opinion seems to
be a cutting of the knot with Alexander, and casting all loose, when he cannot
so untie it, as to hold fast the exercise of Christ's Kingly Power in Governing
his Church. Neither is this Opinion new, as the Author seems to imply; for it
was long since maintained, and largely propugned by Mr. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Polity, and solidly refuted by Mr. Rutherford in his Divine
Right of Church Government; and indeed has always been and still is the main
Pillar to uphold Episcopacy in these Nations, it being the most ready and
plausible way for them, who would wreath this Iron Yoke on the Necks of their
Brethren, when they cannot show them Christ's Authority for it, to take the
determining of the Case out of his hand, and to put it in the hand of the King,
and then to press it from his Authority with Fire and Sword. And indeed this
Opinion is a most colorable excuse for the unfaithful compliance of them, who
would fain hold their places under any Form of Church Government, that shall
lie uppermost; for so they shall be sure never to cross Authority, and not to
cross the Interest of their own Back and Belly; and how much mischief this
piece has done this way, is too evident; seeing men, that incline to comply,
are satisfied with shadows instead of substantial reason, to put off
troublesome Conscience. Yet among them, who are conscientiously zealous for any
one way of Government, I suppose, the Lot of this Author will be that, which is
ordinary to such unhappy Peacemakers, as sell truth, or some part of it by an
overreach of condescendency, and that in Gods matters, not their own, (in
which we must bargain as hard Merchants do in worldly things,) to redeem peace;
for I suppose men of all persuasions will be about his Ears: For that which I
am persuaded to be the truth of God in point of Church Government, viz.
Government by Ministers acting in parity, and ruling Elders met in
Congregational, Classical, Provincial and National Presbyteries or Assemblies;
it is more easily upheld against his undermining Engines, than any of the other
Forms; for the least of his Book is levelled against it in particular and what
he says against it, I hope, will appear not to have great strength; yea, I
believe, that out of what he has said, this truth may be strongly confirmed;
which I shall thus essay in a word. He acknowledges and stiffly maintains,
that Christ has given power, not only of teaching, but of ruling his Church,
to all and every one of his Ministers; and that he has not given more power to
one of them than another, nor made them subject or subordinate to one another.
Whence it clearly follows that Presbyterian Government (I mean the parity of
Ministers and their Association) is jure divino, ex confesso; and that Prelacy
is an addition to it, made jure humano. And hence it follows, that this
addition is unlawful, except he can prove that Christ has given a power to men
to make them unequal, whom he has made equal; to subject one to another of
them, to whom Christ has given equal power; to restrain, yea and take quite
away the exercise of ruling power in some of them, to whom Christ has given it
as much as to others; and to enlarge that power in some, to whom Christ has
given no more than to others. Which I am sure he will never be able to do: Yea
further it is confessed by him, that Christ has instituted the Office of
Presbyters; and that he has not instituted the Office of Prelates, ruling over
Presbyters: Wherefore he must either say, that the Church has power to
institute new Offices, which I hope he will not assert, and I am sure he cannot
prove; or that Prelacy is unlawful. For, that a Prelate is another Officer than
a Presbyter, is undeniable, because the one is ruled by the other. Now these of
the same Office cannot be ruled by or subordinate to one another; as common
sense and reason will teach.

. 2. But to come to the Book it self. My design is not a full Refutation, but
some brief Animadversions for private satisfaction, and mine own establishment
in these truths, that he endeavors to shake: Neither do I intend to meddle
with the whole, but only to cull out these passages, that relate to
Presbyterian Government, and any that might infer the unsetling of that or any
part of it.

3. The first thing, that I meet with, to be disproved, is p. 2. where he
asserteth a Principle, that will not only shake our Faith (if it be received)
in the point of Church Government; but (which I hope he does not intend) will
unsettle us in most points of Christian Religion. His Principle is this, That
Difference in Opinion about a point, and probable Arguments brought on both
hands by wise and able men; if it be not a matter of necessity to Salvation,
gives men ground to think, that a final decision of the matter in Controversy
was never intended as a necessary means for the Peace and Unity of the Church
of God. His Opinion in this he sets down in fewer and clearer words in the
Contents of chapter 1. things, says he, necessary for the Churches peace must be
clearly revealed; the Form of Church Government is not so, as appears by the
remaining Controversy about it. I shall first show the danger and falsehood of
this Principle, and then try the strength of what he says for the
establishment of it. And 1. I argue thus: This Assertion destroys it self;
for if no point, not necessary to Salvation, be so sure, that we must
necessarily hold it, in order to peace; then this his Assertion falls under
the same condition, and needs not to be maintained, for it is not needful to
Salvation; I hope, they will go to Heaven, that are not of his mind in this;
and I am confident he does not think it so clear, that no wise and able men
will controvert with him about it; and if it be needless in order to the
Churches peace, why is it here laid down as the ^rst stone of the Foundation,
on which he builds his Irenicum? but it fares here with our Author, as it
does with all other Abetters of Skepticism; they attain at least so far their
end, as they make men question that Opinion, that they labor to establish, by
persuading them to question every thing.

. 4. Secondly, There is no cause at all, why the Author should except from the
uncertainty, here asserted, things, that are of necessity to Salvation; for, if
we are to think, that the Lord has so clearly revealed things not needful to
Salvation, which are needful to peace in the Church; much rather are we to
think so of things needful to Salvation (which also cannot but be necessary to
peace; for we can have no peace with them, that destroy the Foundation.) For it
has hitherto been a received Principle, that things of necessity to Salvation
are revealed with more clearness, than other things. And, though Papists have
labored to cast a Mist upon Scripture discovery in both sorts of things, that
they might take all power to themselves over the Truths of God, and Consciences
of men, in determining what is truth; (as Dr. Stillingfleet would darken the
discovery of the circa-fundamentals of Religion, that he might put the power of
determining these things in the hand of the Magistrate) yet Protestants have
ever firmly maintained, that however the Scripture speaks darkly in some
things, not essential; yet that the light of it is most clear in things
necessary to Salvation. They are not then of this man's mind, who will have the
things, that do not so nearly relate to Salvation, but are needful to peace, so
clearly revealed, that there can remain no Controversy about them among wise
and able men, but excepteth from this necessity, things of necessity to
Salvation. From what has been said, I argue thus against Dr. Stillingfleet's
Principle: If any things not necessary to Salvation be so necessary to be
clearly revealed, that we are to look upon them as not Christ's Truth, if there
remain a Controversy about them, managed with specious Arguments on both sides
among wise and able men, much more things necessary to Salvation must be thus
clearly revealed; so that there is no truth in them, if they be so
controverted; but the consequent is most false and absurd, and overturneth all
the Foundations of our Religion: for have not the Arrian, Soecinian, Arminian,
and Popish Controversies been managed, yea and are they not managed by the
Adversaries of Truth, with Learning even to admiration. We must then, according
to this principle, not take either part of these debates for truth, but think
that the Lord has determined nothing in them, and we must leave it to men to
determine in them what they please, and must embrace that. Is not this a fine
device to cast loose all, to bring in Skepticism instead of Faith, to make way
for a subtle Sophister to nullify any truth, by disputing speciously against
it? Yet this we are to bless the Lord for, that the overturners of the
Government of Christ's house, have no other means to cast it loose by, but
these, that do also cast loose all our Religion: which I hope will be a
consideration to fix this truth the better in the minds of them, who are
serious and intelligent.

. 5. Thirdly, If these things not necessary to salvation, that speciously on
both hands are controverted, be not needful to be determined in our
consciences, in order to the Churches peace, I ask the Author of this
Assertion, What things of that nature are needful to the Churches peace, that
we hold an opinion about them? Or are there any things such? or must we
hesitate about all the circa-fundamentals in Religion, and look on them as
indifferences determinable by men, if we will not be guilty of disturbing the
peace of the Church? I hope this good man will not say so: and yet it would
necessarily follow out of this principle maintained by him; for I believe he
cannot instance in many things (scarce in any) that are not of necessity to
salvation, which are not controverted, and that with specious pretexts. For
learned men, when they err, use not to come off so bluntly, as barely to say,
it is so, or I think so; but they bring plausible Reasons, and those often
pretended to be drawn from Scripture, for their foulest errors. If then we
receive this principle, we must not think it needful to the Churches peace, to
determine whether there be two Sacraments or seven; whether there be Purgatory;
whether we are to pray to Saints departed; whether there be power of Censure in
Churchmen; or if all Church Power be in the Magistrate; whether the Pope be
the head of the Church; etc. for all these, and suchlike, are controverted;
and there are colorable Arguments for the Errors, that men maintain in these
points. If this, our Author will not assert, what reason is there, that he
should maintain, that the Form of Church Government is not determined by men
for the Churches peace; and that because there are Controversies about what is
the Form appointed by Christ.

. 6. But I come now to examine what the Author has to say for this Assertion
of his. We cannot, says he, with any show of reason imagine, that Christ, who
has made it a necessary duty for all the Members of the Church (...) endeavor
the Peace and Unity of it, should suspend (...) performance of that duty upon a
matter of Opinion, which when many have used their utmost endeavor to satisfy
themselves about, they yet find, that those very grounds, which they are most
inclinable to build their Judgments upon, are either wholly rejected by others
as wise and able as themselves, or else, it may be, they erect a far different
Fabric upon the very same Foundations. Ans. 1. The weakness, if not wickedness
of this Argument will easily appear, by making an Assumption to the Proposition
here set down, and considering what will necessarily follow, which I shall thus
perform. That Christ is true God, is a matter of Opinion, which, when we have
used our utmost endeavors to satisfy our selves about it, we yet find that
those very grounds, which we are most inclinable to build our Judgments upon,
are either wholly rejected by others, as wise and able as we, or else that they
erect on them a far different Fabric; for it is well known that the Socinians,
who are men of Wisdom and Ability, though it be unsanctifyed; and especially
Grotius (the wonder of his Age for Learning) though yet he profess the truth in
this point: That, I say, they do wholly reject all the grounds, on which we do
build our Faith in this point; and that on many of them they endeavor to erect
a contrary Fabric. It does then follow vi syllogistica (supposing our Author's
Proposition) that we cannot with any show of reason think that Christ would
have us suspend the performance of our duty in endeavoring the peace of the
Church on this, That Christ is true God; and so we must by this Argument yield
this Truth as a matter determinable by men, rather than hold an Opinion in it
with the loss of peace in the Church. I hope the Author will not own this
Conclusion; wherefore he ought not to own that his Assertion, out of which it
is clearly deducible.

. 7. Ans. 2. There is very great reason for that, for which he denies all show
of reason; for some matters of Opinion of that condition, which he describes,
are the Truths of God, as is clear from what has been said; but we are to
suspend the endeavoring of the Churches peace, rather than part with any Truth
of God, or then we should yield it upto men's determinations, as if it were
none of his truths.

Ans. 3. When we are to judge of the validity of the grounds, on which we build
our opinion about truth, it is not the thoughts of men as wise and able as we,
that must determine us; for, we know, the wisest may mistake, when they, who
are less wise, may hit the truth through the grace of God: but we must consider
whether these grounds be the dictates of the Spirit of God in his word: and if
they be, we must not be shaken in mind by the contrary assertions of men,
though never so wise, yea and holy too. I grant the opinions of such should
make us search carefully; but they must not hinder our assent to the truth of
God. And this is a valid reason, why we are to suspend our endeavors of peac on
some matters of opinion, though contradicted by wise and able men.

. 8. He adds, That it is not consistent with Christ's Wisdom to leave the
peace of his Church at the mercy of men's private opinions; which are most
uncertain; for it is not expected, that all men should be of the same mind.
Ans. 1. It is too great rashness to think that Christ cannot be a wise
Governor of his Church, unless he take courses for its setlement, that our
Wisdom thinks meet. I hope Christ may wisely govern his Church and yet not
leave it to Men to determine, what shall be the form of it is Government, which
yet cannot be, if this reason prove that, which it is brought for. 2. We may
easily grant the conclusion of this argument, without giving the least
advantage to the assertion, which it is brought to prove. It is true, Christ
has not left the peace of his Church at the mercy of men's private opinions;
viz. So as that there can be no peace in the Church, except all men agree in
opinion about all things: for peace may be maintained among dissenting
Brethren, by harmony of affection, mutual forbearance, and a prudent managing
and concealing of our opinion, so far, as it may be without sin: and all this
may be done without denying that, which we differ about, to be determined by
Christ; and asserting it to be a thing left indifferent. And if this be not
particable, either through the Nature of the truth, that we dissent about; in
that it is practical, or so important that it cannot be concealed; or through
the obstinacy, or wrong zeal of dissenters; the Lord has not left his Church
without a Remedy even in this case, viz. they who do unreasonaly dissent must
be censured, or shunned: and if this cannot be done without breach of peace, it
is our Lords Wisdom to provide, that we should rather loose Peace then Truth.
3. All that is here said will as well prove, that there is no fixed truth in
any controverted point, though of never so great concernment: for it may be
said also in these, that Christ has not left the peace of his Church at the
mercy of Men's private opinions, which are not the same in the most fundamental
points. But of this enough.

. 9. From what has been said, we may see what fit advice this healer gives,
while he thus says, p. 3. The only way left for the Church's setlement and
peace, under such variety of apprehensions, concerning the means and method in
order to it, is to pitch upon such a foundation, if possible to be found out,
whereon the different parties, retaining their private apprehensions, may yet
be agreed to carry on the same work in Common, in order to the peace and
tranquillity of the Church of God. Hitherto we consent with him, and wish he
would help us to such a Foundation, so as it self be founded on the Word of God
and not contrary to it. But he goes on. Which, says he, cannot be by leaving
all absolutely to follow their own ways; for that were to build a Babel instead
of Salem. This also we grant: but that which follows we cannot agree to. It
must be then, says he, by convincing men, that neither of these ways to Peace
and Order, which they contend about is necessary by way of Divine command
(though some be as a means to an end) but which particular way or form it must
be, is wholly left to the prudence of those, in whose Power and Trust it is to
see the Peace of the Church secured on lasting Foundations. If this be a fit
way of healing Church-rents, then those Churches are in the best way to peace,
who cast away the Bible, and will not look there what God has commanded:
because some may say, he has commanded this, and others, he has commanded
that: and so refer all controversies to be determined by men, as supposing
nothing to be determined by God. And indeed this is the basis that the peace of
the Popish Church stands upon: and I believe no Jesuit would have given
another advice, than this, toward the fetling of our divided condition. What?
Must we say that neither way is commanded of God, whether it be so or not? when
we can prove from Scripture that this is Christ's Institution, that not, but a
device and usurpation of men; must we yield this our ground? and leave the
whole matter to men's wills, as being the readiest way to peace. If this be his
cure for Church-Divisions, I believe they, who take the word of God for their
rule, especially in Church Matters, will think it worse than the Disease. Every
way to peace is not a good way, otherwise there were no duty at any time to
contend for the truth, once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3.

. 10. I do not dissent from the learned Author in his Determinations about the
Nature of Right and Divine Right, but must examine some of the Principles, from
which he will have a Divine Right to be inferred. Wherefore as to the rest of
the first Chapter, I first take notice, that what he largely discourses from
p. 6. to p. 11. concerning the lawfulness of that, which is not forbidden by
God; however it may be granted sano sensu (on which I now insist not;) yet it
does not reach his point, unless he prove that Christ has determined no
species of Government; for if he has determined one, then all other
inconsistent with it are eo ipso prohibited: Wherefore, though we grant to him,
that ratio regiminis ecclesiastici is juris naturalis; yet we cannot grant,
except he proves it, that the modus of it is juris divini permissivi; that is
to say, it is juris humani; but we assert it to be juris divini, partim
naturalis, partim positivi, viz. in respect of the diverse parts, of which that
Form is made up, which are approved of God.

. 11. To make up an Obligation, whereby we are bound to a thing as duty, we
assert with him, that there is required Legislation and Promulgation of it. But
what he says of the way of Promulgation of Divine Positive Laws, that is
necessary to lay an Obligation on us, I cannot fully agree to. P. 12. He
asserteth that whatsoever binds Christians as an universal standing Law, must
be clearly revealed as such, and laid down in Scripture in such evident terms,
as all who have their senses exercised therein, may discern it to have been the
will of Christ, that it should perpetually oblige all Believers to the Worlds
end; as is clear in the case of Baptism and the Lords Supper. But because the
learned Author could not but see, how obvious it was to every one to argue
against this Assertion from the instances of the change of the Sabbath, and
Infant Baptism, which he acknowledges to be Christ's Will and Law established,
and yet not thus revealed; therefore he labors to obviate that Argument by
this exception; (to wit) that there is not the same necessity for a particular
and clear revelation in the alteration of a Law unrepealed in some
circumstances of it, as there is for the establishing of a new Law: The former
(says he) may be done by a different practice of persons infallibly guided; as
in the case of the change of the Sabbath and Infant Baptism; not so the latter.
To this I reply a few things. 1. It had been good, if, in an Assertion so
fundamental to his whole discourse, and so positive for the clearness of Divine
Laws, he himself had used more clearness; there is no small muddiness and
ambiguity in his expressions, which I must a little remove. And first, when he
says, that Christ's Laws must be revealed clearly as such; either he means
(as Hooker, Eccles. polit. defending this Opinion of our Author's, expresses
it) that they must be set down in the Form of Laws. But it is too great
presumption to prescribe to him, how he should word the intimations of his will
to his People; or in what mode or form he should speak to them: His will
manifested to us is that which obliges us; and this may be without such a
Form. Or he means, that Christ's Laws must be so clearly revealed, as that we
may come to know, that this we are to do, and that to forbear, and that he
would have us to take notice of it as his Will; and this we agree to, and do
maintain, that the Form of Church Government is thus revealed. Another
ambiguity is, that he requires them to be laid down in such evident terms as
all who have their senses exercised therein, may discern them to be his will to
oblige us. If he mean that they, who have competent understanding and means,
and do seriously search the truth in these things (which, I suppose, is the
meaning of having their senses exercised in them) may for the objective
evidence of the things come to know them; this we do not deny; if he mean, that
such will certainly be convinced of them, and that there can be no impediment
insuperable by them, neither in the Object, nor in their blindness or
prejudice, or other Infirmity or Disadvantage that they lie under, which may
make them, that they cannot see that to be the will of Christ, which is so
revealed; this we utterly deny. Now this latter, not the former, must be his
meaning, because it is nothing to the purpose, which I will not impute to so
learned a man; for what is not so revealed, is not revealed at all, seeing it
is unintelligible by defect of objective light; now, to say that Christ's Laws
must be thus revealed, is to say that they must be promulgated, some way or
other; which was never questioned by any; and makes nothing for his design,
viz. that Christ's Laws must be so revealed, as that the disputes about them
shall be taken away. Yea, he cannot mean this, for the change of any
Circumstance of an old Law must at least be thus revealed, else it is not
revealed at all; and yet he requires another sort of Revelation of new Laws,
as appears from what has been said.

. 12. 2. If this Assertion thus explained were true, there should remain no
more Controversy among serious and learned men about any of the Laws of
Christ; for such have their senses exercised in these things: Wherefore they
may (if we believe this Author) know such to be Christ's Laws, and therefore
cannot be in an Error about them. But how absurd this is, sad Experience
makes too evident: Is it not a Controversy whether Christ has appointed
seven or but two Sacramentst? whether he has commanded us to pray to Saints
departed? whether Excommunication be loy his Law, etc. We must then either say,
that Christ has made no Law in these things; or that men cannot mistake in
them; but that they who oppose the truth herein, do oppose that which they know
to be Christ's Law, or that Christ has made and revealed a Law about these
things, but these men cannot see it, which is contrary to the Author's
Assertion.

3. Is it not enough to bind the Conscience of any, who soberly seek to know
what is the good, and perfect, and acceptable will of God, that the Lord in his
word has given some intimation, from which we may gather, that such a thing is
his will: Sure, seeing it is his will, that binds the Conscience, whatever
way we come to the knowledge of this will, we are obliged by it to our duty.
Now we may be able, in some cases, to deduce from Scripture such a thing to be
the will of God, though it be not set down in such evident terms as are here
mentioned, as is clear to any who do consider. 4. There are many points of
Truth, or many Credenda, in the Scripture, which want such an Evidence of
Revelation, as is here required; which yet we are to believe as the truths of
God; for it is clear, that the Lord has taught us many things in the Bible, as
it were on the bye, and left them to be gathered from Scripture Assertions: yea
many times Truths are couched in Duties commanded, as Commands also are
comprehended in Assertions and Promises. Now if this clearness of terms in the
Revelation of the Credenda of Religion be not necessary to bind the Conscience
to believe, how is it imaginable, that it should be necessary in the Revelation
of the Agenda, to bind the Will to act? seeing the Lord does as peremptorily
require us to believe what he has said, as to do what he has commanded. 5.
For the exception that he makes of the changing some Circumstances of old
Laws; I see not on what Foundation of reason, the difference between these and
new Laws can stand; but that this shift serves his purpose: For (to take his
own instance) supposing a standing Law for a Sabbath, and that the seventh day
must be kept: This Circumstance (as he is pleased to call it) that not the
seventh, but the first day be kept, is really a new law: yea there are here two
new laws; one abrogating what was before, and making it no duty to keep the
seventh day: another establishing a new, which was not before, and making it a
duty to keep the first day. Now if this may be thought no obliginglaw of Christ
without that evidence of revelation, which he talks of, why may not another
thing, that was not such before? If we are to look to Apostolic practice as
ground sufficient why we should think it Christ's will, that we should keep the
first day of the week to the Lord; which was not done before; why should we not
think the same ground sufficient, why Ministers should rule the Church by a
parity of Authority? Yea, reason would say, that there is need of more
clearness, in the revelation of Christ's will for altering a standing law in
such of it is circumstances as does annul one duty, and establish another, than
for settling that as duty which is altogether new, seeing in the former, we must
both know the will of God in abrogating and establishing: in the later we are
to know only, that he will stablish sucha thing.

. 13. In his examination of what makes an unalterable Divine right, I agree to
most that he teaches; only his Postulatum p. 14. one which he builds all his
assertions, needs to be a little cleared. He asserteth that nothing can be
founded on Divine Right, nor bind Believers as a positive Law, but what may be
certainly known to have come from God, with an intention to bind Believers to
the Worlds end. Where I only take notice that, though Plerophory in that case
be very desirable; yet such certainty is not necessary to our obligation: But
so much knowledge of the will of God as may satisfy the Conscience, by
inclining it to the one hand, and not leaving it absolutely in suspense. If
this be not sufficient, we shall take off all obligation of Gods positive laws
from most men: for few have plerophorie in most things. I agree with him, that
a divine right is built on the law of nature, and on the immutable positive
laws of God: also, that these are three good marks of the immutability of
divine positive laws, which he brings: viz. when the reason of the law
remains: when God has declared such a law never to be changed: when it
conduces to the being of a Society, that he would have to continue. Only I
cannot see how these (espeeially the former two marks) do consist with the
mutability of that Church government, (in these things we controvert about)
which the Apostles practiced (no doubt, as being Christ's will and law) seeing
there is the same reason for parity now, that then was: and Christ has not
said, that he will have it altered in after ages.

. 14. Page 23. He comes to examine some pretenses (as he is pleased to call
them) for a divine right. And first, he labors to enervate the argument for
the divine right of Church Government, taken from Apostolical practice: of
which he promises to say more after: but what he here says, we shall examine.
I yield to him, that all Scripture examples do not bind; neither does any
example bind as an example: also, that the rule, whereby we know what examples
do bind, is not immediately obligatory, but directive. I grant likewise that in
such examples, that which binds us, is either the moral nature of the action,
or the law commanding us to follow the example. And yet all these concessions
yield him no advantage, neither bring our cause any loss: for when he requires
us, who plead for the divine right of a particular form of Church Government
from Apostolical example, to show either the morality of their actions; or a
law commanding us to follow them: I Answer, as to the first, there needs no
particular demonstration of the morality of Apostolic actions: but this we can
say for them, the nature and condition of the actions, and the Apostles doing
of them, being considered; reason will not suffer us to question the morality
of them. I mean it is certain that they are the will of Christ: for we must
think that in matters not light and occasional, but weighty and of great
concernment whether they be well or ill done; and which were done on mature
deliberation; as the administration of the affairs of Christ's house: in
matters, I say, of this nature, we are to think that the Apostles did that
which was best and most approved of God; they being infallibly guided by his
spirit. Now that, which was best to them, must certainly be best to us also, we
managing the same affairs; except some diversity of our case from theirs can be
shown: wherefore we are obliged to think that the parity of Ministers in ruling
the Church, is Christ's will, and so a moral duty; (not a thing indifferent)
seeing it was so in the Apostolic Churches; as, I suppose, is proved by the
maintainers of that way: and there is no reason why it should be otherwise with
us than with them. For the second, we have also a law for following Apostolical
example (as we have for following Christ's example; which, our Author says,
makes it our duty) viz. 1 Cor. 4.16. Wherefore I beseech you be ye followers
of me. 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ. And lest any
think that this command of imitation is only in reference to duties otherways
known to be such, as faith, love, etc. it is evident that this last place
relates to Church administrations; for he prefixeth this exhortation to the
doctrine of decency and purity in their worship. Beside, that the exhortation
being general, can suffer no exception; but where imitation would not have the
same morality in us, that giving example had in them, viz. where the case is
different. Other Scriptures to the same purpose are Phil. 3.17. Heb. 6.12. and
this is commended (which clearly supposes a command) 1 These. 1.6. and 2.14. 2
These. 3.9. Ja. 5.10. Wherefore, if we can show Apostolical practice for our way
of Church Government (as I know we can) it is incumbent on our adversaries to
show a reason why they did such things, which does not agree to our case; or
else to submit to that way, as that which is Christ's law. For the other
grounds of divine right, that he examineth, we insist not on them, as not being
necessary to the defense of that truth which we maintain. Wherefore I wave what
might be said against what he there disputes.

CHAP. II.
. 1. IN the second chapter of the first part of his Irenicum he lays some
hypotheses for a foundation of his following discourse: where I shall pass over
in silence, these things that have truth in them; and these also, the examining
of which is not needful to the present purpose, viz. defending Presbyterial
Government to be juris divini. Only, I take notice, that here, and through his
whole book, he spends most of his pains and learning, in proving these
points, which are either digressions from the present business, or are not
denied by any of his opposites: which is magno conatu nihil agere.

. 2. In his fourth hypothesis, p. 38. some things need our remark: he sets
it down thus: In things which are determined both by the law of nature and
divine positive laws, as to the substance and morality of them, but not
determined as to all circumstances belonging to them, it is in the power of
lawful authority in the Church of God to determine them so far as they judge
them tend to the promoting of the performance of them in due manner. Two things
in this hypothesis I condemn. 1. That he warranteth men to determine things
undetermined in the Church, so far as they judge needful: he should have said,
so far as is needful: for if we hold this his assertion in terminis,
superstitious men in lawful authority may bind us in all things where Christ
has left us free; so that it shall not be lawful to speak, look or act in the
Church, but as they think fit. And indeed here is a foundation for almost all
the Ceremonies that either Popes or Prelates ever burdened the Church of God
with: they are nothing but determinations of what is left undetermined; and
they judge them to tend to promote worship: as, it is not determined, what
Garment a Minister shall wear, the Church judges a Surplice to tend to promote
worship: then by this hypothesis, the Church may determine this: which is not
only against truth, as might easily be showed, if that were now my work, but
also against this Author, who declares himself against Ceremonies of Men's
appointing.

2. That he extends this determining power so far, that not only things
undetermined, and that must be determined, otherwise the Ordinances cannot be
gone about without defect or sin, may be determined by lawful authority (for
this we grant, and therefore do close with his example of appointing the place
and hour for worship) but also things that they judge tend to promote the due
manner of the Ordinances, may be thus determined; which a little after he
expounds of the decency and solemnity of worship. This we cannot assent to:
For there is no pompous Ceremony that ever man devised, but they judged it fit
to promote the solemnity of worship. And indeed the Scripture condemning the
pompousness and gaudiness of worship, and commending the simplicity of it,
says plainly, that it is not left to men to add their determinations to God's,
to make the worship as solemn as they judge meet; but that we ought to be
content with that solemnity, which is made in worship by God's Institutions,
and the needful determination of circumstances. Neither can this blow to his
hypothesis be evited, by saying, that he speaks only of circumstances, which
we confess may be determined by the Church. For 1. All Ceremonies are also
circumstances; and he does not here mention mere circumstances, to exclude
Ceremonies from the determing power of Authority in the Church. 2. Though he
should be understood of mere circumstances, viz. which are such before they be
determined; as the habit in which we are to worship: yet even such, when they
are determined by men without necessity, only, that they may add to the worship
a decency, which is not needful by nature, civil custom, nor divine
institution, they become Religious Ceremonies; their end being Religious, and
they being peculiar to Religion: As I have shown in another piece.

. 3. It seems to me very strange, and not to be passed over in our
Animadversions; that in the prosecuting of this his hypothesis, wherein he had
ascribed a determining power to lawful Authority in the Church; he takes
notice of no power or Authority seated in Churchmen; but speaks only of the
Magistrate: for p. 38. showing why there is need to prove this hypothesis, he
tells us of some that give no power, and some that give little power to the
Magistrate about Religion: and then falls upon a large debate of the
Magistrate's power in Church Matters. Which is an evident supposing, that all
Church Power is in the Magistrate, and in none else: otherwise this discourse
should be very impertinent to his hypothesis. But this supposition is a gross
falsehood, as is fully proved by many worthy men against Erastus and his
followers. I shall not now engage in that large debate. If we should grant a
determining power to any authority about the things in hand, it should not be
to the Civil Magistrate; but to the Guides of the Church met in a lawful
Assembly. And it is not only contrary to truth, but a contradiction to what
this Author writes elsewhere, in his Appendix about Excommunication; where he
takes much pains to assert a power of Discipline in the Church-Guides: and if
so, certainly the Magistrate is not the lawful Authority in the Church: for
that implies Church Authority. I hope he will not say, that Ministers have
lawful Authority in the State; because they have no Civil Authority: why then
should we say, or suppose, that the Magistrate has lawful Authority in the
Church; except he think that the Magistrate has Church Authority? against
which he there disputes; especially seeing Respublica non est in Ecclesia, sed
Ecclesia in Republica; he that has only Civil power, has no power in the
Church, whatever he has about Church Matters, and over Churchmen.

. 4. In asserting the Magistrates power in these things, he professes, that he
will not so much make his way through any party, as strive to beget a right
understanding among them that differ: how well he keeps his promise may be
seen, by examining what he says; on which I will not much insist, (intending
to meet with this his Doctrine elsewhere) but only mark what is amiss, with a
short ground of our censure of it: for this debate is somewhat extrinsecal to
the indifferency of Church Government: it rather supposes it, than asserteth
or proves it. In explicating his second distinction about the Magistrate's
power, p. 41. The internal, formal, elicitive power of order, says he, lies in
the Authoritative exercise of the Ministerial function, in Preaching of the
word, and Administration of the Sacraments; but the external, objective,
imperative power of jurisdiction lies in a due care and provision for the
defense, protection, and propagation of Religion. The former is only proper to
the Ministry, the later to the Supreme Magistracy. Here several things are to
be noted. 1. That he makes the power of Order to be all one with internal,
formal, elicitive power about Church affairs; and the power of Jurisdiction the
same with external, objective and imperative power about them. This is instead
of distinguishing to confound things most different: for, I hope, he is not
Ignorant that all the Assertors of Church Power against the Erastians, do
distinguish Church Power, or the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven (for so is this
power designed by Christ) in the power or Key of Order; and the power or Key of
Jurisdiction. Let the Author show us one (not Erastian) who before himself did
ever make the power of Order in the Church to comprehend all formal and
elicitive Church Power. Yea, he does by this most evidently contradict himself
(which I wonder to meet with so often in such a learned man) for in his
Appendix he makes the power of Discipline to be in the Church; and so to be
formal, internal and elicitive Church Power: and sure the power of Discipline
is the power of Jurisdiction, not of Order: not only because all that speak of
this distinction do so understand it: but also our Author does here make the
power of Order to respect only the word and Sacraments; and so the power of
Discipline must belong to Jurisdiction, according to him: now whereas he makes
the power of Jurisdiction there to be internal only in the Church: and here to
be external in the Magistrate only; if this be not a contradiction, let any man
judge. 2. Another thing, that here I take notice of, is, that the power which
he ascribes to the Ministry is only Administration of the Word and Sacraments.
Then they have no power of Discipline, for every one knows that that is some
other thing than the Word and Sacraments. Now this is contradictory to the
whole of his own Appendix: and also to Scripture, which gives to
Church Officers power of binding and loosing, Mat. 18.18. Jo. 20.23. and of
ruling the Lord's People, 1 These. 5.12. Heb. 13.17. But I insist not on this,
it having been made evident by so many against the Erastians. 3. He ascribed
all power about Church affairs to the Magistrate, except that of Administering
the Word and Sacraments; and so to the Magistrate as it is only belonging to
him: for he gives him that which he called the power of Jurisdiction, and that
is to him all power but that of Word and Sacraments. Now there was never any
Erastian that gave more to the Magistrate than this: for by this means, he has
all the power of deciding controversies in Synods (for that is not preaching of
the Word) of Ordination, the exercise of Discipline, etc. and none but he has
any share in it. Behold unto what absurdities this man runs unawares, while
he makes it his business to unhinge that Government which Christ has settled
in his Church. And indeed I cannot but take notice of a necessary connection
between this putting all Church Power in the hands of the Magistrate, and
denying it to be juris divini. For he knew well, that if it had been left to be
decided by Churchmen among themselves; it had not been easily determined
amidst the interest of men clashing one with another; the more conscientious
and self-denied sort being ever the fewest.

. 5. Page 42. Speaking of the Subordination or Co-ordination of the Magistracy
and Ministry, there be some mistakes worthy of our notice. Though he
acknowledges the person of the Magistrate to be subject to the word of God,
yet he denies it to be subject to the power of the Ministers. This is the
Doctrine of Court-preachers, who love to flatter rather than speak truth. But
consider. 1 It is to me an inconsistency, that Ministers have power or
authority of Preaching the Word; and the Magistrate's person is subject to this
Word, and yet he is not subject to the power of Ministers. When they teach,
rebuke, exhort with all authority and command in the name of the Lord; does not
this reach Magistrates as well as others, if they be subject to the word of
God? I see not how they are subject to it, if they be not subject to it as
declared by Christ's Ambassadors, which is the ordinary way of dispensing it:
and if so, then are they subject to the Preaching power of Ministers at least.
2. Magistrates are also subject to the ruling power of Ministers: for they rule
over Christ's Flock; the Members of the Church, of which number, if the
Magistrate be, I see no ground in Scripture for exempting him from the power of
their Jurisdiction. When Christ said, Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are
ramitted, and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained; he did not add,
except the supreme Magistrates. May not, I pray, the Pastors of the Church
debar him, if he be a flagitious man, from the Lord's Table, as Ambrose did to
Theodosius? and if they may, certainly the Magistrate personally considered is
subject to the ruling power of Pastors in spiritual things; as they are subject
to him in civil things. And to deny this, what is it, but to make the supreme
Magistrate head of the Church and not a Member of it? Much more worthy to be
received is the opinion of Crysostome, who speaks thus to Ecclesiastical
persons, in reference to abstention from the Lord's Supper; Si dux igitur
quispiam, si Consul ipse, si, qui diademate ornatur, indigne adeat, cohibe ac
coerce; majorem tu illo habes authoritatem.

. 6. He comes afterward, p. 43. to ascribe to the Magistrate not only a
political power, which he makes to lie in the Execution and Administration of
laws for the common good: but also an Architectonical and Nomothetical power
(though not absolute and independent) whereby he may make laws in things that
belong to the Church. His meaning in this he expresses more fully in the end
of p. 44. In matters, says he, undetermined by the word of God concerning the
external policy of the Church of God, the Magistrate has the power of
determining things, so they be agreeable to the word of God. And because he
knew that the Church-Guides would put in for this Power, that here he gives to
the Magistrate, therefore, p. 45. he labors to reconcile these parties, by a
distinction or two, viz. between declaring Christ's Laws, and making new Laws:
and between advising what is fit, and determining what shall be done. The
declaring and advising Power is given by him to the Church; the Authoritative
determining power to the Magistrate. For p. 46. The great use, says he, of
Synods and Assemblies of Pastors of the Church is, to be as the Council of the
Church unto the King; as the Parliament is for matters of Civil Government. And
p. 47. but yet, says he, When such men thus assembled have gravely and
maturally advised and deliberated what is fittest to be done; the force,
strength, and obligation of the thing so determined does depend on the Power
and Authority of the Civil Magistrate. Against this Doctrine (before I come to
examine the Reasons that he brings for it) I have these things to say. 1. It
must be noted (by passing over which in silence our Author has confounded the
matter) that we are not here speaking of things that are properly Civil, though
belonging to the Church, viz. as it is a Society, and in the Commonwealth;
such as Church-rents, Meeting-places, liberty of the use of them, etc. but of
the Government of the Church, as it is a Church, of its Discipline; which
things are properly the external policy of that Church, as our Author terms
that which he speaks of. Now the Question is, whether the Power of
determining these, be in the Church-Guides or the Magistrate. 2. That which is
the (...), and the ground of most of this Author's mistakes, is, he supposes
that some things of this Church-policy are so left undetermined by the word,
that they are capable of a determination by men's Legislative power, and that
new Laws may be made about them. This is not truth; for, if we speak of the
Substantials of Church Government, even of a particular Form, it is determined
in the word, and so not subject to men's Nomothetical Determinations; if of the
Circumstances of it, neither are these left for men to make Laws about them,
but they are determined by the Lord, in the general Rules that are in the word,
and the Dictates of right reason compared with them; and the Obligation, that
lies on our Consciences in these things, is not from the Magistrates Law
(though we do not deny but he may add his Sanction to both sorts of things, and
make them the Law of the Nation, as Dr. Stillingsleet says well, that he may
with any thing in Religion) but from the will of God, which ought to be
searched out, and held forth Authoritatively by the Guides of the Church, that
are acting in the name of Christ. 3. It is false then that the Magistrate has
Power in determining what of the External Policy of the Church is undetermined
in the word. For if we speak of that which is not determined at all, neither by
particular Praecepts, or Examples, or otherwise, signifying particularly the
mind of Christ about such a thing, viz. by the general rules of the word
compared with right reason, is not held forth to be the mind of Christ; such
things ought not to be determined by any man or men, but are left to Christian
Liberty; for such things must be determined merely by man's will, but the Lord
has not left the matters of his Church to that crooked rule. But if we speak
of things not determined by particular praecepts, etc. yet in which the mind of
Christ is deducible by general rules: Neither here has the Magistrate the
determining Power, but they, whom the Lord has made the Guides and Eyes of his
Church; they must declare what is the will of Christ, not impose what is their
own Will or Law. And here the Obligation is from the will of Christ, not the
Authority of the Church, nor the Magistrate neither; the declaration of it from
them, whom Christ has made his Ambassadors. For what I have said, I give this
brief reason, The Affairs of the Church are to be managed by a Ministerial
Power, the farthest extent of which is to declare Christ's Laws, and apply
them; as is generally confessed by Protestants against Papists: but the
Magistrate's Power is not Ministerial, but Magisterial: Ergo, it is not his
part to manage or determine the Affairs of the Church, of which doubtless her
external Policy is no small part, which may be further enforced thus;
Church-Determinations must be the Declarations of the will of Christ, but not
the Magistrate, but the Pastors are the Ambassadors of Christ, whose it is to
declare his will: ergo, it is not his, but their part to make such
Determinations. We speak not of the Judgment of Discretion, which the
Magistrate has in these things, in order to the adding his Sanction to them;
and that not only as others have, theirs being private, and his public and
with Authority: But we speak of that determination of things, which is the
ordinary means of promulgating to us the mind of Christ in Church Matters. 4.
It is most false that the great use of Synods is to be the King's
Church-Council, as the Parliament is his Civil Council; for, 1. himself
acknowledges another use of them, while he ascribes to the Church, a power of
declaring Christ's Laws; is not this of great use? but Contradictions are no
rarity in this Author. 2. Hence it follows, that as Parliamentary Acts have
no sorce without the King's Sanction, so likewise Church-Determinations have
none without it; and if the Church Excommunicate any person, it is not valid,
nor his sins bound in Heaven, till the King put his Seal to it; for that such a
person be Excommunicated, is not determined in Scripture. 3. The Council at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. and all the Councils before Constantine's time, were of no
great use; for they had not this use, there being no Magistrate to own them as
his Council. 4. This destroys that received Axiom among all them, who are not
the avowed Followers of Erastus, viz. that the Magistrate's power is cumulative
to the Church, not privative; for it makes his to swallow it up, there being
no Authority, nor great use of Synods, without the Magistrate. 5. This takes
away from the Church entireness of power in her self, in things that do concern
her as such a Society, and a Capacity to subsist without the Magistrate; which
I hope this Author, when better advised, will not own. 5. It is also false,
that when Church-Guides Assembled, have deliberated and determined, the force,
strength, and obligation of the things so determined, does depend on the
Magistrate; for it depends on the reason of them containing the Will of
Christ, and not on the Authority of men.

. 7. I come now to see what Arguments he brings for what he has asserted. 1.
Says he, Taking the Church as incorporated into the Civil State, though the
Object of these things, the matter of them, and persons determining them be
ecclesiastical, yet the force and ground of the Obligation of them is wholly
Civil. Ans. That the Church is in the Republic we do not deny: yet that must
not be so understood as if either these two were not distinct Corporations, or
the Power of the one were subordinate to, or swallowed up the other. The saying
of Optat Milev: (which he cites) that Ecclesia est in Republica, non
Respublica in Ecclesia; will not bear that: but the meaning is, that either the
Church is in the Rep. as the lesser society in the greater, as a few Parishes
are in a County; so the Primitive Churches were in Rome, Corinth, etc. or when
the Church is aeque late patens with the Nation, that the Church is in
Protection of the Civil State, not e contra; seeing Kings must be Nursing
Fathers to her, and as it were keep house for her to be nursed in. Or speaking
of a National Church, that it is being a nation is Prior in order of Nature than
it is being a Church; because it might be a Nation, and not a Church; but it
cannot be a Church and not a Nation. Now, none of these do infer that the
Obligation of determinations made by Church men, about Church affairs is civil;
but it may be and is Ecclesiastical, viz. from the will of Christ, which the
Church holds forth as his Ambassadors. Wherefore this Ratiocination is
altogether inconsequent. But he comes to Authority, to see if that will help
him. He cites P. Martyr. lo. com. clas: fig. 4. c. 5. s. 11. and in 1 Samuel 8.
Nam quod ad potest atem ecclesiasticam attinet, satis est civilis Magistratus:
is enim curare debet ut omnes officium faciant. What he means for citing both
these places for these words, I know not, un less it be that they are to be
found in them both. But I am sure neither they, nor any thing like them is in
the former place (for the later I have not that part of his works) but the
contrary of what this Author intends, is there clearly and fully taught, viz.
he is refuting them who would have the Power of discipline in the Church to
cease, now when the Magistrate is Christian, and he asserteth Ecclesiastical
Power and Civil as distinct: and only says that the Magistrate should correct
ministers if they do not carry as they ought: but this is far from that, quod
ad potestatem Ecclesiae attinet, satis est civilis Magistrate us. He refers, for
the judgment of the reformed Divines in this to Vedel. de Episc. Constable. Mag. et
Offic. Magistratus, annexed to Grot. de Imper. sum. pot. circa sacra. But it is
well known that Vedelius was an Erastian and (as this Author does) did fowly
abuse the reformed Divines making them speak what they never thought; wherefore
I refer to Apol. Triglandius, Revius; who have refuted that seducing Pamphlet
of Vedelius. For the other Author, let his Citations be weighed, they will
never prove that any of the Reformers gave the Power of determining
Church Affairs to the Magistrate. He adds three reasons of his Allegation,
yet they are but two, for the two former do coincide, and the strength of them
is; that it is from the Authority of the Magistrate, that obligation to
obedience or penalty is; or (which is the same) it is from him that the
sanction, or annexing of Penalties to the constitutions, is; that it is from
him only that the force of obligation is in matters determined by advice of the
Church and which do concern the Church. Ans. All this is easily taken away by a
well known distinction in things that are commanded by Christ, and by his
Church declared to be such; and also, are ratified by the sanction of the
Magistrate, there is a twofold Obligation: one Spiritual; this is from Christ
as Lawgiver; and is laid on by the Instrumental intervention of the Church as
his Herald Proclaiming his will: Another civil, whereby we are bound to
external Punnishment if we contravene such a constitution; this is from the
Magistrate: of this, not of the former the Author's Assertion is to be
understood; otherwise it is false: For that Obligation is no way from the
Magistrate. His third reason is, the Magistrate can null any Obligation laid on
by the Church representative: as if they do prescribe some indifferent rites
and ceremonies to be observed by all; he forbidding them the former supposed
Obligation is null; otherwise these absurditier would follow. 1. That there are
two Supreme Powers in a Nation at once. 2. That a man lies under different
Obligations to the same thing. 3. The same action may be a duty and a sin, viz.
Being forbidden by the one Power and commanded by the other. Ans. 1. He
supposes (which we will never yield to him) that ceremonies may be indifferent
and imposeable by men. Nay, all the Ceremonies of God's worship, being worship
themselves, are Christ's institution; otherwise but will worship: And so
himself understands Ceremonies p. 68. It is like forgetting what he here
said. 2. It concerns the Author as much as it does us to answer his own
Objection, for he ascribes to the Church an intrinsecal power of Discipline:
Now suppose one be excommunicated; the Church commands it, the Magistrate
forbids it, if his prohibition does not null the former Obligation, the same
absurdities follow, that are mentioned in his reason; if it does, then this
does as much destroy the power of Discipline in that Church, which he
asserteth; as it destroys the Power of determining about other
Church Matters, which we assert. 3. We deny that the Magistrate by his power
can destroy the obligation to any Church-Act (being otherwise warrantable) laid
on by the Church, or rather by Christ, the Church declaring his will (for so
the Church only commands) other wise we might as well say (and it must needs
be this Man's Opinion; if he believe what here he writes) that when the Church
ordains a Minister and commands him to preach Christ, the Magistrate by
forbidding him to speak any more in that name, makes null the former
Obligation. It Is true the Magistrate may, in some cases, restrain the outward
exercise of what we are so obliged to, and also when he does injuriously forbid
such exercise, we may be, in some cases, obliged to cede to this violence: but
neither of these destroys our Obligation to our duty; neither the power by
which it is laid on; more than the Magistrate does destroy my Obligation to
obey my Father, or his power over me, when he puts me in Prison, and so I
cannot do what my Father commands. The Absurdities that he would fright us
with, do not follow from our opinion, but from his own false supposition. For
the first, it is not absurd that there should be two Supreme Powers about
things so different that one Power cannot have them both for it is formal
Object. Will not the Author grant that Ministers have the Supreme preaching
power, that is not subordinate to the Magistrate: and the Magistrate the
Supreme civil Power? Why not then, that they have the Supreme ruling Power in
Church affairs? These Powers need not clash, though they be not subordinate,
being about things so different as are this world and that which is to come,
the Soul and the Body: But this man fears that Caesar be dethroned, if we
confess Christ to be a King; and so would have Christ's Kingdom subordinate to
Caesar's. For the second, there cannot be two Obligations here; for if the
Church keep within her Limits, her command is Christ's. And so any contrary
obligation must be null: if not, her Authority lays on no Obligation. For the
Third, it is the same Argument, and it admits of the same Answer.

. 8. Having made the Magistrate the sole Judge and determiner in the matters of
the Church even Ceremonies themselves: our Author proceeds p. 49. to examine
the extent of his Power, asserted in his former Hypothesis, and here he
proceeds by three steps. 1. That there are some things left undetermined by
the Word. This we assent to, as it is here set down; but cannot understand it
(as he does, which appears a little after) of Ceremonies: but rather of bare
Circumstances of the worship of God (if he take these for one, he is very
ignorant of the Nature of both) neither of the species of Church Government,
for which this indifferency of things is here asserted. What he discourses
here of the Nature of indifferency, I shall not insist upon, intending to meet
with it elsewhere, Only I take notice of his concession p 53. that in things
wholly indifferent both in respect of their common nature and their use and
end; that are neither commanded nor tend to the peace and order of the Church,
there can be no reason why the Nature of these things should be altered by
humane Laws: wherefore matters that are indifferent as to a command, but are
much conducing to the peace and order of the Church are the proper matter of
humane constitutions concerning the Churches Policy. Let it be here considered
that these things are not properly indifferent, but commanded, viz. where the
peace and order of the Church is enjoined: and if it be so, it is the part of
the Church representative, not of the Magistrate, to Judge what things are thus
conducible to peace and order; and to hold forth the doing of these, as the
Laws of Christ.

. 9. His second step is, that matters of this Nature may be determined and
restrained; and that it is not to the wronging of Christians liberty, so to do:
And this he does very largely prove against some as he pretends of great note
and learning; I wonder who they are: For I never met with any who do deny what
he asserteth: It is true that many do, and that warrantably, maintain; that
where Christ has left us free, man has no Power by his mere will to restrain
us; especially in things that belong to the worship of God: but all do
acknowled ge so far as I know, that in things (though not expressly commanded)
which by their nature or circumstances are made conducible to the ends that
Christ has enjoined us to endeavor, the Church may enjoin us; and that
without making any new Laws; but by declaring the will of God. This and no more
do all the arguments, which the Author with much pains has set down, conclude.
And indeed, if our author had once proved the Species of Church Government to
be indifferent, we should not deny it to be determinable and imposeable (not by
the Magistrate, but) by the Church. In the prosecution of his Arguments, there
occur several things that I cannot assent to; but they not being to the
Question in hand, and intending to touch some of them in a Treatise elsewhere,
I pass them here; he has some greedy hints after obeying whatever is
commanded, though unlawful; the non-obligation of the Covenant, etc. which do
discover his spirit. Though the Author does state the Question as has been
said, yet all his reasons whereby, from p. 56. he proves the determination of
indifferent things, not to take away our liberty, does prove as much, that
determination grounded on man's mere will does not take it away; for in that
case there may be left a liberty of judgment; and there may be no necessity
antecedent to the command; as he says in his first Argument; also in that
case, the determining of the things supposes them to be matters of liberty,
which is a second medium, and the obligation in that case, is only in respect
of contempt and scandal, which is his third Argument; and the repealing of the
law or ceasing of the authority commanding, may free us of impositions made by
mere will, which is his fourth Argument. Wherefore these Arguments prove that
which the Author does not own, if they prove any thing, which is a token that
they prove nothing at all. But that I may shortly answer them. The first
Argument is inconcludent; for though radical liberty, ( i. e. a right to do or
not do) be consistent with such commands, as men, without warrant from God, lay
on us, (their authority never being able to destroy that right given to us
which is founded on the will of God) yet these commands are an unlawful taking
away of the exercise of our liberty: for where neither Scripture nor Reason
(which are Gods law) do bind, man's will ought not to bind; especially in the
things of Religion. He has here, p. 57. a gird by the way at them who hold one
posture of receiving the Lords Supper to be necessary, as more destroying
liberty, than does the command of the Magistrate imposing one posture. Answ. If
they hold this without warrant from the word of the Lord; I yield to what he
says; but if they can prove that we ought in this to imitate Christ, and keep
a table gesture as he did; it is no destroying our liberty, unless he think it
less liberty to be bound to the will of Christ, declared by his example, than
it is to be bound to the will of men. Other falsehoods I pass over (it not being
my intention to touch every thing) but I wonder at a gross aspersion that he
lays on the Apostle Paul, viz. that he did use the Jewish Ceremonies, ( as
that he circumcised Timothy) when they were not only mortuae but mortiferae,
and that, where there was no opinion of their necessity. What is it I pray to
say they were mortiferae, but that it was sin to use them? (for when they were
mortuae, they were indifferent, not as to the opinion of their necessity, but
as to their use) then Paul used them when it was sin to use them. I hope the
Author will not own this when he is better advised: but we see whither zeal for
an error will lead men. His other Arguments run on the same mistake, viz. they
prove that radical liberty is not taken away whatever be commanded: but they
prove not that when men command without warrant from the Lord, they hinder that
exercise of liberty that the Lord allows us. Wherefore I need not insist on
any further Answer to them. p. 59. He makes this difference between laws
concerning Ecclesiastical and Civil things; that these bind extra casum
scandali and contemptus, those not so; whether this does consist with his
opinion that both these Laws are from the Magistrate, let it be considered. I
thought that the different way of obligation had been from the different
Authorities, not from the things about which the Laws do converse: and that
violation of all the Magistrates Laws, had been alike opposite to his
Authority. I mean, where the things are of equal moment, as certainly may be in
things Civil, and Ecclesiastical. The wise advice of Ambrose to Augustine
(which he cites p. 60, 61.) I do with Augustine reverence as coeleste
graculum: so it be understood of Customs truly indifferent: but that the
things we plead about, and that the Author would permit to the will of the
Magistrate; are such, we cannot yield: Wherefore all this his pains about
indifferent things, is to small purpose. what he says, p. 62. of superstition
in the imagined necessity of things really indifferent, I will elsewhere
examine; and what others also have alleged to that purpose.

. 10. His third step is to set bounds to the restraint of Christian liberty,
where his first rule is, that nothing be imposed as necessary, but what is
clearly revealed in the word of God. But what if it be revealed, so as it is
visible to them who read and search attentively; though it be not clearly
revealed? must such things be slighted, as no part of Gods will? but of this we
have said enough before. The second rule is, that nothing be determined but
what is sufficiently known to be indifferent in its own nature. The way to know
what is such, he makes to be, by taking the primitive Church, and the reformed
Churches to be Judges in this. I confess, their decision should have much
weight; but we dare make none Judge, but God speaking in the Scriptures. What
if Christ has in Scripture signified his will in a point, and yet these
Churches looked on it, and used it as a thing indifferent? must we then think
it indifferent? I hope not. This is to lay too much weight on men: especially
considering that the mystery of iniquity (which did prostitute all or most of
Christ's Institutions to men's will; as if they had been indifferent things)
began early to work in the primitive Church, 2 These. 2.2. and few reformed
Churches want their own Lees; from which the Lord is yet daily purging them.
Wherefore I think (with submission to better judgments) a surer standard, to
know what is indifferent, to be this; what cannot be proved to be determined by
the Lord in Scripture, and is not of the Law of nature, neither primarily nor
secondarily; that is to be thought indifferent. Passing his other rules; in
prosecuting the last, he opens a door to humane ceremonies, (though he seem
to speak against them) by approving the Feast of Dedication, the Jewish
Ceremonies in the Passover: sure these were some more than ordinary decency;
neither were to be esteemed of the same rank (as he does) with building of
Synagogues, hours of prayer, which are mere order: the continuation of the
Passover by Hezekiah which was transient; no recurrent fast; and had a reason
then urgent; and the feast of Purim which was a Civil solemnity: and the fasts
of the 4th, 5th, and 10th Months; which were occasional for the captivity, and
expired with it. But of this matter I treat at large elsewhere.

. 11. In his 5th Hypothesis, there is an unwary expression, viz. that things
determined, as aforesaid, by lawful authority in the Church (which to him is
the Magistrate) do bind the conscience. I suppose he means, that we are bound
to obey for conscience sake; and not that Civil Authority by it self does reach
the Conscience, which Protestants with good reason deny against the Papists.

The rest of his first part needs not our Animadversions, seeing it
contains nothing contrary to Presbyterial Government; but rather asserteth
several parts of it: wherefore I shall only set down briefly his Assertions,
many of which are so many Concessions to us. He Asserteth, ( cap. 3.) that the
law of Nature dictates that there must be a society of men for the worship of
God; that is a Church And ( cap. 4.) that there must be a government in this
society. Where he makes 6 things in this Government to be juris naturalis; 1.
That there be a distinction of persons, and a superiority both of power and
order in some over the rest. 2. That the persons so above others have respect
paid them suitable to the nature of their employment. (cap. 5.) The third thing
is, that all things either pertaining to the immediate worship of God, or
belonging to the Government of the Church be performed with the greatest
solemnity and decency that may be, (cap. 6.) Fourthly, that there be a way
agreed upon to determine and decide all the controversies arising in the
Church, which immediately tend to the breaking of the peace and unity of it.
Where he pleads for the definitive sentence in the major part, where power is
equal; and for liberty of appeals, where there is subordination; as being of
natural right: and that this subordination must be in a Society consisting of
many Companies or Congregations. (cap. 7.) Fifthly, that all who are are
admitted unto this Society, must consent to be governed by the laws of that
Society. (cap. 8.) Sixthly, that in a well-ordered Society, (and so in the
Church) every offender against the rules-of that Society, must give an account
of his actions to the Governors of that Society; and submit to the censures of
it, according to the Judgment of the Officers of it.

All this we accept of as truth, but how this last does consist with his
putting all power of jurisdiction in the hand of the Magistrate, and leaving
the Church Officers only power of Preaching and Administering the Sacraments,
(of which before) I cannot understand. So much for the first part of his
Irenicum.

PART II. CAP. 1, 2.
. 1. IN his second part we have also some concessions to be taken notice of, as
cap. 2. p. 154. that there must be a Form of Government, as necessary, not by
Nature only, but by a Divine Law. This we receive as truth, and do thus improve
it ad hominem: The Author cannot show us any express Law in Scripture,
commanding that there be a Form of Government in the Church: Neither can any
Scripture ground of this truth be brought, but what is drawn from Apostolic
practice; they had a Form of Government, ergo, so must we; seeing it is as
needful to us as it was to them. Now if this be so, why does the Author dispute
so much against our reasoning from Apostolic practice (where the case is
alike) for this particular Form of Government, as being established by Divine
Law? If their practice be a sufficient evidence of a Divine Law (beside the Law
of Nature) for this, that there be a Form: why is it not as significant of a
Divine Law for this, that this is the Form; where the case of them and us is
alike.

. 2. We receive also as a concession, p. 157. that there is a Divine Warrant
for a National Church; and for a National Form of Church Government. Also, cap.
2. he concedeth that the Government of the Church ought to be administered by
Officers of Divine Appointment, is of Divine Right. Where, in one word, he
destroys (unawares) all that he says for maintaining the lawfulness of
Episcopal Government; for he does not deny that Bishops as ruling over
Presbyters, and having more power than their Brethren, are of Humane
Constitution; and so they cannot be Officers of Divine appointment: If so, then
by this Concession the Church ought not to be ruled by them; and so Episcopal
Government is unlawful. I know not, if he did foresee this Argument taken out
of himself: But in explaining his Concession he would fain seem to say some
other thing than he has indeed said: For he says, that he here takes the
Church for the Members of the Church: So that his meaning is, there must be a
standing perpetual Ministry: And this he proves largely. This does no ways
explain what he has said: For it is one thing that it be Divine Appointment
that there are Officers; and another thing that these Officers be such as God
has appointed. Jeroboam when he made Priests of the lowest of the People, kept
Divine Institution so far, that he made Priests; and did make that work common
to all: And yet his Priests were not Officers of Divine Appointment: So neither
is the Church ruled by Officers of Divine Appointment, though there be Officers
who rule, which is Divine Appointment; except these Officers be such as God
has Instituted, and not such as men have devised. And besides this, the Law of
Nature dictateth that there should be Rulers in the Church, distinct from the
Ruled, as he had formerly observed: Wherefore he must here either trifle, or
say some more, viz. that the Lord must appoint these sorts of Officers that
should govern his Church: for the Author is here speaking of what is of Divine
positive Right; having formerly showed what is of Divine Natural Right.

. 3. In the third Chap. we have the Question stated; in speaking of the Church
as comprehending many particular Congregations, (and so excluding the
Independent way from this Competition) he compares these two forms of
Government, viz. 1. The particular Officers of several Churches, acting in
equality of power, called a College of Presbyters. 2. A superior order above
the Ministry, having the Power of Jurisdiction and Ordination belonging to it.
Now the Question is not whether of these comes nearest to the primitive
pattern: But whether either of them be settled by Divine Right; so as that the
Church is bound to obseeve it. He holds the Negative: We the affirmative: and
we say, that the former of these two is Juris Divini.

. 4. For proving his opinion, he undertaketh to enervate all the Pleas which
are made for the Divine Right of either of these: Five he proposes, viz. 1. A
former Law standing in force under the Gospel. 2. Some plain institution of a
new Law under the Gospel. 3. The obligatory Nature of Apostolical practice. 4.
The general sense of the primitive Church. 5. The Judgment of the chief
Divines and Churches since the Reformation. Of these he discourses severally:
And we shall give our sense of them as in following him we come at them. But
first I must here note a few things. 1. It is an injurious way of stateing the
Question about this Divine Right, to exclude any who put in for it, from the
liberty of Competition: Now he knows that others besides these plead a Divine
Right of their way; as Erastians will have the keys given by Christ to the
Magistrate: Independents, to the Community, or at least the Officers of a
particular Church (Popery is not excluded, seeing it stands on the same
bottom with Episcopacy) though I think the Resolution of the question about
Divine Right, might have laid both these aside; yet I think the stating of it
might have taken them in; and they might have a fair hearing; lest some by
seeing Presbytery and Episcopacy laid aside as of no Divine stamp, might be
tempted to take of either of the other two for Christ's Government, rather than
leave the matter wholly at an uncertainty, and the will of men. But I observe
that though the one of these he does altogether slight; yet the other he does
not pass, out of any misregard to it; for he labors to take all power by
Christ's gift, out of the hands of Presbyters and Bishops, that the Magistrate
might have it in solidum.

. 5. 2. I observe, for further clearing the state of the Question, that all
other parts of these two forms of Government, are confessed to be juris divini,
vel naturalis, vel positivi, (as from his concessions have been manifest, and
will yet more appear) only the matter of Parity or Superiority of Ministers is
in question: and it being so, I propose this to be considered: that Parity be
of Divine Right, it is sufficient, 1. That Christ has given power to all
Ministers to rule the Church. 2. That he has not given a greater share of it
to some than to others. 3. That it is his will that as he has distributed this
power equally, so that no man make it unequal; seeing that cannot be but by
taking from the rest what Christ has given them, and giving to one what he
has not given him. If these three be granted, Parity of Power is Christ's Will,
and so of Divine Right. Now our Author agrees to the first two as Truth: For
the first he asserteth in terminis; the second he cannot deny, while he
asserteth Superiority not to be juris divini; the question then is only about
the third, viz. When Christ has given equal power to his Ministers, whether
men may make it unequal, by subjecting one of them to another; abridging the
power of one, and enlarging the power of another: Or which is all one; whether
it be in the power of men, when Christ has made but one Officer: to set up
another of their own devising, who shall have a power that Christ never gave to
any Officer in his Church? I am sure, we have this clear advantage; that
Presbyters acting in Parity, do keep themselves within the bounds of Christ's
Institution; and can show his warrant for so doing; whereas setting up a Bishop
over them is without that line, and can be warranted by no divine Institution.
Let it then be considered whether of these is the safest way for us to take.

. 6. 3. I take notice that the Pleas that he ennumerateth for a particular form
of Government, are not all which may be alleged; there may be many
significations of the will of God in Scripture, that are neither set down in
the plain terms of a Law, nor expressed by Apostolical practice. We draw good
consequences from Promises, Reproofs, etc. which may show us what is our duty.
4. Let it be minded that it is not needful for asserting of Divine Right, that
we prove it from all these Topics: one demonstration that it is the will of
God that such a thing be, is sufficient. 5. The question being stated as
before, the probation will be incumbent upon him, who asserteth that it is
lawful for men to make them unequal in power, whom Christ has made Pairs: we
assert that the power of Ministers that is of Divine Right, is equal; which the
Author does not deny: he asserteth further, that men may restrain this Power in
some, and enlarge it in others; for this he must show warrant; for affirmant,
incumbit probatio: we deny it; and here we might rest, till it can be showed
that Christ has given such power to men, to cut and carve on his Institutions.
The Divine Right of Parity is built on the want of Divine Right of Imparity.
Notwithstanding we hope, (ex abundanti) to make other Pleas for it stand good,
which he labors to make void.

. 7. The first plea from a standing law in the Jewish Church we do not insist
on, knowing that in matters of Institution, the Old Testament is no pattern for
the New. Neither are we obliged to insist on this Plea, as he alleges,
because some of ours do some times make use of their Example, as in proving a
subordination of Courts: For 1. It is not instituted, but of the law of Nature;
supposing once the unity of more Congregations: now what is taught by Nature
may well be confirmed to us by the Law of God to the Jews; though we be not
bound by that law, where there is not that reason. Again, Jewish example should
have weight with us, where their case is not peculiar; seeing their practice
came from an Infinitely wise Lawgiver: but this holds not in imparity, or
subordination of Officers: It is known that the High Priest was Typical: that
the Priesthood was annexed to one Tribe, for a peculiar Reason: these things do
not concern us.

CHAP. IV.
HE comes to the second Plea for a particular form of Government, viz. Christ's
instituting it by a new Law, where he alleges, that it is more hotly pleaded
by many, that Christ must do it, than that he has done it. This is a
mis-representation, to say no worse. If it be not proved by the Assertors of
Presbyterial Government that Christ has instituted that form of Government,
let their cause fall to the ground. We are ready to acknowledge that it were
rashness, and a limiting of the Holy One, to say that he must institute a
particular form: if we were not otherwise satisfied that he has done it. But
being convinced of that; we may be very much confirmed in our Opinion, by the
consideration of these arguments, that hold forth, how fit, and how suitable to
the wisdom of God, and the Administration of Christ's Gospel Kingdom it is, that
he should take this course; and not leave the affairs of his House to man's
will, or lust rather. This is not prescribing to him; but a declaring of the
fitness of what he has done. Moreover, we do not, neither ever did we argue
barely from the necessity of a particular form to be instituted by Christ,
considering the thing it self only: but from some Scripture ground holding
forth the necessity of it. Now if the Lord in the contrivance of the Gospel
has made it necessary to his design that there be a form of his appointment,
and has signified this to us by his word: it is no rashness to assert the
necessity of it; even though we could not (through our darkness) certainly
determine what is that form, in all the particulars of it. But I come to
examine what he has said against the Reasons that our Authors do bring for the
fitness of a particular form of Christ's instituting.

. 2. The first of them is taken from comparing Christ the Lawgiver under the
New Testament, with Moses under the Old Testament; and it is thus instituted,
Heb. 3.2, 5, 6. That as Moses was faithful in that House, as a Servant; much
more was Christ as a Son; if then Moses was so faithful as to declare the Will
of God concerning the Government of the Church, and that particularly what Form
should be used, we must not think that Christ has left this undone. To this he
answers, 1. Faithfulness is the discharge of a Trust: So that the
faithfulness of Christ and Moses lies in doing the Work that the Lord laid on
them: and this was to be Mediators, the one Typical the other True. Moses had
the Pattern showed him in the Mount, and therefore faithfulness required that
he should settle that Form, and no other: But it cannot be made appear that
Christ has any Command from his Father of settling one Form of Government. So
he, p. 176. To which I reply, 1. Our Argument may be so laid, as this Answer
does not at all touch it, thus; It is the Will of God (and so entrusted to the
care of Christ) that there should be a Government in the Church; as is
confessed by our Author: This Government must be managed, hic and nunc, in some
particular Form, as sense and reason teaches: Now that Christ might be
faithful as Moses was in the discharge of this Trust, it was needful that he
should set down a particular Form to be used by all; or appoint some who should
determine what the particular Form should be. But according to this man's
opinion, he has done neither of these: Not the first, for that he pleads
against: Nor the second, for our Author can show us no Scripture where it is
entrusted to any: And if we should require a plain and direct Law for this, in
express and formal terms, as he does of us in the like case; he would find it a
hard task: Besides, if we consult Scripture, there is far more to be said for
the power of the Church, than for the power of the Magistrate in such a
determination: And reason also may, at least, set them in equal competition, if
not cast the Scales in the favor of the Church, it being a matter purely
Ecclesiastical, that is contended about; and yet this man gives the deciding
power in this to the Magistrate. It is strange if the Government of the Church
under the Old Testament be so plain, and that under the New be left at such
uncertainty.

. 3. 2. That Moses and Christ are compared as Mediators, I do not deny: but
this makes nothing for, but against what he intends: For their Mediatory
Work takes in the management of all the dealings that are between God and his
People; and (as it is here spoken of) is chiefly meant of outward
Administrations, of Teaching and Ruling: For the inward Administrations of
satisfaction for sin, and communicating the Spirit to Believers, are not
applicable to Moses: Now the settling the Government of the Church cannot but be
a part of this Mediatory work, it being of so much and so near concernment to
the spiritual good of believers: Wherefore Christ and Moses are here compared
in their faithfulness, in settling of Church Government as well as in other
things. This is clearly confirmed out of the 5th v. of that chap. where it is
said, that Moses was faithful in all his house: Then the Law of Comparison
says that Christ is also there said to be faithful in all his House, i. e. in
all the matters of the Church: Now it cannot be denied, but Church Government
is one, and that a main one, of the matters of the Church. Wherefore Christ and
Moses are here compared in their faithfulness, in this Administration. 3. His
Answer does not well hang together, when first he will have them here compared
as Mediators, as if the matter of Church Government were impertinent to that
wherein they are compared; and yet subjoyneth, that Moses his faithfulness lay
in keeping close to the pattern showed him: Whereas Christ had no such command
laid on him, nor pattern showed him. If the faithfulness of Moses did ly in
keeping Gods command, about Church Government; how is he only spoken of as a
Typical Mediator? and how is Christ's faithfulness compared with this
faithfulness of Moses, seeing he received no such command?

. 4. It Is false, that Christ received no Command about the Govenment of the
Church: for the Scripture is clear that he is made head of the Church; has the
Government laid on his shoulders; has received all power in Heaven and in
Earth, etc. If he be by his Office King of the Church, sure it is his Office
and Trust to settle the Government of his Church. This reply he makes to
himself, and answers to it ( p. 177.) in two or three things: First, he
grants that Christ is King of his Church, and does govern it outwardly by his
Laws, and inwardly by his Spirit; but we must not therefore say that one Form
of Government is necessary, whether it be contained in his Laws, or dictated by
his Spirit or not. To this I reply, 1. Neither do we make any such Inference:
If we prove not one Form to be contained in his Laws, we shall pass from this
Argument. That which we say is, that because he is King, and a faithful King,
as Moses was, who settled a Form of Government, therefore a Form is contained in
his Laws: Not that it is necessary whether it be contained in his Laws or not.
2. If Christ be King and Governs the Church by his Laws, and that outwardly;
how can it be that the particular Form of its Government is what many may think
fit, and not of Christ's Institution? For the Church is governed by a particular
Form, not by a general notion of a Government (for universale non existit nisi
in suis singularibus) if then the particular form be of man's appointing, the
Church is not outwardly governed by Christ's Laws, but by men's; for men make the
Laws, or Rule of its Government. If a King should send a Deputy to Govern a
Nation, and give him leave to choose what Form of Government he would, either
by himself, or by a Council where he should have but equal power with the rest:
it could not be said in proper speech, that that Nation is Governed by the
Kings Laws (for he makes not the Laws of its Government) but by the Laws of
them who determines the particular Form of Government. Yea, suppose the King
should make some Laws about it, as that nothing should be acted contrary to his
Will, or Interest, that there should be Government, and not Anarchy, that there
should be Rulers, and Ruled, etc. Yet the Nation may rather be said to be
Governed by the Laws of him who determines the particular Form: seeing the
Government does essentially consist in the management of a particular Form, and
not in some general directions. This is easily applicable to our case: for our
Author will have Christ to give some General directious about
Church Government; and men to determine and contrive the Form: Now let any
judge then, whether the Church in that case be Governed by the Laws of Christ,
or the Laws of men? Wherefore I conclude that this Answer destroys it self,
while it denies a particular Form instituted by Christ, and yet will have the
Church outwardly governed by his Laws. 2. He says, the main original of
mistakes here, is the confounding of the external and internal government of
the Church of Christ: and thence, whenever men read of Christ's power,
authority and government, they fancy it refers to the outward government of the
Church of God, which is intended of this internal Mediatory power over the
hearts and consciences of men. Reply. We are willing to distinguish these; and
I believe he cannot show any of ours who do confound them: yea, we will go
further in distinguishing the outward and inward Government of the Church than
he does: and I may retort this charge on himself, hoping to make it appear that
he confounds these two, and that this is the ground of his mistakes. The
Government of the Church is then two fold: Inward, and Outward: both these may
be distinguished according to diverse objects of this Government: for Inward
Government is either that which is exercised in the conscience; and so is
invisible: or that which is exercised in the Church, or in matters that are
properly spiritual and not civil; though they be visible to men, and so outward
in respect of the conscience. So outward Government is either such in respect
to the conscience, and it is that we have now described; or outward in respect
to the Church, viz. That that which is exercised in matters relating to the
Church, and yet are not properly Spiritual but Civil, and concern the Church,
not as it is a Church but as it is a Society. Or we may distinguish thus, the
Government of the Church is either invisible, viz. in the conscience; or
visible; and this is either in things that are Ecclesiastical, and so it is
inward in respect to the Church: or in things that are Civil, and so it is
outward. The first of these is immediately exercised by Christ; the second
mediately, and that by the Guides of the Church, as his Deputies; the third by
the Magistrate as a servant of Christ in his Kingdom that he has over all the
World. I hope now the outward and inward Government of the Church of Christ is
sufficiently distinguished, and not so confounded as to be the cause of
mistakes about it. But now let us see whether he himself, who charge others
with this confounding, be not guilty of it; and does not here mistake the truth
by confounding the Internal and the External Government of the Church. It is
very evident that it is so: for, 1. He sets down the bare terms of a
distinction between internal and external Government; but does not tell what he
means by either of them: Whether the distinction be to be applied to the
Conscience, and so be meant of invisible and visible Government: Or to the
Church, and so be understood of Ecclesiastical and formal, or of Civil and
Objective Government of the Church: We are to seek in this, for all his
distinction. 2. He seems confusedly to refer to both these, as he here
manageth the distinction; or at least, some things seem to draw the one way,
and some the other: For when he denies Christ's power and Authority, spoken of
in the Scripture, to refer to the outward Government of the Church, this must
be meant of that Government which is Civil, not of visible Ecclesiastical
Government. I hope he will not deny that to be a part of Christ's Authority.
Again, where he grants Christ's internal mediatory power over the Conscience;
this must be meant of his invisible Government; both because it is certain
Christ has such a Power, and our Author here denies all other power of
Government to him! Also because no other power is internal over the Conscience
but this. But whatever be his meaning, this answer does not take away the
force of our argument, for if he deny the Scriptures, that speak of Christ's
power, Kingdom, and Authority, to be meant of Civil power, but to be meant of
visible internal power in the Church; this is all we desire; for if Christ has
such a Kingdom; then the management of the visible Government of the Church is
his trust; in which his faithfulness would make him settle a particular form as
Moses did. Only I take notice how inconsistent this is with his Principles,
seeing he denies any visible power in the Church (save that of Word and
Sacraments, as it follows immediately) and puts all other power in the
hand of the Magistrate, as do all the rest of the Erastians. If he deny the
Scriptures, that speak of Christ's Authority and Kingdom, to be meant of
Visible Ecclesiastical Government, and make them speak only of an invisible
Government over the Conscience; which is exercised by his Word and spirit; in
this first he is contrary to all men, for even Erastians themselves do grant
that Christ has such a Kingdom; but they would have it managed by the
Magistrate; whom they make Christ's Vicegerent in his Mediatory Kingdom: and
others do hold such a Kingdom of Christ, and that it is managed by the Officers
of his Church. Secondly, he derogateth from the Kingdom of Christ, denying that
which is a confiderable part of the exercise of his Kingly Office: What? is
Christ a King, not only of Angels, but of Men, united in a visible Society, the
Church; and yet has no visible Government exercised in his name among them?
this is a ridiculous inconsistency. Thirdly, he is contrary to many Scriptures
which speak of Christ's Kingdom and Authority; and must be understood of a
visible Authority exercised in a visible Government; such as Ephesians. 4.10, 11.
Setting up of Pastors there mentioned is a visible act: and it is made an act
of his Authority, 1 Cor. 11.3. Christ's Headship is mentioned with a reference
to the ordering the visible decency of his Worship. Also, Psalm. 2.8. Psalm.
22.27. Psalm. 110.3. Col. 1.13. and many other places; which it is strange
daring to restrict to the invisible exercise of Christ's Authority in the soul.
Fourthly, this is contrary to all these Scriptures which speak of the several
outward acts of the exercise of Christ's Government; as gathering a people to
him, Isa. 55.4, 5. Acts 15 14, 15, 16, 17. giving them laws, Isa. 33.2. Mat.
28.20. Mat. 5.17, 19. Verses, etc. setting up Officers, Ephesians. 4.10.11. giving
them power of Discipline, Mat. 16.19. Mat. 18.17, 18. John 20.23. Fifthly, it
is contrary to himself; for Preaching and Administering Sacraments are visible
acts: if then Christ as King has invested his Servants with this power (which
he confesses p. 177. where also he confesses that he Governs the Church
outwardly by his Laws) he must have a visible Government as he is King of his
Church. That which he adds, viz. that this is made known to us in the word,
but not the other; viz. that he has appointed a particular Form: this I say,
1. Beggeth the Question. 2. Destroys his Answer, wherein he denies Christ's
visible Government; for this is a part of it, which he grants.

. 5. Another Answer he frames to our Argument from Christ and Moses, p. 177.
That if the comparison of Christ and Moses infer an equal exactness of
disposing every thing in the Church; then we must be bound to all circumstances
as the Jews were: but there is this difference between the Old and New
Testament; that there all ceremonies and circumstances were exactly prescribed;
here there are only general rules for circumstantial things; there, the very
pins of the Tabernacle were commanded; here it is not so, but a liberty is left
for times, place, persons, etc. Reply, 1. We do not plead for an equal
exactness in determining all things: We know the Old and New Testament state of
the Church requires a diversity here: but we plead for the equal faithfulness
of Christ with Moses; now Christ was entrusted with setting up a Government in
the Church as well as Moses; whence it follows that he behoved to enjoin the
particular Form of it as Moses did: seeing without this, great matters in the
Church, even that whereon its Union and Being, as a Society, do hang, are left
at a great uncertainty, and exposed to the will of man, who may and readily
will err. 2. The difference that he makes between the Law and the Gospel is
most false, viz. That there all circumstances of worship were determined, here
not so: yea, it is with more truth observed by some that more circumstances of
worship, were left to the prudence of men under the Law, then now under the
Gospel: For every one of their actions imposed; as sacrifices, washings, etc.
had of necessity abundance of circumstances attending them; as when, how, with
what Instruments, etc. Wherefore the more ordinances there were, the more
circumstances undetermined. There is indeed this difference; that God under the
Law did by his command place Religion in many natural circumstances of worship;
as in the day of Circumcision, of killing the Passover, etc. and so set them
above the degree of mere circumstances, which he has not done under the
Gospel: but it does not follow that all things, even of greaatest moment to
Church Order, and the worship of God are now left free, because we have not so
many Ceremonies as the Jews had; for those circumstances, which are of Civil
and common concernment to Religion, and other actions, be left to prudence, and
matters relating to the Government of the Church, which are of that nature, be
also left free: yet we must not for that, think that the Government it self, as
managed, even the substance of it (which must lie in a particular Form, seeing
a general notion of Government is not practicable) is left to the will of men.
I hope our Author will not say that the Form of Government is a circumstance,
neither ought he to say that it is a thing of common concernment to the Church
and other Societies: The Church is a Society singular, and of another Nature
than others, Cant. 6.9. She is but one, the only one of her Mother, therefore
her Government must be suitable; wherefore it ought not to be put in, in the
same case with the Natural circumstances that accompany all our actions; which
here the Author most unwisely does.

. 6. For a third answer he brings reasons why all punctillio's (as he is
pleased to speak) should not be now determined as they were under the Law. In
this we do not contradict him, as appears from what is now said: Quere non
respondes ad rem? Neither is it savoury to account the form of Government, by
which the visible being of the Church does stand, a punctillio: Such a
diminutive expression is not without contempt. But let us hear his Reasons: The
first, p. 179. is taken from the perfection of the Gospel-state above the
Jewish: That Church needed the fescues of Ceremonies to direct her, and must
have every part of her Lesson set her: This must not be still sub ferula, and
not dare to vary in any Circumstance which does not concern the thing it self.
As boy a at School has his Lesson and the manner of learning it prescribed: At
the University, more general directions do serve. In that Church every
circumstance was determined; in this things moral remain in force, but
circumstantials are left more at liberty.

Ans. 1. The point in question is not here touched: It Is not questioned whether
the Gospel Church should be loaded with Ceremonies as was the Jewish; nor
whether in every Circumstance she be bound by a Law (though he does falsely
suppose that the Jewish Church was bound in every Circumstance, as I have
already showed) but rather whether she be bound in any thing besides the moral
Law: And particularly whether she be bound to a form of Church Government. Such
loose declamations as this, aggravating some absurdities impertinent to the
thing in hand, are no solid refutations. I hope the Church may be bound to a
particular form of Government, viz. to parity of Ministers, and yet have
liberty in abundance of circumstances. His example of a Schoolboy, and one at
the University; of a Son when a Child, and when at Age, makes nothing against
us: For in both Cases they are in subjection to some positive commands of the
Master or Father: So is the Gospel Church under some such Commands, though not
so many as the Jews were. 2. Is it contrary to Gospel-perfection to be under
the Commands of Christ as to a Form of Church Government, and to be ruled by a
way of his contriving? This must be a strange kind of perfection that he
dreameth of. We believe that the Church is yet so imperfect, and will be while
on Earth, that she has need to be Governed by Christ's Laws; and is far happier
in that Case, then if she were left to choose her own way in matters of so great
Concernment as is the Form of Church Government. 3. Is it not as contrary, and
far more, to the perfection of the Gospel Church to be under a form of
Government, imposed by the Magistrate (as this man would have us) then if it be
imposed by Christ? Sure Christ's Yoke is easier then men's; and his device must
be better then theirs. Indeed in things that concern one Church and not
another, it is better that the prudence of Governors does determine, then that
there be an Universal Law binding all: But in things that are equally good to
all; it is better to be under Christ's General, then man's particular Law. Now
the thing in debate, Parity or Imparity among Ministers is attended with the
same conveniences, or inconveniences, in all Countries and Conditions, and
while men are prone to Tyranny on the one hand and to divisions on the other:
Wherefore it is no ways unfit that Christ should here decide the matter by a
general Law. It Is not like the Time or place of meeting, which must vary in
diverse places: Neither can he show us any reason, why it should be one way in
one Church, and another way in another, except man's pleasure, which is a bad
Rule in the matters of Christ. 4. Whereas he says that in the Gospel Church
things moral remain in their force; but circumstantials are left at more
liberty: I suppose he means Natural morality, or things contained in the
moral Law; and not things that have any morality, or goodness by any Law of
God: for if he meant this latter, he does but trifle; for his meaning must be,
that things which are not determined by any command, and have neither good nor
evil in them, are left at liberty; which who does not know? Neither can he say
that it was otherwise in the Jewish Church as this his assertion must imply, if
that be his meaning. If he mean the former (as certainly he does) then, 1. it
is an ill division of things that belong to the Church, in Morals and
Circumstantials: Be there not Christ's positive institutions which belong to
neither of these kind? The Lord's Supper is no moral thing in this sense;
neither, I hope, is it a Circumstantial thing that is left at liberty. 2. If he
call all things Circumstantial which are not thus moral; and assert them to be
left at liberty; he does at one blow cut of all the institutions of Christ, and
will have the Gospel Church so perfect as to be under no law of God, but the
moral Law, and what Laws men please to add unto it. This I hope he will retract
when he considers what he has here asserted: For I perceive, that even
learned men can say sometimes they know not what.

. 7. His second reason, p. 180. is this, The Form of government among the Jews
in the Tribe of Levy was agreeable to the form of Government among the other
Tribes; and their Ecclesiastical Government was one of their Judicial Laws:
Wherefore, if in this we compare Christ with Moses we must hold it needful that
he prescribe also a form of Civil Government.

Ans. 1. When we compare Christ with Moses, we have very good cause to make an
exception where the Scripture has evidently made it. We compare them then as
two Mediators, entrusted with managing the affairs which concern men's Eternal
Salvation; among which are Church Administrations: Hence there is Warrant for
stretching that comparison made of them in Scripture to their faithfulness in
appointing Church Government; but as to Civil Government the Scripture makes a
plain exception, when it evidently holds forth Moses a State Lawgiver as,
well as a Church Lawgiver; and it does as evidently testify that Christ was
not such; when he denies his Kingdom to be of this World, Joh. 18.36. And that
he is a Judge and divider of inheritance among men, Luke 12.14. and his mean
condition in the World (unlike to Moses) makes this farther appear.

Wherefore there is no necessity of comparing them in Civil, though we compare
them in Church-Administrations. The Lord was pleased to make the Government of
Israel, in respect of Church and State both, to be Theocratia; to give them
both kinds of Laws immediately from himself: That seeing he has under the
Gospel done otherwise, as to State-Government, he has also done otherwise as
to Church Government; what a mad kind of consequence is this? And there is
evident reason of this differing Dispensation under the Law, and under the
Gospel. I suppose if the difference of cases that arise from variety of
Circumstances did permit; it were the happiest case for God's People to have
all their actions and concernments particularly determined by the Lord, who is
wiser then men: now the Lord does thus with them, so far as it hinders not
their happiness, by a load of multiplicity of Laws: Wherefore, seeing the
Church and State of the Jews were commensurable, being in one Nation, it was as
easy for them to have their State-Laws determined by the Lord as their
Church-Laws: But it is far otherwise under the Gospel, where the Church is
spread over so many different Nations, of diverse dispositions and manners; to
have determined all things for the Civil Good of all these Nations, which must
be superadded. To the Determinations of Natures Law, would have made the Bible
a burden to men.

But it is not so in Ecclesiastical matters, there is nothing peculiar to the
Church as a Church, or Religious Society, but (supposing what Nature Dictates)
may without burthening People with many Laws, be determined and imposed upon
all.

Hence is it that the Lord saw it for the good of the Jewish Church, to give
them both Civil and Church-Laws, and for the good of the Gospel Church to give
them Church-Laws; but to leave Civil-Laws to prudence guided by the general
Rules of Scripture and Nature. Neither do I think (as our Author seems
sometime to think) that it was any part of legal bondage to have Laws from God,
even in the least matters: and that which is Christian liberty to be free from
Gods Laws in these things, when we are bound to the same by the Laws of men: I
should rather prefer their state to ours, thus far: but their bondage was, to
have many things determined and imposed upon them which were naturally
indifferent, and so free: which the Lord has now left free under the Gospel.

Answ. 2. It is not to the purpose to tell us, that the Government of the Tribe
of Levy was like that of the other Tribes: For Church Government was very
different from Civil Government for all that, viz. in this, that it was in the
hand of the Tribe of Levy, and no other Tribe, which was a positive Institution
of God: that it did cognosce of other matters than Civil Government did; that
it did inflict other censures. But let it be never so co-incident with Civil
Government, yet it was of Gods Institution, which is all that is needful to our
purpose. That the Form of Ecclesiastical Government took place among them, as
one of their Judicial Laws, is a groundless Assertion: Yea, it is a begging of
the Question, and also taking away the Distinction of Church and State among
the Jews, which is not needful here to be insisted upon, till some man Answer
what Mr. Gillespie in his Aarons-rod has written to this purpose.

. 8. His third Reason, ib. is, the People of the Jews were an entire People
when their Church Government was settled: the Gospel Church was but in Forming
in Christ's and the Apostles times: they settled what was for the present need
of the Church in her first Constitution, as in appointing Officers; this will
not serve when the Church is grown, and spread: her coat cut out for her
Infancy must not be urged on her when grown.

Answ. 1. This does no way satisfy the comparing of Christ's faithfulness with
Moses; for Moses gave Laws in the Wilderness, not only for that wandering
condition, but for their settled state in the Land of Canaan. Must we then think
that Christ took care that the Church in Infancy should have his Laws to be
guided by, but afterward to be left to the Dictates of men? Sure our Lord was
as careful to foresee future needs of his People, as to provide for present
wants.

2. The Church in the Apostles days, though not so far spread as now, yet was
so multiplied and settled, as that she was capable to be ruled by Parity or
Primacy: Might there not be a Bishop in Ephesus, Corinth, etc. and especially
in Galatia, a National Church? Might there not be a College of Presbyters then
as well as now? Wherefore, if the Apostles provided for present need, they
behoved either to determine either of these two, ex are tuo.

3. What is there in our case that makes another kind of Government needful,
then what was needful in the Apostles times? We have many Congregations which
all need their several Officers, and must be ruled in common; either by all
these Officers, or by some set above the rest: was not this their case too? I
would fain know where lies the difference: may be in this, there could not
then be one Head over all the Churches; which now may, seeing the powers of the
world profess Christ. It is true, there was a time when Government could not be
fetled, viz. When first a Church was planted, and Believers very few: But I am
sure it was otherwise in many places before the Apostles departed this life.

4. Must we say then that the Directions in the Epistles to Tim. and Pet. and
elsewhere, concerning Church-Administration, do not concern us; but their force
expired with that time? I must see stronger Arguments than any that this Author
has brought, ere I be persuaded of this: and yet it does clearly follow, out
of what he he says. Yea, we must say that these Scriptures which tell us what
Officers should be in the Church, as, Ephesians. 4.12. 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.6, 7, 8.
do not reach us: but it is lawful for the Magistrate (in this man's opinion) to
appoint what Church Officers he thinks fit for this time, as the Apostles did
for their time. For he says, p. 181. the Apostles looked at the present state
of the Church, in appointing Officers. This I hope sober men will not readily
yield to: Yea, he is against himself, as we have seen before, and may have
occasion further to show afterward.

. 9. His fourth and last Reason is, p. 181. the Jews lived under one civil
Government, according to which the Church Government was framed and
contempered: but Christians live under different civil Governments; therefore
if we compare Christ with Moses in this, we must say that Christ did frame the
Church Government according to the Civil; and so it must not be one but diverse.

Ans. It is here boldly supposed, but not proved that the form of the Jewish
Church Government, was framed according to the Civil, which we deny, and so
raze the foundation of this Reason. And whereas his assertion wants proof; our
denial shall stand on surer ground: for the Civil Government among the Jews was
often changed: they had Judges, Kings, Governors under their Conquerors: but we
read not of changing their Church Government, which behoved to have been, had
it been framed according to the Civil. Wherefore neither must Christian Church
Government be formed by the Civil, but by Christ's Institution.

. 10. To these answers to our Argument, he adds, e^ abundanti, as he
speaks, some Arguments to prove the Antithesis, viz. that Christ did never
intend to institute any one Form of Government. He might have spared this his
supererrogation, except he had had more to say for taking off the strength of
our Argument then we have met with. But to his Arguments, the first p. 181 and
182. he frames thus; what binds the Church as an Institution of Christ, must
bind as a^ Universal standing Law: one Form of Government cannot so bind, ergo,
prob. min. what binds as a Law must either be expressed as a Law in direct
terms; or deduced by necessary consequence, as of an universal binding nature:
The first cannot be produced; The second is not sufficient; except the
consequence be necessary, and also the obligation of what is drawn by
consequence be expressly set down in Scripture: for consequences cannot make
Institution, but apply it to particular cases: because positives being
indifferent, Divine Institution must be directly brought for their binding; so
that no consequence can bind us to them, without express declaration that it
shall so bind. This is no new Argument, it is proposed by him p. 12. and
answered by us p. -- to what is said there, I shall add a little applied to his
Argument, as here framed, his major is not so evident but that it needs a
distinction to clear it. What binds as Christ's Institution must bind as an
universal Law, i. e. in all times and places, negatur, for there are cases in
which the Lord will admit, and necessity will impose a dispensation with some
of God's Institutions, as I exemplified before in the case of Hezekiah keeping
the Passover; i. e. in all times where God or Nature does not make a clear
exception; or where the present case does not exempt it self from the intent of
that, as being given in a far different condition, conceditur. Hence there were
some of Christ's Laws for the Church, temporal; some peculiar to some cafes:
these do not bind us, all the rest do, where they are possibly practicable.
That the Laws for parity of Offices in the Church are of the latter sort, we
maintain. For his Miner, we deny it, and for the disjunctive proof of it we are
ready to maintain both the parts which he impugneth. And, First, That there is
express Law of Christ for parity: which I wonder he should so barely deny: that
it can be produced; when he knows or might know that it is brought by our
Writers out of Mat. 20.25, 26. Lu. 22.25, 26. But what he has to say against
the evidence brought from these and other places, we shall examine; when we
come at them. 2. Though there were no express Law for it, we maintain that
there is abundant evidence drawn by consequence from Scripture to show that
this is the Will and Law of Christ: as for these two conditions that he
requires in such a consequence; the first we own and maintain, that it is
inferred by clear consequence from Scripture that there ought to be a parity
among Ministers, thus; what was the practice of the Apostles in framing Church
Government, should be ours also, except the case be different; but the Apostles
did settle the Ministers in equal power, without a Bishop over them: neither is
there any difference in our case that should cause us to do otherwise; ergo, we
ought so to practice. It is not needful to insist here on the confirmation of
this Argument, seeing we are here only asserting that this conclusion may be
proved; not undertaking the proof of it: which is fully done by Presbyterian
Writers, and which we are ready to defend against what this Author will object.
For the second condition, viz. that what is drawn by consequence be expressly
set down in Scripture as binding: this is unlike Mr. Stillingfleet's ability to
require such a ridiculous condition; for if it be expressly set down in
Scripture as binding, then it is not a consequence but an express Law; and so
belongs to the former part of his disjunction. And besides, it is a hard task
to put any one upon, to find out a consequence so deduced in Scripture: What if
Anabaptist^, who deny consequences from Scripture in the point of Institution,
should put Mr. Stillingfleet to prove Infant Baptism by such a consequence a^
this: where something is said in Scripture, from which the duty of Baptizing
Infants does clearly follow; and where it is expressly said in Scripture, that
it does follow from this, that Infants must be baptized; he would find this an
hard task, and yet he requires the same of us. What he says for the
warranting of this strange Doctrine, wants force. It is true Consequences
cannot make an Institution, yet they may declare an Institution: we may gather
the Will of Christ in matters of Institutions by Scripture consequences as well
as in points of Truth. And though Positives be indifferent, it is not needful
that Divine Institution be directly declared; for their binding; seeing it is
the Will of God revealed that binds us, not his Will revealed in such or such
terms. He were a bad Servant that would do nothing of his Masters Will, but
what he declares to him directly, and in the Imparative Mood: such Servants to
God this Author would have us, that so we may have the greater latitude to be
the Servants of Men; taking their Will instead of Divine Institution.

. 11. His second Argument, p. 182. is this; All the standing Laws for Church
Government in Scripture may be applied to several forms, ergo, there is no one
Form prescribed. For proof of this, he reduces all the Laws about Church
Government to these three heads. 1. Such as set down the qualification of
Officers. 2. Such as require a right managing of their Office. 3. Such as lay
down Rules for the managing their Office. On these he insisteth distinctly.
Before I come to what he says on these three Heads; let me answer generally to
the Argument. And first by standing Laws, I suppose he means such as are
expressly set down in the form of Laws: and then we deny his consequence, for
though these do only respect Government, in its more general consideration, yet
that does not hinder but the species of it may be determined another way, viz.
by Apostolic practices, or consequences drawn from Scripture. 2. Though we
should grant that all the Laws set down in Scripture are equally applicable to
either form, yet the one Form, viz. Parity may be determined in Scripture thus.
Parity and Episcopacy do agree in many things; suppose then they agree in all
that is commanded in Scripture; and that Episcopacy be so far warrantable: no
wonder that they be not discriminated by these Laws; but then here comes the
differences; Parity requires no more for its establishment, but these
Scripture Laws: and so it holds it self within the bounds of Divine
Institution; but Episcopacy goes beyond this boundary, by setting up a new
Officer in the Church which the Scripture knows not; and so one Form is
determined, though not by any Law condemning the other expressly; yet by the
Laws that warrant it; and the want of any Law to warrant the other. 3. We deny
that all the Scripture Laws reducible to these three Heads, do relate to either
Form, in that wherein they differ. But let us hear his proofs. He begins
with the first Head, p. 183. where, I confess, that all the qualifications of
Persons which he mentions may be applied to either Bishop or Presbyter. But
then, 1. This is an Argument that Bishop and Presbyter are one, or rather that
there is no such distinction by the Will of Christ; for sure there are distinct
qualifications required, the one being to Rule, the other to Obey: wherefore if
the Apostles had thought there might be both Bishops and Presbyters in the
Church; surely he would have set down the qualities of a Bishop as he is
distinguished from a Presbyter, as well as he sets down the qualities of a
Presbyter. Confirmatur, a man may be a well qualified Presbyter acting under a
Bishop, and yet not qualified to be a Bishop: wherefore if the Apostle had
thought it lawful to set the one over the other, his qualifications of Church
Officers are very lame, seeing he does not show us who among the Presbyters is
fittest to be made my Lord Bishop; as well as he shows who among the People
are fit to be Presbyters. 2. The Laws concerning qualifications do require in
all Presbyters an ability to rule the Church, and do suppose them to be rulers
of the Church; as is clear, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. this is not applicable to
Episcopacy, for in Episcopacy it is not needful that Presbyters be able to
rule, seeing they have no exercise of that Faculty: as God creates nothing in
vain, so he does not require any qualifications of men in vain. Is it
imaginable that if a man be well qualified to Preach, etc. and yet unfit to
rule; that the Lord will have that man kept out of the Ministry for that want
of a ruling ability, seeing he should have no use of that faculty if he had it?
Ergo, these qualifications are not applicable to Episcopacy, where the Bishop
alone rules. If it be said, that this makes the sole Jurisdiction of Bishops
unlawful, not their being Rulers together with the Presbyters; Ans. If Bishops
be set over Presbyters, they must either be only Praesides, which is not
contrary to Parity (for we speak of Parity or Imparity of Jurisdiction) or they
must have Authority above and over their Brethren; and if so they may rule
without their Brethren; seeing they may command them and make that power void
which Christ has given his Servants; and so the force of what I have said does
return. Again, if Presbyters under a Bishop have Ruling Power, either they may
determine without, or against his consent, or not; if so, the Bishop is but a
President; if not, the Presbyters are but Ciphers, seeing the Bishop may do in
the Church what he pleases.

Sect. 12. He comes p. 184. to the Laws concerning a right managing of their
work, which I do not deny to be applicable to either form; and no wonder, for
faithfulness is a commanded duty in what ever station God puts a man: But
our Author takes occasion here to infer the indifferency of either form. 1.
Because Paul did not determine in his Epistles to Tim. and Tit. (which chiefly
concern Church Government) whether any should succeed to Timothy and Tit. in
Ephesus and Creet. Ans. It is a bad consequence, for the thing did determine it
self, for they were Extraordinary Officers, immediately called by God, being
Evangelists; therefore they were to have no Successors, unless the Lord did so
call them. Further, they were not fixed in these places, but for a time: they
did not live and die there; which showed that there was no need of Successors
to them in that Office. Again he argues, that the Apostle did not determine
how the Pastors of several Churches should order things of common concernment;
which, considered with the former, would seem a strange omission, were either
of these forms necessary. Ans. This is no strange omission, nor should it so be
esteemed by this Author, who makes all that is requisite for the right
managing of affairs by the Pastors of several Churches, to be of the Law of
Nature, viz. that they should meet, that one should moderate, that there should
be Appeals, etc. as I observed out of him before. 2. We deny that it is
omitted: yea, this Author in saying otherwise, contradicts himself; for he
will not deny, but there are directions in these Epistles for
Church Government; and he affirms, that they are applicable to either form,
Ergo, to Pastors acting in Parity; neither was it needful that there should be
directions to them, which are not applicable to Bishops governing, because the
managing of the work is the same in both ways, except what Nature makes
necessary to a Society, or a single person governing, which also it does teach.
3. The matter is determined even in these Epistles, viz. 1 Timothy 4.14. where it
is not obscurely held forth, that Tim. was ordained by a Presbytery; which
infers, that Presbyters ought so to be ordained, and not by a Bishop alone.
4. Though the matter were not determined in these Epistles, it is no wonder,
they being written to particular men, but it is determined in other Scriptures,
viz. where Christ gives the Keys, not to one, but to all the Apostles then,
the only Church Officers; and where Paul commits the care of the Church of
Ephesus, not to one Bishop, but to the Elders in common, Act. 20.28. Of this he
says, p. 184. it is equally a duty, whether we understand by Overseers some
acting over others, or all joining in equality. But by his leave, when the
Apostle gives this charge peremptorily to all the Elders of Ephesus (for to
them he speaks, not to these of other Churches of Asia, as he dreameth the
Text may be understood, upon what ground I know not) there is no doubt left,
whether he makes it the duty of them all in common, or of some one set over
the rest: And may we not think that this Command is a standing Rule, reaching
even to us, as he himself says, ( p. 185.) of what is contained in the
Epistles to Tim. and Tit.? and if so, then all Pastors are Bishops or
Overseers, not one over the rest by Apostolic Authority. He argues thus, p.
185. Tim. is charged to commit the things he had heard of Paul to faithful men,
who might be able also to teach others, 2 Timothy 2.2. Had it not been as
requisite to have charged him to have committed his power of Government to
them, etc.? Ans. 1. Yea, he does here commit power of Preaching, and of
governing, jointly to Timothy, to be transferred by him to others; for of both
these, I suppose, Tim. had heard from Paul: why then must we here understand
the one, rather then the other? in that he mentions Teaching, not Ruling, it
is because Teaching is the main business, and has the other power necessarily
joined with it, by divine Institution. 2. It is not always needful to mention
Governing Power, where ever the power of a Minister is mentioned, and here, it
cannot be deemed needful, because the Apostle had formerly instructed Tim. that
he choose none to be Pastors, but they who are able to Rule too, whence it
follows, that when he bids him commit to them the Pastoral charge, he
intends Ruling Power as a part of it; else to what purpose should he require
ability to Rule in them? To the same purpose is what he says of Tit. That he
bid him ordain Elders, but told not what Power did belong to them; a Negative
Argument from one place of Scripture, is in concludent, such as this is: From
the Superiority of Tim. and Tit. (I pass his clearing of it, from being an
Argument for Episcopacy) be infers two things, p. 186.187. First that the
Superiority of some Church Officers (he should have said Presbyters, for of
Officers it is not Questioned on either hand) over others, is not contrary to
the Rule of the Gospel. 2. That it is not repugnant to the Constitution of the
Church in Apostolical times for men to have power over more then one particular
Congregation. These says he follow, though their Office be supposed
extroardinary; and that they acted as Evangelists. Ans. It will follow indeed
from these examples, that Superiority is not contrary to Nature, nor to the
Nature of a Gospel Church: Also it will follow, that it is not contrary to
Gospel Institution, that the Lord should immediately, when he sees cause,
appoint such Superiority; and what if we say it follows, that it is not
contrary to Gospel Institution, that in some extraordinary cases, that
Superiority may be allowed for a time. But none of these are the thing in
Question: for this does not follow, that because the Lord did immediately call
these men, and gave them Extroardinary Power over others; therefore he has not
instituted, that the ordinary way of Church Government shall be by Pastors
acting in Purity, which is here disputed. His third head of Laws, formerly
mentioned, he touches, p. 188. and brings instances of some General rules
for Church Government, which I confess are not peculiar to one form: But this
does not hinder that there may be other Rules which are such; which himself
instanceth; as, that complaints be made to the Church: it is an odd exposition
to say, i. e. Tell the Bishop. The Church implies clearly a Plurality. p. 187.
had it been the will of Christ, says he, that there should be no Superiority
of Pastors, there would have been some express and direct prohibition of it.
Ans. 1. Might not a prohibition by Consequence serve turn? This is very
peremptorily spoken. 2. What needs any prohibition, when Christ had
instituted a way inconsistent with it; this was a prohibition of it: now this
he did by giving Ruling power to all Presbyters, as has been already showed.

Sect. 13. He brings another Argument of his Opposites, p. 189. Viz. That it
is of equal necessity, that Christ should Institute a certain Form, as that any
other Legislator that moderates a Commonwealth should do. His first. Ans. To
this is, that Christ has instituted such an immutable Government in his Church
as is sufcient for the succession and continuance of it; which is all that
founders of Republics looked after, viz. That there be such an order and
distinction of Persons, and subordination, that a Society may be preserved
among them. Till then it be proved that one form is necessary for the being of
a Church, this Argument can prove nothing. Reply, it is false, that Legislators
looked after no more but that, we find none of them, who settled not a
particular Form: ye^ this was necessary; for these Generals could not be
practiced, but in some particular Form, this or that: and of these we find they
choosed what they thought fittest: even so Christ not only appointed Generals,
but knowing a particular Form is only practicable, he chose that which he
thought fittest; man's choice in this is alterable, because other men may have
as much wisdom and authority as they; Christ's choice is not so, for the
contrary reasons. His second Ans. p. 190. Is, what is not absolutely necessary
to the being of a Church, is in Christ's liberty, whether he will determine it
or not: even as when I hear, that Lycurgus and others did form a Republic; I
conclude there must be Government: But not that they Institute Monarchy, etc.
this must be known by taking a view of their Laws. Reply, we acknowledge that
Form of Government to be in Christ's liberty whether he will determine it, or
not; but we think it like, that he has determined it: as for other reasons, so
because even men have not appointed the Generals of Government, without a form
in which they should subsist: much less would the wise God do so; if they being
wiser then others, did think it fitter to choose the Form then to leave it at
other men's will, much more would he. What he says, of inferring, that they did
appoint this or that Form, from their modelling a Common Wealth; is not to the
purpose: for that they did appoint a Form we know by History; and, I suppose,
that every one thinks that they did wisely in so doing; and that their doing
so was for the good of the Republic: hence we infer that it is like Christ did
so, seeing he sought his peoples good more then they; and the Church is less
able to choose for her self, then those Republics were; seeing Church Matters
are of spiritual concernment, and so lie further out of the Road of men's Wit
then the affairs of State do. I yield to him that we could not know, what Form
Christ has instituted, but by looking into his Laws; yea, and but that way, we
could not certainly know that he has determined any one form; yet this does
not hinder, but such Arguments as this may have their own weight. The Testimony
he brings out of Mr. Hooker, is answered from what has been said, and I am
to meet with it elsewhere: He mistaketh our intent in such Arguments, and
falsely supposes that the form we plead for is not found in the Bible.

Sect. 14. He brings another argument, p. 191. from the similitude of a Vine
which must have its Dressers; and a House, and a City, which must have
Government: it was very easy for him to answer the Argument thus propounded; I
know not who ever did so manage it: But it might have been thus improved, a
wise Master of a Vineyard will not let his servants do what they please, but
will appoint them his work in his Vineyard; and a Master of a Family, or a King
in a Country or City, will not let the Servants or Subjects choose in what they
shall be governed; Ergo; if the Church be a Vine, a House, a City, and Christ
be the Head and Ruler of it, it is not like that he has left the choice of the
way of governing it to men, but has appointed it himself: If he had thus
propounded the Argument, it had not been so easily answered. The same way he
uses the next Argument, p. 192. taken from the difference of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government; the one of which is called the Ordinance of man, and
the other is Gods Ordinance; therefere though that be mutable, this is not. I
choose rather to frame the Argument otherwise, out of his own Concession he
makes difference between these two Governments, the one is for a Political,
the other for a spiritual end; the one for a temporal, the other for an eternal
end; the one given to men as men, the other to men as Christians; the one to
preserve Civil Right, the other to preserve an Eternal Interest, etc. Then,
however the Lord let men choose the way of attaining political and temporal
ends, and provide for their own standing as men, and preserve their Civil
Rights; yet it is strange to think, that he has left it to men's choice to take
this or that way for attaining their spiritual and eternal end, for procuring
their standing as Christians, for preserving their spiritual rights; though the
one be the Ordinance of man, sure the other must be the Ordinance of God: But
the form of Church Government is the way to attain these, because
Church Government is the mean, as is confessed, and it cannot be acted but in a
particular form, and the form is the way of managing that mean, and so
attaining the end; yea, it is such a way as has exceeding influence upon
attaining these ends, seeing a wrong form may more hinder than promote them;
man, I suppose, may choose a way that may do more hurt than good; it is strange
then if Christ has left this which is of such high concernment, to such high
ends, to the will of corrupt men: and this Argument may have the more weight ad
hominem, because this Author is often endeavoring to shape Church Government
according to the Civil, which is very unsuitable to what he asserteth of their
differences.

Sect. 15. Another argument p. 194. is, if the form of Church Government be not
in Scripture determined immutably, then it is in the power of the Church to
make new Officers which Christ never made. To this he answers: 1. These
Officers are only said to be new which were never appointed by Christ, and are
contrary to the first appointment of Christ, but one set over many Pastors is
not such; for besides the general practice from the first Primitive times,
Christ himself laid the foundation of such an Office, in appointing Apostles.
Reply. Here are many things hudled together, to excuse Episcopacy from Novelty,
which we must examine severally. 1. They are not a new Office, would he say,
because Christ instituted such an Office, viz. Apostles. Reply. I hope he will
not say, that the Office of an Apostle, and of a Diocesan Bishop, is the same
Office; for the Apostles had much power, which Bishops have not, and were
Extraordinary Officers, immediately called by God, so are not Bishops: and
however there may be some resemblance between them, yet if they be not the same
Office, it must be a new Office from what Christ appointed: It is not the want
of Similitude, but the want of Identity, with what has been before, that
makes a thing new; neither need we enter the dispute with him, what way
extraordinary, and what not, in the Apostolic Office, nor does the Question
lie in that, as he alleges; for we maintain (and I think it will not be
denied by him) that the Office in complexe, viz. as it did subsist in rerum
natura, was extraordinary, and is ceased; and therefore whatever Office is made
up of some part of the power they had, without the rest of it, must be a
different Office from that, and so new. Indeed if Christ had given them their
power by halves, and made the one half of it common to some Officer appointed
by him to continue in the Church, viz. power over Presbyters, and the other
half of it peculiar to them, then Bishops having power over Presbyters, though
they had been a new Office from the Apostles, and not the same, yet should they
have had the same Office with these others that we supposed, and so had not
been new simply; but there being no such thing, they must be in another Office
than Christ ever appointed, and so simply new. Wherefore it is an unreasonable
demand of the Author, p. 195. that we must prove power over Presbyters to be
extraordinary, before we say it must cease: For it is enough that the whole
Office be extraordinary, that it be not a pattern for any other Office that
should be the same: Yea, we can easily prove that that power, as in the
Apostles, and making up the Complex of their Office, was extraordinary, because
it cannot rurvive the Office it self under that notion; and we can also prove,
that Christ never instituted any such power by it self, and without the other
parts of the Apostolic Office: whence it clearly follows, that such a power
by it self (which is a clear description of the Episcopal Office) is diverse
from all the Offices iustituted by Christ, and so is a new Office: What he
says of the ceasing of this power with the Apostles, as to its necessity, but
not as to its lawfulness, is most impertinent, and a begging of the Question;
for the conclusion of the Argument is, that it is unlawful, because it has no
institution, that institution which it had in the Apostles being ceased. His
confirmation of this his distinction contains a manifest falsehood, viz. to
make a thing unlawful, says he, which was before lawful, there must be an
express prohibition forbidding the use of such a thing: This, I say, applied to
the matter in hand, is most false, for we speak of things which have their
lawfulness only from institution, viz. Authority given to one over others: now
that which is thus lawful, becomes unlawful, merely by the withdrawing of the
Institution, though no express prohibition of it be made. As is evident from
the like case among men, when a King gives a Commission to a Judge, it is
lawful for him to act in that capacity: now if the King shall call in his
Commission, though there be no express forbidding of the man, I suppose it is
now become unlawful for him to act. Just so is our case; one Pastor can have no
authority over another, unless it be given him by Christ, who ascended up on
high, and received these gifts for men, Ephesians. 4. Now Christ had given once such
a power to men, viz. the Apostles, this he has now withdrawn, by not giving
such Commission to any others, but the Apostles; for I suppose (to follow the
former example) that when a Judge which had a Commission dies, it is a
sufficient withdrawing of his Commission, that the King does not give it to any
other who may succeed him: wherefore any who take that power to them, do it
without Commission from Christ which is unlawful.

Sect. 16. Another Answer he brings to this argument, p. 195. on which he
insisteth much, as a foundation tonding to establish his whole Cause, but I
hope it shall prove a ruinous foundation. The Answer is this; The extending of
any Ministerial power, is not the appointing of any new, but a determining the
extent of that in actu secun^o, which every Minister has in actu primo. For
clearing this, he undertaketh two things. 1. To show that the power of every
Minister does primarily and habitually respect the Church in common, which I do
freely yield to him. 2. P. 197. That the Officers of the Church may in a
peculiar manner attribute a larger and more extensive power to some particular
persons, for the more convenient exercise of their common power. Before I come
to examine what he says to this purpose, let me note: 1. That he speaks here
in a new strain, before he had at tributed this power of determining to the
Magistrate, now the Officers of the Church must have it, which I confess is
more fit: But he soon repents, and in the end of the same page makes it lie
between the Pastors and Magistrate, whether he please. It is strange to see how
those who loose hold of the truth, hang as Meteors and know not where to fix. I
take notice; 2. That whereas the former part of his undertaking (which he knew
to be out of controversy among them against whom he disputes) he establishes
by five strong Arguments; but for that part where the stress of the matter
lies, he has not brought so much as one reason to evince what he says, but
some few bare Assertions for the clearing of it; and indeed it is sometimes
easier to prove the thing that is not, than the thing that is denied, even to
such able men as Mr. Stillingfl. But let us now attend to what he says for his
Opinion: We have seen, says he, that their power extends to the care of the
Churches in common; that the restraint of this power is a matter of order and
decency in the Church. Here are two things, the former of which we have heard,
and seen solidly proved; but the latter I have not yet seen, where he has done
any thing but asserted it, as he here does: but sure, it being a matter of such
concernment and controversy, needed some more proof; wherefore I cannot pass
it so slightly as he has done. We may distinguish a twofold restraining (the
same holds in enlarging) of the exercise of the power of Church Officers,
viz. in respect of the Object of it, and in respect of the acts of it.
Restraint, in respect of the object of this power, may be subdivided: First,
when that power is permitted or appointed to be exercised over more or fewer
objects of the same kind, which it does respect by the appointment of Christ;
as that a Minister should have a narrower or larger bounds for his Parish, or
more or fewer people to watch over; and so of the limiting of Presbyteries,
Synods, etc. This restraint, or enlargement of power in its exercise, we
acknowledge to be a matter of order and decency, and may be determined by the
prudence of the Church. Secondly, when it is extended to the objects of another
kind, or restricted from the whole Species of these objects that Christ has
appointed it for; as when a Bishop by himself, who by Christ's Institution has
only power over the people, gets power, given him by man, over his fellow
Pastors; and when a Presbyter, who by Christ's Institution has a power over the
Flock to rule them, is hindered from the exercise of this power altogether, and
is set only to feed, and this ruling power, as to its exercise, is wholly
devolved upon another: This we deny to be a matter of order and decency
committed to the Churches prudence. Restraint and enlargement, in respect of
acts of power, is when some acts which may be by Christ's Institution exercised
by all Presbyters, are only permitted to be exercised by some, and not by
others; as Ordination, Church Censures: and when some are authorized to do some
acts of power that Christ's Institution gives them no Commission unto; this,
together with that restraint mentioned in the second member of the subdivision,
we prove, not to be matters of order, left to the prudence of the Church, but
to be the setting up of a new Office in the Church. 1. Order that the Church is
commanded to look after, requires the right circumstantiating of these acts
which Christ has appointed to be done in his Church; as that they be done in
fit time, place, method, etc. neither can this ordering of things reach beyond
the determination of circumstances, for whatever is more than this, is not an
ordering of that action unto which the circumstances do belong, but an
instituting of a new action; because (for example) the right order of reading
does not require prayer, or singing to be joined with it, but respects only
the circumstances of reading it self: now, such restraining or enlarging of the
exercise of power, is no right circumstantiating of it, but some other thing;
it being no circumstance of the exercise of Pastoral power, whether he shall
rule or not, but an essential part (I mean as to the integrality, it being an
integral part) of that power which Christ has given him, as is confessed:
also, giving the exercise of that power to one which belongs to many, is not
adding of a circumstance, but a supernumerary part of power (as to its
exercise) above these parts that Christ has given them; ergo, this is no
ordering of the exercise of power, but setting up of it anew. 2. Order that
belongs to the prudence of the Church, is that unto which confusion is
opposite; then is that order obtained, when all confusion is avoided; but
confusion may be avoided, without this restraining and enlarging of
Church Power by men, else it were in no case lawful to let power be exercised
as it is instituted by Christ, because we must always be careful to avoid
confusion; ergo, I confess restraining of the exercise of power, as to objects
of the same kind, as fixing of Parishes, is necessary to avoid confusion: but
this cannot be said of taking power of ruling out of the hands of Presbyters,
and giving it to Bishops; else we must say that Episcopacy is necessary, which
destroys this man's Hypothesis. If it be said that sometimes it falls out
that this is necessary to avoid confusion, and then Episcopacy is necessary.
Ans. If we should grant that it is sometimes useful to avoid confusion, as that
which may be the fruit of Parity, yet it cannot be said that Parity it self is
confusion: now, it is not in the Churches power to take her own way, to avoid
whatever may have a bad effect (for the best things may be such) but she must
shun that which is evil by a right managing, not by laying aside that which is
good: wherefore seeing Order is consistent with Parity, and Parity with the
Institution of Christ, and Imparity goes at least a step beyond the
Institution, and takes that from men which Christ gave them, and gives it to
some to whom he gave it not, this cannot be a right ordering of his
Institution, but rather setting up some other thing in the place thereof. 3.
The right ordering of the exercise of that power which Christ has given to
men, must consist in determining of these things which he has not determined,
and yet are necessary to be determined, as time, place, extent of Parishes,
etc. for if men either take upon them to determine in these matters, which he
has already determined by his Institution, or to determine things that he has
left at liberty, because the determination was not needful to his design, they
then, would be wiser then he, and do not order his Institutions, but set up
their own. Now this which our Author calls Ordering is guilty of both these,
for Christ by giving Ruling Power to all Presbyters has declared his Will that
they shall all Rule, and especially by requiring an ability for this, as a
necessary qualification of them, who should be put unto that Office: do not men
then, by appointing who should Rule, pass their determination on what he has
already determined, and that contrary to what he has appointed. Again, Christ
has not appointed any Superiority and Inferiority among Presbyters; neither is
it needful this be, the Church may be without it, and yet men take upon them to
appoint it. Is this then to order that Government that Christ has appointed,
and not rather to set up new Officers that men have devised.

Sect. 17. Next he subjoyneth a strange assertion. Now, says he, in matters of
common concernment, without all question, it is not unlawful, when the Church
judges it most fit for edification, to grant to some the executive part of
that power, which is originally and fundamentally common to them all. Answ. If
it be so, all this pains that our Author is at, is needless, and his Book to no
purpose: For I mistake much, if the main business in it be not to prove the
lawfulness of this, which here he asserteth to be unquestionably lawful. For he
confesses that ruling power is given by Christ to all Presbyters: then, we
must either say that it is his institution that they all exercise it and so
parity is his institution: or, that the executive part of it may be given to
some, or may be common to them all; and so the form of Government may be left
indifferent is the scope of this Book. Now if it be unquestionable, what
needs all this pains about it. But I conceive, this confident assertion is
put instead of the Arguments, whereby this undertaking of his should have been
confirmed: It is an easy thing, when one cannot find proofs for their opinion
to say, it is out of Question, but it is an unhandsome way of disputing,
especially unbeseeming the person, who could not but know that this is denied
by his Opposites, and is the main hinge of the Controversy in hand. We do
maintain this Antithesis, that it is the Question between us and them who are
for the indifferency of Church Government, whether the exercise of Ruling Power
may be taken out of the hands of Ministers, and given unto one, to be Bishop
over them: and we maintain the negative as that which should be out of
Question: and this we shall not barely assort, as Mr. Stillingf. has done his
Opinion. I. Then, this taking the exercise of that power from men, which Christ
has given them is unwarrantable; ergo, it is unlawful; I hope, the consequence
will not be denied: for what we lawfully do must be some way warranted, either
by a Command or a Permission. The Antecedent I prove, because a warrant for
such a practice cannot be showed, and further, if there were any warrant for
it, it must either be from Christ's command, or 2. From his express Permission,
or 3. From the Law of Nature, or 4. From want of a Law forbidding it: But none
of these do warrant it, not the First nor Second, for our Opposite cannot
produce such Command or Permission, either directly let down or drawn by
consequence from it. Nor the Third, for then they must produce some dictate of
the Law of Nature which gives leave to do this; but what that shall be I
understand not. Nature indeed teaches, that a Society may use means, for its
own Peace and Order: but this may be without hindering the exercise of that
power, the Supreme Governor gives to any of his Officers: there may be this
in the Church where Presbyters Rule in Common. Nature also teaches that when
more have a Common power, they may consult about the best way of Managing it;
but it does not teach that they may manage it otherwise then it is committed
to them by him who gave it; which they must do if they put it into the hands of
one, which is given to more: especially, when it may be managed well without
such crossing the Institution of it. Besides all this, Nature can never warrant
this alienation of the Power that Christ has given to his Servants; because
Nature does only warrant us to step beside Christ's Institution (in his matters)
where Institution is not sufficient to attain that which is naturally
necessary; or when the Acting only by Institution would cross Nature: but there
is no natural necessity of giving all power to a Bishop, which Christ has
given to Presbyters: neither does leaving the exercise of it in common cross
Nature: Ergo Nature does not warrant this practice. Neither can the fourth
warrant it, for then it should be in the power of men to take all the power
that Ministers have from Christ out of their hands and give it to one, so that
only my Lord Bishop might preach, baptize, etc. as well as that he only may
rule; for their is no Law forbidding the Church, to lay all the parts of
Pastoral power on one, more then forbidding to lay one part of it on one. Sure
sobriety and due reverence to the Institutions of Christ would teach us to
think, that while he has given equal power to many it should be a sufficient
forbidding, that any be so bold as to lay the exercise of that power on one,
taking it from the rest.

Sect. 18. 2. I prove it thus. When Christ gives a power to his Servants to
manage the affairs of his Church, it is not only a License, whereby they are
authorized to do such work, if they think fit, but it is a trust: they get it
as a charge that they must give account of, as is evident from the command to
this purpose given them, Act. 20.28. take heed to the Flock over which the Holy
Ghost has made you Overseers: here is a Command to Overseers to do that work,
and they must give an account of this their charge, Heb. 13.17. Rulers who must
be obeyed are such who must give an account. Now it is not lawful for one, who
gets such a Trust to lay it on another: neither may any take it out of his
hands to bestow it upon another without his leave, who gave that trust: when
Christ has Commanded Ministers to rule, and will seek account of them, may
they lay their work on a Bishop? will it be well taken in the day of Account,
to say, they committed their Flock to another to keep, who left them to the
Wolf, or scattered, and slew them: will not the Lord say to them why did not ye
feed them your selves? Sure Christ will require account of them to whom be gave
the charge, and that is of Pastors, neither will he ask Account of Bishops,
except for their Usurpation. Ergo it is not lawful, to take the exercise of
Church Power out of the hands of Ministers, and give it to a Bishop. 3. Proof.
If Presbyters, who have received Power from Christ may put the exercise of it
into the hands of a Bishop alienating it from themselves; why may not Bishops
devolve their Power on one who shall be over them, and so we shall have an
Universal Bishop the Pope; in whom shall rest all Church Power, and at whose
direction it shall be exercised? If that may be done, there is no shadow of
Reason why this may not be done, for if once the Power be taken out of the hand
of them to whom Christ has given it, then prudence must be the only Director
to teach us who must have it: now prudence will as well say, that Bishops must
have one over them to keep them in Order and peace, as that Presbyters must
have one over them. Neither is there here any inconvenience that is not there;
for that one may turn to tyranny as well as the other: and a Bishop cannot
oversee his charge, without substitutes, more then the Pope can do: the one may
substitute Bishops, Cardinals, etc. as well as the other may substitute Dean,
Prebends, Archdeacon, etc. Now, I hope, Mr. Stillingfleet is not come to that,
to think the Papal Office an indifferent Ceremony. ergo. neither should he
think so of Episcopacy. 4. If Presbyters may devolve the exercise of that power
that Christ has given them into the hands of a Bishop, then they may also give
away with their power the very Office that Christ has given them: But this
they may not. ergo I prove the Major, for when they devolve the exercise of
their ruling power on the Bishop, they not only consent, that they shall rule
the people, which they might do: But they make it unlawful for themselves to
rule, yea, they give up themselves to be ruled and commanded by them, so that
he is their Judge and cannot be judged by them, in case of maladministration
(at least this is true de singulis if not de omnibus) but this is to give away
the very power; for if I may not act, how have I a power to act; if both I and
the people be under the command of another, so that I may not act any thing in
reference to the People but by his authority, how have I power to rule? sure a
power is the possibility of the act (quantum est ex part causae) and a moral
power is such a lawfulness of the act, but in this case Presbyters want that
possibility, or lawfulness of that exercise of Ruling; and that so, as the
defect or hindrance ex part causae, is in themselves, who should put forth the
acts, ergo, they want not only the exercise but the very power of Ruling,
which Christ gave them, in such a case. The Minor of the Argument is evident;
for such an alienation were a clear contradicting of Christ: he says it shall
be lawful for you (such a one being lawfully put into the Ministry) to rule: he
by this alienating says, it shall not be lawful for me to rule. If it be said,
that Christ's gift makes it lawful for such a one to rule, but not in all
cases; as suppose the good of the Church requires that this power be taken from
him; his alienating makes it only unlawful in this case, when for the good
of the Church, he has quit his right: so that here there is no opposition;
Christ gives him a jus in actu primo, he alienateth only this jus in actu
secundo, as Mr. Stillingfleet does express it. Answ. 1. However there may be
some color of reason why this may be done in some extraordinary cases; when
Christ's institution (which is calculated to ordinary cases, and must ordinarily
take place) cannot reach the end of Government: yet to say that it may be done
ordinarily, cannot. but clash with Christ's institution: for when Christ gives
ruling power to Presbyters, though we may think that it is not his will, that
they must needs exercise it in all cases, yet must we think that he intends
they should exercise it ordinarily: for why gives he them a power, which they
as readily never as ever act, and that as men please to determine? we must not
think that it is the intent of Christ's Commission to his Servants, that men may
without the force of necessity laid on by an extraordinary Providence (and then
God does it and not men) hinder the acts of it as as they will. 2. It is
supposed without ground that the good of the Church can ordinarily require the
restraining power given by Christ; for if we speak of what is ordinarily good
for the Church, how can we better discern that than by looking into Christ's
institution? wherefore, seeing by this equal power, at least in actu primo is
given to Presbytery; we are to think, that the exercise of this power is best
for the Church; though ambitious men, and they who would flatter the
Magistrate, think otherwise; yea though the best of men should dissent, sure
Christ's giving such a power says more for the goodness of the exercise of it
then men's opinions, though seeming to have a foundation on some inconveniences
of it can say against it: especially considering, what ever way beside, men
devise, is attended with as great, if not greater inconveniences of another
nature. 3. I have already made it appear, that this alienation of power given
by Christ does not only reach the actus secundus of it, but even the actus
primus; seeing a man is not in capacity to recall his deed, and reassume the
exercise of his power, though it were improved never so much against the end of
Christ's giving, and his alienating of it.

Sect. 19. 5. Proof (which is directly against enlarging the exercise of Church
Power in the hands of any beyond what Christ has given them) if the exercise
of that power, which Christ has given to all, may be taken from the rest and
given to one, then that one gets a power both in actu primo and in secundo,
which he had not from Christ, but this is unlawful, ergo The Major I prove: for
it is clear he gets power in actu secundo, which he had not from Christ,
ergo he gets such power in actu primo, seeing actus secundus cannot be
without primus, nor lawful exercise of power without the jus or power it self.
If it be said, that Christ gives only the actus primus, and that so as it
extends to the whole Church: and therefore no actus secundus of power can be
given to one, which does extend further than this. Answ. 1. It is true, he
gives formally only the actus primus, but the actus secundus does result from
it, and therefore he gives both. 2. It is true, the power that Christ gives
does extend to the whole Church, but this must be understood with a twofold
distinction Did. 1. Disjunctive it is true, that is, every Minister has a
power to rule whatever part of the Church, this or that, or another; so that no
part of it is without his Commission, as that he should go beyond his bounds in
being set over it. Conjunctive, it is false, that is, Christ has not given so
much of the actus primus o^ power to rule all, or many Congregations. Did. 2.
When Christ gives the actus primus of power to a Minister, extending to the
whole Church; it is to be understood in adequate, i. e. that he has a share in
that power so extended; and may in conjunction with other rule the whole
Church: not adequate, i. e. Christ has not given to any such a power, as that
he by himself or with a few excluding the rest, who are also in the Commission,
rule the whole Church. So that when ever any one exercises authority by
himself, or excluding others, who have the same power granted by Christ, over
more than his particular Congregation, over which he may have personal
inspection; he takes a power in actu secundo, where Christ has given him no
jus, nor actus primus of power. The Minor of the argument is manifest; for when
both power and exercise of it is given to a man, which Christ has not given;
this is setting up a new Office, which Christ has not set up: for what is an
Office in the Church, but a power and a lawful exercise of it? but this our
Author confesses to be unlawful, ergo 6. Proof. It Is presumption even among
men for a servant to commit that work to another to do, which his Master has
given him to do, except he know, that he has his Masters leave so to do: this
is so well known, that I need not insist on it, ergo it is much presumption,
when Christ has committed the ruling of his house to every Minister, that some
should devolve that work on a Bishop to do it for them, unless they could show
Christ's warrant for this, which if Mr. Stillingfleet or any other will do, we
shall acquiesce. If there be any disparity in this comparison, I am sure it
will tend to the strengthening, not the weakening of our argument, for we are
more absolutely under Christ's command, than Servants are under their Masters;
his commands are more perfect and effectual to compass their end, without our
taking our own way in managing obedience to them, then men's are: also, the
there is a greater tie to cleave scrupulously to his injunctions than to men's:
also the matters about which they are, be of more weight, and miscarriage in
them more dangerous, then men's commands. All which make it more absurd to
commit the execise of our power, that he gives to others, than for Servants to
do so with their Masters work.

Sect. 20. For better understanding of what he had said, our Author subjoyneth
a distinction of a twofold power belonging to Church Officers, viz. a Power of
Order in preaching the word, visiting the sick, administering the Sacraments,
etc. this he makes to be inseparably joined to the function; and to belong to
every ones personal capacity, both in actu primo, and actu secundo, and a power
of Jurisdiction, in visiting Churches, overseeing particular Pastors,
Ordination, Church Censures, making Rules for decency: this he makes to be in
every Presbyter quoad aptitudinem and habitually, so as he has a jus to it in
actu primo; but the exercise and limitation of it, and some further power of
choice and delegation to it, and some further Authority besides the power of
Order. And when this power, either by consent of the Pastors of the Church, or
by the appointment of the Christian Magistrate, or both, is devolved to some
particular persons; though quoad aptitudinem, the power remain in every
Presbyter; yet quoad executionem, it belongs to them who are so appointed. To
this, I reprove a few things briefly. 1. I take notice here of a contradiction
in terminis, to what he taught, Part. 1. c. 2. p. 41. and we refuted p. there
he made the power of Order peculiar to Ministers and power of Jurisdiction
peculiar to the Magistrate, describing both powers no otherwise then he does
here, and yet here he gives the power of Jurisdiction as well as of Order to
Ministers. 2. Seeing he acknowledges both powers quoad jus to be equally given
by Christ to all Ministers; it is strange that he should deny that men may
restrain the one (for he confesses the actus secundus of it to be inseparably
joined to the Office) and yet does boldly affirm that they may restrain the
other; without giving the least show of permission that they have from Christ
who gave both powers, so to tamper with the one more then with the other. If
Christ has made no difference between these (and if he has it should have
been produced) how dare men do it? I confess, Nature makes a necessity of
restricting the power of Jurisdiction: for if every one should Rule, when and
where he pleased, there would be confusion; and therefore it is needful that
every one have their own charge which they exercise this power over: but this
is common to the power of Order also (though with some difference) for it is
not fit that every Minister should preach and baptize where and when he
pleases, without any limitation. Neither could this be without confusion. Also
Christ has made a limitation of the exercise of the power of Jurisdiction; for
by giving it to many, and making it relate to things of common concernment, he
has, eo ipso, determined, that none of these who have it, shall exercise it by
himself nor without the concurrence and consent of them, who are equal in
Commission with him. This limitation of the exercise we confess to be
warrantable: but what reason there is, I cannot understand, why men should take
away the exercise of ruling power from many, and give it to one, more than they
can take away the exercise of preaching power, and so give it to some, as it
shall not be lawful for them to preach, but only to rule, more than they can
take away the exercise of both powers, seeing Christ has equally given them.
Sure it is an impregnable Argument that our Author here furnishes us with
against himself; men may not restrain the exercise of the power of order,
further than Nature makes it necessary; Ergo, they may not any further
restrain the exercise of the power of Jurisdiction, because Christ has not
made such a difference in his giving these powers to men. If it be said, that
the restraint of the power of Jurisdiction is sometimes necessary, because
Parity breeds Factions, and many are unfit to rule. Ans. Even so, letting all
preach, does often breed Heresy, many preach false Doctrine, and many are
unfit to preach. So this argument must either plead for the restraint of both
powers, or of neither. Let us then see what must be the remedy of this abuse of
the power of order, and the remedy of the abuse of the other must be
proportionable: sure the remedy is not to restrain the exercise of the power of
preaching (except it be for a time, in expectation of their amendment, which
holds also with reference to ruling power) but to put such unfit men out of
the Ministry. Were it fit to lay the work of an Heretical Preacher upon a
Curate, and let him still have the charge of the Flock, though his Curate does
the work for him? No, but he should be removed, and another put in his place:
Even so, they who are unfit to rule, must not have a Bishop do it for them, but
be removed, that other fit men may be put in their place; seeing ruling
abilities are a necessary qualification of a Minister, as well as preaching
abilities, as was showed before. If Parity breed Factions, we must censure the
guilty, not cross Christ's Institutions in the exercise of that power he has
given.

Sect. 21. 3. It is not good sense that he says, (speaking of the power of
Jurisdiction) that though it belong habitually, and in actu primo to all, yet
in a constituted Church, some further Authority is necessary, besides the power
of order. Whether this be the Printers fault, or the Authors, I know not: but
sure, the power of order is no part of that Authority by which the power of
Jurisdiction is exercised. 4. He leaves us in suspense about the power of
restraining the exercise of the power of Jurisdiction; for he implies, that it
may be done by the consent of the Pastors, or by the appointment of the
Magistrate, or both. If this power that Christ has given his Servants may be
taken from them in its exercise, it is very fit we should know to whom the Lord
has given leave to do this. I believe, and have proved that no man may do it;
but if it may be done, sure it is not thus left at random, that it should be
primi occupantis: Pastors themselves cannot do it, for they have got the
charge; and they, not the Bishop whom they entrust, must give an account: The
Magistrate may not do it, for he is no ruler of the Church; but this is the
highest act of ruling the Church, and of ruling and disposing of the Rulers of
it as he pleases; and if neither may do it, both may not do it, seeing the
reasons brought exclude both from any measure of power in that thing. I do not
stand on the Authority of Camero (which is all the proof he has for his
opinion) cited p. 198. viz. Ordinatio non fit a Pastore quatenus Pastor est,
sed quatenus ad tempus singular authoritatem obtinet: Neither shall I strive
to strain it to a sound sense; but be satisfied with the truth, that we have
upon better grounds than Camero's Authority established, viz. that Ordination,
and other acts of Church Power, are done by Pastors, not by virtue of any
superadded power, or Delegation that they have from men, above what Christ has
given them in their Pastoral Office, but by virtue of that power he has given
to all Pastors, though the convenience of exercising it, hic and nunc, requires
the concurring of some more circumstances: Ergo, that other Pastors join in
Ordination; that it be not without the limits which are fixed (for order) for
the inspection of that Society of Pastors, whereof such an one is a Member; or
if it be without these limits, that it be not without a special Call from them,
who should there exercise their Authority. The Conclusion of our Author needs
small Animadversion, supposing what has been already said: By this, says he,
we may already understand how lawful the exercise of an Episcopal power may be
in the Church of God (yea, by what we have said may be seen how unlawful it is)
supposing the equality of the power of order: (But we must also suppose (and it
has been yielded) the equality of the power of Jurisdiction, at least in actu
primo; and that may show us the unlawfulness of Episcopacy.) And how
incongruously they speak, who supposing an equality in the Presbyters of the
Church at first, do cry out that the Church takes upon her the Office of
Christ, if she delegates any to a more peculiar exercise of the power of
Jurisdiction: Yea, we have made it appear, that they speak most congruously to
the thing; for it is Christ's Office to give the exercise of power to such men,
by giving them the Office on which it follows; and therefore they who take it
from them, and give it to them to whom he gave it not, do take his Office. But
it is a mincing of the matter, to talk of a more peculiar exercise of the power
of Jurisdiction; when indeed, setting up of a Bishop, is a laying others aside
from the exercise of it at all, and suffering them to do nothing that way, but
by his Authority: yea, that which we have all this while disputed against, is
yet less intolerable than is our case, where Bishops have most absolute and
Lordly powers, and delegate it to whom they will, Laymen or others, and
Presbyters have no power at all.

Sect. 22. Another Argument he propounds, p. 198. from the perfection of
Scripture, from which it does much derogate, to say, that in it Christ has not
laid down an immutable form of Church Government. This Argument he almost
tusheth at; but that is easier than to answer it solidly: Unto it he brings
three Answers, all which will not make up a satisfactory one. The first is the
perfection of the Scripture here meant, is in reference to its end (this I
grant) which is to be an adequate Rule of Faith and manners, and sufficient to
bring men to Salvation; which is sufficiently acknowledged to be, if all things
necessary to be believed or practiced, be contained in the Word of God: Now
that which we assert, not to be fully laid down in Scripture, is not pleaded to
be any ways necessary, nor to be a matter of Faith, but something left to the
Churches liberty. Reply. I perceive it to be ordinary with this Author (I
observed it before) to slight with confidence that which he has little to say
against in reason. What a pitiful come off is this? that the not determining
the form of Government is not against the perfection of the Scripture, because
it is not a thing necessary, but left to the Churches liberty: What it is to
beg the question, if this be not, I know not; for the question is, whether the
form be determined in Scripture, or left to the Churches liberty: the latter he
maintains, we assert the former, and prove it, because otherwise the
Scripture were imperfect: He answers, it does not follow that the Scripture
is imperfect, because the form of Government is left to the Churches liberty.
Is this the easy dispatch of this Argument which was promised? 2. If the end
of Scripture be to be an adequate Rule of Faith and manners; then sure, in a
special way, of Religious manners or practices, among which is the way of
managing Church Government, being a Religious thing; for we speak of Government
as it is pecullar to the Church: hence then it must belong to its perfection to
lay down this, especially seeing the Scripture has told us, that this is one
of its particular ends, to direct the Pastors of the Church how to behave
themselves in the House of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. but this it cannot do completely,
without setting down a form of Government, for general Rules will not tell a
Pastor whether he must exercise his ruling power with others, or lay it over on
my Lord Bishop; Ergo, the want of this form in Scripture does derogate from
that perfection which our Author confesses to be in it. 3. By things
necessary, I hope he does not mean only necessary to salvation, but necessary
to these particular ends propounded in the Scripture, one of which is the right
managing of Church Government. Now if all things necessary to this be laid down
in Scripture, there cannot want a form of Government in it, for without that
Government cannot be managed. His second answer is, that the doing of a thing
not contained in Scripture, with an opinion of its necessity, does destroy the
Scriptures perfection; and so in that sense every additio perficiens is
corrumpens; such are the Popish Traditions; but the doing of a thing without
the opinion of its necessity does not destroy it. Reply. This is a poorer shift
than the other: For 1. It is not the adding of a form of Government to what is
in Scripture that we make unlawful, or against the Scriptures sufficiency; for
sure if it be not in Scripture, it must be added, seeing Nature makes it
necessary: but it is the opinion of its not being in Scripture that we plead
against; and therefore this Answer does not at all touch the Argument, neither
is the example of Poplish Traditions to the purpose; for we do not say that
they are against Scripture perfection, because they are held not to be found in
it, (for that is most true) but because they are thought needful to be added to
it. 2. It is against the perfection of Scripture to say any addition to it is
necessary for attaining its end; whether that particular thing added to it be
necessary, or its defect may be as well supplied by another thing of that kind;
as if any should maintain that we must have more Sacraments than are in
Scripture, and should not think this in particular necessary, but leave it to
the Churches liberty, what particular Sacrament should be superadded: But
Master Stillingfleet's Opinion makes an addition necessary, viz. that there be
a form of Government which is not in Scripture, though it leave the particular
form to the Churches liberty; Ergo, it is against the perfection of Scripture;
and this addition being of a thing in its general nature necessary to an end
that the Scripture aims at, viz. the right governing of the Church, and not
being found in Scripture, so much as that men may determine it, it is such an
additio perficiens as the Author confesses to be corrumpens. 3. By this
Answer, none of the Popish Traditions are additions to the Scripture, or imply
its imperfection; for though they be held necessary in the general, yet in
particular they cannot so be held; for either they were freely determined by
the Church, and so they might not have been, and therefore are not necessary,
or the Church was necessitated to determine them by some antecedent objective
truth in the things: if so, they must be the Dictates of Nature, which are no
additions to Scripture; wherefore this Answer destroys it self. 4. At least,
by this Answer, all the Popish and Prelatical Ceremonies, and whatsoever
superstitious men can devise to bring into the worship of God, is no addition
to the Scripture, nor a blot upon its perfection; for these are not held for
necessary things, but indifferent, and only necessary when commanded by
Authority; which necessity, I suppose, Mr. Stilling. will plead for to his form
of Government. Now this Consequence I hope he will not own; wherefore he may be
ashamed to own that from which it does so clearly follow. His third Answer is
yet of less weight, viz. that the Essentials of Church Government are in
Scripture, not the Circumstantials. Reply. If he means, as sure he does, the
Essentials of Government in its general and abstract notion, in which it is not
practicable without a particular form, he says nothing to the purpose: The
Scripture may be an imperfect rule for Church Government, though it have these;
if he mean the Essentials of a particular form, he destroys his own cause.
Now we maintain, that to the perfection of Scripture there is required not only
a general notion of Government, but so much as is sufficient light to direct
the practice of Government: this cannot be without the institution of a
particular form, for Government otherwise is not practicable. If it be said,
that the general rules in Scripture about Government want nothing requisite for
the complete practice of Government, but the determination of circumstances,
which cannot belong to Scripture perfection. Ans. This we deny (if by general
Rules he means, as sure he does, such as do not determine a particular form) it
is some more than a circumstance, whether Pastors exercise that power Christ
has given them, or commit it to a Bishop. I hope it is more than a bare
circumstance in Civil Government, whether the power be in the hand of one, or a
few, or all the people, even so it is here: yea, herein lies the very Essence
of a form of Government; if this then be not found in Scripture, the Essentials
of a form are wanting; but a form is essential to Government, considered as
practicable; Ergo, some of the Essentials of Government are wanting.

CHAP. V.
HAving refuted as he supposed the general Arguments, for a particular Form of
Church Government to have been laid down in Scripture; he comes now to
particular Arguments, which are brought for some one Form, and many he takes
much pains to refute in this Chapter, which I am confident never any did make
Use of to prove what he opposes. We shall let him pass with his supposed
Victory over these, and only take notice of what opposes the Truth we hold, or
the Arguments by which it is established. I shall only note, not insist upon
his large Harangue, by which in the beginning of this Chapter, he charge all
who are not as Skeptical about Church Government as himself, with prejudice,
and following custom and education, rather than truth, and being loath to quit
that opinion, though false, which once they have been engaged in. To which I
say nothing, but let every one search his own Conscience, and see what grounds
his Persuasion stands upon. I hope the sincerity of many will be able to bear
them out before God, and the solid Reasons they are able to produce will make
them stand before men, against such reproaches of this Adversary. Neither shall
I retaliate this his charity with the Jealousies of many who fear that they who
cast Church Government thus loose, that the Magistrate may dispose of it at his
Pleasure, do fetch the strength of their Arguments, and the life of their
persuasion, from no better Topics then design to please them who can reward
this their pains, or to hold fast that which is good (as some have spoken of
their fat Benefices) what ever side of the World be uppermost, to which end
this opinion is a notable mean. I desire to judge no man, the Lord will ere
long judge our opinions and motives too: but this I am sure of, we have no
Worldly baits to allure us at this time, to plead for the Divine Right of
Presbyteral Government, and if the Interest of Christ did not more move us than
our own, we might with much Worldly advantage yield the cause. We do not insist
on any of Christ's acts toward the Apostles in calling them, sending them out
either first or last, as Arguments for the Form of Church Government; knowing
that their Office being Extraordinary and Temporal, can be no Rule for the
ordinary cases of the Church. Wherefore I pass over all that he writes in this
Chap. till p. 218. Where he undertaketh to vindicate two places of Scripture
from determining Parity or Imparity in the Church. The first is Mat. 20.25. to
which is parallel Luke 22.25. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Authority over
them, and they that exercise authority over them, are called Benefactors: but
ye shall not be so. Though I confess, there be other places more unquestionable
to our purpose; yet I see not the weight of what he has said against this
place, being brought as an Argument against Imparity. His Answer is made up of
two, First, he asserteth, and solidly proves against Papists, that it is not
the abuse of Power that is here forbidden, but that the Power it self spoken of
is forbidden, as incompetent to Church Officers; his Proofs for this I need not
repeat, I accept it of him as a Concession. Secondly, He says it is only Civil
Power that is here forbidden; and so it does not make against Imparity in
Church Officers, Reply. He keeps his wonted way here, which is to take much
pains, to prove what is least in debate with the adversaries he deals with:
we do not question but the Power it self, not the abuse of it is here spoken
against: but that it is Civil Power only we question; and that he has not
spent one word to prove. We affirm that Christ is here making a difference
between his Apostles and Civil Governors in this; that one of them should not
have Authority over another, as it is among Rulers of States and Kingdoms; and
so that there should be no Imparity of Power among them; to prove this, I
borrow the 3d reason by which Mr. Still. militateth against the abuse of Power
being here meant, viz. This only can answer the Scope of the Apostles
contention, which was about Primacy. The Sons of Zebedee would have been set
over the rest, Mat. 20. and their Strife was, which should be (...) pro (...)
(so Drusius cited by Leigh Crit. Sac.) that is, who should be Pope over the
rest: now, though we deny not but theirs might be upon a Civil and Coactive
Power, they dreaming of an earthly Kingdom of Christ, yet sure, this was
neither mainly nor only in their design: not only, because they could not but
know that Christ's Kingdom, in which they were to be Officers, should be
Spiritual, and conversant about the things of another life, though they thought
it might be Worldly to, and therefore it could not be; but they designed a
Supremacy in that respect also, not mainly, both because they could not but
know that their main work both in teaching and ruling, was to be about the
things of Eternity: as also it is evident from Luke 22.24. that their
contention was about Supremacy in a Power that then they had begun to be
partakers of, (...): but they knew very well that yet they had no Civil Power:
seeing then they contended about Eccl siastical Supremacy, and Christ's answer
is suited to their Intention, and does wholly discharge that Power whereof it
speaks: the first of which I have proved; the two latter Mr. Still. has
confessed: it follows, that Christ does here forbid all Superiority of the
Apostles, one over another: so that not only Christ had not set one over the
rest but he will not permit themselves to do it if they would: (...) is a
Simple forbidding of it. Hence I infer the Argument to our purpose thus, if
the Apostles who had received equal power from Christ, might not delegate that
Power to one whom they might set up as chief; then Presbyters may not do this
neither, Ergo Imparity of Presbyters is unlawful. The consequence is evident,
the antecedent I prove from parity of Reason: it is not immaginable that
Presbyters may set one of themselves over themselves: and that Bishops may not
do the like, and Apostles the like; seeing order may require the one as well as
the other. Yea, Secondly, if there be a disparity of reason it makes much for
us, for sure the Apostles had more liberty of managing that Power, they had
received from Christ, by prudence, than Pastors now have; wherefore they might
far rather restrain the exercise of it in themselves, if they saw cause, than
we may do. 3. I hope it will not be denied, that what is here said to the
Apostles is not said to them as Apostles; but as Officers of the Church, who
have received the same Power from Christ: that it is no Temporary, but an
abiding precept: and therefore if it forbid superiority among the Apostles, so
does it among Presbyters, Mr. Still. p. 220. objecteth thus; 'this place does
no ways imply a Prohibition of all inequality among Governors of the Church;
for then the Apostles Power over ordinary Pastors should be forbidden. Ans.
concedo totum: we also grant inequality among Pastors and Elders. But that
which we plead is, that here is forbidden an inequality among them who are of
the same Order: that when Christ has given men the same Power and Office, as
he did to the Apostles; they may not usurp power one over another, nor take it
though others would give it them. This is clearly proved from what has been
said. And further, it may be hence also concluded, that the inequality which is
among Church Officers ought not to be such as is among the Governors of the
World, where a single Person may have his Underofficers at his command: but
that inequality must be of one order above another in place and rank, both
which do concur jointly to the ruling of the Church; and thus also Episcopacy
is here made unlawful. That Pride and Ambition is here forbidden, I readily
grant him: but that these are not only forbidden, is clear from what has been
said.

Sect. 2. The next place that he considers is Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Where,
after private admonition is used in vain, we are commanded to tell the Church,
and they who do not hear the Church, are to be counted as Heathens and
Publicans. That which he first brings for an Answer to this place is, That
because men of all Opinions about Church Government make Use of it to establish
their Opinions, therefore no Argument may be drawn from it for any opinion.
This unhappy way of reasoning I have met with before, and insist not now on it.
It is the Devils way, I perceive, to raise contentions about truth among some;
and having done this, to tempt others by these contentions to Schism and
slighting of truth. But we must not quit the light held forth in this
Scripture, because men have darkened it, by their raising dust about it: let us
search the more soberly and carefully, not cast away the truth for this. Yet
for all diverse Opinions that have been broached about this place, Mr. Stilling.
has a new one of his own, which I shall briefly examine. The difficulty of the
place (he says well) lies in these two. 1. What are the offenses here spoken
of. 2. What is the Church mentioned. For the first, he asserteth (with more
confidence than strength of Reason, when he says, it is evident to any
unprejudicated mind,) that the matters are not of scandal; but of private
offense and injury: this he proves p. 222. (his Arguments we shall consider
after.) For the Church, he proposes at length the Erastian opinion, as very
plausible: yet at last rejects it p. 224, 225. and returns to the Offenses p.
226. which though he makes to be private differences and quarrels; yet he will
not have them to be lawsuits, nor Civil causes; but such differences as respect
persons, and not things. And then he determines p. 227. that the Church is not
here any Juridical Court acting by Authority; but a select Company, who by
arbitration may compose and end the difference: and so concludes p. 228. that
here is nothing about Church Government; though by Analogy some things about
it may be hence drawn. This is the sum of this opinion, which I shall first
refute and then consider his grounds for it.

Sect. 3. And first of all I cannot but wonder that this learned Author should
with so much confidence deny this place to speak of Church Government; and nor
say something in answer to the many Arguments for establishing a Form of
Government, which are drawn from it by many Learned men; as Gillespy in his
Aarons Rod. Rutherford in his Jus Divin, Reg. Eccles. Beza de Excom, and
Presbyt. Cawdry of Church-reformation; and other Presbyterians: beside many
Authors of other judgments. What? are all their Arguments unworthy to be taken
notice of, and easily blown away with Mr. Still. his bare Assertion? for what
he says of the matters of offense spoken of in this place, he seems to aim
at a new opinion, but I cannot see wherein it differs from what the Erastians
hold, save in its obscurity: for when he has with them, made them to be no
Scandals, nor Sins against God, but private injuries against our Neighbors, he
will not have them to be Civil causes, or Lawsuits; but such differences as
respect Persons, not things. What these can be I cannot understand, for what
wrong can I do to my Neighbor besides scandalising him by Sin against God, for
which he may not Sue me at Law? if he mean not matters of Money or meum and
tuum, but other injuries against ones Person, as beating, reproaches, slanders
etc. (as I guess he does, so far as I can see his opinion through the midst of
his words) these are yet Civil causes, and matters of Lawsuit: and this is the
one part of what the Erastians here understand: neither do I see any reason for
understanding these here, and not other private Injuries, as the Erastians do:
for is it imaginable that Christ would prescribe this course for redress of
wrongs in our own Persons and names, and not also for wrongs in our Estates?
but it may be he means that though the injuries here meant, be in matters
Civil; yet the design of the place is not to prescribe a way of making up the
injury, but of taking away the animosities, and quarrels that these injuries
breed among Christians; but this cannot hold; for sure the best way of allaying
the animosities that arise about injuries done by one to another, must be by
determining what is the due of each, and who does, and who sustaineth the
wrong, and so making reparation of the injury done. We must not then think that
Christ has appointed one course for repairing the wrong; and another for
taking away contention about it: but it is his Will that Christians in such
cases, either let their wrongs be judged by the arbitration of Friends; or if
that cannot be, by that law: and whethersoever of these ways the matter be
determined; that they should acquiesce, and not contend any more. Besides this,
when I receive a private injury from another, it is my duty to lay aside all
grudge and animosity against him, which if I be willing to do, why should the
matter be brought before others, or to the Church? if I be not willing to do
it, it is not like that I will bring it thus to others, who may persuade me to
lay aside animosity against him. I cannot understand how I can bring a matter
of private wrong to be judged by others, except it be in reference to the
getting of some reparation of that wherein I conceive my self to be wronged. If
he mean that I should bring the matter before others, not that my animosity may
be laid aside (that being my duty without such ado) but that they may persuade
him who has wronged me to lay aside his grudg, and be reconciled to me: sure
this cannot be the Scope of the place, both because Christ gives another rule
in that Case, which will sooner attain that end, viz. Forgive him, Lu. 17.3.
and indeed it is a more compendious way to allay his fury, to carry it
dutifully, friendly and kindly to him, than to convent him before others. Also
because it is a strange reflection of the Sense of the expression, Trespass
against thee i. e. refuse to be reconciled to thee: sure there is no Warrant in
Scripture or reason from the notation of the word, thus to expound it. And
besides all this, this exposition destroys the Authors opinion, viz. that this
place is not meant of Scandals; for when one has wronged me, and I am willing
to forgive him and be at peace with him, and he refuses to be reconciled to
me; this is a Sin against God, and a Scandal of an high nature. Now why the
place should be meant of taking away this sort of Scandal and no other (seeing
other Scandals also are Sins against the Scandalized, as is clear 1 Cor. 8.12.)
I think it is hard to conjecture except Mr. Still. must say so to make up the
opinion that he intends to defend.

Sect. 4. But I shall now prove that this place speaks purposely of Scandals,
or Sins against God, whereby the Consciences of others are offended; and not of
private Injuries. And that briefly because this is largely and fully performed
by all our Authors who write against Erastians. 2. Our Lord had spent the
former part of the Chapter about Scandals, especially in pressing your shunning
to give offense, and in showing the danger of offenses; both to the offended,
and especially to the offender, verse. 7. Now in all this discourse he had said
nothing of the means of taking away of Scandals: wherefore seeing he joyneth
these words we dispute about, to the former discourse of Scandal; it may be out
of question that he is here laying down that way of removing these Scandals
when they should arise in his Church, that the evils he had spoken of may not
ensue upon them. 2. The design of this Remedy here prescribed is to gain the
faulty Person: now this expression of gaining Men from that which is Evil, is
in Scripture only used in reference to Sins against God, which are apt to
destroy men, and whereby they are lost. 3. this evil from which the Person is
to be gained, is Sin or Scandal If it be said that it is gaining of a brother,
when he is Persuaded to lay aside animosity against a brother, and to be
reconciled to him; this is true only and so far as such animosity is Sin: for
on no other account, freeing of one from it can be called gaining him in
Scripture Phrase; and if these animosities be here spoken of only as they are
Scandals, then the Scope of the place is to redress Scandals; for a quatenus ad
omne valet consequentia. 3. To sin against a brother is (in the Phrase of the
New Testament) mainly, if not only, to wrong his Conscience or Spiritual Estate
by Scandal. 1 Cor. 8.12. or to be guilty of Sin against God in his sight or
conscience Luke 15.18, 21. so Luke 17.3, 4. Neither can any instance be brought
where it signifies a private injury as such; therefore it must be meant of
Scandal. 4. In redressing of private Injuries in a charitable way, it is not
usual to lead Witnesses: but these belong to a judicial proceeding; but here
the matter is to be established by Witnesses, Ergo it is a matter not to be
transacted in such a way as this Author would have these private Injuries. 5.
It is unimaginable that Christ would have us count our Brother a Heathen or a
Publican, and would have him bound in Heaven for persisting in a fact that
either is no sin against God, or which is not considered as a sin against God:
does the Holy Ghost any where speak so of private injuries, considered as such?
no sure; but if private injuries are to be thus noted with censure by God and
Men, it is under the notion of heinous sins as they offend God and scandalize
his people, and if so: then Scandals are here meant; for if such injuries be
here spoken of for that which is common to other Scandals, and especially
private injuries not particularly mentioned, but set down under the general
name of Sin; what a boldness is it to exclude other sins, and make these only
to be here spoken of?

Sect. 5. Next, I come to consider his Notion about the Church, to which these
offenses must at last be brought for remedy: It is, says he, no juridical
Court, but a select company called together by the party offended, who by
arbitration may compose and end the difference. Against this Conceit I bring
these Reasons: 1. This company is to be called together by the offended party;
for the Text carries the whole managing of the business to be by him; and it
is very like the stubborn offender will not be active in this: now, is this a
way that our Lord would prescribe for taking away the distemper of a galled
mind, that his Adversary (so the stubborn offender looks upon the other)
should choose the persons before whom he is to be convented, and who should judge
him? this I cannot be induced to believe, except I see more proof of it than
our Author's bare saying it is so. 2. We must conceive that these three steps
of proceeding here prescribed, have some notable difference one from another,
and are remedies of different Virtues and operations applied to this stubborn
Disease. Now the first step is secret Admonition: the second is Private and
Charitable, not Judicial; the third then must be different from both: which I
cannot conceive how it is, if it be not authoritative. In this Authors opinion,
it is no more but this, when two or three Friends cannot accommodate the
matter, then take a few more, having no more but the same power the former two
or three had: now what great influence can 5, or 6, or 10 have to persuade a
stiff offender, more than 2 or or 3 using the same motives? it is not to be
imagined that the difference can be such as Christ intends when he
prescribes this as a remedy of that evil the other could not cure. 3. When
Christ is here prescribing a cure for offenses which may fall out among his
people, and is so exact in describing all the steps of it and final result
thereof; we must conceive that his last cure will be such as will effectually
root out that evil so, as that it do not any more hurt his Church or those who
are harmed by it. Now if the last mean be only arbitration, and no juridical
authoritative act, this end can never be attained: for neither is the stubborn
offender gained, nor is he taken away that he may not the same way trouble the
other party as before. What great matter is gained if the wilful party will not
hear this advising Church our Author dreameth of? he is still a Churchmember,
enjoying the public fellowship of the people of God, for all that these
arbitrators can do: and suppose some do withdraw private intimacy with them,
yet we cannot think that all are obliged to it by the authority of private
arbitrators declaring him stubborn, when all do not know the causes which made
them so determine, nor the proofs that did convince them of the truth of what
was alleged against him. It is then evident that this last Remedy of the
miscarriage (be what it will) of a stubborn offender which Christ here
prescribes, is an authoritative act, and therefore the Church here is no
company of private men for arbitration. 4. Though we grant that the word (...)
signifies any company called together, yet here it must be of more restricted
signification; and must needs signify a company called out of the World by the
Gospel to worship God, and to serve him in the managing of his affairs and
institutions; which is not applicable to a company of arbitrators called by a
man, not by the Gospel, to agree contending parties, which is a work of duty
common to all the World, and none of the special works of the Church as
distinguished from other Societies. Now that the word Church must be thus
understood, and not as Mr. Stilling. would have it, I prove 2 dly; It is
constantly so used by the Writers of holy Scripture; neither can an instance be
brought in all the New Testament where any ever put Ecclesia for a company met
about any business, save that the Town Clerk of Ephesus used it otherwise, Acts
19.39. and Luke, speaking of him in his own dialect, uses it as he did, ver.
40. But when Christ here speaks of a Church to which he sends his offended
people by a standing Law for the redress of their grievances, we must certainly
conceive that he will have them by the Church, to understand that which is
ordinarily known by that name in the New Testament; for how should they know
the meaning of an ambiguous word, but by the constant Use of it in the
Scripture? 2. The demonstrative article added in the Greek puts the matter
beyond all question, (...) signifies a particularly designed Church, which
they to whom it is said, have pointed out unto them: not any Church, this or
that, an individuum vagum, or such a Church as themselves may particularize or
pitch upon: it is not [a] Church, but [the] Church, Now a company of
Arbitrators chosen ad libitum by the grieved party, are not (...) [the] Church
particularly, as individuum determinatum designed by Christ; they are at best
but [a] Church, and should be here designed only confuse, or vage, huic aut
illi ecclesiae, which the word cannot bear. Now if we take it for a
Ruling-church, or whatever Church in Scripture-sense, it is here determined
what Church we should bring the matter to, viz. that particular Church we live
in (at least in prima instantia) and it is not left to our liberty to choose
what Church of many particulars we will complain unto. Or if we take the
article here prefixed to denote the (...) of that Church here spoken of, and to
determine the word to its famostus significatum; it has the same strength of
an argument: for, not a company of private Arbitrators, but Christians, or
their Representatives met for the worship of God, or administration of the
affairs of his House, are that Church.

Sect. 6. I come now to examine what Mr. Stilling. has to say against this
interpretation of the place, or for that which himself has devised. P. 222. he
undertaketh to prove that the Offense here spoken of is not any scandal or Sin
against God, but a private injury. His arguments are, 1. from the parallel
place, Luke 17.3. If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he
repent, forgive him; this is private injury, because a private Brother may
forgive it, which is not in his power were it a scandal to the whole Church,
unless we make every private person to excommunicate and release one another.
Answ. That Luke 17.3, 4. is parallel to Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. I do not
question; and indeed all the Commentators that I have met with, make them
relate to the same passage of Christ's preaching: but this (if we may lay any
weight on the judgment of men) does make much against Mr. Still. for he
understands Matthew. 18. not of Scandals, but of the bare injury, so then must
this place also, but the Text and context both do make it evident, as I
conceive, that this place is not meant of Private Injuries (but in so far as
they are Scandals) but of scandalous sins: I say the context does prove it;
because our Lord is there speaking of Scandals: it is the very purpose that he
is upon ver. 1, 2. The Text also proves it, for the first remedy to be applied
to this evil, is Rebuke: which is known to be a more proper remedy for Scandal
than private wrong: and then, the fruit of this remedy, Repentance, does relate
to Scandals rather than to private wrongs. Neither does it follow that it is
private injury, because a private person may forgive it; for we must understand
it of private Scandal, not such as is public, and a scandal to the whole
Church, as Mr. Still. supposes. Now when the Offender repents upon private
Rebuke, the Rebuker may forgive him 3 ways: 1. By not charging him any more
with guiltiness, but looking on him, as one whom the Lord has pardoned. That
this is called forgiveness in Scripture, is clear, 2 Cor. 2.7, 10. where the
whole Church is commanded thus to forgive the excommunicated man who had
repented. 2. By exercising that Christian familiar love toward him, which we
ought not to exercise towaad them who live in sin. 3. By forbearing to bring
the matter to any more public hearing, which, had not the party repented, had
been his duty. Now this gives not a power of Excommunicating and releasing to
a private person; but only a power of the prudent use of our own charity. His
second Answer is the same, only built on another Scripture, Matthew. 18.20. Where
Christ in answer to Peter's Question, bids us forgive our brother as often as he
repents. The answer is also the same; for we must forgive a scandalous
Brother (in the way but now laid down) as often as he repents; and not bring
him to public Rebuke, but in case of obstinacy. His 3d. argument is this, If
this be matter of Scandal that is here spoken of; then might a matter of
Scandal be brought before the Church when there is no way to decide it, there
being but one privy to it, who is the Accuser, he affirms, and the Offender
denies. Answ. 1. Does not this same inconvenience follow if the matter be a
private Injury? May there not in that case be no way for the Arbitrators to
decide the matter, the Offender denying, and the injured party affirming, and
that where himself is the party? The Objecter then is as much obliged to answer
this argument as we are. But 2dly, This inconvenience is easily avoided thus:
if the grieved person be the only witness of the fact, and the offender deny
the fact, it ought not to come before the Church, neither is this injunction to
be understood of such cases: but where either the fact is known to more than
one (for even so it may be a private and no public offense) or where the
Offender does not deny the fact; but denies that it is wrong: in that case,
first two or three, then the whole Church must endeavor to convince him. It is
a bad consequence; some works of darkness, for want of witness, cannot be
decided by the Church; Ergo, We are not commanded to bring scandals before the
Church. That which he adds p. 223. That Christ here speaks as to an
ordinary case, and in allusion to what was then in Use among the Jews; which
was to reprove one another, commanded Lev. 19.17. and for neglect of which,
Jerusalem was thought to be destroyed by R. Chamna. This I say, is nothing to
the purpose; for I suppose these Reproofs, Lev. 19.17. and which are mentioned
by that Rabby, were not only for private Injuries, but mainly for sin against
God: wherefore this consideration makes not a little against the design for
which it was brought. P. 224. He will not have the Church here spoken of to be
the Christian Church; because, says he, Christ is speaking to a present case,
and lays down a present Remedy. Now if he lay down Rules for governing his
Church; this could not be, because there were yet no Ecclesiastical Courts for
them to apeal to: if then the case had presently fallen out, they were left
without a redress, having no Church to tell it unto. Ans. It cannot be proved
that Christ here lays down Rules for a case presently practicable, more than
he does when he impowereth his Apostles, and charge them concerning their
work, Matthew. 16.19. John 20.23. Mal. 28.19. and yet will have them to delay a
while before they should put all that power in act. Luke 24.49. And indeed we
have far better cause to think that he is telling his people what to do in the
after and ordinary times of his Church, than what they should do in that
present and extraordinary case, when the Church was not yet framed, and when
they had himself personably to go to for direction. 2dly, However we maintain
that this Rule, as it serves for our time, so might it serve for that time in
which it was spoken: for if the case had then fallen out, though there were not
the ordinary Ecclesiastical Courts to go to, that now ought to be, yet there
wanted not a visible Church Power residing in the person of Christ, and after
in the Apostles, to whom did succeed the ordinary Judicatures: so that the
offended party wanted never a Church to make his complaint unto. I do not say
that [Tell the Church] does directly signify any other to which the complaint
was to be made, but the ordinary guides of the Church; for our Lord
accommodateth his terms he uses to the ordinary cases in which this Law was to
take place; but by Analogy, it is applicable to any who in extraordinary cases
act the part of the ordinary Guides of the Church.

Sect. 7. I agree to the argument of Mr. Gillespy, cited by the Author, that
unless we understand the word Church as usually, it would be no easy matter to
know what Christ here means by the Church; for seeing this was to be a
standing Law in all Ages, it is not imaginable that the Lord would have us
otherwise understand the terms of it than they are ordinarily used in the
Bible, which he intended should constantly be in his Peoples hands. Neither is
that of any weight which our Author opposes to this; that such as so argue
would do well to consider, how those to whom Christ spoke, should apprehend his
meaning, if he spoke in a sense they never heard of before. We confider that
they may easily understand Christ's words, because he had often before spoken to
them of the Gospel Church that was to be set up, and even in this very term of
a Church, as Matthew. 16.19. and frequently under the notion of the Kingdom of
Heaven; which they might easily apprehend to be meant by the Church. Wherefore
the Author did not well consider what he said, when he supposed this language
to be unknown to the Disciples. Hence all that he says of the way of
understanding Scripture in the sense of the words then common, is not to the
purpose; for, Christ had made this sense common among them. Neither must we
understand the word as it was then commonly apprehended among the Jews, but as
it was apprehended among Christ's ordinary Hearers, who were in expectation of
another Church, and another way of Government in it to be set up, than was then
among the Jews. I find no more in the Author that is argumentative either
against our opinion of this Text, or for his own. He concludes p. 228. that
this place, though it speaks not of Church Government, yet it may have some
influence on it by way of Analogy, viz. in proving, 1. Gradual Appeals, 2.
Church Censures, 3. The lawfulness of Excommunication. This he yields at
least, that something of Church Government may be inferred from this place:
then ex concessis, it is not so impertinent to this purpose as he would have
made us believe in the beginning of this Chapter.

Sect. 8. But let us see if we can draw any more out of it than he will yield
us. We have already proved it to be directly meant of Church Government, and to
give Rules for the right managing of it: now I assert, that it does implicitly
determine the form of Church Government, viz. That it ought to be by Parity,
not Episcopacy; which I thus make out: The first Authority before which the
complaint of the grieved party is to be brought, is the Church, (and it is also
the last:) but if the Church were governed by Bishops, this should not be,
Ergo, The Church ought not to be governed by Bishops. The Major is clear; for
after secret and private admonition (which are not authoritative) immediately
succeeds [Tell the Church:] sure this Church must be that Authority which we
must go to prima instantia, and also that which must finally decide the matter;
seeing Excommunication does immediately follow upon Disobliging this Authority.
The Minor I prove thus: in the Episcopal way, the complaint must be brought to
the Bishop or to his Delegate or Delegates (which is all one as to the matter
of Authority) and he must be the last that must determine, and on disobedience
to him follows Excommunication: but the Bishop is not the Church, Ergo, In
the Episcopal way complaints cannot be made to the Church, nor does the Church
finally decide the matter. The Minor of this last Syllogism is evident; for
neither the nature of the word, nor Scripture-Use will bear, that one Man shall
be called the Church. If it be said that Episcopacy be so modelled, as the
Bishop with the Presbyter may judge of the offense, and they may well be called
the Church. Answ. In that case, either the Presbyters have a decisive Vote as
well as the Bishop, or they be only his Advisers. In the first case the Bishop
is only a Praeses: which is not that Episcopacy pleaded against, though we judge
it inconvenient. In the 2d, the Bishop is the only Power, and therefore there
is no such Church as here meant, for the Church here is a Church clothed with
Authority, whom the party ought to hear, i. e. obey, and for contumacy against
which he is Excommunicated: but the Bishop and his counsel is not such a
Church; for his counsel has no Authority, and himself cannot make a Church;
and therefore both taken together, make no Church having Authority.

CHAP. VI.
HERE Mr. Stilling. does undertake to lay aside Apostolical practice from being
a pattern for us in the matter of Church Government; What success he has in
this attempt we now examine. His two main scopes in this Chapter, are, that it
cannot be known what the practice of the Apostles was in this; and that if it
were known, it is no binding example to us; which desperate assertions do, not
a little, reflect upon the Scripture and tend to the casting loose the
Government of the Church, The latter of them I have spoken to before, and
purpose to examine what he says for it. Concerning the former, I shall premise
but this to our trying of his proofs, that it is very strange the Spirit of God
in Scripture has written so much of their practice, both Historically, and
implied it in Doctrinal assertions and Precepts, if for all this we cannot know
what it was; which if it do not accuse the Scripture-relation of things of
great imperfection, I know nothing: for I am sure the Scripture does purposely
set down much of their practice, both in Preaching, administration of
Sacraments, ordination of Officers, directing these Officers in their behavior
in the House of God, censures and other parts of Government: if yet we cannot
know by Scripture what was their way in Ruling; the account given of these
things must be very imperfect. I believe it would be imputed to any Writer of
the History of a Church, if out of his History could not be gathered what was
the Government of that Church: shall we then think that the Sacred Writers, who
have undertaken to give us an account of the acts of the Apostles, are so
deficient? especially many of the writings of the Apostles themselves being
added by the same Spirit; out of which much may be gathered to this purpose.
But let us hear how he makes out this his strange opinion. I insist not on what
he writes of the Apostles Commission; I confess the form of Government is not
expressed in it: though we have ground to think, that when Christ charge them
to teath his People to observe all he commanded them, Matthew. 28.20. that it was
his Will that they should not leave so great a matter as is the form of
Church Government to men's Will, but that his Institution should be observed in
this: especially seeing he spent 40 days with them before his Ascension, Acts
1.3. speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, that is the
Gospel Church: it is hard to think that among all his Instructions to them
then, he told them nothing of his Will about the way of governing his Church.
Neither do I take notice of his large Discourse about the Division of Provinces
among the Apostles: nor of his too true observation, that looking on ancient
practice through the Glass of our own customs, has bred many mistakes: only I
wonder at his bringing that for an instance, that Lay Elders are proved from
the name Presbyters: I believe there was never any that used such an Argument,
seeing the name is common to them and Preaching-Elders. He will find stronger
arguments than this for that Order of Church Officers, if he please to read the
Assertors of it.

Sect. 2. For clearing what was Apostolical Practice he lays down this as a
foundation, p. 239, etc. That the Apostles in the forming Churches did observe
the custom of the Jewish Synagogue. About this Notion he spends a huge deal
of pains, as if the strength of his cause lay here; but to what purpose it is,
except to show his reading and skill in Antiquity, I know not. Does it follow,
the Apostles imitated the Jews in the matter of Church Government, Ergo, we are
not obliged to imitate the Apostles? I should think that the contrary
consequence might rather be inferred; but whatever be of that, this we are sure
of, that whether there was any coincidency or similitude between the
Apostolical and the Jewish way, or not; Whether the Apostles in what they did
had an eye at the Jewish Example, or not: they were acted by an infallible
Spirit, which did both guide them unerringly, and warrant them unquestionably
to do what they did in the management of Church Government, so that it is not
the occasion of their taking such or such a way that we are to look to, but the
morality of it, that should determine us to follow it, because we know it is
the will of Christ. Wherefore I might pass without any more notice all that he
writes in many sheets of the modelling the Government of the Church by that of
the Synagogue. Yet for further clearing the matter, I shall lay down a few
Considerations.

Sect. 3. First, I take notice how inconsistent this Author is with himself in
this Point; for p. 322. he asserteth, That the Apostles did not observe (in
probability) one fixed course of settling the Government of Churches, but settled
it according to the several circumstances of places and persons which they had
to deal with. I hope he will not deny, but the Jewish way of Government was one
and the same every where: How then did the Apostles imitate that, if they were
so various in their settling of Government? sure if they did not stick to one
form, they did not stick to the Jewish form. But I perceive he would fain say
any thing that might cast Church Government at an uncertainty; however the ways
he takes to this end, do clash one with another. 2. All this pains he takes,
tends either to prove nothing, or to prove that which himself will not own:
for suppose that he had evinced that the Apostles did imitate the Jews in their
Church-administrations: if any thing follow, it must be this, that these things
which were done by the Apostles on such an account are not now binding, but are
indifferent and determinable by men: and that as the Apostles had their liberty
in imitating the Jews, or not, so we have our liberty in imitating the
Apostles, or not, in them. Now this I am sure he dare not own in most of these
things which he makes to have been taken up from the Jewish customs: for he
speaks, p. 240. of Christ's taking many Rites of the Lords Supper from the
postcoenium among the Jews, and the Use of Baptism from the Baptisms used in
initiating Proselytes, and Excommunication from their putting out of the
Synagogue; and afterward he makes building of Churches, to be taken from the
Synagogues: public reading of the Scripture, and Pastors from the
Archisynagogi: Ordination from that used among the Jews: Will then Mr.
Stilling. say that all these are now indifferent. That Baptism,
Excommunication, Pastors, nay Ordination are no Institutions of Christ; and
that as the Apostles took them from the Jews ad placitum; so we may take them
from the Apostles, or leave them, as we list. Sure he will not say it: and if
he says not this, he says nothing, but magno conatu nihil agit: parturiunt
montes: nascetur ridiculus mus. 3. It is needful to distinguish the things that
the Apostles did by imitation take from the Jews, by confounding of which Mr.
Stilling. has mired himself and his Reader too. There are 1. somethings that
are the dictates of Nature and Reason: as that public assembling be ordinarily
in some one convenient place: that in a Society there be Rulers and Ruled: that
where many Rule they meet together for that end: that in their meeting one
preside, to avoid confusion, etc. 2. There are other things which be the
commandments of God concerning his moral Worship; as that Prayers, Praises,
pulick reading of his Word, with opening of it, that his people may know his
Will, be performed in the solemn meetings of his people. 3. God's ceremonial
Worship, which consists in the observance of Rights sacred, or peculiar to
Religion, without which all that Worship of God might well be performed, which
is, and has been of moral and perpetual Obligation. 4. Such things as receive
their usefulness and fitness from custom: as Words, Habits, Gestures, etc. Now
for the first two sorts, though there was co-inciding in them, between the
Jewish and Apostolical way (and indeed it could not be otherwise, Nature and
what is of moral Obligation being the same unto all) yet that the Apostles were
determined in these by the Jewish Example, we deny. For the 3d, It is clear,
that the Apostles used no such things with the Jewish Church, except a few for
a time to avoid Scandal, Acts 15.28.29. Yea, they are declared unlawful to be
used, Gal. 4.9, 10. and 5.1, 2. Col. 2.16, 17. which I am elsewhere to show more
at length. The 4th sort of things we hold to be in themselves indifferent, and
determinable by the laudable custom of every place. Neither do we deny the
Apostles to have in many of these imitated the Jewish Church; and no wonder,
because they lived among them. Now Church Government having in it some things
of all these sorts, it is clear from what has been said, how far we confess
the Apostles to have followed the Jews in it; and how far not. That wherein we
are likest to controvert with Mr. Still. is, about things of the third sort,
which I must yet distinguish: they were either such as the Lord had commanded
to the Jews, or such as they without his command did take up. The former, he
does not alledg that the Apostles followed the Jews in. The latter he
asserteth, and we deny it; and shall anon hear what he brings for his
Assertion. But for further clearing this and the whole matter, I lay down a
fourth consideration, viz. to make it out, that the Apostles did imitate the
Jews, there are two things required. 1. To show the co-incidency of their
practice. 2. To show that this co-incidency did proceed from a design of
conformity, viz. that the Apostles were determined in such things by the Jewish
Example: for the former without the other is no imitation, because in
imitation, the former practice must have some influence on that which
follows; such as the exemplary cause has on the exemplatum. Now if the
Apostles did (in some of these) the same things with the Jewish Church, only
accidentally, or upon other motives; and did not (as Mr. Stilling. phraseth it)
copy out the Jewish way of Government, it is no imitating of them.

Sect. 4. From what has been said, it will be easy to maintain against Mr.
Stilling. large Discourse, that the Apostles did not in the Government of the
Church imitate the Jewish Synagogue as their Pattern; I shall touch such things
in his Discourse as seem to prove it. And 1. I take notice of that which was
occasionally touched before, p. 240, viz. That Christ delighted to take up the
received practices among the Jews, as the Postcoenium he turned to the Lords
Supper, Baptism of Proselytes, imitated to Christian Baptism, casting out of
the Synagogue to Excommunication. And this he says he did with Rites, not
which were originally founded on Moses's Law; but which were brought in by a
confederate Discipline among themselves. This, says he, has been abundantly
manifested by many learned men; of which he cited some in his Margin. I
confess, many learned Men, especially such as have spent their pains in
Critical Learning, have done but bad service to Christ and his institutions,
while to serve their Phoenomena, and make their critical Conjectures the more
plausible, they have made Men's devices like Maezentius his bed to curtail or
stretch out Christ's Institutions by them at their pleasure. But the Authority
of such Men, though never so learned, shall not persuade me (what their Reasons
may do I say not, till I hear and consider them) to think that Christ had such
delight in Men's inventions in the Worship of God, as to make them the Pattern
of his Gospel-institutions; and that rather than the Ceremonies, which of old
were of divine Authority: shall we think that he who condemns Men's Doctrines
in Gods Worship, as vain, Mal. 15.9. and especially in that Chapter, condemns
a Ceremony brought in by confederate Discipline, which in it self was as
harmless as any of these mentioned, viz. often Washing: shall we think, I say,
that he had such pleasure in these things? sure he cannot be so unlike himself.
Neither I am sure can the Assertors of this Paradox, show any such difference
between that Ceremony and these here instanced, as that Christ should hate the
one, and delight in the other. For that often alleged, that the Pharisees
placed much Religion in their often Washings (besides that the thing simply,
not their opinion, is condemned in the place cited) it cannot be made out, that
they placed more Religion in this, than they did in their Postcoenium, washing
of Proselytes, etc. For further Answer to this Assertion of our Authors, I add,
that supposing Christ did make his Institutions to consist of some material
acts, like to these of the Jewish uncommanded observations (for this is the
furthest, that the Authors consideration can pretend to prove) it does not
follow that he approved of these inventions: neither that we may mould the
affairs of the Church by our Reason and skill without Scripture; and that for
these Reasons: 1. From Christ's Wisdom. 2. From his Authority which did warrant
him to do such things, and does not make it lawful for the Church now to do
them. 1. I say, from his Wisdom: he is an able and competent Judge of what is
suited to Gospel Worship, and what not: and therefore of these unwarranted
Observations in Use among the Jews, he could choose what was fittest for his
designs (the things being indifferent in themselves) and appoint them in his
Church: we cannot so well judge of the fitness of a thing to his design in the
Gospel-model of affairs; and therefore must not take such liberty in doing what
Man has done without a special institution of Christ. Moreover, he knew well
how in the depth of his Wisdom to make such a choice in his institutions serve
unto two great ends, viz. the gaining of the Jews, by making as little
diffrrence between the old way (to which they were wedded) and the new
Gospel-way, as could be: and the adorning of his Gospel-service with most fit
and excellent Ceremonies: this cannot be pretended for devices of Men in Gods
Worship, whether found out by themselves, or wherein they imitate others. 2.
For his Authority, however these Observations being uncommanded were on that
account unlawful to the Jews; yet the things materially considered being
indifferent, and Christ having absolute Authority to institute particulars in
his Church, he might well choose these, and seal them with his Authority, and so
make them both lawful and duty to us: this no Man can do; they must have his
Command for Institution; and not make them by their own authority. Wherefore
Christ taking the Jewish Customs for Patterns to his Institutions (if he did
so) makes nothing for Men's setting up their institutions in the Church; or
for the indifferency of things belonging peculiarly to the Church.

Sect. 5. That which he says ibid: makes little to his purpose, viz. That
even when God did determine the positives of Worship, he left the Morals to the
wisdom and discretion of his People: which he instanceth in building and ruling
Synagogues. Ans. this is true of such things as are of common concernment to
Religion and other Actions; we also allow such parts of Church Government to be
managed by Christian Prudence: his mstance proves no more; for we permit also
the building of Churches to prudence. But the question is about things proper
to the Church a it is a Religious Society: these things we deny to have been
left to prudence among the Jews, or to be now so left among Christians. I
cannot yield to what he seems to aim at, when he says, that though the
reason of erecting Synagogues was builded on a command, viz. Of having holy
Convocations, yet they were not built for a long time after they came to the
Land: I cannot think that the building of Synagogues was indifferent though the
place and manner was: for the same command that requires holy Convocations,
requires that there be a place fit for them. If they were at first long of
building, it was either from some impediment, or from inexcusable negligence.
Much less do I agree to what follows, viz. Although Moses requires the duty
of Assembling, yet he prescribes no Orders for the place of meeting, nor for
the manner of spending these days in Gods service, nor for the Persons who
were to superintend the public work. Ans. the first of these, as to the
Circumstances of it, is left to Prudence, it being merely a natural
Circumstance of Worship, the second for substance is in the law, viz. What
duties they should spend the day with, viz. Sacrificing in the Temple, reading
the Law, and Teaching the People in other places: the natural Circumstances of
this are also left to prudence. The third is falsely asserted: are not the
Levites appointed to superintend that work when they are made the Public
Teachers of the Peope? Wherefore all this makes nothing for his design, viz.
That the Jewish Church Government was left to Prudence, and that the Christian
should be so. Their reading of the Law we approve; but deny it to have been
voluntary but commanded; their curious dividing of it, and leaving out some of
it we disprove, as the fruit of the superstitions of the latter ages of that
Church: and indeed it may be compared with the frame of our Service Book,
though it was not so bad by far. I insist not on his guesses about the
Government of Synagogues, which he takes much pains to make appear to be like
the Government in the Apostolic Church, that he might make us believe, that
this was taken from that. I only observe that the product of all his pains is
not operae pretium: both because of the uncertainty of the matter of Fact, that
there were such Officers so employed in the Synagogues: as also the far off
resemblances that are between them and Officers in the Christian Church; as any
attentive Reader may observe. And so I pass to p. 253. where he shows how far
the Apostles in forming Christian Churches did follow the Jewish Pattern.

Sect. 6. I smile indeed to consider how Mr. Still. magnifies this his notion,
and judges this birth of his own Brain, as that which with his Improvement (
such as it has yet received from no other) will be more conducible than any he
knows to the happy end of Composing our differences about Church Government.
I hope I have said as much of this notion. p. 186. etc. as will make it to be
of less esteem with unbyassed men. I profess I cannot yet understand, for all
that I have meet with in this Author about it, how this Notion should have any
such effect, for the Question is not what pattern the Apostles followed, so
much, as whether what they did was the Institution of Christ, and whether we
ought to follow them as our pattern: and to the determining of this I see very
little or no Use of this notion which he so much cries up. But to make it get
entertainment he takes much pains. First, he promises some general
considerations to make it probable: and shows next how the Apostles did
imitate the Synagogue in 4 particulars. Let us hear what probability it gets
from his Considerations. The 1 is, That Christ and his Disciples, and
Christians afterward went under the name of Jews; that they kept Communion with
the Jews, and observed their Customs, not only which were commanded of God,
but which they had taken up themselves, if they were not contrary to Gods
commands. Here are 3 or 4 considerations jumbled together, some of which are
false, others true, but prove not the Point. I shall answer them more
distinctly than he has set them down. And first for the name, it is no wonder
they were called Jews, for they were so by nation: if at any time they owned
themselves as of the Jewish Religion, that proves nothing; for this they might
do, because the Jewish Religion, as commanded of God, was the same in Substance
with the Christian, see Act. 26.22. It does not from this follow that there
were the same Administrations in the Jewish and Christian-Church. And if in
aftertimes the Jews and Christians were both reckoned as one body by the
Heathens (for which he brings some proof p. 255. and 256.) yet it does not
follow, which he there infers, viz. That they observed the same Rites and
Customs: for this mistake of the Heathens did proceed partly from the
agreement that was between Jews and Christians, as to most great points of
Religion: partly from the Agreement of their Rites in this, that both were very
unlike the Heathen Rites. Neither did the Heathens understand the difference
between Jews and Christians, though wise men among them knew that there was a
difference: this may be gathered from Act. 18.15. and Act. 25.19, 20. It does
not follow from this, that the Rites were the same. 2. For their keeping
communion with the Jews, this does far less prove the point: and that because,
1. the time when they kept Communion with the Jews was when the Jewish Church
was yet standing, and the Christian not framed nor erected: our Author cannot
prove that they kept Communion with them after the Christian Churches were set
up: for their going to the Temple and the Synagogues to Preach, proves
nothing. For that they did because the People were there met, not because they
would join in their Service. 2. Because it was fit for that time to yield to
the Jews so far as was possible, that they might be gained to the Gospel: hence
they observed even some of the legal Ceremonies, they being then indifferent:
but it follows not that they did settle the ordinance and abiding practices
of the Church by the Pattern of the Synagogue. Paul's being freely admitted
into the Synagogue to Preach, proves no more than we have granted: his
condescending to them did procure this, not his framing Gospel-Churches
according to their mould, much less is this his design proved by the mistake of
the believing Jews about the conversion of the Gentiles, and their being
zealous for observing the Law of Moses; yea and grant that they were zealous
for the uncommanded Customs of their Father, as he alleges. For this
proceeded from their being bred up in these things, and their Ignorance of the
mind of God in abolishing them, and in calling of the Gentiles: and the
Apostle's yielding to the Jews as far as might be for a time, was because he
had not yet showed the difference between the Gospel and Jewish Church, because
they could not then bear it: but with what shadow of consequence does it
follow from this that the Apostles did afterward frame the Christian Church
after the model of the Jewish? For the 3d. it is a bold and most false
assertion, that Christ and his Disciples conformed to the uncommanded Customs
of the Jews: yea they are accused for Nonconformity in this point Matthew. 15.2.
And Christ defends them in it, and merely on this Account, that these customs
were the traditions of men, and humane doctrines: which is true of all
uncommanded Customs in Religion. But how proves he this Assertion? he
brings Instances; Christ observed the Feast of dedication: this is Impudently
said; he walked in Solomon's Porch Jo. 10.22, 23. that he might have occasion to
teach the People: but did he offer a Sacrifice, or observe any other rite or
Custom of the Feast? we read no such thing, going to their Synagogues and
teaching there was no uncommanded Custom. Washing the Disciples Feet a custom
used by the Jews before the passover (says Mr. Still. but others say it was
done between the 2 courses of the passover) this Christ did, and gives a
Mystical reason for it. Jo. 13.5. but that he did it in Conformity to the
Jewish Custom ( if any such there was) let it be proved, appointing Baptism I
hope has a better Foundation than the Jewish Custom, but of this before; thus
what he says in prosecuting his First consideration, is answered: neither is
it as yet probable that the Apostles imitated the Jews in framing the
Gospel Church.

Sect. 7. His 2d consideration p. 257. is that the Apostles framed Christian
Churches out of Jewish Synagogues: what solid Proof for this he brings let us
hear. We see says he, how fearful the Apostles were to offend the Jews, and
how ready to condescend to them in any thing that might be; and if Paul would
yield to them in circumcising Tim. (a thing which might seem to cross the
design of the Gospel) would he scruple to retain the old Model the Synagogue,
when there was nothing in it repugnant to the doctrine of the Gospel? Answ. The
Apostles at first did yield very far to the Jews, because they could not at the
beginning digest the taking down of the old frame of Worship, and setting up a
new; hence they did conform to the Jews, for that time, as much as might be in
their transient and occasional practices: but this reason did no way oblige
them to frame their constitutions and practices of the Church that were to
abide afterward, by the Jewish Pattern, because then the Gospel was fully
promulgated, and the Will of Christ known to the new Gospel Church, differing
from the old; and in this case we are rather to think that the Apostles did not
conform to the Jewish way in things not necessary; because as at first, their
work was to bring them to Christ, and so they yielded to them as much as might
be; so afterward now their work was tobring them from Moses, and to this end
it was fit to bring them off all those customs and ways which might keep that
their I dol yet in their minds, as sure he Jewish customs might do; Here is
more then a show of reason (which our Author requires) why the Apostle should
slight the constitution of the Jewish Synagogues; and besides, it is reason
enough why they should do this, if it be not proved that they did other wise,
seeing they were guided by an infallible Spirit, not led by men's Customs in
their Actions. I find no further proof of this consideration, but that they did
not only gather Churches out of Synagogues, but that in probability whole
Synagogues in some places were converted. What ground there is for this
probability I know not; we read nothing of it, as we read of whole Houses
converted: neither see I any reason to think that the Apostles did respect
Synagogues in their reforming Churches: they made the Churches of them who had
before been in the Synagogues; and that I believe they did according to the
Peoples best convenience for partaking of ordinances together: but that their
Synagogues were their Pattern I see not. Another argument from the Jewish and
Gentiles Coetus, he would fain be helped by; but finding it weak, disputes
against it: wherefore we lay it aside, and come to his 3d consideration p. 260.
viz. the Synagogue-Model was most agreeable to the State of the Churches in
Apostolic times; because it was so ordered, as that it needed not depend on
the Secular Power for attaining the end of Government. Answer. Wherein the
Synagogue-Model was, in the nature of the thing fitted to the State of the
Gospel, we do not say that the Apostles would reject such a good thing because
used by the Synagogue; only we deny that they used it because the Synagogue
used it: so this proves nothing. Further it proves only co-incidency between
the Church and Synagogue-Government in this general that both were such as
might consist without Secular power: but diverse particular forms may be of this
nature; so that there is no need from this consideration that the Church and
the Synagogues be governed by the same Model.

Sect. 8. We see how probable he has made this his assertion: he comes p.
261. to show what particular practices of the Synagogue, the Apostles did take
up and follow; and first he speaks of their public service in the Church:
where all that he can attain to is this, that there was in the Church, as there
had been in the Synagogue, solemn Prayers, Praises, reading of Scripture, and
teaching of the People out of it: all which are parts of Moral worship; and
would have been in the Church though there had never been a Synagogue to take
example by; he is forced to acknowledge a considerable difference, viz.
omitting the reading the Sections of the Law as was done in the Synagogue, and
celebrating the Lords Supper, which was not in it: which one consideration
destroys all that he is at so much pains to establish: for if Christ and his
Apostles had made the Synagogue their pattern, they might easily have conformed
to them in reading the Sections of the Law and taking the Lords Supper, from
some of their customs as well as they did Baptism, as this Author alleges.
Next he comes p. 264. to ordination: about which he makes a great deal of do,
but to no purpose: for Ordination i. e. a Solemn setting of men apart for the
Office of the Ministry, does naturally follow as necessary to Order; supposing
that some should be in that Office and the work be not common to all, which I
believe should have been in the Church whatever had been done in the Synagogue;
as for the Rite of it, laying on of hands, whether it was used in the Synagogue
or not is not worth our enquiry, for it will not thence follow that the
Apostles took it from the confederate discipline of the Synagogue ( i. e. from
their men-devised Customs) as our Author confidently asserteth: but all that
he discourses proves not this, but only, if it prove any thing, that it was
used in the Synagogue. I assert with more warrant that it was taken up both by
the Synagogue and by the Apostles from the ancient cust^me of blessing, or
dedicating any thing to God by this Ceremony: of this Judgment is Calv. Inst.
lib. cap. 4. Sect. hunc autem ritum fluxisse arbitror ab Hebraeorum more, qui
quod benedictum aut consecratum volebant, manuum impositione deo quasi
repraesentabant: sic Jacob benedicens Ephraim and Manasse, eorum capitibus
manus imposuit: quod sequutus est dominus noster, cum super infantes
precationem faceret: eodem ut arbitror significatu Judaei ex legis praescripto
suis sacrificiis manus imponebant: quare apostoli per manuum impositionem eum
se deo offerro significabant quem initiabant in ministerium: quanquam usui sit
etiam super eos, quibus visibilis spiritus gratias conferebant. We see then it
was not the practice in Synagogue-Ordination only: but in many things else, and
it is most probable that this Rite so constantly used in all Ages of the
Church, in all cases of blessing or consecration has something more in it then
humane Institution in the Synagogue: the constant use of it by men infallibly
guided, as Abraham, the Apostles, Christ himself; the commanding of it in the
like case of consecration under the Law cannot but give it a stamp of divine
Authority. Yea we find the Levites thus ordained Number. 8.10. wherefore all this
his pains does not prove that Gospel-Ordinance was taken up from the humane
custom of the Synagogue. A few things in this his discourse. I shall further
shortly take notice of. p. 264, 265. he will have Gospel Ministers not to
succceed (no not by Analogy) to the Priests and Levites, but rather to the
Officers in the Synagogues: for the Priests were not admitted by Solemn
Ordination; but judged of their fitness, as to birth and body by the same
ordination: but the Rulers of the Synagogues were admitted by Ordination: and
if any of the Priests came to that Office, they as well as others had their
peculiar designation and appointment to it. Here I reply. 1. I believe that
Gospel Ministers did not properly succeed to either of these; but stand upon
another foundation, viz. Christ's Institution: and so it is needless to enquire
which of them they should succeed to. I yield also, that the name of Priests
under the Gospel has brought in the thing it self, and even the Mass: which
ought not to be. 2. What can he design by this Discourse? Would he make the
Office of the Ministry stand on no other bottom but imitation of the Synagogues
Rulers; and these Rulers to be brought in by a confederate Discipline, i. e. to
be a humane invention? If he say not this, he says nothing to the purpose; but
I hope he will not say it. 3. It is false, that the Priests were not solemnly
set apart for their Office; though they had it by birth, yet they behoved to be
solemnly initiated to it; and I am sure Mr. Still. would not have said, that
they were no otherwise set apart but by the judgment of the Sanhedrim, of their
birth and body; if he had not in this so consulted Antiquity, as that he forgot
to look into the Bible. I do not deny but there was such a Judgment to pass on
them, (neither ought Ministers be now admitted without trial) yea the Scripture
(which is surer than the Talmud) tells us so much. Ezr. 2.62, 63. Yet we find
also their solemn setting apart to the Office described, Exodus 28.41. and 29.1.
Lev. 8.2, etc. And spoken of, 2 Chronicles. 26.18. Yea the very Idol-Priests would
not want this solemn setting apart, 2 Chronicles. 13, 9. Jud. 17.5, 12. Yea, our
Authors opinion everteth it self; for to what purpose was a public judging of
them before their entry on the exercise of their Office, if there was no solemn
admission of them to it; sure a solemn declaring them such as God had appointed
his Priests to be (if there had been no more, they being kept from exercising
the Office till this was done) was a solemn admission. 4. I would know who
these others were who were Rulers of the Synagogue, and so Teachers of the
people; at least Superintenders over Gods public Worship (as he elsewhere
phraseth it) beside the Priests? if they were only Levites, or others also, as
he seems to imply: and if any other but Priests and Levites were admitted to
that Office, I would know quo warranto: sure the Scripture speaks of these as
old Testament-Teachers, Neh. 8.9. 2 Chronicles. 17.8, 9. and of none else, but
immediately inspired Prophets. But I see Mr. Stilling. looks more to
Rabinical stories in these matters, than to the Bible: and to the customs of
the Synagogue in the days of the Apostasy than to the commands of God, as he
gave them, though they be rare who are made mad by too much Learning; yet there
are whom too much reading (without holding to the Scripture as the Rule) makes
to dote. I need not insist on what he writes, p. 268, etc. of the Rite of
laying on of Hands; enough has been said, to show that it proves not what he
intends: nor on the persons ordaining in the Synagogue and in the Church; of
which he, pa. 272, etc. for in both he confesses abomination to have been done
in common by those in Power; and afterward without divine Warrant restrained to
one: if Christ has given power to all Presbyters to do it; we must have some
warrant to restrain this Power ere we dare do it; but of this enough before.

Sect. 9. In his further prosecuting the correspondence of the Apostolic
Church with the Synagogue: he speaks p. 285. of the Order settled by the
Apostles in the Churches planted by them, for ruling of them: and first he
makes a work about the name (...), which is the same with (...) used in the
Synagogue; but from his own Discourse it is clear how little weight is to be
laid on this consideration, as to what he intends: seeing that name was ever
used to denote Power and Dignity, whether in Church or State, and so does no
more belong to the Synagogue than other things. I take notice of what he says
in the end of p. 286. If his design is not to dispute the Arguments of of
either party, ( viz. those who conceive the Apostles settled the Government of
the Church in absolute purity, or else by Superiority and subordination among
the settled Officers of the Church) but to lay down these principles, which may
equally concern both, in order to accommodation. But I humbly conceive, it was
very incumbent upon him to answer the arguments of both parties: and they must
be answered to us before we be obliged to receive his Doctrine (of which anon)
that we cannot know what form the Apostles settled, and that they settled not any
one form. For as long as arguments brought by either of the controverting
parties do stand untaken away; to prove that the Apostles settled this or that
form: the Judgment can never acquiesce in his opinion, that they settled none;
or that we cannot know what they settled. This is a strange way of disputing,
especially when the design is to satisfy the Conscience in order to peace, and
yielding up its opinion: to lay down such Principles to this end, with strong
arguments standing against them, untouched or answered. It Is like Mr. Stilling.
thinks that when he has furnished Men with some probabilities, that may
encourage them to comply with what Government shall be set up in the Church;
their interest and maintenance should resist the strength of all arguments
against it: for he will furnish them with no help in this; but they must have
very pliable Consciences, if Will be furnished to an opinion so maintained. His
Principles in order to accommodation, or all that he will say of the Apostles
Government, he draws into 3 Propositions, p. 287. which in sum are these:
That we cannot know what was the Apostles practice: that it was not always the
same: that whatever it was, we are not obliged to observe it. Let us hear how
he makes these out.

Sect. 10. His first Proposition he sets down thus: That we cannot arrive to
such an absolute certainty what course the Apostles took in governing Churches,
as to infer from thence the only divine Right of that one form which the
several parties imagine come nearest to it. This Proposition is not so
ingenuously nor clearly set down as need were; wherefore I shall a little
remove the mist cast on the Truth by his words, which may make simple Souls
mistake it. And 1. There is some ambiguity in [absolute certainty] if he mean
so much certainty as amounts to Plerophory, and does dispell all degrees of
darkness and doubting, this we assert, not that every one may attain (such is
the darkness of Men's minds (neither is it needful to this that we look upon
what the Apostles did, as being juris divini. If we mean, so much certainty as
does incline the mind to the one part, and not leave it in suspense: we assert,
that this may be attained in reference to what is in Question. 2. The matter in
debate, is very obscurely, if not fraudulently expressed by these words [what
course the Apostles took in governing Churches] the Question is not, whether we
can know every thing that they did in this, (for many particulars are
comprehended in this general expression) but whether we can know if the settled
Presbyters acting in Parity, or Bishops acting with authority over Presbyters,
as the ordinary Officers of the Church. 3. It is not fair dealing to imply (as
this Proposition does) that we infer the only divine Right of one form from
bare Apostolical practice: he knows that we walk upon other grounds, viz. we
take Christ's command of imitating the Apostles: the Parity between our case and
theirs, which may make the morality of our practice to be the same with theirs.
4. It is not the one form which several parties imagine to come nearest to
Apostolical practice: but that which is proved to be really the same with it,
we plead for: it is not man's imaginations, but Scriptural grounds which we
establish that correspondency upon, we are asserting between Apostolical
practice, and what we would have to be now in the Church. The antithesis then
which we maintain against this his Proposition, is this, That they who search
the Scripture may come to be satisfied on good grounds, whether the Apostles in
planting Churches did setle Presbyters acting in Parity, or Bishops ruling over
Presbyters as their ordinary Officers: so as they may (considering the duty
laid on us to follow them, and the parity of our case with theirs) infer the
divine Right of that one Form (of these two) which was used by the Apostles.
For proof of this our antithesis I refer to the consideration laid down, p.
184, 185. about the perfection of Scripture-history, and its design to instruct
us in this point: which does so far prevail with me, that I look upon the
Authors Proposition as such a reflection on Scripture, that any but a Papist may
be ashamed of. To this I add, that the arguments brought for Presbyterial
Government by the Assertors of it, do evidently destroy the Authors
Proposition, and do establish our Antithesis: which seeing he does not intend
nor endeavor to answer, we need not insist upon. A further confirmation of our
Antithesis, shall be to take off the arguments that he has brought for his
Proposition, which I now come to.

Sect. 11. His first argument is, p. 287. from the equivalency of the names and
doubtfulness of their signification, from which the form of Government used in
the new Testament, should be determined. He says, That it is hotly pleaded on
both sides, that the form of Government must be derived from the importance of
the names [ Bishop and Presbyter] and that there can be no way to come to a
determination what the certain sense of these names is in Scripture. He makes
out the uncertainty, by laying down four opinions about the signification of
these names: and from this variety of interpretation, infers that we cannot
know what sense they are to be taken in. Ans. 1. when he says that it is
pleaded on both sides, that the form of Government must be derived from the
names of Bishop and Presbyter; this is a misrepresentation; for 1. There be
arguments from which it might well be derived, though these names should never
be mentioned. 2. When we dispute from these Names, it is not from the bare
force of the word; but from this, that the Scripture does often apply these
names to the same thing, never to diverse Officers in the Church: and therefore,
there is no ground for asserting the difference of Bishop and Presbyter. This
is a surer argument, than what can be drawn from the importance of Names. Answ.
2. It is most false and injurious to the Spirit of God speaking in his word, to
say, that there can be no way to determine what is the certain sense of these
names in Scripture. We must then say, that the Spirit of God speaks that
which cannot be understood, if he use names and words to express some thing to
us, and it is impossible to know what is meant by them. When we hear of Bishops
and Presbyters in any place of Scripture; either we must say, that these words
signify nothing, or that they mean somewhat, but no man can know what it is,
or that we may come to know what is meant by them. The former two are foul
reflections on the Author of holy Scripture: yea, it were a reflection on a Man
to speak or write (in a Book designed for instruction) that which either has
no meaning, or such as cannot be known. The 3d, contradicts our Authors
Assertion. His proof of the uncertainty of the signification of these Names, we
have met with before in the like case: it is a most unhappy and inconsequential
reason; Men have diverse ways understood these words of the Holy Ghost, Ergo,
they cannot be understood at all. They must have a meaning, and it is our duty
to search it out, however Men differ about it. There are better Reasons brought
by Presbyterians, to prove that these two Names signify the same thing; which
was incumbent on this Author to answer, and not to shift the matter with
saying, that other Men think otherwise. I shall give but this instance, or
hint, which may satisfy any what is the meaning of these words in Scripture.
Tit. 2. The Apostle leaves in Crete Titus to ordain Elders or Presbyters,
verse 5. and tells him how they must be qualified, verse 6 and gives this
reason, why they must have such qualifications, verse 7. for a Bishop must be
blameless: If a Bishop were another thing than a Presbyter, to what purpose
were this reason here brought? Ergo, they are one and the same thing. And if
any affirm, that these words signify different things in any place of
Scripture, let him prove it, and we shall yield the cause. I might also show,
that the same Office and work is every where in Scripture laid on both these;
and that never any thing is given to the one, but what is given to the other:
but this has been done, and other arguments managed fully by our Writers
against Episcopacy; neither has Mr. Stilling. had the confidence to answer
them, though destroying this his Assertion, and therefore I shall supersede
this labor. For the name of [Angels of the Churches] the argument brought from
it is not ours, but our opposites.

Sect. 12. His 2d. Argument for the uncertainty of Apostolical practice, p.
290. is, That the places of Scripture most in controversy about the form of
Government, may be without any incongruity understood of either of the
different Forms, which he makes out by going through the several places. The
first is, Acts 11.30. where it is said, That the relief for the Brethren of
Judea was sent to the Elders. There is nothing here, says he, to show whether
there were the local Elders of Jerusalem, or the Bishops of the several
Churches of Judea. Answ. I wonder why he should have brought this as the first,
or as one of these few Scriptures that he undertaketh to answer, (for, the most
part of the most pungent Scriptures against his design, he does not so much as
mention) for, I think, it is very little insisted on by either party: nor can I
remember that I have met with it; as brought to prove either Parity or
imparity. Yet I do not doubt but at least some probability may be hence
brought, that the Apostolic Churches were governed by the Parity of Elders;
for which I lay down briefly these grounds, First, The Elders here spoken of,
are the Governors of the Church; this he does not deny. 2dly, They were the
Governors of the Church of Jerusalem. This he says, is not sure; for they
might be the Bishops of the Churches of Judea. But against this I argue; 1. It
is not enough to say, they might be; but what ground is there to think that
they were the Bishops of Judea, we bring probable grounds for what we assert;
but what can be said for the contrary? It is a bold way of expounding Scriture,
to say such a sense it may have when there is no ground to think that it has
such a sense; but some ground to the contrary. 2. However, the Relief ought to
be sent to all the Churches of Judea, yet it is delivered at Jerusalem to be
sent abroad: for it is delivered to these Elders by Barnabas and Paul; whom it
is not like they sent through the several Churches of Judea: it is spoken of as
one single act of theirs, delivering the others to a company of Elders met
together. Now it is not imaginable, that all the Bishops of Judea were met
together on this occasion: for what needed such a Convention for receiving
Alms? Yea, we have no ground to think that it was so natural to them
beforehand, as that they could meet about it. Neither has that conceit of
some, any probability; that these Bishops did reside at Jerusalem: such Men did
not begin so soon to slight their particular Charge, but of this after; These
Elders then were the Elders of Jerusalem. 3. We find a company of Elders
ordinarily at Jerusalem, not only Acts 15.6. Which might be upon the solemn
occasion of the Council; but Act. 21.18. That these were the Elders of Judea,
come up with their flocks to keep the Feast of Pentecost (as Mr. Still.
guesseth) is a most irrational conceit: for though many of the Jews were
zealous of the Law; shall we think that the Apostles had set Teachers over
them, who were no better instructed in the Gospel than so? And besides, these
believing Jews, ver. 20 who are said to be zealous of the Law, can neither be
proved to have been then present at Jerusalem; for they might hear of Paul's
condescendency to their Customs, though they were not there: neither that they
were those of the Country of Judea; they might be of Jerusalem it self: but I
incline rather to the first. Now we find not any other company of all the
Elders of Judea met in one place: these were then the Elders of Jerusalem. 4.
It is then observed, both by the ordinary gloss, and by Lyra in loc. That this
famine was mainly like to be in Jerusalem: the Believers there being spoiled of
their movable goods in the persecution about Stephen; and therefore this Relief
was chiefly to them: Ergo, they are the Elders of Jerusalem, which here
received it. Now from these grounds it easily follows what we intend, viz. If
there was a company of Elders who were Rulers of the Church at Jerusalem: then
this Church (of the rest there is the same reason) was not governed by a
Bishop, but by Presbyters acting in Parity. It is strange, if the Elders of the
Church should be spoken of, and no notice taken of My Lord Bishop (if there
were any such person) in such a matter.

Sect. 13. The 2d place is Act. 14.23, when they had ordained them Elders in
every Church, to which he joineth the 3d, Tit. 1.5. that thou should ordain
Elders in every City. Of which places he says that (...) and (...) signify no
more but Ecclesiatim and oppidatim; so that the places may well be understood
of ordaining one Elder in every Church and City or of more, but does not
determine whether one or more were ordained in them. But granting all that he
alleges, a strong Argument for our purpose may be brought from these places,
thus: there was at least in every Church one Elder, in the Apostles times, and
such an Elder as was also a Bishop and had governing Power over the Church, as
appears by comparing verse. 7. of Tit. 2. with this verse 5. But there could
not be in every Church a Diocesan Bishop ruling over Presbyters: for one of
these are over many Churches, Ergo. The Church was then governed by the Elders
of the several Churches acting in Parity: for if every Church had its Elder, or
Elders, and these all were Rulers, then the Rule was not in the hand of one
Superior over many Churches. Nothing can be questioned in this Argument,
except it be said that every Church here is not every congregational but
Diocesan Church. But this can in no wise be, for there was a necessity of an
Elder or Elders in every Congregational Church for the Peoples Instruction: if
these then did rule, the Church was ruled by the Elders of Congregational
Churches. The next place is Act 20.17. And from Miletus Paul sent and called
the Elders of the Church. These, say we, were Elders of the Church of Ephesus,
to whom in common Paul commits the ruling of the Church, verse. 28. not to
one Bishop over the rest, so that Church was governed by Parity of Elders. To
this place he answers by showing some Probabilities for both meanings viz.
That these were the Elders of Ephesus; and that they were the Bishops of Asia:
but takes no pains to Answer what is said on either hand, only concludes,
that because there is probability on both hands there is no fixed truth on
either; which is most detestable Skepticism: for if there be Arguments for both
parts, sure both cannot be true, seeing they are contradictory, neither can
both be false for the same reason, for contradictoriarum altera semper est
vera, altera semper est falsa: then it was his part either to show that neither
of the arguments prove any thing, by answering to them, or to hold to the one
as true, and not to hang between two. But I prove that these Elders were the
Elders of Ephesus, not the Bishops of Asia. 1. (which Argument he mentions
but he answers not) the Article in the Greek makes it clear, it being
demonstratory does apply his Speech to the Church which he had mentioned in
particular: where when it is said that he sent to Ephesus and called for the
Elders, (...) it might well be translated [of that Church:] it points out
that Church and no other. It is an unheard of way of speaking when a particular
thing or person is mentioned, and the demonstrative Article joined to it, that
that Speech should be understood of any other but that. 2. Paul sent to Ephesus
for these Elders, not through the several parts of Asia. Ergo. They were at
Ephesus not in other Churches. That he did not send through other places to
gather them together is evident both because the Text mentions sending to
Ephesus, not other places; and it is strange if he sent through all Asia and
mention be only made of sending to one place not to any other: also because
Paul was then in have passing by them verse. 16. wherefore it is not like that he
could stay for the convening of a Synod of Bishop; from many remote parts. That
which is alleged by some, that the Bishops of Asia did reside at Ephesus, and
thence were sent for by Paul, is most absurd; for 1. There is not the least
shadow of reason to think that non residence of fixed Officers did so soon
creep into the Church. Let us see any Instance or Warrant to think that any who
had a fixed charge did leave it long, or often, or at all, but upon some
weighty and extraordinary emergent. 2. What could be their business at Ephesus:
their work lay elsewhere, and there they could do nothing except to meet and
consult about matters of common concerment: which will not infer ordinary
residence there. 3. The work of these Elders was particular inspection over
their Flocks; verse. 28. [over all the Flock] which they could not have if they
resided at Ephesus, and had their charges lying up and down Asia, for that
probability which he brings for the contrary, it is none at all, viz. It is
said verse. 18. That he had been with them at all Seasons; but he was not all
the time in Ephesus, but abroad in Asia as Act. 19.10, 22, 26. Answ. [at all
Seasons] must not be taken in such rigor as if he had never stirred a Foot out
of Ephesus; but that he had his residence and Preached most there, which is
evident from Act. 19.1, 9.10. he disputed daily in the School of Tyrannus; this
was at Ephesus: and it is said that it continued 2 years, i. e. for the most
part of the time he was there, and yet might sometimes Preach elsewhere. For
the humane Testimonies he brings for either part, I were then in the same
balance with him and shall be content to lay no stress upon them. As for the 1 Timothy 3.1. which is his other place, we make no Argument from it, but maintain
that it speaks not of a Diocesan Bishop: let them who assert the contrary
prove it. His discourse p. 293. is a very unsavory comparing of some
Philosophical Problems which cannot well be determined (and therefore we may
hesitate about them) with points of truth revealed in Scripture; as if we might
also be Sceptick in these. But sure the Comparison is miserably lame, for 1.
These do not concern our Faith or duty as these other do, and therefore there
is much less hazard in Scepticrsm about the one than the other. 2. Even in
those points the motion of the Earth or Heaven, the Flux and Reflux of the Sea,
there is some truth in them, though men through darkness cannot see it: neither
must we say that nothing there is, because there is nothing certain to us in
these things; or that men may impose on our belief what they please in them:
hence men are the more studious in searching out these Secrets and give them
not over as being destitute of all objective truth. But he deals worse with
the things of Church Government; he will have no objective truth in it, and no
duty to lie on us in searching out the truth, but that we must believe what men
say of it. For conclusion of what I would say to this ground of his Skepticism
about Church Government, I will but mention several Scriptures, on which the
truth in this is built viz. That the Apostolic form was parity, which Mr.
Still. has not so much as touched: neither need I insist on them, seeing
Arguments from them are established by our writers, and not enervated by him.
One place is 1 Timothy 4.14. where Tim. is said to be ordained by a Presbytery or
company of Elders joining with Paul in that Action: this could not have been if
Elders had not had a Parity of Power. Another is, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. where
excommunication is transacted by the Authority of a Community, not of a single
Person: and so is the relaxing of that Sentence 2 Cor. 2.8.10. Also 1 Thessalonians.
5.12. They who ruled that Church, who were over them, and must be obeyed, were
many; not one Person: yea that work and the work of laboring among the People
and admonishing them are made to be the business of the same Persons; which is
a demonstration that the Presbyters of that Church did rule in common and not a
Bishop over them. Heb. 13.7, 17. proves also the same thing most clearly.
Other places might be brought, but these Instances may show that Mr. Stilling.
undertaking to show that no place in Scripture determines what was the Form of
Government in the Apostolic Church, does not touch the most considerable
places commonly brought to that purpose: but has mentioned a few, and those
which are least insisted on by them whom he opposes; and even to them he has
said nothing to scare any from using them as Arguments afterward. His third
Argument for the uncertainty of the Primitive or Apostolical Form of
Government, taken from the insufficiency of the Testimony of Antiquity, is
this; I pass it, because we have ground enough for the certainty of it from
Scripture, and what he says proves no more but that antiquity is not
sufficient to bear witness to it: also because ali or most that he there
discourses proves that it cannot be gathered from ancient records that
Episcopacy was the Apostolical form, which we willingly yield.

Sect. 14. I come then to his 2d proposition mentioned before, which he lays
down p. 322. Thus, That the Apostles in probability did not observe any one
fixed course of settling the Government of Churches; but settled it according to
the several circumstances of places and Persons which they had to deal with.
This assertion he lays down ex abundanti, not as a Foundation of his opinion
but a doctrine of probability, which may tend to compose differences about
Church Government. To clear our way in this dispute with him, let it be
observed, 1. That the question being only about Parity and Imparity of Pastors,
all other differencies in Apostolic practices that may be alleged are
impertinent to this purpose. 2. It helps not him, nor harmeth our cause, if
we should grant, that the Apostles did in some extraordinary cases vary from
their ordinary course: for it is what they did ordinarily, and where no
extraordinary cause moved them to do otherwise, that we inquire about. 3. Our
question is not about the Government of the Church that was for a time
exercised by extraordinary Officers immediately sent of God: but what was the
way the Apostles settled that the Church should be governed in by her Ordinary
and abiding Officers. Wherefore it makes nothing for his purpose if it be made
out that the Church was some times governed one way by extraordinary Officers,
at other times or places another way by ordinary Officers. Taking these
considerations along with us, I come to hear the Proofs of this his
proposition. The first is taken p. 323. from the different state, condition and
quantity of the Churches planted by the Apostles, and here he premiseth 3
things, viz. That God did not give the Apostles equal suceess of their Labors
in all places, that a small number of believers did not require the same number
of Officers to Teach and Govern them that a greater Church did. 3. That the
Apostles did settle Church Officers according to the probability of increase of
Believers, and in order thereto, in some great places. About these I shall not
controvert with him; only the 2d must be understood with this distinction, else
we cannot grant it; that a fewer number, if formed into a Church-Society,
though it did not need as great a number of Officers of every kind, as
Teachers, Elders, Deacons; yet would it need as many sorts of Officers; and the
reason is because all those acts are needful to be done to them which must be
done to greater Congregations: they must be taught, ruled, and their Poor cared
for; and therefore they must not want any of these sorts of Officers whose work
these acts were: I mean where such Officers could be had: for Christ's
Institutions tie not to impossibilities. From these Premises he infers
these two conclusions to make out his proposition; the first is p. 325. That in
Churches consisting of a small number of believers where there was no great
probability of Increase afterward, one single Pastor with Deacons under him
were only constituted by the Apostles for the ruling of these Churches. On this
conclusion (before I come to his Proofs of it) I shall make these remarques. 1.
Here is nothing here for the Imparity of Presbyters, or the Authority of a
Bishop over Presbyters; if where more Presbyters could not be had, one was to
do the work, this does not at all say that the Apostles ever did, or that we
may set one over the rest, where many may be had to rule the Church. This
conclusion then proves nothing. 2. These Deacons that here he speaks of
either had ruling power or not: if he say the first I doubt, if he can prove
that ever any such Deacons were in the Apostolic Churches, where the Deacons
work was to serve, not to rule that Church: and if they had ruling power they
were not only Deacons but ruling Elders, both works being laid on the same
Persons for want of men to exercise them distinctly; which makes nothing
against Presbyterians. If the second, first I question if any instance can be
given of a Church so constituted by the Apostles. 2. If it was so, it was
necessity, not choice that made them be without ruling Elders.

Sect. 15. But how proves he this his conclusion? by 3 or 4 Testimonies out of
Clement, Epiph. and others. What? has he so soon forgot himself? he had
immediately before spent about 30 pages in proving that the Testimony of the
Fathers is not sufficient to prove what was the Apostles Practice; and that by
making out the defectiveness ambiguity, partiality and repugnancy of the
Records of the succeeding Ages: it is strange then that to prove this his
assertion concerning Apostolic Practice, he should bring no other Argument at
all but such as he had set that Nigrum Theta upon. Neither see I what those
Testimonies prove contrary to us. The Testimony of Clement says no more than
what is employed, Phil. 1.1. That the Apostles ordained Bishops and Deacons: and
our Author himself maintains that those were not by their constitution any
more than Presbyters: whatever they might after get by men's Institution proves
not what was Apostolic constitution. For the Testimony of Epiphanius he
confesses its intricacie and obscurity, and therefore (by his own Argument, of
which before) it is not to be laid weight upon: but he takes a great deal of
pains to explain it and make it speak this, in sum: that at first there were
only Bishops and Deacons (by Bishops he means Presbyters, as appears from his
Subjoyning immediately that there was neceility for Presbyters and Deacons) and
that by these all Ecclesiastical Offices might be performed: but afterward
where there was need and there were found any worthy of it, there was a Bishop
appointed: but where there were not many to be Presbyters; they were content
with a Bishop and Deacons. Here are 3 cases; Presbyters and Deacons; a Bishop
and Deacons; this in case of necessity where more Presbyters could not be had:
this Bishop, as has been shown before, could be nothing above a Presbyter;
none of those cross our design: for the third, viz. a Bishop set over
Presbyters, first Epiphanius does not say it was so appointed by the Apostles,
but [it was done] it is like he means by succeeding Ages. 2. He does not say
that this Bishop was set over Presbyters with jurisdiction; he might be merely
a praeses, so there is nothing here to prove that the Apostles ever settled any
thing contrary to Parity of Presbyters. The Testimony out of Clem. Alexan. even
with Salmasius his commentary proves no more but that in some places were more
Presbyters, in some fewer, in some but one. His last Testimony says nothing at
all to the purpose: only that the Apostles settled things by degrees, not that
ever they set up Bishops.

Sect. 16. The 2d Conclusion that he infers, p. 332. That in Churches
consisting of a multitude of Believers, or where there was a probability of a
great increase by preaching the Gospel, the Apostles did settle a College of
Presbyters, whose Office was partly to govern the Church already formed, and
partly to labor in converting more. This we close with, and from it, and the
former Conclusion which make up his whole Argument, infer the quite contrary to
his design, viz. That the Apostles kept a most uniform course, (so far as
necessity did permit) in settling the Government of Churches: and that they
settled the Government in the hands of Presbyters acting in a Society where they
could be had, and singly where more could not be: and that they never settled it
in the hand of a Bishop Ruling over Presbyters. All this is evident from what
has been said. He takes occasion, p. 336, etc. to speak against the Office of
Ruling-Elders in the Church: in which Dispute he touches not any (except one
Scripture) of those arguments which are brought by the Defenders of that
Office: which is but a slight way of disputing against any Opinion. It is not
needful to our Design to handle this Debate fully, till that be answered which
is written by the Author of the Assertion of the Government of the Church of
Scotland: by the Author of the Treatise of Ruling-Elders and Deacons: by the
London Ministers in their jus divinum Reg. Eccles. and in their Vindication of
Pres. Gov. by Smect. by Calv. Just. lib. 4. c. 4. sect. 8. and lib. 4. c. 11.
sect. 6. by Peter Martyr, Loc. com. clas. 4. c. 1. number. 11. and many others.
Wherefore I shall only answer what this Author has said against the Truth in
this Point. Whereas among many other Scriptures proving this Office, 1 Timothy
5.17. is brought as one, there being implied there a distinction of Elders that
Rule well, and are to be honored with double Honor; into such as labor in
the Word and Doctrine, and another member of the distinction not expressed,
which can be none else but Elders who rule and do not labor in the Word and
Doctrine, i. e. whose Office it is only to Rule, not to Teach publicly, as
Pastors. Of this Scripture he pretends to bring a full, clear and easy
understanding, viz. That of the Elders that were ordained in great Churches,
(who had power to discharge all Pastoral acts, but did not all attend equally
the same part of the work) some did most attend the Ruling of the Flock already
converted; others labored most in converting others by Preaching; and that
according to their several abilities: now these last deserved greater Honor,
both because their burden was greater, and their sufferings more. This is no
new, though it be a false interpretation: for the Author of Asser. Govern. Chapter
of Scotl. p. 48, 46. brings it as one of Dr. Fields Answers to the same
place: or rather two of them which by our Author are put together. But against
this exposition of the Text, I thus argue: 1. This Gloss supposes that there
were Elders, whose Office it was to Teach and to Rule: and yet they did
ordinarily neglect the one part of this their work, and contented themselves
with doing the other. Is it imaginable that the Lord allows any Honor at all
upon such? and yet the Text allows double Honor, even on unpreaching Elders,
though the Preachers have it more especially. This Reason is strongly enforced,
if we consider that Church. Power communicated by Christ to the Officers of his
house, is not only a License or Permission (as we noted before) but a charge of
which they must give an account: as it is said of Church-rulers Heb. 13.17.
Neither do I see how any who by their Office are Preachers of the Gospel, can
free themselves of that wherewith the Apostle charge himself, 1 Cor. 9.16.
Necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is unto me if I Preach not the Gospel; and of
that charge laid on Timothy (who was as much taken up with ruling as any) 2 Timothy 4.2. that he should Preach the word, be instant in Season, out of Season:
May men when Christ has put them in Office and given them a charge; choose
what part of the work of that Office and Charge they will do, and what not? But
I perceive, this Man's principles lead him to subject all Christ's Institutions
to Men's will, to cut and carve of them as they please: Christ has given
Pastors a charge that they should Teach and Rule his Church. He had pleaded
before the Ruling-power may be taken from some, and laid on others; now he
affirms the same of Teaching-power: this is intolerable boldness. 2. We have
no better ground for judging of the diversity of Officers in the Church, than
by considering diverse sorts of work which some did ordinarily with the Lord's
approbation, that others did not, but were employed in other work. What better
Note can we have to know what is a Man's Office; than his work which he is
ordinarily employed in, and that with God's own approbation? Wherefore, if some
Elders Preached; others preached not, but Ruled; we must think that these were
distinct Officers, and that their Office led them only to do what they did. 3.
This learned Author should have brought some reason for what he alleges, viz.
That these unpreaching Eledrs, who Ruled, had power to preach, (...), shall not
persuade us of it: neither is there the least show of warrant for such an
Assertion. If it be said that they preached sometimes, and therefore could not
be without Preaching-power. Answ. It cannot be proved that there were any
Officers in the Apostolic Church, who had Preaching power, or did sometimes
Preach, and yet were so taken up with Ruling, that they did not ordinarily
Preach. 4. We may with as much (yea the same) reason say, That every Officer in
the Church had all Church Power, and might occasionally exert it; though some
according to their gift did ordinarily exert one part; others, another: and
that Deacons might preach, and do all the work of the Pastors, though
ordinarily, being better gifted for that, they served Tables: but this is to
jumble together what the Lord has made an ordinary separation of. 5. This
Opinion makes the different work that Church Officers are employed in, not to
proceed from distinct Office or Power, but from different gifts, which would
bring a Babel of confusion into the Church; For 1. As Men think they are
gifted, so will they take up their Work; and so most will readily incline to
the easiest work, and think their gift lies that way, to the great neglect of
the difficult and main business; and because Ruling is sweet to an ambitious
mind, and laborious preaching is painful; we shall have abundance of Rulers,
but few Teachers. 2. By the same reason one may neglect all the parts of his
work, that he may neglect one: pretending that his gift is not for this, nor
for that, and that they may be done by others. If it must be said. the Church
must appoint them their work, and not leave it to their choice. Answ. If the
Church appoint Timothy's work to be to Rule, and exempt him from preaching
ordinarily; I see not how he differs from the Ruling-Elders, which this
Author disputes against, notwithstanding his supposed power to Preach; which
to him is an idle Talent (I mean, if this be done warrantably: otherwise it is
not done) especially, if the Church give him no more power than Christ has
given to every Pastor, that is, to Rule over the flock with the equal
concurrence of his fellow-Presbyters; not to rule over Presbyters by himself
singly: for that they cannot give him this Power, I have before proved. 6. If
the Elders that preach, because of the greatness of their work and sufferings,
have more honor than they who only Rule; then the Bishop being of this last
sort, must be inferior in honor to those other Presbyters: especially this
must hold in the opinion of this Author, who holds, That Bishop and Presbyter
differ not jure divino: but this I suppose will not well please his Lordship
and indeed is very unsuitable to the dignity of one who Rules over others:
sure the dignity of Church Officers is to be reckoned by the dignity of their
place; where it is different: as it is by the discharge of their work where
their place is the same.

Sect. 17. To strengthen this his Conceit, he brings a testimony out of
Chrysostom. affirming, that the (...), the fixed Officers of particular Churches,
who were (...), were inferior to them, who preaching the Gospel, traveled
abroad into diverse places. Answ. This is not at all to the purpose: for they
who so traveled abroad, were Evangelists; no fixed Officers: but of the
former, the Apostle does not at all speak here; It rather appears (says the
Author, Asser. 1. Gover. Chapter Scotl.) that Elders were ordained in every City,
there to abide with their particular charges, Acts 14.23. Tit. 1.5. He argues
also thus against Ruling-Elders: These Elders are not the Bishops Paul speaks
of, 1 Timothy 3. For these must be (...), verse 2. l. Answ. The Author now cited,
answers this Argument brought by Dr. Field, and cites Beza, answering to
Sarav. who had used it. Passing his first Answer, I make use of the 2d, which
is Beza's, That the Ruling-Elder, though he ought not to Teach publicly as a
Pastor, yet he ought to Teach privately, and occasionally, according as the
need of every one requires: it is his part to oversee the manners of the
people, and to bring miscarriages to the Church to be censurd; but first he is
to labor to reclaim the Offender by private admonition, according to Christ's
Rule, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. and that not only ex charitate, as every Christian
ought to do; but virtute Officii and authoritatively: and for this cause he
ought to be a Man of Understanding above the common sort, both able and willing
to Teach (so the word bears) so far as his place requires. Again, he argues
from Act. 20.28. All the Elders of Ephesus had a Pastoral charge, for they are
bid take heed to the Flock as Overseers: but this is inconsistent with the
Notion of a Lay-Elder, Ergo, there were none such at Ephesus. Answ. The Major
is false: they had a charge and oversight: but every oversight is not Pastoral.
Ruling also falls under this Notion, which is the Office of the Elder we
plead for. He confesses, p. 338. the weakness of that argument from
Maintenance, which he says brought Blondel quite off from Ruling-Elders, in
that place of 1 Timothy 5 17. It is true, Blondel de jur. Pleb. in Reg. Eccl. p
77, etc. alleges, That these Elders are not there meant, because Maintenance
(implied in double Honor, as is clear from ver. 18. compared) is due to these,
but not to Ruling-Elders. Yet the Argument, with all the enforcements of that
learned Author, will not prove what he designeth. For 1. Some famous
Interpreters understand this double Honor, only of a degree of Honor beyond
these spoken of before, viz. Widows, so Calv. in loc. 2. How shall it be
proved, that Maintenance is not due to Ruling-Elders, or the seniores plebis,
as Blondel calls them? His arguments taken from the disuse of it, will not
conclude this: neither what he says of the want of Power in any to remit it:
for where it cannot be had for them, necessity excuses the withholding of it:
where it cannot be had, let the Inhauncers of Church-Rents answer for it, if
such necessaries be not supplied to the Church: neither do I blame him for
blaming ( p. 83.) these Protestant Nations, who have cast out Abbacies which
abounded in Riches, have rather taken the Revenues into the State-Treasury,
than allowed it for such good Uses as this. I add for further answer out of
Asser. Gover. Chapter Scotl. p. 105. That a stipend, though due, is not essential
to the Office, either of Elders or Ministers; and therefore the want of the
one, can be no argument against the other; But neither is Blondel against the
Office of Ruling-Elders (though he deny them to be spoken of in 1 Timothy 5.17.
but disputes strongly for it, yea, and groundeth it on the Apostles practice,
p. 85, which is an evidence of Divine Right. The next thing Mr. Stilling. says
against Ruling-Elders, is, That if we remove from the Scripture to the
Primitive Church, we shall find the greatest difficulty to trace the footsteps
of a Lay-Elder through the Records of Authority for the first 3 Centuries
especially. Answ. 1. We look on the Scripture as a surer Word of Prophecy, and
therefore are unwilling to pass from it, to that which Mr. Stilling. has above
proved, to be utterly so insufficient to determine in matters of
Church Government. 2. Others are of another mind than this Author. Blondel. de
jur. pleb. in Reg. Eccl. p. 85. aliis igitur, says he, firmamentis, iis
nimirum, qui nobis Apostolorum primamque per trium saeculorum periodum
antiquitatis, praxin stravit, seniorum plebis Institutio and functio (ut sic
dicam) vitae a protestantibus per Gallias, Scotiam, Belgiam instituta
statuminanda est. And Asser. Grov. Chapter Scot. par. 1. c. 8, 9. Unpregnable and
abundant Testimonies out of Antiquity are brought for this Office, which seeing
Mr. Stilling. has not Answered, it is needless to insist on them. 3. But, and
if in many places in the Primitive times this Office was disused, it was their
fault, and taken notice of by the better sort. Calv. in 1 Timothy 5.17. speaking
of this Office, says, Hunc morem Ambrosius absolevisse conqueritur doctorum
Ignavia, vel potius superbia dum soli volunt eminere. See Testimonies for the
Antiquity of it. Smect. sect. 15.

Sect. 18. His second proof of his second Proposition, viz. That the Apostles
took diverse courses in Ruling Churches, is p. 340. from the multitude of
unfixed Officers residing in some places, who managed the affairs of the Church
in chief, during their residence: such were Apostles and Evangelists. In some
places, says he, these were, others not, and in some places no Officers but
these. Answ. This is obviated by our 3d Observe. For the Question is only about
Government by ordinary and abiding Officers, and that only where they could be
had, of whom this proof does not speak. His 3d Proof, ibid. is from the
different customs observed in the Church after the Apostles times. This is most
inconsequent: yea, one might as well reason thus: In aftertimes they set up
Metropolitans, and at last a Pope, Ergo, it was so in the Apostles times. We
say then, That diversity in after Ages flowed from this; that Men (following
Mr. Stilling. Principles) did not follow divine Institution, or Apostolic
practice, but their own Wit and Reason. Beside, the diversities he here
instanceth in, are not to the purpose; for he does not show us that Parity was
in one place, and imparity in another; but that in one place the Presbyters
chused their Bishop, in another not.

Sect. 19. We come at last to his 3d proposition about Apostolic practice p.
341. viz. That a mere Apostolical practice being supposed, is not sufficient of
it self for the founding of an unalterable and perpetual Rite for the Form of
Government in the Church which is supposed to be founded on that Practice. This
doctrine he laid down before par. 1 c. 1. p. 23. And we examined p. where I
stated that question far otherwise than he seems here to do, and indeed this
proposition, as here laid down, might be yielded by us: neither does it nor his
Arguments for it touch the controversy, which is andabatarum more pugnare. We
lay no obligation on any by a mere Apostolical Practice; but by their Practice
considered as done in the same case that we are in. Neither 2. do we say that
such practice is sufficient of it self to bind us, for it has Gods command of
Imitation, of which before; and equal Morality of that action to us and then to
concur with it in this. Neither do we say. 3. That their Practice does found a
Riet: it does but declare what is founded on the will of Christ as that which
we must do. Most of all his Arguments are obviated by what is already said. The
first, that they did many things without intention of obliging others, as going
abroad to Preach the Gospel unprovided; Paul's not taking wages etc. This does
not touch the point, seeing these things were for a peculiar reason. To the
same purpose is the 2d Argument p. 343. (which indeed is but the same Argument)
that they did many things on particular occasions, emergencies and
circumstances; as Paul's celebate, Community of goods, Preaching in private
Houses, Fields, etc. That which only is worth the noticing in this Argument is
p. 344. That he requires, before Apostolical Practice be obligations, that it
be made appear, that what they did was not according as they saw reason
depending on the several circumstances of Time, place and persons, but from
some unalterable Law of Christ. Answer. This we are able to prove, as to ruling
the Churches by a Parity of Elders, for they did ordinarily so practice, and
that where the place, persons and times were not the same: neither can it be
showed that ever they did otherwise. i. e. set up a Bishop over Presbyters: is
not this sufficient ground to think that they did this not occasionally but by
a Law of Christ? His 3d Argument, is That the Office of Deaconesses is of
Apostolic practice: and yet now laid aside as not binding. Answer. 1. It is
the opinion of some Learned men, as Peter Martyr Loc. Com. clas. 4. c. 1. number.
11. and the Author of Asser. Gov. Chapter Scot. par. 1. c. 5. p. 38 (who cites
also Aretius) that though women might be taken into that part of the Office of
the Deacon that concerns caring for the Sick; yet men also might exercise it:
which is gathered from To. 12.8. (...) he that shows mercy, and 1 Timothy 5.8.
(...) though Widows be there spoken of, yet the best interpreters turn these
words in the masculine gender; and our translation thus, If any provide not for
his own House, which they would not do if they thought that Widows only were
they to whom that Office belonged. 2. Supposing them to be used in the
Apostolic Church, there may be a peculiar reason for it: in those days of
persecution many were strangers, others cast off by their Parents and Friends
for the profession of the truth: when such were sick, none could so well attend
them as women: the case is not so now: and if it were, sure this example might
show us our Duty. 4. If it can be proved to have been the constant Use of
Apostolic Churches, and that with out such extraordinary necessity; then the
neglect of it is a great defect in the Church. His fourth Argument is, that
some Apostolic rites and Customs are out of use, Ergo, their example does not
bind. He instanceth dipping in Baptism, Love Feasts, community of goods, the
Holy Kiss. Answer. We deny the antecedent, being understood of Customs not
built on a reason peculiar to them. His Instances prove nothing, dipping cannot
be proved to have been only used, and if it were; to us it is not false,
because of the coldness of our Climate. We deny the love Feasts to have been
Apostolical. Yea they are expressly condemned as used in the Church 1 Cor.
11.22. and if they were used elsewhere, it was a Civil Custom, and so not
falling in within the present debate. Kissing was the Civil custom in
Salutation; this the Apostle 1 These. 5.26. would have them to use holily:
neither can it be proved that ever it was religiously observed in the
Apostolical Church. Community of goods was built on a peculiar reason, suting
those times of persecution, and so not to the purpose. Whatever can be proved
to be Apostolical and falls not under the exceptions before mentioned, we
shall bear the blame if we observe them not.

CHAP. VII.
THE Medium by which he here proves the Form of Church Government to be
indifferent, is taken from the practice of the ancient Churches in Ages
succeeding that of the Apostles: he takes much pains to prove that the
Primitive Church did not conceive it self obliged to observe one individual
Form; but settled things as it judged them tend most to peace and edification,
without any antecedent obligation binding to one course: and thence infers,
that no certainty can be brought from their practice to prove one Form to be
juris divini. We are not concerned here to enter the lists with him: it shall
be sufficient to our purpose, to animadvert a few things in general. 1. It is
no great matter if we yield him the conclusion, seeing we have sufficient
ground to build the divine Right of Presbyterial Government upon, in Scripture;
and so may spare any Argument that may be brought for it from antiquity. 2. It
is no wonder that the one Primitive and Apostolical yea, divine Form of
Government was not every where stuck to in after ages: seeing the ambition of
many men began soon to carry them beyond the boundaries Christ had set, to
devise what might best suit their own humors, rather than what was for the
Churches good: the Apostle tells us that even in his days (which was a
wonder) this Mystery of iniquity had begun to work, 2 These. 2.7. It is no
wonder then, that soon after it began to appear: and when some had thus
miscarried, and others stuck to the Apostolical frame of things, this might
quickly breed a diversity. 3. It will easily appear to any who reads this
Chap. that all the Authors discourse tends to prove that the ancient
Churches thought not Episcopacy to be jure divino: let them who are concerned
answer him in this if they can, I am convinced of the truth of what he says.
But let us take a short view of the grounds on which he establishes what he
asserteth in this Chap.

Sect. 2. The first is, That the extent of the Power of Church Officers did
increase merely from the enlargment of the bounds of Churches: which he makes
out in 4 steps or periods. The first is, when Churches were the same with
Christians in a whole City. And here he handles 3 things, first he shows
that the Primitive constitution of Churches was in a Society of Christians in
the same City: where he will have the name [Church] in Scripture to be only
given to that, not to a particular congregation meeting in one place. I do not
deny but the name is given as he says, because of that confederacy in
discipline among diverse congregations in one City: yet neither the name nor the
nature of a Church must be denied to a single congregation; for a Church in
Scripture Language is a company met together to serve God: now this agrees
well to a single Congregation; seeing in it not only word and Sacraments are
administered, but also discipline is exercised, as shall anon appear. All that
he says proves the former Use of the word; but nothing against this latter.
2. He speaks of the Government of these Churches p. 352. And that 1. before
Parishes, or distinct Congregations were settled. 2. after they were settled
(about which he largely disputes when it began, which is not to our purpose)
in both cases, he says, they were ruled in common; and p. 354. That it is a
weak conceit to think that after the settling of Congregations, every one had a
distinct Presbytery to rule it, and p. 356. this crumbling says he, of
Church Power into every Congregation is a thing absolutely disowned by the
greatest and most Learned Patrons of Presbytery beyond the Seas, as may be seen
in Calv. Beza, Salmasius, Blondel, Gerson, Bucer and others. I do readily yield
to him, that it is most probable that in times of Persecution, particular
congregations could not be soon settled: and that then, where there were in one
City more Christians then could meet in one place, they were ruled only in
Common, yea and had their meetings for worship occasionally as they could. Also
we grant that when Congregations were settled, the several Congregrations in
one City were ruled by one common Presbytery made up of the Officers of them
all: but that they had not their distinct Presbyters that ruled them severally
in subordination to this superior Presbyters we utterly deny; and I look upon
it as a too supercilious assertion, to call this a weak conceit. seeing it is
well known that it has been the Judgment of men with whom, for ability, I
think Mr. Still. modesty will not suffer him to compare himself. But what ever
be of the ability of them who own it; there is reason for it so weighty, as may
excuse it from weakness; which is this: Single Congregations meeting ordinarily
together for the worship of God, cannot but have many affairs that do only
concern them, not the other Churches or Congregations in the same City; as
admission or exclusion of their members from the Lords Supper, rebuking them,
consulting about the time and ordering of their Administration etc. It Is very
unfit to bring all these things, in prima instantia, to the Presbytery that
rules in common. This I confirm out of what himself has written, p. 368. He
says that Country Churches had their own rulers who ruled them, though with
subordination to those in the City: is there not the same reason why particular
Congregations, though in City should have their Rulers? it is as really
inconvenient to bring every matter of a City-Congregation, at the first hand,
to the common Presbyters, as it is to bring the matters of a Country Parish to
it. Yet we acknowledge that it is to be ordered according as it conduces most
to the good of the Church: neither if we should yield all that he says, is it
any thing against the Divine Right of Parity. What he says of these worthy
Divines disowning this Power of particular Congregations, we have cause to
suspend our belief of it, till he bring some testimony of their own writings to
prove it, which he has not so much as essaid. It is like they were against
Independent Power of Particular Congregations; not their subordinate Power: for
the Testimonies that he brings they prove no more than what we have granted,
viz. That the Congregations were ruled in common: not, that they had no
particular Government in each of them; as any may easily see by considering
them. Neither is it any wonder that the records of Antiquity speak of the acts
of those greater, not of the lesser and Congregational Presbyteries: seeing
matters coming before the latter were of so private concernment; such as use
not often to be so much taken notice of. The 3d thing he speaks of in this
first step of the growth of Churches, is, what Relation the Churches in several
Cities had one to another, and to the lesser City, that were under them: and
here he maintains that Metropolitans are not of Divine Right; to which we
agree: I add, that in the first and more pure Primitive times they had no Being
at all, as is clearly made out by Diocl. Altar. Damasc. c. 2. Where he shows
that Justine and Ireneus have nothing of the different degree of Bishops: and
that Cyprian in the middle of the third Century does often assert their Parity.
The second step is, p. 368. When Churches took in the Villages and Territories
adjoining to that City: he says, that the City-Presbyters did Preach in these
places, and adjoined the Converts to the City-Church. till after, when they
were increased in Villages they got peculiar Officers set over them, who did
rule them, yet with subordination to the City-Church. This last I only dislike:
neither do I see it proved by him, for the Titles of matrix ecclesia, et
Cathedra principalis signify no more but a greater dignity and primacy of
Order, not of Jurisdiction. What he says of that Eulogie, sending abroad
consecrated pieces of bread, does not prove the point: and also it was a
superstitious custom: the bad improvement of it appears in the Papish
adoration of their Hostia. His next step is p. 372. When Churches did associate
in one Province: where he speaks of Provincial Synods once a year, and
shows that no Bishop had power over another, but that their Honor depended
on their Sees. Thence he comes to the last step, when the whole World became
Christians, and the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople did strive for the place
of Universal Bishop. I hope it appears to any who consider, that there is
nothing yet said by him which can overturn the Divine Rite of Parity, even to
have been maintained in the Primitive times (I mean not of the last step he
speaks of, when Papacy it self began to appear) for all that has been said
shows that Imparity was never judged of necessity; and that the Imparity
which was used was rather of Order than of Jurisdiction, which is nothing
against the Divine Rite of that Parity we plead for.

Sect. 3. His 2d Argument p. 374. is, That the same Form was not of old
observed in all Churches: where he shows that in many places, there were no
Bishops; as he proves of Scotland and other places. This we accept of, and
add, that where there were Bishops, it is not, nor cannot be by him proved,
that they had any Superior Jurisdiction, but only Precedence: and so the Divine
Rite of Parity may stand for all this. His 3d Argument p. 377. is, That the
Government of the Church was conform to the Civil Government, which he says is
insisted on by Learned Persons on all sides; especially after the division of
the Roman Empire. And he gives some Instances of it in the correspondency of
Civil Prefects and Archbishops in several places. To all this let me say a few
words. 1. This Argument destroys it self: for in the first antiquity which
was the surest, the Powers of the World were not Christian, and so the Church
could not conform to the state in her Offices. 2. It is here confessed, that
this Conformity was especially (I believe it may be said only) after that
division of the Roman Empire: but those were the times when the man of Sin had
almost got into his chair; and therefore their practice can prove nothing of
the mind of the Primitive Church. 3. If this notion hold, then it must be
looked upon as a lawful and prudent expedient, that there be one Pope as there
was one Emperor. This Mr. Still. must maintain, or he says nothing. 4. If this
was their Rite of old, then the Church behoved to be under two chief Bishops
when the Roman Emperor was divided into two. But this he does not allege, but
rather shows how it was divided into 13 Diocesses. 5. If we receive this
opinion, then in a Kingdom there must be one head, who must have his Council
of Bishops, without a charge of the several Diocesses (for the Kings Council
has not Precedence of several parts of the Country) and they must authorize
their deputies, like Sheriffs, yearly etc. And in a Commonwealth there must be
Independent Government: but this I hope the Author will not own. 6. It is most
unreasonable to say that the Church Government should be conform to the Civil;
because they are conversant about things and aim at ends so different: the one
respects things that are most different in several Nations, viz. Men's Civil
Interest, and Customs and Inclinations: the other respects that which ought
to be every where the same, viz. Religion. His 4. Argument p. 379. is, That
other Episcopal Government was settled in the Church, yet Presbyterian
Ordination was looked on as valid. This is not against us. His last Argument p.
382. is, That several restraints were laid on by Councils about the Observation
of Rites and Customs and something of Church Discipline; but what is this I
pray to Parity or Imparity? we are not against determinations of Indifferent
things that concern order and decency: though we think that the Form of
Government is determined by Christ, not left to the will of man.

CHAP. VIII.
IN this Chapter our Author would make us believe, that all the world was ever
of his Opinion: and indeed this is so common for men to alledg, whatever be
their singular notions of things, that we are not to lay much weight upon it.
Videlius took as much pains to make all reformed Divines to speak for
Erastianism. I might excuse my self from meddling any further with this last
Chapter of his. 1. From the needlesness of the thing; because we do not build
the Divine Right of Presbytery on men's Opinions, who we know can err, and
therefore if all the world were against it, if the Scripture be for it so must
we. 2. From the disadvantage I lie under as to this part of the dispute with
him. If I had been of Mr. Still. opinion in this point in controversy, I might
through compliance with courses have been furnished with a good Library and
other conveniences of studying, the want of which does incapacitate me to
search into the opinions of those worthy men which he cites: in doing whereof,
I hope it would not be difficult to show that some of their Testimonies are
made to speak otherwise than they thought; and others of them are
irreconcilable with what themselves have elsewhere written.

Sect. 2. Notwithstanding we shall essay briefly to say as much to his
allegations, as may take off that edge they seem to have, for cutting asunder
the cause which we maintain. P. 384. he has a confident assertion. I believe,
says he, there will upon the most impartial survey, scarce be one Church of
the Reformation brought which does embrace any form of Government, because it
looked upon that form as only necessary by an unalterable standing Law: but
every one took up that form of Government which was judged most suitable to the
state and condition of the several Churches. I wonder to see this so
confidently asserted, without proof. It had been incumbent on Mr. Still. for
confirming this his dream, to have gone through the confession of the several
reformed Churches; and let us see on what ground they then built their
Church Government; for it will not sufficiently prove what was the judgment of
these Churches, that some eminent men in them did assert such things: which
latter of the two he only insisteth on, and that to little purpose too, as I
hope shall appear. But the falsehood of this Allegiance I will make appear
afterward, when I have tried the strength of the Testimonies he brings for
his opinions.

Sect. 3. He begins with them who have asserted the mutability of the form
of Government in Thesi where he makes it his chief business to show, that the
Church of England of old was of this opinion. To which I answer, That those
worthy men having nothing in their eye but Episcopacy; their work was to oppose
the Divine Right of that: there was never an other form brought in competition
with it, nor much minded by them: and therefore we agree with them in their
design. Of Foreign Divines, his first Testimony is of Chemnitius: to which I
cannot give a particular answer, because not having his book I cannot try it:
only this confideration I shall lay down, to take off the strength of it.
Neither Mr. Still. nor any man else ought to lay weight on this Testimoney to
the purpose it is brought for: for either he means that the degrees of
Church Officers in respect of precedence are left free, or in respect of
Jurisdiction: if the first, it is nothing contrary to what we hold, for we
acknowledge it indifferent, whether there be a standing Precedent over
Presbytery or not. If the second, he is directly contrary to Mr. Stillingfleet,
who maintains, that the Church may set up no new Officers but what Christ has
instituted, as we have seen before: now an order of Officers with jurisdiction
above what Christ has instituted, cannot but be a sort of Officers that he
has not instituted: wherefore Mr. Still. could not make Use of this Testimony,
neither ought any else, for it crosses the Scripture; which ( Romans 12.6, 7, 8.
Ephesians. 11.1. 1 Cor. 12.28.) does on purpose enumerate the Officers of the
Church in all their degrees. I dispute not now what they are; but sure they are
not left at liberty; seeing the Lord has so often declared his mind in this
Point: to what purpose is it said that the Lord has in his Church such and
such Officers; if men may at their pleasure set these or others, more or fewer
of them in the Church.

Sect. 4. His next Testimony is the Centuriators of Magdeburge, but it
contains an answer in its forehead, viz. That it speaks not to the thing;
for they say no more but that it is neither Recorded, nor Commanded, how many
Ministers should be in each Church; but that their may be more or fewer,
according to the number of the Church. What is this to their parity or
impatity? it is a token that he is very scant of Witnesses, when he calls in
them who say so little to his purpose. The next Testimony is of Zanchy, which
he makes to speak very fair for him: but he has unhandsomly concealed that
which is the Key to understand the meaning of this Author; for the Reader may
evidently see his drift, if he first look into Sect. 9. ( de Relig. c. 25.)
where he asserteth that Christ has only given to his Church two forts of
ordinary Teachers, viz. Pastors and Doctors: the same he asserteth, Sect. 10.
and yet (which is his modesty) he will not condemn the Fathers who had other
Orders of Officers: but what his meaning is, in this his condescendency, he
explaineth Sect. 11. That whereas in after Ages, one Pastor was set over the
rest (non ut Dominus, sed ut Rector in Academia reliquis Collegis,) this he
thinks was lawful, and yet setteh this note upon that practice in the same
Sect. Qua de re Hieronymi tum alibi, tum in Epist. ad Evagr. and in Commentar.
Epist. ad Tit. c. 10. Narratio and sententia nobis probatur, dicentis totum boc
magis ex consuetudine quam ex dominicae dispositionis veritate profectum esse.
Which is as much as to say, He thought it rather somewhat tolerable through
necessity, than allowable. Which small glance at the tolerableness of a
Precedence in the Church (if it may pass for so much) was not well taken by
other Worthy Divines; as appears by Zanchius's own observations on this his
Confession (which Mr. Stilling. takes notice of, but passes what might make
against him) for Magnus quidem vir, as Zant. calls him: who was well
satisfied with the rest of his Confession, excepteth this which he had said of
the Archbishops and Hierarchy; and that not only as what did dispeafe
himself, but was unsuitable to the harmony of confessions that the Protestant
Churches were then drawing up: as appears by a part of an Epistle of that
Magnus vir, to Zan. which he inserteth to the Preface to his Observations. So
that it seems, this was generally disliked by Protestant Divines, contrary to
what Mr. Stilling. would make us believe, viz. That all the Protestant Churches
thought the form of Government indifferent. All which being laid together, let
any then judge what great advantage Mr. Stilling's cause has received from this
Testimony of Zanchie. Especially, if we consider with what Weapon Zan.
defends this his Opinion, viz. That it was generally practiced by the Ancient
Church; and he would not take upon him to disallow them: as may be seen in his
Observations on Chap. 25. of his Confessions. We see he brings no better
Warrant than the practice of Men who might, and did in many things err. But Mr.
Stilling. tells us of the same Opinion of Zan. de 4to praec. loc. 4. qu. 2.
p. 943, etc. and indeed he teaches the same thing, but with some advantage to
our design: for, after he had made the ordinary Officers to be of three sorts,
viz. Pastors, and Doctors, and Ruling-Elders (whose Office he proves from
Scripture, and asserteth as the Opinion of the Reformed Divines generally) and
Deacons: and had proved at length p. 950, 951, 952. Presbyters and Bishops to
be the same in Scripture: He shows p. 952, 953. That in after-Ages one of the
Presbyters was set over the rest: but adds, to qualify it p. 953. Idcirco
damnari haec, piae vetustatis ordinatio and consuetudo non potest, modo plus
sibi authoritatis non usurpet Episcopus quam habent reliqui Ministri, ut recte
monet Hieronymus. Here he overturneth all Mr. Stilling's design, for such a
Bishop is but a mere President. He thinks he has gained another Testimony from
M. Bucer, whom Zan. in those his observations cites: but Mr. Stilling. has
not told us wherein Bucer speaks to his purpose; wherefore take this account
of Bucer's Opinion out of Zanch. He cites two large Testimonies of Bucer: the
first is out of his Commentary on the Ephesians. where he speaks of seven kinds
of Teaching, viz. By Reading, Interpretation, Instruction, (Doctrina)
Exhortation, Catechisms, Disputing, private Admonition: from which he says,
That in the Ancient Church they brought in seven kinds of Teachers. Now what is
this to the Parity or imparity of Ministers? He speaks nothing here of
setting a Lord-Bishop over his Brethren, as a thing lawfully practiced in the
ancient Church. Yea, if we consider his Discourse well, we shall find that
these were not diverse Offices, but the work of the Pastors divided among more,
where there were many Officers in one Church: yet so as all might exercise all
these Duties; and so here is no multiplication of Offices beyond Christ's
Institution. Though I do not deny, that this distributing of the work of
Ministers did afterward begin to be looked upon, as making several orders of
Officers: but this he does not approve of. The second Testimony of Bucer is out
of his de Discipl. Clerical. The sum of which is this (for the words are too
long to be transcribed) That in the Ancient Church they set up a Bishop among
the Presbyters; 'Vt Consul inter Senatores, (this is devolving their Power into
his hands, which Mr. Still. pleads for) That these Bishops and Presbyters did
meet when occasion required, in Synods; that one was over the Synod to
convocate and moderate it, (this is not to have Jurisdiction over the rest) who
was called Metropolitan, from the chief City, where he used to reside: then
over the Metropolitans were set up Patriarchs (but behold how careful he is to
protest against imparity, as to Jurisdiction) of whom he says, His tamen
Primatibus Episcopis nihil omnino juris erat in alios Episcopos aliasve
Ecclesias, ultra quod dixi cuique Metropolitae in Ecclesias atque Episcopos
suae provinciae: Which, we took notice before, was to convocate and moderate
the Synod. At last he shows how among these Patriarchs the Bishop of Rome was
set up as Chief: and then how all good Order went to ruin. Now let this
Testimony be considered, and we shall hope for more advantage by it, than Mr.
Stilling. could expect. From it we draw these two Conclusions: 1. That Bucer
looked upon setting up a Precedent over Presbyters, as the greatest length that
the Primitive Church did or could go toward the making of imparity among
Ministers. 2. That even this their practice, though not unlawful in it self;
yet is so inconvenient, that it was the Method and Mean that Antichrist got
into his Chair by.

Sect. 5. He comes next to the French Divines, and begins with Fregevile,
whose Testimony we think not worth the Answering, seeing as Mr. Still.
confesses, he was Episcopal. His opinion did not suit well with the principles
of that Church he lived in, as we shall see after. The next is Blondel, that
learned writer for Presbyters, as he is called: whose words cited by Mr. Still.
are not at all to the purpose; as any may see at first view; seeing he says no
more, but, that it is in the Churches Power to make a perpetual Precedent or
not. For Bochartus his opinion, that neither Presbyterialis nor Episcopalis
ordo is juris divini: if he mean the difference between them in jurisdiction,
and not only in Precedence: I see not how it can be defended, and not having
his Book I cannot determine how consistent it is with his own principles. For
Amiraldus, whom he brings next, his design of Union with the Lutherans, I
believe, did either stretch his opinion or made him stretch his affections to
an excess of condescendency, which cannot be excused but from his good
Intention.

Sect. 6. Our Author comes next to those who look on Parity as the Primitive
Form, and yet allow Episcopacy as a very Lawful and useful constitution.
Concerning those, I premise 2 general Remarques. 1. That what these worthy
Divines say to this purpose is to be understood, not of Episcopus Princeps, but
Praeses, according to that distinction very common among them. This we must
hold as only consistent with their principles, till the contrary be proved out
of their own writings. 2. That many things said by them to this purpose were
the over reaches of their desire to be one with them who differed from them in
this, but agreed in most things as the Lutherans and some English Divines: they
did often (as Smect. says of Spanhem to the same purpose, p. 65.) deliver a
Complement rather than their Judgment. But to come to particulars: he begins
with Cracanthorp, who excuses all the Reformed Churches from Aerianisin,
because they held not Imparity to be unlawful. But this man was a Son of the
Church of England (as they speak) and wrote in her defense against Ant. de
Domin. wherefore his Testimony of the opinion of the Reformed Churches is not
to be taken, being willing to have them all think as he did. They are better
defended from siding with Aerius by Smect. p. 79. where it is proved, that
Aerius was condemned for his Arianism and other Errors, but not for holding the
Divine Right of Parity: and that Jerome, Augustus, Sedulius, Primatius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, were of the same opinion with
Aerius in this. Next he brings the Augustane confession: of the Testimony of
which I have these 3 things to say. 1. This was not a confession of them who
are ordinarily called the Reformed Churches; but of the Lutherans; for at the
same meeting at Augusta did Zuinglius and the Helvetians give in their
confession apart, by themselves: wherefore it is no wonder, if these worthy
men, who were a reforming, but had not attained to that pitch of it which
others had, did retain some small tincture of the way according to which they
had been bred in this point. 2. Luther himself was not well pleased with this
confession, as appears by the Relation of Pezelius, who ( Mellific. Histor.
par. 3. p. 336.) says thus. Author vero confessionis cum Luthero qui in
Pontificiis concessum Stomachabatur confessionem rudem magis magisque
nespiritum extingueret, limabat, poliebat, et duriuscula, fermentumque vetus
redolentiaexpurgabat: via enim justi sicut aurora lucere pergit usque ad
meridiem, id quod ex ipsa apologia apparet. 3. All that is said in this
confession, is no more but an expression of their desire to conform and
condescend to the Papists in the Primitive order of the Church: but this was no
more but the Precedence of Bishops; the confession speaks not of the Lordly
power of Bishops as it then stood; that they could yield to that: so that even
the furthest they go, in their complemental condescendency, does not help Mr.
Still's cause; who pleads for the sole jurisdiction of Bishops as lawful.

Sect. 7. In the next place, he is not ashamed to force Calvin to speak for the
lawfulness of Episcopacy, which he could never comport with while he lived. He
brings his Instit. lib. 4. c. 4. sect. 1. and 4. in both which Sections he
alleges no more out of him but this; That the ancient Bishops had almost
nothing in their Canons which was beside the Word of God: and that they used no
other form of Governing the Church, than was prescribed in the Word. What does
this help his Cause? The Ancient Bishops in Calvin's judgment, were no more but
Praesides: These, he says, were not constituted beside the Word of God. This
is nothing to the scope of our Authors Discourse. I hope after to show that
Calvin was far from His mind. At present let it suffice to observe, that the
very words cited by Mr. Still. do make against him. For when Calvin says, Si
rem omisso vocabulo, intuemur, reperiemus veteteres Episcopos non aliam
regendae ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere ab ea, quam deus verbo suo
praescripsit: It is not evident, that he supposes God in his Word to have
prescribed a form of Church Government. And 2dly, That he asserteth, that the
Ancient Bishops (if we look to the thing, and do not understand the name
[Bishop] as now it is used for the Prelate) did stick close to this Form; What
could be more directly against Mr. Still.? Neither is he more happy in the
citing of Beza for him: for Beza's distinction of Bishop is well known, in
Divinus, i.e. Presbyter; Humanus, i. e. etc. a President or constant Moderator;
and Diabolicus, i. e. a Prelate with sole jurisdiction. The indifferency of the
2d he asserteth, and will not prescribe that Form used at Geneva (which was
without such a fixed President) to other Churches: but what is this to the
purpose? It is a pity to see a Learned Man at so much pains, and lose his
labor. It being so as has been showed. Mr. Still. does foully misrepresent the
state of the Controversy about Church Government, that was between the Church
of England and of Geneva in Queen Elizabeth's time: it was not, as he alleges,
whether Parity or Episcopacy were more convenient: but whether Prelacy putting
sole jurisdiction in the hand of a Bishop, or giving him power over his
Brethren, were lawful.

Sect. 8. Next he brings George Prince of Anbalt, Luther, Melancton, and
Calvin, professing their readiness to submit to Bishops, if they would do the
duty of Bishops. All which amounts to no more than this, That if Bishops would
keep within bounds, not usurp Authority over their Brethren, nor use it to the
destruction of Religion, they might be born with; but this makes nothing for
the lawfulness of Prelacy, which these Men did ever detest. For Jacobus
Heerbrandus, I am not acquainted with his Principles, nor his Book. Hemingius
(who comes next) speaks expressly of dispares dignitatis ordines, not
authoritatis; and so comes not up to the thing in Question. For Zepper his
judgment of the necessity of a Superintendent, it destroys our Authors
Hypothesis; for if it be necessary, it is not indifferent. If in any case such
a thing be necessary, it is in that case lawful, (nam necessitas quicquid
coegit defendit) in other cases it is unlawful. What he says of Bishops in
some Lutheran Churches, as Sweden, Denmark, etc. does not weigh with us,
knowing that they err in greater matters also. What he says of other Churches
that have their Praepositi or Seniores enjoying the same power with Ancient
Bishops; proves nothing of the lawfulness of Prelacy; We think their way
lawful: and whether it be convenient to them, or not, we judge not; but to us,
sad experience has proved it most inconvenient. The next thing that he
insisteth on, viz. Episcopal Divines, holding Episcopacy not necessary, it does
not concern us to Answer, and so we see to what amounte^ the strength of these
Testimonies, which he would fright us with, as if all Men were of his judgment.

Sect. 9. Having now seen of what force are our Authors Witnesses, brought for
the indifferency of the Form of Church Government; let us see if there can be
more pregnant Authority brought for the divine Right of it. I do not question
but many sheets may be filled with pertinent Citations to this purpose, by one
better stored with Writings of our Reformed Divines, and having leisure to
search them. I shall give some instances, such as my poor Library does afford,
both of Churches and of particular Divines. And before the Restorers of the
Truth, I shall mention those famous Conservators of it in the darkest times of
Antichristianism, the Waldenses, whom some of our Divines call Majores Nostros:
their Opinion in this may be seen in Waldensia Confess. Taboritarum per Joa.
Lukawitz. cap. 3. p. 5. Lex evangelica Jesu Christi -- per se sufficientissima
ad regimen Ecclesiae militantis, etc. 14. p. 32. Nos qui pro lege liberrima
Jesu Christi per se sufficienti, ad regimen Ecclesiae militantis, sine
Ceremoniis Legis veteris and ritibus humanis post adjectis, scientes, quia
securissimum est and optimum Magisterium Ecclesiae primitivae, quam regebant
Apostoli, actus imitari. We see here the sufficiency of Scripture for
Church Government asserted, and that without new Laws or humane devices; which
could not be if the particular Form were not determined in it, but left to Men's
devising: Also, that Apostolic practice is in this a Rule to us; both which
militate against Mr. Stilling's Discourse. I shall next bring the opinion of
the French and the Dutch Churches, held forth in their Confessions: which I
have out of Smect. sect. 14. The French Church Artic. 29.30. speaks thus:
Credimus veram Ecclesiam gubernari debere, ea politia quam dominus noster Jesus
Christus sancivit (then it may not be such as Men think fit, nor is it
indifferent) ita, viz. aut sui in ea Pastores, Presbyteri, sive seniores and
Diaconi (then Christ's institution is against Bishops, seeing he appoints the
rest, and leaves them out) ut doctrinae puritas retineatur. Credimus omnes
Pastores ubicunque collocati sint, eadem and aequali potestate inter se esse
praeditos (then there can be no imparity of power) sub uno illo capite and solo
universali Episcopo Jesu Christi. The Dutch Church, Art. 30. thus: Credimus
veram hane Ecclesiam debere regi ac gubernari, spirituali illa politia quam nos
deus ipse in verbo suo edocuit, ita ut sint in ea Pastores ac Ministri, qui
pure and concionentur and sacramenta administrent, sint etiam seniores and
Diaconi, qui Ecclesiae senatum constituant; ut his veluti mediis vera Religio
conservari, hominesque vitiis dediti spiritualiter corripi, and emendari
possint. Tunc enim rite and ordinate omnia fiunt in Ecclesia, cum viri fideles
and pii ad ejus gubernationem deliguntur, juxta Pauli praescriptum 1 Timothy 3.
caeterum ubicunque locorum sint verbi Dei Ministri, eandem atque aequalem omnes
habent tum potestatem tum authoritatem: ut qui sint aeque omnes Christi unici
illius universalis Episcopi and capitis Ecclesiae Ministri. What has ever been
the opinion of the Church of Scotland about the Divine Right of Presbyterial
Government, is so well known, that I need not mention it: also what has been
the judgment of the Presbyterian Ministers of England, both in the National
Synod of famous memory, and the Provincial Assembly of London, who have written
for the jus divinum of it.

Sect. 10. To this Truth also, the famous Professors of London bear their joint
Testimony. Synops. Pur. Theol. Disp. 48. These. 23. Nec tamen propterea
concedimus a solo aliquo Episcopo, sive Romano, sive Eugobino, ex motu proprio
aut plenaria authoritate, ut loquimur, hanc potestatem posse vendicari: sed
rectorum ac Presbyterorum Ecclesiae, concilium, totiusque adeo Ecclesiae aut
apertum, aut tacitum consensum, adhibendum esse; ex praescripto Christi ac
purioris Ecclesiae praxi asserimus. And this they prove, These. 24. Because that
[Tell the Church] cannot be understood of one Bishop. Calvin is clear for us;
for he makes the Officers of the Church to be by Christ's Institution; and
shows who they are that he has Instituted. Instit. lib. 4. c. 3. sect. 4.
Also, c. 4. sect. 1. He shows how in the Primitive Church, they studied
carefully to adhere to God's Institution in the Government of the Church. And
on Phil. 1.1. reproving the Usurpation of Bishops, he says, Perinde ac si non
omnes Presbyteri Collegae essent ad eandem vocati functionem, unus sibi,
praetextu novae appellationis dominium in alios arripuit.

Sect. 11. I close with a short Answer (such as it deserves) to his last
Assault; which is p. 416. If Prudence must be used in settling
Church Government, as he says is confessed by Independents in their Elective
Synods: by Presbyterians in their subordination of Courts,
Classical-Assemblles: Episcopal Men in several things. Ans. All this is nothing
of the particular Form of Government, Parity or imparity, and so nothing to the
purpose. We absolutely deny that That is to be settled by Prudence; but by the
Institution of Christ; though many Circumstances in Government must be
determined by Prudence, guided by Scripture Light. For his advice in order to
Peace, it contains many good things; yet cannot we fully close with it, till
he establish on better grounds than we have yet seen, the Basis of it, viz. The
indifferency of the particular Form of Church Government.

FINIS.

