THE SPEECH Of His Excellency Henry Lord Viscount SYDNEY, Lord Lieutenant of
IRELAND, To Both Houses of Parliament Assembled at DVBLIN. October 5. 1692.
Published by Authority.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Received Their Majesty's Commands, immediately upon my Arrival, to call this
Parliament, as the greatest Demonstration Their Majesty's could give of Their
Affection to you, who, after having suffered so many great Oppressions, during
the late Revolution, almost to an utter Desolation of the Country, can no way
be so well restored to any degree of Settlement, as by a Parliament thus
legally Constituted and Assembled, which I must observe is a Blessing that for
many Years you have been deprived of, whereby the English Interest has been
exposed to apparent Danger of losing, not only their Religion, but all that
Property which with so great Expense of Blood and Treasure they had purchased.

This Privilege of Meeting in Parliament, being thus restored by Their
Majesty's great Goodness, it cannot be doubted but you will make use of it to
pass such Laws, as now are, or hereafter shall be, transmitted to you, as may
tend to the firm Settlement of this Country upon a Protestant Interest.

The King is so much the more intent upon this great work, having been here
Himself a Witness, with great Compassion, of the Miseries you were all involved
in, when another Party prevailed, and you may therefore easily imagine, it will
be a more than ordinary Satisfaction to His Majesty to see this Kingdom once
again established in Peace and Prosperity, because, by his Personal Valor and
Conduct, He had so Great and Glorious a Part in Relieving you from the
Calamities under which you then labored: And Their Majesty's being in their
own Royal Judgments, satisfied, that a Country so fertile by Nature, and so
advantageously situated for Trade and Navigation, can want nothing but the
Blessing of a Peace, and the help of some good Laws, to make it as Rich and
Flourishing as most of it is Neighbors: They hope for the first from the Hand
of GOD, the Author and Giver of all Blessings, the other they expect from the
wise, sober, and calm Determinations of your own Counsels, which being what
depends so much on your selves, Their Majesty's cannot think, that either They,
or you, will be disappointed in it, especially since I am ordered to assure
you, there shall be nothing wa^^ing upon* There parts, that may contribute to
your Perfect and Lasting Happ^^ess; for the mo^^ effectual Accomplishment
whereof, I am particularly commanded to put you in mind of the Duty we all owe
t^ GOD Almighty, whose constant and religious Worship, Their Majesty's
recommend to be daily carried on, both by your Care and Example, with all Piety
and Devotion in all Decency and Order.

His Majesty has tha^ entire Confidence in your Loyalty and Dutiful Affection,
and of the grateful Sense you have of what He has done for you, that he cannot
doubt of your Assistance in what shall be necessary for His Service, and your
own Security, and it is upon that Assurance, that He has commanded me to
acquainty you that the ^resent established Re^enue of this Kingdom is not
sufficient to de^ray ^he Expe^ce of such ^n Army as must be kept u^ for the
comm^n Safety and the o^^er n^^essary Charges of the Government. It is very
gre^^ troubl^ to His Majesty, that the Necessity of His Affairs compels him to
recommend this to your Consideration, and to ask for a Supply, at a Time when
the Kingdom is in so low a Condition, and has suffered so much in the late
War, yet the Sum will be so moderate, and the Methods of raising it so easy,
that His Majesty cannot doubt of your ready Compliance.

My Lords and Gentlemen.
I Shall trouble you but little at this time concerning my self, whom Their
Majesty's have thought fit to constitute Their Lieutenant here, hoping it may
be better to be known to you by an Equal and Impartial Administration of the
Government, than by any Expressions from the Throne, which may seem to have too
much of Affectation in them; yet this I will venture to tell you, Th^^ I will
use all the Diligence and Application I can to discharge this great Tru^^ Their
Majesty's have been pleased to repose in me, and shall think my self very happy
if by any Pains or Care of mine I may be instrumental to the restoring you to
that Peace and Unity, to that Plenty and Wealth, in which I my self have
formerly seen you so well established. And as I doubt not of your carrying on
Their Majesty's Service with that Temper and Moderation as is absolutely
necessary to a lasting Settlement, so I do assure you, that your Readiness in
Complying with what their Majesty's desire shall lose no part of its Duty, or
any good Quality that may make it the most acceptable to Their Majesty's, in
the Representation that I shall faithfully and constantly make of it.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, 1692.


