INFORMATION For the Lady Craigleith, and Lord of Prestoungrange, at first
presented against Sir James Rochead, and now repeated against James Rochead his
Son, with an Addition for the Lord of Mortounhall, humbly offered to the
Members of the Committee for Security.
THe deceast John Rochead of Craigleith, eldest Brother to the said Sir James,
in his Contract of Marriage with Kathrine Trotter his Lady, is obliged to
provide his Lands to his Heirs whatsomever, and coming to die about November
1673. years, he leaves only one Child, a Daughter of the Marrige, whom in his
Testament he names his Executrix and universal Legatrix, and leaves to his Lady
6000. merks of Legacy: and farther appoints her sole Tutrix to his said
Daughter, recomending the Care and Education of her very particularly and
earnestly.

And farther, there is a Clause interlined in the Testament, whereby he ordains
his Daughter to match with his said Brothers eldest Son, if it shall please the
Lord to spare her, the Daughter being about that time scarce nine years of Age,
and Sir James his eldest Son about three years younger.

After the Fathers Decease, the Lady Craigleith as sole Tutrix takes upon her
the Care and Education of her Daughter, and performs it with all Tenderness,
and when her Daughter grows up to almost twelve years of Age, thinks how she
may be disposed upon for her best Advantage, but Sir James laying hold upon the
Recomendation in his Brothers Testament, touching his Daughters Marriage with
his Son to make all sure, Impetrats from the Privy Council, a Warrant for
sequestracting the Daughter in the Family of the Bishop of Edinburgh, without
ever calling or hearing the Mother sole Tutrix, or any other Party concerned,
which Warrant being evidently very summar and undoubtedly Impetrat by the great
Moyan Sir James, then had with some principal persons in the Council, and the
effect of it being to pull an only Daughter out of her Mothers Arms, to whom
her Father had so earnestly recommended her, and to expose her to the will and
pleasure of Sir James, her next Heir appearand, the Lady did not think her^self
obliged to comply with it, besides the Surprise of it was so amazing to her
young Daughter, that she cried most bitterly and hung about her Mothers Neck,
when the Intimation of the Order was made to her, crying out that she should
not leave her Mother, nor ever marry Sir James's Son, and so slipped out of her
Mothers House; and her Mother observing her Daughters Aversion, and many other
things not proper her to be commemorate, and in a word being desirout to
disposs upon her Daughter, as both the ill Consequences of a constrained and
unpromising Marriage might be evited, and the Fathers Recomendation far more
effectually satisfied, makes up and concludes the Marriage betwivxt her
Daughter and Prestoun-Grange now her Husband, whom all must now grant to have
been a most proper and advantageous Choice.

But there being a necessity to have the Marriage privately celebrate, because
of Sir James his Power and Influence for the time, the Parties go to the Border
and are there married by a Non-conform Minister, whereas Sir James Storming
highly conveens, not only the Lady Craiglieth with her Daughter, and Prectoun
Grange her Husband, but also Henry Trotter of Mortoun-hall, and Prestoun-Grange
elder: and libelling them before the Council upon an Act of Council made in the
year 1668. whereby it is declared, that such as take away any young
Gentlewoman within Age contrary to the Councils Commands should be should be
punished as they should think fit: and that such as contract Marriage with them
should be punished by Fines equivalent to their Tocher. and upon the Councils
foresaid Order for Sequestration, and likeways making mention of the Fathers
Testament and Recomendation, and that it was by his procurement that the 6000
merks of Legacy was left to the Mother, and yet she, and her Accomplices had sent
her away to the Border to be married there to Preston-grange, by an outed
Minister, to the high Contempt as he alleged of Authority, he obtained the
Lady to be Fined in no less than 6500 merks, and the rest in 3500 merks, and
9000 merks to be given to himself, for his pretended Damages, beside the Legal
Fine of 1000 merks imposed upon Preston-grange, for his clandestine Marriage,
and accordingly all these Fines were paid.

But it being declared by the Claim of Right, that extraordinary Fines are
contrary to Law, the Lady Craigleith has now appealed to the Parliament, and
obtained a Reference to the Commission for Fines and Forefaultures, to have the
same there tried and examined, in order to her Redress, and that she and
Prestoungrange have good reason to demand this Redress, appears.

First, because the foresaid Act of Council 1668, was made upon the occasion of
a particular case of a young Gentlewomans being carried away without the
consent or knowledge of her Friends, and cannot in reason be farther extended,
since no man of Sense will think that it was the meaning of the Council, to
make themselves absolute Arbiters of all young Gentlewomens Marriages, as the
words lybelled upon seem to import; But so it is, that Prestoungrange did carry
away his Lady, with her own, her Mother, and all Friends Consent, Sir James
only excepted, so that this Act of Council concerns not this case.

2. It is evident, that even the Council did not judge that Paestoungranges
case did belong to the foresaid Act, otherways they should (and undoubtedly
would) have fined him in the Equivalent of his Tocher, whieh we see they have
not done. But 3. Whatever is in this Order of Council more than Law allows,
could not at that time, nor is at any time binding; but so it is, that all that
can be found in Prestoungranges case, was a clandistine Marriage, whereof the
pain of Law is only 1000 Merks.

3. As to the Councils Order for Sequestration, It is not doubted, but that the
Council may in certain Cases Sequestrate; But then it ought to be upon the
hearing of Parties, and certainly, if Parties had been first heard, the Council
had not granted this Order: And if the Lady was both surprised and terrified to
find her Daughter taken from her, and ordered to a Bishops house, at the desire
of Sir James her nixt Heir, and so far contrary to her Daughters Education, and
both their Inclinations, it was nothing to be wondered at, but a matter every
way excusable, and could not justly be construed a Contempt of the Council
Authority, where Sir James had proceeded so illegally, and had only Impetrate
the Order upon his own Peril.

4. As to what Sir James pretended from his Brothers Testament; 1. It is
possitively affirmed, that the Recommendation in the Testament was insert and
interlined, after it was Subscribed. But 2. Whether it was so or not, the Words
bear only a Recomendation or Advice, which imports no Obligation, and always
leaves a latitude for a more equal Choice. 3. It was a most false Insinuation,
That Sir James procured the Legacy of 6000 merks to be left to the Lady, nor is
there the lest vestige in the Testament, that that Legacy had the least respect
to the foresaid Recommendation. 4. No rational man can doubt, but if the
deceast John Rochead were alive this day, He would approve his Ladies Choice,
and pass from his own Recommendation. And it was notourly known that the
Sequestration was contrived by Sir James, not in order to a Marriage with his
own Son, but he was to dispose of her to another Person on purpose to make his
Interest at Court.


5. As to the Ladies marying her Daughter to Preston-grange, it was evident at
that time by all that were Impartial, judged to be the more equal Marriage: Sir
James his Son was three years younger than the Ladies Daughter, and the
Daughters Marriage did not happen till near three years after the Fathers
Death, in which space, many Grounds of Aversion and Alienation might have
fallen in, as in effect they did, which might justly determine both the Mother
and the Daughter to make a new Choice, notwithstanding of the Defuncts
Recomendation. If the Daughter and Sir James's Son had been both Marriageable
when the Father died, the Recomendation might have had more weight, but to
think that a Recomendation of Marriage, as to Persons under Age, should be of
any moment three years thereafter, against a more equal Choice made be both
Mother and Daughter, is contrary both to the Liberty of Marriage, and all Rules
of Good Sense.

6. That Prestoun-Grange was married by an Outed-Minister, is clearly enough,
and in terminis Lybelled; And the very Act of Parliament discharging Marriages
by Outted Ministers, is one of the Acts lybelled upon: but whether this should
have been an Aggravation for so exorbitant a Fine, all men may judge.

In Respect whereof, it is evident, that the Grounds of the said Fine were
Arbitrary, and the Fine it self extraordinary and exorbitant, and such as are
Condemned by the Claim of Right, and is most justly referred to the Cognition
of this Commission.

Sir James would willingly decline the Commission, or have the Commission to
decline themselves; because this Case seems not to be included in the Act of
Parliament, which grants this Commission. But First, if it had been more
directly included in that Act, it had not needed an express Reference. 2. Its
Reference is the same, and every way as Valid as many others made by the
Parliament to this Commission, without any formal Vote, and far more Remote
from the Subject of the said Act of Parliament. But 3. This Case is clearly
comprehended in the Claim of Right; which its well known, was the Rule
principally regarded in making the foresaid Act of Parliament; and had the case
been then named, it had certainly been expressly Included. 4. In so far as
marrying by an Outted-Minister, is made one of the principal Aggravations of
this Sentence: it falls directly within the Compass of the said Act of
Parliament; and its very like, that at that time the Ladies refusing to put her
Daughter in the Bishops house, and her Daughters marrying by an Outted
Minister, were the greatest Ingredients in their Guilt, to procure this heavy
Fine. 5. It is evident, that this Matter cannot be Tried by any other Court,
but by the Parliament; for seeing the Fine was Imposed by Act of Council, and
was manifestly exorbitant, and by the Claim of Right, appointed to be
Considered and Redressed. It is obvious, that the Parliament are the only
proper Judges in this Review. And 6. Since that this Commission is only to Try
and Report; Innerleith must have a very suspicious Diffidence of his Cause, if
he draw back from the Commission, and be unwilling that His Majesty and the
Parliament Determine in it.


This Affair being afterward brought before the said Commission, and Debated
in their Presence; the Commission induced, the Parties to submit, and gave
forth their Decree Arbitral: But Sir James having Reclaimed against it, the
Lady Craigleith did likewise Resile, and so the Decree took no Effect. Likeas,
John Trotter now of Mortounhall, as representing his Father, who was likewise
concerned in that Matter, did not at all submit: and therefore, both he, and
the Lady Craigleith, and Prestoun-Grange for his Interest, do humbly apply to
the Committee for Security; as come in place of the foresaid Commission, to
have this whole Matter Reported and Determined in Parliament.


