A TRUE COPY of the PAPER Delivered By Brigadier Rookwood, TO THE SHERIFF At
TYBURN, the Place of EXECUTION. April. 29. 1696.
WIlls of Dying Men, were ever Sacred, and as such ought to be fulfilled. The
Sufferer a Man of Deeds, more than Words, by way of Will made to the People,
consigned his Thoughts to Paper; The Paper to the Sheriff to be Published. To
this Paper as he told the said Sheriff he referred himself; And that he might
not fail of his Intent, some days before his Execution, he had Transmitted a
Copy of it to a Friend, who since the Sheriff has so long failed of his Trust
and Duty, resolves to supply it by doing His. Take it therefore in Print. Mr.
Sheriff cannot but Own it to be the same Word for Word.

The PAPER.
HAving committed the Justice of my Cause and recommended my Soul to God, on
whose Mercies, through the Merits of Jesus Christ, I wholly Cast my self; I had
once resolved to die in Silence; But second Thoughts of my Duty to others,
Chiefly to my True and Liege Sovereign K. James, moved me to leave this behind
me.

I do therefore, with all Truth and Sincerity, Declare and Avow, I never Knew,
Saw, or Heard, of any Order or Commission from K. James for the Assassinating
of the Prince of Orange, and Attacking his Guards; But I am Certainly informed,
he had rejected Proposals of That Naure, when made unto him.

Nor do I think He Knew the least of the Particular Design of Attacking the
Guards at his Landing, in which I was engaged as a Soldier, by my Immediate
Commander, (much against my Judgment,) But his Soldier I was, and as such I was
to Obey and Act.

Near twelve years, I have served my True King and Master K. James, and freely
now lay down my Life in his Cause. I ever Abhorred a Treacherous Action even to
an Enemy. If it be a Guilt to have Complied with what I thought, and still
think to have been my Duty, I am Guilty. No other Guilt do I Own.

As I beg all to forgive me, so I forgive all from my Heart, even the Prince of
Orange, who as a Soldier ought to have considered my Case, before he Signed the
Warrant for my Death. I pray God to open his Eyes and render him Sensible of
the Much Blood from all Parts Crying out against him, so to prevent a Heavier
Execution Hanging over his Head, than what he Inflicts on me.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1696.


