REASONS For Restoring of the SUMMER SESSION.
WHatever Alterations have been in the Dyets of the Session, yet these several
hundreds of years since the Institution of the College of Justice, the wisdom
of His Sacred Majesty's Royal Ancestors, and the prudence of our Parliaments,
did at last settle into a Summer and a Winter Session, as the fittest Seasons
(after they had Balanced all inconveniences) for easing the necessities, and
accommodation of the Leidges; and which was excellently well Contrived, both
for the Dispatch of Business, and the convenience of the People: It being
evident from Experience, that as much Business can be Dispatched in these two
Months of the Summer Session, as in the four Months of the Winter, the Days
being long, and the Weather good, and so not exposed to these Diseases that are
contracted by Men's attending their Business in the cold and rigid Nights of
Winter; and these two Months of Summer are proper for the Inhabitants of the
Isles, and other remote Countries, to come and get their Causes Discussed;
whereas in Winter there is scarce any Traveling from these parts; or if they
come, they are necessitat to stay the whole Winter: And there can be nothing
more convenient for the People, these two Months of June and July being free
from Laboring, as falling in betwixt Seed and Harvest-time; whereas the Month
of March now Adjected to the Winter Session, is a part of our Seed-time; and in
respect of that inconveniency, the Lords were anciently discharged from sitting
in that Month: And we may justly have that respect for this ancient Practice,
as to believe it has been done upon just and rational Considerations; and old
Laws and Customs are like Men, who have lived long, whose longaevity presumes
them to have been of a sound and wholesome Temperament and Constitution; and Lex
secunda digest. de constitutionibus principum, says excellently, That in novis
rebus constituendis, the Utility must be very great and evident before we
depart from what has been long received as just and expedient, all Mutations
being dangerous, the Supposition and Prospect of advantage by the change
oft-times falling short of expectation, as has clearly fallen out in this case
of suppressing the Summer Session.

2o. The alteration of this Diet of the Session, by taking away the two Months
in the Summer, has occasioned an unexpressible damage to the Liedges, by want
of Justice, more than the one half of the Year; There being no Kingdom nor
State in the World, where there is so long a surcease of Justice, England and
other Nations finding the great advantage of keeping frequent Terms; neither is
this inconvenient salved by the Inferior Courts, seeing a stop is either put to
their Procedure by Advocations, or to the Execution of their Sentences by
Suspensions, so that this Prospect of a long Vacation, forces Parties who stand
in need of Money to Compone and give down of their just Claims, for a part to
save their Credit.

3o. The taking away of the Summer Session puts a stop to all Legal Diligence
and Execution; As for instance, where a Creditor does Diligence upon a Decree
or Bond in the Month of March, or has then a Process depending before an
Inferior Court; if the same be Advocated or Suspended, they will not be gotten
discussed for Ten Months thereafter: For when the Session sits down in
November, a time must be allowed for Seeing, Returning and Inrolling the same;
and when it comes in by the course of the Roll, if there be any difficulty, or
some Points require Probation, the Creditor will be delayed to another Session,
which is an unspeakable prejudice to the Leidges; for during that time, Widows
and Orphans starve, Debitors turn Bankrupt and Insolvent, and Creditors are
reduced to great Straits for want of their Money: And the Case is as clear in
the matter of Removings, where a Tennent being warned before the Whitsunday, by
Advocations and Suspensions, he possesses violently for a whole Year; and the
hazard that arises to Adjudgers is unanswerable, who are oft-times by the said
long Vacation of Seven Months, excluded from coming in within Year and Day of
the first Adjudger, and so he loses his Money: All which Prejudices and
Inconveniences were remeeded when the Session did sit these Two Months in the
Summer time; And many more Instances of the like nature could be given to
Evince the infinite Prejudices arising to the whole Kingdom through the want
thereof.

4o. By taking away the Summer Session, His Majesty's Authority during the
space of Seven Months, wants the Support and Assistance which otherways it uses
to have from the frequent Attendance of the Nobility, Kings Officers, and
others in the Session time, because of the convenience they then have in
managing their private Business; whereas in this long Vacation of Seven Months
they can hardly be brought together; and so want that Correspondance,
Intelligence, and mutual Assistance, which they have in time of the Session;
and Our Rebellions being ordinarily in the Summer time, because of the
convenience which Rebels have of lying in the open Fields, and of getting
Provision for their Horses, it would be much easier to suppress the same when
His Majesty's Authority is fully represented, and His Nobility and Servants
fully conveened; a great instance whereof appeared in the Rebellion of
Bothwell-Bridge, and last Summer against the late Earl of Argile.

5o. The want of the Summer Session destroys all Trade and Commerce, for when
Mercchants cannot get in their Money timeously by Legal Executions, this
necessarily ruins their Credit, and makes so many Bankrupts: Neither is this
deadness of Trade alone within Edinburgh, but throughout all the Nation; For
where there are not Concourse and Meetings of the People, there is neither
occasion for Bargains nor Commerce; and the intercourse of Money is wholly
stopped by it; for the Affairs of this Kingdom do run so, that the Term of
Whitsunday occasioned a resort of Borrowers and Lenders to Edinburgh, which was
so well accomodat for the ease of the Subjects, that they both managed their
Law-business, and gave out and took in their Money at one and the same time;
Whereas now since the removal of the Summer Session, the practice of paying at
Whitsunday is much diminished.

6o. Corn being the great Staple-Commodity which Scotland yields, there is a
most sensible decay both in the Consumption and Price of Victual, since the
taking away of the Summer Session; Neither does this only concern the Heretors,
and the Inhabitants of the Shires near Edinburgh, whose Corn, young Bestial,
Poultry, and the other Product of their Ground used to be consumed in these two
Months of the Summer Session; But likewise the Victual belonging to the
Nobility and Gentry in the North, must ly in their hands un-sold, in regard it
is not transportable till March or April; because of the Storms, and then there
is no use for it at Edinburgh; Whereas formerly it was consumed in the Summer
Session: So that it can be demonstrated, that this alteration has not only
broken many Tennents, but made a Diminution in the Rents of many Heretors in
Scotland.

7o. The suppressing of the Summer Session does inevitably occasion a great
Detriment to His Majesty's Revenue and Excise, both as to the two Merks upon
the Boll of Bear, and by hindering the Consumption of other Merchant Ware which
used to go off in Summer, and for which Custom was payable, and has proven a
great Discouragement to those who upon the Faith of the late Act of Parliament
engaged in the Manufactories for Improvement of Our Native Product, the Summer
Session being the great occasion of the Consumpt of such Commodities, and which
has drawn on more Disadvantage and Decay of Trade upon this Nation, then all
the imaginary Good that was proposed would follow upon the removal of the
Summer Session can Compense.

8o. As the want of the Summer Session is a great Prejudice to the State, so it
is no less prejudicial to the Church; for when there is no Summer Session, the
Commission for Plantation of Kirks does not then meet; so that Ministers cannot
get their Stipends augmented, nor the Bishops who live at a distance cannot
attend; and in that surcease of Justice for seven Months, Heretors do
sometimes suspend their Minister, which cannot be got discussed till the
Winter; and it is very hard that Ministers who have no other way of Livelihood,
should want their Stipends for a whole Year.

9o. The Interest of the Town of Edinburgh in the restitution of the Summer
Session needs not to be insisted on; seeing res ipsa loquitur: But they crave
leave to Represent, That the want thereof is no small Prejudice to the Gentry,
who send in their Children, either to be bred in Callings, or to be educated in
Schools and Colleges, and who for shunning the expense of two Families, did
come and Reside in the Town, whereby they at one and the same time, both got
their Law Affairs followed, when there was a Summer Session, and their Children
Educated: and the parallel used by Menenius Agrippa for reclaiming the Commons
of Rome, (as is recorded by Livy,) is apposite to this Case, That by what
degrees the Belly is famished, by the same measures of proportion the rest of
the Members of the Body will perish and decay. Edinburgh as it is the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, and the City of our Solemnities, so it is the
communis patria of Scotsmen, and Center where Gentlemen's younger Sons are bred
in Merchandise and other Callings; so if it Flourish, the rest by a kindly
reciprocation participat therein.

10. As to the Pretense that was made, that the taking away the Summer Session
would cut off Pleas, and all Causes could be dispatched in Five Months as well
as when there was Two Months in Summer, the Books of Inrollment gives an
evident demonstration how much this has failled, for there are more Actions
standing in the Books of Inrollment for the Inner and Outer-House yet uncalled,
then could be discussed in Two Months: So that the only way to Obviat and
Remeid all these Inconveniences and Prejudices which the King, the Country,
and the Church do so evidently Sustain, is to Restore the Summer Session, as it
was formerly, according to the Old Institution, and the inviolable Custom
introduced by Our Kings and Parliaments, upon such grave and weighty
Considerations; And therefore it is hoped, the Lord Commissioner his Grace, and
the Honorable States of Parliament, will Promot so good a Work, tending so
eminently to the Advantage and Benefit of the whole Kingdom.


