HIS HIGHNESS Prince Rupert's LETTER TO THE EARL OF ARLINGTON His Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State. From on Board the ROYAL CHARLES off the
Oster-bank, the XXIXth of May, 1673.

Distant from East Capel Seven Leagues, at One of the Clock Afternoon, the Wind
S. S. W.

Published by Authority.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1673.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1673.

His Highness Prince Rupert's Letter to the Earl of Arlington, His Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State, from on' Board the Royal Charles off of the
Oster-bank, the 29. of May, 1673. distant from East Capel Seven Leagues, at one
Afternoon, the Wind S. S. W.
I Give you herein an account of our Action yesterday, being the 28. such as at
present can be made, having not had time to learn the Particulars of the
Enemies losses. The foul weather before having given us opportunity and leisure
to sound all the Sands; on the 27. It was resolved at a Council of War, held
here on board with the Flag-Officers, to attack the Enemy riding at Anchor in a
Line between the Rand and the Stony-bank. Accordingly a Squadron was then
ordered out of the several Divisions of the Fleet (whereof the Eldest Captain
was to command each Party) consisting in all of 35. Frigates, and 13. Fireships,
besides small Craft to sound before them. Yesterday morning about 8. of the
clock, they drew out of their Squadrons, and sailed toward the Enemy, the Wind
at S. S. W. and by 12. a Clock at Noon engaged the Van of them, commanded by
Trump: We were forced to engage sooner then I intended, to prevent the Enemies
getting the Wind. That Squadron so commanded by Trump was so pressed by us, that
it gave way, and retired as far as the Sands would give them leave. The
Squadron commanded by De Ruyter fell to the share of Count D' Estrees, and the
French, who behaved themselves very bravely. Sir Edward Spragge also on his
side maintained the fight with so much courage and resolution, that their whole
body gave way to such degree, that had it not been for fear of the Shoals, we
had driven them into their harbors, and the King would have had a better
account of them. The case being thus, and the night approaching, I judged it
fit to stand a little off, and to anchor here where I now ride.

The enemy have had a considerable loss (which they will not easily repair)
having many men slain, many ships disabled, and some destroyed; De Ruyter and
Trump had run a great hazard of being burnt by some of our Fireships, if they
had behaved themselves as they ought to have done. Our losses are very
inconsiderable, two of our Ships only being disabled, viz. the Cambridge and
the Resolution, which I shall send home to refit, the rest of our work will be
easily done here. We have lost very few Common Men; as yet I have an account
but of these Officers slain; Captain Fowls, Captain Woerden, and Captain
Finch) Colonel Hamiltoun has his Leg shut off. All the Officers and Common
Men, generally behaved themselves very well, of which I shall send the
particulars, when I am better informed; In my Squadron more especially Captain
Leg, Sir John Holmes, Captain Wettwang, Captain Story, Sir Roger Strickland,
and Sir William Reeves. The first took a Ship of the Enemies, and the latter
brought up a Fire-ship, and laid himself to the Leeward of Trump, and if the
Captain of the Fire-ship had done his duty, Trump had certainly burnt;
Notwithstanding which, Story and Wittwang so belabored him, that Reeves cleared
himself from the crowd of the Enemy. I hope His Majesty will be satisfied, that
considering the Place we engaged in, and the Sands, there was as much done as
could be expected. And thus I leave it to His Majesty's Favorable Construction,
to whom I wish many happy Years to come, this being His Birthday.

FINIS:

