RULES OF THE SCHOOLS OF THE ROYAL COLLED(...) AT HOLY-ROOD-HOUSE
THE Intention of Opening these Schools is, to Teach Youth Virtue an(...) (...)
They shall be taught Gratis; nor shall they be at any farther Charg(...) (...)
pences than the buying of their own Pens. Ink, Paper and Books.

II. These Schools are common to all, of what condition soever (...) shall be
excluded, when they shall be thought fit to begin to learn (...) Write
sufficiently well: And in these Schools shall be taug^ht Greek an(...) (...)
also Poetry, Rhetoric, and Philosophy, etc. as they shall rise to higher S(...)

III. And although Youths of different Professions, whether Cat(...) (...)
Protestants, come to these Schools; yet in Teaching all, there shall (...)
(...)stinction made, but all shall be Taught with equal Diligence and Care,
(...) one shall be promoted according to his Deserts.

IV. There shall not be, either by Masters or Scholars, any tamperin(...)
(...)ling to persuade any one-from the Profession of his own Religion; (...)
shall be all freedom for every one to practice what Religion he shall please,
and none shall be less esteemed or (...) for being of a different Religion from
others.

V. None shall upbraid or reproach any one on the account of Religion; and when
any Exercise of Reli(...) (...) be practiced, as hearing Mass, Catechizing, or
Preaching, or any other it shall be lawful for any Protest(...)(...)out any
molestation or trouble, to absent himself from such public Exercise* if he
please.

VI. All shall be taught to keep God's Commandments, and therefore none shall
be permitted to Lie, (...) Curse, or talk uncivil Discourse; Nor shall fight or
quarrel with one another; and he who shall be observe(...) (...) these Duties,
shall be punished according to his demerit: And when any one, for these, or
other Faults, sh(...) (...) judged to any Chastisement, if he shall refuse to
receive such Chastisement quietly, or be stubborn, he shall b(...) (...) the
Schools, and not be readmitted again, until he shall have given satisfaction
for such his Fault.

VII. All shall be in their respective Schools by a quarter before Eight in the
Morning, and shall there stay (...) and a half: Again at a quarter before Two,
until half an hour after Four. And all Parents are earnestly desir(...) (...)
their Children timely to School, and not easily to stay them at home; for the
neglect of some Days may (...) Profit of many Weeks and Months: And they are to
send them decently Clad.

VIII The other hours of the day they shall Study at their own Homes, and
prepare those Exercises, which th(...) (...) in the Schools appoint to be
brought, at their next coming to the Schools. And therefore all Parents are
(...) allow their respective Scholars such convenience for their Studies at
their own House, that they may comply (...) Duties which are appointed them.

IX. All are required to be exact and diligent, in daily frequenting the
Schools, and being there, none are (...) without leave of their Master: and
when any one shall be absent from School, he shall the next day he co(...)
(...) from his Parents a Ticket of the lawfulness of such his Absence: Yet they
shall have every Week two After(...) (...) creation, in which they come not to
School; unless a Holy Day happen that Week, which shall then be th(...) (...)
(...)laxation.

X. Such as comes from the Writing-School, and have no Entrance in Latin, are
to be received but three (...) (...) Year, viz at the beginning of the New
Year, at Easter, and about our Lady Day in September.

HOLY-ROOD-HOUSE, Printed by Mr. P. B. Enginneer and Printer to the King's Most
Excellent Majesty, for his House Chapel and College; M.DC.LXXXVIII.


