A True and Exact COPY OF A PRODIGIOUS and TRAITOROUS LIBEL, Affixt upon the
Church-door of Kettle, in Fife, the third of this instant, being Easterday;
written and subscribed by James Russel, one of those bloody and Sacrilegious
Murderers of the late Lord Primate of Scotland, his Grace.

Published by Authority, for the satisfaction and information of all His
Majesty's Loyal and dutiful Subjects.

EDINBVRGH. Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1681.

Edinburgh, eighteenth day of April, 1681.
VEra Copia collationed with the Original, (all written and signed by this
execrable Murderer his own Hand) which is kept amongst the Records of His
Majesty's Privy Council; and attested by

WILL PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij. and PAT MENZIES. Cl. Sti. Concilij.

A True and Exact COPY OF A PRODIGIOUS and TRAITOROUS LIBEL Affixt upon the
Church-door of Kettle in Fife, etc.
BE it kend to all men, That whereas these who were once lawful Magistrates and
Rulers, and were exercising their power, in opposition to all the Enemies of
God, and were a terror to allevil doers, are now become Tyrants and Land
judgments, and Murderers of all these who departs from iniquity, and who are
jeoparding their lives every day for maintaining and promoving of the Gospel of
Christ and the true Presbyterian Government, which the three Kingdoms swore
oftener nor once or twice to maintain with their lives and liberties, which
Oaths they have all now broken, and have taken new Oaths contrair to the word
of God, in opposition to their former Oaths and Engagements, by the which
doing, they have overturned the whole Government, Civil and Ecclesiastic, and
having made butcheries and havoc of all the truly Godly, and Loyal and true
Subjects of the Land, and raised such Persecution, that I was forced to flee
the Country; and I hearing tell that my Mother, and others who meddled with my
Affairs, were still paying the Few Duty (which properly belongs to the Crown of
Scotland) and Sess, which that Tyrant causes uplift for the bearing down the
Gospel of Christ, and for maintaining these Butcherers, Troopers and Soldiers,
and was paying that Teind which properly belongs to the Ministers of the Gospel
of Christ, to Mr. John Barkley, who is both a thief and a robber; by the paying
of which, they acknowledge Charles Stewart to be a lawful Magistrate, and Mr.
John Barkley to be a Minister of Jesus Christ, which is blasphemy to say, as I
shall prove afterward; and after several times writing to my Mother, and some
others who pretended kindness to me, showing the great sin that we were
involved in, by owning any of these Tyrants any manner of way, and earnestly
desiring her to forbear and not to own them any manner of way directly or
indirectly, but rather to suffer the outmost of hazard, than to sin against God
by strengthening the hands of the stated and avowed enemies of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is King, and alone Head of his Church; but my writing being to no
purpose, and I being convinced of the greatness of this sin, and the heinous
aggravations thereof, and the Judgments that would follow, if repentance
prevented not, and being exercised for a long time, about what way to take for
exoneration of my conscience before God and the World, and a testimony against
all others who does go on in that sin, the clear conviction of the
indispensibleness of this my duty, I have now resolved through the grace of
God, be the outward hazard whatsomever, to write their two or three Lines, and
cause put it on the Kirk-door of Kettle, being the most public place, as my
testimony against all the wrongs and injuries done to my sweet Lord Jesus
Christ.

As I do own and declare before God and the World, that Magistracy is an
ordinance of God, so I disown and declare, that Tyranny is not of God, and so
in opposition to God, and so against God, and therefore cannot be of God: and
Charles Stewart being once made King of Scotland, upon condition that he should
keep these Covenants, and rule according to these Covenants, and the Covenants
being the Coronation Oath, which Oath he has broken, and caused burn these
Covenants (which was the contract and Covenant betwixt him and the people) by
the hands of the Hangman, by the burning of which Covenant, he has forfaulted
his right of the Crown and Kingdom of Scotland, and is no more a King, but is
become a Tyrant; therefore the people is loosed from all obligations and ties
as to him. Buchannan acknowledges and says, When the King breaks the Contract
and Covenant that was betwixt Him and the people, and does contrair to that He
covenanted to do, whatever Right or Privileage did belong to Him by that
Agreement and Covenant, is then lost. Likewise he says, When a King does those
things which are directly for the dissolution of Society for the continuance
whereof He was created, He is a Tyrant. Other Loyalists acknowledge and say,
When a King overturns one of the Fundamental Laws, He is no more a King, but a
Tyrant. 2. They say, When a supreme Magistrate makes use of a^ absolute power,
and so breaks all Bonds for the good of the main Society, He is a Tyrant. 3.
They say, When He takes from one or more members of the Commonwealth, free
exercise of the Orthodox Clergy or Religion, He is a Tyrant. 4. They say, When
a King does not defend His Subjects from injuries, when he may, but suffers
them to be oppressed, He is no more a King, but a Tyrant: (And much more when
he oppresses them and murders them himself, as Charles Stewart does.) 5. They
say, When a King oppresses the Subjects by immoderate exactions, and hinders
the free suffrages of Members of Parliament, so that they dare not speak what
they would, He is a Tyrant. 6. They say, When He takes away from the people
all power to resist His Tyrany, as Arms, Strengths, and chief men though
innocent, he persecuteth and exhausts their goods without right or reason, He
is a Tyrant. 7. They say, When a Magistrate for corrupting of youth, erects
Stage plays, Whorehouses and other Play Houses, and suffers the Colleges, and
other Seminaries of Learning to be corrupted, they are unfit for any Office,
therefore He must be a Tyrant.
Prove. 6.13. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and they love him that
speaks right, therefore Charles Stewart cannot be a King, because the
unrighteous lips are his delight, and he loves all them that does evil and
speaks against the truth, and therefore he must be a Tyrant: and seeing that
the least of all these forenamed particulars makes a King a Tyrant, surely
without debate Charles Stewart must be one of the Monstrous and wildest of
Tyrants, for he is guilty of all these, and has overturned the whole
Fundamental Laws of the Land, by that Act rescissory, and has set up Lustful
and Tyrannical Laws of his own, in opposition to the Laws of God, and the
Ancient Laws of the Land; and if we will believe Buchannan and other sound
Writers, A Tyrant has no just Authority over a People, neither is the People to
own or obey him in any thing, for he is their enemy, and says he, there is a
just and lawful War with an Enemy; much more with the enemy of all Mankind,
that is Tyrant, of the which Tyrants Charles Stewart is one: and he says, a
lawful War being once undertaken with our Enemy, and for a just cause, it is
lawful not only for the whole People to kill that Enemy, but for every one of
them. I would sp^^^ that Question at these who are not of this judgment, seeing
that Tyrants are reckoned in amongst the number of the most cruel bruit Beasts
by all sound Writers; and the Scripture, Psalm. 22.12. calls them Bulls of
Bashan, of the which Bulls, Charles Stewart is one, and all his Associats are
Bulls and Kine of Bashan: What would you judge to be your duty, if there were a
wild and mad Bull running up and down all Scotland, killing and slaying all
that were come in his way, man, wife, and bairn? would you not think it your
duty and every ones duty to kill him, according to that Scripture, Exodus 21.28,
29. and if this be granted, as it cannot be denied, wherefore should any say,
that it is not lawful to kill Charles Stewart or his Associats, that has been
these twenty years, as it were, running up and down Scotland, killing and
slaying all the true Subjects of the Land, and are still continuing, and
killing all that are departing from Iniquity, and are adhering to, and pursuing
the ends of the Covenants, by desiring to bring all Malignants to condign
punishment, according to the Covenants, which all the three Kingdoms did swear
with lifted up hands to the most High God.

Therefore, I James Russel Portioner of Kettle, does reject Charles Stewart
from being my King, or from having any lawful authority over me; and I do
declare before the world, that I will not own nor obey him any manner of way,
either by paying of Few-Duty or any other thing which properly belongs to the
Crown of Scotland, or that which they call Sess, which is falsely imposed upon
the Kingdom, and lifted up for the banishing Christ and his Gospel out of the
Land, yea, for upholding and maintaining ruffian Troopers and Soldiers, for no
other thing but that they may Crucify Christ in his members every day: and
likewise I protest against my Mother and James Dale, who is now laboring my
Land, at my Mothers instance, against their paying of the Few-Duty, or any
other thing which properly belongs to the Crown of Scotland, but not to a
Tyrant, and therefore not to Charles Stewart; and against the paying of that
which they call Sess. And likewise, I do protest against all these who take the
name of Christians to themselves, who owns him or acknowledges him to have any
lawful authority over them; and I do protest against the owning of any that has
their authority and power flowing from him, either higher or lower Courts of
Judicatures, for these who have no power themselves, cannot cloth others with
power and authority: and Charles Stewart has no power, therefore he cannot
cloth any other with power and authority, for he cannot give others that which
he has not himself; therefore all these Courts and Judicatories that have
their Power flowing only from Charles Stewart, have no lawful Power nor
authority, more nor these who receives a commission from a Robber to go and
kill and slay all that they meet with on the High way; therefore cannot be
owned, nor obedience given to them any manner of way, except they say that we
must obey the Devil, whose Vicegerents they are, and that will not be granted.
And I do declare, that I look upon all who own that Tyrant or any under hin to
be lawful Magistrates, to be guilty of Blasphemy, an^ I prove it, Romans 13. For
there is no power but of God and the powers that be, are ordained of God;
therefore that power that is exercised in opposition to God and godliness
cannot be of God, for Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil,
for he is the Minister of God to thee for good: Therefore Charles Stewart^s
power is not of God, for he exercises all his power in opposition to God and
Godliness, and he is a terror to good Works, and he gives praise and gifts to
all these who do Evil; therefore he is the Minister of the Devil, to thee for
Evil, for he executes Wrath on these who do Good, and therefore he has no
power of God; and therefore it must be acknowledged that it is the height of
Blasphemy to say that he is a lawful Magistrate, seeing that he exercises all
his power in opposition to God; and therefore is no lawful Power, but an
usurped tyrannical Power: Therefore, I would desire all that profess to be
Christians, to be war of calling Charles Stewart a lawful Magistrate, or any
whose power flows from him, to be lawful Rulers, lest ye be found amongst the
number of these Blasphemers, who say, that God is the Author of Sin; and ye may
read the Blasphemers doom in Lev. 24.16. And he that blasphemeth the Name of
the Lord, he shall surely be put to death, and all the Congregation shall
surely stone him, etc. Number 15.30.31. I would desire all who are expectants
of Heaven, as they would not have God to be their enemy, to be war of doing
any thing that strengthens the enemies of Christ's hands, if it were but to give
them a leepy of Corn, or a bottle of Straw to their Horse, or Bread or Drink,
or Lodging to themselves: for Christ's enemies is another thing, nor our
particular enemies. They that will prepare a Table for that Troop, and furnish
the Drink Offering for that number, they may read their sentence in Isa. 65.12.
Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall bow down to the
slaughter, etc. and do it who will, when the Lord makes inquisition for the
blood of his Saints, I am sure they will be found guilty, and to be more nor
consenters to the Saints murdering, Act. 25.20. Yea, it is, as it were a buying
of a sword and putting of it into a Robbers hand, to cut of all that is walking
or trafficking in the Kings free road; yea it will be found to be a joining
Issue and interest with Gods stated and declared enemies, and they may expect
to be ranked up amongst the number of these enemies (that our sweet Lord Jesus
Christ, who is King and alone Head of his Church,) will pass that Sentence
against, if speedy Repentance prevent not, Luke 19.27. But these mine enemies
which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them
before me.

Likewise I do protest against the paying of Teind (which properly belongs to
the Ministers of Christ) to Mr. John Barckley, which is acknowledging him who
is both a Theif and a Robber, to be a lawful Minister of Jesus Christ,
according to that Scripture, Joh. 10. He that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a theif and a robber,
which Theif and Robber Mr. John Bar^ is; for Christ is the door, ver. 7. I am
the door of the sheep, and not the Lordly Prelates, which was the entry that Mr.
John Barckley entered in, and all the rest both did, and does enter; therefore
they are all Thieves and Robbers, Mat. 20.25. Ye know that the princes of the
Gentiles exercised dominion over them, etc. ver. 26. but it shall not be so
among you, but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister,
Luke 22.25, 26, 27. But I am among you as he that serves; (...) Neither as
being lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to the stock: And Mr. John
Barckley was thrust in upon the flock against their wills by the Lordly Prelat,
without so much as the Call of the least of all the Paroch; yea, I was witness
that day, that he was thrust in (to my shame I may tell this, and to the praise
of his free Grace that has reclaimed me) and there was not one that would rise
to take him by the hand, till they were threatened by the rest of the
Hirelings; therefore he entered not in by the door, but clim'd up an other way,
therefore he is both a Thief and a Robber, and a false Prophet, Jer. 23.21. I
have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken unto them, yet
they prophesied. Mat. 7.15, 16. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves, ye shall know them by
their fruits: 2 Pet. 2.12. But these are natural brute beasts, etc. Jer. 10.21.
For the Pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord; therefore
they shall not prosper. Ezekiel. 13.3. Thus says the Lord, woe unto the foolish
Prophet, ver. 9. Mine hand shall be upon the Prophets that see visions and
divine lies, they shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they
be written in the writings of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter
into the land of Israel, and ye shall know that I am the Lord God, because,
even because they have seduced my people, saying, peace, and there was no
peace, etc. to the 27. 2 Cor. 11.15. Therefore it is no great thing if these
Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness, whose end
shall be according to their works. Ezekiel. 34.4. Woe be to the shepherds of Israel
that does feed themselves, etc. Ezekiel. 13.4. And it shall come to pass in that
day, that the Prophets shall be ashamed, etc. Mal. 2.8. But ye are departed out
of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted the
covenant of Levi, says the Lord: therefore have I also made you contemptible
and base before all the people, etc. O ye dumb dogs, the blood of many souls
will be found in your skirts, and in a little God will bring you to judgment,
and will require the blood of all the souls in that congregation at your hands,
Ezekiel. 3.18. the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I
require at thine hand; I doubt nothing, but it would be acceptable service to
God, to do with you all as Elijah did with Baals prophets, 1 King. 18.40. Take
the Prophets of Baal, let not one of them escape, ye greedy dogs which can
never have enough; come say ye, let us fill our selves with strong drink, and
the morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundantly. Ye think your
kingdoms will never be shaken, I doubt nothing but Baals Prophets thought so
to, but they got a disappointment, and I doubt nothing but ye will meet with
the like: They cried to their God, but they were not heard: When any thing
troubles you ye may cry to your god, which is your Belly, and to your King,
which is King Charles, but rather that Tyrant, which you are all crying up so
fast, and blessing him; it may be ye may get some kind of comfort, but I am
sure of that, the day will come, that both you and others that are crying him
so fast up this day, will cry and not be heard, and will be made to curse your
King and your God and look upward. I^ may be some will say, What needs all this
hatred? I answer, Psalm. 139.21. Do not I hate them O Lord, that hate thee, and
am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee; I hate them with a
perfect hatred, I count them as mine enemies. They Will may be say, I may hate
them, and not cry out to let all the world know of it. I answer, Luke 19.40. I
tell you, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry
out. I doubt not but some will say that I am mad to do that which will procure
the hatred of all Ranks; I care not what perjured Apostats say, for my God has
said unto me, fear not, for I am with you, be not dismayed, for I am your God,
I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness. I confess if I would have sought counsel at
flesh and blood, or yet at backsliding Ministers or Professors, I would not
have ventured; but praise to the Name of my God, he has advised me better in
Matthew. 18.28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul, but rather fear him which is able to kill both soul and body in Hell.

Written and subscribed with mine own hand, at the day of 1681. Sic
subscribitur, RUSSEL.


