Books printed for, and sold by R. Wellington.
THe History of Polybius the Megalopolitan, containing an Account of the
Transactions of the whole World, but principally of the Roman People, in 3 Vol.
translated by Sir Henry Sheers and Mr. Dryden, the like never before extant:
Price ten Shillings.

A Discourse of the Nature and Faculties of Man, in several Essays, with some
Considerations on the Occurrences of Human Life; by Tim. Nourse, Gent. price 4
Shillings.

The History and Novels of the late Ingenious Mrs. Behn collected into one Vol.
viz. Oroonoko, or The Royal Slave: The Fair Jilt, or Prince Tarquin: Agves de
Castro, or The Force of Generous Love: The Lover's Watch, or the Art of Making
Love: The Ladies Looking-glass to dress themselves by: The Lucky Mistake:
Memoirs of the Court of the King of Bantam: The Nun, or the Perjured Beauty:
The Adventures of the Black Lady. These 3 never before published, together with
her Life and Memoirs, written by one of the Fair Sex; interwoven with several
Love Letters, which passed beeween her and Mine Here Van Bruin, a Dutch
Merchant, the third Edition enlarged; price 5 Shillings.

A brief and easy Method to understand the Roman History, with an exact Chron.
of the Reign of the Emperors, and an Account of the most Eminent Authors, when
they flourished; and an Abridgment of the Roman Antiquities and Customs, by way
of Dialogue, for the use of the Duke of Burgundy: Done out of French, with
large Additions, by Mr. Tho. Brown; price two Shillings.

Familiar Letters: Vol. II.

CONTAINING Thirty Six LETTERS, By the Right Honorable John, late Earl of
Rochester. Printed from his Original Papers.

WITH Letters and Speeches, BY The late Duke of Buckingham, The Honorable
Henry Savile, Esquire, Sir George Etheridge, to several Persons of Honor.

And LETTERS, By several Eminent Hands.

London: Printed for Rich. Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1699.

TO Sir EDWIN SADLER, Bt. OF Temple-Dinsley, in Hertfordshire.
Honored SIR,
Though some may accuse me of Presumption, in offering this Collection of Letters
to your Patronage, without having the Honor of your Acquaintance; yet,
considering the Merits of the Noble Authors concerned in it, and your own, all
Impartial Judges will acquit me, and applaud my Choice. Since not to know the
Interest you, Sir, have in the Republic of Letters, and what our Country has
owed to the happy Counsels of your Great Ancestors, is to be equally
unacquainted with our History, and with all those whom you Honor with any
Intimacy. In the first we shall find, what a considerable Figure Sir Ralph
Sadler, your Noble Progenitor, once made in the Public Affairs of this Nation.
Among the latter, we shall meet with no Man more Celebrated for the Politer
Studies, and that true Generosity, which compose a Fine Gentleman: and in you,
Sir, give us an agreeable Proof of the present Care Providence takes of Eminent
Merit.

The Reputation of the Vivacity and Wit of my Lord Rochester, is so
established, that it is not in the Power of those Illnatur'd Critics,
described by Himself, that Are dully vain of being hard
to please,
to lessen his Esteem. The great Success of the First Volume, has made this
evident; of which this Second (I hope) will be a farther Proof.

The late Duke of Buckingham, Mr. Savile, Sir George Etheridge, bring their own
Credentials: And as for the rest that make up this Book, I shall leave them to
their own Desert, being convinced that no Apology will ever prepossess a Reader
to the Advantage of whatever wants Force enough to recommend it self; and all
that a Man can say, is taken (like Court Recommendations) for Words of Course;
though I might here be allowed to be Impartial, where I have nothing of my own to
bribe my Opinion. But, Sir, as I offer the Diverting Part to Your Pleasure, so
I must that, which may prove otherwise to Your Generous Protection, with him,
who begs leave to subscribe my self,

SIR, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, Charles Gildon.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
THE Extraordinary Success of the First Volume of my Lord Rochester' s Letters,
and the great Encouragement of several Persons of Quality, (who had seen the
Original Papers) to go on with the Undertaking, have engaged me to present You
with this Second Volume, (in Compliance with the frequent Importunities of
Gentlemen for the speedy Edition of it) before an Excellent Collection of Fifty
more of my Lord's, and a considerable number of the Duke of Buckingham' s, and
Sir George Etheridge' s came to my Hands; and which are now transcribing for
the Press, being sufficient to make a Volume by themselves; and therefore I
shall mingle none with them, unless any Gentleman or Lady, who have any of
these Incomparable Authors by them, will send 'em me to gratify the Public,
which has with so much pleasure received those already published. This Volume I
design to get ready in Trinity Term.

If any one should doubt the Reality and Authentickness of these Letters in
either of these Volumes, I have yet the Originals by me, and shall willingly
show 'em to any Gentleman or Lady that desires it; which must convince all that
know my Lord's Hand.

There Is a Letter, by Mistake, put into this Volume, which was never intended
for it, though not discovered till the Sheet was wrought off, for which I desire
the Reader' s Pardon.

A TABLE OF LETTERS In this Second Volume.
THirty six Love Letters, written by the Right Honorable John, late Earl of
Rochester, to Mrs. --, from p. 1. to p. 37 Four Letters by Mrs. J. Price, to
Madam Roberts, from p. 38. to p. 41 A Letter by the Honorable H. Savile, to
Henry Killigrew, Esquire. p. 42 Sir George Etheridge from Ratisbonne, to his Friend
in London, p. 44 Sir George Etheridge to the Earl of Middleton, p. 47 Sir
George Etheridge to the Earl of Middleton, p. 50 A Letter from England, to Sir
George Etheridge in Germany, p. 52 A Letter to a Lady, that desired to marry a
Courtier, p. 56 A Letter to Mr. Congreve, p. 61 A Letter to Mr. Wicherly, by
Mr. Dennis, p. 65 A Letter to Dorinda, p. 68 A Letter of his Grace, George,
late Duke of Buckingham, to the Lord Berkley, p. 71 The Duke' s Speeches on
several Occasions, from p. 73. to p. 102 The Emperor of Morocco' s Letter to
King Charles the Second, p. 103 Madam Peachy' s Letter to Mr. Bulstrode, at
White Hall, p. 107 A Letter to Sir Politic, by -- p. 109 To Mr. Savage, p. 111
A Letter from a Gentleman in the Country, to a Lady in the City, p. 114 Three
Love Letters, p. 116. to p. 121 A Letter to Mr. G -- p. 122 Letters from a
Person of Honor from on Board -- at St. Hellens, May 27, 1694. p. 124 A Letter
to Mrs. -- p. 127 A Letter from Paris to the Lord H -- p. 131 A Letter to Mr. T
-- p. 135 To the Chevalier Choiseul, at La Hogue p. 138 A Letter to Mr. -- p.
145 To Mrs. -- p. 147 To Sir John -- p. 149 To Mrs. -- p. 153 To a Gentleman at
Cambridge, p. 155 To T -- W --, Esquire. p. 157 Letters of Love and Gallantry to
Eugenia, p. 167 To the same, p. 171 To the same, p. 173 To the same, p. 175 To
the same, p. 178 Lysander to Eugenia, p. 182 To the same, p. 186 To the same,
p. 188 To the same, p. 190 To my Lady -- p. 193 To Mr. -- p. 195 To Mrs. -- p.
198 A Letter of Aeneas Sylvius, who was afterward Pope Pius the Second, to his
Father about a Bastard son; whom he sent to him, p. 200

Books printed for, and sold by R. Wellington.
AN Italian Voyage, or a complete Journey through Italy, in 2 Parts; with the
Characters of the People, and a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches,
Monasteries, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Villa's, Gardens, Pictures, Statues,
and Antiquities; as also of the Interest, Government, Riches, Forces, etc. of
all the Princes, with Instructions concerning Travels; the second Edition, very
much enlarged, by a Modern Hand; price 5 Shillings.

The whole Works of that Excellent Practic. Physician Dr. Tho. Sydenham,
wherein not only the Hist. and Cure of acute Diseases are treated of, after a
new and accurate Method; but also the shortest and safest way of curing most
Chronical Diseases, translated from the Original Latin by John Pechey, of the
College of Physicians; price 5 Shillings.

A General Treatise of the Diseases of Infants and Children, collected from the
best Authors, viz. Etmuller, Willis, etc. by John Pechey, of the College of
Physicians; price 1 Shilling and 6 d.

The Family-Physician, or a choice Collection of Remedies for all Diseases
incident to Human Bodies, whether internal or external, useful in Families, and
serviceable to Country People: To which is added the English Wine-Cellar, being
the best Method for making English Wines, and Metheglin, with a Collection of
Cosmetick Remedies, for the preserving the Beauty and Complexion of Ladies,
never before published, by George Harman, Philo Chemist, Servant to Sir Kenelm
Digby till he died; price 3 Shill.

OVid Travestie, or a Burlesque on Ovid's Epistles, by Capt. Alexander
Radcliff, of Gray's-Inn; price 2 Shillings.

Reflections on Ancient and Modern Learning, by William Wooton, Chaplain to his
Grace the Earl of Nottingham; with a Dissertation upon the Epistles of
Phalaris, Euripides, Themistocles, Socrates, and the Fables of Europe, by
Doctor Bentley; price 6 Shillings.

Cocker's Decimal Arithmetic, the second Edition enlarged, by John Hawkings,
Schoolmaster at St. George's Church in Southwarke.

Incognita, or Love and Duty reconciled, a Novel, by Mr. Congreve; price 1
Shilling.

Examen Poeticum Duplex, sive Musarum Anglicanarum Delectus alter cuisubjicitur
Epigrammatum, seu Poematum Minorum Specimen novum; Land. impensis Rich.
Wellington, ad Insigne Chelyos in Coemeterio Paulino: price 3 Shillings.

Mr. Walker's Treatise of Education, but especially of Young Gentlemen, in two
Parts; price 3 Shillings.

Where You may have most other Books and Plays newly Printed.

LOVE LETTERS, By the Right Honorable JOHN, LATE Earl of ROCHESTER.
Printed from his Original PAPERS.
Vol. II.
To Mrs. -- -- --
MADAM,
SO much Wit and Beauty, as You have, should think of nothing less than doing
Miracles; and there cannot be a Greater, than to continue to love Me: affecting
every thing is mean, as loving Pleasure, and being fond where You find Merit;
but to pick out the wildest, and most fantastical odd Man alive, and to place
your Kindness there, is an Act so brave and daring, as will show the Greatness
of Your Spirit, and distinguish You in Love, as You are in all things else,
from Womankind. Whether I have made a good Argument for my self, I leave You to
judge; and beg You to believe me, whenever I tell You what Mrs. R. is, since I
give you so sincere an Account of her humblest Servant: Remember the Hour of a
strict Account, when both Hearts are to be open, and we obliged to speak
freely, as You ordered it Yesterday, for so I must ever call the Day I saw you
last, since all time between that and the next Visit, is no part of my Life, or
at least like a long Fit of the Falling Sickness, wherein I am dead to all Joy
and Happiness. Here Is a damned impertinent Fool bolted in, that hinders me from
ending my Letter; the Plague of -- -- take him, and any Man or Woman alive that
take my Thoughts off of You: But in the Evening I will see You, and be happy in
spite of all the Fools in the World.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
IF there be yet alive within you the least Memory of me, which I can hope
only, because of the Life that remains with me, is the dear Remembrance of you;
and methinks your Kindness, as the younger, should outlive mine: Give me leave
to assure you, I will meet it very shortly with such a share on my side, as
will justify me to you from all Ingratitude; though your Favors are to me the
greatest Bliss this World, or Womankind, which I think Heaven, can bestow, (but
the hopes of it:) If there can be any Addition to one of the highest
Misfortunes, my Absence from you has found the way to give it me, in not
affording me the least Occasion of doing you any Service since I left you: It
seems, till I am capable of greater Merit, you resolve to keep me from the
Vanity of pretending any at all. Pray consider when you give another leave to
serve you, more than I, how much Injustice you run the hazard of committing,
when it will not be in your power to reward that More-deserving Man with half
so much Happiness as you have thrown away upon my Worthless Self,

Your Restless Servant, --

To Mrs. -- -- --
MADAM,
I Know not well who has the worst on it, you, who love but a little, or I, who
dote to an Extravagance; sure, to be half-kind, is as bad as to be halfwitted;
and Madness, both in Love and Reason, bears a better Character than a moderate
state of either. Would I could bring you to my Opinion, in this Point; I would
then confidently pretend you had too just Exceptions either against me or my
Passion, the Flesh and the Devil; I mean all the Fools of my own Sex, and that
fat, with the other lean One of yours, whose prudent Advice is daily concerning
you, how dangerous it is to be kind to the Man, upon Earth, who loves you best.
I, who still persuade my self, by all the Arguments I can bring, that I am
Happy, find this none of the least, that you are too unlike these People every
way, to agree with them in any particular. This is writ between sleeping and
waking, and I will not answer for its being Sense; but I, dreaming you were at
Mrs. N -- -- 's, with five or six Fools, and the Lean Lady waked in one of your
Horrors, and, in Amaze, Fright, and Confusion, send this to beg a kind one
from you, that may remove my Fears, and make me as Happy as I am Faithful.

To Mrs. -- -- --
Dear MADAM,
YOU are stark Mad, and therefore the fitter for me to love; and that is the
reason, I think, I can never leave to be

Your Humble Servant, -- -- --

To Mrs. -- -- --
MADAM,
TO convince you how just I must ever be to you, I have sent this on purpose,
that you may know you are not a moment out of my Thoughts; and since so much
Merit as you have, and such convincing Charms (to me at least) need not wish a
greater Advantage over any; to forget you, is the only Reprieve possible for a
Man so much your Creature and Servant as I am; which I am so far from wishing,
that I conjure you by all the assurances of Kindness you have ever made me
proud and happy with, that not two Days can pass without some Letter from you
to me: You must leave 'em, etc. -- -- to be sent to me with speed. And till the
blessed Hour wherein I shall see you again, may Happiness of all kinds be as far
from me, as I do, both in Love and Jealousy, pray Mankind may be from you.

To Mrs. -- -- --
MADAM,
THere is now no minute of my Life that does not afford me some new Argument
how much I love you; the little Joy I take in every thing wherein you are not
concerned, the pleasing Perplexity of endless Thought, which I fall into,
wherever you are brought to my Remembrance; and lastly, the continual
Disquiet I am, in, during your Absence, convince me sufficiently, that I do you
Justice in loving you, so as Woman was never loved before.

To Mrs. -- -- --
MADAM,
YOur safe Delivery has delivered me too from Fears for your sake, which were,
I Will promise you, as burthensom to me, as your Great-belly could be to you.
Every thing has fallen out to my Wish, for you are out of Danger, and the Child
is of the soft Sex I love. Shortly my Hopes are to see you, and in a little
while after to look on you with all your Beauty about you. Pray let no Body but
your self open the Box I sent you; I did not know, but that in Lying-in, you
might have use of those Trifles: Sick, and in Bed, as I am, I could come at no
more of 'em; but if you find 'em, or whatever is in my power of use, to your
Service, let me know it.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
THis is the first Service my Hand has done me, since my being a Cripple, and I
would not employ it in a Lie so soon; therefore, pray, believe me sincere, when
I assure you, that you are very dear to me; and, as long as I live, I will be
kind to you:

P. S.
This is all my Hand would write, but my Heart thinks a great deal more.



To Mrs. --
MADAM,
NOthing can ever be so dear to me as you are; and I am so convinced of this,
that I dare undertake to love you whilst I live: Believe all I say, for that is
the kindest thing imaginable, and when you can devise any way that may make me
appear so to you, instruct me in it, for I need a better Understanding, than my
own, to show my Love, without wrong to it.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
NOw, as I love you, I think I have reason to be Jealous; your Neighbor came
in last Night with all the Marks and Behavior of a Spy; every word and look
implied, that she came to solicit your Love, or Constancy: May her Endeavors
prove as vain as I wish my Fears. May no Man share the Blessings I enjoy,
without my Curses; and if they fall on him alone, without touching you, I am
happy, though he deserves 'em not: but should you be concerned, they will all fly
back upon my self; for he, whom you are kind to, is so blessed, he may safely
stand the Curses of all the World without repining; at least, if like me, he be
sensible of nothing but what comes from Mrs. --

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
YOu are the most afflicting fair Creature in the World; and however you would
persuade me to the contrary, I cannot but believe the Fault you pretend to
excuse, is the only one I could ever be guilty of to you: when you think of
receiving an Answer with Common Sense in it, you must write Letters that give
less Confusion than your last: I will wait on you, and be revenged by
continuing to love you, when you grow weariest of it.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
YEsterday it was impossible to Answer your Letter, which I hope, for that
reason, you will forgive me; though indeed you have been pleased to express your
self so extra ordinarily, that I know not what I have to Answer to you. Give me
some Reason upon your own account only, to be sorry I ever had the Happiness to
know you, since I find you repent the Kindness you showed me, and undervalue
the humble Service I had for you; and, that I might be no happier in your
Favors, than you could be in my Love, you have contrived it so well, to make
them equal to my Hatred; since that could do no more than these pretend to,
take away the Quiet of my Life. I tell this not to exempt my self from any
Service I can do you, (for I can never forget how very happy I have been) but
to convince you, the Love that gives you the Torment of Repentance on your
side, and me the Trouble of perceiving it in the other, is equally unjust and
cruel to us both, and ought therefore to die.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
YOu shall not fail of -- -- -- on Saturday; and for your Wretches, as you call
'em, it is usually my Custom when I wrong such as they, to make 'em amends; though
your Maid has aggravated that matter more to my Prejudice than I expected from
one who belonged to you, and for your own share, If I thought you a Woman of
Forms, you should receive all the Reparations imaginable; but it is so
unquestionable, that I am thoroughly your humble Servant, that all the World
must know, I cannot offend you, without being sorry for it.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
Though upon the Score of Love, which is immediately my Concern, I find aptness
enough to be jealous; yet upon that of your Safety, which is the only thing in
the World weighs more with me than my Love, I apprehend much more. I know, by
woeful Experience, what comes of dealing with Knaves; such I am sure you have at
this time to do with; therefore look well about you, and take it for granted,
That unless you can deceive them, they will certainly cozen you. If I am not so
wise as they, and therefore less fit to advise you, I am at least more
concerned for you, and for that reason the likelier to prove honest, and the
rather to be trusted. Whether you will come to the Duke's Playhouse to Day, or
at least let me come to you when the Play is done, I leave to your Choice; let
me know, if you please, by the Bearer.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
MIght I be so happy to receive such Proofs of your Kindness, as I my self
would choose, one of the greatest I could think of were, that all my Actions,
however they appeared at first, might be interpreted as meant for your Service;
since nothing is so agreeable to my Nature, as seeking my own Satisfaction; and
since you are the best Object of that I can find in the World, how can you
entertain a Jealousy or Fear? You have the strongest Security our frail and
daily changing Frame can give, that I can live to no end so much, as that of
pleasing and serving you.

To Mrs. --
Madam,
I Have not sinned so much as to deserve to live two whole Days without seeing
of you. From your Justice and Goodnature therefore I will presume you will
give me leave to wait on you at Night, and for your sake use not that Power
(which you find you have absolute over me) so unmercifully as you did last
time, to divert and keep me off, from convincing you by all the Reasons
imaginable, how necessary it is to preserve you faultless, and make me happy;
and also, that you believe and use me like the most Faithful of all your
Servants, etc.

To Mrs. --
Madam,
DEarest of all that ever was dearest to me, if I love any thing in the World
like you, or wish it in my Power to do it, may I ever be as unlucky and as
hateful as when I saw you last. I who have no way to express my Kindness to
you, but Letters, which cannot speak it half; whether shall I think my self
more unfortunate, who cannot tell you how much I love, or you, who can never
know how well you are beloved; I would fain bring it about, if it were
possible, to wait upon you to day; for besides that I never am without the
passionate Desire of being with you, at this time I have something to tell you,
that is for your Service, and will not be unpleasant News, but I am in Chains
here, and must seek out some Device, to break 'em for a quarter of an hour.

To Mrs. --
Madam,
IT is impossible for me to neglect what I love, as it would be impertinent to
profess love where I had none; but I take the vanity to assure my self, you
cannot conclude so severely both of my Truth and Reason, as to suspect me for
either of those Faults. If there has been a Misfortune in the Miscarriage of my
Letters, I beseech you not to add to it by an uncharitable Censure, but do me
the right to believe the last thing possible in the World, is the least
Omission of either Kindness or Service to you: I wish the whole World was as
entirely yours as I am, you would then have no reason to complain of any Body;
at least, it would be your own Fault, if they were not what you pleased. Those
Wretches you speak of in your Letter, are so little valuable, that you will
easily forget their Malice, and rather look upon the more considerable part of
the World, who will ever find it their Interest, and make it their vanity to
serve you. And now to let you know how soon I propose to be out of pain, two
Days hence I leave this Place, in order to my Journey toward London; and may I
then be but as happy as your Kindness can make me, I shall have but very little
room either for Envy or Ambition.

October. 6th. This Morning your Messenger came.
To Mrs. -- -- --
Madam,
I Found you in a Chiding Humor to Day, and so I left you; to Morrow I hope
for better Luck: till when, neither you, nor any you can employ, shall know
whether I am under or above Ground; therefore lie still, and satisfy your
self, that your are not, nor can be half so kind to Mrs. -- -- -- as I am:

Goodnight.
To Mrs. -- -- -- --
Madam,
MY Faults are such, as, among reasonable People, will ever find Excuse; but to
you I will make none, you are so very full of Mystery: I believe you make your
Court with good Success, at least I wish it; and as the kindest thing I can
say, do assure you, you shall never be my Pattern, either in Goodnature, or
Friendship, for I will be after my own rate, not yours,

Your humble Servant, -- -- -- --

To Mrs. --
Madam,
I Am far from delighting in the Grief I have given you, by taking away the
Child; and you, who made it so absolutely necessary for me to do so, must take
that Excuse from me, for all the ill Nature of it: On the other side, pray be
assured, I love Betty so well, that you need not apprehend any Neglect from
those I employ; and I hope very shortly to restore her to you a finer Girl than
ever. In the mean time you would do well to think of the Advice I gave you, for
how little show soever my Prudence makes in my own Affairs, in yours it will
prove very successful, if you please to follow it; and since Discretion is the
thing alone you are like to want, pray study to get it.

To Mrs. --
Madam,
I Came to Town late last Night, though time enough to receive News from the King
very surprising, you being chiefly concerned in it: I must beg that I may speak
with you this Morning, at ten a clock; I will not fail to be at your Door: The
Affair is unhappy, and to me on many Scores, but on none, more than that it has
disturbed the Heaven of Thought I was in, to think, after so long an Absence, I
had lived to be again blessed with seeing my Dearest Dear, Mrs. --

To Mrs. --
Madam,
I Am forced at last to own, That it is very uneasy to me to live so long
without hearing a word of you, especially when I reflect how Ill-natured the
World is to pretty Women, and what occasion you may have for their Service.
Besides, I am unsatisfied yet, why that Inconsiderable Service you gave me
leave to do you, and which I left positive Orders for when I came away, was
left unperform'd; and if the Omission reflect upon my Servant, or my self, that
I might punish the one, and clear the other. I have often wished, I know not
why, but I think for your sake more than my own, that Mrs. -- migh forget me
quite: but I find it would trouble me of all things, should she think ill of
me, or remember me to hate me, but whenever she would make me happy; if she
can yet wish me so, let her command some real Service, and my Obedience will
prove the best Reward my Hopes can aim at.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
MY Visit Yesterday was intended to tell you, I had not Dined in Company of
Women, which (though for a certain Reason I could not very well express with
Words) was however sufficiently made appear, since you could not be so very
Illnatur'd to make severe Reflections upon me when I was gone. Were Men without
Frailties, how would you bring it about to make 'em love you so blindly as they
do. I cannot yet imagine what fault you could find in my Love-letter; certainly
'twas full of Kindness and Duty to you; and whilst these two Points are kept
inviolable, it is very hard when you take any thing ill. I fear staying at Home
so much gives you the Spleen (for I am loath to believe it is I) I have therefore
sent you the two Plays that are acted this Afternoon; if that Diversion could
put you into so good a Humor, as to make you able to endure me again, I should
be very much obliged to the Stage. However, if your Anger continue, show your
self at the Play, that I may look upon you, and go mad. Your Revenge is in your
own Eyes; and if I must suffer, I would choose that way.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
Though not for real Kindness sake, at least to make your own Words good, (which
is a Point of Honor proper for a Woman) endeavor to give me some undeniable
Proofs that you love me. If there be any in my Power which I have yet neither
given nor offered, you must explain your self; I am perhaps very dull, but
withal very sincere: I could wish, for your sake, and my own, that your
Faillings were such; but be they what they will, since I must love you, allow
me the liberty of telling you sometimes unmannerly Truths, when my Zeal for
your Service causes, and your own Interest requires it: These Inconveniences
you must bear with from those that love you, with greater regard to you than
themselves; such a One I pretend to be, and I hope, if you do not yet believe
it, you will in time find it.

You have said something that has made me fancy to Morrow will prove a happy
Day to me; however, pray let me see you before you speak with any other Man,
there are Reasons for it, Dearest of all my Desires. I expect your Commands.

An Hour after I left You.
To Mrs. --
MADAM,
I Have a very just Quarrel to Business, upon a thousand Faults, and will now
continue it, whilst I live, since it takes from me some Hours of your Company.
Till two in the Afternoon, I cannot come to you; pity my Ill-fortune, and send
me word where I shall then find you.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
I Was just beginning to write You word, that I am the most Unlucky Creature in
the World, when Your Letter came in, and made me more certain; for You tempt me
by desiring me to do the thing upon Earth I have the most Fonaness of, at this
time; that is, going with You to Windsor; but the Devil has laid a Block in my
way, and I must not, for my Life, stir out of Town these ten Days. You will
scarce believe me in this particular, as You should do, but I will convince You
of the Truth, when I wait on You; in the mean time (to show the Reality of my
Intentions) there is a Coach ready hired for to morrow, which, if not true, You
may disprove me by making use of it.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
BElieve me, (Dearest of all Pleasures) that those I can receive from any thing
but You, are so extremely dull they hardly deserve the Name. If You distrust
me, and all my Professions, upon the Score of Truth and Honor, at least let
'em have Credit on another, upon which my greatest Enemies will not deny it me;
and that is, its being Notorious, that I mind nothing but my own Satisfaction.
You may be sure I cannot choose but love You above the World, whatever becomes
of the King, Court, or Mankind, and all their Impertinent Business. I will come
to You this Afternoon.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
THat I do not see You, is not that I would not, for that, the Devil take me,
if I would not do every Day of my Life, but for these Reasons You shall know
hereafter. In the mean time, I can give You no Account of Your Business as yet;
but of my own part, which I am sure will not be agreeable without others, who,
I am confident will give full Satisfaction in a very short time, to all Your
Desires: When it is done, I will tell You something that, perhaps, may make You
think that I am Mrs. -- --

Your humble Servant,
Sunday.
To Mrs. --
MADAM,
TIll I have mended my Manners, I am ashamed to look you in the Face, but
Seeing You is as necessary to my Life, as Breathing; so that I must see You, or
be Yours no more; for that is the Image I have of Dying. The Sight of You then,
being my Life, I cannot but confess, with an humble and sincere Repentance,
that I have hitherto lived very ill; receive my Confession, and let the Promise
of my future Zeal and Devotion obtain my Pardon, for last Night's Blasphemy
against You, my Heaven; so shall I hope, hereafter, to be made partaker of such
Joys, in Your Arms, as meeting Tongues but faintly can express. Amen.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
I Assure You I am not half so faulty as unfortunate in serving You; I will not
tell You my Endeavors, nor excuse my Breach of Promise; but leave it to You to
find the cause of my doing so ill, to one I wish so well to; but I hope to give
You a better Account shortly. The Complaint You spoke to me, concerning Miss, I
know nothing of, for she is as great a Stranger to me, as she can be to You.
So, thou pretty Creature Farewell.

Your humble Servant, --

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
YOur Letter so transports me, that I know not how to answer it, the
Expressions are so soft, and seem to be so sincere, that I were the
unreasonablest Creature on Earth, could I but seem to distrust my being the
happier: and the best Contrivance I can think of, for conveying a Letter to me,
is making a Porter bring it my Footman, wherever I am, whether at St.
James's, Whitehall, or home. They are at present pulling down some part of my
Lodging, which will not permit me to see You there; but I will wait on You at
any other place, what time You please.

To Mrs. -- -- --
MADAM,
I Could say a great deal to you, but will conceal it till I have Merit: so
these shall be only to beg your Pardon, for desiring your Excuse till Monday,
and then you shall find me an Honest Man, and one of my Word. So Mrs. -- --

Your Servant, -- -- --

To Mrs. --
Dear MADAM,
MY Omitting to write to you all this while, were an unpardonable Error, had I
been guilty of it through Neglect toward you, which I value you too much ever to
be capable of. But I have never been two days in a place, since Mrs. -- went
away; which I ought to have given you Notice of, and have let you known, that
her Crime was, making her Court to -- -- with Stories of you; entertaining her
continually with the Shame she underwent to be seen in Company of so horrid a
Body as your self, in order to the obtaining of her -- 's Employment; and
lastly, that my -- was ten times prettier than that nasty B --, I was so fond
of at London, which I had by you. This was the grateful Acknowledgment she made
you for all your Favors, and this Recompense for all the little Services;
which, upon your Account, she received from,

Your humble Servant, etc.

To Mrs. -- -- --
MADAM,
ANger, Spleen, Revenge, and Shame, are not yet so powerful with me, as to make
me disown this great Truth, That I love you above all things in the World: But,
I thank God, I can distinguish, I can see very Woman in you, and from your self
am convinced I have never been in the wrong in the Opinion of Women: It Is
impossible for me to curse you; but give me leave to pity my self, which is
more than ever you will do for me. You have a Character, and you maintain it;
but I am sorry you make me an Example to prove it: It seems (as you excel in
every thing) you scorn to grow less in that noble Quality of Using your
Servants very hardly: You do well not to forget it; and rather practice upon
me, than lose the Habit of being very Severe, for you that choose rather to be
Wise than Just or Good-natured, may freely dispose of all things in your Power,
without Regard to one, or the other. As I admire you, I would be glad I could
imitate you; it were but Manners to endeavor it; which, since I am not able to
perform, I confess you are in the right to call that Rude, which I call Kind;
and so keep me in the Wrong for ever, which you cannot choose but take great
Delight in: You need but continue to make it fit for me not to love you, and
you can never want something to upbraid me with.

Three a Clock in the Morning.
The End of the E. of R.'s Letters.
LETTERS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS, Written by Mrs. J. PRICE.
To Mrs. Roberts.
MADAM,
HAving so much Wit, I wonder you should in the least mistake Kindness for
Prudence; that is a thing I never had yet laid to my Charge. In time I doubt not
but you will know me better: I am the sorrier for my Indisposition, since I
cannot comply with your Desires; however, if you please to come hither, you
shall be extremely welcome to her that will esteem her self happy in you
Friendship.

J. Price.
Thursday.
To Mrs. Roberts.
MADAM,
'TWere very dull and ill-natured in me, to forget the Joy and Satisfaction I
received in your last Kindness; and seeming to do it, were a Fault not
pardonable: therefore, Madam, forgive this Impertinence, since there is no way
that can tell so much the Sense of your Favors as this; and I have had a Hope
that you would be so Goodnatur'd, as to have seen me: But the same Cross-fate,
which generally pursues me, leaves me not in this concern: Let me know that you
are well, and 'twill make some Reparation for the Pain I suffer in not seeing
you; and, if you think I deserve your Kindness, it is a Happiness, which shall
never be forgot, by

Your most humble Servant, J. Price.

To Mrs. Roberts.
MADAM,
I Have this Morning acquainted the Party with the Honor you did me last
Night; and, as you express your self to me only in general Terms, I could do no
more to him: I find him very sensible of his Obligation to you, and willing to
comply in any thing, in his own Power, reasonable for your Service; it is an
easier Task for Beauty to get twenty new Servants, than recover one old one;
and, truly, I conceive him in a desperate condition: He was a little surpised
to find me your Ambassador; but, I believe, took it better from my Mouth, than
he would have done from any other.

J. Price.

A Letter to Mrs. Price.
MADAM,
I Need not tell you how drunk we were on Saturday; since, as I remember, we
gave you good proof of it under our own Hands: however, I made a shift to ride
home, but am now galloping to Poltimore; and, if I am not mistaken, you will
have occasion to take a little Journey too; Mum! for that. Here Is not a
Syllable of News, but that all things of our Concern stand fair and well; and
if it should ever happen otherwise, which I Am confident it will not, be assured
it shall not be the Fault of,

Your Love,

A LETTER, Written by the Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
To Henry Killigrew, Esquire.
Noble HENRY,
SWeet Namesake of mine, happy Humored Killigrew, Soul of Mirth, and all
Delight; the very Sight of your Letter gave me a kind of Joy, that I thought
had been at such a Distance with me, that She and I were never more to meet:
For, since I have been at St. Albans, Heaven and Earth were nearer one another,
than Joy and Fermyn; for, here, some half a Mile out of Town, absent from all
my Friends, in the fear of being forgot by 'em, I pass my wearisom time, in a
little melancholy Wood, as fit for a restless Mind to complain of his sad
Condition, as I am unfit to relate my Sufferances, to one so happy as your
Blessed Humor makes you; therefore as freely I quit you of Hearing what I
could say on this Subject: likewise allow me the Liberty of not answering in
your own Style; yet, dear Harry, write still the same way: Once I could drink,
talk strangely, and be as mad as the best of you, my Boys; who knows but that I
may come to it again? Comfort me, it is well I can stay thus long upon the
matter, after the Life I have led, it is more than I did believe was possible
for me to do; therefore do not abandon me yet, try two or three Letters more,
there is great hopes of me; and if that does not do the business, send me to my
Wood again, and allow me not other Correspondent, but pert and dull Mast -- 's,
a Punishment great enough for a greater Offender; for, in this my Misery, he
plays the Devil with me, surpasses himself by much: Prithee, Killigrew, allay
his Tongue with two or three such sharp things, as you and I used to say of,
you know who, for I lost mine. And so Farewell.

H. Savile.

LETTERS IN PROSE and VERSE, ON Several Occasions, BY Sir George Etheridge,
Knight.
To his Friend in London.
Dear SIR,
MY Letters from England tell me, that this Summer My Lord Chamberlain has won
the Money at Bowls, and my Lord Devonshire at Dice; I hope neither of 'em have
been lucky at your cost. Before you receive this, I reckon you will be in your
Winter Quarters, where you may have leisure to give me a short Account of what
passed at the Campaign at Tunbridge. I cannot but remember Mr. M. though he seems
to have quite forgot me; he is a very extraordinary Person, I find he had
rather lend a Friend a hundred Pounds, than take the pains to write to him. I Am
sensible his many Employments afford him little leisure, and I should pity his
Mistress, but that I am persuaded his Prudence has made him choose her in the
Family. The Women here are not generally handsome; yet there is a file of young
Ladies in this Town, whose Arms would glitter, were they drawn up against the
Maids of Honor; but the Devil's in it, Marriage is so much their Business, that
they cannot satifie a Lover that has Desires more fervent than Frank Villers.
It Is a fine thing for a Man, who has been nourished so many Years with good
substantial Flesh and Blood, to be reduced to Sighs an Wishes, and all those
Airy Courses which are served up to feast a Belle Passion; but to comfort my
self, in my Misfortune, I have learned to Ogle and Languish in public, like
any Walcup; and to content my self in private, with a piece of Housholdbread,
as well as some of my Friends. However unkind Fortune has been to you, don't
revenge your self on me; force the Sullenness of your Temper, and let me hear
from you; it is not reasonable I should lose a Friend, because you have lost
your Money.

Yours, G. Etheridge.
From Ratisbon, Aug. 23 d, 88.
To the Earl of Middleton.
Since Love and Verse, as well as Wine,
Are brisker where the Sun does shine,
It Is something to lose two Degrees,
Now Age it self begins to freeze;
Yet this I patiently could bear,
If the rich Danube's Beauties were
But only two Degrees less fair
Than the bright Nymphs of gentle Thames,
Who warm me hither with their Beams;
Such power they have, they can dispense
Five hundred Miles their Influence:
But Hunger forces Men to eat,
Though no Temptation's in the Meat.
How would the Ogling Sparks despise
The Darling-damsel of my Eyes,
Should they behold her at a Play,
As she is tricked up on Holiday,
When the whole Family combine,
For public Pride, to make her shine?
Her Locks, which long before lay matted,
Are, on this day, combed out and platted,
A Diamond-bodkin in each Tress,
The Badges of her Nobleness;
For every Stone, as well as She,
Can boast an ancient Pedigree:
These formed the Jewel Crest did grace
The Cap of the first Grave of the Race,
Preferred by Graffin Maryan,
To adorn the handle of her Fan;
And, as by old Record appears,
Worn since in Rinigundus Years,
Now sparkling in the Fraulin's Hair,
No Rocket breaking in the Air,
Can with her starry Head compare;
Such Ropes of Pearl her Arms incumber,
She scarce can deal the Cards at Omber;
So many Rings each Finger freight,
They tremble with the mighty Weight;
The like in England never was seen,
Since Holbin Drew, Hal, and his Queen.
But after these fantastic Flights,
The Lustre's meaner than the Lights:
The Thing that bears this glittering Pomp,
Is but a tawdry ill-bred Ramp,
Whose Brawny Limbs and Martial Face,
Proclaim her of the Gothic Race,
More than the painted Pageantry
Of all her Father's Heraldry.
But there is another sort of Creatures,
Whose ruddy Looks, and grotesque Features,
Are so much out of Nature's way,
You Would think'em stamped on other Clay,
No lawful Daughters of Old Adam.
Amongst these, behold a City-Madam,
With Arms in Mittins, Head in Muff,
A Dapper Cloak, and Reverend Ruff.
No Farce so pleasant as this Mawkin,
And the soft sound of High Dutch talking,
The pretty Jet she has in walking:
Here unattended by the Graces,
The Queen of Love in a sad Case is;
Nature, her Active Minister,
Neglects Affairs, and will not stir,
Thinks it not worth the while to please,
But when she does is for her Ease;
Even I, her most devout Adorer,
With wandering Thoughts appear before her,
And when I Am making an Oblation,
Am fain to spur Imagination,
With some old London-Inclination.
The Bow is bent at German Dame,
The Arrow flies at English Game;
Kindness, that can Indifference warm,
And blow that Calm into a Storm,
Has, in the very tender'st Hour,
Over my Gentleness no Power,
True to my Country-Womens Charms,
When Kissed and Pressed in Foreign Arms.
G. Etheridge.

To the Earl of MIDDLETON.
FRom hunting Whores, and hanting Play,
And minding nothing else all Day,
And all the Night too, you will say,
To make grave Legs in formal Fetters,
Converse with Fops, and write dull Letters,
To go to Bed' twixt Eight and Nine,
And sleep away my precious Time,
In such a idle sneaking Place,
Where Vice and Folly hide their Face;
And in a troublesome Disguise,
The Wife seems honest, Husband wife;
For Pleasure here has the same Fate,
Which does attend Affairs of State;
The plague of Ceremony infects,
Even in Love, the Softer Sex,
Who an essential Will neglect,
Rather than lose the least Respect:
In regular Approach we storm,
And never Visit but in Form;
That is, sending to know before,
At what a-clock they will play the Whore.
The Nymphs are constant, Gallants private,
One scarce can guess who it is they drive at,
This seems to me a Scurvey Fashion,
Who have been bred in a Free Nation,
With Liberty of Speech and Passion:
Yet cannot I forbear to Spark it,
And make the best of a Bad-market;
Meeting with One, by Chance, Kind-hearted,
Who no Preliminaries started,
I entered beyond Expectation,
Into a close Negotiation;
Of which, here after, a Relation:
Humble to Furtune, not her Slave,
I still was pleased with what she gave:
And with a firm and cheerful Mind,
I steer my Course with every Wind,
To all the Ports she has designed.
G. ETHERIDGE.

A LETTER FROM ENGLAND.
To Sir GEORGE ETHERIDGE, Knight.
TO you who live in chill Degree,
As Map informs, of Fifty-three,
And do not much for Cold atone,
By bringing thither Fifty-one:
Methinks all Climes should be alike,
From Tropic to the Pole Arctick,
Since you have such a Constitution,
As no where suffers Diminution;
You can be Old in grave Debate,
And Young in Love-Affairs of State;
And both to Wives and Husbands show,
The Vigor of a Plenipo --
Like mighty Miffi'ner you come,
Ad parts Infidelium:
A Work of wondrous Merit sure,
So far to go, so much endure,
And all to preach to German Dame,
Where sound of Cupid never came;
Less had you done, had you been sent,
As far as Drake, or Pinto went
For Cloves or Nutmegs to the Line-a,
Or even for Oranges to China;
That had indeed been Charity,
Where Lovesick Ladies helpless lie,
Chopped, and for want of Liquor dry.
But you have made your Zeal appear,
Within the Circle of the Bear;
What Region of the Earth so dull,
That is not of your Labors full?
Triptolemy, so sung the Nine,
Strewn Plenty from his Cart Divine:
But, spite of all these Fable-makers,
He never sowed on Almain-acres;
No, that was left, by Fate's Decree,
To be performed and sung by Thee.
Thou break'st through Forms with as much ease,
As the French King through Articles.
In grand Affairs thy Days are spent,
In waging weighty Compliment,
With Such as Monarchs represent;
They whom such vast Fatigues attend,
Want some soft Minutes to unbend,
To show the World, that now and then
Great Ministers are Mortal Men;
Then Rhinish Rummers walk the Round,
In Bumpers every King is crowned;
Besides three Holy Miter'd Hectors,
And the whole College of Electors;
No Health of Potentate is sunk,
That pays to make his Envoy drunk:
These Dutch Delights I mentioned last,
Suit not, I know, your English Taste;
For Wine, to leave a Whore or Play,
Was never Your Excellency's way;
Nor need the Title give Offense,
For here You were his Excellence;
For Gaming, Writing, Speaking, Keeping,
His Excellence for all but Sleeping.
Now if You Tope in Form, and Treat,
It Is the source Sauce to the Sweet Meat,
The Fine You pay for being Great:
Nay, there is a harder Imposition,
Which is (indeed) the Court-petition,
That setting Worldly Pomp aside,
(Which Poet has at Font defied.)
You would be pleased, in humble way,
To write a Trifle called a Play;
This truly is a Degradation,
But would oblige the Crown and Nation,
Next to Your wise Negotiation:
If You pretend, as well You may,
Your high Degree; Your Friends will say,
The Duke St. Aignan made a Play:
If Gallick Peer convince You scarce,
His Grace of B -- has writ a Farce:
And You, whose Comic Wit is Terseal,
Can hardly fall below Rehearsal.
Then finish what You once began,
But scrible faster, if You can:
For yet no George, to our Discerning,
Has e're writ under ten Years Warning.
A Letter to a Lady, that designed to Marry a Courtier.
WHat Irreligious Courses have you run,
That such hard Penance must be undergone?
Have you, like Harlots, made your Tail your Trade,
And whor'd you into Sustenance and Bread?
Have you to Hospital some Lover sent?
And for that Mischief, by this worse, repent.
At Rome one Penance for their Ills they bear;
But you will all in this united share.
None e're this dangerous Sea of Mischief past,
Who did not suffer, or repent at last.
The giddy Passions of a youthful Mind,
Are often by Wishes swayed or Beauty blind.
Girls choose their Husbands as they do their Clothes;
Where, if without no Fault they can disclose;
They easily espouse the Pageant Show,
In hopes the Color will the Service do:
So you on Marriage look, are more intent
Upon a fine trimmed Coat, than settlement.
One, who though destitute of Wit and Sense,
Is stockt with Essence, Powder, and Pretense,
What though without he seem designed for Show,
The greatest Ass is still the greatest Beau:
And Asses always are esteemed by you.
Don't tell me that his Promises are great;
Who ever forbore 'em, that designed to cheat?
Lovers and Courtiers, you must know, by course,
Are much as fickle as your self, or worse:
Nor that his Page that follows at his Tail,
Will e're secure him, upon Change, from Jail.
There Is great Uncertainty in Human Life,
And he must stick to's place, as well as Wife:
And that, you will say, is a laborious thing;
All Night to serve his Wife, all Day the King.
Don't tell me of his Gardens and Retreat;
Fine Wives and Horses seldom make Men great.
Except we do 'em, as some Hackneys take,
More for our Interest, than our Pleasure's sake:
Both to recreate by turns, when first enjoyed;
But, by Possession of them both, we are cloyed.
Would you procure a Husband for your Ease,
Who for his Folly, not his Parts, might please;
Then take a Statesman, when he is gone to Court,
You may contrive how to promote your Sport.
In every Instant deal for fresh Delight;
And fill his Wishes, and his Arms at Night.
Or if his Business ben't a fit Disguise,
To give admittance to a Harmless Vice:
Yet his great Folly will contribute still
To help your Wishes, and promote your Will.
Under the Notion of a Country Friend,
You many pretty Pleasures may intend.
But to reserve your Virtue for a Fool,
Exceeds the Limits of Prudential Rule.
For a dull Ass, whose Passion's like his Brain,
Rather than Pleasure, will create your Pain.
And Lover's Ecstasies are never so great,
As when in Sympathetick Fire they meet:
For Fools in Love, with Soldiers may compare,
Who, stunned with clamorous Noise of Guns and War,
Are silently regardless of Command,
And, senseless of your Pleasure useless stand.
Thus they, when Pulse of Passion e're beats high,
Seem quite regardless of the profer'd Joy;
And, ignorant of the Symptoms of Delight,
Smoke out the Day, and Snore away the Night.
Don't tell me, You Are excessively in Love;
Your Wit will soon that vain Pretense disprove.
Blockheads much labored under that of old;
But none dies now, but for their Darling, Gold.
Great is your Love, and great the Risque you run,
To be Unhappy, or at least Undone.
Those Pleasures Young Girls fancy are so Good,
Are seldom felt, but always understood.
It Is but the Magic Spell, which Nature yields,
To bring such untried Lovers to its Fields:
A specious Bait, fit Mankind to enslave,
And to bereave us of the Joys we have.
Would you be virtuous, get a Man of Juice,
Fertile in Wit, and of his Love profuse;
For only such are fit for Women's Use:
Where you in mutual Bonds of Joy may range,
And in your Kisses may your Souls exchange.
One, with such Qualities, would a Nun invite,
To quit Eternal Day for Earthly Night.
Such would your lavish Wishes all engage,
And guard your Virtue as secure as Age.
In Joys unknown you then might pass the Day,
Till Night shall take the Sun's bright Beams away,
And both in clammy Joys, and Slumber, quit the Fray.
J. W.

To Mr. Congreve.
Dear SIR,
THE last Fortnight which I past in Town, and the first which I past in the
Country, I had so much Sickness, and so much Spleen, that the greatest Kindness
I could do my Friends, was, to let them know nothing of me. And yet, unless I
had been silent so long, I should hardly know what to write to you. The Excuse
for having held my Tongue, affords me Matter to talk of. Otherwise I could find
nothing to say to you, unless I would send you Professions of Friendship;
which, I hope, are wholly needless: or entertain you with Talk of my self. And
I am yet more unwilling to do the last than the first: For I have observed,
That, for the most part, a Man who talks much of Himself, talks of a Subject
which he does not at all understand. But you are to be excepted from this
General Rule; and you could oblige me with nothing more grateful than some News
of your self. I long to know how you proceed in your Tragedy, and should be
glad to be informed how many are making a Party for it; that is, how many are
writing Plays besides. I make no doubt but it will appear at the Head of a
numerous Train; yet I believe you will have reason to be ashamed of some of
your Equipage. I hear of three or four, who have a couple of Plays a-piece,
which are to go into the House, as Vermin entered into the Ark, by Pairs; where
they are both received and preserved with as much care, as the most Reasonable,
and the most Noble Productions. Since Providence will have it so, we ought to
conclude, that it is fitting it should be so. And indeed, why may not their
Songs and Madrigals, and absurd and Speechless Farces, help to constitute the
Beauty and Harmony of the Intellectual World, as well as Owls, and Stotes, and
Polecats, do that of Material Beings. However, these Fellows Productions are
fit to discover one Truth to us, which we should not have imagined without
them; and that is, That there are greater Sots than themselves; for such are
all their Applauders. But to leave them for better Company, give my Service to
all my Friends at Will's; both to those who show their Wit by their Writing,
and to those who by their Silence show their Judgments. Tell -- and -- and --,
that I would fain know of them; nay, and of you too; so as D -- says, What a
Devil have I done to you, that you cannot let a Man alone in his Solitude, but
that you must disturb the Tranquillity of his Mind: I mean that little I have
here. For hither come your Idea's at Five every Day precisely, and give me
furious Desires to be at Covent Garden. I am forced to make use of a little
piece of Philosophy; for I fancy you Quibling there, and then I am as calm as a
Matron. For I am apt to believe, that I have better Diversion here. I am
lately, you must know, grown a great Angler; perhaps, the greatest Man in the
Age for Gudgeonfishing; though I say it, who should not say it. That is Pastime
which probably you may despise. However, as I take it, it is better than lying
upon the Catch at Will's, and laying Snares for Puns, as Spiders do for Flies.
But I am about to fall into the Vice, which I designed to avoid For I am about
to talk of My self to you, which is a Subject of which I am sure I ought to say
nothing, since it is needless to assure you, that I am

Your humble Servant.
Newport, Aug. 96.
To Mr. Wycherley.
Dear SIR,
Though I have enough to allege in the behalf of my Silence, to excuse it to any
Man living but You; yet I have always professed that peculiar Esteem for you,
that to make a sufficient Apology for my self, when Appearances are so much
against me, I had need have an equal share of Wit with You. But since I come
infinitely short of that, You would oblige me extremely, if You would instruct
me by the next Post, what Thoughts and what Words I should use to make You
forgive me. Yet to engage You to that, I know You expect something at least
that is like Wit from me. But You may every jot as reasonably expect a lusty
Letter of Credit from me. And who the Devil, at this Conjuncture, should
expect, that the Post should bring either Wit or Money with him, when the
Paper-credit of the Nation is lost in relation to both. Yet we have reason to
believe, since You are resolved to turn Author again, that You may retrieve it
in regard to one of them. I wish You all the Success to which Your Merit
entitles You; and that is another Reason to make me wish for a Peace. For the
Men who are able to judge, have now no leisure to read: They who have the
greatest share of Wit and Spirit, being engaged in the Armies, or in Affairs.
When Apollo nowadays inspires a Poet, he did as when he fed Admetus his
Sheep, and the God sings now to Cattle. Wit certainly never was at so low an
Ebb, of which the Coffee-house is a lamentable example, as it is a miserable
Spectacle. When you, and one or two more went out of Town, the great Supports
of Politeness left it, and then the Enemy broke in upon us; and scarce any
thing has appeared ever since in it, unless it be that Anti-wit, a Gamester. We
almost regret those moments of abominable Memory, when Puns flew about as thick
as Squibs upon a City-Festival. Even Quibbles, and Quarter-quibbles, if they
could now be found, would be as much valued as Vermin are in Dearths. But what
shall we say? -- Etiam periere ruinae.
The very Ruins of Wit have perished.


So much of the Coffee-house in general. Now for one or two of the noble
Members in particular. And first, I have Wonders to tell you of Lucifer: Quod
optanti Divum promittere nemo
Auderet, volvenda dies, en, attulit ultro.


Lucifer is grown the most regular Fellow in the Universe: For he rises still
exactly after Sunsetting, and goes to Bed still precisely before Sunrising;
and he and his Father, I mean his Spiritual Father, that is, his Father
Phoebus, live just as he and his Natural Father did, without ever seeing the
Face of one another. But he has just sent a Message to me from the the Rose;
where, as the Drawer tells me, he has the most earnest Business in the World
with me. The most earnest Business in the World to Lucifer, is, the securing a
Man to sit up till five with him. However, I will just go and hear what he
says, and drink Mr. Wycherley's Health with him. I am,

Dear Sir, Your most humble Servant, J. Dennis.
Land. Sept. 10, 1696.
To Dorinda.
Madam,
OH! how tedious is Absence from the Persons we adore! And with what killing
Anguish did I receive the doleful News of your Departure! Where a mutual
Inclination has united two tender Hearts, a Separation is more insupportable
than Death it self: Yet if my Dorinda left the Town without a Sigh, I am more
miserable still. You could not sure forget (so soon at least) all those
obliging Vows you so fervently made; Vows, whose Solemnity and Frequency were
no inconsiderable part of my Felicity. Alas! it is equally impossible for me to
express the Horrors I now feel, or the powerful Luster of those victorious
Eyes, that gave Birth to my raging Passion. Since that fatal Minute, that
ravished from me all my Joys, in your leaving London, Heaven's my Witness, and
every Divinity that conspired my Ruin; nay, by your own beloved Self I swear,
(the greatest Oath my Love can invent) That my Heart has known no other Bliss
than the endearing Thoughts of you. The pleasing Idea your irresistible
Beauties have imprinted on my faithful Breast, at present constitutes all the
easy Moments I enjoy; and how few they must be, under the rated Circumstance
of being deprived of your Sight, none can know, but those that love as well.
Two Post-days are now past, and not one Line from my Dorinda! Oh! what can mean
this Silence? Do you then join with Fate to break a Heart, that would not
vouchsafe to live, but to be yours? An unusual Shivering darts through every
Vein, and my drooping Spirits presage some other evil, which your unhappy
Strephon must undergo. Were it only want of Health, and not of Love, that
prevented your writing, my grief would be less wounding. You may have a Fever;
but that you should be false, I will not as yet believe possible. One Proof of
your Infidelity would terminate all my Pain: For I were utterly unworthy of
your Affection, if mine could support so fatal an Assurance. But such
Suspicions are injurious; and I would rather question the Testimony of my
Senses, than think you were Untrue. Oh! let me hear from you, though but one
Word; the Rigors of Absence from your Arms and Eyes, will be less intolerable:
Till then, my Torments are more than Arithmetic can number, or Rhetoric
describe. Oh, Dorinda! that I were at your Feet, to give you fresh Assurances
of the Inviolableness of my Passion, whose Greatness was once your Wonder and
Delight.

LETTERS AND SPEECHES, ON SEVERAL SUBJECTS, By the Late Duke of Buckingham.
To the Lord Bercley.
My LORD,
I Must needs beg your Lordship's Excuse, for not waiting upon you next Sunday
at Dinner, for two Reasons: The first is, Because Mrs. B -- refuses to hear me
preach; which I take to be a kind Slur upon so learned a Divine as I am. The
other, That Sir Robert Cl -- is to go into the Country upon Monday, and has
desired me to stay within to Morrow, about Signing some Papers, which must be
dispatched for the Clearing so much of my Estate, as in spite of my own
Negligence, and the extraordinary Perquisits I have received from the Court, is
yet left me. I Am sure your Lordship is too much my Friend, not to give me Leave
to look after my Temporal Affairs, if you do but consider how little I Am like
to get by my Spirituality, except Mrs. B -- be very much in the wrong: Pray,
tell her I am resolved hereafter, never to to swear by any other than Jo. Ash;
and if that be a Sin, it is as odd a one as ever she heard of. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble, and most faithful Servant, Buckingham.

The DUKE' s Speech in a Conference.
Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
I Am commanded by the House of Peers, to open to you the Matter of this
Conference; which is a Task I could wish their Lordships had been pleased to
lay upon Anybody else, both for their own sakes and mine: Having observed, in
that little Experience I have made in the World, there can be nothing of
greater Difficulty, than to Unite Men in their Opinions, whose Interests seem
to disagree.

This, Gentlemen, I fear, is at present our Case; but yet I hope, when we have
a little better considered of it, we shall find, that a greater Interest does
oblige us at this time, rather to join in the Preservation of both our
Privileges, than to differ about the Violation of either.

We acknowledge it is our Interest to defend the Right of the Commons; for,
should we suffer them to be oppressed, it would not be long before it might come
to be our own Case: And I humbly conceive it will also appear to be the
Interest of the Commons, to uphold the Privilege of the Lords; that so we may
be in a condition to stand by and support them.

All that their Lordships desire of you on this Occasion, is, That you will
proceed with them as usually Friends do, when they are in Dispute one with
another, That you will not be impatient of hearing Arguments urged against your
Opinions, but examine the Weight of what is said, and then impartially consider
which of us two, are likeliest to be in the wrong.

If we are in the wrong, we and our Predecessors have been so for these many
hundred of Years; and not only our Predecessors, but yours too: This being the
first time that ever an Appeal was made in point of Judicature, from the Lords
House, to the house of Commons. Nay, those very Commons, which turned the Lords
out of this House, though they took from them many other of their Privileges, yet
left them the constant Practice of this till the very last day of their
Sitting. And this will be made appear by several Precedents, these Noble Lords
will lay before you, much better than I can pretend to do.

Since this Business has been in Agitation, their Lordships have been a little
more curious than ordinary, to inform themselves of the true nature of these
Matters now in Question before Us; which I shall endeavor to explain to you,
as far as my small Ability, and my Aversion to hard Words will give me leave.
For howsoever the Law, to make it a Mystery and a Trade, may be wrapped up in
Terms of Art, yet it is founded in Reason, and is obvious to common Sense.

The Power of Judicature does naturally descend, and not ascend; that is, no
Inferior Court can have any Power, which is not derived to it from some Power
above it.

The King is, by the Laws of this Land, Supreme Judge, in all Causes
Ecclesiastical and Civil. And so there is no Court, High or Low, can Act, but
in Subordination to Him; and though they do not all Issue out their Writs in the
King's Name, yet they can Issue out none but by Virtue of some Power they have
received from Him.

Now every particular Court has such particular Power as the King has given it,
and for that reason has it Bounds: But the Highest Court, in which the King can
possible Sit; that is, His Supreme Court of Lords in Parliament, has in it all
Judicial Power, and consequently no Bounds: I mean, no Bounds of Jurisdiction;
for the Highest Court is to Govern according to the Laws, as well as the Lowest.

I suppose none will make a Question, but that every Man, and every Cause, is
to be tried according to Magna Charta; that is, by Peers, or according to the
Laws of the Land. And he that is tried by the Ecclesiastical Courts, the Court
of Admiralty, or the High Court of Lords in Parliament, is tried as much by the
Laws of the Land, as he that is tried by the King's Bench, or Common Pleas.

When these Inferior Courts happen to wrangle among themselves, which they must
often do, by reason of their being bound up to particular Causes, and their
having all equally and earnestly a Desire to try all Causes themselves, then
the Supreme Court is forced to hear their Complaints, because there is no other
way of deciding them. And this, under favor, is an Original Cause of Courts,
though not of Men.

Now, these Original Causes of Courts, must also of necessity induce Men, for
saving of Charges, and Dispatch sake, to bring their Cause originally before
the Supreme Court. But then the Court is not obliged to receive them; but
proceeds by Rules of Prudence, in either retaining, or dismissing them, as they
think fit.

This is, under Favor, the sum of all that your Precedents can show us; which
is nothing but what we practice every day: That is, that very often, because we
would not be molested with hearing too many particular Cases, we refer them
back to other Courts. And all the Argument you can possibly draw from hence,
will not in any kind lessen our Power, but only show an Unwillingness we have,
to trouble our selves often with Matters of this Nature.

Nor will this appear strange, if you consider the Constitution of our House;
it being made up, partly of such whose Employments will not give them leisure
to attend the Hearing of Private Causes; and entirely of those that can receive
no Profit by it.

And the truth is, the Dispute at present is not between the House of Lords,
and the House of Commons, but between Us and Westminster Hall: For, as we
desire to have few or no Causes brought before us, because we get nothing by
'em; so they desire to have all Causes brought before them, for a Reason a
little of the contrary nature.

For this very Reason, it is their Business to invent new ways of drawing
Causes to their Courts, which ought not to be pleaded there. As for example,
this very Cause of Skinner, that is now before us, (and I do not speak this by
Roat, for I have the Opinion of a Reverend Judge in the Case, who informed us
of it the other day in the House;) they have no way of bringing this Cause into
Westminster Hall, but by this Form, the Reason and Sense of which I leave to
you to judge of:

The Form is this, That instead of speaking as we ordinary Men do, that have no
Art, That Mr. Skinner lost a Ship in the East Indies; to bring this into their
Courts, they must say, That Mr. Skinner lost a Ship in the East Indies, in the
Parish of Islington, in the County of Middlesex.

Now some of us, Lords, that did not understand the Refineness of this Style,
began to examine what the reason of this should be; and so we found, that since
they ought not by Right to try such Causes, they are resolved to make bold, not
only with our Privileges, but the very Sense and Language of the whole Nation.

This I thought fit to mention, only to let you see, that this whole Cause, as
well as many others, could not be tried properly in any place but at our Bar;
except Mr. Skinner would have taken a Fancy, to try the Right of Jurisdictions
between Westminster Hall and the Court of Admiralty, instead of seeking Relief
for the Injuries he had received in the place, only where it was to be given
him.

One thing I hear is much insisted upon which is, The Trial without Juries; to
which I could answer, That such Trials are allowed of in the Chancery, and
other Courts: and, that when there is occasion for them, we make use of Juries
too, both by directing them in the King's Bench, and having them brought up to
our Bar.

But I shall only crave leave to put you in mind, That if you do not allow Us,
in some Cases, to try Men without Juries, you will then absolutely take away
the use of Impeachments; which I humbly conceive you will not think proper to
have done at this time.

The Duke' s Speech in the House of Lords.
My LORDS,
THere is a Thing called Property, which (whatever some Men may think) is that
the People of England are fondest of, it is that they will never part with, and
it is that His Majesty, in His Speech, has promised Us to take a particular
care of.

This, my Lords, in my Opinion, can never be done, without giving an Indulgence
to all Protestant-Dissenters.

It is certainly a very uneasy kind of Life to any Man that has either
Christian Charity, Humanity, or Goodnature, to see his Fellow Subjects daily
abused, divested of their Liberty and Birthrights, and miserably thrown out of
their Possessions and Freeholds, only because they cannot agree with others in
some Niceties of Religion, which their Consciences will not give them leave to
consent to; and which, even by the Confession of Those who would Impose it upon
them, is no way necessary to Salvation.

But, my Lords, besides this, and all that may be said upon it, in order to the
Improvement of our Trade, and the Increase of the Wealth, Strength, and
Greatness of this Nation, (which, under Favor, I shall presume to discourse of
at some other time) there is, methinks, in this Notion of Persecution, a very
gross Mistake, both as to the Point of Government, and the Point of Religion.

There is so as to the Point of Government, because it makes every Man's Safety
depend on the wrong place, not upon the Governor, or a Man's living well
toward the Civil Government established by Law, but upon his being transported
with Zeal for every Opinion that is held by those that have Power in the Church
then in Fashion.

And it is, I conceive, a Mistake in Religion, because it is positively against
the express Doctrine and Example of Jesus Christ.

Nay, my Lords, as to our Protestant Religion, there is something in it yet
worse; for we Protestants maintain, That none of those OPINIONS, which
Christians differ about, are Infallible; and therefore in Us, it is somewhat an
inexcusable Conception, That Men ought to be deprived of their Inheritance, and
all the certain Conveniences and Advantages of Life, because they will not
agree with us in our uncertain Opinions of Religion.

My humble Motion therefore, to your Lordships, is, That you will give me leave
to bring in a Bill of Indulgence to all Dissenting-Protestants.

I know very well, That every Peer of the Realm has a Right to bring into
Parliament any Bill which he conceives to be useful to this Nation: but I
thought it more respectful to your Lordships, to ask your Leave for it before;
I cannot think the doing of it will be of any Prejudice to the Bill, because I
am confident the Reason, the Prudence, and the Charitableness of it, will be
able to justify it self to this House, and to the whole World.

The DUKE' S SPEECH in the House of LORDS.
My LORDS,
I Have often troubled your Lordships with my Discourse in this House; but, I
confess, I never did it with more trouble to my self, than I do at this time,
for I scarce know where I should begin, or what I have to say to your
Lordships: On the one side, I am afraid of being thought an Unquiet and
Pragmatical Man; for, in this Age, every Man that cannot bear every thing, is
called Unquiet; and he that does but ask Questions, for which he ought to be
concerned, is looked upon as a Pragmatical. On the other side, I am more afraid
of being thought a dishonest Man; and of all Men, I am most afraid of being
thought so by my self; for every one is best Judge of the Integrity of his own
Intention: And though it does not always follow, that he is Pragmatical whom
others take to be so; yet this never fails to be true, That he is most
certainly a Knave, who takes himself to be so. No body is answerable for more
Understanding than GOD Almighty had given him: And therefore, though I should be
in the wrong, if I tell your Lordships truly and plainly what I am really
convic'd of, I shall behave my self like an honest Man: For it is my Duty, as
long as I have the Honor to sit in this House, to hide nothing from your
Lordships, which, I think, may concern either his Majesty's Service, your
Lordships Interest, or the Good and Quiet of the People of England.

The Question, in my Opinion, which now lies before your Lordships, is not what
we are to do, but whether at this time we can do any thing as a Parliament; it
being very clear to me, that the Parliament; is Dissolved: And if, in this
Opinion, I have the Misfortune to be mistaken, I have another Misfortune joined
in it, I Desire to maintain the Argument with all the Judges and Lawyers in
England, and leave it afterward for your Lordships to decide, whether I am in
the right or no.

This, my Lords, I speak not out of Arrogance, but in my own Justification;
because if I were not thoroughly convinced, that what I have now to urge were
grounded upon the Fundamental Laws of England; and that the not pressing it at
this time might prove to be of a most dangerous Consequence, both to his
Majesty, and the whole Nation, I should have been loath to start a Motion, which
perhaps may not be very agreeable to some People: And yet, my Lords, when I
consider where I am, whom I now speak to, and what was spoken in this Place,
about the time of the last Prorogation, I can hardly believe that what I have
to say, will be distasteful to your Lordships. I remember very well how your
Lordships were then disposed with the House of Commons, and remember too as
well what Reasons they gave to be so: It is not so long since, but that I
suppose your Lordships may easily call to mind, that after several odd Passages
between Us, your Lordships were so incensed, that a Motion was made here for an
Address to his Majesty about the Dissolution of this Parliament; and though it
failed of being carried in the Affirmative, by two or three Voices, yet this in
the Debate was remarkable, the Cit prevailed much with the Major part of your
Lordships that were here present, and were only overpowered by the Proxies of
those Lords, who never heard the Argument. What change there has been since,
either in their behaving, or in the state of our Affairs, that should make your
Lordships change your Opinions, I have not heard; and therefore, if I can make
it appear, (as I presume I shall) that by Law the Parliament is dissolved, I
hope your Lordships ought not to be offended at me for it.

I have often wondered how it should come to pass, that this House of Commons,
in which there are so many honest, and so many worthy Gentlemen, should be less
respectful to your Lordships (as certainly they have been) than any House of
Commons that ever were chosen in England; and yet, if the matter be a little
inquired into, the Reason of it will plainly appear: For, my Lords, the very
Nature of the House of Commons is changed; they do not think now they are an
Assembly that are to return to their Houses, and become as private. Men again
(as by the Laws of the Land, and the Ancient Constitution of Parliament, they
ought to do) but they look upon themselves as a standing Senate, and as a
Company of Men picked out to be Legislators for the rest of their whole Lives;
and if that be the cause, my Lords, they have reason to believe themselves our
Equals. But, my Lords, it is a dangerous thing to try new Experiments in
Government. Men do not foresee the ill Consequences that must happen, when they
go about to alter those Essential parts of it, upon which the whole Frame of
the Government depends, as now in our Fall the Customs and Constitutions of
Parliaments; for all Governments are artificial things, and every part of them
has a Dependence one upon another. As in Clocks and Watches, if you should put
great Wheels in the room of little ones, and little ones in the place of great
ones, all the Fabric would stand still: So you cannot alter any one part of
the Government, without prejudicing the Motions of the whole. If this, my
Lords, were well considered, People would be more cautious how they went out of
the old English Way and Method of Proceedings. But it is not my business to
find fault, and therefore, if your Lordships will give me leave, I shall go on
to show you, why, in my Opinion, we are at this time no Parliament.

The ground of this Opinion of mine, is taken from the ancient and
unquestionable State of this Realm: And give me leave to tell your Lordships,
by the way, that Statutes are not like Women, for they are not one jot the
worse for being Old.

The first Statute that I shall take notice of, is That in the Fourth Year of
Edward the Third, Cap. 14. and it is thus set down in the Printed Book, Item,
It is accorded, that a Parliament shall be holden every Year once, and more
often, if need be. Now these Words be as plain as a Pikestaff, and that no Man
living that is not a Scholar, could possibly mistake the meaning of them. It is
the Grammarians of those Days did make a shift to explain, that the Words, If
need be, did relate as well to the Words, Every Year once, as to the Words,
More often. And so by this Grammatical Whimsey of theirs, had made this Statute
to signify just nothing at all. For this Reason, my Lords, in the 36th Year of
the same King's Reign, a new Act of Parliament was made, in which those
unfortunate Words, If need be, are left out, and that Act of Parliament is
Printed thus, relating to Magna Charta, and other Statutes, made for the
Public Good; Item, For maintenance of these Articles and Statutes, and the
Redress of diverse Mischiefs and Grievances, which daily happen, a Parliament
shall be holden every Year, as at other time was ordained by another. Here now,
my Lords, there is not left the least Color or Shadow for any further Mistake;
for it is plainly declared, That the King of England must call a Parliament
once within a Year: And the Reasons why they are bound to do so, are as plainly
set down; namely, For the Maintenance of Magna Charta, and other Statutes of
the same Importance, and for the preventing the Mischiefs and Grievances which
daily happen.

The Question then remains, Whether these Statutes have been since repealed by
any other Statutes, or no? The only Statutes I ever heard mentioned for that,
are the two Triennial Bills, the one made in the last King's, the other made in
this King's Reign. The Triennial Bill in the last King's Reign, was made for
the Confirmation of the two Statutes of Edward the Third, beforementioned: For
Parliaments having been omitted every Year, according to these Statutes, a
Statute was made in the last King's Reign to this purpose, That if the King
should fail of Calling a Parliament according to these Statutes of Edward the
Third, then the third Year the People should Meet of Themselves, without any
Writs at all, and choose their Parliament Men of Themselves. This being thought
disrespectful to the King, a Statute was made by this last Parliament, which
repealed the Triennial Bill; but after the Repealing Clause, which took notice
only of the Triennial Bill made in the last King's Reign, there was then in
this Statute a Paragraph to this purpose, That because the ancient Statutes of
the Realm, made in Edward the Third's Reign, Parliaments were to be holden very
often, it should be Enacted, That within three Years after the Determination of
that present Parliament, Parliaments should not be discontinued above three
Years at most, and should be holden oftener, if need required. These have been
several false kind of Arguments drawn out of these Triennial Bills against the
Statutes of Edward the Third; which, I confess I could never remember; nor,
indeed, those that urged them to me ever durst own; for they always laid their
Faults upon Somebody else: Like ugly aufish Children, which, because of their
Deformity and want of Wit, the Parents are ashamed of, and so turn them out to
the Parish. But, my Lords, let the Argument be what it will, I will have this
short Answer to all that can be wrested out of the Triennial Bills, That the
first Triennial Bill was repealed before the matter now disputed of was in
question; and the last Triennial Bill will not be of force till the Question be
decided; that is, till the Parliament be Dissolved. The whole matter therefore,
my Lords, is reduced to this short Dilemma, Either the Kings of England are
bound by the Acts mentioned of Edward the Third, or else the whole Government
of England by Parliament, and by Law, is absolutely at an end: For if the Kings
of England have Power, by an Order of theirs, to invalidate an Act made for the
Maintenance of Magna Charta, they have also a Power, by an Order of theirs, to
invalidate Magna Charta it self; and if they have Power, by an Order of theirs,
to invalidate an Act made for the Maintenance of the Statute De Talligio non
concedendo, they have also a Power, when they please, by an Order of theirs, to
invalidate the Statute it self; and they may, not only without the Help of
Parliament, raise what Money they please, but also take away any Man's Estate
when they please, and deprive one of his Liberty and Life, if they please.
This, my Lords, is a Power, I think, that no Judge or Lawyer will pretend the
Kings of England have; and yet this Power must be allowed them, or else we that
are met here this Day cannot act as a Parliament; for we are not met by virtue
of the last Prorogation; then Prorogation is an Order of the King's, and a
point blank Contrary to the two Acts of Edward the Third: For the Acts say,
That a Parliament shall be holden within a Year. And the Prorogation says, That
Parliaments shall not be held within a Year, but some Months after. This, I
conceive, is a plain Contradiction, and consequently that the Prorogation is
void.

Now, if we cannot act as a Parliament, by virtue of the last Prorogation, I
beseech your Lordships, by virtue of what else can we act? Shall we act by
virtue of the King's Proclamation? Pray, my Lords, how so? Is a Proclamation of
more force than a Prorogation? Or if any thing that has been ordered a first
time be not valued, does the ordering it a second time make it good in Law? I
have heard, indeed, That two Negatives make an Affirmative: But I never heard
before, That two Nothings ever made Anything. Well; but how then do we meet?
Is it by our own Adjournment? I hope that Nobody has the Confidence to say so.
Which way then is it we do meet here? By an Accident: That, I think, may be
granted. But an accidental Meeting can no more make a Parliament, than an
Accidental Clapping of a Crown on a Man's Head can make a King. There is a
great deal of Ceremony required to give a Matter of that Moment a Legal
Sanction. The Laws have reposed so great Trust and Power in the Hands of the
Parliament, that every Circumstance relating to the manner of their Electing,
Meeting, and Proceeding, is looked after with the most Circumspection
imaginable. For this Reason the King's Writs about the Summons of Parliament
are to be issued out verbatim, according to the Form Prescribed by the Laws, or
else the Parliament is void, and nulled. For the same Reason, that a Parliament
is summoned by the King's Writs, does not meet at the very same Day it is
summoned to meet at, that Parliament is void and nulled; and by the same
Reason, if a Parliament be not legally Adjourned de die and in diem, these
Parliaments must also be void, and nulled. O, but some say, there is nothing in
the two Acts of Edward the Third, to take away the King's Power in Prorogation,
therefore Prorogation is good.

My Lords, under Favor, it is a very gross Mistake: For pray, examine the
Words of the Acts; and the Acts say, Parliaments shall be holden Once a Year.
Now, to whom can these Words be directed, but to them that are to call a
Parliament? And who are they, but the Kings of England? It is very true, this
does not take away the King's Power of Proroguing Parliaments, but it most
certainly limits it to be within a Year.

Well then, it is said again, If the Proroguing be null and void, then things
are just as they were before: And therefore the Parliament is still in being.

My Lords, I confess there would be some weight in this, but for one thing,
which is, That not one word is true; for if, when the King had prorogued, we
had taken no notice of his prorogation, but had gone on like a Parliament, and
had adjourned our selves the die in diem, then I confess things had been just
as they were before: but since, upon the Prorogation, we went away, and took no
care our selves for our Meeting again, if we cannot meet and act again by
virtue of the Prorogations; here is an Impossibility of our Meeting and Acting
any other way; and one may as probably say, that a Man, who is killed by
Assault, is still alive, because the Assault was unlawful.

The next Arguments that those are reduced to, who would maintain to be yet a
Parliament, is, That the Parliament is prorogued sine die, and therefore a King
may call them by Proclamation.

To the first part of the Proposition, I shall not only agree with them, but
also do them the Favor to prove, that it is so in the Eye of the Law, which I
have never heard they have yet done: For the Statutes say, A Parliament shall
be had once within a Year. And that Prorogation having put them off till a Day
without the Year, and consequently excepted against by the Law, that Day, in
the Eye of the Law, is no Day at all, that is sine die, and the Prorogation
might as well have put them off till so many Days after Doomsday; and then, I
think, Nobody would have doubted but that had been a very sufficient
Dissolution. Besides, my Lords, I shall desire your Lordships to take notice,
That, in former time, the usual way of Dissolving Parliament, was to dismiss
them sine die; for the King, when he used to dissolve them, said no more, but
desired them to go Home, till he sent for them again; which is a Dismission
sine die. Now if there were forty ways of dissolving Parliament, if I can prove
this Parliament has been dissolved by any one of them, I suppose there is no
great need of the other thirty nine.

Another thing, which they most insist upon, is, That they have found a
Precedent in Q. Elizabeth's Time, when the Parliament was once prorogued three
Days beyond a Year: In which I cannot choose but observe, That it is a very
great Confirmation of the Value and Esteem all People have had of the
forementioned Acts of Edward the Third; since, from that time to this, there
can be but one Precedent found for the Prorogation of a Parliament above a
Year, and that was but three Days neither. Besides, my Lords, this Precedent is
of a very odd kind of Nature; for it was in the Time of a very great Plague,
when every one of a sudden was forced to run away one from another; and so,
being in have, had not leisure to calculate well the time of the Prorogation;
though the appointing of it to be within three Days after a Year, is an Argument,
to me, that their Design was to keep within the Bounds of the Acts of
Parliament; and if the Mistake had been taken notice of in Q. Elizabeth's Time,
I make no question but She would have given a lawful Remedy to it.

Now, I beseech your Lordships, what more can be drawn from the producing this
Precedent, but only because once upon a time a thing was done Illegally,
therefore your Lordships should do so again: Now, my Lords, under Favor, this
of ours is a very different Case from theirs; for as to this Precedent, the
Question was never made; and all Lawyers will tell you, That Precedent that
passes sub Silentio, is of no Validity at all, and will never be admitted in
any Judicial Court where it is pleaded: Nay, Judge Vaughan says in his
Reports, That in Cases which depend upon Fundamental Principles, from which
Demonstrations may be drawn, Millions of Precedents are to no purpose. O but,
say they, you must think prudentially of the Inconvenience that will follow it;
for if this be allowed, all these Acts which are made in that Session of
Parliament, will be then void; whether that be so or no, I shall not now
examine.

But this I will pretend to say, That no Man ought to pass for a Prudential
Person, who only takes notice of the Inconveniences on one side; it is the part
of a wise Man to examine the Inconveniences on both, to weigh which are the
greatest, and to be sure to avoid them; and, my Lords, to this kind of due
Examination, I willingly submit this Cause; for, I presume, it will be easy to
your Lordships to judge which of these two will be of most dangerous
Consequence to the Nation, either to allow that the Statutes made, in that
particular Sessions, in Queen Elizabeth's Time, are void, which may easily be
confirmed at any time by a lawful Parliament; as, to lay down for a Maxim, That
the Kings of England, by a Titular Order of Theirs, have Power to break all the
Laws of England when they please: And, my Lords, with all the Duty we owe to
His Majesty, it is no disrespect to Him, to say, That His Majesty is bound by
the Laws of England; for the Great King of Heaven and Earth, GOD Almighty
Himself, is bound by His own Decrees; and what is an Act of Parliament, but a
Decree of the King, made in the most solemn manner? It is possible for Him to
make it, that is, with the Consent of the Lords and Commons.

It is plain then, in my Opinion, that we are no more a Parliament; and I
humbly conceive your Lordships ought to give GOD thanks for it, since it has
pleased Him thus, by his Providence, to take you out of a Condition wherein you
must have been entirely useless to his Majesty, to your selves, and the whole
Nation.

For, I beseech your Lordships, if nothing of this I have urged were true, what
honorable Excuse could be found for acting again with this House of Commons,
except we would pretend to such an exquisite Act of Forgetfulness, as to avoid
calling to mind all that passed last Sessions; and unless we could also have a
Faculty of teaching the same Art to the whole Nation! What Opinion would they
have of us, if it should happen, that the very same Men that were so earnest,
the last Sessions, for having this House of Commons dissolved, (when there was
no question of their lawful Sitting) should now be willing to join with them
again, when, without question, they are dissolved?

Nothing can be more dangerous to a King or People, than the Laws should be
made by an Assembly, of which there can be doubt whether they have a Power to
make Laws or no; and it would be in us so much the more inexcusable, if we
should overlook this Danger, since there is for it so easy a Remedy; a Remedy
which the Law requires, and which all the Nation longs for, the Calling a New
Parliament.

It is that can only put his Majesty into a possibility of receiving Supplies;
that can secure your Lordships the Honor of Sitting in this House of Peers,
and of being Serviceable to the King and Country, and that can restore, to all
the People of England, their undoubted Rights of choosing Men frequently to
represent their Grievances in Parliament; without this, all we can do is in
vain; the Nation might languish a while, but must perish at last; we should
become a Burden to Our selves, and a Prey to our Neighbors.

My Motion to your Lordships, therefore, shall be, That we humbly address Our
selves to His Majesty, and beg of Him, for His own Sake, as well as for all the
People's sake, to give us speedily a New Parliament, that so we may
unanimously, before it is too late, use Our utmost Endeavors for His Majesty's
Service, and for the Safety, Welfare and Glory of the English Nation.

THE Emperor of Morocco's LETTER, TO CHARLES the Second.
WHEN these Our Letters shall be so happy as to come to Your Majesty's Sight, I
wish the Spirit of the Righteous God may so direct Your Mind, that You may
joyfully embrace the Message I send. The Regal Power allotted to Us, makes Us
first Common Servants to Our Creator, then of those People whom we Govern: So
that, observing the Duties we owe to God, we deliver Blessings to the World. In
providing for the Public Good of Our Estates, we magnify the Honor of God,
like the Celestial Bodies, which, though they have much Veneration, yet serve
only to the Benefit of the World. It is the Excellency of Our Office to be
Instruments, whereby Happiness is delivered to Nations.

Pardon Me, Sir! this is not to Instruct, (for I know I speak to One of a more
clear and quick Sight than My self;) but I speak this, because God has pleased
to grant me a happy Victory over some part of those Rebellious Pirates, that so
long have molested the peaceable Trade of Europe; and has presented further
Occasion to root out the Generation of those, who have been so pernicious to
the Good of our Nations: I mean, since it has pleased God to be so auspicious
to our Beginnings, in the Conquest of Sallee, that we might join and proceed in
hope of like Success in the Wars of Tunis, Algiers and other Places (Dens and
Receptacles of the Inhumane Villainies of those who abhor Rule and Government.)
Herein, whilst we interrupt the Corruption of malignant Spirits of the World,
we shall glorify the Great GOD, and perform a Duty, that will shine as
glorious as the Sun and Moon, which all the Earth may see and reverence: A Work
that shall ascend as sweet as the Perfume of the most precious Odor in the
Nostrils of the LORD; a Work grateful and happy to Men; a Work, whose Memory
shall be reverenced so long as there shall be any remaining amongst Men, that
love and honor the Piety and Virtue of Noble Minds. This Action I here
willingly present to You, whose Piety and Virtues equal the Greatness of Your
Power; that We, who are Vicegerents to the Great and Mighty GOD, may
hand-in-hand Triumph in the Glory which the Action presents unto Us.

Now, because the Islands which You Govern, have been ever Famous for the
Unconquered Strength of their Shipping, I have sent this my Trusty Servant and
Ambassador, to know, whether, in Your Princely Wisdom, You shall think fit to
Assist me with such Forces by Sea, as shall be answerable to those I provide by
Land? Which if You please to grant, I doubt not but the LORD of Hosts will
protect and assist those that fight in so Glorious a Cause. Nor ought You to
think this strange, that I, who so much Reverence the Peace and Accord of
Nations, should Exhort to a War: Your Great Prophet Christ Jesus, was the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah, as well as the Lord and Giver of Peace; which may
signify unto You, That He which is a Lover and Maintainer of Peace, must
always appear with the Terror of his Sword; and wading through Seas of Blood,
must arrive to Tranquillity. This made James, Your Grandfather, of Glorious
Memory, so happily Renowned amongst all Nations. It was the Noble Fame of Your
Princely Virtues which resounds to the utmost Corners of the Earth, that
persuaded me to invite You to partake of that Blessing wherein I boast My self
most happy. I wish GOD may heap the Riches of his Blessings on You, increase
Your Happiness with Your Days; and hereafter perpetuate the Greatness of Your
Name in all Ages.

To Mr. Bulstrode, at White Hall.
SIR,
THE Turks breaking their Truce, and besieging Vienna, is very deplorable, but
might reasonably enough have been foreseen, and is therefore the more strange
the Emperor should be so unprovided. From the Princes of the Empire, surely no
great Matters are to be expected, for they have their various Interest, and
such Confederate Armies seldom do great things: and, should they call in the
French to their Assistance, the end of that may easily be discerned; for, in
all kind of Probability, it must make that King the Universal Emperor, and
perhaps they may then bring amongst themselves as dangerous an Enemy as him,
they now fear: The old Saying is a Truth, Everybody for himself, and God for
us all; and therefore, I confess, I think it better for these Parts of the
World, the Turks should have that part of Germany than the French; for that
Almighty Neighbor, (should he acquire the Empire) will be a perpetual Plague
to the Northern Countries, and in time to the warmer Climates too; for* he has
already made one Step into Italy, by Casal, and more than two Strides into
Spain by his other Conquests, though he had solemnly protested, at the Holy
Altar, Religiously to observe the Peace of the Pyrenaeans; but, we see, these
Protestations are no Tie upon this Most Christian King; for when ever (that he
calls) the Advancement of his own Glory, comes in Competition with his Justice
to His Neighbor, the Latter is sure to be the Sufferer. I doubt you will think
me very impertinent, in meddling in State Affairs, but I rely upon your Goodness
to forgive me, since you know, I am

Your most humble Servant, M. Peachey.

To --
Dear Sir Politic,
TO prepare my self for writing to you, I wish I could conjure up the Spirit of
Nick Machiavel; for how can I be able to make good my Promise to you, who are
the Great Anima Mundi Politici? I have naturally a strange unhappy Honesty,
which makes me not the best qualified for Politics. I suppose you have heard
over and over, of the Action in Hungary, where we have been as honorably
Beaten, as a Man could well desire. The Business of our Coin, which, under the
new Dispensation, has been more then Mosaically Circumcised, begins now to make
a very handsome Appearance, there being great store of new Money. To tell you
my poor Opinion, the Nation has suffered the Fate of a Man that has got the
Pox, who yet very wisely rejects all the Quacks, and relies upon the known
approved Method of Fluxing: She throws off all the unsound Part, the bad Money,
and in its room gets up a fresh Stock of Vigor. You very well know how Matters
have gone with the Bank: Their Abatements are not so great as they have been,
and it is hoped it will be again in a flourishing Condition. You and I have
private Reasons to wish well, besides this public one, That the Bank is one of
the Pulses of our Government, and, as it beats high or low, a Man may make his
Inferences: And thus much for State Affairs; for really, Sir, I have but a mean
Opinion of that sort of Study. Politics in Italy, may be refined
Understanding; in France, a genteeler sort of Villainy; in Holland, Interest
coarse spun; but in England, are certainly Flatus Hypocondriaci. If this be not
an effectual Plea for my Carelessness, you ought to consider, I am out of the
Road of Government, and of an Age when Men generally mind other things: People
under Seven and Twenty, though they live about Town, either are for none, or else
for a lower Species of Politics; such as which, in the present War of
Pleasure, shall get the better, King Thomas, or the Confederacy of Players.

Sir, I am, etc.
October. the First, 1696.
To Mr. Savage.
SIR,
IEsteem, though I could not merit your Salute; and, while I return you mine in
exchange, I acknowledge you a Loser by the friendly Venture you have made; yet,
let not one Loss deter you from a farther Correspondence: The Amorous, or
rather Wanton Widow, bears her Loss like a Christian; her Grief proceeds more
from your Absence than his Death. I have the Secret, but am not beholding
either to him that is dead, or her that is living for it. I am sorry to hear
you made no greater Progress in that Affair; but do not wonder the Spirit moves
not your Fancy so little, since you make all your Courtship to the Ladies;
those more substantial Mistresses, the Muses, are but thin airy Phantoms, and I
know you have more of the Real, than the Platonic Lover, in you. When you come
to my Years, perhaps, you will be more inclined to court the latter; yet, I must
confess, when we come to be Fumblers in Love, we are but Bunglers in Poetry:
The Muses, as well as the Ladies, are for the brisk, young and gay: I know not
how well (the Ladies you mention) were pleased with hearing my Plays read; if
they were delighted, I Will assure you, 'twas more with the Reader than the
Writer. Children have often been kissed for their handsome Nurses sakes; 'twas
you they liked, and not the Plays; the Pleasure was in your Company, and not in
their Wit and Merit. You please to say the Ladies often wished my Company; that
indeed would have given 'em Diversion, for then they would have laughed at me too;
or if they did heartily wish it, I suppose you did not tell 'em I was an Author
of Fifty; which now you may, and so preserve all their kind Thoughts for your
self: But had they their Wish, I should never have had mine; they would wish me
gone from 'em, and I should wish to stay with 'em; I should admire them, and
they would admire at the folly of Wishing. The Sighs the Fair One sent in the
Paper, are not come to hand; but if I know by what Messenger you sent the
Letter, I would go and enquire what is become of 'em; the fragrancy of their
Breath is wanting too, but that may be blown away by the Wind, since the Paper
passed the Region of Thirty Five Miles at least, for so I take it from Mayfield
to London; or at least, the Wind turning, drove back their Sighs and Breath to
you again --. Every thing favors the youthful Lover; but give my humble Service
to the fair Ladies; for as Youth is pleased with real Favors, Age is not
displeased with being handsomely flattered. As a farther Token of your
Friendship, Sir, pray, kiss these Ladies Hands for me; your Kisses will be
felt, though these I send be invisible --. I have kissed it twenty times: Pray,
make just payment, for I think I am indebted so many to 'em at least. Sir, I
hope this last Commission will make amends for the Errors of this Epistle.

Sir, Your most obliged and humble Servant, E. Ravenscroft.

From a Gentleman in the Country, to a Lady in the City.
MADAM,
I Was as apprehensive of the tediousness of my Journey, as the Effects of my
Arrival, for the Persecution of my Thoughts; each step, I trod, seemed like a
Journey from the Land of the Living: I am certain, if Anybody had spoke to me,
they could not look upon me in my Wits, and perhaps you will say so too, for
degenerating into so unmanly a Condition. At the same time, Madam, I Will be
judged by your Conscience, I will not say your self, (for Women's Modesty, like
false Glasses, discommend 'em only for Flattery) whether or no I am not a
Martyr to a true Cause or not. I may well say I Have made a Sacrifice of my Heart
to you; for ever since I saw you, Victims on their Altars never burnt with
greater Heat and Ardor. I Am as solitary as the place I reside in: Methinks I
could wish we might converse in Thoughts, or that our Souls might meet
sometimes in Sighs; but Thoughts and Sighs are Airy Substances, and barren Food
for Women's Souls; such fond Platonicks as my self may languish under them in a
Borough, where Innocence, Rusticity, and Ignorance agree, but here I waste my
time and wishes in vain: My Writing to you, is like my keeping of you Company,
in this, that the Hearing from you, and ceasing to write to you, seems equally
perplexing, and at the same time equally unavoidable; for the Idea I have of
you, has so transfixed my Mind, that even my Breath and Sighs can scarce
forbear to speak the Wishing-flame of,

Madam, Your most afflicted Sufferer, DAMON.

Three LOVE LETTERS.
To Madam --
My Charming TYRANT,
Though you forbid me to repeat Suns, Rocks, Mountains, Earthquakes, which are
as essential to a Letter of this kind, as Gilt-paper; yet you forgot to except
against Sighs, Prayers, Vows, Tears, and the many other little Reliefs the
Unhappy fly to; however, I Will now conceal the Trouble of my own Breast, rather
than disturb your Patience: I have found, by experience, that neither Despair,
nor any other Perturbation of Mind, can kill me, since I have born a
Fortnight's Absence from you, and am yet alive: It Is true, Life is more
supportable this Morning, than Yesterday: For, if Hamlet had not been murdered
at the Playhouse last Night, I had been worse than dead to Day. Tell me, Dear
Madam, how long must I live on the Plenty of my last Night's Feast? Must I
quickly again be happy, or linger out a tedious Life, under your Displeasure?
Let me know my Sentence in one Line; speak Truth, and say, You hate me, because
I love you. It Is a Pleasure to be out of Pain, and when One's going to be
Executed, the greatest Cruelty is the greatest Mercy. Once more let me beg a
short Letter from you, though it be to chide me, for troubling you with so long a
one as this: I swear, to hear only you were well, I Would give my Eyes; nor would
the loss be considerable, because they are of no manner of use to me in your
absence, unless to read those Letters, which, I hope, Heaven will dispose you
to write to,

YOURS.

To Madam --
MADAM,
HOpe is like the Heart; and as it is the first thing that lives, so it is the
first thing that dies in us, otherwise I could despair of seeing you any more;
but methinks it is impossible for one to have the Beauty and Brightness of
Heaven in her Eyes, without gentle Compassion in her Heart: Reflect upon your
Angel's Frame; Consider, Madam, how that Tongue, that was fashioned by Nature,
to pronounce nothing but Blessings to your Adorers, will be mis-imployed, when
you Curse so much, as to forbid me seeing you. I Am not so vain as to expect any
Return to my Passion; only suffer it, and I am happy; call it by no less
familiar Name, than Love. Let it be Adoration, and even that the Gods will
allow of: They refuse not our Sacrifices, nor are they angry at our Anthems:
and if they withold their Blessings, they plead Predestination for their
Excuse. Cruel, as you are, I must thank the Weather, or I Would met you no more;
your Journey was fixed for this Morning, but Yesterday's Rain did more than a
Flood of Tears, from the Eyes of,

YOURS.

To Madam --
Dear MADAM,
NEver could the Author of Don Quixot more handsomely ridicule the Mad and Airy
Gallantries of Romantic Heroes, than you did in your last, your most
unfortunate humble Servant. Your Letter has had so good effect upon me, that I
have not executed my Resolution; though this Scribble will seem to signify, that
the Lead has entered my Skull already: Truly, Madam, I have so much occasion for
Brains, especially when I write to a Lady of your Apprehension, that I can as
little part with any, as a Member of -- would do with his Privileges; but, it
is possible, Madam, that a Pistol can do more to your Admirer than the
Conclusion of your Letter. You tell me there, I must not hope to see you more;
you may from thence imagine, that no other Attempt can be equally fatal to a
Man of Errantry. I have only the Satisfaction left, to know that I cannot be
more Miserable, for he that is drowned, needs no more fear Rain, than the
withered Flowers does the hot Sunshine. Now, Madam, to free you from the pain
of Reading any more, (which, I suppose, you will take care to do your self, by
not calling for them) I Will only ask leave to tell you, That Cruelty becomes the
Nymphs, as little as an Effeminacy does the Swains, nor can I study any Revenge
half so terrible to you, as your acting against your self, which is, in
designing to Marry. I hope, before you leap down the Precipice, you will once
more take leave of,

Madam, Your humble Servant,
I dare not tell you how things go, lest you should laugh at me; but if you
will lose your time at the Play, in Lincolns-Inn-fields, on Tuesday, I Will be
the Subject of your Diversion.



A LETTER by Mr. M.
To Mr. G --
Dear G --,
THE dull Business of the Day is over, and our Cushion-cuffer has given me
leisure for a better Employment, than hearing him cant over his musty Morals;
it is not the least Grievance, in the Country, to do Penance once a Week, and
sit with passive Ears, two live-long Hours, and put such a Violence on One's
Nature: Heaven be praised, in this lukewarm Age, nothing is so easily
counterfeited as Devotion, otherwise poor Culprit would have a hard part to
play. 'T was the Opinion of a sage Monk, that the Torment of Hell was nothing
but an eternal Crowding and Elbowing; but I think it an everlasting Solitude;
for, I assure you, I think that the Country is but a State of Probation for
Hell, and an Earnest of Damnation: I was revived, with your Letter, from a
stupid sort of a Lethargy; for any thing, that comes from London, in my forlorn
Circumstances, must needs be a Cordial, like poor Dives in Hell, viewing the
great Gulf between, and begging some Small-beer of the Beggar in Abraham's
Bosom; even so your desolate Friend, begs the Favor of a Letter to comfort him
in the midst of his Afflictions, who am,

Your Friend and Servant, M --

LETTERS, Written by a PERSON of HONOR.
To --
From on Board -- at St. Hellens, May 27th, 1694.
HEre we are still, Sir, at your Service; Bragging, and Lying, and Hectoring,
and Bouncing of what we are going to do; but the Proof of the Pudding being in
the Eating, a Month hence you may expect a truer Account of our Conduct and
Courage, than I Will pretend to give you now: However, this is certain, we have
Mischief in our Hearts. It Is positive, we are going to do or undo something;
here are strong Simptoms of War: I have not heard, since I came on Board, one
Sentence (except when the Chaplain says Grace) without Blood, Plunder, Fire, or
Rape in it. Yesterday I could not bear it, nor my Lord C -- neither: so we slunk
into a little Boat, and made a Descent on the Isle of Wight, where I was
presently seized, and had like to have died of a Disease, called, Rapture: Such
Hills; such Valleys; such Woods; such Plains; such Faces; such A -- s. Look
you, Sir, I Will say no more, but one Expedition under V -- s, is worth two under
M -- s; and so I Will tell you what I did three Nights since: Hearing there was a
Cargo of French Protestants newly debark'd, about four Leagues off, a certain
Lord and your humble Servant, having a mind to inform our Selves of the State
of the Enemy, went ashore, and inquired 'em out: We found in a Cow-house, full
of Straw, sixteen Women, nine Children, eight Lap-dogs, and a Tup-cat, all at
Supper together.

We ask't 'em what part of France they came from: They all answered at once,
and every one named a different Place.

We ask't 'em what rate Bread was at: They all answered together again, and
every one named a different Price.

With that, he singled out one, and I another: We pressed 'em about half an hour,
with a closer Examination, and, comparing of Notes, we found, That the Spirit
is sometimes as weak as the Flesh; and that Women, as well as Priests, of all
Religions, are the same.

Adieu.
To Mrs. --
--,
BEtter late than never, is an old Proverb, Madam; and, I hope, a true one; at
least I rely so much upon it, that I venture to write to you after six Months
Neglect. Not that I think you care much for my Letters neither; don't mistake.
But perhaps you may be apt to say, People need not be so sparing of 'em, unless
they were of greater Value; and perhaps you would say right: but that does not
hinder People from being as lazy as ever; nor from continuing to be so impudent
to expect Pardon, without being able to urge one tolerable Excuse: For what is
bred in the Bone, you know, will never out at the Flesh. So there is another
Proverb for you: Half a dozen more would stand me in great stead to make out my
Letter: For I know my Lady -- gives you an Account of all material Things,
Intrigues and new Petticoats. As for Politics, you would clap them under
Minc'd-pies, and well if they fared no worse. In short, I know nothing but
Religion you care a Farthing for; and that the Town's so bare of at present, I
could as soon send you Money. Nobody prays but the Court; and, perhaps, they
had as good let it alone; at least Nobody sees, by the Effects, what they pray
for; it is thought, a general Excise. But Heaven, who knows our Wants better,
seems to be of Opinion a General Peace will do as well. They say, The Bully of
France is leaving all in the Lurch; for which he has both the Blessings and
Curses of many a poor Dog about this Town. For as to matters of Wealth and
plenty, you must know the Impartiality of our Men of Business has been such,
they have brought Williamite and Jacobite to much about the same Pitch. But now
we are all going to flourish again: so, I hope, we shall see your Ladyship in
Town against the Peace is proclaimed, that upon the Bonfire-night your Billet
may burn too.

I can tell you one thing: You ought to appear in your own Defense; for the
first time I showed my self, since I came to Town, upon that Theater of Truth
and Good Nature, the Chocolate-house, I was immediately regaled with the old
Story, (though from another Hand) That now you were gone for certain. But, that
worthy Knight Errant, Mr. W --, that Mirror of Chivalry, for all wronged
Ladies, drew his Tongue in your Defense; and I, Madam, had the Honor to be his
Sancho Pancho in your Justification. But how long we shall be able to stand our
Ground, I cannot tell, unless you will come and lug out too, and then I don't
doubt but we shall make our Party good. Now you must know, Madam, One good turn
deserves another, (there is a Proverb again) I stand as much in need of your
Weapon, as you can do of mine. Here Is a scoundrel Play come out lately, by
which the Author has been pleased to bring all the Reverend Ladies of the Town
upon his Back, with my Lady -- at the Head of 'em, for saying, An old Bawd was
good for nothing. But that is not all his Misfortune; there is a younger Knot,
who having grimac'd themselves into the Faction of Piety, say, It Is a wicked
Play, and a Blasphemous Play, and a Beastly, Filthy, Bawdy Play; and so never
go to it, but in a Mask. Dear Mrs. S -- come to Town again quickly, and don't
put your Country-tricks upon us any longer, for here is a World of Mischief in
your Absence: The V -- is Leaner than ever. I am grown Religious. My Lord W --
is going to be Married. Sir John Fenwick is going to be Hanged. The W. L -- is
Boarded by a Sea-Officer: The Lady Sh -- is Stormed by a Land one. Yel -- has
got a high Intrigue; and the P -- has got the Gripes. For God's sake come to
Town quickly: You see all is in Disorder; nor are things much better in the
Country, as I hear: For, it is said, the Spirit of Wedlock haunts Folks in
Shropshire, and has played the Devil with the Flesh. Somebody swore by --
the other Day, you were Married; to whom, I have forgot, though that was sworn too.
But, pray, let us see you here again; and don't tell us a Scripture-story, That
you have married a Husband, and cannot come; the Excuse, you see, was not
thought good, even in those Days, when things would pass on Folks that will not
now.

My due Respects to the Mayor and Corporation of S --
To the Lord H --
Paris, October. 21. 1681.
NOw things mend, my Lord; and an Italian Abbot makes a good Pimp: His only
Fault is, he is damned hard of Hearing; a Shout in another Man's Ear, is but a
Whisper in his: A vile Quality for a Bawd. However, he is a Person of Business,
and one of his Belles Dames is a better Sophister than you are; for you pretend
but to argue Fornication no Sin, whilst she proves it a Virtue; and (all L --
apart) would -- for the downright sake of Religion. Her Case is this: She Is a
Sister of the String, tickles a Guitar to a Miracle, and that she gets her
Living by, Her Beauty, her Modesty, her Wit, and her Youth, would help her to a
better Livelihood, if her Conscience would give her leave to lay about her like
the rest of her Sex; but her Inclinations being Upwards, and having a sower
Contempt of this vile Earth, she desires to give her self to her good God, and
saunter out her Days in a Nunnery: But she wants Five Hundred Pistoles to
introduce her; and that she is willing to -- for. She computes about a
Twelve-month's Run may satisfy any Reasonable Gentleman, and that he will then
give her leave to quit that same filthy Business, for a Swing of Spiritual L --

So, if your Lordship knows ever a Knight Errant, whose Purse is as lavish as
his -- and will both -- for the Relief of Distressed Virtue; pray, tell him
this pitiful Story, which is a Truth, by J --

The French say, You Will be altogether by the Ears about six Weeks hence; and
that they are to go over, and take Possession of some Houses and Parks, that
belong to Des Bougres d'Anglois, qui vont a leur ordinaire se soulever contre
leur Prince Naturel. God send this Invasion, I say, 'twill at least have one
good Effect, 'twill Legitimate Adultery here, which I have been seeking
Arguments for in vain; for if they enter our Houses, Lex Talionis, we whip into
their Wives. Rapes will be lawful too, by the same Morality. So, pray my Lord,
come over; for here is like to be Work for a better -- than mine.

My Lord S -- has got a nauseous Mistress here; a cry'd-up Beauty, a slatternly
Sow, foundered of both her Feet: In short, I hate her; and so I do Everybodies,
but my own; and her I like so well, I believe I shall have my Bones broke about
her, before I have done; there being some impertinent People akin to her, who
will not let her -- in quiet.

My Lord, the Soup's upon the Table, you will excuse me: for there are four tall
Germans about it, who will swallow it down scalding hot, in less time than an
Englishman can say Grace. May Heaven preserve you still fifty Years more, and
kill your Father betwixt this and Christmas.

Je suis tout a Vous.
Two Days since my Lord S -- being in appearance at the Door of Death, he
repented, as is usual: but there is now hopes of a Return to his Health, and
Relapse to his Vices.



To Mr. T --
Rakehelly T --,
JUst now, stroling through my Pocketbook, I stumbl'd upon your Name: Mrs. P --
's Name, Charing Cross, and the Sign of the Elephant, which gave Remembrance
such a Bang, I have made a Collection of Pen, Ink and Paper, with a design to
be as good as my Word, and write to you. So the Question how I shall write, and
the Question whether I shall write or not, are indeed become no Questions at
all; but the Question what I shall write, is a great Question still. The House
of Office may perhaps help me. You Will excuse me for a Moment.

I am returned, and by Providence's help, have done your Business as well as my
own. I have found six leaves of a Dutch Sermon; the Title Page I have made use
of, the rest I send you enclosed. I don't understand much of the Language, but
I think it gives you an Account how many Tun of Saints the Pagans shipped off
for the Spiritual Indies, when the Christians lived in Holland: He says the
Manufacture now is quite destroyed, and the Trade is not worth a T -- Now you
must know, Parsons in this Country tell Truth in their Sermons; so, as to a
lover of Truth and Sermons both, I send you this. The Postage will not cost you
above half a Piece; a Dog Pennyworth, I think.

All I have to say, is, That this is a scoundrel Town. The Dutch Women here are
greasy and fat, the English saucy and ugly. Here Is a great deal of Snow, and
very bad Fires; cursed Meat, and worse Company: That for our Diversions. As for
Business: My Lord W -- is asleep by the Fireside; Mr. Rus -- is picking his
Nose; the P -- ss is Quilting a Petticoat; her Maids are all at their Prayers;
Ju -- -- -- is Expounding the Revelations; B -- t is writing of Libels; the Pr
-- is studying, I guess what; and the English Ambassador is a Fool: Zoons, Sir,
I have got the Cramp; O G --! how many damned Tricks has Nature to plague
Mankind -- I cannot write a word more. You Will send me an Answer to this, will not
you? Do, prithee do; and don't be long about it now.

If you direct your Letter to me at Youfrow Zouterkin's, in Cut-straet, it is
six to four but my Hand and my A -- will have it in their turns.

To the Chevalier De Choiseul, at La Hogue.
De l'Enfer, ce 18. Avril, 1692. Mon Cher Chevalier,
SIvostre Voyage a este aussi agreeable que vostre bonne Compagnie l'etoit aux
pauvres Prisonniers a la Bastille, je m'en rejouiray for: Car, sans Compliment,
je m'interesse beaucoup a tout ce qui vous regard. Et quoy que (la Charity
commencant chez soy) je me plaigne de vostre absence, j'ay assez de bon
Naturel, pour me rejouir de vostre Liberte.

Pour moy; je suis, comme j'ay long tems este, (en appearance) sur la veille de
sortir: Cependant, la Port n'est pas encore ouverte.

Le pauvre my Lord a prit les devants; and il est presentement a Boulogne, ou
il attend l'arrivee du General Hamilton. Ainsi voila la Bastille plus triste
que jamais. Le Marquis pourtant continue a nous divertir, and a nous
incommoder: Le voicy, Mort Die, qui enter avec toute sa suitte. Que le Diable
les emporte tous ensemble. Ils font tant de bruit, qu'il est impossible
d'ecrire davantage. Ainsi Adieu, jusqu'a tantost --

Il y a deux heures que j'ay este oblige de quitter ma Lettre, and depuis ce
temps la, j'ay este entretenu, comme quoy, c'est une chose qui choque l'honneur
de la France, qu'un Fills d'un Duc and Pair, de la Noble Race de Crusole,
descendu des anciens Comtes de Toulouse, soit detenu Prisonnier a la Bastille,
pendant que la Nation a besoin de ses plus grands Capitaines, pour repousser
une foul d'Ennemis qui l'attaquent. Mais, Monsieur, (luy repondi-je) les
chooses ne sont pas encore a l'extremite; la France n'est pas encore perdue.
Quand le Roy la verra en danger, ce sera alors qu'il se servira de ses
dernieres resources; and se sera alors qu'il vous sortira glorieusement de la
Bastille, pour vous placer a la test de ses Armees. Si vous estiez deja
dehors, il scait que vous vous exposeriez trop, vostre valeur luy est connue;
c'est pour l'amour de vous, and de luy mesme, qu'il veut vous conserver; c'est
pour vous conserver qu'il vous a done en charge a Monsieur de Besmeaux.

F -- tree de Besmeaux, (dit-il) F -- tree de la Bastille, F -- tree de Sodom,
and F -- tree de Gommore; je suis Fills d'un Duc and Pair, moy.

Monsieur (luy dis-je) vostre Illustre Naissance est desja connue a tout le
monde; un peu de Patience feroit aussi eclatter vostre Virtue.

Je me F -- de la Virtue --
Mais, Monsieur, un peu de Moderation --
Point: Je veux fortir, moy -- Je veux me signaler --
Mais ecoutez, Marquis. Si vous sortiez, and que Monsieur de Besmeaux --
F -- tree de Besmeaux, je vous dis -- Je me mocque de luy, qu'il laisse les
Gens en repos, s'il le veut; ou je luy. F -- tray vingt coups de Pied dans le
Ventre, and autant de coups de Poing sur le Nez; and flinque and flanque, and
l'Abere, and Garanet, and encore cent milles F -- tus Gascoignes, Mort Die, je
les feray tous trembler.

Monsieur le Marquis, (luy dis-je) je suis vostre tres humble Serviteur; mais
comme je n'ay point de Cuirasse, je ne veux plus demeurer seul avec vous. O
(dit-il) vous ne risquez rien.

Pardonnez moy (repartis-je) on risque beaucoup, quand le Sang des Crusoles est
bouillant. Adieu.

Je descendis donc, and il evacua ma Chamber: and a mon Retour, pour achever ma
Lettre, j'ay bien barricade ma Port.

Comme tout le monde icy, pretend que vous allez droit en Angleterre, pour
Retablir le Roy Jacques, bon gre, mal gre. Et que je considere, que dans les
Expeditions de Mars, Venus ne manque jamais de se mettre de la Party: Je vous
pry d'avoir soin, que si mes Soeurs doivent estre baisees, du moins else
puissent avoir la Consolation d'estre bien baisees Il y en a a choisir; mais la
troisieme, en etant la plus Belle, je vous la recommande pour vostre propre
Bouche. Si vous la trouvez Vierge (car je ne repons de rien) allez doucement,
ne faites point trop de fracas; de peur de fair pleurer la pauvre Fille. Mais
quand vous aurez pris le Fort, je vous supply de n'y pas laisser Garnison.

Pour nos Eglises: Remettez-y tout ce qu'il vous plaira, horse le Pouvoir
Despotique du Prestre; car je ne desire pas d'aller au Ciel la Fourche au Cul.

Dans la Police, faites moy la grace de pendre tous les Procureurs: mais
traitez avec becaucoup the Respect un certain Avocat, qui s'appelle Habeas
Corpus. C'est un veritable honneste Homme: mal gre sa Robe longue, vous pouvez
vous souvenir que nous avons quelque fois beu a sa Sante. En verite il le
merit bien: c'est un Amy a tout le monde, and qui en mesme temps ne flat
person: il est vray qu'il va souvent a la Court, mais il n'est pas du tout
Courtizan. Il faut que vous scachiez qu'il a des manieres qui ne s'accommodent
pas tout a fait avec ses Messieurs la: ils luy donnent de bonnes oaroles, mais
ils ne l'aiment pas trop. Que cela ne vous empeche pas de luy fair la
Reverence: Tossed ou tard, vous en pourez avoir besoin. Je vous pry de luy fair
bien mes Compliments, and de luy asseurer que je me souviens fort souvent de
luy.

Au rest: Crevez moy toutes les Vieilles, qui refusent d'estre Maquerelles;
car il nest pas pour le bien publicq, que des chooses inutiles, mangeassent le
Pain de l'Etat.

Etoufez tous les petits Chiens de Village, and les Enfans qui crient; car tout
ce qui fait du bruit me desole.

Enfin, si vous rencontrez (ce que je no crois pas) un Fills d'un Duc and Pair,
pareil au Marquis, envoyez le a la Tour, pour le repos de sa Famille.

Et voila, mon cher Compatriot de malheur, toutes les Commissions que j'ay a
vous donner. Si je vous voy a Paris, d'icy en six Mois, vous me rendre^ Compte
comment vous les aurez executez. Si c'est bien, je vous en loueray fort: si
c'est mal, je vous pardonneray volontiers. Car je suis (sans Compliment) tout a
fait de vos Amiss, and fort vostre Serviteur.

To Mr. --
HARRY,
I AM afraid you are turned a mere Adamite, that is, have forfeited thy Health
and Happiness to purchase more Knowledge, or else thou art plaguily belied. Oh!
that Pleasure, Harry, is a Hellish Pleasure. How sweet in the Enjoyment, and
how sower in the Event! Well, I suppose you are thoroughly convinced, there is no
such thing as Heaven upon Earth, as a great many vain Fellows imagine; since
our Pleasures are not only bounded in one particular thing; but the greatest
Variety of Enjoyments finish in the uneasy Desire of their Continuance, or the
more torturing Experience of its Impossibility; or at least, their Punishment
by a prodigious Fluxing. The most permanent of all our Habits, is that part of
'em which are vicious; or that which we are taught to believe so. A good
Thought is as easily spoiled in Devotion, as it is in Study. The obscenest B --
in one Moment will ruin the strongest Efforts of a pious Preparation. Oh! this
Nature of ours, though it be the most prevailing Rhetoric, is yet a Compound of
Extremes: the Minute that gives Birth to the most endeared of our
Entertainments, gives such an Assurance of their Conclusion, that palls them in
the possession: Our Entertainment is very often uneafie to us, from the Care we
take to be Regular; and we are seldom guilty of so great Solecism, as when we
endeavor to avoid all for Silence, which is a peculiar Remedy against 'em, is
at the same time the greatest Solecism in Conversation. Why, this Moment I was
thinking to treat you as one of my Familiars; and in my very Design of being
so, my Deficiency has carried me to a quite opposite Matter, and I am unawares
an unskilful Moralist, or an unbiting Satyr. I hope you will pardon my
Impertinence, and accept this small Epistle from him, who is your affectionate

Humble Servant.

To Mrs. --
MADAM,
I Could no more hope to see you (considering the time of your Letter's coming
to my Hands) than I could have any Peace without it. Not all the Objects in the
World could divert my Melancholy, but your Letter, which had done it
effectually, but that it gave me the sensible Mortification of despairing to
find you. Lord, Madam, how insensible of Passion are you, to see and reject
such Evidence of my Love? I am sorry you give me so great a show of your
Levity, and so much Apprehension of my ill Fortune. If my Condition be not
answerable to your Beauty, this I can tell, my Passion is the most exalted in
Nature. I wish Nature would afford me some signal Method to convince you of it,
that I might at least hope a reciprocal one from you. In my own Brain, I feel
both all the Pain and Love, which Poets feign Romantic Heroes to have done;
and am scarce less mad to let you know, how much I would be thought to be your
Humble Servant.

DAMON.

To Sir John In Imitation of a Letter in the Histoires Facetieuses, p. 78.
Dear KNIGHT,
THis comes to inform you, that I am in the Land of the Living; and that is all.
But as for the Pleasures of this Transitory World, (which the Hypocrites that
use them, and the Rakehells that are past them, call Vanities) I am no more the
better for them, than a Laplander is for the Sun of Italy; or, to come nearer
Home, than Grocer's-Hall is for the Wealth of the Bank at Amsterdam. A Curse on
that unlucky Night, when you and I got so drunk at the Blue-posts together: for
do but observe what were the Effects on it. Drunkenness, Sir John, drew
Fornication after it; and these two Sins in wicked Conjunction begot a most
undutiful Child, the Lord knows, between 'em, who before he was a Fortnight
old, deposed both his Father and Mother. Thus being disabled from Whoring, and
out of respect to my own Carcass not daring to drink, I am grown as grave, and
as contemplative, and as virtuous a Person, as you could desire to stick your
Knife in. Like the rest of the World too, when they turn Saints, I find the
Devil and all of Ill Nature has come upon me with my Virtue. I am as splenatick
and peevish as a poor Dog of an Author that has been bilked in a Dedication.
Neither Man, Woman, nor Child can escape my Censures. I roar against Sin,
louder than a Fellow that is paid to do it in Public, though at the same time
wishes it no mischief in his Heart. I rail at Everybody, whether I know them
or no; and in some of my moody Fits don't care a Farthing if half the Men in
the Kingdom were hanged, and all the Women sent pick-a-pack to Old Clovenfoot.

Once more, a Curse on that unlucky Night, when this Disaster befell me. Dear
Sir John, for Heavens sake, help me to pelt it with some Vigorous, some
Emphatical, some Gigantick Curses: May it hereafter know no Mirth nor Pleasure,
not even that of Lamb-blacking Signs, and rubbing out of Milk-scores; no Balls,
nor Serenades; no Jollity of Drunkards, nor Enjoyment of Lovers. May it hear of
nothing but Execrations of Losing Gamesters, Fires, Burglaries, and slaughtered
Watchmen. Magistrates of the Night surrendering up their pious Souls in Kennels,
and the Withered Bullies that did it, dying and blaspheming by their side.
Murders hideous enough to fright an Italian, and unnatural Rapes, that would
make even a Pampered Cardinal tremble. But a Pox on it, I don't curse worth a
straw. One Scotch Pedlar heartily warmed would outdo half a dozen such puny
Fellows as I am. Therefore, dear Sir John, come to my Assistance, and help me
out at a Pinch. Curse that unlucky Night, or curse the Wine, or curse the
Master; it is all one in the Original Hebrew, so you do but curse. But
especially pour a double Vial of your wrathful Spirit upon the Discourteous
Damosel that brought me to this. May Providence everlastingly toss her from the
Chirurgeon's Hands to the Bayliff's, and so back again in Soecula Soeculorum:
Or may her Ill Fate force her in her Old Age to Scotland, where may the Kirk
condemn her to be roasted alive for a Sorceress; and may she be as long a
burning, as the Universe will be at the Conflagration.

T. Brown.

TO Mrs. --
Dear MADAM,
NEver any Mortal labored under such a Perplexity of Fortune, or Variety of
Confusions: I should certainly put a Period to this Being of mine, but that I
am still willing to submit to you the Triumph: As you have had it so
indisputably over my Heart, even so take it over my Life, since it offends you,
and affords me no Comfort. How can you imagine, that one bereft of his Soul,
can survive its Absence? No more can you the Possibility of mine, and at the
same time be convinced of the Reality of my Passion. These Twelve Months at
least have I been endeavoring to cast off my Chains, and to quit a Cause which
I could no more hope to triumph in, than I had to be happy without it: but find
as impossible as to abandon my Breath, and retain my Vital Motion. I conjure
you, Madam, by all the Ties of Nature, pity me, and the mischievous
Circumstances of my ill Fortune, that has placed me in a Sphere, which can no
more entitle me to your esteem, than encourage my Presumption. But pardon me,
Madam, if I wish Fortune had been less benevolent to you, that I might have
given you a more ample Evidence of my Passion, and my self a greater Prospect
of Success; and believe assuredly, 'twou'd be the greatest Inhumanity in the
World in ceasing to kill, or ceasing to make me the happiest of your Humble
Servants.

Adieu.
To a Gentleman in Cambridge.
Honest SAM!
SInce you are so stout, I Will be so too, and pick your Pocket of two Pence; a
thing, I hope, excusable in a Friend. But perhaps you will say, Some People have
a plaguey deal of Impudence, to call themselves so, since you give 'em no
encouragement by your Letters; but, at the same time, that does not suppress
this Impudence: For what is bred in the Bone, will never out of the Flesh; and
so there is a Proverb for you. Why, I Will promise thee, Sam, I wish thoud'st pick
my Pocket after such a friendly manner. But, I see, absent Acquaintance are as
little thought of, as past Iniquities; and the Devil of Forgetfulness reigns as
much in Cambridgeshire, as that of Poverty does in London. However, I heartily
wish thee void of both; for these Devils are bloody things to be dispossessed,
when they have once got a footing: As an Instance of which, there is a good
honest Fellow has sent his Wife to the other World under the same Predicament.
Your Brother and I are consulting now to make you Penniless; for we are plaguily
afraid, that you eat so much of the Divine Banquet, that you can afford none of
your absent Friends so much as a Refreshment: And so, Honest Sam, good Night to
thee.

To T -- W --, Esquire.
May the 19th, 93. SIR,
It Is strange, that what e're Noddle aches,
Some Friend or other still partakes;
Whoever wrote, have always sought
Some one for Gossip to their Thought.
I, after hunting long in vain,
To vent the Encumbrance of my Brain,
(Like spurious. Race of humble Whore)
Resolve to lay it at your Door.
And just as other Writers use,
Shall plead Prescription for Excuse:
For Custom that does still dispense
With Universal Influence,
And makes things right or wrong appear,
Just as they do her Liv'ry wear;
Can justify Impertinence,
And stamp it into Sterling Sense.
I therefore care not what I write,
For though I Scribble, You Endite;
I treat you at Your own Expense,
And furnish words, but You the Sense.
And therefore fear not to miscarry,
Since I am but Your Secretary:
For as our Eyes but passive are,
(As learned Philosophers aver)
And only convey to the Mind,
Idea's, which first there we find;
Yet are Themselves but Helps to see,
As other Optick-Glasses be,
So in these Lines, what ever's meant,
I only am Your Instrument;
And nothing have at my command,
But the mere Motion of my Hand:
For all the Sense, You must expect,
Springs from Your proper Intellect.
The learned' st Book that e're was wrote,
To him that understands it not,
No other prospect e're affords,
Then a mere Anarchy of Words:
For Books (like all things else) are good
Or bad, but as they are understood;
And when Men quote 'em, they mistake,
They did not find it so, but make:
So whatsoever from them we smatter,
Is but the Sense of Commentator:
For Words indeed, although sown thick,
Like Ciphers in Arithmetic,
When all cast up, to nothing come,
The Figure only make the Sum:
So Readers must to Books supply,
What feeble Characters deny.
And hence it is that all things sound,
Just as their Fancies do expound;
And if they take 'em in a wrong sense,
All Authors have been served so long since.
Did they not make old Homer prate
Of Boots and Shoes, and God knows what?
Made him hold-forth on Philosophy,
And Virtues of Sage, Tea and Coffee;
And Jests too up and down to scatter,
Where he thought nothing of the matter?
Made they not Virgil strange things write,
And prophecy by After-light;
Foretell the Means of our Salvation,
And all this by their Inspiration?
Make they not him Men's Fortunes tell,
Of which he never thought Syllable;
Pronounce the Fate of Men in Battle,
And of Invaders of strange Cattle;
Detect by Wholesale in his Verse,
Thieves, Pick-pockets and Conjurers;
And surer tell who drives that Game on,
Than P -- dge, G -- ry, or S -- on?
Mean time, perhaps, there is but one Leaf,
Betwixt the Justice and the Thief:
His Worship would a little later,
Have found it quite another matter,
And had been, to his sole jeopardy,
Suspended for mere being tardy;
Or acted at the Rump of Cart,
With Spartan Patience his part.
Make they not Horace a stark Ass,
Reduced to Du -- -- Ballad Class,
Strip him of all that is gay and witty,
To fit him up to doleful Ditty?
Tagg'd forth with miserable Rhimes,
From Bulks, and in the Streets he chimes.
With Rosamond now Lydia vies,
And fills the Milk-maids maudlin Eyes;
While Hopkins is forgot and Sternhold,
So often chanted forth in Barn old.
Was not Sage Terence at adventure,
By Oily Shadwell turned to banter?
And taught, for duller Sense of's own,
The brisk gay Nonsense of the Town?
And his insipid Tale improved,
By what the Town and Sh -- ll loved?
Sh -- ll, whose whole Stock is, a Bully,
A Wench, a Usurer, a Cully.
From whence, with little pains, straightway,
Or Wit, he often does launch a Play:
As Cits, with Blue, secure from staining,
A Hero fit on Days of Training.
I need not tell of late Projectors,
That Stories tell of Witches Specter;
Hold forth, with learned Theory,
On the Proboscis of a Flea;
Pursue with Microscope, the Tract
Of List upon a Grey-louse Back;
Philosophize upon Salt-waters,
And other much surprising Matters.
Those Pedlars in all sorts of Wares,
That Haberdash in Love-Affairs,
Mechanics, Meter, Politics,
And forty other modish Tricks,
As Tumbling, Juggling, Vaulting, Dancing,
Intriguing, Ridling, and Romancing,
That do with Pamphlets Epidemick,
Laden with Billingsgate Polemicks,
Confound the Jacobites, and Quakers,
With their Adherents, and Partakers,
To the ruin of their Grace, and quite
Extinguishing their inward Light;
That fill Men for a Dish of Coffee,
With Politics and Philosophy;
And for a single Penny can
Instruct at once a whole Divan
Of Cobblers, Chimney-sweepers, Car-men,
And the whole Tribe of Two-legg'd Vermin
Nor need I mention Foreign Journal,
Translated to Gallants Diurnal,
Where Verses given, and stolen Prose,
A motly Rhapsody compose,
To teach poor Prentice, sadly panting,
More modern Methods of Gallanting;
And Sempstress, the most recent Arts,
Of captivating straggling Hearts,
And exercise the Wit of Youth,
On Snails, Tobacco-pipes and Truth.
Nor him that late in sparkish Prose,
Appeared to edify the Beaus,
Who, with soft Lines, and softer Looks,
Expertly baits his Amorous Hooks,
And brings with Elegant Epistle,
Each melting Damsel to his Whistle,
And makes her stoop to him as sure
As hungry Hawk does to his Lure;
Who lately drew, in Vindication,
Of all the Beauties in the Nation,
And boldly tilted with his Pen,
Against all that durst oppose him then;
Which some Apology mis-call, some Satyr,
Both equidistant from the Matter;
For surely no Design was in it,
But barely to appear in Print.
Which he as kindly since has done,
Gallants, for your Instruction;
Where the Grand Secrets he imparts,
For battering Obdurate Hearts;
How you to Vizard-mask, or Coach,
May make a Regular Approach:
He shows you how you shall prevail
With Lines as fenceless as a Flail;
For Letters Missive, Weapons are,
Which Lovers combat with from far:
Shows how to take 'em by Surprise,
Or use the Artillery of Eyes:
But if Necessity oblige
To Methods of a closer Siege,
He shows such Means as might improve
The greatest Engineer in Love;
To bribe the Sentinel, her Maid,
Or storm her with a Serenade:
And if by these she be not won,
Bombard with Sonnet, or Lampoon;
If these Attempts she still defies,
To blow her up with Mines of Sighs;
For Sighs indeed, although no louder,
Are the Discharge of Love's White-pow-der;
And therefore it is they seldom fail,
To blow up Petticoats full well:
But if so fortified she prove,
To baffle all the Assaults of Love;
And, on strict Scrutiny, you are
Obliged in Honor to despair;
He Is deepest read in all those Laws,
That relate nearest to your Cause;
Can tell you whether, soon as known,
'Twere properer to Hang or Drown;
Instruct you too what Streams or Boughs,
It were convenient you should choose,
What Art is requisite, what Care
To plunge, or swing with moving Air;
What Rules are ordered by Romance,
And which are A la mode de France:
For these things must be nicely done,
Or else the Glory of 'em's gone;
By one Mistake more Honor's lost,
Than being beaten from your Post.
I pass by S -- tle, D -- rs, A -- es,
For Doggrel celebrated Names;
With Authors of substantial Prose,
That dress like Wits, and write like Beaux.
But, to return to Application,
That is, to Self-justification;
From citing Verse-wrights of great Name,
That often fill every Mouth of Fame,
Rendered by her so necessary,
To Grocer, Cook, Apothecary;
In doing which, my sole Intent
Was merely to show Precedent,
And prove, that fine things may be writ,
With very little, or no Wit,
For Wit (some Authors do maintain)
Is but a Fungus of the Brain,
The Offspring of superfluous Thought,
By too luxuriant Fancy wrought;
A hasty and abortive Birth,
Like that of over-teeming Earth,
Which does to thousand Figures vary,
And therefore not held salutary;
And though for wanton Palates dressed,
Counted uneasy to digest;
And then too, must be taken young,
Before its Venom grow too strong:
So Wit's anomalous and rude,
Of ill digestion, and crude,
Till after needful Preparation,
With wholesome Picle of Discretion;
And, where it is of constant use,
Does Surfeits in the Mind produce;
Breeds strange Diseases in the Purse,
And is its own Admirer's Curse:
They therefore Pardon surely merit,
Who in their Writings do forbear it;
And rather choose to feed in quiet,
On homelier, but more whole some Diet;
From whence, if peccant Vapors breed,
Or turgid Flatulence proceed,
The only Symptoms they produce
And Danger's, but a Crepitus;
Which (as we do in Authors read)
Springs from the Bowels, not the Head;
And, though received with public scorn,
Expires as soon as it is born:
So Writings, which no Sense affords,
Are but a Crepitus of Words;
And, though with windy Lines they swell ye,
Rise from a Vacuum in the Belly;
In which no Meaning's to be found,
Or any Scope, beside the Sound.
But, Sir, I have almost forgot,
What I intended to have wrote,
And my first Subject worse neglect,
Than modern Pulpiteer his Text,
Who take the freedom to digress,
And vary Subjects as they please;
While with Rhetorical Harangue,
And Voice tuned to Religious Twang,
He treats all those that come to hear it,
With choicest Gifts of purest Spirit:
Where Pious Folks convene, drawn thither
By the help of stiff erected Leather;
With Dresses, Faces, Mien, and Air,
Screwed up to Piety and Prayer;
Where Holy Man in all he says,
Lays Salt of Grace on Tails of Faith;
Where Saints are sous'd in Gospel-pickle,
By Moderns styled, A Conventicle.
LETTERS OF LOVE and GALLANTRY.
To Eugenia.
MADAM,
THOUGH it be not a full Week since I received the Honor of my dear Eugenia's
Letter, yet it has been long enough for me to wish a thousand times I were
Left Handed; since, by an unlucky Sprain in my Right Hand, I Have been forced to
omit the Duty these three Posts. My Building is near finished; and when it is
so, I hope my dear Eugenia will be so kind to her constant Slave, to furnish my
new House with an Engaging new Mistress; if not for my sake, at least for her
own; since I vow I shall come into -- with a most fierce Design on Love and
Matrimony: And Love, you know, is a Spirit, that when once a Woman has conjured
up, she must find it some Employment, or else 'twill tear the Charming
Sorceress her self to pieces. Therefore, fair Widow, beware!

If my Hand were not still in great Pain, I Would give you a thousand Thanks for
your dear Letter; and, perhaps, pick as many Quarrels with you about it: But
Heaven forgive you your want of Charity, when you think I could write the same
things to my Grandmother, I do to Eugenia; when my Conscience cannot reproach
me with thinking the youngest of your Sex charming enough to extort one of this
kind from me, excepting your self. Nor is it, Madam, the easiest thing in the
World to feign a Passion, say things of that Force and Tenderness, or act an
absent Lover for so many Years together, as I have been Eugenia's Votary. I Am
sure the whole Legend of Love cannot furnish you with one Example of so constant
an Hypocrite, as I have been, if I must needs be so. Therefore, if I cannot
convince you of my Sincerity, and by that plead a Merit to your Love; yet let
the Novelty of the thing, at least, move your Pity, when you think what Pains
I Have taken (since all that comes not Naturally is so) to say so many kind,
tender, and passionate things of one I have no concern for. Think whether it be
not almost equally difficult to write passionately to one I am not really in
love with, and to paint a Sound. Who can act Hunger without an Appetite? Or
long Scene of Fury and Anger, without being pefectly heated.

But if you are so severe, to think that my first Pretenses were all Fiction;
yet, Madam, pray, consider that Liars often tell Stories of their own Invention
so long, till at last they themselves believe 'em true: And, as the Roman in
Martial counterfeited the Gout, till he had it in earnest; so, supposing my
Vows at first but feigned, they must by this time be ripened into Truth by your
Influence, (like the Dew drops of Heaven into Precious Stones by the heat of
the Eastern Sun) and so become Sacred, as all things addressed to you must be,
Madam.

But if I loved not Eugenia with the greatest and most sincere Passion that
ever Man loved a Woman, I know not what Reason, what Interest, or what Design I
could have to pretend it, since I Am not so vain to expect any other Benefit of
it than her Laughter, and in that my Trouble. However, Madam, I have this
Satisfaction in my own Mind, that I love the best and finest of her Sex, (though
a Mother) who, like a Taper, has not suffered the least Diminution of her own
Luster, by the lighting others into the World; but still preserves her Original
Light so firmly, as to enslave all that behold her, as well as, Madam,

Your Eternal Slave, Lysander.

By the Same.
MADAM,
NO desperate Wretch, guilty of the most execrable Murders, had ever that
Trouble, that Agony of Mind, that I have endured since the Receipt of Your
last; in which you discovered so severe and cruel a Resentment of a Crime I was
not guilty of. If I have ever offended You, I ask Your Ladyship ten thousand
thousand Pardons. Ah! Madam, if my Love were not as lasting as my Life, and so
were as inseparable as Soul and Body: Nay, were there any Prospect, any
Possibility of my ever loving You less, I should not need to be thus troublesome
to Your Ladyship, to beg You not to use the Extent of Your Power over me, to
punish me for a Crime I was never guilty of: Yet, whether I Am guilty or not, so
much, so extravagantly I love You, that if You yet convict me, I shall stand
condemned even in my own Opinion. Nay, if You, Madam, will positively accuse me
of all the the Ills in the World, I Will own 'em; for it shall never be said,
That for the sake of my own Happiness, Interest, or Honor, I ever contradicted
the Assertion of her, I professed the greatest and most generous Passion for,
that ever unhappy Man experienced. But, Madam, had I been guilty of any little
Error, consider it as coming from a Man almost distracted: -- Distracted,
Madam, for the Love of you; for I Am sure I appear so to all that visit me; yet,
though most guess the Cause, the Person is only known to the wounded Heart of,

Madam, Your Constant Slave, Lysander.
Ah! Madam, don't use a Passion so tender as mine with so much Tyranny, since
the Power you have is but what I give; and it is not generous enough for
Eugenia to turn against its Original, though he is incapable of withholding it.



By the Same.
MADAM,
HOw can the Unfortunate Lysander ever hope for his Divine Eugenia's Pardon,
thus daily to torment her with his Impertinence, if she were not the best, and
most generous Woman living. As for the Character of a Beau, which you're
pleased to honor me with, I pretty well guess whence you had it; a very honest
good-humored Lady as lives, I mean Mrs. S --, who Dined with me once at my
Lodging, where Night nor Day you were not forgot. I need not tell you, that
Mrs. S -- is as good a Woman as lives, since all that you recommend must be so.
Whenever she is a mind to oblige me most, and render her House most agreeable,
she tells me, many think her like Eugenia: But could she make me believe so
too, she had done her Business: For (as I told her) that was the way to make
her House my Prison; for had Eugenia been Mistress of it, I could with Pleasure
have been confined to it for ever. If you would do an Act of Charity, (as
Widows, you know, are good for nothing else) you would come up to Town, and
help marry me to some old rich Woman, that would be sure to die quickly, in
order to the marrying a young one; at least, you would speak a good Word for me
to my Lady --, whom, if ever I was to marry, my Lord D -- should give her, as
you should me.

I hope, fair Widow, after this long Silence, your Pen will venture on some
other Subject besides Business. If your Letters were sometimes dashed with
Love, etc. 'twere but a Venial Sin, and what I weekly pardon to some young
Women in the Mal, of your Acquaintance; from whom, by my Soul, I Have as good
Letters, as those celebrated Nuns Letters. My two Mistresses Valeria and
Belinda, I serve under the Name of Polydorus; but would be ten times more proud
and happy to serve your Ladyship under any Title or Name, whereby I might merit
the Character so long since engraven in the Heart of,

Madam, Your Humble Slave, Lysander.

By the Same.
MADAM,
THis Day's Post made me the happiest Man living, in receiving the Honor of a
most obliging Letter from my dear Eugenia, who can never do any thing that is
otherwise: However, did I not know your Modesty was so extreme, as to look on
the smallest Encomiums as Flatteries, though your real Merit keeps the greatest
from being so: I confess it would be a real Trouble to me, that one, whom I so
cordially honor, should mis-interpret the unfeigned Dictates of my Soul, for
Compliments. A Devotion, so justly grounded on Merit, can never be judged
counterfeit; for the Glory of the Sun, and the Benefits Mankind reaped from his
Beams, were allowed as sufficient Arguments, to justify the Persians Adoration
of him. Your generous Invitation of me into -- is so much to my own Advantage,
that a dying Man, when he knows there are but two ways to go, would sooner
refuse an Invitation to Heaven. I beg you, Madam, make an Experiment of your
Dominion over me, in imposing some Commands, that you judge the most Rigorous,
and that may appear as Difficult as this is pleasing. I would fain see how
Ill-natured you can be, as well as give a Proof of my Pride, in obeying you. As
for London, every thing that is worth a Visit there, will be gone the very
Minute you leave it: And therefore, till your Return, I declare for an
Abdication of it, and will here, like another Timon of Athens, live retired,
and in hatred of all Mankind, for your Sexes sake.

But now, Fair Widow, you must give me my Revenge, and let me give you Advice,
in Return of what I have received from you, though mine, I promise you, shall be
more conscionable than yours was: For you advise me to marry an Old Woman
(blessed, for ought I know, with a stinking Breath, Rheumatisms, Coughs,
Catarrhs, false Teeth, and the other damned Accomplishments, which may entitle
her to the honorable Appellation of Venerable:) But I am, Madam, better
natured in my choice for your Ladyship, and recommend to you a young Man that
prefers the Widow to the Jointure, and leaves all but the Treasure of her Heart
to others; one who would be confined to a Desert (if to be in Heaven can be a
Confinement) with her, where the perpetual Business of his Life should be
Immortal Love; and I swear, he that would not do all this, and ten thousand
times more, is not worthy of her. Such a one, Madam, I choose for you, and if
that will not please, forbear Wedlock for ever, as I will do, rather than take
up with that reverend piece of Antiquity you mention. In the mean time, the
only Alms I beg, is, your Pity and Pardon for,

Madam, Your most sincere, obliged humble Slave, Lysander.

By the Same.
MADAM,
TO express the real Sense I have of all the Noble Favors conferred on me at
your House, during the long Persecution I gave you there, were as impossible as
to give your Ladyship a full and perfect Character of the Pangs and Tortures of
Mind I have been under, ever since my Departure from the Divine Eugenia, whose
Idea perpetually swims before my Sight in all Companies and Places. Madam, I Am
sensible, I have ten thousand Pardons to ask for the Extravagance of my Passion
in the Presence of the Divine Eugenia: But I can appeal to Heaven and my own
Conscience, that never any Profane Thought entered my Breast, reflecting on
the Divinity I with so unfeigned a Zeal adore, since no Man living has that
Sacred Opinion of the exalted Honor, Virtue, Wit and Beauty of any Woman, that
I have of my too Dear and Destructive Eugenia. Your Caution, Madam, of the
Bath, might have been necessary to one that loved less than I do; the Variety
of Company that Place now affords, with its other diverting Amusements, might
have some influence over an Amorous Friend, or Common Lover: But as my Passion
is proportionable to the Object, so nothing on Earth is Diversion or Pleasure
to me, but the Thoughts of Her I love. I can be alone even in a Crowd, and
therefore make it my endeavor to avoid so troublesome a solitude. Good GOD,
Madam! What is there I can do to show how miserable I am for your sake? It Is
true, Madam, my Misery derives it self partly from my Unworthiness; But ah!
more! much more, from your not knowing what it is to love: For who can have a
real Sense of another's Pain, but they who have felt the same? How can the
Unfortunate Lysander ever hope for one kind Thought from his Adored Eugenia,
while her Heart's not touched with his Sufferings, nay, fortified against
Compassion, by her being surrounded by none but his Enemies? Some may think it
a Reflection on their Friends, to be refused, if you should honor any other
with your Favor, but them: And others think it impossible, that a Passion for
Eugenia should last an Age, since they never had Merit enough to procure an
Hour's Love for Themselves. Thus, Madam, between the Vanity of the Old, and the
Ignorance, Envy, and impotent Charms of the Young, I may well expect to be
sacrificed; but, however, I shall have the satisfaction of being distinguished
from the rest of your Adorers, by being at least your Martyr,

Lysander.
POSTSCRIPT.
Lysander, Madam, can never banish nor lessen that Passion you mention for
Eugenia, yet my Esteem of Friendship is so great, that if I could present you
with a Pillow of Love, to repose your charming Head on, it should be stuffed
with Friendship; if with a Landscape of Love, the Shadows should be Friendship;
if with an Embroidery, the Ground should be Friendship; though in the Gardens of
Venus I can never allow Friendship to be more than a Winter-fruit, which, when
the Delicacies of the Summer is over, may be comfortable enough to the Reverend
Old Couple, sitting by a Fireside, in a long Winter's Night, even as good as
roasted Apples.



LYSANDER to EUGENIA, whom he had desired to write Letters enough to him to
make him a Shroud.
Dear MADAM,
THis Day was I Blessed with a Letter from Eugenia, which comes far short of
finishing my Shroud; a Ream, at least, will modestly suffice to keep even Death
from blushing at himself; and then, for Warmth, another Ream, I Am sure, you will
not deny, when cold Lysander begs

That Heat and Flame which now your Beauty gives,
Can then alone be by your Wit supplied.
Entombed in Amber, Bees may boast their turn;
And wrapped in Flames, let pious Martyrs burn.
Stretched in your Letter, Death will be my Triumph.
Embalmed in Sense, who would not wish to die?
And Sense that comes from so Divine a Hand?
Egyptian Mummies perish and decay;
But Shrouds, like mine, will Time it self outlive,
Wear out his Scythe, and every fleeting Sand.
One Dram of Body cannot here be lost:
But, like a Summer-sute, laid safely by;
When Spring appears, are fit to wear again.
So true a Resurrection will be rare;
The self-same Body, with the self-same Soul.
Who then can doubt but the same Passions too?
The same my Love, the same my Mistress YOU.
Madam, though I designed these Thoughts in downright Prose, yet in the Ardor of
writing they run into Blank Verse, whether I would or no. I hope your Ladyship
received my last Godly Letter, by which, you may perceive, I can be Devilishly
Devout upon Occasion. The Truth on it is, I have often wondered, Why all the
Young Fellows of the Town set up for Atheism, since they can be so much more
conveniently lewd under the Masque of Religion. If Belinda, in the Letters I Have
communicated to your Ladyship, has behaved her self in any kind disagreeable to
her Sex, let me know it, and I Will engage she shall mend her Manners for the
future. If you don't think she loves enough, she shall grow jealous, and never
speak well of him her self, nor suffer Anybody else to speak ill of him, (the
surest sign of Love in the World) Or if you think her too kind to her Lover,
she shall set up for Religion, be very Godly, and very Ill-natured, rail at
Profaneness, and in a Pious Christian way enjoy Somebody she likes better.

Your Ladyship is pleased to censure my Jealousy as incurable: But pray,
Madam, be pleased to consider, where Men are apt to be jealous out of Fondness,
as they are often jealous without a Cause; so they are as often satisfied
without Reason. I Am surpised at Eugenia's Apology for her writing Nonsense,
when there is no Woman living, but what might be proud to copy after her: so
Free, so Easy, so Witty are her Letters: Besides were it not so, as Mr.
Congreve has it, there would be more Eloquence in your false-spelt
Superscription, than in all Tully's and Demosthenes his Orations, to me, Madam,
who am

Your most constant and faithful Humble Servant. LYSANDER.

By the Same.
MADAM,
TEN Thousand Thanks to the Divine Eugenia for this Morning's Blessing of a
Letter, full of the Charms of her that sent 'em; full of Honor, Wit, and
Good Humor: nay, more than Providence could spare to you, without forming a
Mass of Fools at the same time to retrieve the Expense.

On You the Image of Himself he stamped,
And every part He most Divinely hit;
Your Eyes His Glory, and his Power Your Wit.
Pardon me, Madam, for this Start of Poetry; for though I have no Skill in it, I
have yet a double Pretense to the Attempt, both as Lover and Fiddler. Besides,
your Ladiship's Poetry (the finest, as well as the easiest in the World)
provoked me to return the Debt; not that I presumed, Madam, that I could pay
you in the same Sterling, but in such Birmigham Coin as I can compass. Tho'I'm
persuaded there is so much of the Poetic Fire in yours, that more of them would
do with me, what the Hermetick Fire does with Metals, transmute me into true
Standard Gold, and make my Poetry as engaging as your Charms, that inspire me
with a Love as lasting as your Slave.

LYSANDER.

By the Same.
MADAM,
HOw long must I Write and Sigh in vain? Not one line, not one word, to the Man
that loves and adores you next Heaven? Why should I grieve for her, that hates
me? Or write to her, that scorns to answer me? That, after all her Professions
of Friendship to her Lysander, forgets him, now Alphonso's in the Country? As
if she measured Love by the proud weight of the Person, and not of the Passion;
that, after so many Years of sincere Love, after the faithful Service of the
old Patriarch's waiting, turns him off, for a New-comer; as if you did it to
fulfill what is written, in giving the Laborer that came the last Hour, the same
wages with him that came the first. For my part, Madam, I never knew what it
was to compound a Debt with a Mistress; and for Love to dwindle into
Friendship, is not so much as to pay Twelve-pence in the Pound: No, Madam, Time
has not made me such a Bankrupt, and I Have an honester Principle, than to break,
when I Am so well stocked with Love.

This is the third Letter, Madam, I Have sent you, since I Have heard from you:
Town and Country are equally uneasy to me, when I hear not from Eugenia, when
I Am deprived from the fight of her: But I shall find more frequent Opportunity
of seeing you, designing, Don Quixot like, with my Sanca Panca, to travel about
in pursuit of Adventures, that may bring me to Eugenia, or Death.

LYSANDER.

By the Same.
MADAM,
THe Letter this Day's Post brought me, would have surpised any one but me,
whom you have so inured to Injuries, that I look on my ordinary Injustice as an
Obligation, having had the honor to have received an hundred times more than
this from your Ladyship. I was telling my Friend, last Night, That I had read
several Encomiums on the Gout, Fever, Plague, etc. written by witty Men; to
which I thought the Praise of Women might be annexed; but little expected so
home and serious a Proof of the Reasonableness of my Jest. Faith, Madam, you
have such ill success in the Counsels of your Allies, that I would, were I you,
for once, try my own. You seldom find Confederates successful against a single
Foe, who has Nobody to consult but his own Will and Pleasure. We take the
Field when we will; march when we will, and do what we will, while the
different Powers, that make up a Confederacy, draw each a several way, and by
the slowness of their Resolutions, lose the Opportunity of their Fortune.
However, Madam, it is not your Severity can destroy my Passion, I must and will
be yours one way or other; no Resolutions, no Unkindness can ever alter me. My
Love, Eugenia, is like the Appearance of a Phoenix, not to be seen, but once in
a thousand Years: My Tongue never professes what my Heart is not possessed
with. No, no, Madam, Love is too noble a Passion to be fooled with. Your laying
Addresses elsewhere to my Charge, is Obliging; for nothing could please me more
than your Jealousy; yet, let me assure the Divine Eugenia, that it is no easy
matter for a Man bred up in an Adoration, for twice seven Years together, to
change his Devotion; and whatever little Excursions I might make, all this
time, 'twas but to pray to others for your sake. And thus you see, Madam, how
little Pains I spare to win the Empire of the World, Your Love.

If only to be happy, be to live,
As all the Brave and Generous believe;
You Will in one Year within my Arms live more,
Than all the tastless Years you lived before;
One blast of Breath will never then be lost,
But Lip from Lip, each others Soul be tossed:
Thus by a new Philosophy, we'll prove,
Perpetual Motion, and Eternal Love.
Dearest Eugenia, Adieu; never again be so cruel to throw away any more
fruitless Advice, about changing my Address; for it is impossible I should ever
be other than

Your Constant Slave, LYSANDER.

To my Lady --
Richmond, March 4.
HEre I am at last, Madam, to show you the force of my Resolution; and here I
positively stay till Saturday: Nay, I don't know but I may stretch it to
Monday: For if once I get into Town again, the Lord knows when I get out on it;
and, I Am afraid, I shall not suck so much of this Heavenly Air in two Days, as I
may possibly stand in need of: For I don't find my Legs of half that Importance
to me they used to be. Half a Mile up Hill makes 'em grumble cursedly. I have a
scoundrel pair of Bellows too, that puff and blow, and make a damnable
Splutter. In short, the present Situation of my Affairs are such, I can give
but a very scurvy Account of the pertest part about me.

That things may mend, is my Hope and my Comfort, Madam; for were they to hang
long thus, 'twere no great Loss, either to my self, or other Folks, if I were
hanged too. Possibly your Ladyship may be of my Opinion; if you are, pray, toss
me a short Prayer into your Lent-devotions for my Re-establishment. I would
have begged one from a Catholic Lady in the next Room, who is puzzling over a
long lewd Account she is to make up against Easter; but she is so taken up with
her Sins and her Crucifix, she cares not if I were damned. If I am not, I hope
she will; for she is so ugly, I desire I may never be in the same place with her
again.

The Penny-post, Madam, is to hand this to the Town's-end, and he is just
starting: So, if my Letter's too short, it is he is the Puppy-dog this time, not
I.



To Mr. --
Honest DICK,
I Have not only heard of, but born a part in some of your Frolicks; yet never
observed any so extravagant, as gave me reason to apprehend you would ever be
so mad as to marry. Sure the Devil is in thee, or her; for without Fascination
this Miracle could never be wrought? To be very sick of Love is no wonder, but
that cannot last long; the raging Fever must pass, or kill. Your Fate is soon
determined; a few Days bring it to its Crisis: And is it not better dying
quietly in your own Sheets, than in a whining Wife's Arms? You can never live
in Charity with her ten Days together, unless you are a stricter Christian than
I take you, or think it possible for one of Nineteen to be. Experience,
dear-bought Experience has convinced me, that the Difference between Women
consists more in our Capricious Humors, and the Sense of Variety, than any
intrinsic Goodness, not very common to their Sex. The Novelty may please, it is
true; but after the first Week's Enjoyment, a Wife is eternally the same: the
Ruin of your Estate, and the Disquiet of your Bed. If she live three Years,
she will spend more than her Fortune in Clothes. If she bring you any Children,
these are so many fresh Additions to your Misfortunes, creating Torments if
they live, and Grief if they die. Which of thy Sins, Dick, has been so black in
it self, or so heinous in its circumstances; so frequently repeated, or so long
unrepented of, as to deserve so heavy, so lasting a Damnation? You that could
never like a Woman above a Week, and changed your Mistresses faster than they
did their Lodgings: How, alas! do you think it possible not to be miserable
under this Pagan Yoke? Though I don't pretend to the Spirit of Prophecy, yet I
dare engage you would give five times her Estate, within the Year, to be at Liberty
again. Alas! Dick, this is not a Confinement that ten Guinea's will bear you
out of; but, what is the greatest Mischief, 'twill last all your Life. The
knowing that we cannot alter our Condition, I believe, is the most sensible
Affliction that can befall us. You know the Story of the Man that broke his
Heart with the Thoughts of being forbidden to walk without the Walls of a great
City, though he had never stirred a Foot out of it before. Besides, a Husband is
the most insipid Character of all Mankind, never pleasing, and seldom pleased;
tormented in his own Person, and more feelingly in that of his Children, who
are continually whipped and beaten, to be revenged of his Unkindness, or to
provoke his Anger. Be sober once in thy Life, and renounce the Thoughts of so
fatal a Consequence. Why will you affect drinking out of Horn, when you have so
much Plate? You had best show this to you Fair Charmer, and demonstrate the
Powers of her Eyes, by resisting so wholesome and seasonable Advice. If you think
fit, do so; I had rather lose her Good Will, than not show my own Integrity;
and would refuse your Friendship, if I might not show my own.

To Mrs. --
Lovely Object of my solicitous Desires!
It Is impossible for me to resist the Charms of your bewitching Face; and if you
are not less cruel than you're fair, I shall be eternally miserable. Heaven
knows with what an unusual throbbing my Heart was seized, when first I saw you.
And who, indeed, could behold, without a tender Concern, the Beautifullest
Creature, that Nature ever made, or our Eyes at least beheld? And from whence
could proceed so unaccountable a Disorder, unless from Love? It is not
superfluous to confess a Flame, I could not possibly avoid. And what needs
there more to convince the World of my Passion, than the Assurance I had seen
you? Love is so Charming in its Birth, that we readily yield to his softer
Impulses; but so powerful withal, that we as vainly oppose them. In your
Company consists my Happiness; and I am wretched, when I am forced from your
Feet. Could my Dear Dorinda know, with what Anguish and Horror I pass every
tedious Hour away, while at this distance from her, she would doubtless wish my
Condition less wretched. Common Gratitude obliges us to Pity, if we cannot
redress the Miseries we cause. Since this is the only Happiness I can at
present enjoy, be so indulgent as to permit it: For why should you refuse me a
Felicity, that can stand you but in Two Pence? If the declaring my Passion you
imputed to me as a Crime, the Torments it creates me, are a sufficient
Punishment, and you are revenged of all my Faults in my own Despair.

A LETTER of AENEAS SYLVIUS, who was afterward Pope PIUS the Second, to his
Father, about a Bastard-Son, whom he sent to him.
Translated from the Latin, by Mr. T. Brown.
Aeu. Sylv. Oper. p. 510. Edit. Basil. YOu sent me word in your last, That you
could not tell whether you were to rejoice, or grieve at the late Present that
Providence made me of a Son. For my part, I see reason enough for the former,
but not the least pretense for the latter: For tell me, what prettier Sport is
there, than for a Man to beget his own Likeness? Or what more refreshing sight
can there be, on this side. Heaven, than to see one's Table well stocked with
Olivebranches? As for my self, without blushing, I own to you, That it is an
unspeakable Pleasure to me, to find, that I have not bestowed my Pains in a
barren Soil; and I daily return my Thanks to Heaven, for sending me no Cloven
Present, no whimpering, silly Girl; but a fine chopping, lusty Boy, who will
help to divert you and ray Mother, with his innocent Prattling. Now, Sir, if you
took any Satisfaction at my Birth, why should not the Cockies or your old Heart
dance upon this occasion; or why should you not be as well pleased to behold my
Picture in a Grandson? But, perhaps, you will tell me, That your Conscience is
some what uneasy, because the poor Child was begotten in Sin, and out of the
Pale of Matrimony. If the Shoe pinches you there, I must ask you a few Civil
Questions before we part. Pray, Sir, what Materials was I composed of? As I
take it, I am not made of Stone, or Iron, or any such unrelenting Ingredients.
You begot me true Flesh and Blood, and, if I have committed any Crime, in
making use of my Parts, I Will even place it to your Score; for I Will swear I had
all the peccant Utensils from you. In the next place, Do but consider how it
was with your self at my Years: You know well enough, without my refreshing
your Memory for you, that you never lay under the scandal of a Fumbler. I am
your own lawful Son; no blot to your Family, I hope; no Eunuch, or any thing
like it. Neither am I Hypocrite enough, to pretend to more Sanctity than the
rest of my Neighbors. I frankly own, I have been a trespasser, a vile
abominable trespasser in my time; but, to my great Comfort, David and Solomon,
went the same road before me: and, as I am modest in my own Nature, a Curse
light on me, if ever I desire to be thought holier than King David, or wiser
than his Son. If it is a Sin, it can say abundance of shrewd things for it self;
it can plead Antiquity and Universality, and quotes the Lord knows how many
Texts out of the New and old Testament; and, to deal plainly with you, I don't
believe there is one Man between the two Poles, unless he has a very scurvy
confounded Body indeed, that has not at one time or another been guilty of it
in Thought or Deed. This Corruption (if it may be called a Corruption for a Man
to employ his Natural Talent) is of all Countries and Regions: But, under the
Rose, Sir, why should Copulation be treated with such ill Language, as
generally it is; or why should our Casuists so furiously condemn it, since
Nature, that never does any thing in vain, has interwoven this Appetite with
our very Constitutions, and inspired the whole Creation with an eternal desire
to continue their own Species? But, I suppose you will reply, That there are
certain limits within which it is lawful, and that this Action ought never to be
done without the Church's Consent. Well, for once, let us take it for granted,
That as Man ought never to get up and ride, without the Priests Benediction:
But how does this mend the Matter? Was there never any Sin, do you think,
committed within the Matrimonial Sheets? I hope, Old Gentleman, you will not
advance such false Doctrine as that is. There are fixed Rules too for our
Eating and Drinking; but what Man, in a thousand, is such a slavish Coxcomb, as
to be confined to them? Some Whining-grave Rascals may tell you, They were
never guilty of Sin, and demurely wipe their Mouths after they have said it;
but I hate all Liars, and, since I carry Human Infirmities about me, scorn to
conceal or deny them: So much for this Point. But because you seem to distrust,
that other People have had a Finger in the Pie, and would fain be satisfied
whether the Child really belongs to me or no: Pray, Sir, be pleased to take
this short History of the whole Affair. I had been Envoy at Strasburg some two
Years, and, as it happened, had no great Business upon my Hands, when a Woman,
newly arrived from England, who had Youth and Beauty enough to please a nicer
Palate than mine, chanced to come to the same Inn where I lodged: She spoke the
Italian Tongue perfectly well, and I had a long Conversation with her in that
Language, which was so much the more entertaining to me, because I so little
expected to meet one that understood Italian in those parts of the World. In
short, what with her Wit and Beauty, she gained an absolute Ascendant over my
Heart; so that, as often as I beheld her, I could not help thinking on the
Famous Cleopatra, who, chiefly with the Gaiety and Charms of her Discourse,
made such a pair of Asses of Julius Coesar and Mark Antony. Thought I, to my
self, who can blame such an inconsiderable diminutive Fellow as I am, for doing
what the most Illustrious Heroes of Antiquity have justified by their own
Examples? Sometimes I supported my self by the Precedent of Moses, sometimes of
Aristotle, and sometimes by famous Instances in the Christian Church. To make
short of my Story, I was passionately in love with this Belle Tramontane, and
attempted her with all the Rhetoric I was Master of. But she, deaf to my Vows
and Passion, slighted all my Protestations; so that, for three long-lived Days,
(an Age in the Chronicles of Love) I found I had made little or no progress in
her Affections. Whether this was the Effect of her Virtue, her Fear, or
Discretion, I will not be positive, but am inclined to the latter. For, as it
appeared, she stood in some awe of the House, from whom she expected certain
Kindnesses.

The fatal Night now approached, and next Morning early she was to pursue her
Journey. What Fears, what Apprehensions reached my Soul, least the Quarry
should escape me? I threw my self down at her Feet, embraced her Knees, and
conjured her not to bolt her Door; adding, that in the Silence of the Night I
would steal to her Chamber, and give her the last Convictions, that I was her
most devoted Vassal. She refused to comply with my Desires, stood much upon her
Virtue, and gave me not the least Hopes of succeeding. I still importuned her
upon the same Chapter, but she still made me the same Answer, and insisted upon
her Virtue. Well, when all the Family was gone to Bed, said I to my self, Shall
I see whether the Lady has done as I desired her, or no? All Women are Riddles;
perhaps she has since thought better of the matter; and, after all, it is no
great trouble to try the Experiment. Finding all was hushed, I groped my way to
her Chamber in the dark: The Door was shut, but not bolted; so in I came,
rushed into Bed, and after a little foolish struggling, got Possession of her
Body, the Fruit of which Night's Work was this hopeful Boy. This merry Scene
befell me about the beginning of February, and nine Months after, my dear lovely
Bedfellow, whose Name was Betty, dropped in two, and was delivered of the
abovementioned Babe. This Account I had from her own Mouth at Basil, where it
was my good Fortune to meet with her again. At first I thought she had invented
this Story, on purpose to wheedle a Sum of Money out of me, and gave no great
heed to it: But then considering, that the Enjoyment of her at Strasburg had
not cost me a Farthing, but only put me to the Expense of a few foolish Oaths,
and so forth, which are easily coined in a Lover's Mint, I began to alter my
Opinion. She acted before upon a generous Principle of Love, and no indirect
mercenary Ends; therefore, why should I now suspect her Integrity? Besides, the
Time, and all other Circumstances agreed so well, that I could no longer doubt
of what she told me, especially it being at a Juncture, when she could expect
no great matters from me. These Reasons induced me to believe, that the Child
was begot with the Sweat of my Brows: Therefore, pray Sir, take him into your
Family; bestow some little Greek and Latin upon the young Rogue, breed him up
in the Fear of his Maker, and afford him Shelter in a Garret, till he is big
enough to find the way to his Daddy.

Farewell.
FINIS.

