EPOSYLIS STIX. OR A SCOURGE OF SACRILEGE: In Answer to a Pamphleter calling
himself ANTHONY PEARSON, Concerning The Great Case of Tithes.

Wherein many gross Fallacies and Untruths of the Pamphleter are discovered
and convinced.

By JOH. READING, once a Student of Magdalen Hall in Oxford.

It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy: and (...) after
vows to make enquiry. Prove. 20.25.

(...) are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this ^^^le Nation,
etc. Mal. 3.9.

(...) abhorrest Idol^ do thou commit Sacrilege? Romans (...)

London Printed by Da^ ^^^well, and are to be sold by George Sawbridg at the
sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill. 1661.

To the Right Honorable Sr EDWARD NICHOLAS Knight. Principal Secretary of State,
and one of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council. Grace, Mercy, and
Eternal Happiness in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Right Honorable,
IT has been the constant practice of the Adversary to oppose Truth, and to
use his power to the discouragement of Faithful Ministers and Professors
thereof: Sometimes like an envious Philistim, by casting dirt and earth into
the Fountain of living Waters, opened by the hard labors of godly men:
Sometimes by casting out of his mouth water as a flood after the Woman (the
Church) that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood: Sometimes by
supersemination of his pernicious Tares among the good Wheat in the Lords Field
Hence were, and now are those multitudes of Schisms and Errors, which in all
ages of the Gospel, have infested the Church of Christ. In this last age, Satan
knowing that his time is short, has more furiously raged, moving all his
engines, and using all his stratagems, for his siege against the holy City, and
Tents of the Saints. Amongst other his artifices, knowing how much innate
avarice inclines vulgar minds to sacrilege; he has lately tempted many to
endeavor the utter taking away of Tithes, the Ordinance of God, as ancient as
his Church on Earth; well-knowing, that by subtracting the Oil from the
Tabernacle Lamps, the light will soon go out, and the people must be left to a
darkness, worse then Egyptian. This fearful condition was coming on us so
precipitately, as that the enemies of Truth were not ashamed openly to boast,
That within one years time, they would not leave either Church or Priest in
England. But blessed be God who has broken the jaw-bones of these ravenous
Lions, and prevented their mischievous designs, by his gracious and mavelous
providence, restoring his Sacred Majesty in peace unto his long afflicted
people, and them by Him to their just Laws and Liberties; and therewith the
free exercise of the true Religion maintained by our former Princes of
ever-blessed Memory. In which respect, though diverse able Champions of Christ
and his Church, have encountered the adversaries of these Church Rites, with
such full abilities, as that they have left little to be added hereto, Quod non
fit dictum prius. Yet seeing this conflict has not so been ended, but that new
enemies still gird themselves to the battle, it is necessary that they be
invested and answered: Therefore having brought to me from an adversary of all
good, this piece which I endeavor to confute, as I conceive, by way of
challenge; I could neither with credit to our Cause, nor good conscience toward
God, be silent, or leave the truth without defense; my hope being, that I may
hereby undeceive some who have misunderstood the case, which this adversary
with his Jesuitical Arguments, so stingily and contumeliously, laboreth in.

Why I presume to prefix your Honors Name to this homely Tract, none need
demand, who know the great favors which your Honor has done for me; others I
desire to understand, that in point of gratitude, I humbly acknowledge the debt
which I am no otherways able to pay, then by acknowledgment, and my daily and
hearty Prayers to Almighty God, abundantly to retribute for me, by his
preserving your Honor, and all yours. Which he really professes, who is

Your Honors most obliged and humble Servant John Reading.

To the Christian Reader.
STanders by see more then the Actors, especially in businesses Polemical,
wherein sundry motions are not so much composed unto comeliness, Wisd. 16.20, 21
as present necessity of defense and offense. It is very rare therefore, that
any piecce of writing, like the Manna, fitteth every palate, or is as strong
meat to the strong, and as Milk to those who are of less exercised senses:
Hence are such variety of Censurers; one profits by that he Reads, another
is imbittered by Truth it self, because some Spirit of Error possesses him,
which like a Feavourish distemper, makes the most wholesome things seem
unsavory. It is an Insipid Discourse which falls under no censure. If in
this velitation some things are let fall, seeming more Sarcastical and sharp,
then the gravity of the cause may seem to allow. I desire the prudent reader to
consider, that I deal with an adversary who cares not whether, Dolus an
virtus, right reason or absurd and fallacious Mediums, fair language, or
railing scurrility, brings his deluded reader to an opinion of safe and
impregnable conclusions on his side.

If any ask why I meddle with this Argument, which some years past has been
discussed by so many learned writers? the business in hand speaks my defense.
This bold Champion of Gath, upon the matter cries out, Give me a man, 1 Samuel
17.10
in his opposing the Ministers of Christ, and reviling Gods Israel; and should
we sleep? The Enemy endeavors to bring Gods curse upon us, and should not we
arm and stand up in the Gap? For my part, however less able then many, yet for
Sions sake I cannot hold my peace, nor sleep, because the Ark, and Israel, 2 Samuel 11.11
and Judah abide under tents, and the servants of my lord are encamped in the
open fields. Here is an emergent danger of seducement cast in among the people,
by which a dreadful curse must inevitably fall upon them, because the Lord has
spoken it, and should we be silent? Consider who it is that says, Ye have
robbed me, -- Ye are cursed with a curse: Remember who it is that says to the
Prophet concerning those sinners whom he warns not, Ezekiel. 3.18
Their blood will I require at thy hands. -- Truly my hope is, if my endeavors
gain none of our adversaries, Matthew. 8.
who are carried on with the foul spirits of Malice and Avarice, like that
precipitate Hoard, to their own destruction, yet by Gods mercful assistance we
may stay and confirm our own, (...) Henod.
lest being deceived by others examples, they should likewise err in unjust
gains, embracing their own mischief. How ever, I would no have this bragging
enemy go away with his vain oppinion: --

Haec dici potuisse, and non potuisse r^felli.

I have endeavored to satisfy those who are not willing to be deceived, but
to know the Truth and their Duties; hoping that others with their greater
abilities, will stand up to defend the Church-rights, and so these blasts of
Jesuits and other Sectaries designs and practices against the Ministers, shall
prove but as wind shaking trees, and thereby causing them to take the stronger
root. Sure I am that such pernicious pieces as this against Tithes, have in
other cases, formerly awakened good Authors, and occasioned them to write many
things for the necessary defense of the Truth, and Rites of the Church of
Christ; so that the Adversaries thereof, in the issue, proved but as those
Geese which gave the Alarm to the Court of Guard in the Capitol, whereby both
that and the City were preserved. Of these things let the prudent Reader judge;
and the good Lord God open all our understandings, that knowing the Truth,
consenting and obeying, we may be happy in the God of Peace and Unity, our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

ERRATA.
Page 4. line 35. read, preached the Gospel. p. 6. l. 7. now ere. p. 8 l. 2 not
certain. p. 9. l. 15. nay, but do you not know? p. 11 l. 10. Pharisees and
Scribes. p. 12. l. 14. as received. p. 13 l. 20. which could not. p. 16. l. 30.
where they pleased. p. 17. l. 7. notoriously faulty. p. 18 l. 9. deserens.
ibid. l. 5. Nicene. p. 19. l. 33 when you mind but. p. 21. l. 11. Mr. Seldom.
p. 29. l. 3. at nunc. p. 31. l. 27. hives of drones. p. 40. antepenult. would
gladly. p. 51 l. 31. captions. p. 53. l. ult. to the faithful Moses. p. 55. l.
14. Minister. p. 56. l. 28. Josh. 2.1. p. 57. l. 15. levity of the Greeks.
ibid. l. 23. arrangeth. p. 59. l. 11. proportion between. p. 63. l. 30. not
unwillingly, grudgingly, or. p. 64. l. 27. as honesty. p. 66. l. 28. concerning
whom we only say. p. 68. l. 3. alta pa^. p. 74. l. 7. laws. p. 78. l. 16.
unhappy. p. 81. l. 11. faithful Ministers. ibid. l. 13. and all Ministe s.

The Great Case of Tithes Stated.
TO the Countrymen Farmers, etc.] The Author very considerably addresseth this
Pamphlet to those who are as Marchant-men to men of War; where he may probably
expect some purchase, and not many knocks.

It is for your sakes, etc. Job. 1.7. and 2.2. 1 Pet. 5.8.
] Satan might have said as much to sinners, and Pharisees to their Proselytes,
for whose sakes they traveled, not to save, but to destroy them; Are they not
much beholden to you? There is but one God, one truth, which whether you or we
follow, let the prudent Reader judge, when he has seriously considered what is
here objected and answered.

You might be truly informed,] Be but sincere to make that one word (truly)
good, and I will have no controversy with you.

Of all that I could find written, etc.] I, on your side; I do not conceive
that you would be so tenacious of your error, had you but so diligently read
the truth, which many have clearly written on this subject.

More than two years last past] You see me to confess either much want of
apprehension, or will to understand any, but those who were of your party and
opinion.

It shall be acceptabl to me to receive it] on which promise, I offer you this
following discourse.

The state of the question in hand, understand thus; Whether Tithes for Gospel
Ministers maintenance are due to them, by the unchangeable morality of Gods
Law? This we affirm; hence we claim; to this what ever you object, we shall
endeavor to answer; against this law, no reason can conclude, no authority or
decrees of man be of value. To your objections now; you say of Tithes. --

-- But they were for the Levites] That the Priests you say received no Tithes
of the People, for these belonged to the Levites: whence if you would infer,
that Tithes belong not unto Gospel Ministers, succeding them, it were a mere
caption to beguile your Reader; for we are to know, that first Priests were
Ministers of the Lord, Joel 1.9, 13. and 2.17 and next, in that Tithes are
confessed to have been due to the Levites, they must be confessed to have been
due to the Priests; for all the Priests were Levites, though all the Levites
were not Priests. The Priests were of an higher order and dignity, in the
service of the Tabernacle, in which they were to Minister; the Levites were to
bear the burdens of the Tabernacle, when it was to be removed; to prepare the
wood, water, fire, vessels and instruments, for the Sacrifice and holy rites,
etc. Now the Priests as they had a more excellent Office, so had they a more
honorable Portion. For first, they had the Tithe of their brethren, the Levites
part, the tenth part of the Tithe of all the Land; which because they were but
few, (as I shall show anon) was a large allowance unto them: So that as the
learned Mr. S. Nettles observes it, Ans. to the Jewish part the history Tithes.
it appears by practice, that the Priests received Tithes, as well as the
Levites; So much does Chimki intimate on Mal. 3.10. He commanded the people to
pay the tenth of their yearly increase unto the Levites, and the Priests; and
this is plainly taught by the Apostle, Heb. 7.5. For verily they which are the
children of Levi, which receive the office of the Priesthood, have a
Commandment to take according to the Law, Tithes of the people, etc. which by
Lyra is explained thus, Levitae generaliter recipiebant decimas a reliquo
populo: inter Levitas autem illi qui erant majores illius tribus, videlicet
Sacerdotes summi, filii Aaron, non solum accipiebant decimam cum Levitis a
populo, sed etiam, de part Levitarum recipiebant quae vocabatur decima
decimae. Number. 18. And therefore by all this it is evident, that the Priests
received Tithes of the people, and not only the inferior Levites. Hererto add,
that in the general grant of the tenth to the Children of Levi, for an
inheritance in respect of their service in the Tabernacle, Number. 18.21. The
whole Tribe both Priests and Levites are included. Here it seems the Pamphleter
followed Mr. Seldom too close, and caught some knock, which made him forget his
own words; page 12. when he comes there to speak of the Popes working under
color of Jewish laws, he says (By which Tithes were given to the Levitical
Priesthood) dic sodes, How given to the Priesthood, if no Priest received
them? Truly, Priests were by their vocation, more honorable then the rest of
the Levites, as being to perform the holy ceremonies within the Sanctuary,
therefore they received a more honorable portion than the rest of the Levits;
for they had the tenth of their part of the Tithes of all the land. Now because
they were but few in respect of the whole Tribe of Levi, of which were numbered
above 22000, Therefore considering the first fruits, and their fees out of the
Sacrifices, and other offerings, Number. 3.39, 43.
besides their part of the Tithes, they had a very large allowance appointed
them, by the Lord. I had done with this point, but that I desire the Reader to
consider how our adversary crosses himself; sometimes denying, sometimes
affirming the same thing. page 1. he says, No Tithes did the Priests receive
of the People; but page 3. he says, The Priesthood which had a Command to
take Tithes of their brethren. Thus his first foundation fails him.

So was their maintenance distinct] That which you said impertinently before,
you now make an introduction, Page 2.
to that which you would fetch in, scil. That the Levites maintenance was
Tyths, but the Priests was distinct from that; ergo, What? the Priests
maintenance was not Tithes, neither ought the Ministers succeding them to be
Tithes; but you have marred this argument, by your own former concessions.

Which were figures, etc.] Who, or what were figures, because you express not,
I owe no answer; only I conjecture what you reach at.

Changing the Priesthood, which had a command to take Tithes of their brethren,
Page 3.
there was made of necessty also a change of the Law] True there was made a
change of all that was changeable therein; that is, the ceremonial part
thereof; if you mean a change of all simply, you had need study the point woe
years more; for here would be a begging the question and paralogisme, a dicto
secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. There was a change of the Law, not
simply, and in all the branches thereof (as the Antinomians would have it) but
of the ceremonial and judicial part thereof. The morality is unchangeable in
the whole and every part thereof; save only, that which was even therein
ceremonial, and so alterable; as bringing titles to Jerusalem, etc. observation
of the Seventh-day Sabbath from the Creation, etc. But the morality is
unalterable and indispensable, in respect of all times, places and persons. In
the rest which follows, you seem a while to fight with your own shadow.

Nor did the Apostles (you say) go about to establish the law by which Tithes
were given] your foundation is here laid on a false ground, and such will your
superstruction be; you suppose Tithes given by the ceremonial Law; in Abraham's
example (as we shall hereafter see in its convenient place) it appears, that
Tithes were due some hundreds of years before God gave the ceremonial Law by
Moses; and God did not then give tithes to the Priesthood of Aaron, as a new
donation for their maintenance, but only determined them according to that
present age of his Church; as for the moral Law, on which Tithes are grounded,
Rom 3.31.
the Apostle says plainly -- Do we then make void the law through faith? God
forbid: yea we establish the law. Yea, out of the ceremonial law, he takes out
this morality, appliable for Ministers of the Gospel, Who goes a warfare any
time at his own charges? 1 Cor. 9.7. etc.
Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? etc. for it is
written in the law of Moses, Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the corn -- for our sakes no doubt this is written, etc. Do ye not
know, that they which Minister about holy things, live of the things of the
Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even so
has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel.

But freely preaches the Gospel, etc.] What infer you from hence? The
Apostles required no Tithes, ergo Gospel Ministers ought to require none.
First, I say, if the Apostles example (without respect to the difference of the
several states of the Church newly planted, and peaceably constituted) must
prescribe us in all things, then are we bound to suffer persecutions; to have
no settled charge, but to travel up and down to preach to all Nations; which
implies not a few impossibilities. Secondly, If your conclusion be, the
Apostles took no Tithes, ergo the Gospel-Minister has no right to them: The
answer is apparent in the forecited place, where Paul says, It was not because
he had no power, but for the exigents of those times. For,

1. Christianity was yet but a stranger on Earth, believers being very few, in
respect of the numerous heathens bred up in Idolatry.

2. Tithes, (whereof the heathens had some knowledge by the principles of
nature, or otherwise) were generally paid to the Idol-Priests of the Pagans and
Idol-service, as by Tithes paid to Hercules, and many other like may appear.
See Sir H. Spelman larger work of Tithes, c. 26.

3. Christians being generally in Cities, they had few predial Tithes, and so
they were incompetent to maintain Ministers

4. For the first 300 years until the reign of Constantine, persecution almost
every where raging, so that few Christians were masters of their own lives,
liberties or possessions, but were almost every day counted as sheep for the
slaughter; Romans 8.36. 2 King. 5.26.
almost every place streaming Christian blood: Therefore as Elisha said to
Gehazi, Was this a time to take? And that from new converted people, lately
cleansed from the filthy Leprosy of sin? Was it not rather a time to give if
they possibly could, to the relief of those they taught? Every thing has its
time; the time was not yet come, that a constituted Church should demand her
own. In the Wilderness wherein the people were in frequent travels, the very
seal of Gods Covenant Circumcision was intermitted by the space of 40 years
together, and in the Apostles times, their often journying, and perils of
waters, Josh. 5.7
perils of robbers, 2 Cor. 11.26, 32 33.
etc. and frequent persecution enforcing them to fly for their lives, gave
them no possible means of receiving Tithes, but as the Levites received them
not in their travel, but when they were settled in Canaan; so the Apostles,
after Christ's ascension being in continual travel through one part or another
of the world, and one while in prison, another while in flight and persecution;
what, convenience in such condition had either Christians to pay or Ministers
to receive Tithes, which were to be taken in the seasons of their maturities,
and only on those places where they grew to be due? nor ere that time came,
they who in right ought to receive them, were by the guidance of the holy
Ghost, in some other Country preaching the Gospel, many hundred miles from the
place where their Tithes grew due. See it in S. Peter's example, walking through
all quarters, Act. 9.32. etc. Sometimes at Lydda, or Joppa; sometime at
Jerusalem, at Babylon, or Egypt sometimes; 1 Pet. 5.13. or the Apostles Paul
and Barnabas, sometimes at Antioch, Seleucia in Syria, Salamis, Paphus in
Cyprus, Perga in Pamphilia, Antioch in Pisidia, Iconium, Act. 13. Act. 14.6.
Lystra, Derbe in Lycaonia, Phrygia, Galatia, Mysiae, Samothracia, Philippi in
Macedonia of Greece; S. Bartholmew in India; Jerome Catal. Script. Eccles.
S. Thomas in Persia, Hyrcania, Bactria; S. Matthew in Ethiopia, etc. What
should these men have done with their Tithes? Where should they have had Barns
for them, who were so little masters of their selves? What security could they
have had, either to gather or keep such things from rapine and spoil? If in a
Church and State so lately settled, so happily governed in peace, we have had so
much experience of plundering and sequestration, What think you could have come
to the Apostles and their primitive successors, if before the Churches peace,
they had claimed their Tithes?

5. Charity of Christians in those first ages of the Church was so abundant
toward those that taught them, ( Gal. 4.14, 15.) that they needed not any other
supply by Tithes; but when that began to grow cold, it was but reason that
their due to Tithes should be revived, and their proper right claimed and
received. How long this charitable contribution continued, it is uncertain, but
as it decayed, good Princes by Gods providence in the overspreading increases
of Christianity, did well to make laws for the maintenance of Gods worship; and
for the same, what so good a way could they take, as that by Tithes, which Gods
wisdom had appointed? So Princes gave not Tithes to the Clergy, by their laws,
but only as need required, restored them to the just Proprieters. God gave
them, though in several ages he put it into the minds of Councels to require
them, and of religious Princes to make coercive laws, to bind their Subjects to
pay them.

6. Another cause of intermission of their claim, was that high opinion of the
devouter Clergy of voluntary poverty; which dream of theirs, Gods providence
made use of, to make their persons venerable, and their doctrine of more esteem
among the Gentiles, when they saw that their teachers aimed not at their own
ease, safety, honor or enriching, but only saving of souls.

7. Lastly, Fear of scandal caused, not only St. Paul to forbear his claim, and
using his just power 1 Cor. 9.12. 2 Cor. 11.12. but others also. Hence probably
it came to to pass, that so little mention is made of Tithes in the primitive
age of the Church, or the exaction of them; yet we must remember that St. Paul
says; it was not that he had not power to have used his right, as he plainly
shows; 1 Cor. 9.4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. So that if it be granted that in
those several obstructions, for some ages we neither read of any claim, or use
of Tithes: What can our adversaries hence infer? No use or claim, ergo, no jus
decimandi? Neither read we of any use of the Sabbath, in all the history of the
Patriarchs recorded by Moses, or of any Priestly or Prophetical function,
neither taxing the neglect, or exhorting to the use or observation thereof; but
can we reasonably conceive, that these ancient Saints either so long omitted
the sanctification of the Sabbath, or Priestly exercises of Religion? no use,
therefore no opinion of the right. What think you of the 40 years intermitting
Circumcision (whereof we have before spoken) did that take away all opinion of
the right?

-- Weekly Offerings for the Saints, etc.] for the poor Saints: What argument
is this against Tithes? Good Christians now relieve the necessities of the
Saints, where collections are made for them; Does this impeach their duty of
paying Tithes? Nay, but this ought ye to do, and not to leave the other undone.
-- This way of contribution continued in the Church, etc.] how long, it is not
uncertain; but certainly the Pamphleter was not well advised, to say that it
continued till the great persecution under Maximinian and Dioclesian about the
year 304. before which time his vouchers, Tertullian, Origin and Cyprian were
dead; which appears (says he) by the writings of Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian.
Tertullian flourishes about the year 208. then wrote he against Marcion:
Origin flourished about the year 232. and died about the year 252. And Cyprian
was crowned with Martyrdom (by Eusebius computation) in the year 259. in the
eight persecution under Valerian, as other Chronologers reckon. Dioclesian
caused that long and bloody Persecution, which was the tenth in order. Your
self confess in your next Paragraph save one, Page 4.
that Cyprian lived about the year 250. Now suppose that the specified
contribution did continue till the year 304. how can that appear by the
writings of Tertullian, Origin and Cyprian? Did dead men write for your
Assertion? But learn to bring your untruthes closer together; and at least to
hold the Poets rule, to write ficta possibilia: possible, though not true
things.

Page 5.
By whose writings it also appears, that there was not the least use or
practice of the payment of Tithes in those former ages] Hence you would
conclude that there ought to be none now, but that Ministers must live on the
abundant charity and contributions of charitable people now. To which I first
answer, Show us that charity of people toward their Ministers now adays, and
then urge their example against Tithes; but while you take from us all that you
can, their example is improperly pleaded against us, which you will not have to
hold for us. Next I say, that by their writings it neither does, nor can appear
which you here say; and how prove you this your negative? -- There was not the
least use or practice of payment of Tithes in those former ages, besides those
which we have to show for the contrary. Know you not, that many excellent
writings are lost, and so never come to our sight? Like diverse famous Cities
mentioned by Strabo and other Geographers, whereof little else now remains, but
the bare names: read the industrious Erasmus his complaint, in the end of
Jerome's Catalogue of Ecclesiastical writers, where after other expressions of
our loss of eminent Authors, he concludes -- Verum hic dolor extimulare debet
onmes bonis addictos autoribus, ut id certe quod superest, tanto legant
avidius, quanto minus est quod temporum ruina nobis fecit reliquum; moreover
who knows not, that both sacred and Ecclesiastcal, and other Authors wrote many
Treatises, pro re nata, and as enemies of the truth gave them emergent
occasions of necessary defense thereof, without which most probably they had
therein been silent: For what need they have written, or armed themselves or
others, when none opposed? But now dato, and non concesso; Suppose that we read
not in the writings of ancient Councels or Fathers any the least use or
practice of the payment of Tithes; What? Therefore no Tithes were paid in those
former ages? Nay, but you do not know, that all that which our Savior Christ
himself did, never came to our knowledge? Many other signs truly did Jesus in
the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this book, John 20.30.
and 21.25. There seems an impossibility of writing all: done, but not written
concludes, a non scripto, ad non factum, non valere argumentum. Again, in the
writing of the history of the Creation, Moses mentions not the Creation of
Angels; What will you say that Angels were not created, because in Moses
writings we read not of their Creation? Nay, but Moses says Genesis 2.1. Thus the
heavens and the earth were finished and all the host of them. You may say, and
that truly, in that general word all, are comprehended the particulars, though
not nominaliter and expressly named; for indeed omne, or totum est, extra quod
nihil est; and why, I demand, where the Apostle says, Gal. 6.6. Let him that
is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good things;
that is, in all his goods, for he would not teach any to offer e rapina
holocaustum, to rob others to pay his teacher: and why may not the Apostles all
comprehend the unspecified particulars, Tithes and Offerings, as well as Moses,
all comprehends unspecified Angels? By this it appears how feeble your main
argument is to prove, no use or practice of payment of Tithes, because we read
them not commanded or paid in express words in the New Testament, and seldom
in ancient councels of the first age of the Church; yet ye will not deny Tithes
expressly specified and paid; Heb. 7. Abraham paid Tithes, or gave a tenth of
all to Melchisedech.

page 5.
Of Ambrose you say, But his authority he produces wholly from Moses writings]
And would you desire better authority then Moses writings, which Christ the
Lord of the Prophets cites? See whither blind zeal precipitates men?

But you say, They imposed their own opinion with so heavy Penalties] How were
they their own opinions, if from the Law given to the Israelites, they take (as
you confess) their whole Doctrine? 2 Pet. 1.19.
St. Peter would teach you better, That no prophecy of the Scripture is of any
private interpretation; But h ly men of God spoke, as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. And what say these men of God as to this matter, more or less then
God spoke by the Prophets Moses and Malachi, Ye are cursed with a Curse, Deuteronomy.
33.11. Mal. 3.
ye have robbed me in Tithes and Offerings?

page 6.
You say Tithes, Easter, Pentecost] Now for another sigary: Our question is
concerning Tithes; What are Easter and Pentecost to that? Will he not bring the
Poles Artick, and an-Arcick together if he please?

But you say, It was not a general received Doctrine that Tithes ought to be
paid] Nor as it seems by you, is it now; it suffices us that the devouter sort
(as your self confess,) gave Tenths or greater parts of their annual increase;
And who knows not that the better part of the people is very seldom the
greater.

You say, -- Fathers, Popes, Bishops] Praesto: pretty Legerdemain: you shuffle
in Popes, hoping as it seems in that company to render Fathers and Bishops
odious to the vulgar; but if we consider the original of that name, Papa was
once a name of honor and reverence, importing only Patrem Patriae, a father of
the Country; and so was it long used in the better part, as Cypriano Papae,
Cyprian l 2. ep. 7. 16. l. 3. ep. 11, 12.
so ad Cornelium Papam. This use of that name continued until after the time of
Gregory, (the last of the good Roman Bishops and the first of the bad.) When
Boniface 3. obtained of the Emperor Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be
called Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, which his predecessor Gregory gave for the
mark of Antichrist, or his forerunner, then was his Seat quickly exalted to
Supremacy; not only above all Bishops of the Western Churches, but also to a
claim of Superiority over Kings, Princes and People: hence the name Papa, Pope,
began to fall into an odium with all those who received not the mark of the
beast, Rev. 13. But if Popes did in any thing declare or determine Truth and
Equity, would you eo nomine, reject it? Remember that the Pharisees, Scribes,
sitting in Moses Chair (though bitter enemies to the Person and Doctrine of
Christ) were to be heard: Yea, If the devil confess Christ to be the Son of the
most high, would you reject it, as devilish? Nay, but consider that though the
Devil spoke it, it is the truth of God, which when Satan utters, he speaks
not his own. God has so overruled some wicked men, as to make them
instrumental to that eminent good, which he, who can do nothing but good,
foreordained to do by them. See it in the example of Judas, the high Priests,
Herod and Pontius Pilat, Act. 4.27, 28.

You say, None of the first 8 general Councils of the Church, did so much as
mention the name of Tythes] While none contradicted, there was no cause why
they should speak of them; yet were the issue and determination of your
controversy put upon antiquity, we could say enough thereof: We can prove that
Tithes are more ancient then the law of Moses, who shows that Abraham paid
them; and you cannot show them taken away by any law of God: why general
Councels did not make Canons for them, Agobardus cited by Mr. S^lden.
some give this reason, Nulla enim compulit necessitas, fervente ubique
religiosa devotione, etc. indeed the actual payment of Tithes was not exacted
in the infancy of the Church of Christ, but respited until the greater
interests of Faith and Obedience to the Gospel were settled in a Church
constituted: yet Paul shows that there was much due unto him, in respect of
his Ministry, 1 Cor. 9.
but concluded that he had not used that liberty, but as the time, and present
condition of the Gospel required, suffered all things, that he might not hinder
the propagation thereof; and that he might stop the mouths of backbiters. Add
hereto, that there appeared more probability that men of the world and Pagans,
would more readily entertain the truth which cost them nothing, and when the
Ministers could not be suspected to preach for gain, honor or any selfishness,
but only for their auditors Salvation.

That which you say, That Tithes were never so much as named in the first 8
general Councels] makes nothing against their right; yet you may know, that
though we avow not the Canons attributed to the Apostles, to be indeed the
children of those fathers, yet that the first of them are very ancient, and
near the Apostles times, it may appear in that Dionysius exiguus, who lived
within 400 years of the Apostles, translated them out of the Greek, and
received long before in the Eastern Church: Sr. Henry Spelmans large work of
Tithes, c. 20. of which City you may see Plin. lib. 3. c. 1. Stra. lib. 3. etc.
Bin. To. 4.
See thereof the fifth Canon; likewise the Council Agrippinense is cited, Anno
356. Decreeing that Tithes should be called Dei census, Gods rent. The
Concilium Hispalense, or Spalense, as Garsias cites it, held about the time of
Gregory 1. about the year 603. in a fragment thereof says, Omnes primitias and
decimas, tam de pecoribus quam de frugibus, dives simul and pauper Ecclesiis
suis recte offerant: The same cites Mal. 3. and thereon says, Sicut enim
Dominus omnia dedit, ita de omnibus decimam exigit, ut de fructibus agri, etc.
siquis autem haec omnia non decimaverit, praedo Dei est, fur, and latro, and
maledicta quae intulit Dominus Cain -- congeruntur. That is, all the first
fruits and Tithes, both of Cattle and Fruits, let both rich and poor, duly
offer (or set out) to their Churches; for as the Lord gave all, so of all he
requires the tenth, as of the fruits of the field, etc. If any man will not
pay Tithes of all these, he is a Thief, and robber of God, and the curses which
the Lord brought on Cain -- are heaped upon that man. The second Council of
Matiscon, Carranz. Sum. Council.
Anno 588. by some accounted a general Council, (because therein all the
Metropolitan Bishops met) says Canon 5. Leges namque divinae consulentes
Sacerdotibus ac Ministris Ecclesiarum, pro haereditaria portione omni populo
praeceperunt, decimas fructuum suorum locis sacris prestare -- quas leges
Christianorum congeries longis temporibus custodivit intemeratas: unde
statuimus, ut decimas Ecclesiasticas omnis populus inferat. That is, Divine
Laws providing for Priests and Ministers of Churches, have commanded all the
people for an hereditarie portion, to bring the Tithes of their fruits to the
holy places, which laws, multitudes of Christians have kept inviolable a long
time. Therefore we decree, that all the people shall bring in their
Ecclesiastical tenths. Council. Turonense held in the time of Charles the great,
An. 813. says, Nonas ac decimas, qui res Ecclesiasticas tenent, solvere
rectoribus Ecclesiarum ordinati sunt. It were easy to add hereto many more
Testimonies of ancient Councels; but because others have sufficiently traveled
herein, I shall refer the Reader who is desirous to be further satisfied, to
the large work of the learned Sir H. Spelman, c. 20. Dr. Tilsley Animad. on
hist. of Tithes, Preface and Catalogue; only let me have leave to inform them,
who know not what is the difference between a general and a provincial
Council. In a general Council omnes provinciarum Episcopi conveniebant: yet the
forecited Council of Matiscon ordained, Ut quolibet triennio, universalis
Synodus celebraretur; which would not be intended concerning a General Council
in the first acceptance, except that Matiscon Council may be allowed for a
general one, as some account it: for a Provincial could not prescribe a General
one, though the General might prescribe the Provincial.

The Provincial thus differed from the General, in numbers of voices and
suffrages, as in that it was of inferior authority to the General. But
concerning this matter, I shall content me to observe, That

1. No humane Constitutions, can any more give credit to precepts divine, on
which all must ground, then many Torches can give light to the Sun, which can
be discerned by none but its own light, nor can all testimonies or decrees of
men impair the truth of God.

2. Testimonies of men, are not to be valued by number, but weight; nor weighed
by any, but the standard of the Sanctuary, the word of God; and so far forth to
be received, as they hold weight therewith; that is, divine truth.

3. Christ promised his presence, where two or three should be gathered
together in his name, whose truth is not limited unto, or by multitudes in
Councels: As the little Molehill may as truly have the Sunbeams shining upon
it, as the vast Mountain; so may few gathered together in Christ's name, be as
truly assisted by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, as where a multitude are met
together. Yet here are two Cautions very necessary to be held: 1. That not
every assembly which says, lo here is Christ, is to be taken for such as are
indeed gathered together in the name of Christ; but such are so to be esteemed,
who sincerely hold the truth of Christ 2. Though holding the truth of Christ
with a comfortable assistance of Gods Spirit, as to their own particular
Interest; yet may they not presume to make and give Laws for the Churches
public discipline: But if Christ be with them, they must show it in their
peaceable obedience to authority and order; either actively, (if with good
conscience they may) or passively, if otherwise they cannot.

4. We may note, that in the general Councels venerable for truth and
antiquity, some have dissented and departed.

1 King. 18.19. 1 King. 22.6, 8
5. The major part have not always been the best, nor the lesser the worst:
Ahabs Prophets were hundreds against one Elijah, and so against one Micaiah.

6. General Councels, though exceeding the Provincial in number and suffrages,
yet may they not excel them in weight; there may be error of many (as may
appear in the second Nicene Council, can 7. Decreeing for Images; and the
Council of Trent, etc.) and there may be truth in few. The Apostles in the
Council at Jerusalem were not many, but sufficient to determine for the world,
because assisted by the Spirit of God.

7. Provincial Councels as occasion was offered them, Decreed that Tithes
should be duly paid; which if the General did not meddle withal, it may be
conceived, that it was because they had no occasion thereof presented to them
by any complaint: and they being then in pursuit of the enemies of truth, would
not divert to the care of things thereto subordinate, and much inferior.

These things laid down, the prudent Reader may be satisfied concerning this
argument of Councels, and perceive the weakness thereof, and the falsehood of
that assertion, that these Councels did not so much as name or mention Tithes,
until the Lateran Council, Ann. 1119. and after a little pawse he says, Ann.
1180. Oh for the whetstone!

-- For the use of the poor] This ointment (said Judas) might have been sold
for much and given to the poor, but this he said, page 7.
not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, etc. Mat. 26 9.
Joh. 12.6. Now whether the poor are here intended and mentioned for love and
care of them, or malice to the Ministers, against whom you bring this argument,
God knows, and all good men know, that a Sacrilegious person is a thief. I fear
your Charity would be contented that any one (the devil not excepted) should
have your Tithes, would he but send his Tything-Carts abroad for them, so that
Ministers might be deprived of them, your work were done: If some Charles
Martell would take the Churches estate to pay Soldiers, you would resolve upon
the question it were Christian policy. But to your often repeated objection, we
say that there were Tithes allotted for the poor, distinct from the Ministers
Tithes, who have willingly relieved the poor, and would do still, but that you
have so pillaged them, that you have scarce left themselves bread.

You say farther -- not any (Councels) that expressly supposed them a duty of
common right, before the Council of Lateran, held in the year 1215.] Were this
so much as probable, it would condemn the Christian world, and the Prelates of
much defect herein. We are too sure that many are faulty herein now, because
Satan has blinded the minds of many, and stirred up sundry impostors to write
and speak against the ordinance of God for support of the Ministry, his design
being to steal away the oil from the Tabernacle lamps, that their light
failing, his Kingdom of darkness may be advanced: but if now, Governors should
set out some more strict decrees for Ministers, more easy recovery of their
Tithes then formerly have been, seeing the apostasy of so many sectaries; would
those decrees be any proof in future ages, that Tithes were never supposed a
duty of common right, before the year 1659. or some following time.

Yet (you say) were they free to dispose them, were they pleased until the
Popish Councels restrained their liberty] Say now, bona fide, were Tithes, due
to Priests and Levites under the Law, or Ministers of the Gospel, ever free to
be disposed of by the people, in a settled state of any Church constituted,
where the people pleased? If you mean tenths for the poor, they are out of the
verge of this present controversy, and so you trifle: If you mean Tithes for
Ministers, and maintenance of Gods service, we justly require your proof; we
know that under the law God never allowed any such liberty to his people;
neither can it appear in the Gospel, that ever he left the Ministers thereof to
a less certain and determinate maintenance, then he did the Priests and
Levites; here now being the Ministry of a more excellent Testament established
upon better promises; and how else did Paul avow his power therein, 1 Cor. 9.
however in those times of the Churches troubles, he used it not?

You say farther -- The old Roman doctrine, that Tithes ought to be paid] And
was the law for paying Tithes, old Roman doctrine? Was Moses a Roman? Or was
Christ a Roman, who allowed the same in the Pharisees practice? But, to take
your meaning, with favorable interpretation of unadvised words; I must put you
in mind, that the old Roman doctrine was pure, Romans 1.8.
when S. Paul commended their faith, and so it continued unto their latter
apostasy. I so much reverence antiquity, as to avow, that, quod antiquissimum,
verissimum. To your following Allegations, I say, what laws and canons for
Tithes among the Saxons determined, does not prove that Tithes are not due to
Ministers by divine right? And as to the rest, I say, if they made laws to bind
the people to obey Gods moral Law, they did well therein: and concerning the
people so bound, it is pity that they (as we now) needed such coercive laws to
restrain their Sacrilege.

To that which you say, page 10. That notwithstanding the many Laws, Canons and
Decrees of Kings, it was left to the owner to confer it where he pleased;] We
answer to these tautologies, if they were true, that is no wonder, if there was
no absolute reformation at once, specially there where the peoples great Diana,
secular interest, has a part. But now consider, Of what strength is your
argument, a facto ad jus faciendi? They did (say you) leave it to the owner, to
confer it where he pleased; ergo, it was just and lawful so to do; that
consequence will appear notoriously faulty in other instances. For example, The
people of Judah built them High places and Images, and Groves on every high
hill: yea, 1 King. 14.23.
in Asa's good reign, The high places were not removed: 1 King. 15.14.
In that miscellanie of Religion, 2 King. 17.29.32. (to which may be added our
modern confusion) Every Nation made Gods of their own, and put them in the
houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, etc. and made unto
themselves of the lowest of them, Priests of the high places. So Jeroboam made
Priests of the lowest of the people, 2 Chro. 33.17.
which were not of the sons of Levi; whosoever would, he consecrated him, 1
King. 12.31.
and he became one of the Priests of the high places. And this became a sin to
the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off: he made him Priests for the Devils,
and for the Calves which he had made: 2 Chronicles. 11.15. Under him the people fell
to Idolatry; their fact concluded it not just: and in the Prophet Malachies
time, the people did not pay their Tithes and Offerings: Did that exempt them
from the curse, Mal. 3.
because there were multitudes of offenders? No, no, it brought it upon the
whole Nation; no examples of multitudes shall excuse Sacrilege.

And Parishes (you say) are but of late erection] What would not he make his
ignorant Reader swallow? Page 10.
Damasus speaking of Dionysius who lived about the year 260. says, Presbyteris
Ecclesias divisit, and caemiteria parochiasque and dioeceses constituit: he
distributed unto Priests, Churches and Churchyards, and appointed Parishes and
Dioceses. Vit. Pontif. Dionys. init.
So also Platina in the life of Dionysius testifies, in the 2d. Council of
Carthage, the argument of the 11 Canon is, Bin. Council. To. 1.
Vt nullus parochiam alienam praesumat invadere. That no man should presume to
invade another Parish: which Council though but Provincial, was confirmed by a
general Council in Trullo: C^rranz. sum. council.
this was held in Cyprians time, that ancient Martyr. In the decrees of Urban
in the year 230. it is said of lands dedicated and given to the Church -- ipsae
verores inditione singularum parochiarum, etc. In the Ancyran Council, Ib.
Carran.
held about the year 308. approved by the Necene, it was decreed that Bishops
and their Ministers, should endeavor utterly to root out that devilish
invention and art of sortiledge -- e parochiis suis. Ib. Carran. page 157.
In the 3 Canon of the Council of Antioch, we read thus, Si quis presbyter aut
diaconus, aut omnino quilibet ex Clero parochiam propriam derens vel omnino
demigrans in alia parochia, etc. This Council was approved in the sixth general
Council of Constantinople. In the Council of Sardis, it was ordained, Canon
18.19. That no Bishop should ordain a Minister, ex alia parochia, without the
consent of his Bishop. In the Laodicean Council, Canon 14. see the like. It
were easy to weary the Reader with such proofs: And is not it a notorious
falsehood to say that Parishes are but of late erection? One thing is here
considerable, that when there were but few Christians, Parishes were of much
greater circuit of land, then since the more abundant plantation of the Gospel,
wherein for the ease and accommodation of Parishioners, many Chapels of ease
erected, have since by Acts of Parliaments been made Parish Churches, subject
to the Bishops and their Diocesses.

Page 11.
The people (you say) then generally being Papists, did yield their obedience]
Yet that God had ever some good corn among those tares I conceive you have so
much faith to believe, (if you believe that he had in all ages a Catholic
Church,) though possibly you have not so much Charity as to confess that he had
such excellent Saints then, as are among you now in this last and worst of ages.

You say, What before was owned for a gift, was now claimed as a debt] Show, if
you are a true man, who ever owned it as a gift or free benevolence of men,
except those who knew not, or would not acknowledge the divine institution of
Tithes: we own them as Gods gift, and therefore as man's due to be paid unto us.
God made us not your almes-men, but in things spiritual our peoples rulers;
Heb. 13.7, 17.
watchmen and guides set over them in the Lord. 1 These. 5.12. And so not to
live of your benevolence, but duty, as spiritual Parents; and show if you can,
why that duty should be less determinate and certain, then it was under the law
to Priests and Levites: that he ever reserved out of the rest which he gave to
Israel, to himself and to his service, never leaving it arbitrary to man's will
or wisdom to appoint, no not to Moses himself; And how prove you that he leaves
us to your will and charity now? All acknowledge a Law for paying Tithes to
those who serve about holy things, show us in any one Text of the Old or New
Testament where that law is repealed, or the whole of Ministers maintenance
left to the peoples pleasure?

Seeing (you say) themselves in a snare] To you it seems that the ordinance of
God is a snare; this discovers your dangerous condi ion, and is an impious
expression.

Again you say, The Pope has been imperious, or in a great height of pride]
What is that to us? If so, it was his sin, for which he is responsible to God,
who can make wicked men instrumental to some eminent good; as in the example of
Judas (as to the passion of Christ for our Redemption and Salvation) appears;
to whom we may add the rest, who did therein that which the hand and Council of
God determined before to be done. And who can deny but that he might also work
good by the Popes commanding Tithes to be paid for the support of the preaching
of the Gospel, to the then living elect, the powerful instrument of Salvation,
however it proved a savor of death to many, possibly of those that preached
it, but obeyed it not.

Next you trouble your readers about Canon-laws, and Parochial payment of
Tithes settled. What, suppose you that no good could be professed, done or
settled in that time, wherein error and wickedness had miserably overspread a
Church? I suppose you will not on second thoughts conclude so; when you mind
not the propagation of the Gospel in Israel, when the Jews, Princes, Priests
and people generally persecuted the faith of Christ,

Next you talk of the poor; Page 11.
For whose sakes (you say) Tithes were chiefly given] If you mean that these
specified Parliaments did settle Tithes chiefly for the relief of the poor, you
do but trifle; knowing that Tithes were anciently appointed for several uses.
1. Ornament of Churches. 2. For the poor. 3. For love Feasts. 4. For Ministers
maintenance. What ever Parliaments enacted, must be judged by Gods laws: human
law is to our duty a mensura mensura^^ a lege divina, ^ae. q. 19.
whose end is the utility of men; therefore to that supreme power and justice
must we look, and in that rest. So that this your argument is childish and
impertinent, except you could show that we take human Laws and Statutes of
Parliaments, to be the ground of our right to Tithes; we say after that ancient
Council of Matiscon forecited; God has appointed them for our inheritance, or
hereditary portion.

You say moreover, He that did not pay, no great punishment could they inflict
on him, but excommunication] You mean I suppose that men could not, you cannot
be ignorant of the power of God to punish the Sacrilegious, who has denounced
the curse on them: Mal. 3.
but was excommunication no great punishment, 1. Cor. 5.
in the Apostles sense delivering to Satan? Possibly you account this
punishment the less, because herein the sacrilegious were but delivered to
their own Master. As for the exemptions you mention, we dislike them as well as
you: as little to your purpose is that which you say in your following censure
of Popish imitation of Jews, l. 1. c. 7. c. 8. etc. ib. c. 4. etc.
which as to those rites which your Durand cites in his Rationale, we utterly
dislike.

But you say, Henry 8. being a Papist. etc.] One thing is remarkable, you use
to call all Popery, which suits not with your fancy. If Henry 8. did any thing
according to Gods Will and Word, that is no more Popish, than that was
Devilish, which the Devil said, Mar. 5.7. Henry 8. was a Papist, and he made a
Law, that every man should set out his Tithes; What is the conclusion yon drive
to; ergo, paying of those duties is Popish; Poor Sophistry! You are not
ignorant that this were a Sophism, Non causae pro causa: His being a Papist,
was not the cause of his making that law for Tithes, but (as your self confess)
because he believed that Tithes were due to God and his holy Church. In that
you call that the Popes doctrine, (which by your own party is confessed to be
grounded on the Law of God,) you commend the Popes Doctrine, though with an
intent to calumniate ours.

And you say, First of our Parliament laws for Tithes, Page 12.
and that upon which the rest are grounded.] Here is another notorious untruth:
Was our Henry 8. before Athelston, who reigned in this land about the year of
our Lord 924? Would you have your readers believe that Henry 8. made a Law,
about 600 years before he was born, and crowned King? Was he King of this land
before Edgar, living about the year 959? or before Canutus, who reigned here
about An. 1016? or William the Conqueror, Henry 1 Henry 2. Henry 3. Hist of
Tithes c. 8.
by William Seldom cited as Lawmakers for the payment of Tithes to the
Ministers? One thing out of the learned S. H. Spelman, I desire the Reader to
consider; King Henry 3. Large work of Tithes.
(says he) In the 9th. year of his reign, by that sacred Charter made in the
name of himself and his heirs for ever, granted all this anew unto God. We
have granted, says he, unto God, and by this our present Charter have
confirmed, for us and for our heirs, for evermore, that the Church of England
shall be free, and shall have all her holy rites inviolable. Magna. c. 1. And
that this Charter might be immortal, and like the sanctified things of the
Temple forever inviolable; It was not only fortified by the Kings Seal, (the
sacred anchor of the Kingdom) but by his solemn Oath, and the Oath of his Son,
and the Nobility of the Kingdom: yea, the whole Kingdom yielded themselves to
stand accursed, if they should at any time after impeach this grant; and
therefore in the 25 Edward 1. a special Statute was made for confirmation of
this Charter; wherein, among other things it is ordained, that the Bishops
shall excommunicate the breakers thereof; and the very form of the sentence is
there prescribed, according to which, upon the 13 May. An. 1304. Edward 1.
Boniface the Archbishop of Canterbury, and five other Bishops solemnly
denounced this curse in Westminster Hall, the King himself with a great part of
the Nobility being present: First against all them that should willingly and
maliciously deprive or spoil Churches of their rites. Secondly, Against those
that by any art or device, infringed the liberties of the Church or Kingdom
granted by magna Charta. Thirdly, Against those that should make new Statutes
against the Articles of these Charters, etc.

And now consider, you that have English hearts to love and pity your Country:
what these Pamphleters aim at, who lay stumbling blocks before the people, that
they may bring the curse upon this Nation, which must inevitably come upon it,
(if sacrilegious hands be permitted to take away the Churches rites) for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Mal. 3.

If Tithes had no other ground, but only the laws of Princes, and that they
were not before the enacting of those laws, and solemn dedications due; yet
consider 1. What came to Ananias and Saphira; Act. 5.4. etc.
the Apostle told him, that whilst the land remained in his hands, it
appertained unto him as a true proprietor, and when is was sold and in money,
that was also his own; it was then arbitrary, and he might have otherwise
disposed of it; but when he had given it to the advancement and service of the
Gospel, he made it sacred, and all due to God and his assigns; and therefore
keeping back any part thereof, he lied to God: and if it were sacriledg to take
away any part of that which had been dedicated to holy uses, by a man's own
donation and dedication of the whole; What is it to rob and take away from the
Church that which God his self has dedicated and consecrated to the same,
(suppose in money, glebe, or other land given toward the maintenance of Gods
worship, or Tithes) on which came also a second bond, by the Vow, Oath, and
free will offering of the whole body of a republic in the representative
thereof, consisting of King, Nobles, Clergy and Commons lawfully assembled in
Parliament? But some say though our former Kings and Parliaments were bound by
their vow and dedication of Tithes, or Lands given to the Church or Churches,
because they lifted up their hands to God to give the same, what is that to us?
very much: for lawful vows of fathers descend and are obligatory to their
Children and posterity; and so in the blessing to the performers, as we may see
in the example of the Rechaebites, Jer. 35.18, 19. and in the curse to the
violaters of the same; therefore because Joshua and the Princes of Israel
(though deceived by the Gibeonites, a people among the rest of the Canaanites,
devoted by Gods own commandment, to destruction) had lifted up their hands to
God, to spare them alive, they were bound by their Oath, so to do; and so were
their Children to succeeding Generations. So that when Saul, after many
Generations, out of a perverse zeal, slew them, 2 Samuel 21 1, 2.
God punished that fact even in David's reign, Three years, year after year
there came a famine upon Israel, until it was revenged on the family of Saul.
Many instances of Gods justice in this kind near us of eminent great and
honorable families utterly ruined (the main cause, to men appearing, being
sacriledg, impropriating Tithes and laying into their own hands those
destructive morsels of gl^be and other lands formerly dedicated with a solemn
curse in the Acts of Mortmain) might hereto be added, even from Henry 8. who
(before his giving away Tithes, and things consecrated to Gods worship unto
impropriators hands) prosperous in an hopeful issue, yet, as to posterity,
that doom was determined which was pronounced by the Prophet Jeremiah on
Coniah, Write this man Childless --. Jer 22.30.
The curse so many years before solemnly and publicly imprecated, came upon
diverse of our principal Nobility, and other illustrious Families, and still
does, whose names I spare; only I hint this, that all whom it concerns, may be
warned to disgorge those sacred morsels, which they yet hold, lest they prove
destructive to them and theirs; and that the Reader may at once perceive of
what validity all the rest of the like arguments are, wherewith this Pamphleter
and his associates endeavor to puzzle the minds of illiterate readers; and
that all may consider what severe whips God yet holds over those who hunger
for sacred morsels. You know the emblem, the Eagle snatching up a piece of
flesh from the Alter, to carry up to her nest of young ones, with it carried a
coal of fire cleaving to the flesh, which consumed the nest, and destroyed the
whole air.

But you say, Some of our famous Reformers, page 14.
did in their days, bear their Testimony against Tithes etc.] I answer, first I
conceive that you call them famous reformers, ironically, and by way of
irrision. Next I say, whatever they, or the Bohemians by you cited, speak
against Tithes, is of no more value then man's testimony against Gods Ordinance.
Lastly, that one Bernard saw not all, it is no wonder, the most learned know
but in part now, that the sun from the rising appears not in his full light at
once, none can rationally wonder; and why should we that the reformation was
not perfected all at once?

You say, In your following heads of recapitulation, He will find the knowledge
of those things which be needfull] Yes, no doubt to confirm him in your error;
but there can be no necessity of sinning.

Tithes (you say) were paid to the Levites, that did the common services of the
Tabernacle, etc. how the payment of Tithes to Ministers, succeeds the payment
of Tithes to the Levites, (you say, we) had need to consider] We consider the
Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. which is, They which minister about holy
things, live of the things of the Temp^^: and they which wait at the altar, are
partakers with the altar. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Secondly, we consider, that
Melchisedech received Tithes, in the figure of Christ, the King of
Righteousness and Peace: and that Tithes are due to Christ and his assigns,
the Ministers of the Gospel, not as a Levitical, but as a moral duty, belonging
to God* long before either Levites or ceremonial Law were in being; and
therefore they continue under the Gospel, because moral duties are
unchangeable. And it is observeable, that Melchisedech met not Abraham the
father of the faithful, with bloody Sacrifice, like a Priest of the Law, but
with a supply of bread and wine, the elements of a Gospel-Sacrament, which the
Ministers are to divide unto the people: That Tithes are not Levitical or
Ceremonially due, it may appear, because

1. They are much more ancient then the Levitical Law.

2. Secondly, Tithes are positively declared to be the Lords, and so to belong
to his Ministers about holy things for ever.

3. Ceremonies of the Levitical-law were all significative, as of something to
be performed by Christ, for the work of our redemption; but so are not Tithes.

4. Tything now used, is not after the manner of the Levitical Law, but after
the manner of Abraham's paying tithes to Melchisedec, who was not of the tribe
of Levi: So our tything, is now to Christ, who was of the tribe of Judah, Heb.
7.13.
of which no man gave attendance at the Altar.

5. The end whereto tithe was ordained, is moral in point of Piety, Justice,
and Gratitude.

First, Piety, for that will maintain the worship of God.

Secondly, Justice, for that is to give every man his due: Now the laborer is
worthy of his reward; 1 Timothy 5.18. 1 Cor. 9.14.
and God has appointed tithes for a reward or maintenance of those who serve
him in the Gospel, as well as under the Law.

Thirdly, Gratitude, for benefits received of him, to whom we ow and offer such
thanks; add hereto, that these are to be paid, to encourage and sustain the
laborers in the work of the Lord; as Hezekiah commanded the people to give the
portion of the Priests, and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the
Law of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 31.4.

And we may here consider, that in the Levitical Law, the Lord had regard to
provision for Gospel Ministers; for he says in one of the branches thereof, --
Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn; which the Apostle
applies to enforce payment of honorable maintenance of Gospel Ministers:
Neither was that equity new, neither the Gospel it self: The first appearance
whereof, which we read of, was from the beginning, when God said, It, that is,
the seed of the Woman, Genesis 3. Gal. 4.4.
Christ -- made of a Woman, shall bruise thy head; that is, the Serpents head,
(in which his life and venom principally lies.) This Gospel promise lay hid
for ages and generations, Ephesians. 3.9. Col. 1.26. Exodus 4. Heb. 9.7. and 18.22.
Genesis 3.19. and 4.4. Gal. 4. Joh. 1.
under dark and mysterious shadows and figures: So that though the Law, like
Tamars Zarah, as it were first put out the hand, which was before its birth,
marked with a skarlet thread (blood and death;) yet in some sort the Gospel was
first born, like Pharez, Genesis 38.28, 29, 30. and was, as the day light, by
little and little, toward the fullness of time (wherein the Sun of Righteousness
should arise to enlighten the World) manifested. See Genesis 49.10. Numb 24.17.
Isai. 7.14. and 11.1, 10, 12. Dan. 9. Mich. 5, etc. and at the last clearly
interpreted, 1 John 3.8. Romans 6.22. and 8.2, 3. 1. Cor. 15.55, etc. Hos. 13.14.
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil, ruin death, and hell. And because God would manifest this
his mercy to the World, for the comfort and confirmation of his Elect in all
ages, after man's fall, he still sent out some Interpreters and Preachers of his
Sacred Mystery, furnished with such means as might every ways enable them
thereto, and support them as to their humane necessities. And it is not
probable, that an alwise God would slack his hand, and appoint a less certain,
determinate, and comfortable maintenance to the Ministers of the most excellent
Testament (the Eternal Gospel) than he did unto the Priests of the more
imperfect, which was to cease and be done away: So that the Gospel-maintenance,
as to the Moral equity thereof, was before the Law of Moses, given many hundred
years after the Gospel-promises.

2.
Your second Observation, is, That amongst the Jews, no outward Law was
appointed for the recovery of Tithes; but he that did not pay them, robbed God,
etc.] And think you, that robbing God, against which the curse of the whole
Nation was denounced, had no punishment following it? Think you not, that every
sin separating between the sinner and God, the sole Fountain of Blessedness,
was not a sufficient punishment to it self in the guilt thereof? And do you
conceive, that we are now bound by Isreal's Judicial Laws, any further than some
Statute Law of this Nation makes them in force to bind us? It seems grievous
to you, that any Law is made by good Princes and their great Councils for
recovery of Tithes; but for which, you and others of your Sect, would venture
on Gods Justice, as if it were a light matter, by the contempt of Divine Laws,
to fall into his hands, Heb. 12.29.
who is a consuming fire.

But know you, that it is both lawful and necessary for those who have
Legislative power in Republics, of authority to execute Justice, to bind
their Subjects from running into sin, and pulling down curses upon their Souls;
and therefore to enact Laws to compel them by respective punishments to
obedience to Gods Moral Laws: As in case of profanation and common swearing,
for which the Land mourns, adultery, murder, theft, oppression, etc. I
suppose you will allow.

You say again, That Tithes were not for the Levites only. 3.
] It is easily granted. Jerome on Ezekiel. lib. 14. cap. 45. shows, That there were
tithes of four sorts: First, For the Levites; Secondly, For the Priests;
Thirdly, For Love Feasts; Fourthly, For the Poor. Which whether this Pamphleter
dissembleth, that he may have something to say, though to no purpose, except to
trouble the Reader, I know not.

You say again, That when the Levitical Priesthood was changed by the coming of
Christ Jesus, 4.
the Law for tything was also changed, as Paul writ to the Hebrews.] Now Samson
will pull the House upon his own head: That very Text which you cite, is
point-blanck against your self; the Law (that is, the Ceremonial Law) was
changed, therefore something was appointed in its place: What, but the Gospel
and the Ministry thereof? And as the Office, so of the necessity of humane
condition, respect must be had for the supplies thereof, whereby it may
continue. There was therefore a change of this Law, as to that which was
Ceremonial, for example in the manner of paying Tithes to the Priests and
Levites, the place where, at Jerusalem, or other public storehouses thereto
appointed; but not in respect of the morality, or any branch thereof: So that
the Priesthood after the order of Melchisedec, is not abolished, nor the Tithes
to the same belonging; as the Apostle shows, Heb. 7.8. saying, And here men
that dye receive tithes, but there he receives them, of whom it is written,
that he lives; that is, Christ. So then tithes still follow the Priesthood;
and so the Apostle makes a Priest, and a receiver of tithes equivalents:
Instead of saying, Men that dye are Priests, he says. That men that receive
tithes: And instead of saying, He that lives is a Priest, he says, He that
lives takes tithes. As if in his judgment, Tithes and Priesthood were as
inseparable in point of right, as Kingdom and Tribute; and so the portion due
to Christ, is still due to his Assigns, the Ministers of the Gospel, who are
his receivers, and in their Ministration in his stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. And so has
Christ appointed, 1 Cor. 9.14.

But to your Objection, I suppose, your familiar, on which you rely, is known
to you, except coming up Janus-like, double faced, you do not so well mark it:
The one is a Parologism, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter; the
other is your old acquaintance, Petitio principii: We say, that changing the
Priesthood, the Ceremonial part of the Law only was changed; but not the Law
for tything, which is Moral. You say that Paul wrote so (that the Law for
tything was also changed.) Paul's words to the Hebrews in the cited place, are
these. -- The Priesthood changed, there is made of necessity a change also of
the Law You corrupt the Text, by adding thereto (of tithes) show us these
words, -- The Law for tything was also changed, either in that place, or any
other writing of St. Paul, or in all the New Testament, and we will rest
satisfied therewith, and never more speak for tithes. But seeing you cannot,
for shame, and danger of these plagues which are threatened, Revel. 22.18. leave
that cause, which you cannot uphold without so many untruths, and falsification
of the sacred Scripture.

You say, For the first three hundred years, while the purisy and simplicity of
the Gospel was retained, no tithes were paid among Christians.] If this were
true, what could it make against our right to tithes? The causes which hindered
their payment, are laid down in our answer to that which you objected in your
third Page. Also for that you speak concerning the Apostles free Preaching of
the Gospel, to which I here add, that Origin, who flourished about 226. or
230. in his 11. Hom. in Numb. after many other forcible persuasions to pay
their tithes, by that which Christ said to the Pharisees, This ought you to
have done, etc. he presently adds, -- How therefore shall your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees, if they dare not taste the
Fruits of their Land. -- Priusquam primitias sacerdotibus offerant and Levitis
decimae separentur? Lib. 1. ep. 9.
Cyprian, whose Martyrdom fell not long after, speaking of the Levites tithes,
says, Quae nunc ratio and forma in clero tenetur, etc. And he blames Victor,
for appointing Geminius Actorem his Attorney, because he would not have him
distracted from his Ministry, and cites these things as a Decree of his
Ancestors. The same Father in his third Tract, De simpl. Praelat. speaking of
the times before him, complains of Charities growing cold, -- Tunc domos, and
fundos voenundabant, -- Distribuenda in usus indigentium precia Apostolis
offerebant: Ut nunc de patrimonio ne decimas damus. -- Sic in nobis emarcuit
vigor fidei: Sic credentium robur elanguit. -- Then they sold Houses and Lands,
and offered the price to the Apostles to be distributed, for the use of the
poor; but now we scarce give tithes of our Patrimonies. -- Thus has the vigor
of Faith languished in us, so has the power of Believers grown faint. Much
concerning this has been noted by others, therefore I content me with these
two ancient witnesses; but what now would you hence conclude? What, that craft
and impurity brought in tithes among Christians? But that were a poor fallacy,
Non causa pro causa: Such as the old man used, who said, That Tenterden Steeple
was the cause of Goodwin Sands: For (said he) just as that was building, they
began to appear: But if in the Primitive Church they had not the use of
tything, understanding Readers will consider that which has been said therein,
persecution everywhere raging, could not suffer the people to pay, or Ministers
to receive their tithes. Yet no time can prevent God in his reserved right; no
use or practice of paying tithes, while persecution hindered; therefore there
was no jus in re, non sequitur. Tithes came into use in Christian Churches so
soon as the owners their selves retained use and dominion in their Possessions;
except in case of Scandal at the first planting the Gospel. See 1 Cor. 9.4. 1
Cor. 12.15, etc. 1 These. 2.9.

That as the mystery of iniquity began to work, etc.] Again, 5.
here is a Fallacia non causae pro causa. Say soberly, Think you that the
working of the mystery of iniquity was the cause of Ministers Preaching of
that, which God had commanded to be done? Or was that men's imagination (as you
say) the ground whereof, you confess, was fetched from the Law of Moses? It is
to be hoped, that your second thoughts will be better. Your sixth Observation
is nothing to the purpose, and therefore deserves no answer.

You say, That in the first payment of tithes, Page 15.
they were not paid as tithes, but as Free-offerings, at the bounty of the
giver, etc.] Say now, when, where, or by whom were tithes ever paid otherwise,
than by Gods Ordinance, from the first mention of them, unto this present; and
show us, if you can, how identity admits of disparity. Payment of tithes, not
paid as tithes? You say, As Free-offerings, not as answering any Law that
required the tenth part, etc. This has, and will appear most false; mean time
circular Arguments are usque ad nauseam, tedious and absurd tautologies, odious
to the prudent Readers. But, Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedec, and Jacob
vowed a tenth to God, which no doubt, he also paid: Did these acts of theirs
answer no command, or motion of Gods Spirit equivalent thereto? Heb. 11.13.
How then is it testified, that these died in the faith? Can faith, as to
please God, be without a divine precept? If you would suppose, That Abraham
gave tithes to Melchisedec, as of mere benevolence to some distressed Prince,
how think you came Jacob to vow a tenth, rather then some other part? how so
great a part of the world, if not by imitation of Gods people constantly and
religiously paying tithes? Whatever you conclude of these, certainly they were
not guilty of Will Worship, of whom God testifies, that they died in the faith.

It was not (say you) a received Doctrine, that tithes ought to be paid till
about the year One thousand and two.] It is easy to answer, That with
Unbelievers, the Gospel which Christ's Sacred Lips Preached, was a Doctrine not
generally received. Was the Jews unbelief, which gave that holy Doctrine no
better reception, any prejudice to the truth of Christ? He said of John
Baptist, Matthew. 11.14. If ye will receive it, this is Elias which was for to
come: And again, Matthew. 17.12. I say unto you, that Elias is come already --:
What if the Jews then would not, or Papists now will not receive this Doctrine,
as their learned Cardinal Bellarmine, Tom. 1. l. 3. c. 6. de Pontif. Romans and
Tom. 4 de gra. Prim. hom. c. 14.
who affi meth, That Enoch and Elias shall come before the end of the world, to
oppose Antichrist, and to convert the Jews. Does man's unbelief any whit annul
the truth of Christ? You see the feebleness of this your Argument, from the
generality of men's not receiving a Doctrine, to conclude it not true. Your
nineth and tenth Observations, are to no purpose against us.

Moreover you say, 11.
That tithes were brought in as a duty owing to God, and were so required and
enforced, etc.] This may be an Argument against you, it is nothing against us.
But we say more, What can any Law made by man, have for so sure a ground, as
the Law and Commandment of God, upon which all Humane Laws and Decrees are, or
ought to be grounded? And who gives Divine or Civil property (as to justice
indefeaceable) but God, whose the Earth is, Psalm. 24.1.
and all the fullness thereof? From him we claim our portion. As for the
Coercive Laws of Princes, giving us a jus ad rem, we look upon Gods good
providence therein, and thankfully acknowledge their favors, for the
preservation of Gods worship, and our Ministers subsistence; without which, it
is too evident, that many men's Atheistical confidence would embolden them
securely to venture on the Justice of God, as they commonly do, when there are
no witnesses of their sacrilege present: They have no Law of Conscience to
hinder them, from taking away what they can from Ministers.

You say again, That till the year Twelve hundred, 12.
or thereabouts, it was the common practice, for every one to bestow his tithes
where he pleased.] Supposing it a free-gift, the owner had fair color so to
do. But were this true, as it is far from it; what were the common practice of
every one, against the Law of God, more or less than a general Rebellion
against him? And your self in your next Observation, show the mischief ensuing
on such arbitrary dispositions; to wit, enriching those lives of Drones,
Abbeys, and Monasteries: And you also confess, That all exemptions from payment
of tithes, came from the Pope. You say here, To bestow his tithes; as if they
were alms of free benevolence, and not duty by God enjoined: But we claim a
right, not depending on your charity, knowing it too well. You are not so kind
to the Prophet, 1 Kings 17.6.
as the Ravens at the Brook of Cherich, they brought him Bread and Flesh in the
morning, and likewise in the evening; but you would rather starve your Prophet,
and pick out his eyes. Your fifteenth and sixteenth Observation, we conceive
make nothing against us.

Next you talk of tithes, That they are the same thing, whether claimed by an
Abbey, or Impropriator, or a Priest, and stand upon the same ground and
foundation, etc.] That they are the same in materia subjecta; it is true, but
to no purpose urged: Would you intimate, that there is in the Creatures tythed
such an inherent mischief, as that quatenus ipsum, they must needs be evil,
which are once tythed, whether taken by Gods Law, or by man impropriated? If
so, the madness of your Argument sufficiently appears. Sacrificing flesh to
idols, did not in St. Paul's judgment, 1 Cor. 10.25, 27, 28.
so pollute it, but that it might be eaten, asking no question for Conscience
sake. That you mention an Impropriator, or a Priest, and tithes, standing on
the same ground. If you mean by Priest, a Minister of the Gospel, and tithes
impropriated, you cross your own Concessions, and the Dictates of Gods Law.
Truly by your obscure grumbling, you seem to be very angry, and that you would
fain bite, but that you know that your Toothless Argument cannot hurt us. And
this, possibly so discomposed the Animal, that (as if he had forgotten on which
side he is) in his seventeenth Observation, he does ingenuously confess, A
state of a Church declining to corruption, and error, clearly to be discerned
and traced in that; as the power of truth was lost, so was the fruit thereof,
which caused such earnest pressing to needful contributions; Page 15.
and when that would not serve, Laws and Decrees were made to force them: But
in the beginning it was not so; for while the purity and simplicity of the
Gospel was retained, there needed no pressing; for their charity then abounded,
not only to the tenth part (that is, tithes) but for greater parts. Antonii
gladios potuit contemnere, si sic omnia dixisset.

18.
Next you say, That the right of tithes was never cleared, even among the
greatest Papists.] What is that to us? Ipsi videant; were ever all Cases of
Conscience cleared among them? advise with your own Casuists.

Further you say, In all ages there were those that withstood the payment of
them.] What then? we know it to our grief: Hereto you may cite this present
age, with a -- witness our self at --

Conclude now (we challenge you thereto) but conclude categorically, Whatsoever
has been withstood by some in all ages, is not good or just. The payment of
Tithes to Ministers, has been withstood by some in all ages; ergo, the payment
of Tithes to Ministers, is not good or just.

To such a conclusion your medium looks, if you deal rationally; and if so, who
sees not the falsehood of your major Proposition, which can neither by you, nor
any Sophister in the World be proved? For if that were universally true, that
whatsoever has been withstood by some in all ages, is not good or just; What
would become of the holy Gospel it self? You know what the Jews at Rome said to
Paul, Act. 28.22.
As concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is spoken against. What
truth was ever yet so evident to all men, that it found no contradiction? Blind
Harpaste will contend, that the room has no light. Antiquity wanted not an
Anaxagoras so paradoxical, Fir. Lactant.
as to affirm that the snow is black; of all truths, Satan will be sure, that
the Gospel shall never want Adversaries: some Jews or other, to gainsay the
preaching thereof, and to withstand the Ministers, as Jannes and Jambres
resisted Moses; 2 Timothy 3.8.
some tinkerly Alexander the Copper-Smith. 2 Timothy 4.4.
O but some of the Martyrs (says our Antagonist) among other things, suffered
in flames, you say, for that, sci. denying payment of Tithes. We answer,
possibly a Martyr may not know all things, and therefore may err in some; but
still we must remember, that it is the Cause, not the Punishment, which makes
the Martyr. Few are persuaded, that either the Conclave which canonized Garnet,
had power to make him a Saint; or that your Neoteric Saints have authority or
warrant from God to unsaint the Evangelists, Apostles and Disciples of Christ,
by the holy Ghost and Church, ever since their times, owned for Saints; Romans
1.7. Romans 16.15. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1. etc.
and so by calling, we fear least their next attempt should be to divest St.
Matthew, St. John, St. Thomas, etc. and to send them out among the vulgar, by
the names of Mat, Jac and Tom: But now justify your assertion, and show us any
one Martyr of Christ, who ever was of your opinion, in denying the payment
Tithes, and suffering death for the same.

Next you demand, Page 16.
Whether any person have a true and legal property in the tenth part of another
man's encrease] Concerning such legality, by the Laws of man, I conceive you
make no question; concerning divine Law, if your quaere be; that upon the
matter, is to doubt, whether God has property in man's increases, or has power
and right, to assign the same to whom he will? For the first part of such a
question, I take it to be indisputable, with all those who take Gods Word to be
their rule and guide; he saying expressly, all the Tithes of the Land; whether
of the seed of the Land, or the fruit of the Tree, is the Lords; it is holy
unto the Lord -- so of the Tithe of the Herd, or of the Flock, the tenth shall
be holy unto the Lord, Levit. 27.30, 32. And concerning these he says, Ye have
robbed me, though the Jews said (as many amongst us now, think it is no
robbing of God, to take away, M l 3.
or detain Tithes from his Ministers) Wherein have we robbed thee? God says,
Ye have robbed me in Tithes and Offerings; and therefore were they cursed; even
the whole Nation. As for the second part of the doubt, all know, that the right
and absolute Proprietor, who holds not of any other, but is the Lord Paramount,
has right and free power to assign his propriety to any other, or others. Now
God does as expressly say, Numb. 18.24. etc. The Tithes -- I have given to the
Levites to inherit: Of which, he yet reserved to himself the Heave Offering, as
it were a Quit-rent for their acknowledgment of his Sovereign right over all.
Now from his grant we claim a moral, and so an unalterable right due to those,
whom he appoints to serve about holy things, and not solely from the Laws of
good Princes and States, though as your self presently confess in the same
Paragraph, Tithes are to be paid, because commanded by the State, and that Law
and equity obliges the payment. That which you after say, That the person that
claims them, may have no particular interest, is contradictory to the forecited
Scriptures, and your own Concessions; as also by that which immediately you
grant, it appears false; where you say, if a true legal Property be in
another person to the tenth part of my increase, I ought in conscience to yield
and set it forth, because it is not mine. To which we say, First, What can be a
true or legal Property, if that be not such, which God himself gives, makes the
conveiance, and in his holy Word testifies, that he has given and settled as
Inheritance, and for such service, on those whom he has appointed to minister
about holy things? Next we say, that you can have no right in Tithes; that they
should become yours either by purchase (for who has right to sell Gods part,
and that invito Domino?) Nor by descent or prescription.

The first (you say) claims these to be due, jure divino, and produce the Law
of Moses for it, etc.] What other men's opinions are, or have been, cannot make
our right and claim by Gods divine donation by the moral Law, void; and
therefore we trouble not our selves about them.

I have (you say again) diligently for two years and more, Page 17.
labored to enform my self, etc.] Here you bring an argument from the time you
have spent in studying this point, and implied unerring faculty of
apprehension. For if this were not, no time can profit to good information.
Concerning the validity of this reason, I leave to others to judge, who better
know your abilities of Art and Nature than I yet do; but now give me leave to
ask, what Authors studied you? Very likely, some, who were in the same error
with you; others who could have informed you better, you condemn unknown; and
because your aim is to uphold a party, for the carrying on a secret design, you
did not receive the love of the truth, and therefore cannot want strong
delusions: and so may you still be of their form, who are ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, if you study to deceive your
self and others: which if it be not so, I am confident that you may find enough
in the writings of sound and Orthodox Divines, to undeceive you, if at least
you will not shut your eyes; if the vail be laid over your eyes, none but God
can make you see; whom we pray, in his good time to remove it.

You speak again, of changing the Law by Christ, etc.] Concerning the change of
the Ceremonial Law, you have been answered; that change is granted you, without
advantage to you, or apparent damage to us. See what has been said to your 14
page Further we say, that Christ changed not the moral Law, in any one jot, or
title thereof, as to the morality of it; Matthew. 5.
he protested against it, who is the faithful and true witness: So that the
precepts thereof, having no repeal appearing in all Gods Word, bind for ever
unto the worlds end. Show us if you can, where the Lawgiver ever repealed the
Law for tything. Bring us any one Text of holy Scripture, either expressly
declaring it, or by necessary consequence concluding it: Which seeing you
cannot do, abuse not the Scripture, making it to speak what you please, to hold
up your party: In a right use of Scriptures, we must carry sense from them, not
bring it to them. Your pretending to an absolute change of the Law, causes
your ignorant and credulous Readers presently to think, they are discharged
from all duty to Moral precepts; not considering, that it must continually
bind all men; and that the Ceremonial and Judicial Law were positive for a
time, and appertaining to Israel only, 12ae. q. 122. 1. 2m.
as determinationes moralium; which being changed, the Moral Law still
continues. A discharge of obedience hereto granted, what an Harvest would the
Devil reap from these pernicious Tares, which you scatter in the Lords field?
and what unspeakable confusion would follow? what (out of Hell) can be imagined
more damnable? Consider therefore what designs of Satan your captious disputes
carry on: You will say you intend no such thing; Parum interest quo animo
feceris, quod fecisse malum est.
but it skills not with what intent you do that which is evil to be done.

You say, Much more color had the Quiristers, etc.] Homo suavis; a merry man,
I trow: But I am not at leisure to exchange words concerning odd Crotchets.

But say you, How does Gospel Ministry succeed to the Levites, etc.] We have
spoken hereof before, and say more; first, they succeed the Legal Priesthood,
as they are Ministers of holy things; and therefore must live of Christ's
portion, which is tithes, though their office in some things differ, as shall
appear in its place. Next the Apostle will show you. Heb. 7.12. The Priesthood,
says he, being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law:
Where note, that he says not, that the Priesthood is abolished, but changed:
So the Law in the Morality thereof, is not abolished, but the Ceremonies, and
things thereto belonging, are changed. Now changing presupposes a suffection
or substitution of some other thing, in place of that which is removed: So the
Ministers succeed in place of the Levitical Priesthood; and their honorary and
maintenance accompanies the same. Now the portion due to Melchisedec's
Priesthood, which is a permanent order, is tithes; these being due to Christ's
Priesthood, are due to Christ's Ministers. As for your buzzing about here and
there, and no where se^ling, concerning the Priesthood, it is nothing to
purpose. And what, say you, was the Primitive Church assured of for some
hundred years? After you have done trifling, we shall have it; that the Church
for some hundreds of years never called for tithes: Your own citations of
Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine, etc. show this to be grossly false; except by some
hundreds, you mean only the first three hundred, wherein the rage of
persecution, neither permitted Christians to pay, nor Ministers to receive
their tithes; concerning which, we have already spoken, in answer to the same
objection.

You say again, What is this to the payment of tithes?] Page 18.
What that Abraham paid tithes? very much. First, this imports a right in
Melchisedec to take them, and therefore a debitum in Abraham to pay them; who
having a special direction, by some inspiration, which had the force of an
injunction, Abraham's act was of duty, not arbitrary benevolence; yea, by the
Moral Law, which before the exact transcript thereof on the Tables of Stone,
was the very same with the Law of Nature, which bound not only Abraham, but
all persons respectively, to all times and places. For, to worship God is a
Moral Precept, though for the time, the determination thereof, 12 ae. q. 99.
as to the manner how, appertained to the Ceremonial, which being antiquated
and changed into another manner of worship under the Gospel; yet is still the
same in point of Morality, which bound and unchangeably binds all. You
possibly may say, Abraham paid tithes but once; but there needs no other proof,
that he constantly paid them at other times, as well as that once specified to
Melchisedec, because God testified concerning him, saying, Genesis 18.19. I know
him, that he will command his children, and his household after him; and they
shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; which is afterward
interpreted, Deuteronomy. 32 46. By doing all the words of this Law. Add hereto, that
he only is good and just, who is constantly so, and accordingly Jacob also
paid tithes; because the Morality of the Law, universally binding to this duty
of Equity and Justice, bound all men and ever respectively to do the same; how
else fell Abraham and Jacob upon a tenth, rather then on a fifth, seventh, or
twelfth part? Without faith it is impossible to please God, as also to do any
thing in faith, which God commands not.

You say more, that -- few are now left, who will only stand to it, and the
generality are of a contrary mind.] Few are now left: We may thank your rage
for that. But I demand, does the appearing paucity of any Truths, Professors
disparage their Cause? What then shall we think of Eliah crying, -- I only am
left? Were there not then many thousands on the Prophets side, whom he knew not
of? might it not even then, have been answered to him, as Elisha said to his
servant, 2 Kings 6.6. -- Fear not, for they that be with us, are more then they
that be with them? But what you mean by, only stand to it, I know not, but
doubt -- hic ambiguo ludimur: Mean you only stand to it, that jus of receiving
of tithes, and so wave and disclaim all right, which in confirmation of the
same, good Princes and Parliaments, or Donations and Bequeathments, which
well-affected men have given us, by several Laws and Acts, in diverse ages past?
That were foolishly and ingratefully done, so to value these grants, to which,
you confess, your self bound to obey, Even for Conscience sake. That the
generality are against Right and Truth, I do no more wonder, then that you are
--

And so (you say) the greatest part of the people of England deny tithes to be
due by Gods Law.] To this, and that which immediately precedeth, I think no
more answer then this necessary; if so, it is the more shame for them.
Concerning the end of paying tithes, you have been answered: As for
Impropriators, they are out of the verge of our present question, which
concerns the Ministers portion; yet here we may use the saying of Boniface,
Archbishop of Mentz, in his Epistle to Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury. Our
complaints (says he) hereof, are not much unlike to a dogs barking at thieves
and robbers breaking open, digging through and rifting his Masters house. --
Quia defensionis auxiliatores non habeat, Spelm. Council. and decret. page 239
submurmurans ingemiscat, and lugeat: Because he cannot have helpers for
defense, yet growling he will grumble and whimper.

And this (you say) leaves every man free to give to him that teaches) I am
sure you are not very free to give to him that teaches; and for all this
preceding Miscellany, you leave us in doubt, what you mean by, this leaves?
this what? your irresolute conclusion, and confused resolution? Do these make
for your dream of the Castle in the air, Competent maintenance for Ministers,
and that arbitrary, voluntary contribution? If you mean voluntary, to import
willingly performed, as all good works must be, we accord. Paul Preached the
Gospel willingly; that act of Preaching was a voluntary act of Paul, 1 Cor
9.16, 17.
yet woe had been unto him, if he had not preached the Gospel, because a
dispensation of the Gospel was committed unto him

Concerning those you speak of, who you say, Page 19.
are transformed as Apostles and Ministers of Christ, who have the form, but
want the power, who teach for filthy lucre, etc.] We may take up the Eunuchs
quere -- Of whom speaks he this? of himself, Acts 8.34.
or of some other man? Where is the power of godliness on your part, when you
broach many falsehoods, setting up impious doctrines of men, instead of Gods
oracles? Non soles te respicere cum aliis maledicis? Is it filthy lucre in us
to require the portion which God has appointed us, or in you, who would take
it from us? Gods Word does evidently enough show, to any whose eyes are not
closed by prejudicate opinion, That, as there was a Legal service, to which
belonged a legal maintenance, a Temple and an Altar service; to which, God
allotted Temple and Altar portions or maintenance to them, who there served;
so, by the same Moral equity, there is a Gospel service, preaching,
administration of Holy Sacraments, etc. to which appertain the things, or
temporal perquisites belonging to the maintenance thereof, which is laid down
in sundry places of holy Scripture. See Gal. 6.6. Prove. 3.6. 1 Timothy 5.17. Now
if there be a portion to be set out unto God, and his Ministers, out of all and
every the temporal goods of every one instructed in the Gospel, according to
the sum and purport of these places of holy Scripture, and no certain portion
or maintenance for Ministers, be found in Gods Word, but tithes; then are
tithes, the portion and maintenance allotted by Gods Word to Ministers for
their service: But there is a portion to be set out to God and his Ministers,
out of all the temporal goods of every one instructed in the Gospel, and no
other determinate certainty for Ministers maintenance, mentioned in holy
Scripture; Ergo, Tithes are the principal portion allotted by Gods Word to
Ministers for their service: And no reason can our adversaries allege, to make
it probable, that God would have Gospel Ministers means of subsistence, less
certain and definite then the Priests and Levites means was under the Law. To
conclude, a Law for payment of Tithes, for the maintenance of Gods public
worship, all confess; show us in all Gods Word, where that Law was ever
repealed.

Page 19.
But you say, He always took care for such as he sent forth, and they never
wanted, etc.] And what reason can you show, why they now should? I presume not
to ask, why so many of Christ's faithful Ministers have of late been driven into
great wants, and so are still? Your device of competent maintenance, does here
but corvis hiantibus illudere. They who were sent out by Christ (you say)
reaped the fruit of their labor: What proves this, but that they ought to do so
still?

Concerning Churches, which you say were gathered; we say you ought to
consider, a great difference between a settled or constituted Church, and that
which in the Primitive Age of the Gospel, was settling, and there to be
constituted: Therefore that which was then done, cannot reasonably prescribe a
maintenance for Ministers of a Church constituted. There was, besides
persecution, unadvised zeal of voluntary poverty; a Bird as rare to be found in
this age, as a Phoenix or black Swan: There was danger of scandal given; we know
none now, except taken, not given, in requiring our Tithes, of such as you.

Herewith (say you) let our now called Churches be proved, etc.] God be
blessed, we have a more just and certain proof then your Lesbian rule to try
our Calling by; Christ saying, By this shall all men know, that ye are my
Disciples, if you love one another; and for the rest, The laborer is worthy of
his hire: This is appointed us by the Lord of the Vineyard by God, out of his
own reserved part; not contracted for, or arbitrarily determined by man. This
we understand, that which God knew to be a proportionable honorary; not that
which fickle man fancieth to be so. This is no mercenary wages, such (as your
Apostles maintenance was grounded on Covenant, Compact, Agreeement, Promise,
etc. but on Gods Providence and Ordinance.

Mercenary wages is definite, particular as to the sum agreed Apostles
maintenance in any of the Churches, to which they preached: Yea, say you, for
their preaching was free. Why they took not Tithes: you have heard formerly,
that they had maintenance from the Churches, is above all dispute; but you
would have us preach freely; that is, taking no Tithes: because in the
Primitive Church, Charity abounding, you say, it appears not that Tithes were
paid: To which, we say, be you such first, as those Christians were to their
Teachers, and then talk of gathering Churches, and our ceasing to take Tithes.
In the mean time, you cannot reasonably require us to leave our good way,
seeing you will not leave your evil one, of sharking Ministers.

Wages is or ought to be proportionable to the merit of Apostles and Ministers
could not, can not be such: for they Minister Spiritual things, and reap
Carnal. And now, Why quarrel you our receiving these supplies of the World, to
which we Preach? And from what part thereof should we reasonably expect to
reap, but from that, on which we sow? 1 Cor. 9.
God has determined that we shall live of the Gospel, which we preach
according to the equity of the moral Law; for this one and the same justice is
to be observed in the Law and Gospel. 12ae. q. 108. 2. o. 19.
The Schoolmen well note, that the Gospel commands no other Moralities, then
the same which the Law commanded.

And here (you say) rulers should have wisdom, etc.] Romans 13.4.
We take you for a pretty Counselor of State; and the Apostle says of the
Magistrate He bears not the Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a
revenger to execute wrath on him that does evil. But in vain carries he the
Sword, who has not wisdom to direct it: And is that wisdom which you here
offer our Magistrates, for Counsel of State, to leave Christ's Kingdom to his
own rule? What to punish no offenders? To cry to Christ as those rebellious
Tribes, 1 King. 14.16. See to thine own house David? What would become of such
inactive Magistrates, and such a Laish? For defect of Justice in the due
execution thereof, Judge 18.7. Genesis 18.25. Ezekiel. 5.8.
the Lord the Judge of all the Earth will do right; as he says, because they
had not kept his judgments -- Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold, I,
even I am against thee, and will execute judgment in the midst of thee, See
also Ezekiel. 11.9. 2 Chronicles 24.23, 24.
in the sight of the nations. So when Joash hearkened to wicked Counsel, and
did not justice upon delinquents, the Lord brought upon Princes and people the
Assyrian Army, so they executed judgment upon Joash. Thus will it still come to
pass, that for want of Magistrates due execution of justice, God will come, and
punish both people offending, and Magistrates conniving, or not punishing. And
do you not mark what a parcel of singular wisdom here is presented to
Magistrates?

Neither (say you) is his spirit diminished, that it cannot, or will not send
forth, and fit Ministers for his service, or that he needs Universities, etc.]
That God can fit teachers, even by infused habits of knowledge, none doubt; but
from his Power to conclud his Will, were but a wide inference. His Spirit is
not diminished, he can make many Worlds; Does this conclude that he will? He
can do whatsoever he will do; Will you thence infer, that he will do what ever
he can? He needs no Universities; neither did he in the days of Prophets, yet
had he then his Naioth in Ramah, 1 Samuel 19.22, 23. a School of Prophets. So had
he in the Apostles times; yet when the learned St. Paul, brought up at
Gamaliels feet, wrote directions to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.13, 16. 3 Tim. 2.15,
he says, give attendance to Reading, Exhortation and Doctrine; the fruit
whereof, he presently subjoins, for in doing this, thou shall both save thy
self and them that hear thee: so study to show thy self approved unto God, a
workman that needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. All this
your party believe they can do, without any Analytical order; but if the Orator
should hear you, he would say, This is not dividere, but frangere.

But, to our purpose again: I demand, Does Gods power to give other means of
enlarging men's hearts to his service, annul his Ordinance in the use of
accustomed means? What then would the brainsick Super-ordinarian not conclude
against Preaching of the Gospel, and use of holy Sacraments?

Against use of Universities, you bring an Argument, a fine: You say, Students
go thither to learn Greek and Hebrew, the original; that they may understand
what Christ spoke, and the Apostles preached.] And do you not think that were
worth their time and charge? What were all knowledge in the world without this?
But sure you are not ignorant, that our Grammar-Schools send few Students to
the Universities without a competent knowledge of the Greek; neither that there
are many other excellent things, besides Tongues, to be learned at the
Universities. As for the Mother Tongue of Christ and his Apostles, I suppose
you are not to learn that it was Syriac, much differing from the Greek and
Hebrew, both in character and form of words. I here remember you, that the
Apostles, Acts 2.
after they had received the Holy Ghost, as occasion served, and need required,
spoke all tongues; but writ the Canon and Rule of Faith, the New Testament, in
Greek; as the Prophets wrote the Old in Hebrew. If they that heard them speak
in their own Language, could not understand their Doctrine, but that it seemed
foolishness to them; If they had heard them speak in unknown Tongues, would
they no say that ye are mad? 1 Cor. 14.23.
But the cause of their not understanding their Doctrine in their own native
tongue, was, because the judgment denounced, Isai. 6.9, 10. was upon them; and
because the God of this world had blinded their eyes, which believed not: So
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ could not shine unto them.
Knowledge of Tongues, none but the stupidly-ignorant will deny to be a shining
light: Possibly a blind man, or he that winks, is not benefitted by it; but
would you conclude, that therefore they who are of entire sensories, and
willing to see, are, as you say, Nothing the nearer for it? What think you,
that the wisdom of God thought good to furnish his Apostles and Disciples with
the gift of Tongues, and interpretation thereof; was that a vain and fruitless
Donation? Were they, who thereby had the mysteries of salvation written in
Scriptures, brought home to them in their mother tongue, no nearer to the
knowledge of the Gospel? The Apostle says the same, which Reason and
Experience confirm, 1. Cor. 14.11.
-- If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be to him that speaks, a
Barbarian; and he that speaks, shall be a Barbarian to me: And are they not
nearer to the knowledge of the Gospel, who understand the Greek, in which it
was originally written, then they who are ignorant of that Tongue? Egyptian
darkness, quintessence of dunsery! Who ever heard of so professed a Purple
John, as you here personate? What, was the Scripture written in English? or
were the Interpreters thereof assisted with such infallibility of spirit, even
in things less then fundamental, that they could not err in any thing? which
if you hold not, you must confess, that they who understand the original must
be nearer the knowledge of the Scriptures, then they who do, and needs must
take up that which they do know, upon trust. Qui been didicit, been docet: And
on the contrary, he that never well learned, can never teach well. I may boldly
affirm, that the want of learning, knowledge of tongues, and good arts have
bred all these Schisms and divisions amongst us, which render us odious and
contemptible among the Nations at this day; and that it was Satan's masterpiece
against unhappy England, to beget a contempt of learning, by emboldning a rude
vulgar, to contemn the persons of the Ministers.

To your Objection again, we say, That Gods Spirit needed no Universities to
instruct men; but all sober men know, that they have need of Universities,
wherein they may be instructed. What then? God can make an Ass speak; but
surely it were not wisely concluded, Gods Spirit is not diminished, etc.
therefore we will have no more Universities, but such Teachers, as that dull
Beast, shall serve our turns to make us Saints of the new Edition. And
seriously, were all men of your mind (at least, of which you would seem to be)
to take away our University bred Ministers, by taking away their settled
livelihood, necessity would so enforce, that ere long you must be served by
such animals, as could only bray pure nonsense by the glass --. Hoc Ithaci
cupiunt --. Consider whether this be not a Jesuitical plot, whereof I heard one
of them say, at the very beginning of our troubles, -- There is a design set
upon you, which when you hear, will make your ears tingle.

But you say, Our Consciences must be judge, who those Ministers are, etc.]
Auditum admissi risum teneatis amici! Page 10.
What? Professed blindmen challenging Prerogative to judge of colors?
Ambitious Absalom did but wish, 2 Samuel 15.4.
O that I were made a Judge in the Land -- But you plead privilege, Our
Conscience (you say) must be judge: And do you not see what a Church and
Ministry we were like to have, if these men might be judges? Think you that
they would allow any, but such as they knew were surely involved in their
Heresy? But now speak clearly, and mistake not Opinion for Conscience: Opinion
is grounded on probability, or that which but seems so unto deluded minds; but
Conscience, on the infallible Word of God, in which can be no falsehood. Show us
now (if you be true men) that this is indeed your Conscience, and we will go
along with you: But excuse us, if we subscribe not unto such dull and stupid
opinions, for which you cannot show, that Christ's Ministers were ever, in your
sense, made manifest. But you would have Magistrates punish, and restrain the
evil: We wish it so, but doubt that you would wince, when you were under the
lash for Sacrilege; and your Opinion could not save your --

You say, Would not this ease the Magistrate, and be more acceptable to God?]
To so impious and vain a question, it is enough to answer, No.

Who (say you) made him a Judge, etc?] He or they who made him a Magistrate and
a restrainer of the evil. Page 20.


A third sort (you say) plead for Decrees, etc.] I am loath to be expensive of
precious time, in examination of that which others plead; and I content me to
say, concerning the rubbish, which you here scrape together, That those things
have been sufficiently answered, by the learned and most industrious Dr.
Tilsley, Animad. on Hist. of Tithes; to whom I refer the Reader, who desires
further to be satisfied concerning those things.

And then (you say) about that time, it came to be received and believed, that
tithes ought to be paid, etc.] I cannot but think you dissemble your knowledge,
who say, That it was about a thousand years after Christ, before it came to be
received and believed, that tithes ought to be paid. Origin, Cyprian, Jerome,
Ambrose, Augustine, etc. believed them to be due, and payable, or else they
would not have pleaded so earnestly for them; and you know, that these lived
some hundred of years before the time which you mention: Consider what your
self have confessed, and for shame contradict not that.

You say, That in England, as well as other Nations, every man might have given
his tithes where he pleased, till about the year One thousand two hundred.] If
that were true I could not but think it great pity, that they were so long
ignorant. But must we still be troubled with your Crambe, and often repetitions
of one and the same falsehood? surely it is already nauseous to the
understanding Reader.

Page 21.
-- Pleaded for Humane right] To this, and many things else gathered out of Mr.
Seldens History of Tithes, I answer again, That it skills not much what others
plead: God gave Ministers the jus and right of Tithes, from that time that he
had a Church: I say, Jus in re, a right in Tithes, though Humane Laws may be
said to give them Jus ad rem; that is, a Law and Custom of Court, to claim and
recover them as their right. To this, if Kings and Parliaments have contributed
their power and authority, by Laws and Decrees; they did justly and religiously
therein: For therefore God put the power into their hands, well knowing, how
malicious Satan is against Ministers of the Gospel; and how (in his ambition to
bring men to his Kingdom of Darkness and Atheism) the subtle Impostor works (as
you do) on the worldly minder of Neuters in Religion; who wouldly gladly be of
the cheapest one, that they might spare their purses, and the newest, that they
might be in the fashion.

Now for Statutes of Kings and Parliaments, suppose they have power concerning
mutual Humane rights, i. e. Meum and tuum; God only has right in his
reserves: Suum cuique, is the Rule of Justice; and Christ said, Give to Caesar,
that which is Caesar's; to every one that which is his; only let Gods Portion
be sacred and inviolable. We look therefore on Statutes, as effects of Gods
mercy toward his Church, making Kings and high Powers her Nursing-fathers; and
yet we say, that we ground not our Claim and Interest therein. God hereby used
a Coercive power to restrain the Sacriledgious, because of the hardness of
their hearts, who regard not Gods Laws, but fear Man's.

The Law (you say) does not give any man a property.] But sure the Law of God
does; of, and by which we hold, from whence we claim our portion. And we
further say, That if no Humane Law, Act, or Decree, had been made for us on
this behalf, yet had we a firm right to that, which God assigned us by his
Will, revealed in his Word: Yet we thankfully acknowledge, that we ow very much
to the Laws and Grants of good Princes, Magistrates, Councils, and Judges, for
our actual recovery of our dues, without which, it may too easily appear by
you, and your party; how little comfort and support, men's consciences would
afford Ministers, notwithstanding your pretended sufficient maintenance for
them, whose Judges you would appoint your selves: Was not Ticonius your Tutor,
August. Ep. Vincent. Cic. Acad. q l. 4.
or one of that Sect, who said, Quod volumus, sanctum est? or some Protagoras,
affirming, Id cuique verum esse, quod cuique videatur?

You say, He that says, they are only due by Humane Right, Page 22.
etc.] We know not any of ours, who say so: We say they are due by the Law of
God and Man, and recoverable by Humane Laws to God subordinate: As, Stante
Repub. Israelitica, peculiar Rights and Interests by the Moral Law due and
claimable, were justly recovered by the Judicial, which God appointed as a
subsidium thereto, and Band of Obedience; the execution whereof, was by men
appointed to judge: so now, For Magistrates are still to execute justice
according to those Laws, which by Statute or Statutes, are made Judicial to us:
And if our Magistrates may justly judge for me, I may as justly claim and
recover my right by the same Law and Equity: Add hereto, That Councils may and
ought to make Laws, to bind the people to obey Gods Moral Law, and by just
punishments, appoint restraints of transgressors thereof, that it may be well
with them and their children: For, Salus populi suprema Lex. This may appear,
if we consider either first or second Table; As in case of profanation and
common swearing, or profanation of the Sabbath, or against Murder, Adultery,
Theft, we have wholesome and necessary Laws. Now if for the obedience to God,
Humane Laws be good and necessary in respect of one Moral duty; why not in
others? As, if for the maintenance of Gods worship in the quota part of time
by God reserved, and thereto still necessary: Why is it not as just and
necessary in the quota part of our substance, by the same Law of God reserved
to, and necessary for the same? To the matters in your following Cavils,
concerning Civil Rights, Ministers Proprieties, and Courts wherein they have
been, or ought to be recovered, you vainly trouble your Reader; our claim being
from Divine Law, whereto all Laws and Courts ought to be subordinate.

Page 22.
You say further, That the Act (for Tithes) gives nothing, but commands what was
before.] Herein you say true; For God gave them from the beginning, and man
confirmed them in sundry times following.

Next, you demand how Laws of Kings and Parliaments, etc. bind the
Conscience?] Your self have formerly answered; but the Apostle more
definitively, says Romans 13.1, 5. Let every soul be subject unto the higher
powers. -- Ye must be subject (needs be subject) not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake: 1 Pet. 2.13.
And St. Peter, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords
sake. And -- will this double band hold Samson if it does, sin not against
Conscience, Satan-like endeavoring to seduce others, and draw them in society
of sin.

Page 23.
Tithes (you say) be not due by the Law of God.] This is a shameless begging of
the question, which will never be approved by us, or proved by you.

But you say, Who has set them up, the Law of man at best?] Here is another
begging of the question at another door, as also in the following words, where
you say, in the place where God disanulled his own command. We offer here again
to join issue with you, and challenge you to show us any one Text of Gods Word,
whereby it appears, that God ever disanulled or repealed his Law of Tything.
For the rest, if you could cite and urge as many Decrees of Princes, or Acts of
Parliaments against us, as you have cited for Tithes; yet no Decrees of men can
Impeach our Right therein; seeing God by the Magna Charta of his holy Word,
has settled it, for an Inheritance upon the Ministry.

You demand, Who put this power into the hand of man, Page 23.
to raise a compulsory maintenance for Ministers:] The Apostle will tell you,
Romans 13.4. The Magistrate is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath
on him that does evil; Is not execution of wrath a compulsory means, think you?
Or is not Sacriledg evil in your Theology? That you further say, that the
Ministers of Christ never looked for, or durst own such a way of provision. We
say, First, That the maintenance of Ministers ought to be willingly aforded
them, not grudgingly or sparingly, as also their ministration; this is, as to
the first intention of the Law; but if men will be obstinate, Compulsion is a
second intention hereof. Secondly, Suppose that Ministers did not own such a
way of provision for recovery of Tithes, before such Acts of Parliament were
made for them; What hinders but that they may justly use such Laws, now
Enacted and in Force?

You proceed -- What Nation in Europe, will not say they have a Christian
Magistracy?] Do you not forget how great a part of Europe is under the Turk?
Your many following impertinences should have had no answer, but that you say,
heavy punishments are inflicted upon such as cannot for conscience sake conform
unto them: To which I say, it was never well since men's Consciences were tied
to their Purse-strings, and that opinions not so much as probable, must go for
Conscience. Show us Gods Word for your Conscience, and we will submit to the
same bond; but we think it an abominable Idolatry, to set up opinions of
beguiled Men, instead of Gods sacred Oracles.

Concerning -- This day of clear and Sunshine light] We say, Isai. 8.20.
to the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them. To this Law we appeal, and willingly
submit; Does this savor, in you tender sensory, of the old Popish Spirit? Who
sees not your endeavor to re-establish Popery, though you so much seem to
speak against it? And now let me bona cum venia, tell you, that either your
hypocrisy, or ignorance is something gross. And is this as you say, a shame to
our reformation? Or is the practice of you deformers a shame to Christian
Religion? It is probable that you carry on the Jesuits design of reducing
England to darkness of Popery again, by decrying Ministers right, to a settled
maintenance; that by taking them away, you may remove the Candlestick out of
his place, the light of the Gospel from us, and then you may possibly bring
many to Popery and Atheism. I must needs say, that this personated Zelote
speaks much against Popery, but works what he can for it; on whom I look as on
Thames-water-men, with their faces one way, but laboring might and main, to
carry their Passengers and Vessel another.

You add -- Were the Law just commanding Tithes, etc.] What will he not
question, Page 24.
who doubts of the equity of the Law? I hope you mean humane Law, which yet
is founded on Gods Law; and have you not learned of Socrates, to doubt of all
things? Concerning treble damages, or other punishments which the Law has
appointed obstinate transgressors; I suppose you know, that the plaintifs
charges of the Suit, commonly exceed the damage justly awarded him, toward
his reparation therein; so that even under the tender hands of just Judges, the
remedy is more burdensome, than the disease; these punishments therefore are
but just. What injustice is it, think you, to force a Thief or Possessor malae
fidei to restore the goods of another man, which he has injuriously possessed
himself of, and still deteineth? What injustice can be in a legal reinvesting
the true owner? And in case that the injurious refuse to submit to the Law, to
compel him by some severe punishment by Law provided in such case? And if this
be justice in one case, Why shall it not be so in another kind of wrong or
robberry? Why not in case of Sacriledg, the worst of robberies, if in inferior
thieveries? O, but you say our consciences tell us, that detention of Tithes
from Mininisters, is no sin. What if a Thieves Conscience (as you account
Conscience) should tell him, that had robbed you, that stealing is no sin;
Would you not pursue him, and prosecute law against him? I doubt in your next
scruple, your weak and tender Consciences will tell you, that it is a sin, to
pay your Landlords any Rent, or at least their sin, to Distrain or Sue for
any, though you can, but will not, for your Conscience sake forsooth pay him
any: And will not the next question in your Schools, be whether it be lawful In
foro Conscientiae, to pay any Debt?

-- To set out Tithes, etc.] You say, this is against his Conscience; once
again we require you to show us any one Text of Scripture, prohibiting seting
out of Tithes; that we may know, that it is Conscience, and not Opinion,
grounded on humane fancy, malice, greedy desire of enriching your selves by
pillaging the Ministers, which moves you to think so.

You say, -- This age so much pretends to reformation] -- and every one cries
woe, woe, and he complain's, that help's to make it so.

Are you not a chief pretender to Reformation? Why then trouble you the sacred
peace of the Church? And truly, I fear, that it will come to pass which you
next say, that Papists (your honored Patrones) shall rise in judgment against
you, and condemn you; they own some Order, Unity, Government and Law; they have
some show of Devotion and religious Charity; but in our new Sectaries, I see
very little of these, if any at all. Your following objections in this Page,
are but quarrelsom, captious, as to the present, not deserving answer.

You say -- By conscientious men, Page 25.
far more heavy than the loins of the Law] Conscientious men, and Opinatours,
are with you, convertible terms; as concerning abuses in offices, we are
ignorant; But what if there were such things? What were this to our Cause? You
say nothing against those wealthy Kerns, who by detaining Tithes, beggar poor
Ministers and their Families, which we know to be true: In this, it is marvel,
but you think they do God service. John 16.2.


You say, The Pope himself has no such penalties.] No? what think you of his
holy House, forsooth, his Inquisition Preaching with fire and faggot? You say,
You write what you can prove by manifold instances. It may be so in some things
impertinent; and possibly you are acquainted with the Popes Ecclesiastical
Courts, and (what ever you seem under your present disguise) are a right trusty
Advocate for them.

You say, Priests are not able to pay tenths unto the Protector, etc.] What
Priests you talk of, we enquire: We own not that title in any, but Christ, a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, that faithful High Priest in
things pertaining to God, Heb. 2.17. And as we conceive, ancient Councils,
Fathers, and the Rubric of our Church Liturgy, attribute that name to
Ministers of the Gospel, Cyprian. ep. Caecilio. l. 2. ep. 3.
by way of analogy and allusion to that, which was under the now-antiquated
Ceremonies of the Law. So Irenaeus, l. 4. c. 20. says, -- Sacerdotes autem
sunt omnes Domini Apostoli -- semper Altari and ^eo serviunt: That is in
respect of their succeeding the Levitical Priesthood, and allusion to their
service. So Cap. 3.32. Sacrificium Deo cor contribulatum; and Cap. 33. --
Incensa Johannis in Apocalypsi, orationes ait esse sanctorum: For, as Cyprian
says, Adv. Jud. l. 17. the old Priesthood was to cease, ut novus sacerdos
veniret, qui in aeternum futurus esset; that is only Christ. See Heb. 7.23. an
elegant figure whereof immediately preceded Christ's coming, when Zachary, the
Levitical Priest, was to come out and bless the people, he was dumb: For then
God would bless his people by his Son Christ, the Eternal Priest, after the
order of Melchisedec; who not only auspicated his preaching with sundry
blessings, but ascending into Heaven, lifting up his hands, Matthew. 5.2, etc.
Luke 24.50, 51.
blessed his Disciples. When he was to come into the World, the Priest, the son
of Aaron, could not speak; that by that sign, God might teach his people to
expect another Priesthood, and Priest, in whom not only Jews, but all the
Nations of the World should be blessed: Gal. 3.8.
And this was also intimated, in that the Levitical Priests were after the
morning Sacrifice only, to lift up their hands, and bless the people; but not
after the Mincha or evening Sacrifice; Maimon. tract. de Orat. c. 14. Heb. 1.1,
2. and 13.10, 15.
for in the evening of time, God spoke unto his people by his own Son Christ.
To our purpose again, the Lords Table may be called an Altar; and praises of
God, a Sacrifice, as it is written, By him therefore, let us offer the
Sacrifice of praise to God continually: So will we render the calves of our
lips, Hos. 4.^. So are all the Servants of Christ Priests; not by propriety of
speaking, Rev. 1.6. and 5.10. and 20.6. 1 Pet. 2.5.
but as they are also called Kings, by analogy and representation. Nor do I
remember where Ministers are called (...), Priests in the Gospel. Here it is
necessary to consider, 1. How Ministers may be called Priests. 2. How not, or
wherein there appears a real difference between them, and Levitical Priests,
properly so called.

1. In that the Apostle says, The Priesthood being changed; Heb. 7.12.
he implies, that the Office of Ministration in the public worship of God is
not abolished, or taken quite away; so that there is nothing substituted in the
place thereof, but that the Office, as to the morality thereof, so continues as
that Analogically, Ministers of the Gospel may in some sense be called Priests.
The Prophet Joel makes them convertible terms, Joel ^.17.
saying, Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep --: And the Prophet
Isaiah speaking of the calling of the Gentiles, Isai. 66.21, etc.
says, I will also take of them for Priests, and for Levites, says the Lord.

2. The Levitical Priest served at the Altar, that is, Did there that service,
which by Gods Law he was there to perform: And so the Minister is to do that
service in the Church, which God has, under the Gospel, appointed and settled
on him in his Calling thereto, and separation from the people, in preaching the
Gospel, Praying, Administration of the Holy Sacraments, and those other
Ministerial Functions, which are peculiar to his Calling.

3. That Priests had their certain and determinate allowance and maintenance
assigned them out of the increases of the Earth (by Gods donation) for his
service; Hebr. 7.5.
never being left to the courtesy, or charity of men, no not the faith Moses to
dispose of; and so have the Ministers of the Gospel: In both which, it was and
is sacrilege, to alienate, take away, detain, or change the whole or any part
thereof, otherwise reserved by God to his own service, and assigned to the
Ministers thereof, or to reduce the same to common uses.

4. The Ministers of the Gospel succeeding the Legal Priests in the public
service of God, as persons in their Office sacred, to which they are set apart,
or separated, Romans 1.1. Gal. 1.15. may not desert, or be distracted from their
Calling, nor impropriated to any other. Thus, and in such like respects, they
may analogically be styled Priests; as has been said, thanksgiving may be
called a Sacrifice, Psalm. 116.17. Spiritual, not bodily or proper; Psalm. 141.2.
as Prayers are Spiritual incense. Let my prayer be directed as incense in thy
sight, and the lifting up my hands, as the evening sacrifice; and as I said,
the Lords Table, may be called an Altar; not properly, but by way of allusion
to that, to which it succeeded: So may Gospel Ministers be styled Priests.

2. Herein observe, That the Legal Priests, and the Ministers of the Gospel
differ.

1. The Legal Priests were to be only of that tribe of Levi, and family of
Aaron, Exodus 40.13, 14. But the Ministers of the Gospel (if lawfully called)
are limited to no one stock or family, but may be of any: So that the Legal
Priests were in some sort, born to the Priesthood; but Ministers are separated
thereto: Therefore the Lord taking to himself, a people under the Gospel out of
all Nations, Isai. 66.20, 21.
says, And I will also take of them for Priests, and for Levites.

Judge 6.37, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.2, etc.
2. The Levitical Priest was to execute his Function among the people of Israel
only: Then Judea like Gideons Fleece had the dew of Heaven, the Doctrine and
Mysteries of Salvation, and the floor of the world beside was dry; as it is
written, Psalm. 147, 19, 20. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and
his Judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation. And as for his
Judgments, they have not known them. And so Christ's injunction bound his
Disciples for a time, Go not into the way of the Gentiles; Matthew. 10.5. and
28.19.
but after his Ascension, the Ministers are to go into all, or any part of the
world, to Preach the Gospel to every creature: Now the floor has the dew, Mark
16.15. Romans 11.25. Ephesians. 2. Col. 3.11. Gal. 3.28.
and the fleece is dry, since that blindness is come upon Israel. Now the stop
of the partition wall is taken down; and in Christ, there is no difference
between Jew and Gentile, bond and free.

3. Levitical Priests offered real, external, visible, material, proper, and
bloody Sacrifices; but the Ministers of the Gospel offer only spiritual
Sacrifices, Prayers, Praises, Thanksgiving, as they are an holy Priesthood, 1
Pet. 2.5. Revel. 1.6.
to offer up spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ: For he
has made us Kings and Priests unto his Father.

4. The Levitical Priest was to officiate in outward Ordinances of a worldly
Sanctuary, which were shadows of good things to come, which Rites are now
antiquated: Heb. 9.1. and 10.1. Col. 2.20. 1 Cor. 9.11. 1 Pet. 2.5.
But the Ministers of the Gospel officiates in things spiritual and permanent;
therefore the Levitical Priesthood is utterly ceased. These things which then
prefigured Christ to come in the flesh, and to die for our Redemption, after
his coming and fulfilling all things foreordained, prefigured under the Law,
and foretold by the Prophets, are done away and abolished; as not only dead,
but a killing letter, a ministration of Condemnation: Before which, the Law
killed non effective, or per se, Gal. 5.2. 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. 12ae. q. 97. 2, 3m.
but occasion arrepta, non data; by reason of man's infirmity. But now after
the Passion of Christ, the Ceremonial Law is not only Lex mortua, but in the
profession and observation thereof, Mortifera; because thereby Christ shall
nothing profit men; because such Ceremonies hold out an expectation of Christ
the Savior of the elect to come: Which whoever now professes, Gal. 5.2, 4.
is Antichristian, renouncing the true and only Redeemer already come in the
fullness of time, and so cutting himself off from all hope of Salvation; there
being no other name given under Heaven among men, whereby we must be saved;
Acts 4.11,
neither is there salvation in any other. Now the present Ministry is of the
Everlasting Gospel of Christ; and the Ministers thereof, Revel. 14.6.
are Ambassadors of Christ, and his Deputies for the Gospel on Earth, who is a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec; who changes not by Death and
Succession, as the Levitical Priest, but lives ever; and is a faithful High
Priest over the House of God: Other Priesthood, in propriety of speaking, we
own none.

To conclude, we must consider, that some names which once were venerable and
honorable, have in process of time, become opprobrious and disgraceful terms, as

1. The word Tyrant. Servius in Aenei. l. 7. tells us that with the Grecians,
Tyranni and Regis nulla discretio est. And Suidas shows also that it was
once, (...).
Nomen melioris ominis, ac levius, until Dyonysius, and others like, by their
cruelty dishonored it: Since, it signifies the worst of men, because of bad,
the greatest; such as Jerome describes, Tom. 1. ad Demetriad. de virg. servand.

1. The name Papa, (as has been said) was once of great reverence, until the
eminent impiety of some so called, embased the same.

3. The name Magus, was once among the Persians, an honorable title, as also
among others. Suidas gives (...), by (...), lovers of God: And Jerome says,
Magi differunt a maleficis; aliqui honesti, etc. such for continence he
specifieth, Lib. 2. adv. Jovin. Serve. in lib. 4. Aenei.
Yet the Romans condemned Magic, probrosa enim ars habita est. And Jerome in
Ephesians. Proem. notes, that the Ephesian Idolaters were given to magic, Which ever
(says he) follows idolatry. This might be instanced in many great examples.

4. Possibly, the Hebrew word (...) was once also of honest signification,
which some learned men give by Caupona, a Victualer: So Vatablus, Pagnin and
Val. Shindler, after the Chaldee, John 2.1. 1 Kings 3.27. he gives this reason,
speaking of the Spies. Si fuisset meretrix, hi viri ad illam non divertissent,
ob suspiciones, and scortatorum advenientium metum. The seventy whom the New
Testament Writers, Josh. 2.1.
generally follow, because it was then their Vulgar Greek, render it by (...),
meretricis, and so (...), meretrices, 1 King. 3. deriving it from (...)
scortatus fuit, but the Rabbis derive the word which we speak of, from, (...),
among other things signifying cibatus est in the Chalde: It may seem, that the
ill behavior of such Women, had caused the word so much to decline to infamy.

5. Certainly, that sacred name of Priest, in proper signification among the
Jews, and in Analogical among Christians, by the rebellion of some of them
against God and his Christ, and their impurity of example in the declining
condition of the Church, in the mouths of the Vulgar, from an honorable
signification became disgraceful; though those of better understanding, knew
and know how to use it to the reverence of Gospel Ministers.

I have thus much digressed for their sakes, who do not, Page 25.
but would understand these things, and now again to our adversary and his
course eloquence.

You say, Oh shameful Reformation! what compel a man himself to set out the
tithes of his own goods, to maintain a hireling Priest, etc.] The Orator would
here say, Let this perverseness be in the equity of Greeks, Qui maledictis
insectantur eos, a quibus de veritate dissentiunt: Shameful Reformation!
Hireling Priest! O shameful scurrility! I say not (...), or bona verba quaeso;
possibly your canine eloquence would break you, if it had no vent. For my part,
I have no list to bark again at so angry a Cur; had I any such custom or mind,
I could say with Jerome, Possum remordere sivelim, Ad Dominon. ep. l. 2.
possum genuinum dentem laesus infigere. But I say only consider with whom the
Apostle araigneth revilers, 1 Cor. 6.10. and what is the root of railing --
Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth; and
mark well, if in that glass, you do not discern your own countenance.

That you wish for, Old Priests, and old Ecclesiastical Courts (that is,
Popish) I easily believe, that herein you do not dissemble: But if there be any
such abuses, as you pretend; what is that to the cause of tything? does an
abuse by man, in your logic conclude, a just cause to take away the holy use
of that which has been abused? if that were so, how little good would be left
us of all the Creatures of God? and what cruelty is it, Page 26.
think you, severely and according to Law, to punish obstinate offenders, who
can, but will not let go that, which they have robbed just owners of?

Next you stomach it, that some say Minsters have as good right to the tenth
part, as the owner has to the other nine.] which is most true: Consider for
the better understanding hereof. 1. The common or civil right of men, which the
Laws of Nations give, and confirm to every possessor bonae fidei, by purchase,
descent, etc. this right to the creatures, a Turk or Pagan may have, in that
determinate portion which he possesses. 2. The divine right which man had in
his Creation, but lost in his fall, and utterly forfeited in the first Adams
attaindor; this was restored again to believers in the second Adam, Christ; of
which he says, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All are yours, and ye are Christ's: This
belongs only to the Elect. In both these kinds, we are to observe. 1. a Right
common to any, so all or any may have a civil right to any kind of Creature. 2.
A Right peculiar to some as being separated from the common Condition, by some
special Act of Gods Providence, of which sort are Tithes given by him, to
those, who serve about holy things, in his public Worship: which being laid
down, it may appear that Ministers of the Gospel have as good right to the
Tenth or Tithe, as the owner has to the other nine parts; if at least you will
grant that God gives as good right, by his divine donation, as any sale or
assignment of man can make.

But you say -- Yet am I not bound to pay them, etc.] True, if neither Laws of
God, Page 26. Mark. 5.3.
nor man can bind you; but that like the Masterless Gadaren, possessed of the
Devil, you break Chains and Fetters, and no man can bind you; but if divine or
humane Law can hold, you are bound to pay, and that by such a Bond, as no Laws,
Decrees, Statutes or Dispensations of Man, can discharge you from; but to speak
to them, whose Consciences tell them, that the Law of God is, and ought to be
their rule. How posterity stands bound in public Grants, Donations, Vows or
Covenants, consider in the example of Israel and the Gibeonites, before
mentioned; how in private legacies and bequeathments, the Apostle will inform
you Gal. 3.15. Though it be but a man's Testament, yet if it be confirmed, no
man disanulleth it. That is, no man ought to make it void by any violation
thereof; but this belongs to another question; our claim being grounded not
on the assignment or grant of man, but on the revealed. Will of God, who
commanded To give Tithes of all the increase of their Land, etc. Numb. 18.21,
26, 30. And to make their Teachers partakers of all their good things, Gal.
6.6. Does this bind men (think you) to pay the settled maintenance of Ministers
Tithes Predial, Personal, and Mixed? Or are you resolved, to suspend your
obedience to God herein, until you be delivered into the everholding Chains of
darkness to be reserved unto judgment? Be well advised in time, for there will
be no change in eternity.

And does your next Supposition conclude it arbitrary, 2 These. 3.
to work or live inordinately? Or were there not the like propositions, between
Tithes and yearly values of the Lands, on which they grew under the Law, to any
that can be pretended to? What sober man amongst you, ever grumbled at the
nimietie of wealth? Who quarrelleth at the largeness of a Lords Estate, who is
a Peer of the Land, or a Gentleman's, or Yeomans, as too much for him and his
Family, except some lawless, impious Leveller? Though perhaps one of these
Estates be forty times more than the Ministers incom; and possibly the Laics
revenue is spent in Luxury, Debauchery, or Idleness at least, while the poor
Minister is envied, and grudged his portion of Gods blessing, the Earths
increase, which he gives you with him, (that I may not say, for him) the
Minister I say, spending many careful hours Night and Day for your Souls
Edification, Comfort and Salvation -- Sudat and alget -- like Jacob over Labans
Flock at Padan-Aram, in the day consumed with drought, and by the frost in the
night, and his sleep departs from his eyes, Genesis 31.40.

You say, A tenth part of the increase is generally more worth, than the Land
on which it grows] What have you dwelt at Gerar, where Isaac reaped an
hundredfold in a Year? Or is it because you have little skill in the
Georgicks? I am confident, that this one untruth would yield you a Million by
the year, if you could make it true; but were it as you say, did ever much
increase of fruits make an exception in Gods grant of them, as that the Tithes
should be holy to him and his service, and paid to the Priests of the
Sanctuary, or Ministers of the Gospel; provided that they did not exceed such,
or such a value? Methinks in reason, the more bountifully God gives increase
of the Earth, the more willing men should be to render him that part thereof,
which he has reserved (as it were a Lords-rent) unto himself, and his own
service; and here excuse me, that I tell you your objections seem not much
unlike the declamation of some ill-contrived Orator, so undistinctly hudled
out, that neither does the Speaker well consider, nor the hearer easily
understand what he says, more then that, quod vult, valde vult.

Your following Cavils and Cases, Pasturing and Stocking Land, Mal. 1.14.
may show, that you have craft enough to beguile the Minister of due
maintenance; but cursed be the deceiver: and it were but lost labor, to teach
others this skill, seeing that too many without your Magistery have enough of
the knave already.

Page 28.
Next you talk, Of new payment of Tithes, etc.] To which we answer, That payment
of Tithes, is evidently as old as Abraham; and for ought you know, as Adam. To
the rest of your Objections present, we say, Abusus non tollit usum; that which
has been abused by some, may yet be returned to the true service of God again.
So the censers of the rebellious Israelites, made covers for the Altar of God;
and truly the annexed reason is remarkable -- For they were offered before the
Lord, therefore they are hallowed, Numb. 16.38. And is not the same reason good
for reducing Tithes (abused to superstitious uses in former times) unto the
present true worship of God, seeing they were hallowed, not by the dedication
of a rebellious Corah, but by God himself; and that to his own holy service?
And what else means our Savior by the Parable of the strong man's Fort, Luke
11.22.
and reprizal of all his impropriated Vessels, but Christ's overcoming Satan,
and recovering the bodies and souls of his Elect, from his Power and Captivity?
Body and Soul must perish eternally, if that alteration which is wrought in the
sinner, by the Spirit of Sanctification, make him not acceptable and beloved of
God, as a son, who was before his reconciliation by Christ, an enemy. How else
says the Apostle (speaking of many sorts of pollution by sin, -- Such were
some of you: Romans 5. ^ Cor. 6.10.
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God: Upon the account of reducing that
to a good use, acceptable to God, which has been abused unto evil, we retain
our Churches, and Oratories, and worship God in Spirit and in Truth therein,
though they have been in times of Popery, houses of Idols, and Idolatry.

To your many following impertinencies, if I should follow you in your
Wilde-Goose-Chase, I should tire the patient Reader; therefore I only add,
That there is much difference between tithes of Mines, Quarries of Iron, Brass,
Tin, Lead, Coals, and that which the Earths superficies brings forth, as Corn,
Grass, Fruits, Wood, etc. though by your leave, all these are increases of the
Earth; and therefore tythable. Sir Edward Coke, by you cited, limits his
sentence, with a Till they be severed from the Land: So that though no tithe be
paid of the Land, yet are they to be paid from the Land.

Your frequent talking of Popery, is but to make your incautious Reader
believe, that you are no Papist; and that you may insinuate into the peoples
minds an odium against Ministers, whereas indeed in such seeming-opposition,
you do your uttermost endeavor to bring in Popery.

You further say, When I bought my Land, I bought not the tithes, etc.] This
you say, some object; to which you frame your answer: But we require our
liberty to answer for our selves. Neither could you, nor any man buy out Gods
part; for that no man had power to sell you: So that in your conveyance, there
needed no specification of Covenant for, or exemption from a tenth part of the
increase of the Land, that being presupposed payable by Gods reservation
thereof unto his own service. What ever man buyeth or sells, in point of
commutative justice, Gods part comes not within the compass thereof; neither
can it be sold or alienated; neither can any sale or purchase of man lessen or
impeach his right, or any part thereof, which he never granted to any but those
whom he appoints to serve about holy things.

Next, you bravely say, I answer, Page 29.
that I have already proved all Land is tythe-free, etc.] Indeed I think he
meant it -- Magnis tamen excidit ausis: Tell me now in sadness, who can free
the earth from the charge of tithes, but that supreme power of God, who gave
them for an inheritance, unto those whom he designed to his public service?
Here we require your explication of this term, Tythe-free; mean you this in
respect of any Humane Law, Ordinance, Provision, or Prescription of Men thereto
pretended? If so, it is to no purpose, seeing, as has been said, None but God
has power of giving or alienating tithes. Now, once again, we challenge you to
show us, where God in holy Scripture, ever repealed his Law of tything. Further
we say, that all the habitable parts of the Christian world, which yield
increase, are tythable, and none exempted therefrom, by Gods Law; in which, if
you beat our ears, with a thousand beggings of the question, you shall never
obtain it of us.

That you say, Tithes are a burden which the Pope laid on us,] Is a fallacious
assertion; the Heathen could here teach you, that quod in divinis rebus sumes,
Plaut. Mil. glor.
sapienti lucro est: But God laid this duty on us, which you call a burden; and
this grant of his, no Ordinance or Law of Man (though enjoining the same duty)
can more drown, than a Lease can a Fee-simple. Man's Laws are alterable, but the
morality of Gods Law is not.

Next you talk of Thieves and Robbers] Whom you mean, I only guess at, and
say, Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes? Clodius accusat maechos --
What? great Thieves, make hue and cry after true men? you Church-Robbers,
stealers of tithes (of whom you are at best, an a better) are the Thieves and
Robbers, Mal. 3.
in Gods judgment, if there be any such on these borders.

You say next, That you may by as good reason, be eased of your tithes, as of
the Popes yoke.] Which is in effect to say, that you may as justly cast off
Gods Law, as the Popes; is this Popery, ho? The reason offered as to the
question, if formed, would appear to be a fallacia non causae pro causa. Your
Land, you say, was purchased when the Popes authority lay heavy on this Land.
That being cast off, you would infer, that we may with as good reason cast off
tithes which he commanded to be paid: Yea, but consider a superior command and
cause, I mean, a Divine enforcing that duty of paying tithes (although the Pope
had not at all commanded such payment) and your fallacy is dissolved.

You say, First to preach that tithes are due, Page 29.
and then to limit them to Parishes, etc.] And why not? Gods Word warranting
the one, and man's just accommodation requiring the other? Once again I say, as
concerning Parishes, there is a parochial or particular dueness of tithes, or
that of Parishes, to the Minister there officiating in Gods public service:
And there is a general dueness of tithes, that is to say, of tithes to be paid
to the body of the Ministry; which is by Gods providence distributed into
several parochial Cures, where they are by the increases of the Earth, thence
arising, to be maintained, that they may there preach the Gospel, and
administer the holy Sacraments, etc. unto the people there inhabiting.

You say again, That tithes were at first, as charity at most, as a
freewil-offering of the owner.] This is an absurd falsehood, and a shameless
begging of the question; and you seem to dispute non ad idem; but circularly.
Speak plainly; Do you mean, that Man's charity giving, and not Gods Law
commanding, brought tithes to be the Ministers maintenance? If so, it is
apparently false, by Gods several commands to pay them to the Levitical
Priesthood; wherein I suppose, you will not affirm, that Men's charity was the
first, or principal moving cause; or do you mean, that the freewil of man, in
this business of tithes, preceded that command of God, as a cause the effect?
or that posito Dei mandato, man did yield a free and cheerful obedience, in
paying tithes, as God had commanded? Which voluntary act, was as Paul's
preaching of the Gospel, such as that woe had been to him, if he had not done
it? Express your terms and sense, and let us have no after-reckonings: We know
that Gods Children yield a cheerful and a voluntary obedience; they do their
duty commanded, not moillingly, grudgingly, or of necessity; and, 2 Cor. 9 7. 1
Pet. 5.2. 1 Cor 9.17.
that God loves and rewards cheerful obedience, and such are all acts of true
Religion, voluntary, not compulsory; the Spirit of God making us willing of
unwilling; so carrying about our wills, and affections, as Astronomers say, the
primum mobile does the inferior orbs of Heaven in their Diurnal motion from
East to West, contrary to their Natural motion, yet by an admirable influence,
Citra violentiam: So we can admit tithes paid by Gods servants, to be a
free will offering, respectu offerentis, but not ex part praecipientis; as if
man instituted, and paid them without Gods Command for the same; and as if they
were works of Supererogation. We know, that in every good which we do, God
works both velle and perficere: Phil. 2.
we acknowledge, that they are not rightly performed by any pure Naturals of
man, but of Gods free Grace, both Jubentis quod vult, and praestantis quod
jubet. So Israel brought a willing Offering unto the Lord, every man and woman,
whose heart made them willing, to bring for all manner of work, Exodus, 35.29.
which the Lord had commanded to be made by the hands of Moses. But our
Adversaries would fain have it, that Tithes were but as some votive Obligation
of the Owners, which they needed not to have dedicated or paid, except
themselves pleased. This is the Witchess Herodias which they so ambitiously
pursue, that they might once conclude an Arbitrary maintenance for Ministers:
and do but mark the Circle, to which this mole is Conjured. Fain would they
have Gods Ordinance undermined, and dissolved into such Imaginary Principles,
as might bear this castle in the Air, that Tithes should henceforth, be only
what men in Charity and Free Will would give their Ministers. Thank you for you
kindness, gentle Sir. but get you Alms-men where you will, we are none of them.
The Papist has too much advantage already, in their large maintenance, open
Presses for their Students Works, liberal Contributions for any advancement of
his Cause; while our Presses are too much shut to good Studies, Contributions;
rare is Honesty, and if the Jesuit could but yet more discourage us, by taking
away the remainder of Ministers necessary maintenance by Tithes, his work were
done, and England undone. To the reverend Ministers, I entreat leave to say --
If they be Prophets, and if the Word of the Lord be with them, let them now
make Intercession to the Lord of Hosts, Isai. 27.18.
that the Vessels which are left in the house of the Lord -- go not to Babylon.

And now limit them (that is Tithes) to Parishes, etc.] That which you speak,
Page 30.
may pass muster among your Impertinences, as to the present question;
concerning Parishes, I have already spoken; Genesis 14.18.
here I only add, 1. That the first place of Scripture mentioning a Priest,
mentions Tithes paid unto him. 2. The first place also wherein, House of God,
Genesis 28.^8.^2
or Church is spoken of, there also are Tithes, the maintenance of the
Priesthood vowed to God; as some note by that name, whereby Parish-Churches
were anciently called; that is, tituli -- lapis iste quem posui in titulum erit
Domus Dei: So Damasus in the life of Evaristus Bishop of Rome. Anno 112. says
-- hic titulos in Urbe Roma divisit Presbyteris: Platins. vit. Eva^ist.
Onuthrius compu^eth Anno 96. Council. To. 1. Page 106. e^i. 1606.
And the Nicen Council, c. 21, mentionth Parishes, as Carraza recites the
Canons thereof, out of the second Epistle of Julius: So that by those
divisions, the Congregations were assigned to such and such Churches, and the
Tithes thence arising, belonged to the Ministers there serving, as has been
noted, from Gal. 6.6. what the Popes you speak of got of first fruits,
impropriate Tithes, etc. is a loss to our Clergy, and therefore not advisedly
urged by you against them.

That which you further say, that -- No man can prescribe to have Tithes, etc.]
Were something against those who make prescription the ground of their claim,
which concerns us not, who claim from divine donation.

Again you say -- many may prescribe to be free from Tyithes, or part thereof]
Consider of what value prescription can be against Gods unchangeable moral Law,
and your second thoughts will tell you, that antiquity of error can never make
any good Prescription. Christ yielded the Pharisaical glosses antiquity on
their side, Math. 5.21. etc. ye have heard of old time, that it was said by (or
to) them, etc. which he presently corrected with his -- but I say unto you,
etc. The rest of your following discourse savoureth strongly of your siding
with the Popish party: as your stomaking the Title of the head of the Church,
which we understand to be the supreme Governor, under God, of inchurched men:
neither is this, as you say here, The Kings new Authority, as the head of the
Church. For what say we more therein, than Tertullian many hundred years since
said -- We honor (says he) the Emperor as we ought -- Vt hominem a Deo
secundum -- and solo Deo minorem -- Sic enim omnibus major est, dum solo vero
Deo minor est. In Scap. c. 2.
I conceive that you are not to learn that Caput imports a Chief, First, or
Principal.

But you say, That all Archbishops, Bishops, etc. were no longer to hold of
the Pope, Page 30.
but of the King; and not to claim their benefices by Title from the Pope, but
of the King, by virtue of that Act of Parliament: and here the succession from
the Pope was cut off and discontinued, etc.] A grief to all good hearts, think
the Papists; But why should this trouble you, if you be none of them? What is
this to us, who acknowledge neither dependence on, nor Succession from the Pope?

You say more -- And so all their Right, Title and Claim, was and is at an end]
What because the Popes donation is at an end, must Gods also be involved in the
same ruin? How will that conclusion follow? The abuse and usurpation is taken
away, ergo, the right use and just possession must down? Are Gods Laws,
grounded on the Popes Decrees and Grants? I never yet heard that claimed by any
of you: And what wild Logic stands your discourse upon? Countrymen, open
your eyes, and let not these Wolves in Sheeps-clothing any longer beguile you;
the Fox under a stupid Animal's skin, enough discovers his appetite to catch
Geese, and to bring you and your Children into the miserable darkness of Popery
and the Tyranny thereof. Consider before it be too late, how easily they will
do it, if by taking away the Ministers of Christ from you, depriving them of
livelihood, they bring into their places, Popish Priests and Jesuits; if they
get footing here again, their little finger will prove heavier than your
Ministers loins were to you; Tithes would not long suffice them.

John 9.21.
Next yout talk of Impropriators Claim by purchase. Concerning one of them we
only say, as the Parents of the once blind man answered the Jews, he is of age,
ask him, he shall speak for himself. Here we thank you for your ingenuous
Confession -- those (you say) that sold him (Impropriations) had no good Title,
neither can theirs be made good, which is derived from them.

Page 31.
By which (you say) it does plainly appear, that no man at this day, can claim
Tithe of another, either by divine or humane Right, etc.] If you speak of
Impropriate Tithes, we have nothing here to do with them; If of Appropriate, we
say, if begging the question would serve your turn, we would at once confess --
actum est de decimis: but you are here come to the same point of your Circle,
in evident begging the question, saying -- no man at this day can claim Tithes
of another, either by Divine or Humane Right: prae clara verba, sed verba;
What? Caesar's, Veni, Vidi, Vici? A singular faculty you seem to yourself to
have; no sooner do you think a thing, but it must plainly appear to be so; but
that we sufficiently know your quality of begging the question, we might think
that some miles gloriosus were entered into the Scene, telling how many thousand
flying Enemies he fetched down with his limed Barbolts, and slew in one day. To
the next we say, that we are not called to meddle with State-Interests; and
concerning the Pope and his, we have here nothing to do; only we mark how the
declining of the Pope's Supreamacy sticks in your Stomach.

Now (say you) to plead for such wages of unrighteousness] You dare call Gods
Donation, wages of Unrighteousness; Page 3^.
speaking as they who care not what, (though blaspemy) but how much they speak.
To that which you say, concerning Priests receiving Augmentations; I say, I
know no Priest so much favored here, I know some reverend Ministers who are.

Which (you say) they may as well take away (meaning Gleb-land) as their
predecessors did the revenues of Abbeys and Monasteries] Yet your selves
confess, Page 33.
that they were the Hives of lazy Drones. We wish that in their just
dissolution, they had been better employed; but affirm that none can justify
the taking away things consecrated to Gods service; but you constantly grumble
at the decay of Popery; we wish that your vizard were pulled off, that speaking
barefaced your incautious reader might discern, on which side you are.

Whose Tithes (you say again) are often as much worth as the Land] I once heard
one, Page 34.
who being censured for reporting a gross untruth, replied, that he had told it
so often, that his self began to think that it was true. But I hope you here
speak Philosopher-like -- ex aliorum sententia, not your own, but others
opinion.

-- Forthwith throw away Tithes, etc.] We thank you, as much as though we did,
and shall think of your Motion.

You say -- So long as they continue, there can never be any possibility of
raising maintenance in such places] If you mean so long as impropriations
continue, etc. per nos, alia pax esto; if otherwise, your argument hence
derived, as to the taking away Tithes, is very feeble, being a fallacia non
causae, pro causa. For what hinderance can paying and receiving of sythes be to
those places, where none are payable as praedial, as in Towns and Cities,
wherein are no fields? But consider you that fear God, what Azariah
acknowledged. 2 Chronicles. 31.10. Since the people began to bring the Offerings
(with their Tithes, as appears there, v. 5, 6.) We have had enough, for the
Lord has blessed his people: which was according to that which God speaks,
Mal. 3.10. Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse -- and prove me now
herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it.

Next you ask concerning Towns and Cities, or Lands Impropriate, where there is
no competency of maintenance by Tithes -- Must they never have an able
Minister? Have they no share in our Gospel, because they have no maintenance? I
answer, the cause why such as you specify have no greater share of our
Ministers pains, is not so much because they have no maintenance, as because
they will have none; while Gadaren-like they value their swine, or temporal
interests, more than the Gospel. And now think you that they do not put the
Word of God from them, and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life; not
only who contradict the Word when it is preached, but they also who take a
course, that it may never be preached unto them? I speak of them, who dwelling
in populous Towns and Cities, will not agree together to levy some such means
for the support of an able Minister, as may keep him alive, and enable him to
the service of God. But to pass by this fault of Townsmen and Citizens, etc.
we can justify by thousands of witnesses, that the Gospel has been powerfully
and diligently preached in sundry Towns, by able Ministers, where no
maintenance was either raised by any Impropriator, or otherwise could be by any
appropriated Tithes, there growing, I will add without any reward of their
pains, either retributed by the auditors, or expected by those preachers.

You demand again -- Have you not a more righteous Rule?] What than that, which
Gods Word prescribed? This and your following farrago libelli, may be satisfied
with this answer, that it is a dangerous thing to account a man's self more wise
than God, and a foolish presumption to endeavor any amendment of his
Ordinances; needs must he find his human wisdom foolishness, who opposes it to
divine. Your objection from the inequality of paying, is vain; for who can be
ignorant that there were inequalities of Estates under the Law, or that every
man was bound to pay according to that which he had, not according to that
which he had not? Your following cavils are more suitable to the gallfull pen
of some apostate Julian, or jeering Lucian than the writing of any professed
Christian.

To that which you say, of Throwing away Tithes as an old relic of Popery] We
answer, that when you have proved them to be such, you may have some ground for
such a motion; till then we require your patience, if we hold fast Gods
Ordinance, and the Ministers just maintenance.

Further you say, Halt no longer between two, etc.] Aeschylus Jasonem ebrium (n
scena quadam) induxi^, quo vitio laboraba^ ipse poeta tragicus, comentitus
Heroas. Athenae. l. 10. c. 7.
We must tell you Sir, here you entitle us to your own faults, as that drunken
Poet Aeschylus did the noble hero Jason, and other Grecians to his own vices;
it is you who halt between Papist and a Schismatical pretender to Reformation.
So Ahab would have put the crime of troubling Israel, on the Prophet of the
Lord: as for us, God knows that our souls desire is to cleave steadfastly unto
him and his sacred Ordinances; and we have not yet temporized (as too many have
done) God preserving us in our suffering of hard things; Is this halting with
Sir Gregory Nonsense?

Next you talk of A more Gospel-like way of maintenance, etc.] To which it is
easily answered, that not only you, but no Creature, Men or Angels of Heaven,
can prescribe a more Gospel-like way, than that which God has appointed, and
Christ approved.

The light which you talk of, we own not for such, who have a more sure word of
Prophecy, unto which as unto light, that shines in a dark place, we attend
until the day dawn -- As for those ignes fatui of Men's inventions, we neither
value them, nor find any cause to follow them.

Next you speak of a way to establish the Nation upon a sure foundation of true
freedom, as to the conscience] We say, 1. Use not your Liberty for a cloak of
malitiousness. 2. Beware that you be not of their number, of whom the Apostle
speaks, 1 Pet. 2.16. 2 Pet. 2.18.19.
who when they speak great swelling words of vanity -- while they promise them
liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption. 3. If you dissemble
not, but bear good will to your Countries freedom, and good conscience; we
cannot but pity the seeming disproportion between your zeal and knowledge, as
we would pity to see mettle in a blind jade.

Jer. 15.19.
As for giving content to separate Congragations, our rule is the same which,
God of old gave the Prophet -- Let them return unto thee, but return not thou
unto them. And as for satisfying such as are self-excommunicate, and divided
from the womb of the Church, we pity them, but must leave them to Gods
tribunal: for our selves we have learned of the Apostle, Gal. 1.10. If I yet
please men, I should not be the servant of Christ. That on which you spend your
Rhetoric about contention for Tithes, as if that were a sufficient cause why
they should be taken away, is very childish. Tell me, have there not been, and
still are many bloody contentions about the preaching of the Gospel of Christ?
What, would it be a sure foundation of true freedom, as to the conscience, to
obey the command of those Rulers, Elders and Scribes, Annas, Caiphas, etc. Not
to speak at all, Act. 4.18.
nor teach in the name of Jesus? Is it your best prescript for the cure of the
headache, to cut off the head? medice cura teipsum. But seriously, your
argument is a fallacia accidentis, a wholesome way were for the people duly to
pay and set out their Tithes according to Laws divine and humane. I conceive
that no man would be so ill-advised, as to sue for his right, if he might have
it without trouble and charge of Law.

That you say, Paying unreasonable, etc.] You speak like your self. But does
paying Tithes hinder Tillage, and the staff of bread as you pretend? Here is
again another fallacia accidentis, if that be true which you say; or a fallacia
non causae, pro causa, if false. It is not paying of Tithes, which is the
obstruction to plenty, but men's unbelief; God himself saying, Prove me now if I
will not -- pour you out a blessing, etc. Mal. 3.10.
Of what kind? Of the increases of the Earth? And what is the condition to
which that promise relates? Is it not paying Tithes, and leaving their
Sacriledg?

Let no man (say you) henceforth think it strange, etc.] We shall not think it
strange, that some men refuse to pay Tithes, while there is a Devil to tempt
them to Sacriledg; nor wonder that some will pay Tithes, because we have a good
God, who though he justly permit many to strong delusions, that they may
perish, yet will he preserve his elect, and incline their hearts to obey his
Laws and Ordinances, that it may be well with them, and theirs.

HAving thus answered these cavils, I propose the ensuing conclusions to the
good readers consideration.

1. All are bound to do the most high Lord God homage and service, of whom it
is written, Him only shall thou serve. Mat. 4.
This is a rule so evidently just, that the very heathens in their twelve
Tables of their Law acknowledged it, on this ground, Az or. l. 6. c. 63. Cic.
de leg. l. 2. 12ae. q. 44. 6. Lex natura is non potest deleri, quoad prima
principia.
that God is the Lord, and disposer of all things. For as Schoolmen say, the
Law of Nature cannot be extinguished, as to its first Principles. Now there is
no Nation of the World so immane and barbarous, but that it believes there is a
God, who created, and still governs this Universe: So that the brutish
Poticius for his ignorance of God, was esteemed a kind of Paradox in Nature, a
Prodigy and Monster of Mankind. Cic. Plaut.
God's Word teaches us, that he must be worshipped, but, as his self commands
in it, which is his revealed will; as it is written, Mic. 6.8.
He has showed thee O man what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee.

2. We must be faithful and true to him, whom we adore as our God, the
searcher of hearts: not encroaching upon any part of that, which the holy Word
declares (as a reserved right) to belong unto the Lord our God.

3. What ever carnal reason, or wisdom of the flesh pretend, or suggest to the
contrary; we must duly and willingly render and pay unto him all his Rights,
and Duties belonging unto him as a supreme Lord of all: As it is written, Give
unto God the things that are Gods; Mat, 12.21. 1 Chro. 29 14. Psalm. 115.16.
which when we have truly done, we must acknowledge with David, Of thy own hand
have we given thee; all is thine: The earth has he given unto the children of
men; only reserving to himself, as it were a small Lords-rent, as an
acknowledgment of his Soverain Dominion.

4. The things which God has reserved, as a Tribute or Rent to himself, are,
1. Either of the time measured unto man for this present life; out of which he
has reserved a Seventh part, or a Sabbath and holy rest, that we may be
enabled to subsist and serve him; without which we cannot be happy.

2. Or of the blessing and increases of the Earth; out of which, God in his
bounty, feeds, clothes, every way necessary accommodates us in our humane
necessities; only reserving unto his own service, little more than a tenth
part, and that for man's good also; that by such means a Ministry, able to
edify, comfort and enform him, concerning the Will of God for his salvation,
may be maintained; to which Ministry, he has appointed that his reserved part,
the tenths; to those I say, whom he calls to labor in his service.

3. A part of the Earth, or land which he has given man to Till, Sow, Plant,
and yield Increase: as he reserved a part of our time of life, for our serving
him, so has he also a part and portion of our place, or the earth on which he
will be served; (for without time when, and place where, there can be no humane
Action) That is, Church, and Churches, Houses set a part from all common use,
to his service and public worship accommodate. So was there a Temple and
Synagogues for Israel, and Churches among Christians, even from the Primitive
age, 1 Cor. 11.22. Also, to the Levites there were Cities appointed, out of
every Tribe; Number. 25. 23. etc. even 48 walled Cities with their Suburbs; their
other revenue being generally provided for them, by Tithes, Oblations, etc. out
of the whole Land beside. Now, our Savior released none of these Rights, as to
the morality thereof; that is, the equity of his servants maintenance, and
necessary accommodation, in his worship: Therefore he avowed the Temple to be
his Fathers House; and the Prophet says, John. 2.16. Mal. 1.11. R v. 8. Mat.
21.13.
From the rising of the Sun, even to the going down of the same -- in every
place, incense (that is Prayers of the Saints) shall be offered unto my name,
says the Lord of Hosts. So Christ declared himself to be Lord of the Sabbath;
and so also, is he Lord of that portion of the Earhts increases, reserved to
the public Worship of God: and in case of detention thereof, Mal. 3.
he says expressly -- Ye have robbed me -- in Tithes and Offerings.

5. The Law had three branches: The Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial. The first
whereof, was and is the rule by which all persons, at all times, and in all
places, are to compose their lives, as to God, which is the substance of the
first Table. The second Table prescribes the mutual duty of man to man. The
Ceremonial Law, prescribed several religious Rights, according to which, God
would have his Israel to worship him, until the fullness of time wherein Christ
was to come in the flesh, and fulfill all those things for man's redemption,
which those rights prefigured, and under which God's people were to be
exercised and trained up all the time of their minority, as a Child under a
Schoolmaster, in expectation of a Savior and Redeemer to come. The judicial Law
appertained to Israel, for the well government of them, by administration of
civil Laws, for the peace, welfare and tranquillity of that people: therefore
these are often joined together in holy Scripture, Precepts, Ceremonies and
Judgments. The first whereof, appertains to the right forming of holy
manners. The second to Rights and sacred Ceremonies, determining the manner of
Gods worship for that time. The third, to the civil government of the people.
And these three are as it were the nerves of every well governed State; holy
Manners, religious Worship, and due execution of Justice.

6. Divine positive Laws or Institutions, bound, as did moral Preceps, though
with some considerable differences. Some positive Laws were binding only to
some particular persons; as that, Genesis 2.16. Of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, thou shall not eat of it: this bound (as to the precept) only Adam
and Eve, who were but one flesh. Some positive Law, Genesis 2.24.
as they were temporal, having their beginning and ending in time, thoug they
were binding to a multitude, or nation, yet were they not so to all men, as
Circumcision, raising up seed to the diseased brother, etc. which bound Israel
respectively, until Christ came in the flesh, that the truth of the promise
concerning his being of the Tribe of Judah, and family of David might appear in
that distinction of Tribes. So the many Sanctions appertinent to Priests and
Levites, Heb. 10.1.
the Service and Rights which having a shadow of good things then to come, were
to cease when the truth was come, and had accomplished all those things, which
were thereby prefigured. So the judicial Precepts were positive for the time,
while Isreal's republic continued, and so were binding, and still are as they
have their ground in moral equity. To these are reducible those precepts
prohibiting Marriages in certain degrees of consanguinity, which positive Law
makes incestuous, then commencing when mankind was increased unto multitudes
and societies of men, which could not bind in the family of Adam, supposing
God's Ordinance for the progagation of all mankind by one man and one woman.

For the Ceremonial Laws, they bound not before their institution signified to
Israel by the divine Lawgiver; neither do they, because they are not positive
unto this time. Therefore that opinion is erroneous and dangerous, which says
-- Naturae lex and ratio deposcit and precipit, Azor. instit. l. 6. 25.
ut Deo Sacrificia offeramus, quibus peccata nostra expiemus. For sacrificing
was no Law of Nature, but a Posi ive Law; the Law of Nature was as the Original
to the Moral, which was a transcript or duplicate thereof; and there was a
positive precept for Abels sacrificing, without which it could not have been
acceptable to God, as done in faith; but now in propriety of terms, offering
Sacrifice for expiation, is no more justifiable, than Circumcision. Christ has
by his own oblation of himself once offered, Heb. 10.10, 14, 18. vid. ib. c. 9.
12.
perfected for ever them that are sanctified -- now where remission of these
(that is sins) is, there is no more offering for sin. These Laws are now not
only mortuae, but mortiferae; not only dead, but a killing Letter. Whereas the
moral Law (in all negative precepts thereof) binds Semper and ad semper. And
the Affirmative (as may be seen in the fourth and fifth precept) bind semper,
though not ad semper. So we are all our life time bound to sanctify the
Sabbath, but we are not bound at all times of our life so to do, because it is
not always the Sabbath or Seventh day, and we are not bound to any
impossibility in Nature.

7. The Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, as positive, had some mixtures with
morality; and the moral had something Ceremonial or Positive for a time; Erat
partim morale and partim ceremoniale. 12ae. q. 100. 3. 2m. Alens. parc. 4.2.
which was the reason why the fourth precept was alterable, from the seventh
day reckoned from the Creation, to the Seventh day from Christ's Resurrection.
The moral precepts, as simply, such, are unalterable, and indispensable, as to
all times, places and persons. Neither did God ever dispense with the morality
of his own Laws: Mat. 5.
Neither did Christ, in any one jot or tittle dissolve them; whatsoever seems
contrary, is but expository in the result; as Christ doing most of his great
works on the Sabbath, was no dispensation with the fourth precept, but only an
interpretation thereof; showing that works of necessity and mercy, Luke 13.15.
and 14.5.
are works of the Sabbath. So God commanding Israel to borrow of the Egyptians,
and take away the things so borrowed; Exodus 11.2. Genesis 18.
by that Act of his justice doing Israel right (he being the great Judge of all
the World) in giving them their just wages, for their unjust servitude (which
wages the Egyptians detained from them) does but interpret the eigth
Commandment -- Thou shall not steal; That is, not by any means take away another
man's goods invito domino i. e. bonae fidei possessore. Now first we must
consider, That due wages belonging to Israel, in point of morality, which says
the labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10.7.
was in the Egyptians hands, who therefore were thereof but malae fidei
possessores, from whom, as from a thief or usurper it was legally to be
recovered; that might not be done without warrant from a competent Judge;
therefore God's warrant empowred them so to do; 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
as the sentence of those who now judge for God, may warrant a labourer, or
servant to recover his due hire, or wages unjustly detained from him. Secondly
it is considerable, That we may not take from him, who though of some other
Nation, is yet united, in the same bonds of community and amity with the
republic, Exodus 13.18. Numb. 14.3, 11. etc. Deuteronomy. 17.16. Genesis 44.14.
of which we are a part (which the Egyptians from that time were no longer to
be) except in case of legal proceeding, or lawful hostility; wherein as thou
may take away the life of an enemy, so may thou his goods; but in an unjust
War, the murder, or latrociny is double injury.

8. In man's fall, some moral Laws were to his understanding more unextinct
than others: So were the precepts of the first Table which concerned our duty
to, and worship of God, more obliterated than the precepts of the second Table,
which concern the maintenance of humane society; as, Honor thy father and thy
mother: Thou shall not kill, Commit adultery, steal, etc. The very Heathens
knew, that such things were unjust, impious, and destructive to humane society;
therefore they prohibited them in their 12 tables, or abridgment of their Laws;
and accordingly, severely punished the offenders. Toward the divine precepts
of the first table, which enjoined the due worship of one true God, their
unerstandings were more darkened, though even thereof they had some very
slender remains by natural principles not utterly extinct, as may appear in
their worshipping of those whom they took to be Gods.

9. The Scripture affirms not only that which is therein expressed totidem
verbis, but that also, which by necessary consequence follows the true sense
thereof; as appears in that which Christ said to the Saduces, Mat. 22.29.
Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures; Wherein? Exodus 3.6.
In that which God said unto Moses, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Why, here is not a word or syllable concerning the
resurrection of the dead, concerning which Christ there spoke; true, if we
consider express words; but from necessary consequence it follows, If God be
the God of the living, and not of the dead; then Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are
not so dead, but that they still live with God in their Spirits, and therefore
their bodies shall rise again to be with God, the God of the living, which they
not understanding, knew not the Scriptures and Power of God to raise the dead,
in the Scriptures declared. This may also appear in that which the Catholic
Church believes concerning the sacred Trinity, which is no where named in holy
Scripture totidem Syllabis, 1 John 5.
but by certain consequence from thence proved. The same also we must
understand concerning Baptising Infants, and the observation of the Christian
Sabbath, and so of paying Tithes to Gospel Ministers, etc,

10. God's precepts be they never so ancient, having no repeal appearing in
holy Scripture, are ever binding, unto the end of the World, and no man can
with any security of conscience attempt to free himself from the bond of any
duty imposed by Gods moral law at all, or from his positive precepts, without
clear evidence of the lawgivers will for the cessation thereof.

11. No moral Law of God is temporary, as concerning the future; but as it
binds every man without exception, respectively, so does it ever bind. Such
is the Law of tything, which is enjoined in the first, fourth, fifth, and
eighth precepts of the moral Law; as will appear in its place.

12. No man, councels, or authority of men, may dispense with any one precept
of Gods Law: Christ disavoweth any dissolution of it by himself, in the least
jot, as to the morality thereof. Therefore it is a sin, and such as shall
exclude a man from the Kingdom of Heaven, to attempt it, though with consent of
many, or most suffrages of men, under any pretense whatsoever. So when God
says, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, What will it avail the
Idolater to plead before his Tribunal, that a great part of the people say,
that Idols are Laymens books? Shall their distinction of dulia and latria
excuse them? What that some think the Sabbath peculiar to the Jews, and
therefore that it ought to vanish away with the ceremonial Law? What that some
think that Christian liberty freeth them from Obedience, to their civil
Magistrates; and that it was proper to the Jewish policy only; that some
impious Nicolaitans thought fornication no sin; or that Christian Liberty
freeth them from Gods Law, forbidding all uncleanness and filthy lust? If all
Nations and people should, or possibly could dispense with these, or any one
precept of Gods Moral Law, such consent could not amount to more or less, than
a general apostasy from God, and his sacred Law. What if people and Nations
should cry down tithes; as when the Hunnes, Goths, and Vandals, invading the
Western parts of the Christian World, Tithes and Churches were pulled down,
Universities, Colleges, and Schools of good learning were overthrown, as our
adversaries would fain have it now: Could all this do any more, than make their
outrages more infamous, hateful to God and Man, and more odious to all
posterities, to whom their detestable and unhappy memory should come; and for
present, themselves instrumental to pull down Gods curses and plagues upon
themselves and their Country, unappy in the birth and breeding up of such
prodigious miscreants?

13. No combination or consent of multitudes, may change or alter Gods sacred
Ordinances, under any pretense of Reformation, or of more convenience or
bettering them by any means. The vain and impious dream of some competency for
Ministers maintenance, instead of tithes, is mere rebellion against God and his
Laws, no better than an high and mad presumption to correct his wisdom,
rectify his providence, and attempting to control and amend his Decreed and
Sacred Ordinances, oblikely censuring them as defective or erroneous; which is
an acme and height of more than Luciferian resolution, he said, Similis ero
altissimo. I will be like the most high; but, Isa. 14.14.
upon the matter, these would be supra altissimum, above the most high, to
control and alter his Decrees. Had the Jews attempted to have changed the
maintenance of Priests and Levites, in the whole or any part thereof, by God
appointed and declared; though they had given them more than the value of their
tithes and offerings, in money or some other kind of commodity: Would God have
connived any more at such sacrilege, than at the rebellion of Corah and his
Confederates? they would have changed Gods Ordinance in the authority of Moses,
and Aaron and his sons Ministry: And can we reasonably conceive, that for such
as now attempt to take away the Ministers, and Gods public worship, branch and
root; the Earth has not yet more back-doors to open for such Conspirators,
that they may go down, body and soul, alive to Hell? Be advised, it is the same
God still, and therefore it is a dangerous undertaking to meddle with that,
Heb. 13 8.
which he has appointed, reserved for his own part, and assigned as an
honorary for their service; whom he calls and designeth thereto, not whom the
assembly of Corah would substitute and ordain to serve in the Sanctuary. And
now if you will rest on the Apostles sentence, Gospel Ministers, in the change
of the Law, succeeding the Priests and Levites, must likewise be maintained;
not by an arbitrary allowance, by the will of man, but by that which God
appointed for them. So the Apostle applies the same moral equity for the
Ministers of Christ: The Priests and Levites portion was tithes and offerings,
etc. even so has God appointed or ordained, That they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. To what relates that (even so,)
but unto that which he before spoke of? even as Legal Priests lived, or were
maintained by tithes and offerings; so must Ministers of the Gospel be
maintained by tithes and offerings.

I demand of our Competency-men, how, even so, if tithes be taken away, and
Ministers left to the peoples benevolence? even so, must signify nothing so:
but even so, by your wills, they who preach the Gospel, shall have nothing
except a meals meat, when they will flatter you.

14. Without all controversy, there was a certain determinate allowance for
Priests and Levites under the Law; and what reason can be showed, why we should
conceive, that God has not appointed as competent and comfortable means for
Ministers subsistence? What Scripture can be produced to demonstrate, or solid
reason urged to make it so much as probable; that God who so disposed of Legal
Priests and Levites, that they were, as I may say, fed out of Gods own hand and
reserved part, should remit the Ministers of a better testament, and a better
hope, to the unkind hands of unconstant men to be maintained in a dubious and
uncertain condition of subsistence? Would he have them under the Law of Moses
depend on his own holy Providence; and Ministers of his dear Son Jesus, on men?
For you must observe, that though the quota pars for Priests and Levites, was
determinate in Tithes and Offerings, yet in the whole, or dividends thereof, it
must needs arise more or less, as God blessed their Land with increases, much
or little. Heb. 3.2.
Add heerto, if God would not trust the Magistrates of his Israel, no nor
Moses, so faithful a servant in his house, so dear, so familiar as he was with
God, to leave the determination of the Priests and Levites portion unto him,
but limited him in every particular thereof; How much less would he leave the
Gospel Ministers livelihood, to the fidelity and discretion of any modern
Trustees, specially in the declining age of the world, which he foresaw would
be more unconstant to all good, in the coldness of charity toward the end? The
face of the Sky, and great deeps, is variable, bur men's minds are incomparably
more fluctuant. Had the prodigious changes which we have seen in this giddy
age, been foretold us; Who could have believed such a report? The Changes, I
say not in matters of small moment, or examples of obscure condition, or men of
vulgar quality, but of the most eminent in their kinds. There were changes in
the primitive Church, when the most evident gifts of the holy Ghost flourished
among Christ's Disciples: one while the Lystrians were hardly restrained from
sacrificing to Paul and Barnabas as Gods; Act. 14.28.
presently they stone them, as the worst of men. Now the Pharisees emissaries
report -- Never man spoke as this man speaks; John 7.
ere long the people would stone him as if he had been a blaspheamer: now they
make the streets and Temple of Jerusalem ring of their Hosanna's; presently
they roar out their Crucify, John. 18.
Crucify. Truth begets enemies, where pride begets impatience of reproof. Ahab
discovered the true cause, why he conceived that Michaiah prophesied no good to
him, 1 King. 22.8.
in saying, I hate him. They that have some appearance of Religion in them,
know not all, and therefore may have some erroneous Opinions; and though
possibly they will hear, like, and love you, while you comply with their
judgments; yet if you dissent, they presently bid defiance. So the Galatians
who received Paul as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus; Gal. 4.14, 15.
presently took him for an enemy, because he told them the truth which crossed
their opinion. So the Jews hearing Paul say, that he must be sent far off to
the Gentiles, Act. 22.21, 22.
gave him audience unto this word, and then lift up their voices, and said,
away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit that he should live.
Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things, but when John reproved
Herod's incest, John must to Prison and die. And are not men as wicked now, as
in those days? What has been the cause of so much cruelty toward fruitful
Ministers and Preachers of the truth of Christ, but Auditors impatience of
reproof? And had you but the pernicious liberty, which you so much affect to
have, all Ministers your Almsmen, Who should with safety to his life and
liberty roprove you, who have been so impatient of hearing truth, though you
have not yet such a bond on Ministers tongues, as you would have? What Prophets
could you hope to have, but such as would Act with you, and in your progress
toward hell, have ready their -- go up and prosper? But you say, we are Godly
people; yea, and your Actions have prettily well declared you such unto the
World. 'Twas godliness with you to spoil our goods, to sequester, and imprison
us: though we are silent, these injuries cry at the gates of Heaven, and
posterity willl freely speak of this your pretended godliness. Oh Sir! but we
ever held out the profession of reformation: truly, as those crested pictures,
which coming on show Saint, but going off, devil. And what competent
maintenance faithful Ministers were like to have of such Professors, but that
of Ahabs allowance? 1 King. 22.27. Put this fellow in Prison and feed him with
the bread of affliction, and with the water of affliction -- here would be your
competency for the Ministers of Christ.

15. Tithes and Offerings (as grounded on the Moral Law) are due to those who
serve about holy things of the Gospel: for all, except Atheists and
Semiatheistical Antinomians, confess that the moral Law does now as strictly
bind (quoad vinculum) as before Christ came into the World to take away the
curse of the Law; he took not away our duty therein commanded; he did not in
respect of our obedience, dissolve one jot or tittle of the morality thereof.
If therefore the moral Law still binds men to pay Tithes, it binds to pay them
to Ministers, whom God has called and assigned to receive that his part
reserved and appointed by him for their service in his public worship, and to
none other. Christ repeating the first Commandment of the moral Law, enjoining
our serving God, says, Mat. 4.10.
him only shall thou serve: which another Scripture expresses, honor the Lord
with thy substance, Prove. 8 9.
and with the first fruits of all thy increase: The quotam partem whereof he
determines by Tithes; which are therefore enjoined in the first precept in the
moral Law.

Likewise in the fourth precept for sanctification of the Sabbath by Prayer,
hearing the Word, etc. And how shall they hear, without a Preacher? And how
shall Ministers Preach without necessary means to keep them alive, and to
furnish them with accomodations necessary to the performance of their
Ministerial charge, which is to give attendance to reading, etc. that they may
both save themselves and their hearers; when they have not so much as means to
preserve their lives, and to supply them with food and raiment, much less to
buy books?

Likewise, Tithes are commanded in the fifth precept, for honoring of our
Spiritual parents, 1 Cor. 4.15. 1 Timothy 5.17. Mal. 3.
who are to be counted worthy of double honor; that is, relief and maintenance.
This is the first Commandment with promise, which the Prophet touches when he
speaks of Tithes and Offerings duly paid; this cannot be in an imaginary
competency, but in that which God has appointed a definite settled maintenance,
for those that serve him in his public Worship, which he never left in Law or
Gospel, to the will or courtesy of man. Now other definite or settled means for
Ministers maintenance, he never appointed any, Decima certam partem desi, not.
Alens. part. 4. q. 2. m 2.
but by Tithes, Offerings, and other like perquisites appertinent to those who
served in the Tabernacle, Temple, or Church constituted; therefore these must
be their maintenance, if any.

Lastly, As Tithes are God's part, reserved to himself and his assigns, so are
they commanded in the eighth Commandment; which in the negative part says,
Thou shall not steal: and God's Prophet shows, that taking away or detention
of Tithes, is stealing: and the Apostle, Mal. 3. Romans 2.
that Sacriledg (the worst thievery) is found under the Gospel, as it was also
under the Law: why says he else, Thou that abhorrest an Idol, committest thou
Sacriledg? If there be nothing now sacred in the time of the Gospel, as some
profane men affirm; How unadvisedly did Paul ask that question concerning a
thing which is not in being, neither can be? And if there be any thing amongst
us sacred, Are not those things such, as God has consecrated and hallowed? And
did he not Consecrate, and set apart from common use Tithes, for their
maintenance, whom he appointed to serve in his public Worship? Now the eighth
precept in the negative part, forbids all taking away and detention of
others right; in the affirmative therefore it commands to yield, give and
preserve what thou can, every ones right; so Tithes belong to the eighth
precept: and indeed, the end of ordaining Tithes, is evidently moral, as in
point of piety, equity and gratitude, as has been noted; and that to which all
men of all ages in the World, places and conditions, are respectively bound; as
well under the Ghospel, as the Law. And Abraham and Jacob paying Tithes, had
the word of promise, To Abraham and his seed, in the faith whereof, he was
justified, Romans 4.9, 10, 11.
before he had received Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith
which he had yet being uncircumcised. So that the Gospel was preached before
(the giving of the Law by Moses) to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. Whence it appears that
paying Tithes is a Gospel duty, performed, before their payment under the Law
given on Sina; and Abraham paid them, before the Levitical Law determined
them. In which determination, God did not infer any new thing, or right of
Tything into his Church, but according to the necessity of the present state
thereof, so regulated, and ordered Tithes for the Priests and Levites, to
govern the people by the Law, which was their Schoolmaster to Christ; who being
come, altered nothing of the morality of his Law, although the changeable
rites, like outworn garments and beggarly rudiments, Zeck. 3.4.
were then to be cast off (as Joshuas filthy garments) and other habits of
sanctity, and religious Gospel Worship to be put on with Christ the new Man,
the same body his Church, Ephesians. 4.
en ire in every part, under the same sacred head Christ Jesus, John 1.
remaining the same: the Law then was given by Moses Ministry, but grace and
truth by Christ, who perfectly fullfilled all that, which was prefigured in
those Ceremonies. And we read, that Abel offered firistlings of his flock, Qui
credidit, obtulit decimas. Alens. Part. 4. Ib. Alens. Heb. 1.6. A naturae
rationalis lege est, ut D^us colatur and honoretur. Alens. quo. s.
and the fat thereof; he of Adam's posterity was primus vere fidelis, before
the deluge; after which, and the growth of Idolatry, the first we read of
paying Tithes, was Abraham, the father of the faithful. Now God was to be
Worshipped, before, and after the giving of the Law, at all times, and by all
persons; which the very Law of Nature dictated to reasonable men; and God's
Worship (supposing his Ordinance by the Ministry of man) could not be without
Ministers to officiate; neither could they subsist without maintenance, being
frail flesh and blood, subject to all humane necessities; to which when Christ
the Lord of all, in the form of a servant, vouchsafed to subject himself, he
was once necessitated to send to Sea for Tribute-mony. Now the maintenance of
his Ministers, is the maintenance of his worship; and therefore Tithes are now
as due to Gospel Ministers, as they were to Priests and Levites under the Law;
for God is now to be Worshipped, as he was in the Tabernacle and Temple at
Jerusalem; John. 4.
even: From the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same; for he is
not the God of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles; even of all the
Spiritual seed of Abraham.

Lastly, Tithes are God's own part, reserved to the Ministers his Assigns:
Therefore he complains, Mal. 3.8. That the Jews robbed him, though they made
such a crime strange to them. And wherein was his spoil? What Thief can
obrepe, or come on him at unawares, who neither slumbers nor sleeps? Besides,
Infinito nihil potest decedere; Wherein could the robbery be, but in the
hinderance of his Worship, and that by taking from him the service of his
Ministers, the Priests and Levites, who being deprived of Tithes and Offerings,
could neither perform their charge, nor give attendance therein, for want of
maintenance thereto allotted them by God?

16. Sacrilege is robbing of God by taking away, Mal. 3.10.
or inverting to common uses those things, which are dedicated to Gods service,
holy uses, or the necessary maintenance thereof; whether they were consecrated
by God himself, Levit. 19.8. Numb. 5 9, 10, and 16.37.
as tithes and offerings, etc. or by man, Gods Spirit consenting and moving
thereto. Of the first sort, all those things are, which are subordinate to his
worship, commanded in the Moral Law; of the second sort, are all those votive
things consecrated by man, to the same end and purpose: As moneys, for the
present relief of the poor Christians (with such Sacrifices God is pleased.)
Also the (...), or ornaments, and necessary utensiils of the public worship of
God in the Church, dedicated to the commodation thereof; also Lands, on which
Churches now are, 2 Samuel 24.18, etc. 2 Chronicles. 3.1
or the Temple or Synagogue were erected (as Auraunahs floor which David
bought, on which he built an Altar, and on which afterward, Solomon built the
Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem;) as also those parcels of Land on which
Synagogues were built, or Churches now are: Understand those sacred, durante
usu. Also Gleabland given by Act of Mortmain, and consecrated for additional
supplies of Gospel Ministers accommodations and maintenance; concerning which,
that ancient Decree of Pius the First, in the year of our Lord, One hundred
forty and seven, is very considerable, which thus says, Praedia divinis usibus
tradita, etc. Carranza.
Farms or Country Houses and Lands given to holy uses, some men apply to
humane, that they may serve themselves, taking them away from the Lord God, to
whom they were dedicated. Quod siquis praesumpserit, -- Quasi sacrilaedium, eo
quod laedit sac^um. Alens. ^ part. 2. 22ae. q. 99. and 151. Zanch. Ursin.
Danaeus. Eth. Christian. l. 2. c. 15. Polan. Synt. Theol. l. 10. c. 63.
sacrilegus habeatur, and sicut sacrilegus judicetur: Let him be esteemed
sacriledgious, and proceeded against, as such. The Schools define Sacrilege
thus, Est sacrae rei violatio, vel ejusdem usurpatio; it is committed -- Cum
res consecrata, vel sacro usui deputata usurpatur. And they say, All that is
Sacrilege, which is done ad irreverentiam rei sacrae. Suidas thus, (...), Qui
sacra diripit, sacrilegus est. Ours thus, Sacrilege is taking away of things
sacred, or deputed to holy uses, or the maintenance or furtherance of Gods
worship. Whether those things were consecrated by God himself, by reservation
to his service, and by express mandate have been hallowed to the same; or those
things which man (as above noted) has consecrated; whereof see Levit. 27.14,
etc. So that alienating or detaining things so hallowed, or returning them to
common use, is the sin of sacrilege; such therefore, is stealing, detention,
or alienation of tithes appointed for the necessary support of Gods service and
public worship.

17. The horridness of this sin, further appears by the express curse of God
inevitably following it, as you may see it denounced by his Prophet, Mal. 3.10.
even on a whole Nation, where such a sin is committed, and connived at by men;
and commonly this curse is a flying Book of the largest Folio ever mentioned.
The length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof, ten cubits.
This is the curse which enters into the House of the thief, and it shall
consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. And shall this
punishment, so swift, so great, like a Spiders Web catch only little Flies,
and let the great break through? Shall the little Theif come under the lash, and
shall the sacrilegious escape the whip?

Some have observed in particular examples cited, how severely it has been
revenged on some in all ages; Josephus de Bell. Jud. l. 1. 2 Maccab. c. 3.
as on Pompey, Crassus, Heliodorus, etc. read but our own Annals, and they may
sufficiently enform you herein; read what has befaln Improrpiators; see what
yet visible Monuments of Gods justice in the consumptions of goodly
Monasteries, Princes Palaces, Houses of Bishops, Nobles, Gentry, to this day
appear. I say no more, though I could say much herein: Seldom does the house of
the sacrilegious flourish to many generations; for as Augustine said, In Joh
Tract. 50.
comparing private robbery and stealing of things public. Quanto vehementius
judicandus est fur sacrilegus, qui ausus fuerit, non undecunque tollere, sed de
ecclesia tollere? Qui aliquid de ecclesia furatur, Judae perdito comparatur.

Now herein, three things commonly beguile men.

1. The multitude of offenders, who think, via trita, via tuta.

2. Because they vainly conceive, that if in their possession there be a sin,
their Ancestors from whom descended the impropriation, must bear it; not
considering, that except they restore all that which they wrongfully possess,
they are guilty of the same sin.

3. Because they think that alienation of Tithes or Gleabland, is at worst, but
a trespass against a poor Minister of a despicable condition in respect of this
world, and possibly subject to some just exceptions in point of abilities, or
manners. But we must know,

First, That multitude can give no patronage to sin, it rather hastneth Gods
judgments on offenders.

Secondly, It cannot excuse thee, that a sin lies heavy on another soul, if
thou becomest guilty of the same.

Thirdly, What ever the Minister be; first, he stands or falls to his own
Master; secondly, in his Charge, he is the Steward of Gods House: And in this
matter of paying Tithes, the Parishioner is not to respect, of what quality and
condition he is; for the debt is due to the Ministers Lord and Master; So that
he receives it not in his own, but Gods right; so that whether he be faithful
in his service, or not, he is not responsible to his fellow servant, committed
unto his charge, but unto his Master, with whom no doubt the account of an evil
servant will be severe enough.

To conclude, it were happy if these who have swallowed down sacred morsels,
would be persuaded to disgorge those poisoned bits, before it be too late; and
that they would cast out that, which they sacriledgiously possess, whether by
power, purchase, or prescription, Acts 27.6. and 19.38.
as those Mariners of Alexandria did their lading; wisely resolving, that it
was better that those things should perish for them, than with them.

The conclusion of the last Prophecy of the Old Testament, Mal. 4.4, 6.
is, Remember ye the Law of Moses; lest I come and smite the Earth with a
curse: The same Moses, in blessing the several Tribes of Israel, said of Levi:
Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim, be upon thy holy One. Deuteronomy. 33.8.
They shall teach Jacob thy judgwents, and Israel thy Law. Bless Lord his
substance, and accept the work of his hands: Smite through the Loins of them
that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. Now
it is to be noted, that Prophets Prayers are also Prophesies.

And now my dear Brethren, concerning whom my hearts desire and prayer to God
is, That ye may be saved: Consider what these Pamphletiers intend you, when
they would teach and persuade you to commit Sacrilege, laying a
stumbling block before the blind, to make them fall upon Gods curse, and to
cause the same to come upon this whole Nation: Which I much fear, already
groaneth, as under many other iniquities; so also under this sin of Sacrilege.
The holy Lord God open their eyes, whom it concerns, that they may not sleep
in death. Amen.

FINIS.

