RULES AND ARTICLES of WAR, For the better Government of His Majesty's ARMY in
the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

Ex M^lis-Moribus Bonae Leges.

royal blazon or coat of arms I7 R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson,

Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. 1686.

RULES and ARTICLES For the better Government of His Majesty's Forces in
SCOTLAND.
JAMES R.

Article 1. ALL Officers and Soldiers (not having just impediment) shall
diligently frequent Divine Service and Sermon, at such time and in such places
as shall be appointed for the Regiment, Troop or Company, wherein they serve;
and such as either wilfully or negligently absent themselves from Divine
Service or Sermon; or else being present, do behave themselves undecently or
irreverently, during the same: If they be Officers, they shall severely be
reprehended at a Court Martial; But if private Soldiers, they shall for every
such first offense, forfeit each man Twelve pence, to be deducted out of their
next pay: And for the second Offense shall forfeit Twelve pence, and be laid in
Irons for twelve hours; and for every like offense afterward shall suffer and
pay in like manner.

2. During the time of Divine Service, public Prayers and Sermon as aforsaid,
if any Sutler or Seller of Ale, Beer, Wine, or other sort of Drinks, Bread,
Victuals or other Commodities, or Merchandise whatsoever, attending the Army,
shall put or set any such thing to sale, he shall forfeit the full value
thereof for the use of the poor.

3. Whosoever shall use any unlawful Oath or Execration, whether Officer or
Soldier, shall incur the same penalty that is expressed in the first Article.

4. If any Officer or Soldier, shall presume to Blaspheme the Holy and
Undivided Trinity, or the Persons of God the Father, God the Son, or God the
Holy Ghost, or shall presume to speak against any known Article of the
Christian Faith, he shall have his Tongue bored through with a red hot Iron.

5. If any Officer or Soldier shall abuse or profane, any place Dedicated to
the Worship of God, or shall offer violence to any Minister or Chaplain of the
Army, or other Minister of Gods Word, he shall suffer such punishment as shall
be inflicted on him by a Court Martial.

But whoever shall take away any of the Utensils or Ornaments belonging, or
Dedicated to Gods Worship, in any Church or Chapel, shall suffer death for the
Fact.

6. All Officers and Soldiers of what quality or condition soever shall take
the following Oath, which shall be administered to them at their first Muster,
and entrance into His Majesty's pay, and at such other times, and by such
person or persons, as His Majesty, His General, Lieutenant General, or
Commander in Chief of the Forces for the time being, shall appoint.

The Oath of Fidelity to be taken by every Officer or Soldier in the Army.
I A. B. Do swear to be true and faithful to my Sovereign Lord King JAMES, and
to His Heirs and lawful Successors, and to be obedient in all things, to his
General, Lieutenant General, or Commander in Chief of His Forces for the time
being, and will behave my self obediently toward my superior Officers, in all
they shall command me for His Majesty's service: And I do further swear, That I
will be a true, faithful and obedient servant and Soldier, every way performing
my best endeavors for His Majesty's service, obeying all Orders, and
submitting to all such Rules and Articles of War, as are, or shall be
Established by His Majesty: And I do likewise swear, That I believe that it is
not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the KING; And
that I do abhor that traitorous Position of taking Arms by His Authority
against his Person, or against those that are Commissionated by Him. So Help me
GOD.

7. No Officer, or Soldier, shall use any Traitorous words against the Sacred
Person of the KING's most Excellent Majesty, upon pain of Death.

8. Whoever shall hold Correspondence with any Enemy of His Majesty, or Rebel,
or shall give them advice or intelligence, either by Letters, Messages, Signs or
Tokens, or any manner of way whatsoever, shall suffer Death for it. And
whatever Regiment, Troop or Company, shall Treat with such Enemy or Rebel, or
enter into any Condition with them, without leave from His Majesty, His
General, or the Officer in Chief for the time being: The Officers of such
Regiment, Troop or Company, who shall be found guilty, shall die for it; and of
the Soldiers who shall consent thereunto, every Tenthman by Lot shall be
hanged, and the ^est shall be punished at the discretion of the General or
Commander in Chief. But all such Officers or Soldiers as can prove, that they
did their outmost to Resist and avoid such a Treaty, and were no ways partakers
of the Crime, shall not only go free; but also be rewarded for their Constancy
and fidelity.

9 Whoever shall go about to entice ^or persuade either Officer or Soldier to
join or engage in any Traitorous or rebellious Acts, either against His Majesty
or Kingly Government, shall suffer Death for it. And whoever shall not reveal
to his Superior Officer, such a Conspiracy or intended Rebellion, so soon as
ever it shall come to his knowledge, shall be judged equally guilty with the
Contrivers of such a Plot or Conspiracy, and consequently shall suffer the same
penalty.

10. If any Officer or Soldier shall behave himself disrespectfully toward the
General, Lieutenant General, or other Chief Commander of the Army, or speak
words tending to his hurt, or dishonor, he shall die for it.

11. Whosoever in presence of the General, Lieutenant General, or other
Commander in Chief, shall draw his Sword, with a purpose to do any Officer, or
any of his fellow Soldiers a mischief, shall die for it.

12. Such respect and obedience as is due to the General, or other Chief
Officer from these under his Command, shall be likewise given to all Superior
Officers, from their Inferiors, under the like penalty.

13. Whosoever shall presume knowingly, To violat any Safeguard, Conduct or
Protection, given by His Majesty, the General, Lieutenant General, or other
Commander in Chief of the Forces, shall suffer Death.

14. If any number of Soldiers shall presume to assemble in order to take
Counsel among themselves, for the demanding their Pay, any inferior Officers
accessory thereunto shall suffer Death for it, as the Heads and Ringleaders of
such mutinous and seditious meetings, And if any Captain being privy thereunto,
shall not suppress the same, or complain of it, he shall likewise be punished
with Death.

15. No Officer or Soldier shall utter any words tending to sedition, mutiny or
uproar, upon pain of Death, or suffering such punishments as shall be inflicted
upon him by a Court Martial; and whoever shall hear any mutinous or seditious
words spoken, and shall not with all diligence possible, reveal the same to his
Superior Officers or Commanders, shall be punished, as a Court Martial shall
think fit.

16. If any inferior Officer or Soldier shall refuse to obey his Superior
Officer, or quarrel with him, he shall be Casheered, but if any shall presume
to resist any Officer in the Execution of his Office, or shall strike, or lift
up his hand to strike, or shall draw, or offer to draw his sword, or lift up
any weapon against his Superior Officer, upon any pretense whatsoever, he shall
suffer Death.

17. Every Soldier shall keep silence when the Army is Marching, Embatteling or
taking up their Quarters (to the end that their Officers may be heard, and
their Orders Executed) upon pain of Imprisonment, at the discretion of the
Officers.

18. Whosoever shall in anger draw his Sword, whilst his Colors are fleeing,
either in Battle, or upon a March, unless it be against the Enemy, shall run
the Goad-loup.

19. When any March is to be made, every man who is sworn to his Colors, shall
follow them; and whoever shall without leave stay behind, or depart above a
mile from the Camp, or out of the Army without license, shall march ^n Irons
for such time as shall be thought ^it.

20. When the Army or any part of them, shall march through, or lodge ^n the
Country, none of them shall ^xtort Free Quarter, or money from them, or shall
commit any waste or ^poil, or cut down Fruit Trees or Plants, ^eface Walks of
Trees, Parks, War^ens, Fish Ponds, Houses or Gardens, ^^ead down or otherwise
destroy stand^ng Corn in the Ear; neither shall they ^ut their Horses into
Meadows without ^eave from their Chief-officer, upon pain of severe Punishment:
But if any Officer or Soldier shall wilfully burn any House, Barn, Stack of
Corn, Hay or Straw, or any Ship, Boat or Carriage, or any thing which may serve
for the Provision of the Army, without ^eave from the Commander in Chief, he
shall suffer Death for it.

21. When the Army or any part ^hereof shall come to engadge the Enemy in
Fight, whoever shall run from his Colors (be he native, or stranger) or does
not defend them to the outmost of his power, so long as they are in danger
shall suffer Death for it; and whosoever shall at any other time run away from
his Colors, shall suffer Death.

22. If any Regiment or Commanded Party shall not behave themselves in Fight
against an Enemy, as they ought to do, they shall either die, or be put out of
the Quarters, until by a notable Act they redeem their honor.

23. When it shall please God, that the Enemy is beaten, every man shall follow
his Officer in the Chase: But whosoever shall presume to Pilladge or Plunder,
until the Enemy be entirely beaten, and any misfortune happen, he shall suffer
death, or such other punishment, as shall be pronounced against him by the
General Court Martial; and the Pilladge so gotten shall be forefeited to the
use of the sick and maimed Soldiers.

24. When any Town or place shall be taken (thaugh by assault) no man shall
presume to Pilladge any Church or Hospital without leave, much less to set fire
to any Church, Hospital, School or Miln; neither shall they offer violence to
any Churchmen, aged men, or women, maids or children, unless they be found
actually in Arms against them, upon pain of Death; and whosoever shall Force a
woman to abuse her (whether belonging to the Enemy or not) and the Fact be
sufficiently proved against him, he shall certainly suffer death for it.

25. In what place soever it shall please God, that the Enemy shall be subdued
and overcome; all the Ordnance, Ammunition and Victuals that shall be there
found, shall be secured for His Majesty's use, and for the better Relief of the
Army; and one Tenth part of all the spoil shall be set apart toward the
relife of the sick and maimed Soldiers.

26. Whosoever shall take any General Officers as Prisoners, they shall present
them to His Majesty, the General, or the Officer in Chief Commanding the
Forces, who will reward them for their service; And whosoever shall take any
other Prisoner, may keep to themselves the Officers and Volunteers, giving
their names to the Marshal-General; but shall not put them to Ransom, without
leave from His Majesty, or the Officer in Chief: And all private Soldiers so
taken Prisoners, are immediately to be sent to the Marshal-General, who is to
take them into his Custody.

27. If any Soldier shall be drunk in the Enemies Quarters, before they have
wholly laid down their Arms, and yielded to Mercy, and any hurt, or mischief
ensue thereupon, he shall be punished according to the preju^^ice, if it be
general; or with Irons, Bread and Water, if no hurt ensue.

28. All Officers whose charge it is, shall see the Quarters kept clean and
neat, upon pain of severe punishment.

29. No Officer shall ly out all night from the Camp or Quarters, without his
Superior Officers leave obtained for the same, upon pain of being punished for
it, as a Court Martial shall think fit; Neither shall any Soldier or Officer go
any by-way to the Camp, other than the common way laid out by Order, upon pain
of being punished as aforesaid.

But if any Officer shall without leave be absent from his Quarters a Week, he
shall lose one Months Pay, and if longer, he shall be discharged from his
Command and Place, as a man unfit to bear Office in the Army.

30. No Soldier shall presume to make any Alarm in the Quarters, by shooting of
his Musket in the night, after the Watch is set, unless it be at an Enemy, upon
pain of Death.

31. No Soldier shall in anger draw his Sword in any Camp, Post or Garrison,
upon pain of Death.

32. After warning is given for setting the Watch by beat of Drum, or sound of
Trumpet or Fife, if any Soldier shall absent himself without a reasonable
cause, he shall be punished by ryding a Wooden-horse, or otherwise at the
discretion of the Commander.

And whatever Soldier shall fail at the beating of a Drum, or sound of a
Trumpet or Fife, or upon any Alarm given to repair to his Colors, with his
Arms decently kept, and well fixed (unless there be an evident necessity to
hinder him from it) he shall be clapped in Irons for it, or suffer such other
punishment, as a Court Martial shall think fit.

33. Whoever makes known the Watchword, without Order, or gives any other
Word, but what is given by the Officer, shall suffer Death.

34. A Sentinel, who is found sleeping, in any Post, Garrison, Trench, or other
place (while he should be upon his Duty) shall suffer Death, or such other
punishment, as the Court Martial shall inflict.

And if a Sentinel or Perdew, shall forsake his place before he be releaved, or
drawn off; or upon discovery of an Enemy, shall not give warning to his
Quarters, according to direction, he shall suffer Death, or such other
punishment, as a Court Martial shall think fit.

And likewise, if any Soldier employed as a Scout, shall not go upon that
Service, so far as he is Commanded, or having discovered an Ambush, or approach
of the Enemy, shall not return forthwith to give notice of it, or warning to
his Quarters; or if he enter into any house, and there, or else where be found
sleeping, or drunk, whilst he should be upon Duty, he shall suffer Death.

35. Whosoever shall do violence to any who shall bring Victuals to the Camp,
or Garrison, or shall take his Horse, or Goods shall suffer Death, or such other
punishment, as he shall be sentenced to by a Court-Marshal.

If any presume to abuse, or beat his Host, or the Wife, Child, or Servant of
his Host, where he is quartered, or billetted, he shall be put in Irons for it;
and if he do it a second time, he shall be further punished, and the party
wronged shall have amends made him; And if any presume to exact free quarter
without leave from the Chief-Officer upon the place, they shall be severly
punished at the discretion of a Court-Marshal.

36. No Soldier, or Officer shall use any reproachful, or provocking speech or
act to another, upon pain of Imprisonment, and such other Punishment as a
Court-Marshal shall think fit.

Nor shall any Soldier, or Officer presume to send a Challenge to any other
Officer or Soldier, to fight a Duel; neither shall any Soldier, or Officer
presume to up-braid another for refusing a Challenge; And whosoever shall
offend in either of these Cases; if he be an Officers, he shall loss his Place,
and Command, whatever it be; and if a private Soldier, he shall ride the
Wooden-Horse, and be further punished, as a Court-Marshal shall think fit: And
if any Corporal, or other Officer, Commanding a Guard, shall willingly or
knowingly suffer either Soldiers or Officers, to go forth to a Duel, or private
Fight, he shall be punished for it by the sentence of a Court-Marshal.

And forasmuch, as all Officers of what Condition soever, have power to Part
and Quell all Quarrels, Frays, and sudden Disorders, between Soldiers, and
Officers, though of another Company, Troop or Regiment; and to commit the
disorderly Persons to Prison, until their proper Officers be acquainted
therewith; Whoever shall resist such an Officer (though of another Company,
Troop, or Regiment) or draw his Sword upon him, shall be severly punished, as a
Court-Marshal shall appoint.

But if two, or more going into the Field to fight a Duel shall draw their
Swords, or other Weapons, though neither of them fall upon the Spot, nor die
afterward of any Wound there received; yet if they be Officers, they shall
loss their Places; and if common Soldiers, they shall be punished with ryding
the Wooden-horse, or otherwise, as a Court-Marshal shall direct. And lastly, in
all Cases of Duels, the Seconds shall be taken as Principalls, and punished
accordingly.

37 None shall be Mustered, but such as are completely Armed, viz. Each
Hors-man shall have for his defensive Arms, Back, Breast and Pot; and for his
offensive Arms, a Sword not under three foot long in the Blade, and a Case of
Pistols, the Barrels whereof not to be under 14. inches in length; and each
Trooper of the Guards is to have a Carrabyne, beside the aforsaid Arms. And the
Foot to have each Soldier, a Sword, or Dagger for their Muskets; and each
Pik-man, a Pike of sixteen foot long, and not under, and each Musquetier a
Musket with a Collar of Bandeliers, the Barrel of which Musket to be about
four foot long, and to contain a Bullet, 14 of which shall make a pound,
running into the Barrel.

If any borrow Arms of another to pass the Muster withal; the Lender, if he be
a Soldier, shall forfeit the value of the Arms so lent, to be taken out of his
pay; and the borrower shall be severly punished.

38 None shall be allowed upon the Muster, who, by loss of Limbs, or otherwise
is unfit for service, but by Order from His Majesty, or the Commander in Chief
of the Forces.

39. No Housekeeper, or Inhabitant in the usual Quarters of His Majesty's
Guards of Horse or Foot, or in the usual Quarters of any other Regiment or
Garrison, shall be received or entertained in His Majesty's Service, or pay, and
Mustered as a private Soldier without order from His Majesty, or the Commander
in Chief of the Forces, nor shall any Officer demand, or receive directly, or
indirectly any sum of money whatsoever from any under his Command, for
admitting and entertaining him in his Troop, Company, or Garrison, upon pain of
being Cashiered, or rendered incapable of being employed again in Army.

40. No Captain of a Troop, or Company shall upon pain of being rendered
incapable of ever serving in His Majesty's Armies, be allowed to Muster any
Servants in his Troop, or Company; but these who are not only able, and fit for
service, but also are bound by oath and pay to follow the Troop, or Company,
and who duly and constantly appear in proper Arms at every Muster unless they
have leave to be absent, which is not to be granted, but upon a real and
necessary occasion; And whosoever shall present himself, or his horse in the
Muster, to mislead the Muster-Master, or defraud His Majesty, shall suffer such
punishment, as a Court-Marshal shall think fit.

41. No man shall presume to present himself to the Muster-Master to be
enrolled in the Muster-Rolls by a Counterfeit, or wrong Name, or Surname, or
of Birth or Habitation, upon pain of running the Goad-loup, if he be a
Footman; or for faulting his Horse and Arms, if he a Horseman.

42 If any Lieutennant, Cornet or Ensign shall discover, and make proof to a
General Officer, or Colonel, that his Captain hes made false Musters, the said
Captain shall be Cashiered, and the Lieutennant, or Ensign discovering as
aforsaid shall have the place of his Captain; and if Sergeant or Corporal shall
discover, and make proof of false Musters, as aforsaid, he shall have for each
time the sum of Five hundredth Merks Scots Money, payable by the Play Master, at
the first Muster immediately following the discovery so made. But, if upon
Examination, his Accusation shall be found False and Malicious, in that case he
shall be immediately Cashiered, and suffer such further punishment, as shall be
judged fit by a Court Martial.

43. If any Soldier shall be sick, wounded or maimed in His Majesty's service,
he shall be sent out of the Camp, or Quarters, to some fit place for his
recovery, where he shall be provided for by the Officer appointed to take care
of the sick and wounded Soldiers, and his wages or pay shall go on, and be duly
paid, until it does appear, that he can be no longer serviceable in His
Majesty's Armies, and then he shall be sent by Pass to his Country, with money
to bear his charges in his travel, or be otherwise provided for, as his case
shall require.

44. All Captains shall use their outmost endeavors to have their Troops and
Companies complete, and full: And within two days after every General Muster,
both the Captain, and the Muster-Master, shall send to the Commander in Chief
of the Forces (if he requires it) and to the Treasurer, or Play Master of the
Army, a perfeit List and Roll of all the Officers, Troopers and Soldiers of
their Troops and Companies that are in actual service, punctually expressing at
the foot of the Rolls what new Officers, Troops and Soldiers have been
entertained since the preceding Muster, in lieu of such as have been
Cashiered, or are Deceased, with the day when the one died, or went off, and
the other entertained in his place.

45. All Commissions granted by His Majesty, the General or Commander in Chief
of His Majesty's Forces to any Officier in Pay, shall be brought to the
Commissary of the Musters, and Secretary at War, who are to receive and enter
the famine in a Book fairly written; and no Commission-Officer shall be allowed
in Muster without a Commission from His Majesty, or the Commander in Chief for
the time being, and the same entered with the Commissary General of the
Musters, or his Deputies, and Secretary at War.

46. No Commission-Officer after inrolment, and being Mustered, shall be
Dismissed or Cashiered without order from His Majesty, or the Commander in
Chief: But for Non-commission Officers, or private Soldiers, their Captains
with approbation of their Collonells, or of the Governor of the Garrison, where
they are, may discharge them, when they find cause; taking other Non-commission
Officers, or Soldiers in their places; Provided that such Colonel or Governor
shall forthwith certify the Muster-Master, that by their approbation, such
Non-Commission-Officers, or Soldiers were discharged, and others taken in their
places respectively; And in Quarters, and Garrisons where there are only single
Troops, or Companies, the Captains Certificats are forthwith to be sent, and
accepted by the Muster-Master, expressing the day of each
Non-Commission-Officers or Soldiers Discharge, or Death, and who was
entertained in his place.

47. No Soldiers Duty either of Horse or Foot, shall be done by any other then
the Soldier himself; but in case of Sickness and Disability, and other
necessary cause, his Captain may dispense with his absence, without causing him
to find another to serve in his stead.

48. The Muster-Master shall always (the night before) give notice to the
Officer in Chief, commanding any Regiment, Troop, Company, or Garrison, of the
time and place for their Musters, that so the Officers and Soldiers may have
time to make ready for their Muster; and upon every Muster, three Muster-Rolls
are to be prepared of the respective Troops and Companies. In Which Rolls the
names of all private Soldiers are to be written Alphabetically, one of which
Rolls is to be in parchment, for the Play Master, and to be subscribed; as also
another Roll, which the Muster-Master is to keep, by two Commission-Officers at
the least of the respective Troops and Companies, together with the
Muster-Master; and the third Muster-Roll is to be subscribed only by the
Muster-Master, which the Officer is to keep; and no Rolls are to be allowed by
the Muster-Master, and Play Master otherwise, than as His Majesty hes herein,
or otherwise directed; and the said Muster-Rolls are to be perfected forthwith
upon every Muster.

49. If any Trooper, Dragooner, or Foot-Soldier shall lose or spoil his Horse
or Arms, or any part thereof, by negligence, or Gaming, he shall remain in the
Quality of an Pioner or Scavenger, till he be furnished with as good as were
lost, at his own charge; and if he be not otherwise able, the one half of his
Pay shall be deducted, and set apart, for the providing of them, till he be
refurnished.

Neither shall any Soldier pawn or sell, or negligently, or wilfully break his
Arms, or any part thereof, or any Hatchets, Spade, Shovels, Pick-axes or other
Materials of War, upon pain of sever punishment, at the discretion of a
Court Martial.

And where any Arms, or other Materials aforsaid shall be pawned or imbazeled,
they shall be forfeited and seized upon, for His Majesty's use.

50. All Officers and Soldiers, and also the Muster-Masters not duly observing
these Articles, and such other Orders, as shall be signified to them, shall be
Cashiered, or suffer such other punishments, as His Majesty, the Commander in
Chief of the Forces, or the Court Martial shall appoint; nor shall any
Muster-Master let any pass the Musters, but such as are duly qualified, upon
pain of losing his Place.

51. None shall presume to spoil, sell, or convoy away, any Ammunition
delivered unto him, upon pain of suffering Death, or such other punishment, as
a Court Martial shall think fit.

52. No Officer, Provider or Keeper of His Majesty's Victuals, or Ammunition
for the Forces, shall willingly embazel, or spoil, or give a false account of
any part thereof, to whom he is to make his account, upon pain of suffering
such Punishment; as a Court Martial shall think fit.

53. No Commissary, or Victualer shall bring, or furnish the Camp with any
unsound, or unsavory Victuals of what kind soever, whereby sickness may grow in
the Army, or the Service be hindered; And if, upon examination before a
Court Martial, he shall be found guilty, he shall suffer such punishment as
they shall think fit.

54. No Victualer, or seller of Beer, Ale or Wine, belonging to the Army, shall
entertain any Soldier in his House, Booth, Tent or Hutt, after the
warning-Piece, Tattoe or beat of Drum at night, or before the beating of the
Revaillies in the morning, nor shall any Soldier (within that time) be any
where, but upon his Duty, or in his Quarters, upon pain of punishment, both of
the Soldier, and Entertainer, at the discretion of a Court Martial.

55. The Commission-Officers of every Regiment may hold a Court Marshal for
that Regiment upon any necessary occasion: And the Provost-Marshal of every
Regiment: As also the Martial of the Troop of Guards, shall have the same
Privilege and Authority, in his own Regiment or Troop, as the
Provost-Marshal-General has in the Army or Camp; and likewise such Fees, as
the Court Martial shall allow.

56. Such as are Judges in any Court Martial, shall take an oath for the due
administration of Justice, according to these Articles; and where no particular
Punishment is hereby assigned, according to their Consciences, the best of
their understandings, and the Custom of War in like Cases; and shall Demean
themselves orderly, in the hearing of Causes (as becomes the Gravity of such a
Court) and before giving of Sentence, every Judge shall deliver his Vote and
Opinion distinctly, and the Sentence shall be according to the plurality of
Vots; And if there happen to be an Equality of Votes, the President is to have
a casting Vote.

And when the Sentence is to be given, the President shall pronounce it; after
which the Provost-Marshal shall have warrant to cause execution to be done,
according to the Sentence.

57. At the Courts-Martial, there shall be a Clerk, who is to be sworn, to make
true and faithful Records of all the proceedings of that Court; and there shall
be also such other Officers appointed, as shall be necessary; And the General
Court Martial may appoint, and limit the Fees of the Provost-Marshal-General,
as they shall think fit.

58. All Controversies either between Soldiers and their Captains, or other
Officers, or between Soldier and Soldier, relating to their military
Capacities, shall be summarily heard and determined at the next Court Martial
of the Regiment.

59. In any matter which shall be Adjudged in any of the aforsaid Regimental
Courts-Martiall, either of the Parties that finds himself aggrieved, may appeal
to a Superior Court Martial, who are to take care, that if the party appealing
make not good his suggestion, Recompense be made to the other, for the trouble
and charge of such an appeal.

60. In all Criminal Causes, which concern the Crown, the Advocat-General, or
Judge-Advocat of His Majesty's Army, shall inform the Court, and prosecute on
His Majesty's behalf.

61. No Officer, or Soldier shall presum to hinder the Provost-Marshall, his
Lieutennants, or Servants in the execution of their Office, upon pain of Death,
or such other Punishment, as the Court Martial shall think fit, But on the
contrary, all Captains, Officers and Soldiers shall do their outmost to
apprehend, and bring to Punishment all Offenders; and shall assist the Officers
of the Army, or Regiment for that purpose: Especially the said Provost-Marshal,
his Lieutenant, and Servants; and if the Provest-Marshall, or his Officers,
require the assistance of any Officer, or Soldier, in apprehending any Person,
Declaring to him that it is for a Capital-Crime, and the party escape for want
of aid and assistance; the Party, or Parties refusing to aid, or assist, shall
suffer such Punishment, as the Court Martial shall inflict.

62. If any Officer, or Soldier shall presume to draw his Sword in any place of
Judicature, while the Court is sitting, he shall be put to Death; And His
Majesty does hereby Authorize the Provost-Marshal General of the Army by his
own Authority to apprehend such offenders; And if any Soldier being committed,
for any offense, shall break Prison; the said Provost-Marshall-General, shall
by his own Authority apprehend him, and the offender shall suffer Death, or
such other Punishment, as the Court Martial shall think fit.

63. If any Fray shall happen within the Camp, or place of Garrison, in any of
the Soldiers Lodgings, or where they meet, it shall be enquired into by the
Officers of the Regiment, and the beginners, and the Pursuers thereof punished,
according to the quality of the Offense.

64. If any Inferior Officer, either of Horse or Foot, be wronged by his
Officer, he may complain to his Colonel, or other Superior Officer of the
Regiment, who is to redress the same upon due proof made of the wrong done; but
if he fail therein, the party aggrieved is to apply to the General-Officer for
redress; and if the accusation be false, the Complainer is to suffer such
punishment as the Officer should have done; if he had been found guilty.

65. If any Colonel or Captain shall force, or take any thing away from any
private Soldier, such Colonel or Captain shall be punished, according to the
quality of the Offense, by the Judgment of a Court Martial; but if a Soldier
shall be wronged, and shall not appeal to the Court, or his Superior
Commanders, but take his own satisfaction for it, he shall be punished by the
Judgment of a Court-Martiall.

66. If any Soldier die, no other shall take or spoil his Goods, upon pain of
restoring double the value to whom they belong, and of such further puni^^ment
as the Court Martial shall think fit; but the Captain of the Company to which
such Soldier did belong, shall take the said Goods into his Custody, and
dispose of them for paying his Quarters, and keep the Overplus (if any be) for
the use of such to whom they belong, as shall claim the same within three
months after his Death; and if any Captain or Officer die, the Chief-Commander
shall take care of preserving his Estate in like manner.

67. No Provost-Marshal shall refuse to receive or keep a Prisoner sent to his
Charge by Authority, or shall dismiss him without Order, upon pain of such
punishment, as a Court Martial shall think fit. And if the Offense, for which
the Prisoner was apprehended, deserved Death, the Provost-Marshall failling to
receive and keep him, as aforsaid, shall be liable to the same punishment.

68. If the Provost-Marshal commit any Person by his own Authority, without
other Command, he shall acquaint the General, or other Chief-Commander of the
cause thereof, within in 24 hours: And the Provost-Marshal shall thereupon
dismiss him, unless he have Order to the contrary.

69. No man shall presume to use any Braving, or Menacing Words, Signs, or
Gestures, where any of the forsaid Courts of Justice are sitting, upon pain of
suffering such punishment, as the Court Martial shall inflict.

70 Where any Sentence of Death is given out in the Court Martial, it shall be
read by the Register of the Court, in the presence of the Condemned Person, and
Signed by the President; thereafter it shall be given to the General, or
Chief-Officer, who may, notwithstanding suspend the same, until he shall
acquaint His Majesty, or see it put in Execution, as he shall think fit.

71. In the General-Court-Martial shall allways preside one of the Great
Officers of the Army; likeas, in a Regimental-Court-Martiall, the Colonel, or
other Field-Officer; and when a Court Martial shall be held for the Horse, the
Captain of the Guard shall preside, or a General-Officer, who, after taking the
Oath aforsaid, shall proceed to give their Judgment, until Sentence shall be
pronounced against the Delinquents, or the matter controverted.

72. Whatsoever shall be Directed by His Majesty, the General, or other
Superior-Officer, shall be published by beat of Drum, or sound of Trumpet, that
no man may pretend ignorance thereof; and whosoever shall be found disobedient,
or faulty against what is so published, shall be punished, conform to the pains
contained in the Proclamation, or these Articles.

IT is Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That these Articles, and Rules, in number
Seventy two, be forthwith Printed and Published, at the first: Muster of Our
Forces, after the Date hereof; and at such other times, as Our General,
Lieutenant General, or Commander in Chief of Our Forces shall Direct, Which is
to be done in the most public manner, at the head of every Regiment, Troop, or
Company: For the performance whereof, This s^all be to all Persons that may be
therein concerned, a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court, at White Hall the 22. Day of April. 1686. And of Our Reign
the Second Year. By His Majesty's Command, MELFORT.



