A DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS COUNCIL IN SCOTLAND, For the GOVERNMENT thereof;
For the better Preventing of Ill-Affected PERSONS from Acting any Design to the
Disturbance of the QUIET of this NATION, by an Unlicensed Repairing into this
Country, and going out of the same.
WHereas many of those lately in Arms against the Peace and Quiet of this
Nation, being fled beyond the Seas because of the many Victories and good
Successes which GOD has given to the Forces of this Commonwealth against the
Common Enemy, which rendered it unsafe for them to remain therein; And it having
been found that some of them are already returned, and it being believed that
others, disaffected to the Peace and Welfare of this Country, are likely to
return there-into, upon pretense of knowing no Order to the contrary: The
Council considering, that the confluence of such disaffected persons hither
might be of dangerous consequence to this Nation; And to the end that no Person
may pretend ignorance thereof, do hereby Order and Declare;

I. That no Person or Persons whatsoever, now beyond the Seas out of this
Commonwealth, who are not Commanders or Masters of any Ships, or other Vessels,
or properly belonging to any Ships Company, as well of this Commonwealth, as in
Amity with it (for all which Companies, the said respective Commanders or
Masters of Ships, or Vessels, will be answerable) shall, after the Twentieth of
January next, presume to come from any place beyond the Seas, not in the power
of this Commonwealth, into Scotland without License in that behalf from his
Highness the Lord Protector or his Council, or from his Highness Council in
Scotland, or the Commander in (...) of Ireland, or the Commander in Chief of
his Highness Forces there, or his Highness Council in Ireland, or the Generals
of the Fleet of this Commonwealth, or any of them, or such others as are or
shall be authorized in that behalf; as they will answer the contrary at their
perils.

II. All such as shall repair into Scotland from any place beyond the Sea, not
belonging to this Commonwealth, after the Publication hereof, though with a
Pass between this and the Twentieth of January next, and after; and though
without a Pass between this and the Twentieth of January next, such Person and
Persons respectively are hereby required before they come on shore, to send
Intimation, as they will answer the contrary at their perils, of their being
arrived, to the Governor of one of the next adjacent Garrisons, who is to send
forthwith for the said Person or Persons, to see his or their Pass or Passes,
lest they might be counterfeited; and for such as have no Pass between this
and the Twentieth of January next, to receive Information of the cause of their
coming into this Nation, of their business here, and of the time of their
intended continuance in this Country; In all which, if the said Governor
receive full satisfaction, he is then to permit the said Person or Persons to
pass about his or their lawful affairs; But if upon such examination the said
Governor has cause to suspect the said Person or Persons, He is desired and
authorized to secure him or them, and forthwith to intimate the Grounds of his
said Dis-satisfaction unto the Council, who will give speedy Order therein;
till which Order be received by the said Governor, he is desired and authorized
to keep the said Person and Persons in safe custody.

III. That no Commander or Master of any Ship or Vessel, shall from or after
the Twentieth of January next, bring any Person, or receive aboard his Ship or
Vessel any Person from any place beyond the Seas, not in the power of this
Commonwealth, coming for Scotland, except the Mariners belonging to the Ship or
Vessels Company (for whom the Ship Commander or Master of the Ship or Vessel
will be answerable) and except such Person or Persons as shall (...) from any
of the Persons or Authorities before mentioned, upon the pain and penalty of
the loss and forfeiture of the Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels wherein such
Passenger or Passengers shall come, and of Imprisonment during the Councils
pleasure, and such further punishment as their contempt of this Declaration
shall demerit.

4. And the Council further considering the Inconveniences that might arise to
this Commonwealth, by the going of Persons out of Scotland beyond the Seas, if
a general liberty should be taken therein, whereby disaffected Persons might
the better pursue their wicked Designs against this Commonwealth, Do further
hereby Order and Declare, That no Commander or Master of any Ship or Vessel,
shall, after the Fourth day of December next, presume to transport or receive
aboard his Ship or Vessel, in order to his Transportation, any Person
whatsoever (except such as belong to the Ship or Vessels Company, for whom he
will be answerable) going for any Foreign Parts, not in the power of this
Commonwealth, without License in that behalf from some one of the Persons or
Authorities before mentioned, or from the Governor of Air, Aberdeen, or Dundee
for the time being, upon pain of forfeiture of his Ship, and imprisonment of
his Person during the Councils pleasure. And this Declaration is to continue
and be of force until the First of July next after the Date hereof. And for the
more effectual having of these Orders put in execution, All Officers whatsoever
belonging to the Customs in the respective Ports in Scotland, are hereby
strictly required (from and after the Publication hereof) upon the arrival of
any Ship or Vessel from any Place beyond Sea, not belonging to this
Commonwealth, to repair immediately aboard, and to acquaint the Commander or
Master thereof with the forementioned Declaration, and strictly to require him,
to give him a Schedule of the Names of his Ships Company, for whom he is to
undertake to be answerable, by writing under his hand at the foot of the said
Schedule, as also to give due observance to the said Declaration. And the said
Officers of the Customs, or one of them, at their respective Ports, are to
require from the Commander or Master of every such Ship or Vessel, a List of
the Passengers coming in the said Ship, under his hand; which List, the said
Commander or Master of such Ship or Vessel is required to deliver him or them;
And also to enjoin the said Commander or Master of such Ship or Vessel, not to
permit any such Passengers to come on Shore until they respectively be ordered
by Warrant from the Governor of one of the next adjacent Garrisons to come to
him. And the said Officers of the Customs, at their respective Ports, are
further hereby required, diligently to search whether any Person or Persons
(other than the Company so undertaken for, belonging to the said Ship or
Vessel) be come over in such Ship or Vessel, And if any such be, to acquaint
him or them also with the beforementioned Declaration, and enjoin his due
obedience thereunto, that no person may pretend ignorance thereof; And also
carefully to observe whether there be any breakers of the Rules set down by the
said Declaration, And if any such should be, from time to time (...) to inform
his Highness Council thereof, and as much as in them lies, to prevent or hinder
any Breach of the said Order.

Friday, the 23. day of November, 1655. At His Highness Council in EDINBURGH,
ORdered, That the above Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published, EMANUEL
DOWNING, Cl. of the Council.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1655.


