A RELATION Of the Late BATTLE Between The Two Great Armies Of The
CONFEDERATES and the KING of France, at the River Pieton, between Charleroy and
Nieuell, on Saturday the 11. August N. S. 1674.



LONDON, Printed for D. Newman in the Poultrey, 1674.

A RELATION OF THE Late Great Battle, between the two Potent ARMIES, etc.
ON Friday the 10th. of August, N. Style, the Prince of Oranges Army lying at
Nieuel, on the North-side of the River Sangery, with the Emperial Army, under
the Command of General Souch, near Mons, and to the Eastward of a small River,
called Pieton. It was given out in the Prince of Oranges Army, that they would
March off the next day to New quarters, which brought the Prince of Conde (who
lay with his Army Entrenched behind the said River Pieton) to a Resolution to
Attempt some Exploit on the Rear of the Confederate Army, under the Command of
the Prince of Orange: But the design of the Prince of Orange was to Attacque a
Body of the French Troops, which were in a Wood, to make good a Pass on the
other side of the River Pieton, for the security of the ^rench Army; whereby he
did suppose he might Engage the whole French Army to their Rescue, and so
forces over the River to the French, in the Wood, leaving his Artillary and
Baggage Guarded only with Nine Regiments; whereupon the Prince of Conde,
instead of drawing out his Army to Rescue his Party which were to be Attaqued,
makes a short cut over the aforesaid small River, with a considerable part of
his Army; Beats off the Prince of Oranges Nine Regiments with no small
slaughter, and so possesses himself of all his Artillary and Baggage, and takes
several Prisoners. Immediately the Prince of Orange, with the Confederates
returns back from their Attempt, and Rescues the remainder of their Men from
being Killed by the French, repressing the French, and recovering his lost
Cannon and Baggage: The Prince of Conde to second his first Attempt, brings
down the remainder of his Army, only leaving a sufficient Party behind to make
good his Trenches, in case of a Retreat; with which supply of his, and the
remainder of his Forces, he Beats off that part of the Confederates Army that
had come over and Rescued their Men and Artillery, and repossesses himself of
the aforesaid Cannon and Carriages. The Prince of Orange seeing that,
Reinforces his repelled Troops, with the remainder of the Confederate Army,
which came down with such courage, that he put the French to another Retreat,
and so recovers again all his lost Carriages and Cannon.

The ground on which they fought being rough and snaggy, thereby not admitting
the Armies to draw up in a regular Battalia, they were forced (by succession of
Partys and Bodies of Horse and Foot, as the ground would permit them,) to have
diverse Encounters, wherein the success proved Various: But many of the Horse
and Foot, with the forwardest of the Nobility and Gentry (some say to the
number of 400. of the French side) were Slain and Wounded on both sides;
falling heavily on the Li^e Guards of the King of France, as it did before in
their first Attemption the Nine Regiments left by the Carriages of the Prince
of Orange; as also in the second Assault upon the three Regiments of Holstein,
Morbec, and the young Prince of Vandemont; the former of which, of 1100 Brave
men (behaving themselves Gallantly) not above one hundred escaped in this
fierce and bloody Engagement of the Armies thus in Partys: The Prince of Conde
was so hard put to it, like a Noble General, he was forced (for the safety of
the whole) personally to Engage to that degree of hazard, that two Horses were
killed under him, and in the Remounting, the industry of his Son was such, that
in helping his Father to a fresh Horse, himself was much wounded. Both sides
thus wearying themselves in their Contest for Victory, the Success proved
doubtful; and when the Valor of both would admit of no other Decision, the
Night interposed, in which the Prince of Conde Retreated to his Camp on the
other side the River Pieton, and the Confederates kept their former posts:
Several Wagons on Sunday Morning early, were at the Gates of Brussels, which
upon the first Approach of the Prince of Condy's Forces Attacking the Artillery
and Carriages, did make their Escape, and did put Brussels into some
Consternation.

In this Battle, there fell (as is adjuged by men on both sides) no less than
10000 Men, the distinct Assignment what of this number were lost on each side,
is too hard for any impartial man to determine, in regard the Slaughter fell
not out by a Rout of either Party, but a mutual falling one against the other;
neither can it be determined, but by the calling over the Muster-rouls of each
Army; But its probable, that by reason of the last Repulse of the French from
the Cannon and Carriage of the Prince of Orange, by the weight of the
Confederate Army (which was opposed by the fury of the assayling French) more
of the French must fall than of the Confederates.

As for the Prisoners taken by the French, they were most of them private
Soldiers, Guarding the Carriages of the Nine Regiments, though there is a
report of several Great Officers and persons of quality; among whom are the
Prince de Salme, the Marquess d' Assentaer, and others, of which you shall know
by the next. The Eminent Persons wounded on the Confederates side, are Prince
Charles of Lorraine, Prince Pio, Count Waldouk, etc.

On the French side, that Renowned Commander Montel, the Governor of Charle le
Roy, Duke D'Anguin, and some say Luxenburgh is killed.

In this Great Battle as the Prince of Conde behaved himself with great Valor
and prudence; so did the Prince of Orange, to the Admiration of all; and the
Generals that were with him; particularly, he that was formerly Governor of
Mastrick for the Dutch. If the French have but equal loss in number, they have
the disadvantage only in this, that their Army was considerably the smaller of
the two.

FINIS.

