C R

In DEFENC^

DIEV ET MON DROIT

God SAVE THE KING.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT, Discharging Pedlars Pack-man, and common Posts, to travel without Passes,
Sederunt HIS Grace The DUKE Of HAMILTOUN, The LORD LUNDIN Secretary of State,
The LORD COLINGTOUN Justice Clerk,
Glasgow the 25th Day of October. 1684.
THe Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's privy Council, considering that
several seditious and disaffected persons, who travel through the Country; as
pedlars, and packman, or common Posts, have made it their business these diverse
years bygone, to carry false and seditious news, and to sell and disperse
transonable lybels and pamphlets, and to convocat some of his Majesty's giddy
and unstable Subjects to house and field Conventicles: those nourseries of
Schism and rendavouses of rebellion, whereby the peace and unity of the
Church, has been almost distroyed, and the government it self endangered.
Wherefore the said Lords do hereby in his Majesty's Royal name and authority
strictly prohibit and discharge all persons whatsomever, under the notion of
pedlars, packman, or common Posts, to travel throw any parts of the Shyres of
Lanerk, Stirling, Ranfrew and Dumbartoun, or Jurisdictiones whither of Royalty
or Regality within the samen, the pedlars, or packman, without a Pass from one
of our privy Counselors, Shireffs, beallies of Regalities, or their deputts,
magistrates of Royal brughs and all common posts, to carry any Letters or
missives, without license from the general postmaster: with certification to
them or any of them, that if they shall presume or take upon hand to travel
without the said Passes, they shall be persewed as vagabounds and soruers, and
as dispersers of seditious lybels and pamphlets; and do hereby require and
command all Shireffs, beallies of Regalities and there deputts, Justice of
peace, and magistrates of brughs Royal, to apprehend the persons of the said
pedlars, or common Posts, who have not the said Passes or license as said is,
and Imprison there persons till they find Caution not to Contraveen herein
hereafter, under the penalty of five Hundredth merks, and to answer before the
Lords of his Majesty's privy Council when ever they shall he called for, for
there contempt and disobedience.

And ordains these presents to be printed and published at the mercat cross of
Glasgow, and heal other mercat-erosses within the four Shyres, that none
pretend ignorance.

Extract By me SIR WILLIAM PATERSON, Knight, Clerk, to his Majesty's most
honorable privy Council.

GLASGOW, Printed by Robert Sanders, One of His Majesty's Printers. 1684.


