ACT Anent the Loyal Curing and Packing of Herring and Salmond-fish.
At Edinburgh the Eleventh of May, 1693.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD and LADY, the King and Queens Majesty's, considering, how
much the true and Loyal Curing and Packing of Herring and Salmond-fish, to be
Exported forth of this Kingdom, contribute to the advancement of Trade, and
general Good of the Nation; DO THEREFORE, with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Statute, Ordain and Enact, that all Casks to be made
hereafter, for Exporting Herr^ing, or Salmond-fish, be made of well seasoned
Knappel, or O^k-timber, free from all white Wood, or Worm-holes, the Heads of
the Cask dowled, the Step or Stave of a third part of an Inch, at least in
thickness, and that none of the Staves be Rift or Cl^ft: And that ilk Barrel
for Exporting of Herring, contain eight Gallons and two Pints: And ilk Barrel
for Exporting Salmond, ten Gallons, and be full Hooped, at least on the one
end, and have eight Hoops on the other end. And SICKLIKE, that there be kept
in each Royal-Burgh, where Casks for Export are made, a Burning-seal, for
marking of such Casks; and that the Magistrates, or Dean of Gild of the
respective Burghs, appoint an honest Cowper, for whom they will be answerable,
for Visiting and Trying all Barrels made for Export, and that the Maker of the
Cask, put his own mark upon them, before he Sell them, and call a Cowper
appointed by a Royal-Burgh to try them, and if they be found sufficient, that
he put the public Seal of the Burgh upon them, for which the said Cowper is to
have four shilling Scots, for ilk Last from the Maker: and that ilk Barrel,
which after such trial, shall be found unsufficient, be confiscated and
disposed upon, for the use of the Poor, within the Paroch where they are made,
excepting such parts thereof, as the respective Magistrates shall think fit, to
give to the Cowper-visitor within the Burgh, for his encouragement: and if the
said Casks shall be found unsufficient, after the public mark of the Burgh is
so affixed thereon, the Cowper who Visited the samine, is to pay therefore six
pound Scots for ilk Last, and proportionally for ilk Barrel: and whatever Cask
shall be put aboard, before they be visited and marked, as said is, the same
are to be seized and confiscated as unsufficient, and applied for the uses
abovementioned. AND SICKLIKE, that all Herring and Salmond for Export, be made
Pyned and Cured with French Bay, or Spanish Salt, or with Salt upon Salt, made
of Foreign Salt: and that all Herrings for Export (excepting such Herrings, as
are Exported to the Sound, before the tenth day of September yearly) be
Repacked, well filled and washed. AND IN LIKE MANNER, that the Magistrates in
ilk Royal-burgh, appoint an honest Man of Judgment, and skill in Curing and
Packing of Herring, for whom they shall be answerable to Visit all Herrings,
Exported out of their Precinct, who is to have a public Burning-mark, and to
affix the same upon all Casks, which are found sufficiently Cured and Packed,
and if any shall be found unsufficiently Cured or Packed, after Visiting and
Trying thereof, they are to be seized and confiscated for the Uses foresaids:
And the first Buyer, is in that case to have recourse against the Curer, and
Maker of the said Herrings, but if the unsufficiency thereof, be discovered at
the Port of Discharge, and be made appear, either by legal Probation from that
place, taken before the Dean of Gild, or Merchant Judge, or by the Attestation,
upon Oath of the Master of the Ship, who Exported the samine, and two Merchants
of good Fame, declaring the said unsufficiency, and that the samine happened
through the not right Curing, Making or Packing of the Herrings at first; then
the Merchant-exporter, is to have recourse for the whole Damage, sustained by
the unsufficiency thereof, against the first Maker, or Curer of the said
Herrings. AND FOR RENDERING the said Recourse effectual, all Curers and Makers
of Herrings, shall put their own Mark upon their Cask by a Burning-iron, and
whatever Herrings are exported without the Makers mark upon the Cask, the
Merchant shall have no Recourse for Damages, throw the unsufficiency thereof:
and in case any Cask with Herring be shipped for Export, without the said mark,
the respective Visitors who shall make discovery thereof, are hereby Authorized
and Empowered to seize and confiscat the samine for the Uses foresaids. LIKEAS,
Their Majesty's with Consent foresaid, ORDAIN and APPOINT, the said, Visitors
for the several Burghs, to be admitted to that Trust, upon their taking an Oath
de fideli administratione, and finding sufficient Caution for that Effect: and
that for their pains therein, they shall have six shilling Scots from the
Merchant, or Owner, for ilk Last, to be marked by them in manner foresaid. AND
FARTHER, it is appointed for preventing all Debate, that may arise betwixt the
Visitors, Merchants, and Curers of Herring, through the Visitors, their
resusing or delaying to mark Herrings and Salmond, that are sufficiently Cured,
upon pretext, that they are not sufficiently Cured, in that case upon any such
Difference in Burghs-royal, the Magistrates are to call five honest Men, well
skilled in Curing of Herring and Salmond, to decide any such Difference; and in
Burghs of Regality, and Barony, or Landwart, the Bailie of Regality, or his
Deputs, and the Baron or his Bailie respectively, is to choice the like number
of honest Men for that end, and these five honest Men, are first to be sworn
upon Oath, before they proceed to Cognosce or Decide in any such matter: and
the Visitor shall be obliged to affix their Marks, if these honest Men shall
declare them loyally Cured, and that under the penalty of ten pounds Scots
toties quoties, and that there be an Act of Court, in presence of the
respective Magistrates made thereupon; BUT IN REGARD of the great distance of
some places, on the Western and Northern Coasts, and Isles, where Herring are
in use to be Cured and Packed, from any Burghs-royal, where-thorow the Visitors
cannot mark the said Herring as well, and loyally Cured and Packed. THEREFORE
IT IS STATUTE AND ORDAINED, that the Exporter of such Herring, who shall Buy
the samine from these who Cured them, shall be Liable for the unsufficiency of
the Cask, and the bad and disloyal Curing of the Herring, conform to this
present Act, in the Sum of forty pound Scots money of Penalty, for ilk Last of
the said exported Herring, which shall be found unduly Cured, as said is, and
that by legal Probation, or by Attestation and Declaration in manner
abovementioned, to be applied to the behove of the Discoverer allenarly: and
for the better advancing of the Trade, of exporting Salmond-fish, Their
Majesty's and Estates foresaids, DO AUTHORIZE AND EMPOWER, the Magistrates or
Dean of Gild of ilk Royal-burrow, to put this Act, and other Acts of Parliament
made there-anent, to all due Execution; DECLARING NEVERTHELESS, likeas, it is
hereby expressly provided and declared, that neither this present Act, nor any
thing therein contained, shall prejudge the particular Rights of any
Burghs-royal, within this Kingdom, but that the samine be reserved to them, as
accords of the Law: And siklike declaring, that this Act is, and shall be but
prejudice to the Powers, and Privileges, Rights, and Jurisdiction of the Court
of Admirality.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by

TARBAT. Cls. Registri.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno 1693.


