AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS COUNCIL In SCOTLAND, For the
GOVERNMENT thereof: For the more equal raising the ASSESMENT, of Ten Thousand
Pounds Sterling by the Month, for the Six Months, commencing the first of
January, 1656/7, and ending the last of June next following.
WHereas his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland, by, and with the advice and consent of his Council, has
found it necessary toward the maintenance of the Forces, which must be kept up
for the preservation of the Peace, the security of the good People of this
Commonwealth, the preventing of Free Quarter, which otherwise would inevitably
follow, and for the defraying of other necessary Charges; To assess the sum of
Ten Thousand Pounds Sterling per mensem, upon the Nation of Scotland: And has
authorized and required his Council here, to cause the Monthly Assesments in
Scotland to be raised, levied, collected, and paid, as well for and upon the
personal as real Estates there, in such Proportions, and according to such
Rules, as the Monthly Assesments are raised, levied, collected, and paid in
England: It is therefore ordered and declared by the said Council, That the sum
of Ten Thousand Pounds Sterling monthly, as aforesaid, be assessed, taxed,
collected, levied, and paid, in the several Shires, Cities, Burghs and Places
respectively named in the Order and Declaration emitted from the said Council,
for the Six Months Assess, commencing the first day of July, and ending the
last of December, 1656; by the several Sums, and according to the several Rates
and Proportions, and in such manner as was expressed and directed for the
preceding Six Months in the said Order and Declaration, for every Month of the
Six Months, commencing the first day of January, 1656/7, and ending the last
day of June next following.

And, it is hereby further ordered and declared by the said Council, That the
respective Commissioners for Assess, who by the said former Order and
Declaration were appointed and empowered for each Shire and Burgh respectively,
be, and shall be continued Commissioners of Assess in those places
respectively, until the last of June next: And the Commissioners of Assess in
their respective Shires, Cities and Burghs, aforesaid, and all others to be
employed in and about the said Monthly Assesments, are in the whole business of
the said Monthly Assess, to proceed according to all such Rules, Powers and
Authorities as were ordered and set down by the Order and Declaration of the
said Council, for the preceding Six Months Assesinent, bearing date the Twelfth
of June, 1656. And the said Council do hereby order and require the
Commissioners for Assess in each Shire and Burgh respectively, to take special
care, that by the Twentieth of April next, the first Four Months Assess, of the
said Six Months Assess, be paid in to John Baynes Esquire Receiver-General of his
Highness Revenue in Scotland; And that by the Tenth of June next, the last Two
Months Assess, of the said Six Months Assess, be duly paid in to the said Mr.
Baynes, for the uses beforementioned.

Given at Edinburgh the 30 day of March, 1657. Signed in the Name, and by Order
of the Council. GEORGE MONCK.

Monday the 30 of March, 1657.At his Highness Council in EDINBURGH,
ORdered, That this Order and Declaration, be forthwith Printed and Published.

EMANUEL DOWNING, Cl. of the Council.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1657.


