royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT For a Contribution throughout the Kingdom of Scotland, to the Irish and
French Protestants.
Edinburgh, the Twenty ninth of April, 1689.
THe Estates of this Kingdom taking to their serious Consideration, that there
are many distressed Protestants fled out of Ireland and France into this
Kingdom, for Shelter and Refuge, whose necessitous condition calls for the
Charitable Supply of all good Christians: Therefore the Estates do grant
Warrant for a voluntar Contribution throughout the whole Kingdom, both in
Paroch Churches, and Meeting Houses, for the relief of these Protestants; and
that either at the Doors of Kirks and Meeting Houses, or to receive the same
from Persons at their private Houses, as the Ministers shall think most
effectual, and that within fifteen days after Intimation out of the Pulpits, in
such Paroches where there are present Ministers, and allows them to Collect any
day within the fifteen days after the Intimation, and before the first of July,
where there are no present Ministers; And Ordains the Ministers to intimate the
same upon the Twelfth day of May next at Edinburgh, and the next Lords Day
thereafter, being the Ninteenth, in each Paroch Church, or Meeting House, on
the South side of the River of Tay; and on the Twenty sixth day of May, being
the Lords Day thereafter, in each Paroch Church, or Meeting House, on the North
side of the said River. And the Estates do hereby recommend to the Ministers of
each Presbytery, or Provincial Assembly, within which these Paroches, having no
present Ministers, lies, to Preach in the said Paroches, the time they make
the said Intimation; and that they, with the assistance of such of the
Parochioners as are best qualified for so charitable a Work, do make the said
Collections; and when the Money is Collected, the Estates do hereby Appoint the
Collection of each Paroch Church to be delivered to the Moderator of the
Presbytery, or Provincial Assembly, upon his Receipt, bearing the Sum to which
the Collection of each Paroch extends; (of which Receipts the Receiver is to
leave a Copy Subscribed by him with the Moderator) And that the Ministers of
the several Meeting Houses do likewise deliver their Collections to one of
their number, to be appointed by them, upon his Receipt of the same in manner
foresaid: And Ordains the said Moderator and Minister thereafter to deliver the
said respective Collections to Sir Patrick Murray, General-Receiver, or his
Deputs, for the use foresaid, upon his Receipt, with the Lists of all the
Paroch Churches, and Meeting Houses who Contributes, and the Sums Collected in
each of them, together with the Subscribed Copies, left with the Moderators,
and others foresaid, of the Receipts granted by them, which shall be a
sufficient Exoneration to them. And the said Estates do further Ordain, That
the Receipts to be granted by the said General Receiver, be lodged in the hands
of Sir John Hall, upon his granting a Declaration under his Hand, that he has
the same in his custody; which Receipts are to be kept by him until the said
Money to be Collected shall be fully Distributed, and shall thereafter be
delivered by him to the persons, in whose favors they are conceived: And
Ordains the several Sheriff-Clerks within this Kingdom, to distribute Printed
Copies hereof to the respective Ministers in Churches, or Meeting Houses within
their Shires, with all convenient diligence. Extracted forth of the Records of
the Meeting of Estates by me

JA. DALRYMPLE Cls.

Edinburgh, Printed in the Year, 1689.


