A REMONSTRANCE and PROTESTATION Of all the GOOD PROTESTANTS Of this Kingdom,
against Deposing their Lawful Sovereign K. JAMES II.

Printed by a Lover of the KING, MDCLXXXIX.

A REMONSTRANCE and PROTESTATION Of all the GOOD PROTESTANTS Of this Kingdom,
against Deposing their Lawful Sovereign, K. JAMES II.
SInce it is evident to the whole World, that the present State of this Kingdom
is a state of Force; and that after all the pretense of Property, there is no
Law in England but the Long Sword; and that upon that Foundation Our present
Architects are raising the Fabric of their New Government: We who profess our
selves to be True Protestants, and Tenderer of the Honor of our Religion, then
of our Lives; to think our selves obliged, in Conscience, to vindicate our
Reputation to Mankind, by declaring our Disatisfaction to the present
proceedings, and making a public Protestation against the Authors of them.

It is true, The Fears and Jealousies we have had of the coming in of Popery,
by the Influence of some great Men of that Religion had upon His Majesty;
improved by the daily Reflections that were made, and the Ill Turn that was
given to every Act of State, by some Malignant Spirits among our selves; made
us, we confess, very Cold and Indifferent in His Majesty's Defense, against a
Prince of the Blood, of our Own Religion, whose Errand (as we were told) Was to
preserve our Religion and Laws, and the Just Succession of the Royal Line. This
only could have made us endure an Action we should else have hated; presuming
our Kings less, should have been His Gain; and our Yielding, our Victory: But
since we behold, to our unspeakable Grief, that our Condissention is
Treacherously abused to private Ends; and that show of our Disloyalty, not made
a Remedy to the Government, but a Ruin to our King, and an Infamy to our
selves, to serve the turn of some Men's Avarice and Ambition; We think fit to
Protest against such Injustice, and to declare, We neither know, nor will
acknowledge any other King, then JAMES the Second, who is our Lawful Sovereign
while He lives; and this Resolution we will maintain upon all Occasions, as
becomes Loyal Subjects and good Protestants to do. Not ought this to appear a
blind or unreasonable Sacrifice on our part; since we can find neither Truth
nor Justice in the Reason given for laying His Majesty aside: For the Kings
Discretion, so much spoken of, was a plain Necessity, and not a Crime: Had
those Forraigners that Conquered, but by leav^ suffered Him to stay a King at
Home, He had never gone Abroad; bu^ if it were a Crime, it was against Himself,
and not against the Kingdom^ His sins against the Nation we have daily expected
to hear of: Those black practices that brought the Prince of Orange hither to
save us, and do hi^ Princes Right: It is plain His Discretion, which is now
made the fault t^^ Dethrone Him, could be none of them; for that was not
foreseen b^^ the Prince, or those that called him in: And we Challenge those
tha^ have Impeached Him to prove to us, as clearly as they made us believ^ they
could, that the Birth of the Prince of Wales is an Imposture, that the Kin^ has
made a League with France to cut off the Protestants of these Kingdoms; an^
that his Brother and the Earl of Essex were murdered by his appointment. Had
these vile things been proved upon Him, we had done with him forever and till
then, common Honesty would fly in our Faces if we should Desert Him: And though
his Enemies have been able to deceive us, w^ hope they shall not be able to
Destroy us. If our Good Nature had suffered us to be easily abused, our
Integrity will oblidge us as quickly an^ thoroughly to resent it: And therefore
since we cannot have their proofs We must and will have our King again for all
this.

We know the excuse that is made for this profound silence, that the forbear to
prove this black charge, out of pure tendeness to the King; but w^ are not to
learn at this time of the day, the great Tenderness of my Lord Shro. Mord. Lov.
Mr. Harb. Burn. and Ferg. toward his Majesty; no more then the gratitude of my
Lords Moug. Chur. Bark. and the Bishop of Durh. o^ the Mercy of Kirk, or the
Valor of Lene. or the Morals of all of them.

But those Gentlemen and Partners are too tender to prove their charge, why did
they make it? and if they cannot do it, why do the proceed and refuse to open
his Letters sent for an Accommodation* They have accused his Majesty of
Imposture, they must prove it, or mak^ themselves the worst of Impostors, which
is an ill bottom for a Reformation to stand upon. It is impossible for Men of
common sense to imagine, tha^ three Kingdoms can be taken away from any Man, out
of tenderness to him especially if the reason of it be, that they show no cause
why they do it. It is a Mystery to us, how they can be so very tender of his
credit, and at the same time, and in the same occasion, so mighty careless of
their Own. This has so ill a Face with us, that the whole seems the plot of a
few Men, to serve themselves of the Kings popery, and the Prince of Orange's
Protestancy, to bring Honors and profits of the Government into their own
Hands which is not preserving our property, but making a property of Us.

It is this that compels us to say, and declare to the whole World, we look
upon our selves to be cheated, and our King to be Belyed and Betrayed ^^t of
all his Kingdoms. Nor can the Prince be blameless, if he yields to what ^^ey
would give him for their own sakes, since that were only to do his and ^^eir
business, and not the Kingdoms. It is not enough to say, it is put ^^on him,
for none can believe a few Naked Conventioners could force him at ^^e head of
his army to take Three Crowns from his Father, Brother, Sister, ^^d Wife,
against his own Will and Declaration. And that he should (...) it out of pure
Self-denial, is as incomprehensible, as that he could do justly after what he
has said to the Sta^es, and to us to the contrary. If ^^erefore he came for
less then 3 Crowns, less then 3 Crowns should sa^^sfie him: if nothing less
will content him; our preservation was not the ^^^al Motive of his coming, and
then the hazards he run upon this score, ^^nnot be justly placed to the account
of Merit. The King of France himself (for ought we know) would have turned
Protestant for the Bar^^an, which had been at least as great a Miracle, as any
we have yet seen (...) this Affair. And though what we have said, were
sufficient to deter (...) good Protestants from taking any part in the Work now
in hand, yet ^e cannot forbear expressing our Zeal against those Evil
practices, by let^^ng our Country men know the great Mischief that must
inevitably ^^llow upon such a Revolution, viz. Reproach, Violence, Taxes,
Blood, and ^^verty.

First, We shall become the Reproach and Scorn of all Nations: It cannot be
otherwise when Subjects attempt to Judge and Deprive their So^eraign, which is
a great Contradiction, as well as Danger in Government: But to do it without
being so much as once heard or summoned, is an ^^jury not to be acted toward
the meanest of his Subjects: King Charles ^^e I. had fairer Quarter from
Cromwell and Bradshaw: They did not on (...) charge Him, but offered matter in
Evidence to maintain the Charge: ^ut this King, must be Guilty of what his
Accusers refuse to prove, if ^et able to do it; and be Dethroned for Deserting
the Kingdom, though ^e could not held it. Nor do these Gentlemen stop here;
they will change ^e Crown, as well as the King; they will not be contented to
lay him by, ^^ut choose who shall follow; and by that make the Crown Elective,
which for above 600. years has been successive: A thing, they ly under ^o
necessity to do, but is the pure effect of their adventerous and flatter^ng
Humor. Can this do less then render us Odious to the whole world, ^hen the
King they lay aside, never attempted so great an Alteration in any ^ranch of
the constitution.

2ly. We are inevitably in a state of Force; for what is gotten by Force must
by Force be maintained; and let us flatter our selves what we w^^ it is not a
Vot of parliament, but the nature of the thing that will p^^vail: They that
make the change, must and will use Force for their o^^ security, whatever
becomes of O^rs.

3dly. The charge of the Revolution, will be intolerable in a whil^^ We shall
lay down a computation of one Years Expense for an Instan^^

To 70 Sail of Great and Small Ships of War in the Channel, and 14 Fire Ships
and Tenders for one year, 1400000 l. To 8 Sail in the Straits, and 5 in America
for the same time -- 0130000. l. To Transporting and Maintaining 15000 Men to
be employed in Ireland, for one year with Artillarly, etc. 500000. l. To the
Charge of sending and keeping an Army in the Low Countries of 15000 Men for a
year -- 0500000 ^ For an Army of 15000 Men in England yearly -- 0300000 ^ --
The Total 2830000. ^

To this must be added the Expense of Civil Gevernment at Home, Emba^^
Intelligence, Secret Services abroad, Domestic or Family Expenses, Char^^ upon
the Revenue for Debs owing, or by Pensions to Persons Aged, ^^cessitous, or
Meritorious, which will mount it to above Three Million, and that is more than
one Third of the yearly value of the whole Kingdom. this must be added the
Abatement that will necessarily follow, both in Customs and Excise, by reason
of War and decay of Trade; which in Customs alone, cannot be less than one
Third, and that comes to least 400000 l. a year.

Here is Poverty like an Armed Man: All Rents must fall at least half. No
Employments can be had in proportion to the Poor: T^^ means of Charity, as well
as Hearts to give, will be wanting; the O^jects of it must extremely increase,
and that so very suddenly, tha^ will not be in our power to hinder it, if we
have not that Peace, whi^^ nothing else can give us, but the Restoration of our
right Master.

4ly. And for Blood, can we hope to escape it in War? First by Sea is not to be
avoided; by Land, we shall invade the Territories or Co^quests of France, if he
in our Kings Quarrel, does not invade us first, S^condly, their is blood with a
vengeance, though we are not beaten, but we are beaten, there is Blood with
Rebellion upon us, which will (...) end without Blood in peace, and almost an
infinite forfeiture of Estates. Thir^ly, We are not assured we shall be long
quiet within our selves, man strong Factions already appearing; and we are less
assured, that Scotland (...) not be in Arms, and find something to do in this
Conjuncture, that (...) a King to loose and to choose as well as we. Fore
Ireland we are assured, or ^^^ht to be, they who possess the Government, will
lose it at as dear a rate ^hey can. Their All is at stake, and they are not
without hopes by French Kings assistance, to recover all for their own, and
will value ^^mselves to him and the World, by revenging our Despysing and
In^^ce both to him and them. Nor can we think they will endure this in^^^ity to
the first King of their Religion, since the Reformation; or suffer ^^se to be
ill used here, that have faithfully served their King, without ^^tting the same
measure to some disloyal persons there. Otherwise, ^ittle wit as we allow the
Irish to have, they have enough to know ^^t a Mossacre, which we so much talk
of, would be their own ruin, ^^^l that if they carry it fair to the English,
they will in a while gain ^^se there to join them, and more than there too, for
the Restoration their and our Lawful King. But be it as it will, whether we
regard ^^selves, Scotland, Ireland, or Holland; War and Blood look us in the
^^e, and Poverty and Misery must follow: These are like to be the Consequence
of this Celebrated Change.

Now whether our Dangers were so great, or our Fears so just, as to re^^^te all
this alteration for our Security, days of Affliction can only in^^^n us, if we
will still be deaf to those just and peaceable Expedients, (...) have been
often proposed to us. We shall close our Remonstrance, (...) this caution to
the present busy Men, that since They cannot holy lay Their King aside,
without entering into the Merits of the Cause, ^^ch it is plain They wave; and
in as much as They cannot justly say, ^as laid Himself aside; by Deserting
Them, when his Desertion, is co^^e and against His will, Let Them Repent of
what They have done, let us all join, for the prevention of Civil, as well as
Foreign bloody Wars, ^^tch Him Home to the Kingdoms of His Fathers, with
greater Glory (...) He came first to Them; and it shall not lessen It, that it
be done with ^^ter Security to our just Freedoms.

FINIS.

