A DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS COUNCIL IN SCOTLAND, For the Election of
MAGISTRATES.
WHereas by an Ordinance of His Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth
of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging,
bearing date the twelfth of April, one thousand six hundred fifty four,
Scotland is United into one Commonwealth with England, and therein it appears,
That the Shires and Burghs of Scotland, by their Deputies conveened at
Dalkeith, and again at Edinburgh, did before the then Commissioners of
Parliament, accept of the said Union and assent thereunto, and did promise to
live peaceably under, and in obedience to the Authority of the Commonwealth of
England, exercised in Scotland. And, whereas by an other Ordinance of His
Highness, Entitled, An Ordinance of Pardon and Grace to the People of
Scotland, It is desired, that they may be made equal sharers with those of
England in the present settlement of Peace, Liberty and Property, with all
other Privileges of a Free People; The Council in pursuance thereof, taking
all the Premises into their consideration, As also, the many prejudices that
may arise to the good People, Burgesses and Inhabitants of the several Cities,
Burghs and Incorporations within this Nation, from the want of the due
Nomination and Election of their respective Magistrates according to their Laws
and Customs; And to the end the Inhabitants of the said Cities, Burghs, and
Towns may receive all due encouragement, and have Government and Justice
righteously administered unto them; Do declare, That all Prohibitions as to
Elections of Magistrates are taken off; And that all Cities, Burghs, and Towns
Corporate in Scotland, to whom the Privilege of Choosing their Magistrates
belongs, may from henceforth Meet and Conveen for that end, within their
respective Cities, Burghs and Towns, and there proceed to the due and lawful
Nomination and Election of their respective Magistrates, wherein the said
Council expects due and particular care be taken, That no person be chosen who
is dangerous to the Commonwealth, disaffected to the present Government, or
scandalous in Life or Conversation; Which Persons qualified, duly Elected and
Chosen as aforesaid, are, and shall be the Magistrates for the ensuing Year:
And, the Council do likewise further Declare, That in case this Declaration
shall not come so soon to all the Burghs, as that they may Elect their
Magistrates by the times limited in their Charters respectively; That in such
case such Burghs, not having such timely notice thereof, may proceed to the
Election of Magistrates for their Burghs respectively, as aforesaid, that day
fourtnight. Provided always, That in the Oath of their faithful Administration
of Justice, and in all other Cases where formerly the Name or Style of King,
or, Keepers of the Liberty of England, has been used in the exercise of the
aforesaid Government of the said Cities, Burghs and Towns, The Name of His
Highness, The Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, be incerted and used.

EMMANUEL DOVVNING, Cl. of the Council.

Monday 24. September, 1655. At His Highness Council in EDINBURGH.
ORdered, That the above Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published

EMMANUEL DOWNING, Cl. of the Council.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins in Heart Close, over against the
Tr^^e Church. 1655.


