REASONS Humbly Offered to the Honorable House of Commons, FOR Continuing the
DUTY or some Part thereof, formerly granted for Rebuilding St. PAUL's Cathedral
and other Churches in London, for some time longer.
THE Quarries of the Island of Portland, are of great Use and Public Conern;
having the largest Blocks of beautiful Stone, and the most proper for
magnificent Buildings; and in regard of their Situation upon Sea, supply all
the West Coast, and the City of London in the Building of St. Paul's and other
Churches, and all both Public and Private Works; much being also used in the
Docks of Portsmouth, Plymouth, and the Fortifications upon the Coast, and other
His Majesty's Works.

The whole Subsistence of many Hundreds of Families in London, the said Island,
the Neighboring Counties and Coasts depend upon these Quarries; and the
Shipping of Weymouth, Brighthelmston, and diverse other Ports, manage this Trade
to several Parts of England; and in time of Peace transport considerable
Quantities of this Native Product.

Upon the Third of this Instant February, 1695. a prodigious Calamity befell the
said Island; all the Ground betwixt the Quarry and the Sea extending at least
sixty Acres, moving for three Days together, and sinking thirty Foot and more,
and spreading it self farther into the Sea; whereby the Harbors and Peers of
Moles (built at great Expense) were ruined and destroyed; the Cranes lately
built of vast Timber, Broke; the Ways and Passages, cut through the Rocks to
the Peers, sunk and intercepted; so that without great Expense the Quarry is
become useless, and Thousands of People are deprived of their Subsistence.

The Use of the King's Quarry there, was granted by King Charles II. to the
Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's, to raise Stone for Rebuilding the Church of St.
Paul's; but the Ways, Cranes and Peers, have been upheld and repaired out of
the Coal Duty of Eighteenpence per Chaldron, appointed for Rebuilding the
Cathedral and Parochial Churches of London, by Two Acts of Parliament formerly
made for that Purpose.

The said Duty determines at Michaelmas in the Year 1700. after which time
Sixpence per Chaldron is granted to the Orphans of London.

For some Years past Freight of Shipping has so increased, that it is become
near double to what it was formerly: By reason whereof, and the Impositions
upon Foreign Timber and Iron, and the great Rate of Oak Timber (although the
Works of the Cathedral are very far advanced) it will not be possible to
complete the same by the Duty aforesaid within the time allotted. Also some
Parochial Churches tho used at present for Divine Service are not finished; and
it is adjudged convenient, that some Houses which are too near to the North
side of St. Paul's be removed farther, to prevent the danger of Firing that
great and expensieve Fabric.

Wherefore it is Humbly desired, that in order to Complete the said Cathedral
and other Churches, and to recover the Quarries and defray the Charge of
Repairing the Peers, Cranes and VVays (without which also they cannot be Built)
the said Duty upon Coals, or such part thereof as shall be thought necessary,
be continued for (...) Years after Michaelmas 1700. without which a great part
of what has been already done to St. Paul 's Church will go to Decay again, and
be in danger of being Lost.


