HONI SOIT (...) MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

AN ACT For ordering the payment of DEBTS, BETWIXT CREDITOR AND DEBTOR.

At Edinburgh the twelfth of July, 1661.

C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY,
Anno Dom. 1661.

An ACT for ordering the payment of Debts, betwixt Creditor and Debtor.
At Edinburgh the twelfth of July, 1661.
Our Sovereign Lord, considering how necessary and essential it is to the very
being and flourishing of Kingdoms and Nations, that there should be a National
confidence among the People themselves, and with these of other Nations with
whom they have correspondence and traffic abroad; and that the most effectual
and proper way to beget, cement, and maintain the same, is, that Promises,
Pactions, Obliegements and Debts be faithfully performed and satisfied, without
which there can be no trust, and consequently no society, intercourse and
commerce at home, and all trade and traffic with other Nations will certainly
decay and cease, to the irreparable loss, ruin and discredit of the Nation:
Yet, the troubles and difficulties of the time being so great, that it is fit
some breathing time and encouragement should be given to the Debitors, for the
better inableing them to keep their credit, and to take some effectual course
for payment of their Debts. Therefore, His Majesty, with advice and consent of
the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That for all Sums and Debts
contracted before the term of Whitsonday, one thousand six hundred and fifty
eight years, and exceeding one thousand pounds Scots of principal, personal
execution shall be forborne by the space of six years, to begin at Whitsonday
last bypast, in this instant year, one thousand six hundred and sixty one,
Providing, that the Debitors make payment of one years Annualrent at
Candlemesse next, in the year, one thousand six hundred and sixty two, and that
the residue of the bygone Annualrents of the said Sums, resting unpaid at
Whitsonday next, shall become and be made a principal Sum, and the Debtor
shall give security for the same to these who have right to the bygone
Annualrents, when they take the benefit of the foresaid forbearance, in manner
aftermentioned; or at any other time that the same shall be demanded: Which
Security to be granted for the said bygone Annualrents, made up in a principal
Sum, shall bear obliegement to pay Annualrent for the same, in manner and from
the terms after-specified, viz. For a third part thereof, from Whitsonday
next, one thousand six hundred and sixty two years; and for an other third
part, from Martimesse thereafter, in the said year; and for the last third
part, from Whitsonday, in the year one thousand six hundred and sixty three,
during the not payment of the said principal Sum so made up, for which personal
execution is to be forborne, as for the other principal Sums, by the space
aforesaid of six years after Whitsonday last. And without prejudice of the
Security to be granted in manner foresaid, it is also Declared and Ordained,
that the said bygone Annualrents, are made up and shall be holden and esteemed
principal Sums; and that Annualrents shall be due and payable for the same from
the terms and in manner foresaid, and that execution shall follow at the
instance of those who have right to the same, upon and by virtue of their
Bonds, Contracts, and Rights, and of this present Act and Ordinance in the same
manner, as if a new Security were already granted in manner and of the tenor
above-written.

And notwithstanding of the premiss, it is hereby Declared, that the Lords of
Session shall have power to grant and pass Suspensions for Sums, not exceeding
one thousand pounds, upon such reasons as they shall think just.

And where those who have right to bygone Annualrents are only Liferenters,
and have no right to the stock and principal Sum, It is Ordained, that it shall
be lawful to them to use execution for the whole bygone Annualrents due to
them, as they might have done before the making of these Presents; and that the
said Lords of Session, shall have power to grant and pass Suspensions against
the said Liferenters, in case they shall find just grounds and cause for
granting of the same.

It is likewayes provided, that the benefit of the said forbearance, shall only
be granted and competent to such Debitors, as shall pay the said years
Annualrent within the time foresaid, and shall betwixt and the first of
November, compear before any of the Lords of Session with the Clerk, and
declare before them upon Oath, that their Debts exceeds the value of four years
Rent of their Estate, pertaining to, and possessed by them: which Declaration,
extracted under the hand of the Clerk of Register, or his Deputies, shall be a
sufficient Security against Personal execution: And for which Extract, the
Clerk Register and his Deputies shall have for their Fees the sum of thirty
three shillings four pennies Scots, and no more. And it is Declared, that all
persons, who shall not by themselves, or their Tutors or Curators, appear and
declare within the time, and in manner foresaid, shall be excluded from the
benefit of the foresaid forbearance, and shall never be reponed or admitted
thereafter upon any pretext whatsoever.

And the benefit of the foresaid forbearance being granted to the Debitors, or
any of their Cautioners, upon the compearance and declaration foresaid, shall
only be personal for them and their Heirs and others representing them, and
shall not be extended to those who are bound with them, and liable to the said
Debts, unless they also compear and declare, that their own proper Debts and
Cautionry for persons who have taken the benefit of this Act, exceeds the value
of four years Rent of their Estate, and that within the time and in manner
foresaid.

And for the more ease of the Debitors, it is Ordained, that in case within the
time of the forbearance foresaid, the Debtor shall offer to the Creditor a
part of his Debt, not being beneath or within the third part of the whole Sums,
due by him to the Creditor for the time, the Creditor in that case, shall be
holden to accept of the said partial payment, and in case of his refusal, offer
being made of a part of the said Sums, not within the proportion foresaid, in
presence of a Notar and Witnesses, the Debtor, upon consignation of the same
in the hands of the Clerk of the Bills, shall be free of the Annualrent of that
part of the said Sum that shall be consigned in all time coming, after the
consignation foresaid.

And whereas the legal reversion of Comprisings, was formerly limited to seven
years, His Majesty, for the reasons and with consent foresaid, is graciously
pleased to extend the same to ten years in all time coming; and Statutes and
Ordains, that all Comprisings, already deduced, and whereof the legal reversion
is not yet expired, or which shall be deduced any time hereafter, shall be
redeemable within the space of ten years after the date of the same; and all
Comprisings deduced since January, one thousand six hundred and fifty two
years, and whereof the legals are expired, and all Comprisings deduced before
the said month of January, one thousand six hundred and fifty two years, and
which were not expired before the said month of January, one thousand six
hundred and fifty two years, shall be redeemable within the space of three
years, after Whitsonday now last bypast, notwithstanding the legal reversions
of the same be now exp^^ed.

And in case the Lands and others comprised, exceed in yearly Rent and value
the Annualrents of the Sums contained in the said Comprisings, (...) of the
expense disbursed in obtaining Infeftments thereupon, and the Debtor shall
desire the Creditor to possess the Lands and others comprised, it shall be
lawful to the Lords of Session, like as the said Lords are hereby empowered
and authorized, upon a Supplication to be made to them by the Debtor and
citation of the Comprisers, to appoint the Apprisers to possess such of the
said Lands and others during the legal reversion, as the said Lords of
Session shall think just and reasonable, the said Debitors always giving
possession to those who have right to the said Comprisings, and ratifiing
their possession already apprehended by them (if any such possession they have)
of such of the said Lands and others as the said Lords of the Session shall
appoint, not being beneath in yearly Rent and value of the Annualrents
abovementioned; or otherwise giving to the Creditors (whether they have
possession or not) sufficient Security, at the sight of the said Lords, for
payment of the said Annualrents, during the time foresaid; the said Lords of
Session having always power to determine, whether in the cases foresaids the
Debtor shall give Surety to the Creditor for his Annualrents, or the Debtor
not being able to give Surety, the Creditor shall be obliged to take
possession of the Debitors Lands: And if the Lords of Session shall appoint, in
the case foresaid, the Creditor to be possessed for his Annualrent, then, and in
that case, the Debtor shall be holden to deliver the Evidents of the said
Lands to the Creditor or transumps thereof; providing always, that the
Creditors right, by virtue of the said Comprisings, be no ways prejudged
after the expiring of the same: And that the whole Lands and others, both such
as shall be possessed by the Debtor, and the remanent of the Lands and others
contained in the said Comprisings, shall pertain to the Creditor irredeemably.

And because oftentimes Creditors, in regard they live at distance, or, upon
other occasions, are prejudged and preveened by the more timeous diligence of
other Creditors, so that before they can know the condition of the common
Debtor, his Estate is comprised, and the posterior Comprisers have only right
to the legal reversion, which may and does often prove ineffectual to them, not
being able to satisfy and redeem the prior Comprisings (their means and money
being in the hands of the common Debtor) Therefore it is Statute and Ordained,
That all Comprisings, deduced since the first day of January one thousand six
hundred and fifty two years, before the first effectual comprising or after,
but within year and day of the same, shall come in pari passu together, as if
one comprising had been deduced and obtained for the whole respective Sums,
contained in the foresaids Comprisings. And it is Declared, that such
Comprisings as are preferable to all others in respect of the first real Right
and Infeftment following thereupon, or the first exact diligence for obtaining
the same, are and shall be holden the first effectual comprising, though there
be others in date before and anterior to the same; and the foresaid benefit
given and introduced hereby, in favors of these whose Comprisings are led
within the time, and in manner foresaid, is only granted and competent in the
case of Comprisings, led since the first day of January, one thousand six
hundred and fifty two years, and to be led after the date of their presents, and
for personal Debt only, without prejudice always of ground Annuals,
Annualrents due upon Infeftment, and other real Debts, and Debita fundi, and of
Comprisings therefore of Lands and others affected therewith, which shall be
effectual and preferable according to the Laws and Practick of this Kingdom now
standing; And it is also provided, that the Creditors, having right to the
first comprising, except as is above excepted, shall be satisfied by the
posterior Comprisers, claiming the benefit foresaid, of the whole expense
disbursed by them, in deducing and expeding the said first Comprising and
Infeftments thereupon.

And further, for obviating the frequent and fraudfull practice of the
appearand Heirs of Debitors, who are in use to acquire the right of expired
Comprisings, and by virtue thereof, to enjoy and possess their Predecessors
Lands and Estate, to the prejudice and defrauding of the posterior Comprisings
and other Creditors, It is Statute, that in case the appearand Heir of any
Debtor, or any other confident person to his behoof, shall at any time
hereafter acquire the right of an expired Comprising, already deduced, or which
shall be led and deduced hereafter, the said right shall be redeemable from the
appearand Heir, or the said confident person their Heirs and Successors within
the space of ten years, after the acquiring of the said right, by the posterior
Comprisers, upon payment allanerly of the Sums truly paid and given out, for
buying and acquiring the said rights, at the least so much thereof as shall be
resting unsatisfied for the same, by the intromission of the appearand Heir, or
of the said confident person, or their foresaids.

And His Majesty, with consent foresaid, does Declare, That the benefit
foresaid introduced hereby anent Comprisings, shall be extended to
Adjudications for Debt; so that the Creditors, at whose instance the same are
obtained, and those who have right to redeem the same, shall be in the same
case as to the benefit foresaid, as if the said Adjudications for Debts were
Comprisings.

And in case a Creditor, against whom the benefit of the foresaid forbearance
for six years shall be taken, or who has led or shall lead a Comprising
against the Debtor, shall think fit, and be willing and desirous to take his
Debitors Lands, or other Estate, or any part thereof for security or payment,
and in satisfaction of his Debt, then, and in either of these cases, the
Debtor shall be holden to give Security out of his Lands, and other Estate, or
to sell the same to the Creditor, at the sight of the Lords of Session, with
such warrandize, and at such rates and prices (if the Creditor be content to
buy) as they shall appoint, with certification, that otherwise the Debtor,
refusing or failing, shall lose and forfeit all benefit introduced in favors
of the Debitors by this present Act, as if it had never been made.

And in regard some persons may have taken advantage of the late times and
troubles, by taking and acquiring of proper Wodsets of Lands and others,
exceeding the Annualrent of the Sums lent upon the same; and providing
nevertheless, by the right of the foresaids Wodsets and express provisions
therein, or by writ a part, that they should not be liable to any hazard of the
Fruits, Tennents, War, or Troubles; His Majesty, with consent foresaid,
Statutes and Ordains, that all such Wodsets, granted since the year one
thousand six hundred and forty nine, shall be restricted to the ordinary
Annualrent of the Sums whereupon the same are redeemable; and the said
Wodsetters, shall be countable for the superplus of the Mailes and Duties and
other benefit of the same, exceeding the Annualrent of the said Sums, and the
same shall be imputed and ascribed, in satisfaction of the said principal Sums
pro tanto: And in case any such Bargains and Rights, shall be made and acquired
hereafter, His Majesty, with consent foresaid, Declares the same unlawful and
usurary, and the Contraveeners shall be punished severely as Usurers, conform
to the Laws and Acts of Parliament against Ockerers and Usurers.

And as to proper Wodsets, granted since the time foresaid, where the Creditor
undergoes the said hazards, and the same are affected with the ordinar
provisions and clauses irritant, in case of not payment of the Sums given out
and due upon the said Wodsets, at the terms and in manner mentioned in the
said Rights, albeit the said Wodsets and Provisions be lawful; yet His
Majesty, considering and having respect to the difficulties of the times,
Statutes and Ordains, with consent foresaid, That the said Clauses irritant,
shall not take away the Heritors right, they always redeeming within the space
of five years after Whitsonday last: And in case the Debitors conceive, that
they have dis-advantage by the said proper Wodsets, and shall desire to redeem
the same, it shall be lawful to them to redeem at any term of Whitsonday or
Martimesse they please, notwithstanding of any provision to the contrair in the
said Wodset-rights, or any other right a part suspending the redemption
thereof: Likeas it is Declared, That the Clauses of requisition contained in
proper Wodsets, granted since the year one thousand six hundred forty nine
years, shall be effectual and no ways suspended nor prejudged hereby; But
prejudice always to the forbearance of personal execution in manner
abovewritten. And where the Creditors and Wodsetters have transacted with their
Debitors and have acquired irredeemable rights, for, and in place of their
former Wodsets, it is Ordained and Declared, That when, and at what time soever
the said Wodsets were granted, whether before or since the year one thousand
six hundred and fifty years, the said transactions and irredemable rights
acquired by the Creditor for the same, are and shall be valide and effectual,
and shall no ways be prejudged by these presents.

And further, His Majesty, with consent foresaid, does Declare, That in case
any Debitors have by voluntait agreement betwixt them and their Creditors, or
any of them, renounced the benefit of any Acts of this nature, concerning
Debtor and Creditor, made, or to be made, the said agreement shall be of force
and effectual, and shall not be prejudged hereby, without prejudice always to
the said Debtor of the prorogation foresaid of the legal reversions of
Comprisiings led and deduced against them, and not as yet expired,
notwithstanding of the agreement and renounciation foresaid.

And because, before the year one thousand six hundren and fifty, when money
past at eight or ten per cent. diverse proper Wodsets were then made and granted
and are yet unredeemed; and since the beginning of January, one thousand six
hundred and fifty, there be diverse persons, who taking advantage of the times,
refused to lend their money, unless they got proper Wodsets of Lands and
Teinds, at extraordinary advantages, to the heavy prejudice of the Debitors:
Therefore, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That in
time coming, during the not requisition of the Sums whereupon the said Wodsets
are redeemable, and during the not redemption of the same respectively, if the
Debitors shall give sufficient Security to the Wodsetter for payment of his
Annualrent, during the not redemption, or not requisition, as said is; In that
case, the Creditor, Wodsetter, shall be holden to renounce and quit his
possession of the said Lands and Teinds, in favors of the Debtor and others
having right from him, At least if the Wodsetter shall be content to retain the
possession of the same; In that case all the free Profits and Rents, which he
shall have or uplift out of the said Lands, shall be restricted to six per
cent. yearly of free money, and the Wodsetter shall be countable to the Debtor
or others having right from him for the superplus; and that without prejudice
of the Wodsetter's real Right and Infeftment, ay and while the Lands be
redeemed, and the principal Sum whereupon the same is redeemable shall be
satisfied. It is always provided, that where any Creditor has had loss by his
possession of the wodset Lands and others since the date of his Wodset, So that
he has not received as much free Rent as communibus annis has extended to the
Annualrent allowed by Law for the time, all charges and burdens being deduced,
in that case, it is provided that the Wodsetter shall be first satisfied of
what he wants before he quit his possesion of the said wodset Lands, or be
holden to accept Security for his Annualrents: And it is Declared, that in the
account of the Wodsetter's bygone loss, there shall be allowed what he has
disbursed upon reparation and building of Tennents houses, Milnes, and for the
advantage of the ground; and generally all other expense which the Wodsetter
was put to, and what loss he sustained in reference to the said wodset Lands,
Rights and Securities thereof any manner of way; and what he has lost by
Quarterings, Cesse, waste Land, depauperated Tennents, or by Tennents who were
or are not able to pay, unless the ground should be casten waste: And because
the Wodsetters probation of his said loss may be difficile, he not conceiving
that there should be necessity for any such count, or that there should be any
alteration made in the right and possession of his proper Wodset, Therefore,
His Majesty, with advice foresaid, does allow the Lords of Session to take such
reasonable probation as in equity they shall think fit: And if there be any
deficiency, to take the Wodsetters oath in supplement; and where the Wodsetter
is in natural possession of the wodset Lands by dwelling thereon or laboring
the same with his own Plough and Goods, or otherwise, having the same
plenished with his said Goods, in that case, he shall not be holden to remove
from his said possession, but at the ordinary term of removing, and that he be
lawfully warned forty days before, and after sufficient Security shall be
made to him in manner above specified before the said warning.

And His Majesty having granted so much favor, benefit and indulgence to
Debitors as the like cannot be shown to have been granted at any time in this
Kingdom, does Declare, Statute and Ordain, That the Laws and Practick of the
Kingdom concerning Debts and payment thereof and diligence and execution for
the same, and concerning proper Wodsets, where the Creditor-wodsetter, has the
hazard of Fruits, Tennents, War and others, shall be observed inviolably, and
be of full force, vigor and effect in all time coming, excepting so far as the
same is altered, innovat and repealed by this present Act.

FINIS.

