AN ORDER AND DECLARATION Of His HIGHNESS COUNCIL in SCOTLAND, For the
GOVERNMENT thereof:
Prohibiting the bringing in of any Arms or Ammunition into SCOTLAND, without
License.
WHereas there has been of late some quantity of Ammunition for War brought
into this Nation from Foreign Parts, and entered into the Custom-House under
the name of some other usual merchandising Commodities; by which it is evident
that some wicked and ill-affected persons are endeavoring to lay Designs for
the disturbance of the present Quiet, which (by the blessing of the Lord) is
now enjoyed. The Council, for the better preventing of such evil Designs, and
that henceforth no person whatever may pretend ignorance, have thought it very
requisite, and do therefore hereby order and declare, That whatever person or
persons shall presume (after publication hereof) to bring into, and land in any
part of this Nation, without express License first had and obtained from his
Highness Council here, or the Commander in Chief of his Highness Forces in
Scotland, any Arms offensive or defensive, or Ammunition for War, shall not
only forfeit all such Goods so brought in and landed, but also shall receive
such further condign punishment as the greatness of his crime shall deserve.
And the Commander or Master of any Ship or Vessel, which shall after the First
day of July next ensuing the Date hereof, import into Scotland, and permit to
be landed, any Arms or Ammunition, without License first had and obtained, as
aforesaid, shall not only (upon due proof thereof) undergo the pain and penalty
of the loss and forfeiture of the Ship in which such Arms and Ammunition shall
be brought in and landed, but also shall be Imprisoned during the Council's
pleasure, and endure such further punishment as the breach of this Declaration
shall merit. And if any person or persons whatsomever, have already received
any Arms or Ammunition, for which they have not had authentic License, They
are hereby strictly required to give notice thereof, and of the Quantities of
the said Arms or Ammunition, to the Governor of the next adjacent Garrison,
who is hereby required and authorized to secure the same, and to give speedy
notice thereof unto the Council, to the end the respective Proprietors so
voluntarily discovering the same, may have due Compensation given them
therefore. And if any person or persons shall make discovery of any Arms or
Ammunition already brought in and concealed, or which hereafter shall be
brought in and landed, contrary to the tenor of these Presents, such person
and persons making such Discovery, shall not only therefore be reputed
well-affected to the Quiet and Peace of this Nation, but shall also receive to
the full value of one half or moyetie of the said Goods, and such further
fitting Encouragement as shall be found requisite. And all Governors of
Seaports, and all Officers belonging to the Customs, are hereby authorized and
required to put this Order and Declaration in Execution so far as in them lies.
And this Proclamation is to continue and be in force until the First day of
July, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty
and seven, and no longer.

Given at Edinburgh the Fifth day of June, 1656. Signed in the Name, and by
Order of the Council. BROGHILL, President.

Thursday the Fifth day of June, 1656. At his Highness Council in EDINBURGH,
ORdered, That the above Order and Declaration be forthwith Printed and
Published.

EMANUEL DOWNING, Cl. of the Council.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1656.


