I7 R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT Concerning the Pre-emption and Excise of SALT.
At EDINBURGH, the 25. of November, 1673.
THe King's most Excellent Majesty, having, from the constant affection and
care, which He has always had of the concerns of this His Ancient Kingdom,
Resolved further to gratify His good Subjects, by such Grants and public Laws
as He shall judge to conduce most for their good and advantage: And
understanding by the prosecution and management of the Pre-emption of Salt
within this Kingdom; that the same has been occasion of trouble and burden to
His Subjects. His Majesty does therefore Annull and Discharge the said
Pre-emption, and all Pre-emptions of Salt in time coming, and Declares the
same, and all Acts, Commissions, or other warrands whatsomever authorizing it,
to be, from and after the first day of December, this present year, one
thousand six hundred and seventy three, vacated, void and ^ull. And in order
thereunto, His Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Does hereby Rescind and Annull, all and sundry the Contracts, which in
prosecution of this Pre-emption, were entered into by the Salt-masters, and
these persons who, by warrant of the Commissioners of His Majesty's Thesaurie,
contracted with them for the sale of their Salt. And declares the said
Contracts and every of them to be void and null, after the said first of
December next to come: It is always hereby declared, that these Contracts are
to stand good to all intents and purposes therein contained, for all the Salt
that is or shall be made before the said first day of December. Likeas the
King's Majesty, for the en-couragement of the Manufacture of Salt, and for the
further ease of His good Subjects, Does hereby declare, all Salt made or to be
made within this Kingdom, to be henceforth free from payment of Excise. And
further, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, allows the importation of
foreign Salt; And Statutes and Ordains, that ilk boll of foreign Salt of
Linlithgov measure, shall pay forty shillings Scots of Excise, whether the
Salt be employed on Fishes or not; and that security shall be given at the
entry of the Salt, that this Excise duty shall be completely paid within year
and day after the importation thereof: And in consideration of the Exemption
which the foreign Salt employed on Fishes had from Excise formerly; His
Majesty Declares, That all exported Fishes, whether Herring, Salmond, or
others, shall be in time coming free from the payment of Custom.

Likeas, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, does Inhibit and Discharge the
Collectors and Farmers of Excise, upon any pretext, to give any ease or
abatement of the said forty shillings of Excise imposed upon ilk boll of
Foreign Salt, under the pain of deprivation, if they be Collectors, and the
loss of the bneefit of their tack of the Excise, if they be Farmers; and of
such further punishment as the Lords of Exchequer shall think fit to inflict.
And to the end it may be known, what quantities of Foreign Salt are truly
entered, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Ordains the several Collectors of
Excise, from time to time, to make patent to any of the Owners of Salt, or
these having their Warrant, their Books, in so far as concerns the entry of
Foreign Salt. And if the Salt-owners, or their Factors, shall find any
quantity concealed or imbezel'd, or that there is abatement given of the duty,
that are hereby warranded to pursue the transgressors before the Lords of
Exchequer: And shall have for their own use, the equal half of the
seisure-concealment, or abatement respective, which shall be so discovered by
them. And His Majesty does, with advice foresaid, Rescind and Annull any former
Acts of Parliament, or clauses therein, relating to the Excise of Salt, which
are inconsistent with, and prejudicial unto, the intent of this Act: And
Declares, that so long as the Excise continues, this shall be the constant rule
for regulating the Excise of Salt, and the custom thereof to continue as it is
in the Book of Rates.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY, Anno 1673.


