ACT For the Levy.
Edinburgh, the twenty third day of May 1693.
THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT Considering the present Dangers, and that Their
Majesty's may think it expedient, to Order the Levying of more Forces, for
obviating the said Dangers: And being withal most sensible, of the Duty they
own to Their Majesty's, for these great and manifold Blessings they enjoy by,
and under Their Happy Government; Do for themselves, and in Name and Behalf of
Their Majesty's good Subjects within this Kingdom, by these Presents, Renew the
Humble and Hearty Tender of their Lives and Fortunes, for the promoting of
Their Majesty's Service: And further, in Pursuance of their Duties expressed in
the Act of Parliament 1663, entitled an Humble Tender to his Sacred Majesty,
of the Duty and Loyalty of his ancient Kingdom of Scotland, they do Cheerfully
Offer to Their Majesty's, a present Levy of two thousand nine hundred and
seventy nine Foot, to be Levied off the several Shyres and Burghs of this
Kingdom, effeiring to proportions and numbers set down in the foresaid Act. And
to the end, the foresaid Levy may be made effectual, Their Majesty's with
Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, do Order and Appoint the
Shyres, Stewartries, and Burghs within this Kingdom, to put out and deliver,
when they shall be thereto Required, and to such Officers, as shall be
Commissionat by Their Majesty's for that effect, the foresaid proportions and
numbers which are hereby appointed to be Levied, according to the numbers
formerly observed in the Militia, and are as follows, viz. the Shyres of
Roxburgh and Selkirk, one hundred ninety eight, Berwick one hundred and
nineteen, the Shyre of Edinburgh, one hundred and nineteen, Haddingtoun one
hundred and nineteen, Peebles forty, Linlithgow fifty, the Town of Edinburgh,
Leith, and Cannongate, one hundred and nineteen, Dumfreis one hundred and
nineteen, the Shyre of VVigtoun forty five, the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright
seventy five, Air and Renfrew, one hundred ninety eight, Lanerk one hundred
forty nine, Stirling and Clackmannan one hundred, Fife and Kinross two hundred
thirty eight, Perth two hundred thirty eight, Forfar one hundred forty nine,
Kincardine and Marischals part of Aberdeen, one hundred and nineteen, the rest
of Aberdeen Shyre and Bamff, one hundred fifty nine, Elgin, Nairn, and this
side of Ross, one hundred forty nine, the Earl of Seaforth and Lord Lovat
their Division of Inverness, one hundred, Sutherland, Caithness, and the rest
of Inverness, one hundred fifty nine, Argyle, Dumbartoun, and Bute, one hundred
and nineteen, Orkney and Zetland, one hundred, to be divided and modelled into
Regiments, as Their Majesty's shall think fit, and to be thereafter paid and
maintained from the said Fonds Imposed, or to be Imposed by this Parliament
for that effect, and that by such Rules of Establishment as Their Majesty's
shall appoint, which Levies and Proportions, the Commissioners of Supply, which
now are, or shall be hereafter in the said Shyres and Stewartries, with one or
two Magistrates for each Royal Burgh, are hereby fully Empowered to make
effectual. And it is hereby Provided, that where the Master and Tennents shall
appoint a man one or more to be put out in the said Levies, the said Person or
Persons may be seized and secured by the Sheriff of the Shyre, or any two or
more of the Commissioners of Supply, or one or two of the Magistrates of the
respective Burghs for their Burgh, when ever the said Officer who is to have
the said Person or Persons comes to require them within the Shyre. Likeas, the
said Commissioners of Supply with the foresaid Officer, are to cognosce and
determine upon the sufficiency or insufficiency of the men: And in regard,
there have been alterations made by the Acts of Parliament, as to the Extent
and Bounds of some Shyres, since the Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred
and sixty three, Their Majesty's with Consent foresaid, do Authorize and
Empower the Lords of Privy Council, to adjust the proportions of the said
Shyres, notwithstanding of these alterations, who are likewise hereby
warranted, to give such other Orders in this matter, as they shall find
necessar. And lastly, Their Majesty's do hereby graciously declare, that for a
year and a half after the date hereof, the Militia of the Country, or any part
thereof, is not to be called out, or made use of, except in the case of an
actual Invasion.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT, Cls. Regist.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1693.


