ACT OF PARLIAMENT, Against saying of Mess, Jesuits, Seminary and Mess Priests,
and trafficking Papists.
At Edinburgh, the first day of February, 1661.
Our Sovereign Lord c^^sidering, that the public contempt of, and disobedience
to, lawful Authority, (though covered with the most specious pretexts) is
always accompanied with great confusons and provocations, to the dishonor of
GOD, and ruin of the people; And that thereby occasion is offered to wicked
and ill affected perons, of all sorts, upon one pretense or other, to subvert
Religion, and ^ervert the Duty and Allegiance of the Subjects; Whereof there be
too sad evidence, by the increase of Popery, and the number of Jesuits, Priess,
and Papists; which have of late, and do now abound in this Kingdom, in far
greater numbers then ever they did under the Goverument o^ his Majesty's Royal
Father and Grandfather, of blessed memory. And his Majesty being desirous to
trace these his Royal Ancestors, by a due and vigorous prosecuti^n of these
many excellent Laws made by them, against the saying or Mess, and the stay and
^^^et of Jesuits, Seminary and Mess Priests, and trafficking Papists, within
this Kingdom: Does therefore, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, command and charge al, and sundry Jesuits, Priests and trafficking
Papists, that none of them presume hereafter to fry Mess within this Kingdom;
And that within a month after publication hereof, they remo^e forth of the
Kingdom, under the pain of death: And siclike, his Majesty, with advice and
consent foresaid, does command, charge, and inhibite all his Majesty's
Subjects, of what quality or degree soever, that none of them presume to hear
Mess, nor resset, supply, entertain, furnish meat nordrink, nor keep
intelligence nor correspondence with any Priests, Jesuits or trafficking
Papists, under the pains contained in the Laws and Acts of Parliament made in
that behalf. And to the end that this Act may receive the more exact obedience
and prosecution, His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, does hereby
command all Sheriffs of Shires and their Deputs, all Magistrates of Burghs, and
other public Ministers of the Laws, to make exact enquiry and search in their
several bounds and jurisdictions, and to apprehendall such Jesuits, Priests, or
trafficking Papists, as they shall find within the same, after the last day of
March next to come; and to commit them to the next sure Prison, there to remain
till they receive due punishment, according to the Laws: And also, that with
all possible diligence, they send in to the Parliament, or in case of their not
sitting, to his Majesty's Privy Council, the list of all such persons within
their bounds, as are known, or suspected to be Papists; that course may be
taken with them, conform to the Laws of the Kingdom: And hereof, the Sheriffs
and Magistra^^s, and their Deputs are to take special notice, as they will be
answerable at their highest peril: Likeas, his Majesty considering how
dangerous it is that Children be educat by persons popishly affected, do
therefore, with advice and consent foresaid, appoint that children under popish
Parents, Tutors or Curators shall be taken from them, and committed to the
education of some well affected and religious friend, at the sight and by order
of his Majesty's Privy Council: And ordains publication hereof to be made at
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Market Crosses of all the Royal
Buroughs within this Kingdom, where-through none of his Majesty's Subjects may
pretend ignorance of the same.

A. PRIMEROSE, Cls, Reg.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1661.


