HONI SOIT QUI MALY PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms ACT
Against false Musters and free Quarters, and anent due Paying of Their
Majesty's Forces.
At Edinburgh, the ninth of May 1693.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD and LADY, the King and Queens Majesty's, and the Estates of
Parliament, taking to their Consideration, that it will contribute much to
Their Majesty's Service, that all Fraud and Deceit in making of false Musters,
be obviated and prevented, and that the Pay destinat and appointed to the
Soldiers be not kept up by their Officers and others, entrusted with the
payment of the Soldiers, but that their Pay be effectually given them.
Therefore, the King and Queens Majesty's and Estates of Parliament, Statutes
and Ordains, that if any Person, Officer, or other of Their Majesty's Forces,
as well in Castles and Garrisons as Others, shall make, or give, or procure to
be made or given, or make use of any false or untrue Certificat, thereby to
excuse any Soldiers for their absence from any Muster or other Service, which
they ought to attend or perform, upon a pretense of sickness or other cause,
that then every Person so making, giving, or procuring such Certificats, shall
be fined for every such offense, in the Sum of one thousand Merks, the one half
to Their Majesty's use, and the other half to the Informer, and if he be an
Officer that contraveens, he, beside the fine of one thousand Merks, shall be
Cashiered and Displaced, and shall be Incapable of any Military Office or
Employment within this Kingdom, and every Officer that shall make any false or
untrue Muster of Man or Horse, and every Commissary, Muster-master, and other
Officer, that shall allow or sign the Muster-roll, wherein such false Musters
is contained, shall be Cashiered and loss their Office, and shall be Incapable
of any Military Office or Employment, within this Kingdom, and shall likewise,
be fined in the Sum of one thousand Merks, the one half to Their Majesty's use,
and the other half to the Informer, and for the more effectual preventing of
false Musters, Statutes and Ordains, that every Commissary or Muster-master,
upon any Muster to be made, shall be obliged, to give notice a convenient time
before, to the Magistrates of the Burghs, or Sheriffs of the Shyres, or their
Deputs, or Baillies of Royalty or Regality, or their Deputs, or Stewarts of
Stewartries, or their Deputs, within whose Jurisdictions the Muster is to be
made, and the Magistrates of the Burgh, in case the Muster be to be made within
a Burgh, and the Sheriff or their Deputs, when the Muster is to be made within
a Sheriffdom, and the Baillie of the Regality or his Deputs, when the Muster is
to be made within a Regality, and the Stewart of the Stewartries or their
Deputs, when the Musters is to be made within a Stewartry, to be present at
every such Muster, and give their utmost Assistance, for the discovering of any
false or untrue Muster, and every Commissary or Muster-master, that shall
neglect to give notice as said is, or shall refuse to take the Assistance of
the Magistrates of Burghs, when the Muster is made within a Burgh, or of the
Sheriffs, Baillies of Regalities and Royalties, and Stewarts, or their Deputs,
when the Muster is made within their respective Jurisdictions, the Commissary
or Muster-master so offending, shall loss his Office, and be fined in the Sum
of one thousand Merks, the one half to Their Majesty's use, and the other half
to the Informer, and no Muster-roll shall be allowed, unless the same be signed
by the Magistrate of the Burgh, or Sheriff of the Shyre, or Baillies of
Regalities and Royalties, or Stewarts or their Deputs, within whose
Jurisdictions the Muster is made, and if any person shall be falsely mustered,
or offer himself falsely and deceitfully to be mustered, upon Certificat thereof
under the hand of the Muster-master, or chief Magistrate of the place, who shall
be present at the mustering, he shall be Imprisoned for the space of a Month,
and shall have his right ear cut off; and if any Person shall wittingly and
willingly, lend or furnish a Horse to be mustered, which shall not truly belong
to the Trooper, or Dragooner, or Troop mustered, the said Horse so falsely
mustered, shall be Forefaulted to the Informer, if the Horse does belong to the
Person, Lending or Furnishing; and if the Horse do not belong to the Lender or
Furnisher, he shall be fined in the Sum of five hundred Merks, to be paid to
the Informer, and if he be an Officer that Lends or Furnishes a Horse to be
mustered, which does not truly belong to the Trooper or Dragooner mustered,
every such Officer so offending, shall be fined in the Sum of five hundred
Merks, to be paid to the Informer, which shall be paid out of the Arrears of
the said Officers Pay, by the Order of the Court Martial to the Play Master, if
the said Officer shall have any Arrears due to him; and if there shall be no
Arrears due to the said Officer, the Court Martial shall immediately give Order,
to seize the Goods of the said Officer, and sell them for payment of the Fine,
which is to be given to the Informer, the Superplus that is more than pays the
said Fine, being alwise restored to the Owner; and if the Officer so offending,
shall have no Goods, that then he shall be committed to Prison, there to remain
for the space of six Months, and the Court Martial shall discharge the
Informer, if he be a Soldier, from any further Service, if he demand the same,
and if any Play Master, or Clerk of any Regiment, Troop, or Company, shall
detain and withhold by the space of a Month, the pay of any Officer or
Soldier, (Clothes and all other just Allowances being deduced,) after the Pay
shall be received; or if any Officer having received their Soldiers Pay, shall
refuse to pay every common Soldier their respective Pay, when it shall become
due, the Play Master, Clerk, or Officer so offending, shall loss his Office or
Employment, and shall be fined in two thousand Merks, to be paid to the
Informer, and to be raised in manner foresaid, and shall be Incapable of any
Office or Employment, Civil or Military within this Kingdom, and the Informer,
if a Soldier, shall be discharged of any further Service, if he demand the
same. And it is further Statute and Ordained, that the commanding Officer of
every Troop or Company, at the time of Muster, shall bring in a Cetificat
signed of the number of such Persons, as are sick, or have leave to absent upon
Foreloffs, and of such as are dead and deserted since the last Muster, with the
days of their deaths or desertions; and if such Certificats shall prove false,
the Officer signing such a Certificat, shall be liable to the same pain, as in
the case of false Musters: As also it is Provided, that if any Officer,
Commissary, or Muster-master, shall Muster any person that is a Servant, or
receives Wages from any Officer, or that shall attend any Officer as a Servant,
in the absence of the said Officer from his Quarters, or shall Muster any
person by a wrong Name, the said Officer, Commissary, or Muster-master shall be
punished as in the case of false Musters. And it is further Statute and
Ordained, that no Play Master of the Army, Commissary, or Muster-master, or
their Deputs and Servants, shall receive any Fees, or make any Deductions
whatsomever out of the Pay of any Officer or Soldier, other then the usual
Deductions for Clothing, under the Pain of being punished as in the case of
false Musters; and it is Declared, that the Play Master of the Army, Commissary,
or Muster-master, shall be liable to the same Pain and Punishment in case of
Contravention, by their Deputs and Servants, as if they had done it themselves;
and as the Officers and Soldiers should be effectually paid, and not
defrauded of their due Pay, so it is just and reasonable that they pay the
Country, and not be allowed to exact free Quarter where they come. Therefore,
and for freeing the Country of other Abuses and Disorders in use to be
Committed by the Soldiers, The King and Queens Majesty's, and the Estates of
Parliament, Ratifies, Approves and Confirms an Act of Privy Council, of the
date the fourteenth day of February last, one thousand six hundred ninety
three, anent the Ordering of the payment of Provisions for the Forces, and
Redressing Abuses committed by them, in the whole Heads, Tenors and Contents
thereof; and Ordains the same to take full effect, and to be put to further
execution, of the which Act the Tenor follows, William and Mary, by the Grace
of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Brittain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the
Faith, To

Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting. Forasmuch as by
diverse Laws and Acts of Parliament made by Our Royal Predecessors, all free
Quartering of Soldiers in transient or local Quarters, and all Localities for
furnishing or carrying Corn, Straw, Hay, or Grass to Soldiers Horses, is
expressly Prohibited and Discharged; and by an Establishment under Our Royal
Hand, there being Measures laid down, and Fonds appropriat for the exact and
punctual payment of the standing Forces and Garrisons within this Our ancient
Kingdom, and a Commissary appointed for making due and regular Provisions of
Corn, Straw and Grass, for the Horses and Dragoons presently under Our Pay, and
in Our Service within this Our ancient Kingdom, by ready Money, or otherwise as
he can best Bargain with any of Our Leidges for their Corn, Straw and Grass:
Whereby the Abuses heretofore done and committed upon any of Our Leidges, by
the Illegal exacting Locality or free Quarter, may be Remeeded and Prevented,
and all Men's meat, and Horse-meat furnished to any Officers or Soldiers in Our
Service within this Our ancient Kingdom, duly paid. And We considering how
necessary it is, that all Our good Subjects should know by whom, and in what
manner they are to be paid for all Provisions of Corn, Straw and Grass, for
Horses, and Meat and Drink to be furnished to Our Officers and Soldiers, by
them or any of them; and that all Officers and Soldiers within this Our said
ancient Kingdom may govern and regulat themselves, and the Troops under their
Command accordingly, as they will be answerable. We with Advice of the Lords of
Our Privy Council, Require and Command the Commissary-General, appointed and
received by the Lords of Our Thesaury, to make due and timeous Provisions of
Oats, Straw and Grass, for all Horse and Dragoons at present under Our Pay, and
in Our Service within this Our ancient Kingdom, in their respective, transient
and local Quarters: And that the same may be more orderly and effectually done,
We Require and Command all Our Officers, who command the said Troops, to give
timely Notice to the said Commissary of their Removal to, and from local
Quarters, and of the Rout appointed for their March in transient Quarters, that
Provisions may be ready accordingly. And in case any Parties be called to March
upon sudden Commands, which may not be fit to impart to the Commissary: Then We
with Advice foresaid, strictly Charge and Require the Commanders of the several
Parties, to buy with ready Money the Oats, Straw and Grass, necessary for their
Horses, as any other of Our Leidges is in use to do, and what he shall depurse
or expend thereon: We hereby Require and Command Our said Commissary to refound
and repay the same. And We with Advice of Our Privy Council, do hereby Require
and Command Our Commissary-General by himself, or fit Persons employed and
entrusted by him, to attend at the Magazines which shall be provided for Our
Troops at their respective Quarters, two Hours each Day, viz. betwixt ten and
twelve in the Forenoon, at the least to attend the two Hours abovenamed upon
one or more days of each Week, such as shall be particularly agreed upon betwixt
the Commissary and the Officers, to the effect, the Provisions may be given out
by the Commissary, and received by the Officers or Soldiers timeously, and
without Disorder or Confusion, and hereby all Officers and Soldiers are
peremptorly Prohibited and Discharged to offer any Injury or Abuse to Our said
Commissary or his Deputs, as they will be answerable at their highest Peril.
And sicklike, We with Advice foresaid, peremptorly Require and Command the
Officer Commanding in Chief, in any place of local or transient Quarters, to
see the whole Meat and Drink furnished to the Soldiers and Officers under his
Command, by the Landlords of their Quarters, exactly and completely paid at
the ordinary Rates of the Country: And in case there shall be any Exaction or
Discharge of free Quarters extorted, or Abatement exacted below the ordinary
Rates, or any other Abuse Committed; We with Advice foresaid, Require and
Command the Commanding-Officer there for the time, to make payment by ready
Money for the whole Soldiers and Officers on the place in their local
Quarters, once every Week at farthest, and transient Quarters before removeal,
if they stay a shorter time than a Week, under the pain of Casheiring and
breaking the said Commanding Officer, upon Complaint of his transgressing the
Premises, to be made the Party injured to Our Privy Council, or to the
Sheriff, or his Deput, Bailie of Regality, or his Deput, Stewart of the
Stewartry, or his Deput, or any two Commissioners of Supply of the Bounds and
Shire, where the said Abuses and Injuries are done and committed, whom or
either of whom: We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command, to receive the
said Complaints, and transmit the same to the Clerks of Our Privy Council,
within ten days after any such Complaints shall be made to them, under the pain
of being liable to repair the Party injured themselves, and which Complaints,
We with Advice foresaid, appoint to be pursued by our Advocat and Solicitor
upon the public Charge. And in case any private Party shall think fit to pursue
the samine themselves, We hereby Require and Command the Expenses that shall be
laid out by them; In Prosecution thereof, to be Repayed and Reimbursed to them
by the Lords of Our Thesaury, als well as the Expenses to be laid out by Our
Solicitor, all which are to be retained and deduced by the said Lords of Our
Thesaury, out of the Officers Pay, against whom the said Complaint is made and
verified. And in case any inferior Officer in Transient or Local Quarters,
shall Transgress any of the Premises; We hereby Require and Command the
commanding Officer, upon Complaint made to him and proven, instantly to pay the
Complainer what shall be due to him, and if the Person complained on, be an
uncommissionat Officer, the said Commander is instantly to break and Casheir
him, and if he be a Commissionat-officer, who shall so Transgress; We with
Advice foresaid, Require the said Commanding-officer, to Suspend him in the
mean time, and immediately to Represent the same to Our Privy Council, that they
may give Orders for Breaking and Casheiring the Officer transgressing,
providing the Complaints for not payment of Local-quarters, or committing any
of the Abuses foresaid therein, be made to the said Commanding-officer, within
eight days after a weeks Quarters are resting, or any other Abuses committed,
and in Transient-quarters; before the Parties removeal, with certification, if
payment be not craved; or Complaints made within the time foresaid, the
Commanding-officer shall be free, but prejudice to the Landlords and others,
to seek their Payment and Reparation from the Persons Debitors therein, or
Committers thereof, by all other legal means, and it shall be sufficient
evidence, that the Commanding-officer has been complained to, and required to
make payment of Provisions furnished to Soldiers, Men, and Horses under his
Command, or redress Abuses committed by them, if the same be made to him, in
presence of a Magistrate within Burgh, a Justice of Peace or two Witnesses. And
We with Advice foresaid, do Declare, that no Discharges, shall be sufficient
for exonering the Soldiers and Officers; and instructing the payment of their
Quarters, unless they be Subscribed by the Master of the Ground, or his
Chamberlain, or the Officer of the Ground before two Witnesses, or a Magistrate
within. Burgh. And for preventing of a common Abuse done and committed upon our
Leiges, by Soldiers and Officers, in their marches Pressing and Seasing upon
Horses, for their own private Use and Service. We with Advice foresaid, do
strictly Prohibit and Discharge all pressing or seasing upon Horses by any
Officer or Soldier, for their own particular and private Service, under the
pain of a months Pay, to be retained (upon complaint to be made and instructed
as aforesaid) off the Officer who commands, and where Horses are necessary for
carrying Artillary, Ammunition, or Provision, or any other use of the Army, in
the Towns, or in the Country, that the same be employed and made use of, by
order of the Commander of the Party, and of the Magistrates of the Burghs
jointly; If the Horses be furnished within Burgh: And by the said Commander,
and any one of the Commissioners of Supply within the Shire, where the Horses
are furnished and made use of in Landwart. And We with Advice foresaid, conform
to the third Act, Parliament One Thousand six Hundred and Eighty one, ordain
that there be paid for each day, that the said Horses shall Travel, three
shilling Scots for each two miles to the Man and Horse, and each day that they
do not Travel, six shilling Scots to the Man, and as much for the Horse, the
Man being obliged to provide himself and the Horse, which shall be paid by the
Magistrates of the Burgh: if the Horses be taken within a Town, or if in the
Country, by the Collector of the Supply in the Shire, who are to be Repayed
thereof, or to have the same allowed to them by the Receiver-general. And that
the Horses necessary to be made use of, and employed for the Service, and use
of our Forces above expressed, may be the more Regularly and Equally
proportioned and provided: We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the
Magistrates within Burghs, and Commissioners of Supply, and Justices of Peace in
Landwart, to cause provide from time to time a competent number of Horses,
within their respective Bounds, for the Service of our Forces, and uses
foresaids, as they will be answerable at their Peril. And We with Advice
foresaid, Prohibit and Discharge any Officer or Soldier to Sease upon, or Press
any Horses, without the concourse of the Persons abovenamed, or to detain them
longer than one days March at farthest; but to restore and give back the said
Horses, employed in the manner foresaid in good case, under the pain of a
months Pay to be retained in manner foresaid, off the Officer who shall be
found to contraveen the Premises, besides the payment of the Price of the
Horse to the Furnisher, as the same shall be instructed before the Bailies
within Burgh, Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies of Regalities, or Deputs, or Justices
of Peace in the Country. And to the end, Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises,
may be made public and known. OUR WILL IS, and We Charge you strictly and
Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Merkat Cross
of Edinburgh, and all other Market Crosses of the Head-burghs of this Kingdom,
als well Royalty as Regalitie and Stewartrie, and other places needful, and
there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of the
Premises: And likewise, that all Our Forces as well as our Leidges, may have
notice hereof. We do Require and Command, these presents to be publictly read,
at the Head of every Troop, and Company of our standing Forces, that none may
pretend ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourteenth day of
February, and of Our Reign the fourth year, one thousand six hundred and ninety
three. With this Addition, that in the case of either local or transient
Quarters; if any Officer, or Soldier shall not make due payment, conform to
the said Act of Privy Council, of what they take on in their Quarters, or shall
commit any Abuses in their Quarters, it shall be lawful and leisum to the
Landlord, upon whom the Soldier was quartered, to instruct before a Justice
of Peace, or a Commissioner of Excise and Assessment, Magistrate of Burgh, or
the next Neighboring Heretor, by Witness, or the Oath of the Party lesed, what
was taken on by the Officers or Soldiers, or what Damages were done by them in
their Quarters; which being instructed, and liquidat as said is, the Justice of
Peace, and Commissioner of Excise and Assessment, Magistrate of Burgh, or the
Neighboring Heretor, before whom the Value of the said Quartering or Damage
shall be instructed and liquidat, shall be holden and obliged to give the
Landlord, upon whom the Officer or Soldier were quartered; a Declaration
bearing the value of the Quartering and Damages sustained: And Ordains the
Collector of the Shire to give Allowance of the same to the Landlord, out of
the fore-end of his Cess or Excise; and that the Collector of the Shire shall
have allowance thereof from the General Receiver: And in case the Landlord be
a Tennent, or other person that is neither liable for Cess or Excise; In this
Case, the Heretor of the Ground shall have allowance of the same, out of the
fore-end of his Cess or Excise, due and payable by him, to the effect that the
Tennent may get payment thereof. And Ordains the Collectors of the Cess and
Excise, to give allowance to the Landlord, or Heretor of the Ground of the Sum
that shall be contained in the said Declaration out of the fore-end of the
Landlord or Heretors Cess or Excise, and the Collectors are appointed to give
account thereof to the General Commissary, or paymaster of the Army, that he
may retain the same off the fore-end of the Officer or Soldiers Pay. And it is
hereby declared, that if the Officer first applied to, as is appointed by the
foresaid Proclamation, shall not give Redress, then the Officers Pay shall be
liable as well as the Soldiers Pay, and the Collector and General Receiver
shall give allowance accordingly, and the Collector and General Receiver, are
ordained to give the said allowance, under the pain of Deprivation, by and
attour the resounding of the Damage of the Party lesed. And Ordains this Act
to be publicly read upon the head of every Regiment, Troop, or Company, every
time the same is mustered, that due Obedience may be given thereto.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT. Cls. Registri.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno 1693.


