RECOMMENDATION In favors of DUNCAN FORBES of COLLODDEN
AT Edinburgh, The seventeenth Day of July One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninty
Five Years, Anent the Petition given in and presented unto His Majesty's High
Commissioner and the Estates of Parliament, by Duncan Forbes of Collodden,
Humbly showing, That the Petitioners Estate being laid wast, in anno One
Thousand Six Hundred eighty and Nine, and One thousand six hundred and ninty by
the Incursions and Depredations of the Kings Enemies, and by the Forrageing of
the Kings Forces: And the Parliament having granted warrant to the Sherrif or
Shertif-Deput of Inverness or Nairn, to take trial and probation thereanent,
and Report to the Parliament* which accordingly was done upon the seventeenth
and eighteen Days of July. and tenth Day of October One thousand six hundred
and ninty one, as the said warrant of Parliament and Reports therewith produced
did testify. Therefore humbly Craving. That His Grace and the Estates of
Parliament would refer his case to the trial of a Quorum of the Committee for
private Affairs and upon their Report to do thereanent as in their Wisdom should
be thought fit, Which Petition being upon the Twelvth day of July instant read
and considered in plain Parliament. His Majesty's High Commissioner and the
Estates of Parliament, have Remitted, and hereby Remitt the same to the
Committee for private Affairs, to prepare and Report: Which Committee of private
Affairs, having upon the thirteenth Day of July instant conform to the Remit
of Parliament, conveened, and having revised and considered the Report dated
the seventeenth and eighteenth days of June One thousand six hundred and ninty
one Years, of the Losses and Damages sustained by Duncan Forbes of Collodden,
and his Tennents of Ferrintosh within the Parochines of Vrquhart and Loggie,
through Depredations, Theists and Robberies committed upon them, by the late
Highland Rebels while in Arms, As they were liquidat and proven by Depositions
taken before Alexander Chisholm Sherrif Deput of Inverness by warrant and
Commission of Parliament direct to him to that effect: As also, Another Report
of Losses sustained by him and his Tennents within the Parochines of Inverness,
Petty, Deviot Croy, and Wardlaw, done partly by the Rebels, and partly by His
Majesty's Regular Forces, Dated the tenth Day of October One thousand six
hundred and ninty one, as the samen was cognosced before the said Sherriff
Deput upon Oath, they found, that the value of the said Damages sustained by
the said Duncan Forbes and his Tennets in Ferrintosh, extends to Thirty six
thousand four hundredth and fifty four pounds thirteen shillings four pennies
Scots Money: And that the value of the Damages sustained by him and his
Tennents within the said Parochines of Inverness, Petty, Deviot, Croy, and
Wardlaw, Extends to ten thousand nine hundred forty five pound thirteen
shilling, four pennies, Inde in all the value of the said whole Damages,
Extends of Forty seven thousand and four hundred pounds six shillings eight
pennies Scots Money foresaid, and it is the opinion of the Committee, that the
said Duncan Forbes of Collodden be recommended to His Majesty's Royal and
Gracious consideration, for the Reparation of his said Damages, as His Majesty
should think fit, And the Report of the said Committy for private Affairs being
this day brought in therefrom, and read and considered in plain Parliament His
Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Estates of Parliamet, have approven, and
hereby approve the same, and Recommended and hereby Recommend the Lord of
Collodden to His Majesty's Gracious consideration for the Reparation of his
Damages as His Majesty should think fit.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by George Viscount of Tarbat
Lord Macleod and Castle-haven etc. Clerk to the Parliament, and to His
Majesty's Councils Exchequer Registers and Rolls.
Tarbat Cl: Register.


