ACT For Putting the Kingdom in a Posture of Defense.
Edinburgh, the Nineteenth Day of March, 1689.
THe Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, Have thought fit to Certify and
Advertise the Leidges, that after an Act and Vote of the Estates subscribed by
the Members, Declaring and Enacting that the Estates would continue their
Meeting undissolved until they should Settle and Secure the Protestant
Religion, the Government, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom: Nevertheless,
several Persons who did Concur with them in that Vote, and Subscribed the same,
have Deserted the Meeting of the Estates, and some of them have presumed openly
to Correspond with the Duke of Gordon since the Proclamation of Intercommuning
against him, and to Retire from this place in Form of Weir; Therefore, the
Estates do Require all such of their Members as have Deserted the Meeting
without Acquainting the Estates or their President, to return with all
Convenience to the Meeting of Estates; and likewise the Estates do Advertise
and Require the whole Protestants of the Kingdom, betwixt sixty and sixteen, to
be in Readiness with their best Horses and Arms, upon Advertisement from this
Meeting of Estates, and likewise to have their Militia in Readiness to receive
such Orders as shall be direct to them from the said Estates for Securing the
Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. And Ordains these
Presents to be Published at the Mercat-Crosses of the several Head-Burghs of
the Kingdom, that none may pretend Ignorance hereof. Extracted out of the
Records of the Meeting of Estates by me

JA. DALRYMPLE Cls.

Edinburgh, Printed in the Year 1689.


