ACT, For Visitation of Universities, Colleges and Schools.
At Edinburgh, the fourth day of July, One thousand six hundred and ninety
years.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queens Majesty's, and the Three
Estates of Parliament, Considering how necessary it is for the Advancement of
Religion, and Learning, and for the good of the Church, and Peace of the
Kingdom, that the Universities, Colleges and Schools be provided, and served
with Pious, Able and Qualified Professors, Principals, Regents, Masters and
others bearing Office therein, well affected to Their Majesty's, and the
Established Government of Church and State: Therefore Their Majesty's, with
Advice of the said three Estates of Parliament, Do Statute, Ordain, and Enact,
That from this time forth, no Professors, Principals, Regents, Masters, or
others bearing Office in any University, College, or School within this
Kingdom, be either admitted, or allowed to continue in the exercise of their
said Functions, but such as do acknowledge and profess, and shall subscribe to
the Confession of Faith, Ratified and Approven by this present Parliament; and
also Swear and Subscribe the Oath of Allegiance to Their Majesty's; and withal
shall be found to be of a Pious, Loyal, and Peaceable Conversation, and of good
and sufficient Literature, and Abilities for their respective Employments, and
submitting to the Government of the Church, now Settled by Law. And albeit it
be Their Majesty's undoubted Right and Prerogative, to name Visitors, and cause
visit the foresaid Universities, Colleges and Schools: Yet at this time Their
Majesty's are pleased to Nominat and Appoint, with Advice and Consent foresaid,
the persons under-named, viz. The Duke of Hamilton, Earl of Argile, Earl of
Crafurd, Earl of Marischal, Earl of Mortoun, Earl of Cassils, Earl of Lothian,
Earl of Kintore, Viscount of Arbuthnet, Viscount of Stair, Lord Raith, Lord
Elphingston, Lord Cardross, Lord Carmichael, Lord Ruthven, Master of Burghly,
Master of Stair Lord Advocat, Sir George Campbel Justice Clerk, the Master of
Forbes, Mr. Alexander Swinton of Mersingtoun, Mr. David Hume of Crosirig, Mr.
John Hamilton of Halleraig, Senators of the College of Justice, Sir Patrick
Hume of Polwart, Sir John Maxwel of Pollock, Sir Thomas Burnet of Leys, Sir
Robert Sinclar of Stevinson, Sir George Monro of Culren, Mr. Francis Montgomery
of Giffins, Mr. James Melvil of Halhill, (...) Broddie of that Ilk, (...) Grant
of that Ilk, (...) Dumbar of Grange, Mr. Robert Lermonth of Balcomey, Peter Hay
of Naughtoun elder, (...) Cunninghame of Craigens, John Dempster of Pitliver,
(...)Drummond of Meggins, George Moncrief of Ready elder, Sir John Hall of
Dunglass, Sir William Hamilton, Alexander Spittle of Lowchat, John Anderson of
Dowhill, Mr. James Smellet, Mr. James Rymer Minister, Mr. William Tullidaff,
Mr. Gabriel Cunninghame, Mr. Edward Jamison, Mr. Alexander Pitcairn, Mr. Hugh
Anderson, Mr. Gilbert Ruel, Mr. Hugh Kennedy, Mr. John Law, Mr. James Kirktoun,
Mr. David Blair, Mr. George Campbel, Mr. George Meldrum, Mr. Alexander Forbes,
Mr. William Vilant, Mr. William Mitchel, Mr. Robert VVillie, Mr. James
Mcgill, Mr. Henry Rymer, and Mr. John Oliphant, to be Visitors, to the effect
under written, viz. With full Power and Commission to them, or major part of
them hereby Declared to be their quorum, to meet, and visit all Universities,
Colleges and Schools within this Kingdom, and to take trial of the present
Professors, Principals, Regents, Masters and others bearing Office therein,
according to the Qualifications and Rules abovementioned, and such as shall be
found to be Erroneous, Scandalous, Negligent. Insufficient, or Disaffected to
Their Majesty's Government, or who shall not subscribe the Confession of Faith,
swear and subscribe the Oath of Allegiance, and submit to the Government of the
Church, now settled by Law, to purge out, and remove: As also to consider the
Foundations of the said Universities, Colleges and Schools, with the Rents
and Revenues thereof, and how the same have been Adminisired and managed, and
to set down such Rules and methods, for the good management thereof, for
hereafter. As likewise, for Ordering the said Universities, Colleges and
Schools, and the Professions and manner of Teaching therein, and all things
else relating thereto, as they shall think most meet and convenient, according
to the Foundations thereof, and consistent with the present Established
Government of Church and State; And to the effect that these Presents may be
the more surely Execute, Their Majesty's with Advice foresaid, Do further
Empower the foresaids persons Visitors, or their quorum, to appoint Committees
of such numbers of their own Members as they shall think fit to visit the
several Universities, and Colleges within the Kingdom, with the Schools within
the bounds, to be designed to them, and that according to such Instructions and
Injunctions, as they shall think fit to give them; And to the effect, that upon
Report, made by the said Committee, to the aforesaid Visitors, or their quorum,
they may proceed and conclude thereupon, as they shall see cause: And Their
Majesty's Appoints the aforesaid Visitors to meet at Edinburgh upon the twenty
third day of July instant, for the first diet of their meeting, with power to
them to Adjourn and Appoint their own Meetings, to such days and places, as
for thereafter they shall judge convenient; And this Commission to endure ay
and while Their Majesty's Recall, and Discharge the same. Extracted forth of
the Records of Parliament, by me

TH. BURNET, Cls. Reg.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


