ACT anent the selling of the Lands of forfaulted Persons. 20. February, 1645.
THe Estates of Parliament now conveened in the second Session of this first
triennall Parliament, by virtue of the last Act of the last Parliament holden
by his Majesty and the three Estates in Anno 1641. Considering that the
Estates of Parliament by their Act of the date the 27. of July 1644.
Considering that it was against all equity and reason, That the Vassals,
Cautioners, and true and real Creditors of any person or persons, of
whatsoever quality, that should be forfaulted in this present Parliament, or
at any time thereafter, should be prejudged by the forfaulture of the said
persons off their right of property of any Lands, Wodsets, and others, holden
by them of the said forfaulted persons, or of the payment of their just Debts,
and relief of their true and real Cautionries, for payment and relief whereof
the said forfaulted persons stood obliged, the said Vassals, Creditors, and
Cautioners foresaids, not being airt, pairt, accessarie, nor assisting to the
crimes for which the sentence and doom of forfalture was or should be
decerned: Therefore the said Estates fand, decerned, and declared, That the
Vassals of any person or persons of whatsoever quality, who were or should
happen to be forfaulted in that present Parliament, or at any time thereafter,
for whatsoever cause, ground, or occasion, whereupon sentence and doom of
forfaulture should be given and pronounced against them, should not be
prejudged anent their right and property of the Lands, Annuall-rents, Wodsets,
and others holden by them of the said forfaulted persons; but that the said
Vassals should be in that same case and condition with these who comes in the
right and place of the said forfaulted persons, as the said Vassals were with
the samin forfaulted persons, their Superiors, before the Sentence and Doom of
forfaulter, The said Vassals no ways being airt, pairt, accessory, nor
assisting to the said forfaulted persons, in the committing of the crimes or
deeds, for the which the Sentence or Doom of forfaulter, was, or should be
given against them, as said is. And also found and Declared, That the true
Creditors and Cautioners of the said forfaulted persons, or these who had any
part of the fines assigned to them by the Public, should no ways be prejudged
by the foresaid forfaulter, anent the payment of the said Creditors, of their
real, just, and true Debts owing and assigned to them, and anent the said
Cautioners their relief of their just and true Engagements, and Cautionries,
but that the said Creditors and Cautioners respective, should have action and
execution for their payment and relief respective, against the Lands and Estate
of the forfaulted persons, their Debtors sicklike, and in the samin manner, as
if they had not been forfaulted; Providing the said Creditors and Cautioners
have not been airt, pairt, accessory, nor assisting to the said forfaulted
persons in the committing of the Crimes for which they were or should be
forfaulted: And with provision, That they be Vassals, Creditors, and
Cautioners, before the committing of the Crimes, whereupon the Forfaulter
follows, as the said Act of the date foresaid proports. And, The said Estates
of Parliament now presently conveened also, considering That several persons
were forfaulted in the last Session of this present Parliament: And that diverse
and sundry persons are and have been forfaulted in this present Session of
Parliament. As also considering, That it is expedient both for the weal of the
lawful Creditors and Cautioners of persons forfaulted heretofore, or who shall
happen to be forefaulted hereafter: And for the weal of these to whom the
persons forefaulted, or who shall happen to be forfaulted in this present
Session of Parliament, are bound as Cautioners for any other person or persons.
And als, for the weal of the Public for defraying of the Public charges of
the Estates of this Kingdom, That ane just and expedite way be taken for the
discovery of the just and lawful Debts, owing by any person or persons, either
already forfaulted before the date of their presents, or who shall happen to be
forfaulted hereafter in this present Session of Parliament, to their just and
lawful Creditors to whom the said persons forfaulted, or to be forfaulted,
are Debtors as Principals, or whom the said persons forfaulted, or to be
forfaulted, are Debtors in the way of lawful relief: They being Cautioners for
the said persons forfaulted, or to be forfaulted, or to whom the said persons
forfaulted, or to be forfaulted, are Cautioners for any other person or
persons. And to the effect, that all person or persons, who are either
Creditors or Cautioners to the persons forfaulted, or to be forfaulted, or to
whom the said persons forefaulted, or to be forfaulted, are Cautioners, May in
due time, both for their own, and the Public weal, make their Debts owing to
them by the said persons forefaulted, or to be forfaulted, either as
Principals or Cautioners in manner abovespecified, known to the Estates of this
Kingdom, that they may have the benefit of the foresaid Act of the date the 27
July 1644. And that their Debts being known and satisfied, and paid by the
course afterspecified; The remainder of the Lands, Estate, and Goods, of the
foresaids persons forefaulted, or to be forfaulted, and hail farther benefit
thereof, may expeditely and conveniently come in to the Estates of this
Kingdom, for the weal of the Public, and for the relief of the Public
Burdens. Therefore the said Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That
all person or persons whatsomever, to whom any person already forfaulted before
the date of their presents, or who shall happen to be forfaulted in this present
Session of Parliament, Is addebted justly and really in any sums of money, or
any otherwise, either as Principal Debtors, or as Cautioners for any other
persons. And als, that all persons who are Cautioners for any persons already
forfaulted, or who shall happen to be forfaulted in this present Session of
Parliament, to their lawful Creditors; Shall exhibit and produce before the
Committee of Estates; to be appointed to sit at Edinburgh, or where it shall
happen them to be for the time after the rising of this present Session of
Parliament, Their whole Rights, Writs, Evidents, and other lawful Securities,
whereby the said persons forfaulted, or to beforfaulted in this present
Session of Parliament, are their just and real Debtors, either as Principal
Debtors to them, or as Debtors to them as Cautioners for other persons, or
whereby they are Cautioners for the said forfaulted persons, or to be
forfaulted in this present Session of Parliament: And which Cautioners, the
said forfaulted, or to be forfaulted persons in this present Session, are
obliged in law to relieve. And that the production of the foresaids Writs,
Evidents, and Securities, in so far concerns any persons forefaulted
heretofore, or in the present Session of Parliament, Be made by the Creditors
and Cautioners, so many of them as are without the Country, within three
months; and these that are within the Country, within threescore days, after
publication hereof at the Head Burghs of the several Sheriffdoms within the
Kingdom: With certification to all and whatsomever the Creditors of the persons
already forefaulted heretofore, or to be forefaulted in this present Session;
That if they failie, To exhibit and produce before the Commit of Estates
Their foresaids Writs, Evidents, and Securities, made to them by the said
forefaulted persons within the Diets respective foresaids: That the foresaids
Creditors, shall never in any time thereafter, Have any action against the
Lands, Estates, and Goods of the foresaids forefaulted persons, for payment of
their debts upon the pretense of the foresaid Act of the 27. July last, or upon
any other pretense whatsoever: But that the Lands, Estate, and Goods of the
foresaids forefaulted persons shall pertain to the Public. Neither shall they
have any action against their Cautioners, but prejudice always to them after
production, in manner, and at the time foresaid, to take presently back their
Writs and Pursue: But prejudice also to the said Creditors of their action and
execution competent to them against their Cautioners, conform to their Bands
and Rights. It is also declared for the Cautioners of the said forefaulted, or
to be forefaulted persons, that they shall not be holden to produce the Writs
and Bands wherein they are Cautioners, But only to give in ane note under
their hands of the names of the Creditors to whom they are Cautioners, and of
the sums contained thereintill (Because the Writs and other Securities wherein
they are Cautioners, are not their evidents and in their option, but in the
hands of the Creditors to whom they are principally made) Likeas the said
Estates of Parliament, Finds and decerns the samin, To pertain to the public
for relief of their public Debts and Burdens in all time hereafter, without
any Burden of payment of the Debts owing to the said Creditors failing, to
produce and make known their Debts, at the time, and in manner foresaid. It is
also declared, That where the Creditors or Cautioners are Minors, Their Tutors
and Curators are obliged in the like manner, To produce their Bands, Rights, or
Notes; or otherwise be liable to their Minors, for refounding their damnage and
interest. Likeas also the Estates of Parliament; considering That the foresaid
persons already forefaulted, may be engaged in manner abovespecified, either as
Principals or Cautioners to diverse and several persons their Creditors: To
which Creditors no present payment of their Debts can be made in a present
convenient and expedit way, without the selling of the Lands, Heritages, and
Estates, which pertained to the foresaids persons forefaulted before their
forefaulter; The sale whereof cannot be expeditely done, neither for the weal
of the said Creditors, nor for the weal of the Public. And to the effect the
said Creditors may receive satisfaction in a just and reasonable way, out of
the said forefaulted persons, their Lands, Heritages, and Estate, And that the
benefit of the residue thereof, may come into the Public of this Kingdom;
Therefore the Estates of Parliament, Decernes and Ordaines, That the foresaids
Creditors or Cautioners shall be obliged, To accept ane proportional part of
the Lands and Heritages of the said persons forefaulted their Debtors
respective, for their Debts owing to them, being instructed at the time and in
manner abovespecified, at the sight and determination of the said Committee of
Estates: And that at the rate and proportion of One hundredth Merks of ordinar
yearly constant Rent for ilk sum of Two thousand Merks, addebted by the said
forefaulted persons, to their said Creditors or Cautioners; or otherwise to be
deprived of the benefit of the Act of Parliament 27. July 1644. and to be
reduced to the old estate of the Creditors of forefaulted persons, as if the
samin had never been made. Likeas also, It is statute and Ordained, That the
superplus of the Lands, Heritages, and Estate of the foresaids forfaulted
persons (their Creditors foresaids being satisfied in manner abovespecified)
shall and and may be divided in parcels, and sold and disponed by the Estates
of this Kingdom, or by the said Committee of Estates to any buyer whatsomever,
paying present money over the Table, at the rate of One hundredth Merks of
y^erly constant Rent for ilk sum of One thousand Merks, as the price thereof:
And where present money for the Lands cannot be had nor offered, that then they
may be sold and disponed to any person to whom the Public is addebted, They
advancing in ready money the one half, at ten years purchsae, and accompting in
payment of their debts, being lent money, or furnishing to the Armies: the
other half, at the rate of fifteen years purchase. Likeas, The said Estates
of Parliament, do by their presents, give full power and Commission to the said
Committee of Estates, To divide the Lands, and others of the foresaids
forfeited Persons; And to that effect, To take up the just and true Rentall
thereof, and to estimat and convert Victual and other Rent (not being silver
Rent) and to redact the samin to money Rent, and to sell and dispone the
residue and remainder of the Lands, Heritages, and Estates of the foresaids
forfeited Persons, to any Buyer, at the rate and in manner foresaid. Likeas,
The Estates of Parliament decerns and declares, That the Dispositions so to be
made thereof to the foresaids Creditors above-specified, and to the said
Buyers, shall be valide sureties to them thereof, in all time-coming. And
siclike Ordains Infestments to pass under the Great Seal, upon the foresaids
Dispositions, to be made by the said Committee of Estates, of the Lands and
others, holden of the Kings Majesty, and Prince. And Presentations to be
granted by the said Committee of Estates, to other Superiors, of so many of
the foresaids Lands, and others above-specified, as are holden of the said
others Superiors.

Alex. Gibsone Cler. Registri.


