A DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS COUNCIL IN SCOTLAND, For the GOVERNMENT thereof:
CONCERNING AN ORDINANCE OF HIS HIGHNESS, Dated the Eighth day of August, 1654.
Whereunto is annexed the said ORDINANCE.

Wednesday the Seventeenth day of October, 1655. At His Highness Council in
EDINBURGH,
ORdered, That this Declaration and Ordinance be forthwith Printed and
Published.

EMANUEL DOWNING, Cl. of the Council.



EDINBURGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone-Church. MDCLV.

A DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS COUNCIL IN SCOTLAND, For the Government thereof:
Concerning His Highness Ordinance of the 8. of August, 1654.
HIS Highness being thoroughly sensible, that whatsoever Union of Nations is
made where the true Religion is not the foundation thereof, it will prove
tottering and unstable; Has therefore expressly commanded his Council here
to endeavor the promoting the Preaching of the Gospel, and the power of true
Religion and Holiness; And to take care, That the usual Maintenance here be
received and enjoyed by such Ministers as are of a holy and unblameable
conversation, disposed to live peaceably under the present Government, and who
for the Grace of God in them, and for their knowledge and utterance, are able
and fit to preach the Gospel, and shall be approved, according to an Ordinance
of his Highness of the eight of August, 1654. entitled, An Ordinance for the
better support of the Universities in Scotland, and encouraging of Public
Preachers there; All which laying a double duty upon the said Council, to
promote the true Religion in soundnes of Faith, and holiness of Conversation,
They shall, through the assistance of the Lord, cheerfully and industriously
endeavor the same: but finding that the said Ordinance of the eighth of August,
by reason of the not acting of most of those persons mentioned therein, has
not been put in effectual execution, whereby the good intended by his Highness
to this Nation, has not been derived to them; they have thought fit to
Declare, That as they shall give all just countenance and encouragement to the
persons who shall certify according to the said Ordinance, and to the persons
so certified of; so if they shall not proceed therein, but continue to delay
the execution thereof, The said Council will esteem themselves obliged (by
ties not to be dispensed withal) to promote and set forward so good and
necessary a Work, in such ways as shall seem best to them to carry it on, both
in discharge of their duties unto God, and obedience to his Highness; And that
all those who are nominated and concerned therein, may yet have a competent
time to consider how the said Ordinance may be most effectually pursued in this
Iuncture of Affairs, and in order to those good Ends, which therein are
proposed, the said Council have fixed upon the first of December next, as the
time before which they desire those aforementioned in the said Ordinance,
would proceed thereupon when occasion is offered: And whereas there may be
diverse places where some persons may have a freedom and willingness to act
upon the said Ordinance, and yet cannot actually express the same by reason no
persons in their Province within that time may stand in need of, or demand such
Certificates; It is therefore desired in such cases, that by the day
above-specified, All such persons would declare their readiness to act when the
opportunity shall be presented, whereby if a defect should appear for want of
persons to act, the said Council may speedily take care to supply it with
other fit persons who shall be willing to carry on that desired Work: And
because the said Ordinance of the eighth of August, 1654. has not yet been
Printed, and containing in it some other things relating to the better support
of the Universities, and encouragement of Public Preachers in Scotland, The
Council conceiving it not fit to sever the parts of the said Ordinance in the
publication thereof, Have appointed the whole Ordinance to be Printed herewith.

Given at Edinburgh the seventeenth day of October, 1655. Signed in the Name
and by Order of the Council. BROGHILL, President.

AN ORDINANCE For the better support of the UNIVERSITIES IN SCOTLAND, And
Encouragement of Public PREACHERS there.
HIS Highness the Lord Protector taking into consideration the great advantage
which may redound to the People of this Commonwealth, inhabiting in Scotland,
That the Universities there should receive both countenance and encouragement,
and be provided for with competent maintenance for the Members of the said
Universities, for the better training up of Youth in Piety and good Literature;
Does Ordain, and be it Ordained by his Highness, by and with the consent of
his Council, that the Superiorities of all and singular the Lands belonging to
the late Bishopric of Galloway, Abbacy of Tungland, Priory of Whithorn, and
Abbacy of Glenluce, And all other Lands annexed and appertaining to the said
Bishopric, together with all Few-Farmes, Few-Duties, Kains, Customs, and
Casualties thereunto belonging, accrewing, or which shall accrue; As also the
Superiorities of the whole Teinds, Parsonage and Vicarage, Teind-Duties, and
all other Duties of all and sundry the Churches and Parishes of and belonging
to the said late Bishopric, Abbacy or Priory where ever the same lie, and by
whatsoever Name or Designation the same be known, (excepting the Superiority of
the Deanery of the Chaplin of Striveling) be, and are hereby, and shall from
henceforth he adjudged, deemed, and taken to be given, granted, doted,
mortified and disposed to the University of Glasgow, and the Principal,
Professors and Regents thereof, and their Successors for ever, with power to
the Principal, Professors, and Regents of the said University, present and in
time to come, and their Successors, to receive Resignations, Enter the
Few-holders, Tenants, and all others formerly called Vassals of the said late
Bishopric, Abbacies and Priory, to their respective Lands, by Charters of
Resignation, Confirmation, or otherwise to Compound, Transact and Receive Fines
and Compositions for the same, and to do all and every other Act and thing
touching the same, as any Superior or Over-lord in Scotland may do to their
Tenants and Few-holders, or others, commonly called Vassals, according to Law.

And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
Encouragement of Students in the said University, the sum of Two hundred Marks
Sterling yearly shall be paid out of the first and readiest of the Customs of
Glasgow to the Principal, Professors, and Regents of the said University of
Glasgow, and their Successors for ever, or such person or persons as they shall
from time to time appoint to receive the same, to be employed by them and their
Order, for the education of pious and hopeful young men and Students of
Theology and Philosophy in the said University; And that the Collectors and
Receivers of the said Customs for the time being, shall pay the said yearly sum
of Two hundred Marks Sterling, by Quarterly Payments accordingly, and shall be
allowed the same upon their Accounts; The first Payment to be made at or upon
the first day of December next.

And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Superiorities
of the Lands belonging to the late Bishopric of Aberdeen, that is to say, The
Superiorities of the Lands of Aberdeen, formerly called the Barony of Aberdeen,
of the Lands of Murthill, Fetterner, Clett, Tallienessell, Daviot, Reine, and
Beirse, all lying within the Sheriffdome of Aberdeen; As also the Lands of
Fordice and Murtlawh, lying within the Sheriffedome of Bamff, together with the
Superiority of the Acres of Old-Aberdeen, and of all other Lands, Tenements,
Houses, with the Appurtenances formerly belonging to the said late Bishopric
of Aberdeen, the Few-Farms, Few-Duties, Kains, Customs, Casualties, Teins,
Parsonage and Vicarage, Tend-Duties, and all other Duties of the Lands,
Churches and Parishes aforesaid; together with other Duties of the Church of
Maucher and Nicholas, and of all other Kirks and Parishes which formerly
belonged to the said Bishopric; together, with the Tenths of the Salmon
Fishing, and other Fishings upon the Waters of Dee and Done, or on the Sea, or
any other places formerly belonging to the said Bishopric, together with the
whole Fruits, Teinds, Church-Rents, and other Duties any way belonging to the
Temporality or Spirituality of the said Bishopric be given, granted, doted,
and mortified to the said University of Aberdeen, the Principals, Professors,
Regents and remanent Members thereof and their Successors for ever, in manner
following, (that is to say) To the College of Old-Aberdeen two parts in three
to be divided, And to the College of New-Aberdeen one third part in three to
be divided, with power to the Principals, Professors, Regents, and remanent
Members of the said University according to their Proportion and Division
aforesaid, present and to come, and to their Successors for ever, to receive
Resignations, enter the Few-holders, Tenants, and all others, formerly called
Vassals, of the said Bishopric Lands, and other the Premises, by Charters of
Resignation, Confirmation or otherwise to compound, transact and agree about
the Fines and Compositions due for the same, and to receive and take up the
same, And to do all and every other act and thing therein that any Superior or
Over-Lord in Scotland may do to their Few-holders, Tenants, and all others
commonly called Vassals, according to Law in such Cases: And in respect of the
Incompetency of the Maintenance of the Masters, Professors, and other the
Members of the said University, and especially of the said College of
New-Aberdeen, Be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the sum of two
hundred Marks Sterling by the year, out of the first and readiest of the
Customs of Aberdeen, shall be from henceforth paid unto the Principals,
Professors, and other the Members of the said University, and their Successors
for ever, or to such person and persons as they shall from time to time appoint
to be paid Quarterly by even and equal portions to be employed for the
Augmentation of the provisions and maintenance of the Principals, Professors,
Regents, and Remanent Members of the said University of Aberdeen, in manner
following, (that is to say) two parts thereof to the said College of
New-Aberdeen, and the other third part to the College of Old-Aberdeen; And
that the Collectors and Receivers of the said Customs for the time being, shall
pay the same accordingly: Provided always, That the Principals of either of the
said Colleges shall have twice as much added to their Provisions out of the
said Augmentation or yearly sum, as is added to the Provision of other
Professors and Members of the respective Colleges; The first Payment to be
made at or on the first day of December next, and so from thenceforth
Quarterly. And for the better Propagation of the Gospel and Advancement of
Godliness in Scotland, Be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners for Visiting the Universities, Colleges and Schools of Learning
in Scotland, do take especial care, That none but Godly and Able men be
Authorized by them to enjoy the Livings appointed for the Ministry in Scotland;
And to that end, That respect be had to the Choice of the more sober and Godly
part of the People, although the same should not prove to be the greater part;
And that no Person shall be by them Authorized, or admitted into any such
Living or Benefice, but such as shall be first Certified by the persons
hereafter named for the respective Provinces hereafter mentioned, or any Four
or more of them, whereof two to be Ministers, to be a person of a holy and
unblameable Conversation, disposed to live peaceably under the present
Government, And who for the Grace of GOD in him, and for his Knowledge and
Utterance is able and fit to Preach the Gospel: Within the Provinces of
Louthian, Mers, and Teviotdale, Master Robert Traile, Master Alexander
Levingstone, Master Gilbert Hall, Master John Scot, Master Edward Jamesone,
Master John Sinclare, Master John Levingstone; Sir Archibald Johnstone, Sir
Andrew Ker, Colonel Gilbert Ker, (...) Dundas of Duddistone. Within the
Provinces of Dumfrieze and Galloway, Master Hugh Henderson, Master Samuel
Austine, Master Alexander Trumbel, Master Andrew Lawder, Master Samuel Row,
Master William Ferguson of Kaitlocke, Earl of Cassilis, Alexander Gordoun of
Knockgray. Within the Province of Glasgow and Air, Master John Carstayres,
Master Alexander Dunlap, Master John Nevay, Master William Guthery, Master
William Adayre, Master Thomas Willye, Master Patrick Colvile, Master Francis
Ayrd, Master William Somervill, Master Patrick Gillespie, Sir George Maxwell,
William Muyre of Glanderstone, Master John Graham, Master John Spreule, George
Porterfield. Within the Provinces of Perth, Fife, and Angus, Master James
Guthery, Master Robert Blaire, Master Samuel Rutherford, Master Alexander
Moncrieffe, Master James Simson, Master William Oliphant, Master John Murray,
Master William Rait, Sir William Bruce, David Weemes of Fingask, Vicount of
Arburchnet. Within the Provinces of be-north Angus, Master Robert Keith, Master
Duncan Forbes, Master John Row, Master Nathaniel Martin, Master Joseph Brody,
Master John Menzies, The Lord Brody, The Lord of Eight, Earl of Southerland,
Alexander Jeffrey, Master William More, Master Andrew Cant.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners do allow and provide out of the Treasury of Vacant Stipends, or
otherwise, as they shall think fit, a Competent Maintenance, for such Ministers
who have Gathered Congregations in Scotland; And to take care that the Stipends
of the Parochial Churches there be employed to the use of such godly Ministers
as are free to Labor amongst them, in the Way of the Churches of Scotland.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners do take care, That such of the Ministers of that Nation as they
shall find to promote Godliness, and to endeavor the suppressing of all
Ungodliness, and Scandalous Practices, whether in the Ministry or the People,
do receive all due Encouragement and Assistance; And that they do oppose all
such as discountenance the Power of Godliness, and are indulgent to such as
are Scandalous or Profane.

Passed the Eighth of August, 1654. HENRY SCOBEL, Cl. of the Council.

Wednesday the 17. of October, 1655. At His Highnesses Council in EDINBURGH,
ORdered, That this Declaration and Ordinance be forthwith Printed and
Published.

EMANUEL DOVVNING, Cl. of the Council.


