I7 R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT For Burying in Scots Linen, June 14. 1686.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, For the Encouragement of Linen-Manufactures in this
Kingdom, and prevention of the Exportation of the Moneys thereof, by Importing
of Linen, Does, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statute
and Ordain, That hereafter no Corpse of any person whatsoever, shall be Buried
in any Shirt, Sheet, or any thing else, except in plain Linen, or Cloth of
Hards, made and Spun within the Kingdom, without Lace or Point; Discharging
from henceforth the making use of Holland, or other Linen. Cloth made in other
Kingdoms, all Silk, Hair, or Woolen, Gold or Silver, or any other Stuff
whatsoever, than what is made of Flax or Hards, Spun and wrought within the
Kingdom, as said is, and that under the pain and penalty of 300 pounds Scots,
toties quoties, for a Nobleman, and 200 pounds for each other person, whereof
the one half to the Discoverer, and the other half to the Poor of the Parish,
where the said Corpse shall be so Interred: And for the better Discovering of
the Contraveeners, It is hereby further Statute and Ordained, That every
Minister within the Kingdom, shall keep a Book, containing an exact Account and
Register of all Persons, buried within their said Parish; As also, that some
one or more of the Relations of the person Deceased, or other credible person
(Tennents in the Country and Cottars being always excepted) shall within eight
days after such Interment, bring a Certificat upon Oath in Writing, Witnessed
by two famous persons to the Minister, Declaring, that the said peason was
Woond or Wrapped in manner herein-prescribed; Which Certificats are to be
Recorded by the Minister or Reader of the Parish gratis, without exacting any
Money therefore. And if no Relation of the party buried, or other person shall
bring such such a Certificat, within the said time of eight days, that then and
in that case, the Goods and Gear of the party Deceast, shall be, and are hereby
Declared, to be liable to the foresaid Forefaulture, to be pursued at the
Instance of the Minister of the said Parish, before any Judge competent; and in
case the parties prove litigious by Advocating, or Suspending the said
Sentence; The said Judges are hereby Authorized and Empowered to modifie
Expenses, as they shall find cause: And if such persons died in familia, the
Father and Mother, or other Relations, in whose Family they die, are hereby
Declared liable for the said Fine: And it is hereby Statute and Ordained, that
if the Minister in whose Parish any such Corpse shall be so Interred, prove
negligent in pursuing the Contraveeners within six Months after the said
Burial, he is hereby Declared liable for the said Fine, the one half to the
Poor, and the other half to the Discoverer, to be divided in manner foresaid.
As also, His Majesty, with Advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That no
Wooden Coffin shall exceed an hundred merks Scots, as the highest rate for
persons of the greatest quality, and so proportionally for others of meaner
quality, under the pain of two hundred merks Scots for the Contravention.

GOD save the KING.
Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty,
1687.


