I7 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT For the more effectual In-bringing of His Majesty's Rents and Revenues.
At Edinburgh, the 8 th. day of May 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, And the Estates of Parliament, Considering the great
Neglect and Remissness of the Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries, and
Regalities, and their Deputs, in the Discovering, Collecting and In-bringing of
His Majesty's Rents and Revenues Constant and Casual; And of the Feuars and
other Vassalls, who are liable for the Rents and Duties of His Majesty's
Property, and the Chamberlains thereof, Whereby the payment of the same is
fallen very much in arrear; And the Compting yearly in the month of July,
according to former Acts of Parliament, is greatly neglected: THEREFORE, The
better to prevent the same for the future. His Majesty, with Advice and Consent
of the Estates of Parliament, not only Ratifies and Approves all former Laws
and Acts of Parliament made for In-bringing His Majesty's Rents, and
particularly the 15th Act 3d. Session of the first Parl. K. Charles the 2d,
Ordaining the same to be put in full execution, Conform to the Tenor thereof;
But likewise, further Statutes and Declares, That in all time coming,
whatsoever Sheriff, Stewarr, Baillie of Bailliarie, or Regality, or their
Deputs, or Chamberlains of His Majesty's Proper Rents respective shall delay,
or neglect to compear and count yearly in Exchequer, in the Month of July, And
accordingly receive their Aequies, and Exoneration of all that can be charged
on them, as due and payable by them to His Majesty; That immediately after they
shall be Charged and Denunced for the same, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
Conform to the former Laws and Practice; And the Horning and Denunciation shall
be duly registrat, that Persons so Denunced and Registrat, shall ipso facto,
amit, loss and tyne (during their lifetime) their Offices of Sheriff-ship,
Stewartrie, Bailliarie, or Chamberlanry, whether the same be Heretable, or
during Life, or Pleasure; And it shall not be lawful for them by themselves, or
their Deputs. to Exerce, or Officiat therein at any time thereafter; but the
same shall vaik and fall in His Majesty's hands, without any Declarator, or
Process of Law: As also that all Feuars, and other Vassals of His Majesty's
Property, who shall neglect, or delay to compear yearly in the said month of
July, in Exchequer, and make count and payment of the Feu, Blench, or
Taxt-ward-duties and others, due and payable by them, and receive their Aequies
and Exonerations thereof accordingly; So as two years thereof shall run
together unpayed, and that they shall be therefore Charged, Denunced; and
Registrat as is abovementioned, that immediately after the said Denunciation,
and Registration, they shall be liable for the double of the whole Feu, Blench,
Taxt-ward, or other Duties, then due and payable by them, and all Execution
shall pass against them therefore, Sicklike as if the same were mentioned, and
contained in the Reddendoes of their Infestments; And that by and attour, and
but prejudice of the penalties formerly Imposed, and payable by the said
Non-accomptants, conform to former Laws. And it is further Statute and
Ordained, That all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries and Regalities,
their Clerks, and Clerk-deputs shall be holden and oblidged, to send Lists from
time to time to the Lord High Thesaurer, Thesaurer Deput, or Clerks of
Exchequer, of all Wairds and Marriages, as well Simple as Taxt, that shall
happen to fall and vaik in time coming, or that are already fallen within their
respective Jurisdictions, bearing the time of the Decease of the Person by whom
the same vaiks, and of the Successor, and their Age, and whether Married or
not; Certifying all such Clerks, as shall not, before the first day of November
next to come, report in Exchequer the Lists under their hands, of all such
bygone Casualities fallen, preceding the date hereof, and thereafter from time
to time, within six months after the same shall happen to fall and vaik, if
the persons die within the Kingdom; That they shall amit, lose and tyne their
Office of Clerk ship, to be immediately disposed on, by these who shall have
right thereto, without any Declarator, or other Process whatsoever; And to the
effect, they may the better know the tenor of the holding of all Lands within
their respective Jurisdictions, His Majesty, with advice forsaid, Ordains the
said Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries, and Regalities, and their
Deputs, at the next Michaelmass Head-Court, and at such other Dyets, as they
shall think convenient, to cause all the Vassals within their respective
Jurisdictions produce before them their Charters, to the effect the Clerks may
record the Reddendoes thereof in their Books, who are ordered immediately
thereafter to return them to the Parties, without payment of any money for the
same. And Ordains Letters of Horning to be directed against those who shall
fail to produce their Charters, as said is: And it is hereby declared, that in
all time coming, when poynding is used for the Kings proper Rents, the
apprising of the Goods poynded may be als Legally done upon the Ground of the
Lands allenarly, as if the samen were Apprised at the Market Cross of the head
Burgh of the Jurisdiction, notwithstanding of any Law, or Practice in the
contrare.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1685.


