A RELATION OF TWO Great VICTORIES OBTAINED BY Their Majesty's Forces OVER THE
R^^^LS in IRELAND.
Giving an Account of

(...) Defeating of Four Thousand at Castle-brock, by 400 of the Garrison of
Mount-Malick, Commanded by the Governor: The Total Routing of the Rebels,
killing 60 on the place, and taking four Prisoners (two of which the Governor
caused to be immediately Hanged) with very great Booty.

The Defeat given (by 70 of the Garrison of Mullengar) to Two Thousand
Raparees, near Donare; the killing 68 of the Rebels, and taking 12 Prisoners,
with great Numbers of Cattle, etc.

To which is added,

The Action of Captain Bellingham's Troop, near Dundalk. The Routing a Party of
Raparees near Rathcarmuck. The Regaining an English Ship taken by a French
Privateer, and bringing of her into Kinsale. With the Condition of the Province
of Connought, particularly Lymerick and Sligo; with the French Succors of
Breast, etc.
LICENCED according to Order.

LEtters from the Town of Mount-Mellick, give the following Account: That by
several Deserters that came thither from the Enemies Quarters, they understood
that four Thousand Raparees were newly come to a place called Castle-Brock,
where for the present they had Encamped themselves, but designed speedily to
undertake some Villainous Enterprise; upon which the Governor gave Orders for
the Drawing-out of the Garrison Four Hundred Horse and Foot, and himself with
Major Wood, Marched at the Head of them, in pursuit of the Raparees, Marching
mostly by covered ways, in order to take the Enemy there at a Surprise, but the
Raparees upon the first Appearance of our Men, took the Bogs, with all the
Expedition possible, our Men fell in with the Rear of them, killed Forty on the
spot, and took four Prisoners, two of which they immediately Hanged upon the
first Tree they came to, and brought away with them Sixty Head of Black Cattle,
Twelve Horses, as many Garrons, and some Baggage.

We have an Account from Mullengar, That the Garrison of that Place had Advice
brought them, by some of their Soldiers that had been out a Raparee Hunting;
that a great Body of Raparees were come to a place called Donow one of the
Enemies Frontiers; upon which Six Hundred of the Garrison marched out, under
the Command of a Lieutenant-Collonel; The advance Party of our M^^ consisting
of Twenty Horse, and Fifty Foot, fell in with the Enemy, before the main Body
of our Men could come up, and notwithstanding the Raparees, were above Two
Thousand in Number (as the Prisoners since taken give an Account) yet they
stood but the first Charge of our Seventy Advanced Men; but immediately upon
the Appearance of our greater Body, fled in great Confusion, we killed fifty
eight of the Rogues, took Twelve Prisoners, and brought away forty Head of
Cattle; the Prisoners are ordered to be hanged, unless by Confession any of
them can merit Pardon.

Tallow the 30th, last Monday a party of the Garrison being out a Raparee
hunting, the Evening Rouzed a party of them, which lay hid in the Hedges,
within a Mile and half of the Town of Rathcormuch, Killed three of them, and
took three more Prisoners, after which our Men went and burnt all the Cabbins
on the Black Water side; one of the Prisoners we took has among other things,
Confessed, that they designed the next day to have plundered the Village of
Rothcormuch.

Dundalk the 30th. Our Northern Mail being set upon and taken, some few Days
since, by a Body of the Raparees, as it was bringing to Dublin; part of Captain
Bellingers Militia Troop went out from hence in pursuit of the Rogues, and took
the Harbourers of Robbers, who they Hanged, and in a Wood near them, found four
of the Horse the Raparees took when they carried away the Mail with Saddles,
Bed-Cloaths, three Swords, three Fire Locks, and a pair of Pistols, with
several other things of Value.

From Kinsale of the 25th. past we have the following Account: That one Mr.
Lawrence coming from Virginia to London in November last, was taken by a French
Privateer, and Imprisoned at a place within two Miles of Breast, till Easter
last, when he was forced on Board a Privateer belonging to the port of St.
Maloes, who sometime after he had been on Board, the Privateer took a
Barnstable prize, laden with Corn, etc. this Lawrence was placed on Board the
said Barnstable Vessel as Master, and commanded to Sail her with the privateer
to Lymerick, but the Vessel being an Excellent Sailer, he took the Opportunity
in the Night to part Company with the Privateer, and carried the Vessel Thirty
Leagues beyond it, and sent his Irish men on Shore for Water, and he with the
Remainder of the Men ran away with the Ship, and brought her into this Port.

The Artillery, and Recruits of Men and Horses for the several Regiments being
Arrived, all things are now in a manner disposed for our Armies taking the
Field: Sarsefield has drawn down a great part of his Men to the side of the
Shannon, in order to endeavor the maintaining a Pass that leads into the
Province of Connought. By Deserters that came in here this Week, we continue to
receive the confirmations of the Lamentable Condition of the Rebel Army in
Connought, particularly those in Lymerick and Sligo, that their Wants of all
manner of Necessary's very much increase, so that great numbers of their
regular Troops daily turn Raparees, and are in that confusion, that they even
Rob one another; that their whole dependence are on the French Succors from
Breast, the Arrival of which they had no Account of when these Deserters came
away, and that when ever they do Arrive, if they answer not their Expectations,
the greatest part of them are resolved to lay down their Arms, and come in and
Submit themselves to their Majesty's Government and Protection.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1691.


