LAWS and ACTS Past in the second SESSION of the first PARLIAMENT, Of our most
High and Dread SOVEREIGN, CHARLES THE SECOND, By the Grace of GOD, King of
Scotland, England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith. Holden at
Edinburgh, from the eighteenth of June, 1663. to the ninth of October
thereafter, on which day the Parliament was dissolved; By a Noble Lord, John
Earl of Rothes, Lord Lesly and Bambreith, His MAJESTY'S Commissioner for
holding of the same, by virtue of a COMMISSION under His Majesty's Great Seal
of this Kingdom.

With the special Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAjESTY,
Anno Dom. 1663. CUM PRIVILEGIO.

royal crest HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



LAWS and ACTS past in the third Session of the first PARLIAMENT, of our most
High and Dread Sovereign, CHARLES the Second, by the grace of GOD, King of
Scotland, England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
Begun at Edinburgh upon the eighteenth of June, 1663. and continued to the
ninth of October thereafter.
I. ACT against separation and disobedience to Ecclesiastical Authority.
FOrasmuch as the King's Majesty, considering the prejudices which did ensue to
the Church and Protestant Religion, to the Prerogative of the Crown, to the
Authority of Parliament, to the Liberties of the Subject, and to the public
Laws and Peace of the Kingdom, by the invasions made upon Episcopal Government
during the late troubles; And finding that Government, to be the
Church Government, most agreeable to the Word of GOD, most convenient and
effectual for preservation of Truth, Order and Unity, and most suitable to
Monarchy and to the Peace and Quiet of the State; Has therefore, with advice
and consent of His Estates of Parliament, by several Acts past in the second
Session of this Parliament, restored the Church to it is ancient and right
Government by Archbishops and Bishops, and has redintigrated the estate of
Bishops to the exercise of their Episcopal Function, and to all the
Privileges, Dignities, Jurisdictions and Possessions due and formerly
belonging thereunto. And in further order to the settlement of the Church, and
bringing the Ministers to a due acknowledgment of, and compliance with, the
Government thereof thus established by Law, His Majesty, with advice foresaid,
has also Statute and Ordained, That all these Ministers, who entered to the
Cure of any Paroch without Right or Presentations from the lawful Patrons, in
and since the year, one thousand six hundred and forty nine, and should not
betwixt and the twentieth of September last, obtain Presentations from their
several Patrons, and Collation from the Bishop of the Diocese where they lived,
should have no right to the uplifting the Rents of any Benefice or Stipend for
the year, one thousand six hundred and sixty two, but that their Places,
Benefices and Kirks should be ipso jure, vacand: And that what ever Ministers
should, without a lawful excuse to be admitted by their Ordinary, absent
themselves from the diocesian Assembly, or who should not concur in all the
Acts of the Church Discipline, as they should be thereunto required by the
Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocese, should be for the first fault suspended
from their Office and Benefice till the next diocesian Meeting; and if they
amend not, should be deprived, and the Church and Benefice to be provided as in
other cases of vacancies. And the King's Majesty, having resolved to conserve
and maintain the Church in the present State and Government thereof by
Archbishops and Bishops, and others bearing office therein, and not to endure
nor give way or connivance to any variation therein in the least, Does
therefore, with advice and consent of His Estates conveened in this third
Session of His Parliament, Ratify and Approve the aforementioned Acts, and all
other Acts and Laws made in the two former Sessions of Parliament, in order to
the settling of Episcopal Dignity, Jurisdiction and Authority within this
Kingdom; and Ordains them to stand in full force as public Laws of the
Kingdom, and to be put to further execution in all points, conform to the tenor
thereof. And in pursuance of His Majesty's Royal resolution herein, His
Majesty, with advice aforesaid, does recommend to the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, to take speedy and effectual course, that these Acts receive
ready and due obedience from all His Majesty's Subjects; And for that end, that
they call before them all such Ministers, who, having entered in or since the
year, one thousand six hundred and forty nine, and have not as yet obtained
Presentations and Collations, as aforesaid, yet dared to preach in contempt of
the Law, and to punish them as seditious persons and contemners of the Royal
Authority. As also, that they be careful, that such Ministers, who keep not
the diocesian Meetings, and concur not with the Bishops in the Acts of
Church Discipline, being for the same suspended or deprived, as said is, be
accordingly, after deprivation, removed from their Benefices, Glebs and Manses;
and if any of them shall notwithstanding offer to retain the possession of
their Benefices or Manses, that they take present course to see them
dispossessed; and if they shall thereafter presume to exercise their Ministry,
that they be punished as seditious persons, and such as contemn the Authority
of Church and State.

And as His Majesty does expect, from all His good and dutiful Subjects, a due
acknowledgment of, and hearty compliance with, His Majesty's Government,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, as it is now established by Law within this Kingdom,
and that in order thereunto they will give their cheerful concurrence,
countenance and assistance to such Ministers, as by public Authority are or
shall be admitted in their several Paroches, and attend all the ordinary
Meetings for divine Worship in the same; So His Majesty does Declare, That He
will, and does, account a withdrawing from, and not keeping and joining in,
these Meetings, to be seditious, and of dangerous example and consequence. And
therefore, and for preventing the same for the future, His Majesty, with advice
and consent of His Estates in Parliament, does hereby Statute, Ordain and
Declare, That all and every such person or persons, who shall hereafter
ordinarily and wilfully withdraw and absent themselves from the ordinary
Meetings of divine Worship in their own Paroch Church on the Lord's Day,
(whether upon account of Popery or other disaffection to the present Government
of the Church) shall thereby incur the pains and penalties underwritten, viz.
Each Nobleman, Gentleman and Heretor, the loss of a fourth part of ilk years
Rent, in which they shall be accused and convicted; and every Yeoman, Tennent
or Farmer, the loss of such a proportion of their free movables (after the
payment of their Rents due to their Master and Landlord) as His Majesty's
Council shall think fit, not exceeding a fourth part thereof; and every Burgess
to lose the liberty of Merchandising, Trading, and all other Privileges within
Burgh, and fourth part of their movables. And His Majesty, with advice
foresaid, does hereby authorize and require the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, to be careful to see this Act put to due execution; and for that end,
to call before them all such persons as after admonition of the Minister, in
presence of two sufficient witnesses, and by him so attested, shall be given up
to the Council as transgressors of this Act, in withdrawing from their Paroch
Churches as aforesaid; and the same, after hearing of the parties, being duly
found, to decern and inflict the censures and penalties abovementioned, and
such other coporal punishment as they shall think fit, and direct all execution
necessary for making the same effectual, and to do every other thing they shall
find necessary, for procuring obedience to this Act, and putting the same to
punctual execution, conform to the tenor and intent thereof.

II. Additional ACT concerning the Declaration to be signed by all persons in
public Trust.
FOrasmuch, as by an Act, past in the second Session of this Parliament, on the
fifth of September last, concerning the Declaration to be taken by all persons
in public Trust, It is remitted to His Majesty's Commissioner to take such
course as he should think fit, how these, who are presently in Office, may
subscribe the Declaration; And the King's Majesty being resolved, that all in
public Trust, should, without further delay, sign the same; But considering,
that in this vacand time, many of the Courts of Justice do not sit, so as some
longer time must be allowed unto them. Therefore, the King's Majesty, with
advice and consent of His Estates in Parliament, Statutes and Ordains all
persons, who enjoy or possess any public Trust or Office within this Kingdom,
as, Officers of State, Members of Parliament, Privy Counselors, Lords of the
Session, Commissioners in Exchequer, all Members of the College of Justice,
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies of Regalities, Commissaries, Justices of Peace and
their respective Deputes and Clerks, and all who enjoy any other public
Charge, Office or Trust within the Kingdom, to subscribe the Declaration
hereunto subjoyned, in presence of the several Courts they relate to, betwixt
and the eleventh of November next to come, or sooner, as they shall have
occasion or be required thereto by His Majesty's Council; Discharging hereby
all such of them, who shall not sign the same, as said is, to exerce any
public Trust or Office within the Kingdom, after the said eleventh of
November. And that a speedy account may be returned hereof, It is hereby
Ordained, that the Sheriffs in the several Shires be careful in requiring due
obedience to this Act, and that they and all others concerned therein, make
report thereof to His Majesty's Council, betwixt and the first of January next
to come. And seeing the election of the Magistrates and Council of Burghs will
occur about Michaelmass next, and that some disaffected persons in Burghs,
having none or small advantages by their Magistracy, may, upon account of this
Declaration, refuse to accept any Charge or Trust; It is therefore, by His
Majesty, with advice foresaid, Statute, That at the next ensuing election of
Magistrates within Burgh, all such persons who shall continue in, or be of new
elected to be Magistrates, Clerks, or of the Council of Burghs, shall at such
their elections, if they be present, or otherwise, how soon thereafter they
shall be required thereto by those who did elect them, sign the Declaration
aforesaid; Declaring hereby, all who shall refuse or delay the same, to be from
thenceforth not only incapable of, and to have forfaulted, the privileges of a
Magistrate, but also all the privileges of Merchandising, Trading, and others
belonging to a Burgess; And that the several Burghs make report of their
proceedings therein to His Majesty's Council, betwixt and the foresaid eleventh
of November, as they will be answerable upon their duty and alleagiance: And
for such as shall hereafter be admitted to any public Trust or Office, they
are to sign the Declaration in the manner, and under the certifications, expressed
in the former Act of Parliament of the fifth of September. And His Majesty does
hereby recommend to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to be careful
that these Acts be put to due execution, and receive obedience conform to the
tenor thereof.

I Do sincerely affirm and declare, that I judge it unlawful to Subjects, upon
pretense of Reformation or other pretense whatsoever, to enter into Leagues and
Covenants, or to take up Arms against the King or these Commissionate by Him:
and that all these Gatherings, Convocations, Petitions, Protestations, and
erecting and keeping of Council-tables, that were used in the beginning, and
for carrying on, of the late troubles, were unlawful and seditious. And
particularly, that these Oaths, whereof the one was commonly called, The
National Covenant, (as it was sworn and explained in the year one thousand six
hundred and thirty eight, and thereafter) and the other entitled, A Solemen
League and Covenant, were, and are, in themselves, unlawful Oaths, and were
taken by, and imposed upon, the Subjects of this Kingdom, against the
fundemental Laws and Liberties of the same: And that there lies no obligation
upon me, or any of the Subjects, from the said Oaths, or either of them, to
endeavor any change or alteration of the Government, either in Church or
State, as it is now established by the Laws of the Kingdom.



III. ACT against Protections.
THe King's most Excellent Majesty being careful, that the benefit of the Law
in the administrations of Justice, be free to all His Majesty's good Subjects;
And considering the prejudices many have formerly sustained, in the stopping of
the course of Justice, by the too frequent granting of Protections against
personal execution. Therefore, and for preventing of the like for the future,
His Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates in Parliament, Does
Ratify, Approve and Renew all former Acts of Parliament, made against the
granting of Protections; And Discharges the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, Session and Exchequer, to grant Protections to any persons against
personal execution, certifying such as shall grant the same, they shall be
liable for the debt against which they grant the Protection; and all execution
shall pass against the havers thereof, as if the same had not been granted.

It is always hereby Declared, That notwithstanding hereof, it shall be free
to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Lords of Session and Exchequer,
and to the Justice-general and his Deputes, when any person or persons are
summoned and appointed to appear personally before them, to give order now, as
they have been in use formerly to do, for suspending personal execution against
the persons so summoned and appointed to appear, for such few days, as they
may come to give their appearance, and during their necessar stay, and some few
days for their return, and that according as the said respective Judges shall
find reason, upon the particular applications to be made thereupon,

IV. ACT for the establishment and constitution of a National Synod.
FOrasmuch as the ordering and disposal of the external Government of the
Church, and the nomination of the persons, by whose advice matters relating to
the same are to be settled, does belong to His Majesty, as an inherent right of
the Crown, by virtue of His Prerogative-royal, and supreme Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical: And in prosecution of this Trust, His Majesty, considering how
fit and necessary it is, for the honor and service of Almighty God, the good
and quiet of the Church, and the better Government thereof in unity and order,
that there be a National Synod and Assembly duly constitute within this
Kingdom, Has therefore Appointed and Declared, and by these presents Appoints
and Declares, that there shall be a National Synod of the Church of Scotland:
And that this Synod, for the lawful Members thereof shall consist and be
constitute of the Archbishops of St. Andrews and Glasgow, and the remanent
Bishops of these two Provinces, of all Deans of Cathedral Churches,
Archdeacons, of all the Moderators of Meetings for exercise, allowed by the
Bishops of the respective Diocesses, and of one Presbyter or Minister of each
Meeting, to be chosen and elected by the Moderator and plurality of Presbyters
of the same; and of one or two from the University of St. Andrews, one from
Glasgow, one from the Kings College, one from Marshals College, of Aberdeen,
and one from the College of Edinburgh; And this Synod, thus constitute, is to
meet at such times and places as His Majesty, by His Proclamation, shall
appoint; and is to debate, treat, consider, consult, conclude and determine
upon such pious matters, causes and things, concerning the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government, of this Church, as His Majesty shall from time to
time, under His Royal hand, deliver, or cause be delivered, to the Archbishop
of St. Andrews, President of the said National Assembly, to be by him offered
to their consideration. The Estates of Parliament do humbly recognosce and
acknowledge His Majesty's Royal Power and Prerogative aforesaid, with the
piety, justice and prudence of His Majesty's resolution herein; Likeas His
Majesty, with their advice and consent, does hereby Establish, Ratify and
Confirm this constitution of a National Assembly, as the lawful constitution of
the National Synods and Assemblies of this Church, His Majesty, or His
Commissioner (without whose presence, no National Synod can be kept) being
always present: And Declares, That no Act, Canon, Order or Ordinance shall be
owned as an Act of the National Synod of the Church of Scotland, so as to be of
any effect, force or validity in Law, to be observed and kept by the
Archbishops and Bishops, the inferior Clergy, and all other pesons within this
Realm (as far as lawfully, being Members of this National Church, it may
concern them) but that which shall be considered, consulted and agreed upon by
the President and major part of the Members above-specified. It is always
hereby provided, that nothing be enacted or put in execution, by Authority of a
National Synod within this Kingdom, which shall be contrary to His Majesty's
Royal Prerogative or the Laws of the Kingdom; And that no Act, Matter or Cause
be debated, consulted and concluded upon, but what shall be allowed, approven
and confirmed by His Majesty or His Commissioner, present at the said National
Synod.

V. ACT anent ruinous houses in Royal Burghs.
OUr Sovereign Lord being informed, that upon the high Streets of several of
His Majesty's Burghs-royal, and in the vennels and other passages within the
same, there be many houses in the public view of all people resorting thereto,
very ruinous and not inhabited these diverse years bygone, nor likely to be
repaired by any, to the great opprobry of the said Burghs, and common scandal
of the Kingdom, as being altogether defective of that policy and good order
which is, and ever has been, so earnestly intended in the many wholesome and
laudable Laws already made, by His Majesty and His Royal Progenitors of most
worthy memory. And finding the Buroughs very desirous to have these many
dangers and inconveniences prevented and remeeded, which the inhabitants of
these Burghs, and the rest of the Lieges frequenting the same, do continually
fear from such ruinous buildings; Does therefore, with advice of His Estates of
Parliament, Ordain the Provost and Bailies of the Burgh where such ruinous
houses are, to cause warn and charge all persons, that have or pretends right
to the property of such Lands and Buildings, or any Annual-rents forth thereof,
to cause build and repair in a decent way, within year and day, such Houses and
Buildings as have been wast and not inhabited three years before the date of
this present act, or shall be wast and not inhabited thereafter by the foresaid
space of three years, or else to sell the same to others, to be builded within
the same space of year and day: And to charge all known persons, personally or
at their dwelling places, and by open Proclamation at the Paroch-kirk or
Mercat Cross of the Burgh; and all others by open Proclamation at the said
Mercat Cross and Paroch-kirk. And in case of their absence out of this Realm,
at the Cross of Edinburgh, and Peer and Shore of Lies, upon threescore days;
with certification to them if they failzie, the said Provost and Bailies shall
cause the said Lands and Tenement to be valued by certain persons, to be chosen
and sworn by them for that effect, and sell the same to any person that will
buy them, and pay the price of the same to these owners, if they be known; and
if they be not known, to consign the prices thereof in the hands of the
Provost, one of the Bailies, or Dean of Gild of the said Burgh, to be
forthcoming to these who have interest thereto: And if no man will buy them,
it shall be lawful to the said Provost and Bailies, after apprising thereof,
as said is, and payment or consignation of the prices of the same, to cast down
the said ruinous Houses, and cause build the same of new. And His Majesty, with
advice foresaid, Declares, That it shall not be lawful in time coming, to any
manner of person to pursue them nor their successors therefore, nor pretend any
right or interest thereto, but that the said right shall be a perfect security
to the builders thereof and their successors.

VI. ACT discharging the importation of Strong Water, etc.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, understanding, that there are
diverse Strong Water, Mum-bear and other Beer for drinking, brought into this
Kingdom from Foreign places, which might be more conveniently made within the
Kingdom, to the benefit of the natives thereof. Therefore, His Majesty, with
consent of the said Estates, Discharges all in-bringing of Aqua-vitae or
Strong Water, Mum-beer and other Beer for drinking (except Black-beer, called
Spruce-beer) within this Kingdom, under the pain of escheat thereof.

VII. ACT discharging the mixing of Tin with Lead.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of this present Parliament considering, the
great hurt sustained by His Majesty's Lieges, by the fraudulent dealing of
Pewterers, in mixing the finer sort of Tin brought from England, France,
Flanders and other parts beyond sea, with baser and courser metal of Tin and
Lead, and their exacting greater prices betwixt the new Pewter casten by them,
and the old which they receive from the Lieges. For remeid thereof, it is
Statute and Ordained, that the Pewterer or Founder of Tin, shall put the mark
of the Thistle, and the Deacons mark; with his own name, upon every piece of
work that he happens to cast, and that the same shall be of the finest of the
Pewter marked with the Rose in England; And in case the same be under the
finest of the said Pewter of England, that the same shall be confiscat, and he
punished in his person at the discretion of the Magistrates of the Burgh where
he dwells: And to that effect, that there be a Say-master appointed by the
Magistrates in each Burgh, for trying of the same. As likewayes, that he shall
take, betwixt the pound of old Pewter and Tin, marked with the Rose foresaid,
and the pound of new casten by him, two shillings Scots allanerly, under the
pain foresaid.

VIII. ACT anent the discharging of Advocations for sums within two hundred
merks.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament considering, the manifold
prejudices and troubles arising to diverse of His Majesty's Lieges, in pursuing
of matters of small importance, by the too frequent granting of Advocations from
inferior Judges. Therefore, our said Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent
of the said Estates, Discharges the Lords of Session from giving and granting
Letters of Advocation, of any actions intended or to be intended before
whatsoever inferior Judicatories, which may competently, by the Laws of the
Kingdom, be decided by the said inferior Judges, before whom the said Action
is or shall be intended, for sums of money within two hundred Merks; or for any
other cause, whereunto by the Laws of the Kingdom, the said inferior Judges
are expressly appointed Judges.

IX. ACT in favors of Minors, anent the duties of the Lands comprised from
them.
OUr Sovereign Lord considering, the favorable condition of Minors, who are
oftentimes destitute of Tutors and Curators; and though they have them, yet in
respect of their minority, they are not in capacity or credit to raise sums of
money for satisfaction of their Creditors: And it being unreasonable, that
their Creditors comprisers of their Estate, should, during the not expiring of
the legal reversion, which, according to Law, continues during their minority,
have more advantage by their Estate then corresponds to the Annualrent of the
true sums owing to them by virtue of their comprisings; Does, with advice and
consent of His Estates of Parliament, Ratify and Approve the act of
Parliament, made in August, one thousand six hundred and twenty one, Cap. 6. in
so far as the same concerns Minors; And Declares, that the true meaning thereof
was, and is, that Minors, having right to the legal reversion, should be no
further obliged during their minority of twenty one years of age, but
allanerly for the Annual-rent of the sums contained in the comprisings; and
that they lose not the right of the super-plus of the mailes and duties of the
Lands, so far as the same exceeds the said Annual-rents, during their said
minority.

X. ACT against exportation of Money forth of the Kingdom.
THe Estates of Parliament considering, how much the Kingdom is impoverished by
the daily exportation of money forth of the same; and that the making use of
our own native Commodities, for furnishing us with these things which formerly
were brought to us from Foreign places, is, by the commendable industry of
several deserving Contrymen and ingenuous Artists, much improved: And that
in order to their encouragement, and that our own native Commodities may go the
better off, necessar it is, that some more severe restraint then formerly be
laid upon the exportation of money. Therefore, the King's Majesty, with advice
and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That no person
or persons whatsoever, shall trade or use merchandise with any other Nation,
till first they take an Oath before the Lord Theasurer or Theasurer-depute, or
before such persons as they shall appoint for that effect, that they shall not
export by themselves or others, directly or indirectly, by Sea or Land, any
Gold or Silver, coined or un-coyned, except such a sum as they shall declare
upon oath before the said Lord Thesaurer, Thesaurer-depute, or these appointed
by them, as said is, to be necessar for making of their voyage to the Port
where they are going; and that if he know any money transported by any other
person, he shall delate the same to the Lord Thesaurer, Principal or Depute, or
to the foresaid persons appointed by them. As likewise, every Skipper shall,
before he make any voyage after the publication hereof, to any other Kingdom or
Nation, take an Oath before the said Lord Thesaurer or Thesaurer-depute, or
these appointed by them for that effect, that he shall not himself transport,
nor suffer any Gold or Silver, coined or un-coyned (except as is
above-excepted, and except the sum of three score pounds at most, which every
Passenger is hereby allowed to carry forth of the Country for his necessar
spending) to be transported in the Ship wherein he is Master, and that he shall
use his utmost endeavor for discovery of the same, if any be: And that if
after he has made sail, it shall come to his knowledge, that there is any
money concealed in his Ship, or in any other Ship, he shall, at his return,
delate the same to the Lord Thesaurer, Principal or Depute, or to these
appointed by them for that effect: and which persons appointed by them, are
hereby required, to give timous notice thereof to the said Lord Thesaurer or
Thesaurer-depute, under the penalty of the half of the money informed to have
been transported. And sicklike, the said Oaths shall be renewed and taken
before the said Lord Thesaurer or Depute, or these appointed by them, as said
is, by all Skippers and Merchants, at the making of every particular voyage;
and both the said Oaths shall be subscribed by the respective parties, and
insert in the Books of Exchequer, or in the Books of these persons appointed by
the Lords Thesaurer or Depute for that effect; for which Extracts, they shall
pay to the keepers of these Registers twelve shillings Scots allanerly, the one
thereof to be carried to the Customer, and insert in their Books gratis; the
other to be carried to the keeper of the Cocquet, and insert in his Books
gratis. And it is further Statute and Ordained, That in case any Merchant or
Skipper, shall, after the publication hereof, trade with, or make any voyage to
any other Kingdom or Nation, before the taking of the said Oaths, and
production of the Extracts thereof to the Customer and keeper of the Cocquet,
that then they shall forfeit the fifth part of their movables and be
incapable, the Merchant of all trading, and the Skipper of having any charge of
any Ship within this Kingdom in all time coming. Provided always, that the
taking of the Oaths abovementioned shall be without prejudice of search for,
or seizure of, any exported money: And if any Gold or Silver, coined or
un-coyned, shall, after publication hereof, be discovered carrying out of the
Kingdom, by any person who has taken the said Oath, the same not only to be
confiscat, but the person or persons owners thereof, to be proceeded against as
perjured persons, and further liable to six months imprisonment. As also, it
is hereby Declared, that notwithstanding of the said Oaths, if it shall at any
time thereafter be legally proven, money has been carried out of the Kingdom
by the persons takers of the said Oath, the said persons shall be proceeded
against as perjured persons, and by and attour, be fined in the value of the
money exported; and whatsoever money shall be discovered or seized upon, the
one half thereof to be for His Majesty's use, and the other half to the
informer. And the Lord Thesaurer and Thesaurer-depute are hereby required, to
appoint sufficient honest men, to be found at the respective Ports of this
Kingdom, or Royal Burghs next adjacent thereto, for taking of the said Oaths;
And that they take Bond, with sufficient caution, from each of the persons so
appointed, under the pain of six thousand pounds Scots, that they shall not
suffer any Merchant or Skipper to use trade or merchandise with any Foreign
Kingdom or Nation, before they have taken the said Oaths; and shall do their
utmost endeavors for discovery and seizure of all money carried out of the
Kingdom: And that if it shall be informed to them, that any money has been
carried out of the Kingdom, they shall give speedy and timeous notice of their
information to the said Lord Thesaurer or Thesaurer-depute, the one half of the
foresaid sum of six thousand pounds, in case of failzie, to be for His
Majesty's use, and the other half to be given to the delator, and to be further
liable to six months imprisonment for breach of their trust. And sicklike, the
said Lord Thesaurer principal, and Thesaurer-depute, are hereby required, to
cause the Farmerers and Collectors of the Custom, and keepers of the Cocquet,
to take an Oath, that the said Farmerers and Collectors of the Custom shall
use their utmost endeavors, for the discovery and seizure of all money
carrying out of the Kingdom by Sea or Land, either by Merchant, Skipper, or by
any person of whatsoever quality or degree, except as is above excepted; and
that they shall not give warrant to any Skipper to receive a Cocquet, unless
they have received, both from the Skipper and Merchants in the Ship, extracts
of the respective Oaths, as said is; and that the keepers of the Cocquets shall
give no Cocquet, unless they have likewise received extracts of the Oaths
abovementioned, both from Skipper and Merchants; and both Customers and
keepers of the Cocquet to give Bond, with sufficient Caution, under such sums
of money as the said Lord Thesaurer principal, and Thesaurer-depute shall think
fit, for fulfilling of the premises. And in case the said Farmerers,
Collectors and keepers of the Cocquet, or either of them, shall refuse to
compear, or compearing, refuse or delay to take the Oath, and give their Bond
as aforesaid, then their Tack, Commission, Gift, or any other Title by which
they enjoy their Places and Charges to be void and null, and they to be further
liable to such censures, as the said Lord Thesaurer principal, and
Thesaurer-depute shall think fit for their contumacy. And if it shall be made
appear to the said Lord Thesaurer principal, and Thesaurer-depute, that any of
the Farmerers or Collectors of Custom, or keepers of Cocquet, shall transgress
the Oath and Bond abovementioned in any part, then their Tack, Commission,
Gift, or any other Title by which they enjoy their said Places, to be void and
null, and they to have incurred the sums and penalties contained in their
respective Bonds (the one half thereof to be given to the informer or delator)
and to be further proceeded against as perjured persons; Discharging hereby,
all granting of Licenses for exporting of money; except to such persons
allanerly as shall make faith in Exchequer, or these appointed by the Lord
Thesaurer or Thesaurer-depute; and give sufficient Bond, that the money which
they are to carry out, is to be bestowed upon Timber in Norway, or in order for
bringing in of Victual in time of extreme dearth, and that they shall return,
in specie, what part of the money shall not be so bestowed.

XI. ACT for encouragement of Tillage and Pasturage.
OUR Sovereign Lord considering, how necessar it is, for the encouragement of
the tillage of this Country, which is subject to so much toil and expense,
though the improvement thereof be most advantageous to the whole Kingdom, That
liberty be granted for the exportation of Corns, after the Natives are
sufficiently provided for. Therefore, the King's Majesty, with advice and
consent of His Estates in Parliament, Statutes and Declares, That it shall be
lawful to export Corns of all sorts, when they are under the prices following,
at the Ports or respective places of exportation; viz. ilk Boll of Wheat, under
twelve pounds the Boll, Beir and Barley, under eight pounds the Boll, Oats and
Pease, under eight merks the Boll; notwithstanding of any former Acts, Laws or
Practice to the contrary, they paying the usual Custom and Bullion as formerly:
with this provision, That when the Lords of His Majesty's Secret Council shall
judge it necessar, for the good of the Kingdom and preventing of dearth, they
may discharge the exportation of Victual of all sorts, for so long time as they
shall think fit. As also, for improvement of the Pasturage of this Kingdom, and
for encouragement of the breeders of the Bestial thereof, It is Statute and
Ordained, with advice and consent foresaid, that the exportation by Sea, of all
sorts of Bestial, either Nolt, Sheep or Swine, and barrelled Fleshes of all
sort, shall be free of Custom, Bullion, and all other impositions, for the
space of nineteen years next after the date hereof.

XII. ACT for a new Imposition upon English Commodities.
THe Estates of Parliament considering, how much it concerns the credit and
wealth of the Kingdom, that our own native Commodities be manufactured amongst
our selves, and that the endeavors of such persons as are setting up
Manufacturies and Trades, have been, and are much retarded, by the importation
of such foreign Commodities as may be made within the Kingdom. Therefore, and
for their due encouragement, the King's Majesty, with advice and consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That from and after the first day
of September next, twelve pounds Scots upon ilk ell of broad English Cloth;
six pounds upon ilk ell of Yorkshire and all narrow Cloth; two pounds eight
shillings upon ilk ell of Searge; thirty shillings upon ilk ell of Castilians;
forty eight pounds upon ilk Beaver-hat; twenty four pounds upon ilk Demy-beaver
and Vigon; and three pounds upon the piece of ilk common Hat; thirty six pounds
upon the dozen of worstead Stockings; twenty four pounds upon the dozen of
Stag-gloves; and twelve pounds upon the dozen of single Stags, Cordivans, Kid
or Shiverings; and twenty four shillings upon ilk pound of Tobacco, imported
either for sale or private use into this Kingdom from England, all Scots money;
Be exacted, levied and collected; and fourscore per cent. upon all other sorts
of Commodities imported into this Kingdom from England, and not particulary
named in this Act, and upon all the growth and Manufactury of that Kingdom,
though imported from any other place, and that over and above all other
impositions put upon the same already. And to the effect this present Act may
be the more exactly put to execution, It is Statute and Ordained, That all
Goods imported from England, or of the growth and manufactury of England, not
above particularly expressed, shall be valued, after sighting, by two skillful
honest men, upon oath, to be nominate by the Dean of Gild or his Assessors, or
Magistrates of the Burgh, or next adjacent Burgh to the Custom-office, where
the said Goods are entered, or by the oath of the party to whom the said
Goods belongs, and accordingly pay the said fourscore per cent. And the Lords
Thesaurer and Thesaurer-depute, and Lords of His Majesty's Exchequer, are
hereby required to take an Oath, and Bond with sufficient Caution, from the
Farmers or Collectors of the said impositions, that they shall exactly collect
the same, without any abatement thereof, directly or indirectly; and that they
shall not suffer any of the said Goods to pass or be conveyed away un-entred,
and that under the penalty of the worth of the said Goods, if the contrary
shall be made appear, the one half thereof to His Majesty's use, and the other
half to the informer, and under the pain of forfaulting their Tacks and
Commissions, and being declared incapable to farm or collect, in any time
hereafter, any Custom, Excise, or other Imposition whatsoever within this
Kingdom. And if any of the foresaids Goods or Commodities shall be informed and
made appear to be brought in, or shall be seized upon, not being entered in the
Custom-office, or any other Office appointed for that effect, then the same to
be wholly confiscat, the one half to His Majesty's use, and the other half to
the first informer or seizer thereof.

XIII. ACT imposing a Custom upon Corn imported from Ireland into this Kingdom.
THe Estates of Parliament considering, what great sums of money are carried
out of the Kingdom, by persons, importers of Corn hither from Ireland, who
having sold their Corns, export the money without battering any of the
Commodities of this Kingdom; whereby the whole Nation, particularly those near
adjacent parts of the Kingdom, are much impoverished of money: And that it is
just and reasonable that the said Corns should bear Custom, toward the increase
of His Majesty's Revenue, proportionably with other imported Commodities,
especially when the Corns of this Kingdom are sold at easy rates. Therefore,
the King's Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does
hereby impose three pounds Scots of Custom upon ilk boll, Linlithgow measure,
of Corn imported into this Kigdom from Ireland, after the first day of
Seplember next; and appoints thirty shillings Scots to be raised upon ilk boll
already imported, and not yet retailed, conform to an Act of the Committee of
Estates made there-anent, in anno, one thousand six hundred and sixty. But,
least the more indigent sort of people might be prejudged, by highting the
prices of the said Corns in time of dearth, under pretense of the said Custom;
Therefore, the King's Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, does hereby
give power to the Lords of His Privy Council, to remit and discharge the
exacting of the said Custom, when they shall find the prices of the Victual of
this Kingdom, Meal and Barley respective, to exceed eight pounds the boll; And
appoints the Lords of His Exchequer to cause put this Act to full execution,
and cause the foresaid Custom be exactly levied, with power to them to allow
such fies to the Collectors thereof as they shall think fit.

XIV. ACT for in-bringing of His Majesty's Rents.
FOrasmuch, as His Majesty and Estates of Parliament, taking to their
consideration, the great contempt and neglect of the several Fewers and others
liable in payment of His Majesty's Rents, where-through (notwithstanding of the
diligence and endeavors of His Majesty's Thesaurer principal,
Thesaurer-depute, and others his Majesty's Officers appointed for the
management of His Majesty's Revenue) the same are not paid, or otherwise so
unseasonably paid, that it proves a great hindrance and prejudice to His
Majesty's Affairs. And finding several Acts of Parliament made for the timeous
and seasonable payment of His Majesty's Rents, as well constituting the time
and sitting of Exchequer, to the effect that the persons liable in payment,
might know both the time, place and persons, where, when, and to whom they
should count and make payment of the said Duties, as also such censures and
penalties as might induce them to due obedience thereto: Particularly, the
sixty third Act, Par. eleventh, holden by His Majesty's Grandfather of blessed
memory, in anno, one thousand five hundred and eighty seven, Ordaining the
Exchequer to sit down the first day of July yearly, and to continue to the last
day of August thereafter; requiring not only the Thesaurer, Comptroller,
Collector, their Deputes and other Officers, to be present and give their
attendance during the said time; but also, all persons liable in payment, who
ought to make count in Exchequer, to be charged by Precepts to compear thereat,
under the pain of forty pounds, to be uplifted by the Thesaurer; Ordaining
Letters of Horning to be directed against them for payment thereof, and that
the said persons do attend for making of the said accounts to the close
thereof; and in case of disobedience to the said Precept, that they be charged
of new at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and in case of their disobedience to
the said Charge, to be denounced Rebels at the said Cross; which denounciation
is declared to be as sufficient, as if the same were at the head Burgh of the
Shire where the person lives, and that the Horning be registrat in the
Thesaurers Books or Sheriff Books of Edinburgh. And sicklike, by the sixty
fifth Act of the said Parliament, All Chamberlains and other Receivers of His
Majesty's Rents, as well heretable as moveable, are ordained to find caution to
the Thesaurer in Edinburgh, for making count at the ordinar time of Exchequer,
and payment within twenty days after the term. And also, by the eighty Act of
the said Parliament, it is Ordained, that Letters be directed, charging the
Sheriffs, under the pain of rebellion; with certification, etc. to find
caution, Burges Indwellers in Edinburgh, that they shall yearly make their
accounts in Exchequer, and pay all things resting owing to the King's Majesty,
by virtue of their Office. And sicklike, by the two hundred and thirty Act,
Parliament fourteenth, anno, one thousand five hundred and ninety four; not
only the foresaid Act is ratified and approven; but also, all Chamberlains,
Fewers, Customers, Bailies of Buroughs, and Sheriffs, and others intromettors
with the foresaids Rents, are ordained to find caution Burgesses of Edinburgh,
for yearly compearing and making count in Exchequer. And sicklike, by another
Act, Parliament fifteen, Act two hundred and sixty two, for preventing of the
prejudice that did then arise, through the not timeous payment of the foresaids
Rents, payable out of the High-lands and Isles, the said Fewers are Ordained
to find caution to the Exchequer, for yearly and thankful payment of the
yearly Rents, Duties and Services due and payable forth of the Lands possessed
and occupied by them, or any other in their names; wherein if they failed,
their pretended Infestments, and other Rights and Titles they have to any of
their Lands, either property or superiority, are declared forfault and null.
Which whole Acts of Parliament respective abovementioned, The King's Majesty
and Estates of Parliament, taking of new to their consideration; and finding no
means could have been more probable and conduceable, for preventing of these
prejudices and obstructions that have arisen to His Majesty's Affairs, through
the not timely payment of His Rents; and that the neglect of the exact putting
of the said Acts to execution, has been the only fountain from whence these
have sprung. Therefore, and for preventing of the same in the future, the
King's Majesty, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, does
Revive, Renew, Ratify and Approve the foresaids Acts, respectively and
particularly above-written, of the dates, tenors and contents thereof in all
points, in so far as the same are or may be extended to the payment or securing
of His Majesty's Rents; and Ordains the same to have force, and be punctually
obeyed and extended against all Chamberlains, Fewers, Sheriffs, Stewards of
Stewartries, Bailies of Regalities, Bailes of Buroughs, and others liable in
payment of any of His Majesty's Rents, for finding caution in Exchequer to the
Thesaurer principal and Thesaurer-depute, who are hereby required to cause
charge the foresaids persons, particularly abovementioned, at the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh to compear before them, to the effect above-written; with
certification, not only under the pains contained in the respective Acts of
Parliament, but also, in case of their disobedience, to denounce them Rebels at
the said Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to be registrate in the Thesaurers or
general Registers of Hornings: Which charge, denounciation and registration
respective, the King's Majesty and Estates of Parliament Declares to be as
sufficient, to all purposes and intents, as if the same charge were given to
them personally at their dwelling-houses, and the denounciation at the head
Burgh of the Shire where they live, and the same registrate in the Sheriff
Books thereof. And sick like, His Majesty and Estates of Parliament taking to
their consideration, that several of the said Fewers, charged and denounced
for not compearing, compting and paying of their said Duties, do ly under the
Process of Horning, apprehending themselves (from the distance of the place)
secure, both as to their persons and goods, to the great contempt of His
Majesty's Royal Authority, slighting, contemning and vilipending His Majesty's
Laws: And His Majesty and Estates of Parliament considering, by the nature,
duty and office of each Sheriff, Stewart and Bailies of Regalities within their
respective Jurisdictions, they as His Majesty's Officers are obliged, and by
several Acts of Parliament, ( viz. the 30. Act JA. 4. Par. 3. Par. 6. Act 69.
Act 97. JA. 5. Par. 7. Act 74. Par. 6. JA. 6. Act 75. JA. 6. Par. 6.) Ordained,
to execute His Majesty's Laws, and put Letters of Poinding and Caption to
execution, take and apprehend the Rebels, uplift their estates and count for
the same to the Comptroller and Thesaurer and to cause their Clerks give in the
Registers of Hornings, and to uplift His Majesty's retoured Duties, blench
Duties, Taxations, and other Duties payable to His Majesty, as not only the
said Acts of Parliament, but also the several Rolls of Exchequer bears;
Whereby it appears, both by Law, and the nature, and duty of their Office, that
they ought to execute His Majesty's Letters, and cause His Majesty be paid of
His Rents by the persons liable on payment thereof within their bounds, and
that the contemners of His Majesty's Authority be duly punished, and His
Majesty's Laws put to execution by them as His proper Officers. Therefore, the
King's Majesty and Estates of Parliament Ordains, when any of the foresaids
persons, for disobedience to the charges given to them for payment of the
Mails, Farms and Duties, as said is, are denounced Rebels and put to the horn,
Letters be directed to charge the Sheriff of the Shire and his Deputes, Stewart
of the Stewartry, Baily of the Regality respective, within those bounds where
the said persons dwells or lands lies, to take and apprehend their persons and
put them in ward, ay and while payment be made to the Thesaurer and
Thesaurer-depute, or others appointed by them, and an eque retired thereof, or
to poind and destrinzie the readiest goods and geer, and make sale of so much
thereof; and to cause His Majesty's Thesaurer and Thesaurer-depute, and others
appointed by them for that effect, to be completely paid of the said sum
charged for, or to instruct sufficient and exact diligence for the same, within
twenty one days next after they be charged: With certification, if they
failzie, the said twenty one days being bypast, Letters shall be directed to
charge them or their respective cautioners to make payment thereof themselves,
under the pain of rebellion and putting of them to the horn; and if they
failzie, to denounce them rebels, etc. in manner above-specified.

XV. ACT concerning Beggars and Vagabonds.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering the many laudable Acts of Parliament, made by
His Majesty's Royal Predecessors for relief of the Poor, and for constraining
of Beggars, Vagabonds and idle Persons to take themselves to lawful Callings,
that they might not be burdensome and dis-gracefull to the Kingdom; Especially
the seventh Act of the sixth Parliament of His Majesty's Royal Grandfather
King James the sixth of happy memory; Ordaining the names of the Poor of ilk
Paroch, and such as must be necessarily sustained by alms, to be taken up, and
to tax and stint the persons within the Paroch according to the estimation of
their substance, without exception of persons, to such weekly charges and
contributions, as should be thought sufficient to sustain the said poor People:
And the hundred and sixty eight Act of the fifteenth Parliament King James the
sixth, Ratifying the former Act; with this addition, That strong Beggars, with
their Bairns, be employed in common Works, and that they shall continue
servants therein during their life times. And considering the tenth Act of the
two and twentieth Parliament of His said Royal Grandfather King James the
sixth, Recommending to all His good Subjects, to take into their service poor
and indigent Children, declaring that they shall be subject to their said
Masters, their Heirs and Assigns, in all kind of service that shall be
enjoined to them, until they pass their age of thirty years complete, and that
they shall be subject to their Masters correction and chastisement in all
manner of punishment (life and torture excepted) and that if it shall happen,
the said persons to absent themselves from their Masters service without their
license, not only to be liable to bodily punishment at their Masters
discretion, but that all recepters of them shall be obliged to restore them to
their Masters, within twenty four hours after they be required, otherwise, to
pay to their said Masters, ten shillings Scots for ilk days absence till they
be restored. And His Majesty considering, that the chief cause, whereby the
foresaids Acts have proven in-effectual, and that Vagabonds and idle Persons do
yet so much abound, has been, that there were few or no common works then
erected in the Kingdom, who might take and employ the said idle Persons in
their service; and that now, by His Majesty's Princely care, common Works for
Manufacturies of diverse sorts, are setting up in this Kingdom; Therefore, His
Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates in Parliament, Ratifies and
Approves the foresaids Acts of Parliament; with this addition, That it shall be
leisum to all Persons or Societies, who have or shall set up any Manufacturies
within this Kingdom, to seize upon and apprehend the persons of any Vagabonds,
who shall be found begging, or who being Masterless and out of service, have
not wherewith to maintain themselves by their own means or work, and to employ
them for their service as they shall see sit, the same being done with the
advice of the respective Magistrates of the place where they shall be seized
upon; And Ordains the Paroches where such Vagabonds or idle Persons, as shall
be found begging, were born; or in case the place of their nativity be not
known, the Paroches where they have any residence, haunt, or most resort, for
the space of three years immediately preceding their being so apprehended, who
thereby are relieved of the burden of them, to make payment to the Persons or
Societies that shall happen to employ them, of two shillings Scots money per
diem, for the first year after they be apprehended, and one shilling Scots per
diem for the next three years thereafter; the one half thereof to be paid by
the Heretors of the several Paroches respective, and the other half thereof to
be paid by the Possessors and Inhabitants dwelling upon the ground of each
Heretor respective. Likeas, His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid,
Ordains the Heretors of each Paroch, or as many of them as shall happen to
meet, upon public intimation, made at the Paroch-kirk upon any Sabbath at the
dissolving of the Church from the first Sermon, by any of the Heretors of the
Paroch, or by the imployers of the Poor, to make up a stent Roll for
maintenance of the Poor in their Paroch, who shall be employed, as said is, at
the rate aforesaid, the one half thereof to be paid by the Heretors, either
conform to the old extent of their Lands within the Paroch, or conform to the
valuation by which they last paid assessment; or otherwise as the major part
of the Heretors, so meeting shall agree, Life-renters and Wod-setters always
being liable, during their Rights as Heretors; and the other half thereof to be
laid upon the Tennents and Possessors, according to their means and substance.
And in case the said Heretors, being required by any Person or Society,
employing the Poor as said is, shall failzie to make up and deliver a stent
Roll in manner foresaid, with power to the Persons, Society or others entrusted
by them, to charge the Heretors of each Paroch for the sum of two shillings
Scots per diem, for each one of their Poor, whereof they shall be relieved in
manner foresaid, conform to the old extent or valuation foresaid, at the option
of the person or Society employing, or these entrusted by them; which stent
Roll shall continue and stand for one year after the making up thereof, either
by the Heretors, or in case of failzie, by the Persons or Societies employing
the Poor. as said is, and shall then be renewed from year to year, during the
years above-written. Providing also, that the Heretors, in case they failzie to
make a stent Roll, as said is, and be charged conform to the old extent or
valuation of their Lands, that they shall have relief of the Tennents and
Possessors of their Lands, for the one half of what they shall be distressed
for. And His Majesty, with consent foresaids, Ordains Letters of Horning to be
directed hereupon, at the instance of the Persons or Societies imployers of the
Poor, or persons entrusted by them, against the Heretors and others for payment
of the said daily allowance for the Poor, or against the recepters of them,
being so employed, for ten shillings Scots money per diem, upon fifteen days
only: Providing always, that after examination of the case, the Lords of the
Privy Council shall find cause for directing such Letters; And Ordains all
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies of Regality, Principality, Magistrates of
Buroughs, or Justices of Peace and their Constables, to be assisting in the
apprehending of the said Vagabonds, or in the bringing of them back to their
service, after they shall be employed: And strictly Prohibits and Discharges
all persons whatsoever, to oppose or hinder the taking or bringing back of them
in manner foresaid respective, under the pain of deforcement. Likeas, it is
hereby Declared, That the Poor so employed shall continue in the service of the
employers, and under their direction and correction, in manner foresaid, not
only during the space of the maintenance to be paid for them by their
Paroches, in manner above-written; but also for the space of seven years
thereafter for meat and cloth only; Declaring always, likeas it is hereby
expressly Declared, that the Burgh of Air nor their Inhabitants shall no ways
be comprehended herein, but are excepted here-from in all points. And
recommends to the Lords of the Privy Council, to see this Act, and all former
Acts of Parliament made against sturdy Beggars and Vagabonds, put to execution,
with power to them to supply by their order what shall be deficient, as to the
execution of the said Acts.

XVI. ACT anent the measure of Coal.
OUr Sovereign Lord considering, that several questions and debates do arise,
betwixt the buyers of Coal, and the Customers and Receivers of the Bullion,
anent the measure of the Chalder, by which the Custom and Bullion imposed upon
the Coal should be paid; Does therefore, with advice and consent of His Estates
of Parliament, Statute and Declare, That the rates of Custom and Bullion,
imposed upon the Chalder of Coal, is, and shall be understood of the
Culross-chalder; and the said rates exacted and paid according to that measure
allanerly, notwithstanding of any former Custom to the contrary.

XVII. ACT anent the Foot-measure.
THe Estates of Parliament considering, that notwithstanding by the ancient
Laws of the Kingdom, the ell is designed to be thirty seven inches, yet many
use inches by which the ell is divided into forty two inches, and of these
small inches, make the Foot-measure of a smaller proportion then it ought to
be, to the great prejudice of the Lieges; and that the occasion of this Liberty
has been, because, that hitherto there has no Standard been appointed for
Foot-measures, as well as other measures. Therefore, His Majesty, with advice
and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That from and
after the first day of June next, one thousand six hundred sixty four, no
Workman nor other person shall make use of any other Foot-measure, then such as
consists of twelve of these inches, whereof the ell contains thirty seven: And
that this may be the better made practicable to the Lieges, Ordains an exact
Standardfoot to be made by the Magistrates of Edinburgh, before the first of
January, one thousand six hundred and sixty four, of Iron or Copper, and
preserved by the City of Edinbugh for all time coming. And that all Burghs
shall have a measure made according to it, and hung at their Tolbooth doors or
upon their Mercat-crosses, before the first of March, one thousand six hundred
and sixty four; and any Burgh that shall fail in this, shall be liable to the
penalty of one hundred pounds Scots. And Ordains, That all Wrights, Glasiers,
Masons, and all other sorts of public Workmen, shall work by this Foot-measure
allanerly, that the Lieges may not be abused by variety of measures. Providing
always, that this do infer no further privilege to the Burgh of Edinburgh, in
justing of the Standard to the Shires and Burghs within the Kingdom, then the
keeping of the same; nor to any others that have Standards of the like nature.

XVIII. ACT discharging Monday and Saturday Mercats in Royal Burghs.
OUr Sovereign Lord considering, that there is much occasion given for
profanation of the Lord's Day in the Royal Burghs, by keeping their weekly
Mercats on Monday and Saturday, and that the same may be as conveniently kept
on other days of the week; Does therefore, with advice and consent of His
Estates in Parliament, Inhibit and Discharge, all the Royal Burghs, from
keeping any Mercats, in time coming, upon the Monday or Saturday, under the
pain of one hundred Merks, to be paid by each of the Royal Burghs for every
contravention respective: And allows them to change and keep their Mercats on
other days of the week as they have done formerly, since the year, one
thousand six hundred and forty four, and that they make timeous intimation of
the change to the next adjacent Burghs. It being always Declared, that this
Act is not to be extended against Fleshers in Royal Burghs, who may keep Market
of Fleshes in their respective Burghs upon these days, this Act
notwithstanding.

XIX. ACT anent Lint-seed, Hemp Seed and Steel.
THe Estates of Parliament, taking to consideration, the manifold mistakes and
differences that do and may arise, betwixt the Farmers of Excise and Merchants,
anent the exacting of Excise upon Lint-seed, Hempseed and Steel, which seems to
be occasioned because these Commodities are not particularly excepted, in the
Act of the Annuity, from payment of Excise: And being certainly informed, that
the present Farmers of Excise and their Collectors, do require and exact duty
of Hemp Seed, Lintseed and Steel, contrary to the meaning of the said Act of
Annuity, and of the fourtieth Act of this present Parliament, made for
encouragement of Manufacturies. Therefore our Sovereign Lord, with advice and
consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does Declare, all Hemp Seed, Lint-seed
and Steel, to be included in the generality of the proviso of the said Act of
Annuity; as also of the said fourtieth Act, whereby all materials for
Manufacturies are exempted from Excise.

XX. ACT anent Manses and Glebs, and poinding for Ministers Stipends.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering the great difficulties which oftentimes the
Ministers of the Gospel do meet with, in the due payment of their Rents and
Stipends; So that they are sometimes forced to use legal execution by poinding,
and in so doing are necessitate to carry the Goods poinded, to be apprised at
the Mercat Cross of the head Burgh of the Shire, Stewartry, Bailery or
Regality, many miles distant from the place where the Goods are poinded, to the
great prejudice of the party and of the Goods also. Therefore, His Majesty,
with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, Declares, That it shall
be sufficient to the Ministers foresaid, in poinding, apprising and
destrenzying the Goods of the persons deficient in payment of their Rents and
Stipends, to comprise the said Goods, by honest sworn men, upon the ground of
the Lands and place where the Goods are, which shall be as sufficient, as the
same were done at the said Mercat-crosses. And because, notwithstanding of
diverse Acts of Parliament made of before, diverse Ministers are not yet
sufficiently provided with Manses and Glebs, and others do not get their Manses
free at their entry: Therefore, our Sovereign Lord, with advice foresaid,
Satutes and Ordains, That where competent Manses are not already built, the
Heretors of the Paroach, at the sight of the Bishop of the Diocese, or such
Ministers as he shall appoint, with two or three of the most knowing and
discreet men of the Paroach, build competent Manses to their Minister, the
expenses thereof not exceeding one thousand pounds, and not being beneath five
hundred Merks: And where competent Manses are already built, Ordains the
Heretors of the Paroch to relieve the Minister and his Executors of all cost,
charges and expenses, for repairing of the foresaid Manses; Declaring hereby,
that the Manses being once built and repaired, and the building or repairing
satisfied and paid by the Heretors in manner foresaid, the said Manses shall
thereafter be upholden by the incumbent Ministers during their possession, and
by the Heretors in time of vacancy, out of the readiest of the vacand Stipend.
In like-maner Ordains, that every Minister have fuel, foggage, feal and
devots, according to the Act of Parliament, made in anno, one thousand five
hundred and ninety three. As also, that every Minister (except such Ministers
of Royal Buroughs, who have not right to Glebs) have grass for one horse and
two kine, over and above their Gleb, to be designed out of Kirk-lands, and with
relief according to the former Acts of Parliament standing in force; And if
there be no Kirk-lands lying near the Ministers Manse, out of which the grass
for one horse and two kine may be designed, or otherwise, if the said
Kirk-lands be arable Land, in either of these cases, Ordains the Heretors to
pay to the Minister and his Successors yearly, the sum of twenty pounds Scots,
for the said grass for one horse and two kine, the Heretors always being
relieved according to the Law standing, of other Heretors of Kirk-lands in the
said Paroch. And because several Kirks have no Glebs as yet designed to them,
it is hereby specially provided, that in all designations of Glebs,
Incorporat-acers, in Village or Town where the Heretor has houses and gardens,
the same shall not be designed, he always giving other Lands nearest to the
Kirk. And His Majesty, with advice foresaid, for special causes and
considerations, Declares, that this present Act, as to the Manses, is to have
force, as the same had been made and dated the fourteenth of March, one
thousand six hundred and forty nine.

XXI. ACT anent comprisings.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering, that since the first day of January, one
thousand six hundred and fifty two, before the making of the sixty two Act of
the first Session of this Parliament, entitled, Act for ordering the payment
of Debts betwixt Creditor and Debtor, diverse persons, having right by
posterior Comprisings to the legal reversion of the first Comprising deduced of
their Debitors Estate, have, according to the Law then in force, redeemed or
satisfied the first Comprising, and acquired the right thereof for their own
better security, lest the legal reversion of the first Comprising should have
expired to their prejudice. And whereas, by an Clause of the foresaid Act of
Parliament, it is Ordained, That all Comprisings, led since the said first day
of January, one thousand six hundred and fifty two, within year and day of the
first effectual Comprising, shall come in pari passu together, in manner, and
upon the provisions, mentioned in the said Act: Which Clause, as it is most
just as to all Comprisings led, and standing un-redeemed and un-satisfied by
the subsequent Comprisers having right to the legal reversion; So it were
unjust to prejudge those, who, for their own security, have redeemed or
satisfied the first Comprising, as said is, according to the Law then standing.
Therefore, His Majesty, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Declares, That albeit the foresaid Act was made ad praeterita, to regulate the
diligence used by Comprisings at the instance of the Creditors: Yet, it was no
ways their meaning to prejudge posterior Comprisers, who, bona side, for their
own security, and for preventing the hazard of the expiration of the legal
reversion of the first Comprising, did redeem or satisfy the same; And
therefore it is Statute and Ordained, That the said second Comprisers shall no
ways be prejudged of the right of the foresaid first Comprising, redeemed and
satisfied by them; Declaring nevertheless, that as to the second or posterior
Comprising, standing in the parties person who satisfied the first, the same
shall only come in with the rest of the Comprisers, pari passu, as it is
provided by the foresaid Act. As likewayes Declaring, That these presents be no
ways extended to any Comprisings satisfied by the second Comprisers, since the
making of the foresaid Act of Parliament, or to be satisfied in time coming.

XXII. ACT anent Sentences of Excommunication.
OUr Sovereign Lord considering, that the proviso in the twenty fifth Act of
the first Session of Parliament, entitled, Act for denounceing of
excommunicate persons, anent the exhibiting the Process and Sentence of
excommunication before the Lords of Session, to the end they might consider the
legality of the Process, and grounds whereupon the Sentence proceeded, before
any Letters of denunciation should pass against excommunicat persons, was
concluded before the restoration of the Bishops, and is prejudicial and
derogatory to the jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical Authority, as it is now
established; Does therefore, with advice and consent of His Estates of
Parliament, Retreat and Rescind the said proviso, and Declares the same to be
void and null.

XXIII. ACT for additional provision in favors of the Universities.
OUr Sovereign Lord, and the Estates of Parliament, taking into serious
consideration, the condition of the several Universities of this Kingdom; And
finding, that the present mean and incompetent provision of the Masters and
Professors thereof, is so prejudicial to the flourishing of these Seminaries of
Church and State, that unless some considerable Augmentation be settled upon
them for their encouragment, the ablest and fittest persons of ingenious
spirits and education, will shun and avoid the undertaking of Functions in
Universities, for want of such ingenuous means as should invite, entertain,
encourage and obliege men sufficient for such laborious employments, to the
great decay of Learning, and detriment of all ranks of Persons in the Kingdom:
For preventing and remeeding whereof, there being an expedient proposed, that
the Archbishops and Bishops, and the rest of the inferior Clergy, may allow
some part yearly of their Rents, Benefices and Maintenance, for the space of
five years to come, as an exemplary testimony of their piety and zeal, for the
advancement of Learning and Religion. Therefore, His Majesty, with advice and
consent of the Estates of Parliament, Does Statute and Ordain, That for the
cropts and years, one thousand six hundred and sixty four, one thousand six
hundred and sixty five, one thousand six hundred and sixty six, one thousand
six hundred and sixty seven, and one thousand six hundred and sixty eight,
there be raised yearly, out of the Rents of ilk Archbishop and Bishop, the sum
of fifty pounds for every thousand merks of the said Revenues, and the sum of
forty pounds out of every thousand merks of the Stipends or Benefices of every
Minister, and so proportionable six of the hundred, as the Benefice or Stipend
shall be valued to be more or less by the Bishops of the Diocesses; And that
the said several proportions, payable by the Bishops, shall be yearly given in
to the Archbishops of the respective Provinces, or such as shall have warrant
from them; and that the said several proportions, payable by Ministers, shall
be yearly given in to the Bishops of the respective Diocese, or such as shall
have warrant from them, and for whom the said Bishops shall be countable:
Which sums so to be raised, shall be distributed to the several Universities,
according to those proportions which shall be assigned by His Majesty, by a
Committee to sit at Edinburgh, consisting of the Archbishops of St. Andrews and
Glasgow, and the Bishops of Edinburgh and Aberdeen, and four others, whereof
one to be nominate by the Visitors of the University of St. Andrews, and
another by the Visitors of the University of Glasgow, the third by the Visitors
of Aberdeen, the fourth by the Council of Edinburgh; Hereby authorizing the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and in his absence the Archbishop of Glasgow, to
preside in the said Committee, and to appoint their diets of meeting from time
to time; and the Committee to take care, that the sums thus allotted, shall be
put into a Stock and settled upon Land or otherwise, by advice of the
respective Bishops, who are Chancellors of the said Universities; and Ordains
the Annual-rent of the said Stock to be proportioned to the Masters and
Professors of each University, as the Visitors thereof shall appoint. And
further, His Majesty and Estates foresaid, do Ordain, that Stipends, and all
Benefices of Kirks that shall vaik after the first day of February, in this
following year of God, one thousand six hundred and sixty four, for the space
of seven years next there-after, shall be up lifed by

Collector thereof, and employed by him in the manner, and according to the
proportions above-specified, for increasing of the Stock of each University:
Declaring, that the fifty two Act of the first Session of this Parliament,
Concerning the disposal of vacand Stipends, shall be of no force during the
space of the years foresaid; And Ordains Letters of Horning and Poinding, and
all other execution necessary, to be directed at the instance of the said
Bishops, or any to be appointed by them; and at the instance of the said
Collector, for the more speedy in-bringing of the sums respective
abovementioned. Further, His Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, do
recommend to the Lords of the Privy Council, to entertain and promote any
voluntary offer or contribution, for the ends aforesaid, to be made by
Noblemen or Gentelemen, for a work so worthy of the public wisdom, piety and
honor of this Kingdom. It is always Declared, that this Act shall be without
prejudice of Acts past in this Parliament, for allowing the vacand Stipends of
the Diocese of Isles and Argyl for breeding of young Scholars, the sum being
regulate by the Committee abovenamed; and that this Act shall be no
preparative for laying on any burdens on the Clergy hereafter, without their
own consent.

XXIV. ACT regulating the proportions of Excise in the several Shires and
Burghs.
THe Estates of Parliament, taking to their consideration, the grievances
represented to them by several Shires and Burghs, anent the excessive
proportions of Excise laid upon them by the late Act of Parliament, and what
great burden the Land-rent of the said Shires and Burghs lies under, for
making up the said proportions, and the great ease which several other Shires
have in their proportions; And it being just and reasonable, that all public
impositions of that nature, should be equally distributed upon those liable in
payment thereof. Therefore, the King's Majesty, with advice and consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, that the several Shires and Burghs
of this Kingdom, shall, for the months of November and December next, one
thousand six hundred and sixty three, and January, one thousand six hundred and
sixty four years, and in all time thereafter, be liable in the monthly payment
of the respective proportions underwritten, viz. The Shire of Edinburgh
principal, in the sum of two thousand one hundred and forty pounds Scots
money; The Town of Edinburgh, in the sum of two thousand nine hundred thirty
two pounds; The Shire of Haddingtoun, in the sum of one thousand two hundred
fourscore and eleven pounds; The Shire of Berwick, in the sum of six hundred
and ten pounds sixteen shillings; The Shire of Roxburgh, in the sum of seven
hundred threescore twelve pounds sixteen shillings; The Shire of Selkirk, in
the sum of one hundred forty seven pounds ten shillings; The Shire of Peebles,
in the sum of one hundred thirty seven pounds ten shillings; The Shire of
Lanerick, in the sum of nine hundred threescore eight pounds eight shillings;
The Town of Glasgow, in the sum of one thousand threescore sixteen pounds four
shillings; The Shire of Dumfriese, in the sum of six hundred fifty six pounds;
The Shire of Wigtoun and Kirkcudburgh, in the sum of seven hundred thirty two
pounds twelve shillings, whereof the Stewartry of Kirkcudburgh is to pay the
sum of four hundred threescore one pounds, and the Shire of Wigtoun the sum of
two hundred threescore eleven pounds twelve shillings; The Shire of Air, in the
sum of one thousand six hundred thirty nine pounds sixteen shillings; The Shire
of Dumbartoun, in the sum of two hundred fifty four pounds; The Shire of Bute,
in the sum of fifty seven pounds; The Shire of Renfrew, in the sum of four
hundred fifty seven pounds four shillings; The Shire of Stirling, in the sum of
nine hundred and threescore pounds eight shillings; The Shire of Linlithgow, in
the sum of seven hundred fourscore nineteen pounds four shillings; The Shire of
Perth, in the sum of two thousand three hundred threescore fourteen pounds
sixteen shillings; The Shire of Kincardin, in the sum of three hundred
threescore three pounds twelve shillings; The Shire of Aberdeen, in the sum of
two thousand four hundred and eighteen pounds nineteen shillings; The Shire of
Bamff, in the sum of four hundred forty seven pounds three shillings; The
Shire of Innerness, in the sum of seven hundred fourscore fourteen pounds eight
shillings; The Shires of Elgin and Nairn, in the sum of five hundred fourscore
sixteen pounds four shillings; The Shire of Cromarty, in the sum of twenty four
pounds; The Shire of Argyl, in the sum of four hundred forty three pounds
sixteen shillings; The Shire of Fife and Kinross, in the sum of three thousand
six hundred and eight pounds eight shillings; The Shire of Forfar, in the sum
of one thousand twenty four pounds four shillings; The Town of Dundee, in the
sum of seven hundred and eighteen pounds four shillings; The Shire of
Sutherland, in the sum of threescore twelve pounds twelve shillings; The Shire
of Caithness, in the sum of one hundred fifty three pounds four shillings; The
Shire of Orknay and Zetland, in the sum of two hundred forty three pounds
sixteen shillings; The Shire of Clackmannan, in the sum of two hundred and six
pounds two shillings; And the Shire of Ross, in the sum of two hundred and four
pounds, money foresaid; Any thing in the said Act of Parliament to the contrary
notwithstanding, which is hereby Declared to be of no force or effect, as to
the proportions of the said Excise, after the said first day of November next.

XXV. An humble Tender to His Sacred Majesty, of the duty and loyalty of His
ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
FOrasmuch, as the Estates of Parliament, upon consideration of the great
blessings this Kingdom enjoys, under the protection of His Majesty's
Authority and the administrations of His Royal Government; being thereby not
only delivered from their former troubles, and all the evils which attend such
usurpations, but being fully restored to, and possessed of, all the liberties and
privileges of a free people; Have, by their several addresses to His Sacred
Majesty, made offer of their lives and fortunes, and all that is dearest to
them, for the advancement of His Royal Honor, Authority and Greatness. And
this Kingdom being still more and more sensible of this their happiness, by the
often and renewed expressions of His Majesty's grace and favor, and of His
tenderness and care of their perservation, in the peaceable and secure
enjoyment of their Religion, Laws, Liberties and Properties; Do find themselves
the more obliged to renew the expressions of their duty and loyalty to His
Majesty. And therefore, the Estates of Parliament, of this His Majesty's
ancient Kingdom of Scotland, do, in name and behalf of all His Majesty's good
Subjects within the same, by these presents, renew the dutiful tender of their
lives and fortunes, for the promoving of His Majesty's Service and the
advancement of His Royal Authority. And as they do cheerfully recognosce His
Majesty's Royal Prerogative and undoubted Right, of the sole power of raising,
arming and commanding of His Subjects; So, in a further acknowledgement of
their duty, they do make humble and hearty offer to His Majesty, of twenty
thousand Footmen and two thousand Horsemen, sufficiently armed, and furnished
with forty days provision, to be raised from the several Shires of the
Kingdom, according to the proportions following, viz. From the Shires of
Roxburgh and Selkirk, one thousand three hundred thirty three Foot, and one
hundred forty eight Horse. From the Shire of Berwick, eight hundred Foot, and
seventy four Horse. From the Shire of Edinburgh, eight hundred Foot, and
seventy four Horse. From the Shire of Haddingtoun, eight hundred Foot, and
seventy four Horse. From the Shire of Peebles, two hundred sixty six Foot, and
twenty nine Horse. From the Shire of Linlithgow, three hundred thirty three
Foot, and forty two Horse. From the Burgh of Edinburgh, Lies and Canongate,
eight hundred Foot. From the Shire of Dumfries, eight hundred Foot, and eighty
eight Horse. From the Shire of Wigtoun, eight hundred Foot, and eighty eight
Horse. From the Shires of Air and Renfrew, one thousand three hundred thirty
three Foot, and one hundred seventy six Horse. From the Shire of Lanerick, one
thousand Foot, and one hundred forty eight Horse. From the Shires of Stirling
and Clackmannan, six hundred sixty six Foot, and eighty eight Horse. From the
Shires of Fife and Kinross, one thousand six hundred Foot, and one hundred
seventy six Horse. From the Shire of Perth, one thousand six hundred Foot, and
one hundred seventy six Horse. From the Shire of Forfar, one thousand Foot, and
one hundred and three Horse. From the Shire of Kincardin and Marshals part of
Aberdeen, eight hundred Foot, and seventy four Horse. From the rest of Aberdeen
and Shire of Bamff, one thousand sixty six Foot and one hundred seventy six
Horse. From the Shires of Elgin, Nairn, and this side of Ness, one thousand
Foot, and eighty eight Horse. From the Earl of Seafort and Lord Lovat, their
division of Innerness, six hundred sixty six Foot, and eighty eight Horse. From
the Shires of Sutherland and Caithness, and the rest of Innerness, one thousand
sixty six Foot, and eighty eight Horse. From the Shires of Argyl, Dumbartoun
and Bute, eight hundred Foot. From the Shire of Orknay, six hundred sixty six
Foot. Which Forces are to be in readiness, as they shall be called for by His
Majesty, to march to any part of His Dominions of Scotland, England or Irland,
for suppressing of any foreign invasion, intestine trouble or insurrection, or
for any other service, wherein His Majesty's Honor, Authority or Greatness may
be concerned. And for the better prosecution hereof, the Estates of Parliament
do humbly entreat, His Majesty may be graciously pleased to give Commissions to
such persons to be general Officers, Colonels, Lieutenant colonels, Majors and
Rute-masters, as His Majesty in His Royal judgment, shall think sit; and for
the other Officers, or any other thing fitting to be done for perfecting of the
Levies and carrying on of this business, they do humbly recommend to His
Majesty, to give His direction therein to His Privy Council, who are hereby
empowered with Commission and Authority, for the ordering, disposing and sole
managing of this Affair, in such a way, as this dutiful offer of the
Parliament of His Majesty may be made most effectual, and according to the
instructions and commands they shall receive from His Majesty. And the Estates
of Parliament do Declare, that if His Majesty shall have further use of their
service, this Kingdom will be ready, every man betwixt sixty and sixteen, to
join and hazard their lives and fortunes, as they shall be called for by His
Majesty, for the safety and preservation of His sacred Person, Authority and
Government.

XXVI. ACT asserting His Majesty's Prerogative in the ordering and disposal of
Trade with forraigners.
THe Estates of Parliament considering, that during the late troubles, diverse
invasions were made upon the Royal Prerogatives of the Crown; and that in a
just abhorrence thereof, and in a due sense of the happiness they enjoy under
His Majesty's Government, they are obliged in all occasions to vindicate and
assert the same, in the several branches thereof: And since the ordering and
disposal of Trade with foreign Countries, and the laying of restraints and
impositions upon foreign imported Merchandises, is, by the Law of Nations,
acknowledged to be proper to, and inherent in, the persons of all free Princes,
as an undoubted Prerogative of the Crown. They therefore, in a dutiful and
humble recognizance of His Majesty's Prerogative-royal, do Declare, That the
ordering and disposal of Trade with foreign Nations, and the laying of
restraints and impositions upon foreign imported Commodities, does belong to
His Majesty and His Successors, as an undoubted Privilege and Prerogative of
the Crown; and that by virtue thereof, they may lay such impositions and
restraints upon imported foreign Commodities, and so order and dispose upon
the Trade of them, as they shall judge fit for the good of the Kingdom. Likeas,
the King's Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates in Parliament, does
hereby Rescind and Annull all Acts, Statutes, Constitutions and Customs to the
contrary; and Declares the same void and null in all time coming.

XXVII. COMMISSION for the plantation of Kirks and valuation of Teinds.
THe King's most Excellent Majesty, being desirous to prosecute the work of
valuation of Teinds and plantation of Kirks, in reference to His own interest
for the annuity, and the universal good of His people, especially for the
encouragement of the Ministers of the Gospel; Does, with advice and consent of
His Estates of Parliament, Ratify and Approve the nineteenth Act of the
Parliament, holden at Edinburgh by His Royal Father of blessed memory, in anno,
one thousand six hundred and thirty three, (entitled, Commission for valuation
of Teinds,) in the whole heads, clauses and conditions thereof, except in so
far as there has been any alterations made therein, by Acts and Commissions
made and granted by His Majesty since the date of the said Act, or granted by
any pretended Parliaments since, and which are Ratified, Salved or Reserved by
this present Parliament; and which alterations are not destructive of, and
contrary to, this present Act, or any clause thereof. And sicklike, Ratifies
and Approves the sixty one Act of the first Session of this present Parliament,
entitled, Commission for plantation of Kirks, etc. in the whole Heads,
Articles and Clauses thereof, except in so far as the same may be contrary to
this present Act, as said is. And His Majesty, with advice and consent
foresaid, gives full power and commission to James Archbishop of St. Andrews;
William Earl of Glencairn, Chancellor; John Earl of Rothes, Thesaurer;
Alexander Archbishop of Glasgow; William Earl Marshal, Privy Seal; Duke of
Hamiltoun; Marquess of Montrose; Earl of Landerdail, Secretary; Earl of
Eglinton; Earl of Linlithgow; Earl of Kelly; Earl of Haddington; Earl of
Annandail; Earl of Leiven; Earl of Tweddail; George Bishop of Edinburgh; James
Bishop of Galloway; George Bishop of Dunkell; (...) Bishop of Aberdeen; John
Bishop of Ross; Robert Bishop of Dumblane; (...) Bishop of Orknay; William Lord
Bellenden, Thesaurer-depute; Sir John Gilmore, President of the Session; Sir
Archibald Primrose, Clerk Register; His Majesty's Advocat; Sir John Home of
Renton, Justice Clerk; Sir James Lockart of Lee; Sir John Scougal of Whitkirk;
Charles Maitland of Halton; Sir Thomas Hamiltoun of Preston; Sir John Wachop of
Nidrie; Sir Robert Fletcher of Salton; Sir Henry Wardlaw of Pitrevy; William
Scot of Ardross; Sir Andrew Ramsay, Provost of Edinburgh; Sir Robert Murray
there; Sir Archibald Sydserf; Sir Alexander Wedderburne; Sir William Thomson;
John Miln; Robert Lentron, Provost of St. Andrews; Mr. John Paterson, Provost
of Perth; William Seatoun, Provost of Haddington; or any fifteen of them;
whereof three of the Clergy, three of the Nobility, three Officers of State,
three Commissioners of Shires, and three of Burghs; of which number, the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, or the Chancellor, or the Thesaurer, or the
Archbishop of Glasgow, or the Privy. Seal, or the Secretary, or the Duke of
Hamiltoun, or the Earl of Haddingtoun, or any of them, being always one, to
meet and conveen at Edinburgh, the (...) day of (...) one thousand six hundred
and sixty (...) years; and at such other place or places, times and diets as
they shall appoint, to value, and cause be valued, whatsoever Tends, great or
small, Personage or Vicarage, of whatsoever Lands within this Kingdom, liable
to the payment of Teinds, which are yet un-valued; Excepting always the
Teithes of the Archbishops, Bishops and other beneficed persons, whereof they
were in real and actual possession, by leading and collecting the same, in the
year, one thousand six hundred and twenty eight; and with provision, that they
be not prejudged of the Fruits and Rents of their several Benefices, as the
same was possessed by them, anno, one thousand six hundred and thirty seven,
conform to the Submission made by the Bishops to His Majesty in the said year,
and Decree arbitral following thereupon: With power to the said
Commissioners, or quorum foresaid, to appoint Sub-commissioners, conform to the
former Acts and Commissions for valuation of Teinds, and receive reports from
them. And with power to them, where Ministers are not already sufficlently
provided, or have not Localities assigned to them for their Stipends, out of
the Teinds within the Paroch where they serve the Cure, to modifie, settle and
appoint constant local Stipends to ilk Minister, out of the Teinds of the
Paroch where they serve the Cure, in so far as the same will amount to,
according to the quantities of victual or money mentioned in the said Acts and
Commissions, and to decide and proportion the said Localities. And with power
to dis join too large and spacious Paroches, to cause erect and build new
Churches, to dismember and annex Kirks, as they shall think just; and to take
order, that every Heretor and Life-renter shall have the leading and buying of
their own Teinds, if they be willing, according to the rates prescribed by
former Commissions; Particularly, by the Commission granted by His Majesty,
with consent of the Estates of Parliament, in anno, one thousand six hundred
and thrity three; with power to them to determine all questions concerning the
prices of Teinds, betwixt Titulars and others having right thereto, and the
Heretors; and to appoint such securities, in favors of the Titulars and others
having right to the Teind, for the prices to be granted by the Heretors, payers
of the valued duties, or buyers of the said Teinds; and in favors of the
Ministers, as to their maintenance, as the said Commissioners shall think
fitting, according to the rule set down in the said former Acts, namely in the
said Act, anno, one thousand six hundred and thirty three. Declaring, That
where the Vicarage of any Paroch is a several Benefice and Title from the
Personage, the same shall be severally valued; to the effect, the Titulars or
Ministers serving the Cure, having right to the said Vicarage, be not frustrat
of the true worth thereof; And that Titulars, and others having right to
Teinds, shall not be forced to dispone any Teinds, valued or to be valued,
which shall be assigned, disponed and allocat to the Minister serving the Cure
of the Paroch. As also, with power to the said Commissioners or quorum
foresaid, to rectify whatsoever Valuations, led or to be led, to the enorm
prejudice of the Titulars, and to the hurt and detriment of the Kirk, and
prejudice of the Ministers maintenance and provisions, or of His Majesty's
Annuity. Provided always, likeas it is hereby expressly provided, that where
Valuations are lawfully led, against all parties having interest, and allowed
by former Commissions, the same shall not be drawn in question, nor rectified
upon the pretense of enorm lesion, at the instance of the Minister (not being
Titular) or at the instance of His Majesty's Advocat, in respect of His
Majesty's Annuity; except it be proven, that collusion was used betwixt the
Titulars and Heretors, or betwixt the Proctor-fiscal and Heretors and Titulars;
which collusion is declared to be, where the Valuations are led with the
diminution of the third of the just Rent, which diminution shall be proven by
the parties oaths. And albeit all the Acts of the pretended Parliaments, in the
years, one thousand six hundred and forty, one thousand six hundred and forty
one and thereafter, are declared, by an Act of this Parliament, null and of no
avail in all time coming: Yet, it is hereby Declared, That all and whatsoever
Valuations, Acts, Sentences and Decreets, done and past by any Commissions
granted by the said pretended Parliaments, with all executions used or to be
used thereupon, are and shall be as valide in all time coming, as if the said
Valuations, Acts, Sentences and Decreets, had been given and pronounced by
persons legally empowered to that effect, any thing in the foresaid rescissory
Act to the contrary notwithstanding; Excepting such Decreets of valuation,
modification of Stipends, or augmentations thereof, past and granted since the
year, one thousand six hundred and thirty seven, whereby the said Archbishops
or Bishops are prejudged of any part of their Rents, whereof they were in
possession in the said year thirty seven. And although, by a special Act of
this present Parliament, the pretended Parliament, holden in anno, one thousand
six hundred and forty nine, and in the beginning of the year, one thousand six
hundred and fifty, is, from the beginning, Declared void and null, and all that
has followed thereupon Yet nevertheless, His Majesty does, with advice
foresaid, autho rize all Valuations, Acts, Decreets and Sentences, led, deduced
and pronounced by the Commissions, one or more, appointed by the said pretended
Parliament, for plantation of Kirks and valuation of Teinds, and all execution
competent thereupon; Excepting such Decreets and Sentences, given in favors of
Ministers for their Stipends, or for dividing, uniting, annexing or building of
Kirks, which shall be found to have been unjustly or exorbitantly decerned: The
determination whereof is hereby referred by His Majesty, with consent foresaid,
to the said Commissioners, that they, after hearing of parties and
consideration of particulars, may take such course, for altering, annulling or
allowing of the said Acts, Decreets and Sentences, as they shall think
fitting, conform to the Laws, Practick and Custom observed preceding the year,
one thousand six hundred and forty nine; And Ordains Processes, upon
supplications, to be summarily granted, parties always being cited, and that
without any reduction. And it shall be lawful to the said Commissioners, or
quorum foresaid, to proceed in all Summons and Actions to be intended for that
effect, within the space of two years after the first down-sitting of the
Commission. And whereas it may fall out, that some of the said Commissioners
may be un-able to attend the service, through death, sickness, or other known
impediment; Therefore, His Majesty Declares, that He shall be careful to fill
their places with other persons qualified, whose oaths for faithful discharge
of the same shall be taken by the Lord Chancellor, or in his absence, by the
President of the said Commission for the time; And Ordains this present
Commission to endure ay and while the same, be discharged by His Majesty; and
the Acts, Decreets and Sentences thereof, to have the force, strength and
effect of a Decree and Sentence of Parliament, and the Lords of Session to
grant and direct Letters of Horning, Poinding and others requisite, in manner
contained in the foresaids Commissions. And considering, that it was the will
and pleasure of His Majesty's Royal Father, that all Heretors, who should be
willing to buy, should have their own Teinds at reasonable rates; therefore,
His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Statutes and Ordains, That all Heretors,
whose Teinds are not valued, (excepting as is formerly excepted in this
Commission) shall have liberty to value and buy the same, at such rates as is
contained in the Acts of Parliament, one thousand six hundred and thirty three.
With power to the said Commissioners, to augment the said rates according to
the burden of augmentation, and others sustained by the Titulars since the
said Acts; and the said Heretors to have the liberty of buying, as said is,
within the space of three years after the valuation. With this Declaration
always, That in case the impediment, during the time foresaid, flow from the
Titular, by reason of his minority or other inability, in that case, the He
retor who offers himself ready to buy his own Teind, within the space foresaid,
shall have place, so soon as the impediment is removed, to buy his Teinds,
notwithstanding of the expiring of the years and space above-exprest. And it is
Declared, that if the Heretor be Minor, and his Tutors neglect the buying of
his Teinds within the foresaid space, the Minor shall have action for two years
after his minority, to compel the Titular for selling of his said Teinds; And
His Majesty, with consent foresaid, hereby discharges all former Commissions,
Declaring the same to be expired.

XXVIII. ACT annent penal Statutes.
THe King's most Excellent Majesty, having, out of His grace and goodness to
His Subjects, granted an full and free Act of Indemnity, Pardon and Oblivion,
for all crimes and offenses committed by them, relating to the late troubles,
and more fully expressed in the tenth Act of the second Session of this
Parliament. And considering, that besides these, there be diverse arbitrary and
pecunial pains adjected to penal Statutes, which being strictly exacted, would
prove an heavy burden to the Subjects who may be liable thereto. And His
Majesty being desirous, now at the close of this His first Parliament, that all
His good Subjects may find the effects of His mercy, as to exceed all former
presidents, so to be beyond their own expectation; Has therefore thought fit,
with the advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, by these presents, to
Discharge, Pardon and Remit all contraveeners of any penal Statutes, for all
deeds heretofore done by them, contrary to the tenor thereof; Excepting the
Statutes concerning the unlawful taking of Usury, transporting of Silver and
Gold, slaying of red and black Fish, and all Acts and Statutes past in this
present Parliament, which are no ways discharged by this present Act.

XXIX. ACT Salvo jure cujuslibet.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering, that in this last
Session of this present Parliament, many particular Acts and Ratifications have
been past, wherein diverse Clauses may be inserted, prejudicial to the rights
and interests of several persons, albeit it has always been His Majesty's
purpose and meaning, and the purpose and meaning of the Estates of Parliament,
in this, as in all preceding Parliaments, That all particular Acts and
Ratifications, general or special, howsoever conceived (where persons concerned
have not been heard for their Interest before the passing thereof) should not
prejudge private Rights of parties. Therefore, His Majesty, with advice and
consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, That all particular
Acts and Ratifications whatsoever, past in this last Session of this present
Parliament, shall be interpreted Salvo jure cujuslibet; Excepting always, an
Act and Ratification past in this Session of Parliament, in favors of the Duke
and Duchess of Buccleuch, of their Contract of Marriage, which is Declared by
His Majesty and Estates of Parliament, no ways to be comprehended herein.

Extracted from the Records of Parliament, by me Sir ARCHIBALD PRIMEROSH of
Chester, Knight and Barronet, Clerk of His Majesty's Council, Registers and
Rolls.
A. Primerose, Cls. Reg.

ATABLE of the Printed ACTS.
1. ACt against separation and disobedience to Ecclesiastical Authority. Page 3
2. Additional Act concerning the Declaration to be signed by all persons in
public Trust. Page 6 3. Act against Protections. Page 8 4. Act for the
establishment and constitution of a National Synod. Page 9 5. Act anentruinous
houses in Royal Burghs. Page 10 6. Act discharging the importation of
Strongwaters, etc. Page 12 7. Act discharging the mixing of Tin with Lead.
ibid. 8. Act anent the discharging of Advocations for sums within two bundred
merks. Page 13 9. Act in favor of Minors, anent the duties of the Lands
comprised from them. ibid. 10. Act against exportation of money forth of the
Kingdom. Page 14 11. Act for encouragement of Tillage and Pasturage. Page 17
12. Act for a new Imposition upon English Commodities. Page 18 13. Act imposing
a Custom upon Corn imported from Ireland into this Kingdom. Page 19 14. Act for
in-bringing of His Majesty's Rents. Page 20 15. Act concerning Beggars and
Vagabonds. Page 23 16. Act anent the measure of Coal. Page 26 17. Act anent the
Foot-measure. Page 27 18. Act discharging Monday and Saturday Mercats in Royal
Burghs. Page 28 19. Act anent Lint-seed, Hemp Seed and Steel. ibid. 20. Act
anent Manses and Glebs, and poinding for Ministers Stipend. Page 29 21. Act
anent Comprisings. Page 30 22. Act anent Sentences of Excommunication. Page 31
23. Act for additional provision in favors of the Universities. Page 32 24.
Act regulating the proportions of Excise in the several Shires and Burghs. Page
34 25. An humble Tender to His Sacred Majesty, of the duty and loyalty of His
ancient Kingdom of Scotland. Page 36 26. Act asserting His Majesty's
Prerogative, in the ordering and disposal of Trade with forraigners. Page 38
27. Commission for plantation of Kirks and valuation of Teinds. Page 39 28. Act
anent penal Statutes. Page 43 29. Act Salvo jure cujuslibet. Page 44
A Table of the special Acts and Ratifications, past in the several Sessions of
this Parliament, which are not printed.
FIRST SESSION.
PRotestations by some Noblemen, Commissioners from Shires and Burghs,
concerning their precedencies in the Rolls of Parliament. Act discharging Sir
Archibald Johnstoun of all public Trust. Act concerning the Burial of the
Corpse of the late Marquess of Montrose and Lord of Dalgety. Commissions for
the Lords of the Articles and Bills. Exoneration to Mr. John Young, concerning
the Registers. Record of the production of the Patents granted by His Majesty
to His Officers of State, and their Admissions. Record of the production of
some Patents of Honor. Decree Earl of Dalhousie and others, against Mr.
Robert Hodge. Act in favors of the Lord of Mackclean. Precognition in favors
of the Master of Bamff. Commission to Mr. John Wilkie, to collect the vacand
Stipends. Act rescinding the pretended forfeiture of the Marq; of Montrose. Act
allowing Messengers to execute Summons of Treason. Exoneration in favors of
the Earl of Crawfurd and Lindsay. Act concerning the Magistrates of Kirkwall.
Act for an Imposition at the Bridge of Musleburgh. Commission for visiting the
University of Aberdeen. Act anent the election of the Magistrates of Monross.
Decree Archibald Lamont contra Campbel. Act for an Imposition at the Calsees
of Cowie-month. Reference Mackenzie contra Mackpherson. Decree Earl of Perth
contra Sir George Mouat. Acts in favors of some Ministers for their Stipend.
Act in favors of Col. Weymes, Col. Lesly and James Scot. Letter and Act in
favors of the Lord of Renton. Act for a Bridge at Ramal-well-craig on Clyd.
Act in favors of the Town of Wigtoun concerning a Bridge. Decree Lockhart
contra Bonar. Decree Mackenzie of Redcastle, contra Gilbert Ker and others.
Decree Elizabeth Duchy contra Henry Dennistoun. Act annent the Custom and
Price of imported Tobacco-pipes. Decree Carnaigie contra Carnaigie.
Ratification to the Earl Marshall of the Sheriff-ship of Aberdeen. Protestation
by the Earl of Roxburgh, in name of the Marquess of Huntly, against the same.
Ratification in favors of Mr. Adam Cunningham of Wood-hall, of the
Commissariot of Dumfries. Ratification in favors of the new College of
Aberdeen. Protestation by the Town of Aberdeen against it. Ratification in
favors of Sir John Urqhuart of Cromarty. Rat. Mr. Hary Hay, of the
Commissar-clerkship of Edinburgh. Ratification to John Ramsay of his Office
from the Lord Register. Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Elgin.
Ratification in favors of Thomas Manson. Ratification of the erection of the
Kirk of Kinlosse. Rat. to Mr. Tho Young. of the Commissar-clerkship of Lauder.
Rat. of the erection of the Town of Findorn in a Burgh of Barony. Protestation
Town of Forres against it. Ratification in favors of (...) Wat. Rat. to Mr.
James Nicholson of the Commissariot of Brichen. Ratification to John Newel.
Ratification in favors of Hary Blaickwood. Ratification to Alexander Monro of
the Commissariot of Stirling. Act concerning the Town of Kirkwall. Rat. to the
Town of Edinburgh of the regality of the Cannongate. Rat. to the Town of
Edinburgh of the mark upon the Tun. Rat. Town of Edinb. of the Land called The
Kings work in Leith. Rat. Town of Edinb. of the Customs at the house in the
Mure. Rat. of the Town of Edinburghs new Charter of Confirmation. Act in
favors of Mr James Daes. Commission for trial of the burning the Gates of
Drumlanrig. Act concerning the Earl of Perth and Lord Drummonds losses. Act
concerning Sir Thomas Hamiltoun of Prestoun his Writes. Act rescinding the
pretended forfeiture of the Marquess of Huntly. Act rescinding the pretended
forfeiture of Mackdonald of Largy. Act rescinding the pretended forfeitur of
Sir John Gordoun of Haddo. Act for a contribution for repairing the Harbor of
Peterhead. Act in favors of the Town of Dunce. Act in favors of George
Campbel. Modifications to suffering Ministers out of the vacand Stipends.
Ratification in favors of the Eail of Mar. Ratification in favors of the Town
of Nairn, and Protestation by the Lord of Caddel against it. Ratification in
favors of the Earl of Panmure, and Protestation by the Burgh of Arbroth
against it. Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Innerness, and Protestation
for Redcastle Dunean, and the Burghs of Forteross, Cromarty and Dingwal against
it. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Linlithgow. Ratification to the Earl
of Callander. Ratification to the Town of Musleburgh. Ratification in favors
of Robert Thomson, and Protestation by the Earl of Athol against it.
Ratification in favors of Mr. Thomas Murray. Ratification in favors of Mr.
John Finlay. Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Wigtoun. Act for a weekly
Market and two Fairs yearly in Bouden. Ratification in favors of the Royal
Buroughs. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Weymes. Ratification in
favors of the Burgh of Kirkcaldy. Commissions for trying some persons
suspected of witchcraft. His Majesty's nomination of the Lords of Sess. and
their Admission. Act for the sitting and diets of the Session. The Lord
Registers nomination of the Clerks to the Session, to the registration of
Seasings and admission of Notars, and their admission, conform to their Gifts
from the Lord Register. Act establishing the Sheriffdom of Ross and the bounds
of it. Commissions for the Fishings on the waters of Ugie and Itham. Act to
James Weymes for a new invention of Milnes, etc. Act in favors of the Earl of
Lauderdaile, anent the Lordship and Regality of Musleburgh, and Superiority
thereof. Protestation by the Lord Colintoun, that the said Act should not
prejudge him of his Right to the Teind of the Paroch of Hales. Act in favors
of the Earl of Laudeidaile. Act in favors of the Earl of Lauderdaile,
concerning the Writes and Securities of his Lands. Act concerning the Earl of
Cassils. Act anent the Lights on the May. Act rescinding the pretended
forfeiture of the Lord of Glengairy. Act rescinding the pretended forfeiture
of Macklean of Lochbouy. Act rescinding the pretended forfeiture of Macklean of
Kingerloch. Decree Earl Southesk and Lord Burghly, against the Shire of Fife.
Decree Marquess of Montrose against the Marquess of Argly. Decree Lord of
Dury, contra Duke Hamiltoun. Act in favors of the Burgh of Aberdeen. Act for
two Fairs and a weekly Market in Strathaven. Act in favors of Patrick Dumbar.
Act in favors of the Lord of Edgerstoun. Act for three Fairs to the Town of
Lesly. Act for a weekly Market and two Fairs in the Town of Tullith. Act for a
yearly Fair in Aldeir. Decree Pluscarden contra Mackpherson and others. Act in
favors of the Clan- Gregor. Decree E. Roxburgh con. E. Lothian, anent the
Title of Lord Ker. Decree Earl of Airly against Mackenzie and others. Act for
repairing the Bridge of Sanchar. Act for two fairs and a weekly Market in
Hamiltoun. Act rescinding the pretended forfeiture of David Graham of Gorthy.
Act in favors of Doctor Gleg. Record of the losses of some Noblemen for their
loyalty. Acts for ordering the precedence of the Officers of State. Decree of
forfeiture against Sir Archibald Johnstoun. Act rescinding the pretended
forfeiture of the Lord Heries. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Roxburgh.
Ratification in favors of the University of St. Andrews. Ratification in
favors of the Burgh of Lauder. Ratification in favors of Major Ramsay.
Ratification in favors of the Lord of Hayning. Ratification in favors of
John Stirling of Orther-field. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Leiven.
Ratification in favors of John Campbel of Ardchattan. Ratification in favors
of the Burgh of Linlithgow. Ratification in favors of the old Town of
Aberdeen. Rat. of the mortification of a Hospital in the Paroch of Largo.
Ratification in favors of the Lord of Monymusk. Protestation by the Earl of
Aboyn, in name of the Marquess of Huntly, against it. Ratification in favors
of the Burgh of Dumbartoun. Protestation of the Town of Glasgow against it.
Ratification in favors of the Town of Glasgow. Protestation by the Dukes of
Lennox and Hamiltoun, and the Burghs of Dumbartoun and Renfrew, against it.
Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Forterose, and Protestation by the Town
of Innerness against it. Ratification in favors of the Officers of the Mint.
Protestation for the Burgh of Edinburgh against it. Act for coining of
Copper-money. Act for providing a Stock to the Mint-house. Decreets of
forfeiture against William Dundass of Magdallans, and John Home of Kello. Act
anent the redemption of Infeftments of Fee granted under reversion. Act
rescinding the pretended forfeiture of Robert Spotswood. Act rescinding all
Decreets of forfeiture against Archibald and Mackgilespik Mackdonal of
Colinsay. Act rescinding the forfeiture of Archibald Mackdonal of Sands.
Protestation by the Creditors of the Marquess of Argyl, that they be not
prejudged by any sentence to be given against him. Decree and Sentence of
forfeiture against the Marquess of Argyl. Decree and Sentence of forfeiture
against Mr. James Guthry. Decree and Sentence of forfeiture against William
Govan. Decree L. Cochran, against the Executors of the Earl of Buccleuch. Act
for Two Fairs to the Burgh of Ruthglen. Act for Imposition for upholding a
Bridge on the Water of Fleet. Acts concerning the Town of Edinburgh and their
Annuity out of the House-mails, and the Imposition granted to them of two pence
upon the pint of Ale, etc. Decree Duke of Hamiltoun contra Ardkinlass.
Commission for a Council of Trade. Decree in favors of the E. of Callander
against the E. of Leiven. Act for changing an Highway at Abbotshall. Act in
favors of William Purvess. Decree Sir William Baily of Lamintoun contra Mrs.
Whaley. Act for the ordinar allowance of the Clerk Registers Subscription.
Ratification in favors of the Marquess of Montrose. Act ratifying the union of
the Paroches of Logy-montrose and Perth. Act anent slaying of Fish in forbidden
time. Act in favors of the Earl Cassils, Earl Lothian, Brody, etc. Commission
concerning the Annual-rents due by persons forfeited by the Usurpers. Decree
in favors Mackintosh against Lochyel. Decree Murdoch Mackclean against John
Mackallester, etc. Protestations by the Earl of Arrol, Earl Craufurd and
Lindsay, the General of the Mint, and the Provost of Edinburgh in name of the
Royal Buroughs, against the power of the Justices of Peace. Act in favors of
the Commissars of Edinburgh. Act in favors of the Earl of Middleton and Sir
John Smith. Act in favors of the Earl of Middleton and Sir John Weymes. Act
for two Fairs to the Burgh of Culross. Act for raising a months maintenance,
imposed in the year, one thousand six hundred and fifty one, for the Kings use,
and eighty thousand merks due by the Buroughs. Act in favors of the Earl of
Dundee. Act in favors of the Hat-makers in Edinburgh, and Protestation by the
Town of Edinburgh against it. Decree John Mackdowgal contra Campbel. Decree
of forfeiture against John Swintoun. Act rescinding the pretended forfeiture of
the Earl of Branfurd. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Panmure.
Commission for the Fishings of North and South-esks. Ratification in favors of
the Lord Rollo. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Murray. Ratification of
the Rights and Liberties of the Burgh of Dundee. Ratification in favors of the
Burgh of Kintor. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Tweddal. Ratification
in favors of Alexander Thomson. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Athol.
Ratification to Sir John Gilmor, President of the Session, of his Rights of the
Barrony of Craigmillar. Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Dunkell, and
Protestation by the Town of Perth against it. Two Ratifications to the Earl of
Craufurd and Lindsay. Ratification to the Earl of Lauderdaile of the regality
of Thirlstane and Lordship of Musleburgh. Rat. to the Earl of Lauderdaile of
the gift of Swintouns forfeiture. Ratification in favors of Mr. James
Douglass. Ratification to Sir John Gilmor of his gift of Pension. Ratification
to Sir James Hope of his rights to the Mines. Ratification in favors of the
Lord of Calder. Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Aberdeen. Ratification
in favors of Mr. John Herbertson. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Home.
Ratification in favors of Sir Alexander Home. Ratification in favors of Mr.
John Cunningham. Ratification in favors of James Innes. Ratification in
favors of Sir James Cunningham. Ratification in favors of Sir Robert Murray
of Camron. Ratification in favors of the Earl Marshal.
SECOND SESSION.
ACt for calling in the Bishops to the Parliament. Act for settling the Orders
in the Parliament House. Act concerning Members of Parliament who do not
attend. Recommendation for the Creditors of the late Marquess of Argyl.
Commission for trial of the burning the Gates of Drumlanrig. Modification and
Recommendations for some suffering Ministers. Proclamation for the anniversary
Thanksgiving. Act concerning the Earl of Mortoun and Town of Kirkwall. Act for
yearly Fairs in Corstorphin. Act in favors of Lord Fraser, for his Title of
Lord Fraser. Act betwixt the Lord Burghly and Shire of Fife. Act in favors of
Alexander Bruce, Brother to the E. of Kincarden. Act anent the Chapter of
Argyl, and Glenorchies Protestation against it. Act in favors of the
Inhabitants of Orknay. Act for relief of those who were over-burdened in their
Levies, in anno, 1649. for their concurrence in the Engagement, in anno, 1648.
Act concerning the Ministers of Edinburgh. Act rescinding the pretended
forfeiture against Harthill. Act in favors of the Earl of Perth and others,
and some moneys due to them by the Shire of Perth. Commission for the Creditors
of forfeited persons. Act for keeping the Registers of Session in the
Parliament House. Decree Marquess of Huntly cont. Innes Cromarty, Rob. Foulis,
etc. Decree Lord of Haddo contra Lesly. Act of dissolution of the Earldom of
Orknay. Decree Mackclaud contra Mr. David Drummond, etc. Decree Sir James
Mackdonald contra Mackconochie Inera. Act for changing the Way betwixt the
south Ferry and Cramond. Act in favors of the Town of Edinburgh. Decree
against Archibald Campbel. Decree of forfeiture against Ardkinlass and Ormsay.
Act in favors of the Lord Lion. Act for an Arch-deanry in the Isles. Act in
favors of Sir Robert Fletcher. Decree Mrs. Whaley contra Lamintoun. Act for
changing the Mercat-day in Aberdeen. Act in favors of the Town of St. Andrews.
Act for yearly Fairs to the Earl of Kinghorn, the Lord Tarbet, the Lairds of
Glenorchie and Haddo. Act for two Fairs yearly, and a weekly Market in Dalmeny.
Act in favors of the Earls of Queensberry and Annandail. Decree in favors
of Mr. Thomas Mackenzie. Act for building a Meal-mercat in Dumfries. Act
concerning the Declaration. Act containing exceptions from the Act of
Indemnity, for Fines. Act anent the Children and Posterity of forfeited
Persons. Act in favors of the Countess of Branfurd and Lady Forrester. Act in
favors of the Lord Mackdonald. Act in favors of Lamont. Act freeing Bishops
Vassals from the charge of Commissioners to the Parliament. Commission for
rectifying the Valuations of Aberdeen Shire. Recommendation in favors of John
Mein. Decree Dunolich against Campbel. Suspension of public Debts, with
References in favors of the Lord Burghly and Lord Carden. Ratification in
favors of the Archbishop of St. Andrews. Ratification in favors of the Bishop
of Edinburgh. Ratification in favors of the Bishop of Galloway. Ratification
in favors of the Bishop of Brichen. Ratification in favors of the Bishop of
Argyl. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Craufurd and Lindsay. Two
Ratifications in favors of the Duke of Lenox. Two Ratifications in favors of
the Earl of Athol. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Tullibarden.
Ratification to Sir John Gilmor of his Lands of Craiglockhart. Ratification to
the Lord of Morphie. Ratification to the Lord of Allardice. Ratification to
the Lord of Glenorchie. Two Ratifications to the Lord of Cromarty.
Ratification to John Beaton. Ratification to the Burgh of Linlithgow.
Ratification to Sir John Strachan. Ratification to Paul Symer. Ratification to
the Earl of Annandail. Ratification to the Earl of Newburgh. Ratification to
Sir Robert Innes of Muretoun.
THIRD SESSION.
ACt concerning the constitution and election of the Lords of the Articles.
Warrands for personal Protections against Captions, for some time, to the Lord
Sinclar and others. Commission for trying of the contrivance and carrying on of
the Act of Billeting. Decree and Sentence of forfeiture against Archibald
Johnstoun, some time of Waristoun. Act ratifying the Remission granted to
George Campbel. Act for annexing some Kirks to the Deanery of St. Andrews.
Record of the production of the Duke of Monmouth's Patent to be Duke of
Buccleuch. Act allowing to the Ministers who served before and in the year, one
thousand six hundred and sixty two, the half of the Stipend due for that year.
Ratification in favors of Sir Peter Wedderburn. Act rescinding a former Act
past in the last Session of Parliament, annent some Fees acclaimed as due to
the Lions Office. Act concerning the matter of Billeting, and a Letter directed
to His Majesty thereupon. Act for repairing the Highways at the Town of
Prestoun. Warrant for three Fairs to the Town of Newburgh. Act concerning the
pardoning and restoring the Children of forfeited persons. Angus and Donald
Mackclauds declared Fugitives. An Imposition for repairing and upholding a
Bridge in Clidsdail. Warrant for changing the Fair-day of the Town of
Clackmannan. Reference to His Majesty concerning the Process against Assint.
Act concerning the Imposition laid on English Commodities. Act past in favors
of Printers, Stationers, Silk weavers, etc. Act for changing of the name of
Souter, of late used by some of name of Johnstoun. Act for an Imposition for
repairing the Highway betwixt Corstorphin and the Cow-bridge. Warrant for
changing the Fair-day of the Town of Nairn. Commission concerning the
Annual-rents due by persons forfeited by the Usurpers. Act Rescinding,
Annulling, and for Razing out of the Records, two Acts past in the second
Session of this Parliament; one for excepting persons from public Trust, and
the other for the manner of voting it by Billets. Act in favors of Doctor
Colvil. Act concerning the riding of the Parliament, and the Penalties of such
as shall be absent from it. Decree betwixt Sir Arthur Forbess and the Lord
Cochran. Act in favors of Mr. John Wilkie. Act anent the vacand Stipends in
Argyl and Isles. Act for repairing the Bridge of Tullibody. Act for the
disposal of some vacand Stipends. Act for the Bridge of Dalkeith. Act for
upholding the Bridge of Kippon, and for two Fairs at the Kirk of Kippon. Act
for changing the weekly Market of Pettenweym. Act in favors of John
Halybrunton, concerning his Writes. Act appointing the Fines to be paid in to
any person His Majesty shall appoint. Act in favors of the Captain of
Dunstaffnage and others. Two Fairs yearly to be kept in the Barony of Preston.
The Fairs ganted to the Town of Whitehorn changed in the days and dyets
thereof. Decree the Earl of Roxburgb contra Sir John Weymes. Act for two Fairs
and a weekly Market in Stanehyve. Act concerning the making of Cairds.
Recommendation in favors of the Marquess of Montrose. Warrant for two Fairs
and weekly Market to the Lord of Drum. Warrant for paying of some debt due by
the Shire of Dumfries. An Act and Ratification of the Contract of Marriage
betwixt the Duke and Duchess of Buccleuch, and Warrant for registrating the
Contract. Act concerning the Stipend of the Ministers of the Cannongate. Remit
the Duke of Hamiltoun contra Lady Forrester. Warrant for two Fairs, and for
changing the Mercat-day of the Barony of Skirling. Warrant for a yearly Fair on
the Brae of Athol. Act for a Fair and weekly Market on the Lands of Kinudy. Act
concerning Broomhalls Writes. Act for an Imposition, for repairing and keeping
up the Bridges of Sauchtonhall and Clegorn. Remit to the Session concerning the
eighty thousand merks claimed from the Buroughs. Lamonts Process against
George Campbel remitted to the Session. Recommendation in favors of some
suffering persons. Commission for ordering the prices of Offices, Writes and
Seals. Act suspending execution for public Debts until the next Parliament.
Act concerning the Zetland Company of White-fishing, remitted to the Council.
Act for a yearly Fair in Paisla. Act for a yearly Fair in the Barony of
Caskibon. Remit to the Council anent the Act for Trade. Warrant for changing a
Way near Ledintoun. Act for renewing the Justices of Peace. Ratification in
favors of Sir Andrew Aiton. Ratification in favors of the Lords of the
Session. Ratification in favors of David Souter. Ratification in favors of
Mr. Alexander Foulis of Ratho. Ratification in favors of the Bishop of
Aberdeen. Ratification in favors of Sir Robert Sinclar of Steinstoun.
Ratification in favors of Mr. Robert Sinclar of Longformacur. Ratification in
favors of Thomas Hamiltoun of Bathgate. Ratification in favors of William
Prestoun of Valifield. Ratification in favors of Mr. Robert Prestoun of that
ilk. Ratification in favors of Michael Balfour of Pitmedden. Ratification in
favors of James Campbel and his Son. Ratification in favors of John Malcolm.
Ratification of a mortification in Perth. Ratification in favors of George
Home of Kames. Ratification in favors of the Earls of Craufurd and
Lauderdaile, the Lord Parbroth, the Lairds of Hatton and Ardross, Colonel Lesly
and James Scot, of their Gifts of Mines and Minerals. Ratification in favors
of James Dickson. Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Whitehorn.
Ratification in favors of Sir John and Mr. Alexander Gibson. Ratification in
favors of the Earl of Rothes. Ratification in favors of the Earl of
Dumfermline. Ratification in favors of Sir John Home of Rentoun, Lord Justice
Clerk, and Protestation for Sir Alexander Home and Wedderburne against it.
Ratification in favors of Charles Maitland of Haltoun. Ratification in favors
of William Scot of Ardross. Rat. to the Town of Edinburgh of their right to the
Citadel. Ratification in favors of Captain Lockhart.
FINIS.

