A PROCLAMATION OF PARLIAMENT, For a Solemn National Fast, Edinburgh the
twelfth day of August one thousand six hundred ninety eight.
THe Estates of Parliament, upon Application made to them by the Commissioners
of the General Assembly of this National Church, taking into their
Consideration, that it has pleased the Almighty GOD, to visit this Land with
diverse tokens of his Displeasure, particularly, with great Scarcity and Dearth
these years past; And that all Ranks of Persons are thereby called to humble
themselves by Fasting and Prayer, for averting the Wrath of GOD, and for the
obtaining his Blessing upon the approaching Harvest, and for Preservation of
His Majesty's Royal Person Directing His Councils, and returning Him in Safety
to his Dominions. Therefore His Majesty with AdviceandConsent of the said
Estates of Parliament, does hereby Command and Appoint, that a Day of solemn
Fasting and Humiliation for making Prayers and Supplications to God, for the
Causes and Ends abovementioned, be Religiously and strictly observed by all
persons within this Kingdom, upon the second Lords day of September next, by
public Prayer Preaching and all other Acts of Deep Humiliation and Devotion
suitable to the foresaids Causes and Occasions. And His Majesty with Consent
foresaid ordains these presents to be Printed and Published at the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the head Burghs of the several
Shires and Stewartries within the Kingdom, that none pretend Ignorance: And
ordains Coppies thereof to be dispatched in the usual manner to the Sheriffs of
the several Shires and Stewarts of Stewartries or their Deputs or Clerks to be
by them published at the Market Crosses of their Head Burghs upon Receipt
thereof, and immediately sent to the several Ministers, to the effect that the
same may be intimat, and read in their several Paroch Churches, upon the Lords
day immediately preceding the day above-appointed; And that all Ministers
concerned, may seriously exhort all Persons to a sincere and devote Observance
of the Premises: Certifying such of the Liedges who shall not give due
Obedience, or who shall contemn or neglect the keeping and observing of the
said Day and Duties, that they shall be proceeded against by Fineing, not
exceeding one hundred Pounds Scots. And Warrands and Commands the ^heriffs,
Stewarts of Stewartries, Lords and Baillies of Regalities and their Deputs,
Justices of Peace and Magistrates of Burghs within their several Jurisdictions,
to proceed against the Persons guilty, and to exact the Fines accordingly, to
be applied the one half to the Judge, and the other half to the Poor of the
Paroch: And certifying such Ministers as shall fail in their Duty in not
reading this Proclamation, and observing the Duties therein prescribed, that
they shall be processed before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council: And
hereby requires all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords and Baillies of Regalities and
their Deputes, Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Burghs and their Clerks to make
report to his Majesty's Privy Council, of these Ministers who shall faillie of
their Duty herein.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament by Mr. Alexander Gibson one of
the Clerks of Parliament, as having Commission for that effect from Charles
Earl of Selkirk, etc. Lord Register, Clerk to His Majesty's Parliament,
Council, Register and Rolls.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. School.


