ACT OF PARLIAMENT In Favors of John Adair and Captain Slazer.
At Edinburgh, The Sixteen Day of July, One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninty Five
Years.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD with Consent of the Estates conveened in Parliament,
Considering the great use and necessity of Exact MAPS, and Descriptions of the
Coasts and Ifles of SCOTLAND, and that both Northern and Western Islands: And
likways considering how much the finishing the Ancient and present State of the
said Kingdom, and the most considerable Prospects thereof tend to the
Advantage, Honor and Reputation of SCOTLAND. And seeing, That John Adair
Geographer has finished several MAPS of those Coasts and is willing to make up
what remains: As also, Captain John Slazer has made ane considerable progress
in describing the Ancient and present State of Scotland, and in making up in
Copper Plates the most considerable Prospects of the Kings Castles, Palaces and
several Burghs, and of the considerablest Houses belonging to the Noblemen, and
Gentlemen: And the said John Adair and Captain Slazer having been at great
Expenses in pursuing the said works, and that they must be yet at greated for
the finishing thereof: Therefore HIS MAJESTY with Advice foresaid, does Stature
and Ordain, That Sixteen shilling Scots be Exacted for every Tun of Foreign
Ships which come in to any Harbor or Road within this Kingdom ilk Voyage, and
four Shilling on every Tun of Scots Ships, above twelve Tun Burden once ilk
year for the space of five Years to be applied by the Privy Council for
completing the said MAPS and Prospects of Scotland: And Ordains the same to be
Collected by the Collectors of the Kings Customs, and to be paid in to the
Kings Cash-keeper Termly, to be disposed of as the said Lords of Privy Council
shall find necessary and useful for Reimbursing what is already expended on the
said Works, and what shall be yet requisite for bringing the same to
perfection, with Power to the Lords of Council, to stop the said Imposition in
whole or in part when they find a sufficient Fond collected for perfiting the
said MAPS, Prospects and Descriptions of Scotland. And lastly. HIS MAJESTY with
Advice foresaid, Ordains this Imposition to commense, and to be exacted from
the first of August next, One Thousand Six hundred and Ninty Five Years: And
Declares, that the said Collectors shall be Liable for the said Impositions on
Foreign and Scots Ships as said is, in so far as the same shall not be
punctually exacted by them: And Ordains the said Collectors to deliver in to
the Lords of Privy Council Subscribed Lists of the said Ships with their
respective Butdens as the ground of their Charge, and appoints the same
Execution to pass hereupon at the Cash keepers instance against the said
Collectors, as is usual for HIS MAJESTY'S other Customs. As likewayes all
Execution at the said Collectors instance against these Liable in payment of
this Imposition as is usual for the Kings Customs.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament by George Viscount of Tarbat Lord
Macleod and Castle haven etc. Clark to the Parliament, and to His Majesty's
Councils Registers and Rolls;
Sic Subscribitur Tarbat Cls. Register.


