ACT Anent Drovers.
Edinburgh, September. 3. 1674.
FOrasmuch, as the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, inconsideration of the
frequent Thefts and Robberies committed by Drovers, or other Persons, employed
by them to drive Horses and Kine from the High-lands for sale; did by an Act of
the 9th of March, 1671. ordain the said Drovers to have Certificats and
Passes, that they are Persons of good behavior: and will be answerable to the
Laws; under the hand either of the Sheriff of the Shire, Stewart of the
Stewartry, Lord or Baily of the Regality, or Magistrates of Burghs Royal, or any
two Justices of Peace. Notwithstanding ^^^^eof, the said Drovers, without any
regard of the said Act, trav^^ ^^rough the Country with diverse Vagabounds and
loose Persons (...) ^^^panies, who in their going or returning, commit several
(...) ^ules. Therefore, the said Lords, do hereby ordain the (...) Dro^^^^ to
have Passes from the Sheriffs, and others foresaids, containing ^^eir Na(...)
and all these in their Company, for whom they are to be an(...)able ^^^charging
them to travel without the same: Ordaining hereby all Sheriffs, Stewarts,
Bailies of Regalities, and others in A (...) to apprehend and imprison any
Drovers who shall travel without ^asses, containing the Names of their Servants
and others employed (...) them; Ay and while they find Caution, that these
Persons shall (...) no Theft, Robberies, or other Crimes contrary to the Laws:
And that they shall present them to Justice, as they shall be called. And (...)
these presents to be printed and published: That all Persons concern^g may have
notice thereof.

Al. Gibson Cl. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.


