C R

HONI (...) ^VI MAL Y PENS^

royal blazon or coat of arms
CHARLES, by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To the Provost and Bailyes of Our Burgh of Northbervik.... And to Our Lovits,
(...) Messengers, Our Sheriffs, in that part, conjunctly and severally
specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as Our Convention of Estates, holden at Edinburgh, the fourth of
August, one thousand six hundred and sixty five years, taking to their
consideration, the great blessings this Our ancient Kingdom does enjoy, under
Our Royal Government, being thereby delivered from all the miseries and bondage
that does accompany the Iron Rod of an insolent Usurpation, and possessed of
all the liberties and privileges of a free People, living under Our Royal
Scepter, and that by a full and free exercise of their Religion, with all
suitable encouragements thereunto, by an equal and due administration of
Justice, and peaceable and secure enjoyment of their Laws, Rights and
Properties: Find themselves obliged in conscience, honor and gratitude, to
embrace every occasion, whereby they may witness to the World their just
resentments thereof, and their readiness to contribute their Lives, for the
maintaining and advancing of Our Royal Authority, Power and Greatness; under
the Protection whereof, the Peace, Freedom and Interest of this Our Kingdom,
and Subjects thereof, can only be secured. And understanding, that We are now
engaged in a War, with the Inhabitants of the United Provinces, for the
maintenance of Our Honor, and the Peace and Trade of Our Kingdom; and that
thereby a new opportunity is offered to them, to make good their Professions of
their zeal and affection to Our service: Therefore, the said Estates of Our
Kingdom, in a due sense of Our Honor and Interest, and of their own duty, Do,
with humble, loy^^ and cheerful Hearts, for themselves and in Name of the whole
Kingdom, whom they do represent, make humble and free tender to Us of a
Taxation, which is to be imposed, collected and paid at the five terms
following, viz. For the Barrons and Freeholders parts of the same Taxation,
forty shillings money yearly to be uplifted off every pound Land of old
extent, within this Our Kingdom, pertaining to Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts, Lords, Barrons, Freeholders and Fewers of Our Proper-lands, holden
by them immediately of Us; Excepting the Shires of Lanerk, Air, Renfrew,
Dumbartoun, Bute, Argyle, Wigtoun, Dumfrise, and Peebles, with the Stewartries
and Baileries lying within the same, who by reason of their high Retours, are
to be taxt only to two Merks upon ilk Pound-land of old extent, in manner
mentioned in Our said Act of Convention, and to be paid by them at each one of
the five Terms following, viz. At Whitsunday next to come, 1666. years, as for
the first Term. At Whitsunday, 1667. as for the second. At Whitsunday, 1668. as
for the third. At Whitsunday, 1669. as for the fourth. And at Whitsunday, 1670.
as for the fifth and last Term. And for In-bringing of the fyft Terms payment
of Our Burghs part of the same Taxation, Our other Letters are directed,
charging the Provosts and Bailyes of ilk Burgh, to make payment of the Taxt and
Stent thereof, To our (...) and (...) Cusigne and Counselor (...) of --
Hamilton ^ Our Collector General, appointed by Us for receiving the same, his
Deputes and Officers in his Name, having his Power to receive the same, at the
said Feast and Term of Whitsunday, 1660; under the pain of Rebellion, and
putting of them to Our Horn, etc. For whose relief,

OUR WILL IS, And we charge you straightly and commands, that incontient, these
Our Letters seen, ye pass, and in Our Name and Authority, command and charge,
the Provost, Bailyes and Council of Our said Burgh of (...) to conveen and
elect certain persons, to stent their Neighbor; and the said election being
made, That ye charge the persons elected, to accept the charge upon them; In
setting down of the said Stent upon the Burgesses and Inhabitants of Our said
Burgh, and so to make and set down an Stent Roll thereupon, as effeires, within
twenty four hours after they be charged by you thereto, under the pain of
Rebellion, and putting of them to Our Horn; And if they, failie, to denounce
and escheat, etc. And sicklike, the said Stent Roll being made and set down as
said is, That ye, in Our said Name and Authority, command and charge the
Burgesses, Indwellers and Inhabitants within Our said Burgh, to make payment of
their part of the said Stent to you Our said Provost and Bailyes, conform to
the Taxt Roll to be given out thereupon, within three days next after they be
charged by you thereto, under the pain of Rebellion, and putting of them to Our
Horn. And if they failie, the said three days being bypast, that ye
incontinent thereafter denounce the disobeyers Our Rebels, and put them to Our
Horn, and escheat and in-bring all their moveable Goods to Our use, for their
contemption. And if need be, that ye Our said Provost and Bailyes poynd and
distreinie therefore, as ye shall think most fit, according to Justice.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourth day of August, and of Our
Reign, the seventeenth year, one thousand six hundred and sixty five years. Per
Actum Conventionis. Thomas Hay^^


