At STIRLING the 12. of June 1645.
FOrsameikle as the Committee of Estates Taking to their serious consideration,
The many practices and endeavors used against this Kingdom, by some unnatural
Contrymen and Traitors, joined with Irish Rebels within the same; And by the
Armies that are preparing in Ireland and England for subversion of Religion,
did by their Act of the 28. of March last, give warning thereof to the Shires,
That they might have their Forces in readiness upon advertisement. And the
Committee now finding the dangers that threaten this Kingdom, still to
continue, and a pressing necessity of the raising of some Forces for
strengthening the Armies, and enabling them to encounter their Enemies abroad.
And being confident, That all who are zealous of Religion, the honor of their
Native Country, and their own safety, will heartily concur herein: And
rather send out their own Forces to meet the Enemy, nor lie still while the
Country be overrun, and themselves, and their Families destroyed at their own
Doors; Have therefore thought fit, Statute and Ordained, That the whole Shires
underwritten, and Burrows within the same, and Committees of War thereof,
Shall presently leavy and raise the number of men following, and have them in
readiness, furnished with eight days provision: And that they deliver them to
these Officers that shall come from the General, to receive them for making up
of their Regiments, betwixt and the 4. of July next, under the pains contained
in the Acts made concerning the former Leavies, and farther to be esteemed and
censured as betrayers of the Kingdom and Cause in hand. The numbers to be as
follows: The Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk, 1000 Foot, whereof 400. for
recruting Colonel Scots Regiment: 400. for the Earl of Lowthians Regiment in
England: And 200. for the Master of Cranstouns Regiment: The Sheriffdom of
Berwick, 600. Foot, for recruting Wedderburne and Aitouns Regiments, according
to the numbers they formerly had out of that Shire: The Sheriffdom of
Hadintoun, 600. Foot for the Lord Humbies Regiment, except the Master of
Yesters proportion, which he is still to have out of these Bounds he had his
first Leavy: The Sheriffdom of Edinburgh principal, and Baillierie of
Lauderdaile, 600. Foot for the Earl of Lauderdailes Regiment, except the
Master of Yesters proportion out of these Bounds he formerly had: The Town of
Edinburgh, 600. Foot for Colonel Raes Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Peebles,
200. Foot for the Master of Yesters Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Lithgow, 250.
for the Earl of Callenders Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Dumfreis, 600. for
Kalheids Regiment, except the Master of Yesters proportion thereof: The
Sheriffdoms of Wigtoun and Kirkcudbright, except the Earl of Cassils division
thereof, 600. Foot for the Vicount of Kenmure, and Colonel Stuarts Regiment
equally betwixt them: The Sheriffdom of Air and Renfrew, 1000. Foot, whereof
600. out of Kyle and Cunninghame, for the Lord Chancellours Regiment, 200. out
of Renfrew for Glencairnes Regiment, and 200 out of Carrick for Cassils
Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Lanerick, 750. for the General of Artilleries
Regiment: The Sheriffdom of Fyffe, 1200. Foot, for the Earl of Crawfurd,
Dumfermlings, and Elchoes Regiments, according to their former proportions,
allowing what Forces they have already put out by public Warrant beside the
former Leavies: And for the Leavies of the remanent Shires, Recommends to the
Committee of Estates in the North to give orders therefore. And the Committee
of Estates do farther recommend to the whole Gentlemen and Heretors of the
Kingdom, To have their whole Forces Horse and Foot in readiness, to march to
the Borders upon advertisement: And to be the more careful in putting out this
Leavy, that the Public are content for ease of the Shire, to bear the Burden
of furnishing Arms to their Forces.

Arch. Primerose.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1645.


