ACT Of the Committee of Estates anent the EXCISE. EDINBVRGH, 16th. October,
1660.
THE Committee of Estates having appointed the Excise to be raised of all
Merchandise and others mentioned in the Table underwritten, since the twenty
third of August last, to the fifteen day of November next to come: And
considering that by reason of the discontinuance of raising and leavying of the
said Excise the rates and proportions afterspecified may not be so well known
to such as are liable in payment thereof: Therefore they have ordained, Likeas,
by these Presents, They ordain the Table of Exciseable goods and Excise due and
payable therefore, as it is contained in the Act of Parliament, One thousand
six hundred forty seven, to be forthwith Reprinted, that none may pretend
ignorance of what is due and payable for the Merchandise and others therein
contained, as after follows: To wit, For ilk pynt of Foreign Imported Beer,
to be paid by the Importer thereof, twelve pennis Scots money: For ilk pynt of
French wine, sixteen pennies: For ilk pynt of Spanish-wine, Rhenish-wine,
Canarie and Malvasie, two shilling eight pennies: For ilk pynt of Aquavitae or
Strong waters Imported, six shillings eight pennies, without prejudice of the
Confiscation by the Kings Thesaurer and his Deputes, according to the former
Acts: For ilk pund of Tobacco, to be paid be the Importer thereof, two
shillings: For ilk Ox, Cow or Bull slain, of sixteen pounds price or above, to
be paid by the slayer thereof, twenty shillings: For ilk Ox, Cow, or Bull
slain, under sixteen pounds price, to be paid by the slayer thereof, thirteen
shillings four pennies: For ilk Ox, Cow or Bull Exported, to be paid by the
Exporter thereof, thirty shillings: For ilk Sheep slain, to be paid by the
flayer thereof, two shillings: For ilk Sheep Exported, to be paid be the
Exporter thereof six shillings: For ilk Stirk of eight pounds price or above
slain, to be paid by the slayer thereof, six shillings eight pennies: For ilk
Stirk under that price slain, to be paid by the slayer thereof, four shillings:
For ilk Stirk Exported, to be paid by the Exporter thereof, ten shillings: For
ilk Calf or Goat slain, to be paid by the slayer, two shillings: For ilk Swine,
six shillings, For ilk Lamb or Kid slain, to be paid by the slayer, twelve
pennies: For ilk Lamb or Kid Exported, to be paid by the Exporter thereof, two
shillings. For the Imported Merchand Wares afterspecified: viz. All Cloth,
Baises, Freeses, Carseys, Sarges, and all other Cloth and Stuff made of Wool;
As also, for all sorts of Silk-Stuffs, Worset and Hair-Stuffs, or Mixt-Stuffs
of Linning and Woolen, Hats, and Hat-Bands of all sorts, Stockings of Silk,
Worset or Thread, Silk-Ribbans, ^^a^ling, Lace, and Pasments of Silk, Silver,
Gold, Worset or Thread hanks and pirns of Gold and Silver, Camerick, Lawn,
Holland cloth and Stuffs, and all kind of made Work whatsoever Imported for
sale: For ilk twenty shilling worth thereof, twelve pennies, to be paid by the
Merchand Importer: For ilk twelve pounds worth of Coals Exported in Scots or
English Bottoms, to be paid by the Coal. Master, ten shillings: For ilk twelve
pounds worth of Coals Exported in Foreign Bottoms, to be paid by the Coal
Master, fifteen shillings: For all Yairn Exported, either Linning or Woollen,
for ilk twenty shilling worth thereof, to be paid by the Exporter, two
shillings: For all rough Hides Exported, for ilk twenty shilling worth thereof,
to be paid by the Exporter, two shillings: For Sheepskins Exported, for ilk
twenty shilling worth thereof, to be paid by the Exporter, twelve pennies: For
all Wool Exported, for ilk twenty shillings worth thereof, to be paid by the
Exporter two shillings, without prejudice of the Confiscation by the Thesaurer
and his Deputes, conform to the former Acts of Parliament. Item, For ilk twenty
shillings worth of Goats Skins Exported, twelve pennies: And for ilk twenty
shilling worth of Buck and Deers Skins Exported, two shillings. And the said
Committee ordains their Presents to continue and endure till the fifteen day of
November next to come, and ay and while the same be Discharged by the said
Committee, or Estates of Parliament. As also, Requires and Commands all
Sheriffs, Magistrates of Burghs and other Officers to be assisting, for causing
ready payment to be made of the said Excise to such Persons as shall have
Warrant for Collecting the same. And ordains the samine to be Printed and
Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that
none pretend ignorance hereof.

Extracted forth of the Books of the said Committee, by me JO. HAY Cler. Com.


