EDINBURGH, the twenty day of June, 1650
THE Estates of Parliament now presently conveened in this fist session of this
second triennal Parliament, Taking to their consideration the dangers which
threatens Religion and this Kingdom, In respect both of intestine and foreign
enemies, and being oblidged in discharge of the trust committed to ^em To take
care of the safety of the Kingdom, As they resolve for ^^em selves to use all
lawful means and peaceable ways to prevent these ^^ngers, So they have
thought fit to keep up such ane number of Forces Foot as may prevent the same;
And for maintaining of the forces now Foot; To prorogate and continue the
monthly maintenance as fol^^ws, Therefore the said Estates of Parliament
prorogates the said month^^ maintenance, And ordaines the same to endure for
the month of July, ^^xt to come in Anno, 1650. And in the same terms and
proportion, (...) was set down in the Act of the sixth of August, 1649 And that
for the ^^mpleat month aforesaid, And ordains the same to be collected by the
^ector deputes, having power and warrant from John Denholme, as they (...)
formerly from him, by warrant from Sir James Stewart then General ^^^missary,
With the same allowance to the Collectors, the Cleck of Colle^^^^n, collector
deputs and others having charge; they having order from John ^^nholme, and with
the said haill provisions, conditions and orders contained (...) the former act
both for Shires and Burghs, And to be paid according to ^^e valuations of the
respective Shires approven by the Parliament, con^^^m to their act of the
Twenty seventh of July last, Except allennerly the ^^erifdom of Wigtown, and
Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, which Shires of ^^gtown, and Stewartry of
Kirkcudbright, The said Estates ordains to pay (...)maintenance of the said
month of July, according to the valuation ^^ly given in by them viz. the
valuatian of the said Shyre of Wigtown (...)ending to 68721. pounds 5. s. money
Scots, and the said Stwartry of Kirk^^^dbright, 115875. pounds 19 s. money
foresaid, According to the which ^^^uation the said Shyre of Wigtown and
Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, are by (...) of the eleventh of June instant,
ordained to pay the maintenance of (...) said month of July, and all public
dues, and sicklike continually ^^^reafter ay and while the Parliament shall
think fit To take ane farther ^^urse concerning the valuations of the whole
Kingdom.

A. Iohnstoun, Cler. Regist.


