At EDINBURGH the 14. day of APRIL 1645.
FOrsameikle as upon the first of this instant, about eight a clock in the
morning, Certain Cleansers in Kelso being cleansing and house at the upper end
of that Town, The firetook hold of that house, and by occasion thereof, the
whole houses of that Town from that down-ward, on all sides and corners of the
streets (which is in effect the whole body of the Town) Together with the whole
Goods belonging to the Inhabitants thereof; With Barn-yards, Girnels,
Merchant-Buithes, and every thing else combustible within that Bounds, is
totally bumt with such an unquenchable fire, as the like hes not been heard of;
So as no fewer than Two thousand souls, are not only bereft of all place of
Residence, but of means for maintenance; and their loss is not within the
value of Five hundredth thousand pound Scots. And whereas this Town hes been a
very considerable Member of the Body of this Kingdom, in all public and common
Burdens, wherein the Inhabitants thereof have these late years of trouble,
Given singular testimony of their affection to the good of Religion and
Country, by undertakings beyond their Neighbors, and the visitation hes
proceeded from Gods wise Providence: It becomes the whole Body of this Kingdom,
as tied, not only by the Bonds of Native and Civil society, but also by
Christian duty, To contribute cheerfully and liberally of their means,
according to their power, for the supply of the necessities of that poor
distressed people, and for the raising and standing of the said Town, and not
to suffer the same to be cut off from the Body wherein it hes been so
profitable a Member: And so much the rather, That the Hand of GOD lies yet
heavy upon that poor people, by the contagious Plague of Pestilence, whereby
they are so restrained, That they may not without endangering the whole
Kingdom, travel abroad to labor, or use any means or industry either for
maintaining of their lives or repairing of their ruined Fortunes. For which
purpose the Lords and others of the Committee of Estates of Parliament, Hes
recommended, and by the tunor hereof, recommends the said Town, and the
deplorable condition thereof to the Christian and Charitable consideration of
all Persons of whatsoever rank, quality, or degree in Kirk or State, within
this Kingdom; and to the whole Judicatories Civil and Ecclesiastic within the
same: Requesting and desiring them and every ane of them, to extend such
proportion of their Liberality and Charity to the said Town, as the importance
and necessity of the cause requires. And the said Lords and others of the
Committee hes committed, and by the tenor hereof, commits, the collection of
this Contribution and Benevolence, during the tine that it shall please GOD to
continue the visitation within the said Town of Kelso; To ane of the Ministers
within every several Presbytery of this Kingdom, to be nominate by the
Moderator and Remanent Brethren of that Presbytery: Which Minister to be
nominate in every several Presbytery, is hereby seriously and earnestly
desired, To use all possible care and diligence in collecting and ingathering
of the said Christian Contribution, Charity, and Benevolence, within the Bounds
of the said Presbytery: And to make a Book, and set down therein the sums
contributed by every several Paroch in cumulo, or by any particular person.
To^^^^er with the names of the persons Contributers, where the Contribution
shall be received from any person severally; And to end the said Contributions
with the Book containing the said sums and names To John Leirmont Writer to
the Signet, and Mr. Andro Ker Advocate, or either of them in Edinburgh, To be
delivered by them to such as shall be appointed by the Earl of Roxbugh, or by
the Minister and Kirk-Session of Kelso to receive the samin. And for the more
speedy and effectual ingathering of the said Contribution, The said Lords and
others of the Committee hes committed, and by the tenor hereof, Commits the
collection of th^s Contribution and Benevolence, so far as shall not be
collected by the said Ministers in this exigent, to any two or more persons to
be nominate and entrusted by the Minister and Elders of the said Kirk-Session
of Kelso, and to be authorized by their power and factorie for that effect.
Giving, granting, and committing to them and every two or more of them, as they
conjoined shall be apprinted by the said Minister and Kirk-Session of Kelso;
Full power, warrant, and commission, To deal and travel with the whole
Noblemen, Barons, and Gentlemen, Synods, Presbyteries, and Sessions of Kirks,
Burrows, Towns, and Villages, and with all his Majesty's Subjects, as well to
Burgh as Land, anent the Benevolence and Christian Contribution to be given for
supply of the said Burgh: Which Commissioners shall have a Book delivered to
them by the Clerk of the Council, whereof every Leaf shall be marked by him:
Wherein the Committee requests all and every person who shall contribute to
this work, To insert, or cause be insert the sums they shall contribute in this
Errand. And if any by sloth or negligence shall omit to do the samin, That the
Commissioners themselves insert the said Contributions, and report their
diligence in the premises, with their Books, containing the ^ames of the whole
persons Contributers, and sums contributed to the Committee upon the first of
January next, To the intent they may know what sums shall be collected, and how
the same shall be employed. And the Commissioners shall give their great and
solemn Oaths at the reporting of their diligence and Books foresaids, That
they have not omitted nor left out of the said Books ane of the persons names
Contributers, nor sums, nor no part thereof contributed by them; Requesting
hereby the Moderaton of Synods and Presbyteries, To give direction to the
Ministers of the several Proches, To stir up their Flocks and Parochiners, to
put to their helping hands in this so important and necessary a Business. And
this Commission shall endure for the space of one year after the date hereof.

Arch. Primerose.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1645.


