ACTS For Settling the Orders in the Parliament House.
IT IS ORDERED, that all Members of Parliament do precisely keep the Dyets of
Parliament, under the Pains following, Viz. Each Nobleman for each Dyets
Absence, without Leave or relevant Excuse, twelve Pounds Scots, each Baron six
Pounds, and each Burgess three Pounds, and that they pay the just half of their
Penalties, for each Diet they come in after the Calling of the Rolls of
Parliament. That none be admitted to stayin Parliament but the ordinary Members
of Parliament, viz. The Noblemen, Officers of State, Commissioners for Shires
and Burrows, and the Clerk-Registers Deputs, and Servants employed by him to
serve in the House: And besides these, Admittance is allowed to the eldest
Sons, and appearand Heirs-male of Noblemen, to the Senators of the College of
Justice, to the Knight Marischal, to the Ushers, to the Lion, to the King's
Agent, and one Servant allowed to the Lord Chancellor, two to the Constable,
two to the Marischal, and one to the Advocat.

And it is Ordered, that none presume to sit upon the Benches, except the
Nobility: That the Officers of State sit upon the Steps of the Throne, that the
Commissioners for Shires and Burrows sit on the Furms appointed for them, that
Noblemens eldest Sons and Heirs aforesaid, sit on the lower Bench of the
Throne, that the Lords of Session sit at a Table, which is to stand betwixt the
Throne and the Commissioners from Burrows: And that none presume to sit at the
Clerks Table, save the Clerk-Register, and the Deputs and Servants to be
employed by him, in the Service of the House, nor to stand betwixt the Throne
and the Clerks Table: That any other Persons allowed Access, shall sit at the
far end of the Seats appointed for the Commissioners from Shires and Burrows.

And it is Appointed, that the Knight Marischal and Macers be careful, as they
will be Answerable upon their Peril, that these Orders be obeyed: And that they
exact Twenty Shillings Sterling for each Person, who shall be found within the
House, and are not Members, nor admitted as aforesaid, besides their Removal
and Imprisonment at the second Fault, and their Penalties to be collected by
the Macers, and depositat in the Hands of (...) to be disposed upon by the
Order of the House. That after the House is set, none offer to stand, or walk,
or keep private Discourses one with another. That none go forth, except in Cases
of Necessity, and that they forthwith return, nor any Persons suffered to stay
at the Committees, save Members of Parliament. That in all Debates of the
House, no Person offer to interrupt another, nor to direct his Discourse to
any, but to my Lord Chancellor, or President. That all reflections be forborne,
and that no man offer at one Diet, and in one Business, to speak oftener than
twice at most, except in such Cases, where Leave shall be first asked and given
by His Majesty or Commissioner. That no Member of Parliament leave the House,
until the Meeting be by His Majesty or His Commissioner dissolved. As also by
another Act, of the date the twenty eight of April 1685, the Clerks of Council,
the Clerk of the Justice-Court, and Sheriff-deputs of Edinburgh Shire, are
allowed to stay in the House, the time of the sitting of the Parliament.

And sicklike, by an Act of the date, the twenty first of April 1693, the
Commander in chief of the Forces, the Captain of the Guard, the Judge of the
Admirality, the Keeper of the Signet under the Lord Secretary, and the King's
Chaplain are also allowed to stay in the House, during the sitting of the
Parliament.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT Cls. Regist.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1695.


