At Edinburgh the 9th. of November, 1648.
THE Committee of Estates taking into consideration that diverse persons in the
Kingdom, especially in the Shires of the West, Tennents to disaffected
Heretors and Masters, have given no small Testimony of their affection to the
Covenant by their late hearty concurrence in Arms, and seasonable assistance
for the Interests of Religion, King and Kingdoms, who for their dislike of and
opposition to the late unlawful Engagement against England, have suffered
great losses, And therefore deserves all favor and ease that may be shown
them in public burdens, And the Committee being sensible of their affections
to the cause, and sufferings for the same, and for their further Encouragement
to remain constant therein. Does therefore Ordain, that all quarterings and
public burdens imposed upon Malignant Heretors and Masters since the first of
September last, for their Malignancie, and accession to the late unlawful
Engagement, or for their guiltiness of the faults contained in the Acts of the
22. of Sept. and fourth of October last, shall lie upon the said Masters and
Heretors alla nerly, and be charged upon their Estates, And the said
well-affected Tenants to be free thereof: And where the quarterings and public
burdens have lain upon, and been exacted from the Tennents, The Committee
Ordains them to have compensation and allowance of their sufferings by
retention of so much of their yearly duties in their own hand as will satisfy
them, And if the said Heretors and Masters shall refuse to allow them any
retention, That upon complaint, the Committees of the several respective
Shires where they dwell, And in case of their refusal or neglect, the
Committee of Estates shall Ordain them to have retention, in manner and for the
causes aforesaid, And the Masters through whose default the Tenants are
necessitate to complain, shall be liable in payment, of the like sumes which
they should allow to the Tenants to be employed by the Committees of the
several Shires where they dwell for the use of the public, by and attor the
retention to be allowed to the said Tenants. And Ordains their presents to be
published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and to
be Printed.

THO. HENDERSON.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty
1648.


