ACT Repealing all ACTS of PARLIAMENT OR COMMITTEE, Made for the late unlawful
Engagement, and ratifying the PROTESTATION AND OPPOSITION against the same.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty,
1649.

ACT Repealing all Acts of Parliament or Committee, made for the late unlawful
Engagement, and ratifying the Protestation, and opposition against the same.
At Edinburgh the sixteen day of January the year of God One thousand six
hundred forty nine years.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened in this second Session of the
second Trienniall Parliament by virtue of an Act of the Committee of Estates,
who had Power and Authority from the last Parliament for conveening of the
Parliament, Taking to their most serious considerations (after so great
judgments and deliverances on Gods part, and after so Solemn an Acknowledgment
and Covenant renewed on their part) the Acts of the last Session of Parliament,
Beginning the second of March, and ending the tenth of June 1648. And of the
Committee of Estates before September last, and the proceeding of the Forces
raised by them in the first and second Levy, and these brought out of Ireland;
and of the Committees of War in the several Shires appointed by them with the
grounds, reasons, and pretenses therefore whither contained in the Kings
concessions at the Isle of Wight, or set down in their Declarations, as in the
fourth and seventh, sixteen, twenty six, twenty seven Acts of the last
Parliament, and in their Declaration to the Kingdom of England, emitted by the
Committee of Estates the twenty eight day of June last when their Army went
into England, in establishing, carrying on, and prosecuting the late Engagement
against the Kingdom of England, and raising the first and second Leavie, in
pressing the same at home by unlawful Bands and cruel Plunderings; and in
rejecting all Warnings, Petitions, Remonstrances from the Kirk Judicatories,
and from Shires at home; and all Remonstrances and offers of Treaty made from
the Parliament of England by their Commissioners, in refusing to declare the
Kings Concessions at the I Will of VVight unsatisfactory to them, in trampling
under foot the Liberties of the Church at home, in invading of the Kingdom of
England, and surprising of their Towns, and marching through their Counties,
and associating with the Malignant party there; in returning after their defeat
to Scotland, to renew their oppression in this Kingdom, and invasion of
England; and to that end in the raising of new Forces, sending Commissions to
the classed Incendiaries of this Kingdom (who by standing Acts of Parliament
were debarred from all Trust, for their joining in the late Rebellion) and in
many other ways, acts, and deeds cuting their design at home and abroad. And
considering the several offers and desires made by the Commissioners of the
Kingdom of England for continuing the Peace and Union, and the many earnest and
humble Petitions from several Shires, and the most part of Provincial Synods
and Presbyteries; and the just and necessary Desires, Remonstrances and
Declarations of the Commissioners of the Church to the Parliament and
Committee, with their unsatisfactory Answer thereunto; and the Papers past
betwixt the late General Assembly and the Committee, and the Dissent and
Protestations entered in the Parliament by a great number of every Estate, and
that of such as has been most instrumental and constant in this Cause since
the beginning. And withal, taking to their serious consideration the manifold
solid reasons against the Engagement, expressed in the Remonstrances of the
Commission of the Kirk given in to the Parliament; And of the unanimous
Declaration of the late General Assembly, and the reply of their Commissioners,
demonstrating from the Word of God the unlawfulness of the said Engagement,
and evidencing the many Breaches of Covenant and Treaties of Peace, the many
wrongs done to the Liberties of the Church, and oppressions of the people of
God, and many other unlawful ingrediences in the matter, manner, nature and
effect of that Engagement: And therefore denouncing Gods judgment against it,
And warning the people to do their duty for the Cause of God and to the
Covenant against all lets and impediments. All which was seconded so speedily
and immediately by Gods own hand, stirring up the hearts of his conscientious
People to the resolution of opposing so great a defection from the Cause and
Covenant. And by his performing the Counsel of his Messengers and confirming
the words of his servants in the defeat of that Army, and their overthrow in
England with their associats in England: As also in scattering of the remainder
of that force returned unto Scotland, and joined with these who at home were
enslaving this Kingdom, and in devesting them with their own consent by Treaty
(with so little blood) of all outward force and exercise of State-power, until
the determination of this Parliament. And the Estates pondering seriously the
great necessity, and manifold reasons pressing the Protesters in Parliament
with the assistance of the constant Covenanters throughout the Land, To make
that opposition in Arms, so trysted, directed and countenanced by Gods own
good hand upon them as is more expressed in the Declaration of the Committee of
Estates of the seventh of October last, and Information of the Kirk, published
to the view of the world upon the ninth day of October last.

Therefore, and for many other reasons and considerations, convincing them in
their consciences, That the foresaid proceedings of the late Parliament and
Committee in the appointing and prosecuting that Engagement against England,
and in the oppressing of the Church in her Liberties, and of the good People
throughout the Land in their persons and estates: And which is most of all, in
their consciences by force and violence, causing the people to sin, after they
had declared by their Petitions the same was against the light of their
consciences, were unlawful before God, and against his Word, were breaches of
the Solemn League and Covenant (which being an Oath to GOD so necessary is not
alterable by any humane Authority) and of the Treaties betwixt the Kingdoms,
and under pretense of doing for Religion, for the King, for the Kingdoms, did
really tend (as does now more appear) to the ruining of Religion, undoing of
the King, and dividing of the Kingdoms; And which in few months has more
wasted the substance of this Kingdom, and especially of the well-affected, then
all our former troubles; And has led out a forced multitude to slaughter or
slavery, with so great reproach and disgrace to the Nation, and occasioned a
powerful Army to enter the bowels of this Kingdom in put suit of their enemies
who had invaded England, to the great endangering of this Kingdom, and so
laying the Land open, and making it liable to the guilt and misery of an
unjust and offensive War, drawing down Gods judgments, and exposing us and our
posterity to invasion from our neighbor Kingdom, if God in his providence had
not remedied the same. As the Estates of Parliament have made before God a
Solemn Acknowledgement of the public sins and breaches of the Covenant, and a
Solemn Engagement to all the duties therein contained, Namely these which do in
a more special way relate unto the dangers of these times, that Gods judgment
drawn upon the Nation by such a sinful course by a prevalent party of the
representative body may be removed, and the like in time coming prevented, So
also that all pretense of Law at home for prosecuting of these courses; And
that all pretense of quarrel from abroad against this Nation for the same may
be taken away; And to testify the firm resolution and earnest desire of this
Kingdom to preserve inviolably the Union betwixt the Kingdoms. The Estates
foresaids, do hereby find and declare the Kings Concessions at the Isle of
VVight, and late Declarations emitted by the Parliament and Committee, to be
unsatisfactory to them, and destructive to the Cause and Covenant: And does
disclaim, condemn, annull, repeal, and declare to be void and of noneffect the
Acts after mentioned, as being in themselves from the beginning unjust and
unlawful, and contrary to the Word of GOD, and Solemn League and Covenant, and
large Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms, The fourth Act entitled, Act anent the
resolutions of Parliament, concerning the breaches of the Covenant and Treaties
betwixt the Kingdoms of Scotland and England, and demands for reparation
thereof. The sixth Act, entitled, Act for putting of the Kingdom in a posture
of War for defense, and constituting the Committees of War of the several
Shires. The seventh Act, entitled, A Declaration of the Parliament of
Scotland, to all his Majesty's good Subjects of this Kingdom, concerning their
resolutions for Religion, King, and Kingdoms in pursuing the Ends of the
Covenant. The eight Act, entitled, Desires of the Parliament of Scotland, to
the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England. The ninth Act, entitled,
Act anent the Levies of horse and foot to be put out by the Shires and Burghs,
and the List of the Colonels, with their numbers. The eleventh Act, entitled,
Act in favors of the out-reikers of Horse and Foot. The sixteenth Act,
entitled, A Letter from the Parliament of Scotland, to the several
Presbyteries within the Kingdom. The eighteenth Act, entitled, Act anent the
Oath to be taken by the Committees of War in the several Shires. The
nineteenth Act, entitled, Act and Ordinance concerning the Garrisons within
the Kingdom, for provision of the Forces thereof, and adding of two months
Maintenance to the former five: The twenty Act, entitled, Act for raising of
Troops. The twenty third Act, entitled, Act Ordaining all Ministers to exhort
their people to obedience to the Laws of the Kingdom, and assuring these
Ministers of their stipends, during their lifetimes. The twenty fourth Act,
entitled, Act Ordaining the whole Members of Parliament, Noblemen, Barons,
Burgesses, and all other Subjects and inhabitants of the Kingdom to subscribe
this Act for defense of the lawfulness of this Parliament, and obedience to
the Acts thereof. The twenty sixth Act, entitled, Act and Declaration of
Parliament, and Answers to the supplications from Synods and Presbyteries. The
twenty seventh Act, entitled, Act and Declaration of Parliament, in Answer to
the Petitions presented to them from some Committees of War of Shires. And all
other Acts, or parts, or clauses of any other Act of the last Parliament
published, and grounds and pretenses thereof, in so far as they import, the
approbation, pursuance, or furtherance of the said late unlawful Engagement.
And this general clause, is declared to be also sufficient for repealing and
annulling of them, as if the tenor thereof were herein insert, wherewith the
Estates dispense.

Siclike the Estates annuls, rescinds and repeals among the imprinted Acts, the
Commission granted to the close Committee, concerning Berwick and Carlisle,
against which diverse Members of Parliament entered their dissent and
Protestation, the Commissions granted to Duke Hamilton, and other Officers of
the Army; The Ordinance in favors of these that protested in Fyfe, and
Hadingtoun; The Ordinance for giving thanks to these, who in the several
Shires presented Petitions, or writ Letters for encouraging the Parliament to
go on in the Engagement: The Act anent the College of Justice, and their
Colonel. The Act anent the Lord Cochrane, Lord Garthland, and Alexander
Crawfurd their going to Ireland: The Act ratifying the Acts of Committee made
in the recess of Parliament; and all other unprinted Acts, or clauses of
unprinted Acts, grounds, and pretenses thereof, in so far as they import the
approbation, pursuance or furtherance of the said late unlawful Engagement.
And this general clause is declared to be als sufficient for repealing, and
annulling them as if the tenours thereof were herein insert.

In like manner the Estates of Parliament condemns, annuls and rescinds all the
Acts of the Committee of Estates, contained in the table subjoyned to this Act,
And all other Acts or parts, or clauses of any other Acts of the said Committee
of Estates, grounds and pretenses thereof, in so far as they import the
approbation, pursuance, or furtherance of the said late unlawful Engagement;
and this general clause is declared to be also sufficient for repealing and
annulling of them as if the tenor thereof were herein insert, wherewith the
said Estates dispense.

And in like manner, do annull, condemn, and repeal all Acts made, and deeds
done by the former Parliament and Committee of Estates, contrary to the
Liberties of the Kirk, or any ways encroaching upon the same, in particular
these which follow; First, their emitting of Declarations, containing things
highly concerning Religion, not only without advice and consent of the GENERAL
ASSEMBLY and their Commissioners, but contrary to their express Desires,
Supplications, Remonstrances and Declarations, declaring the same to be
dangerous and destructive thereto, especially the restoring of the King to
honor, freedom and safety, without sufficient security first had from him for
securing of Religion, as is more fully expressed in the Desires and
Representation of the Commissioners of the General Assembly: Secondly, the
putting of an unsound gloss in the close of the Declaration of the Parliament
upon the Covenant, and Acts of the General Assembly, in these things that
concern our duties to the King, as is clearly holden forth in the
Representation of the Commission of the Assembly. Thirdly, The making provision
for securing of the stipends of such Ministers as shall be censured for their
concurring in, or preaching for the unlawful Engagement against England:
Fourthly, their gross misrepresenting of the proceeding of the Commission of
the General Assembly by the Parliaments Letter of May the eleventh, to the
several Presbyteries, and endeavoring to incense them against the Commission
of the General Assembly, and to pre-possess with prejudices the Commissioners
to the following Assembly. Fifthly, the taking upon them in the Act and
Declaration of the Parliament, commonly called the Band, to judge and determine
such things without advise of the Kirk, wherein the Assemblies of the Kirk have
a special interest of an antecedent judgment, as who are enemies to Religion,
and who not, and what are the most fit and necessary remedies for preserving of
the same. Sixthly, their depriving of the General Assembly and their
Commissioners of the liberty of Printing, by putting an inhibition to the
contrary upon Printers, under the pain of death, against several Acts of
Parliament, Declaring and confirming the Kirks Liberty and Privilege of
Printing: And siclike disclaims and condemns their impious usurpation in
calling in the printed Copies of the Causes of a solemn universal Fast and
Humiliation, indicted by the Commissioners of the Assembly, and inhibiting of
the Printer to give any out of his hands, thereby intending to interrupt the
observing of the Fast by the want of information of the Reasons and Causes
thereof; And also annuls, and repeals, disclaims and condemns, all and sundry
other Acts made, and deeds done by the said Parliament or Committee of Estates,
or by their Authority that may infer any prejudice to Religion, or the power,
privileges and Liberties of the Kirk which we are bound by so many strong
Bands and Solemn obligations to maintain: And siclike annuls and rescinds all
Acts of Committees of Shires, or Burghs Royal, or of Regality, Barony Courts,
or other Judicatories whatsoever made in pursuance of that Engagement; And
Ordains all the subscribed Copies of the Band, condemned by the General
Assembly, to be brought in to the parliament or Committee of Estates, to be
disposed of as they shall think fittest: And all other Acts, grounds, and
pretenses thereof, in so far as they import the furtherance, or pursuance of
the said late unlawful Engagement. Likeas the Estates of Parliament, upon the
manifold abovementioned grounds more fully related in the Declaration of the
Committee of Estates, and Information of the Kirk, being persuaded that the
Protestations of the Members made in Parliament, and their Opposition since by
defensive Arms for the safety of the Covenant, Cause, and themselves, from
ruin against so great a defection, carried on with so great oppression; and
their proceedings in the Treaty at Stirling, divesting the ingagers with their
own consent, of power and force which they had in their hands; and their
assurance given by the Act of the sixth of October to the Kingdom of England for
debarring of the Authors and Abettors of that Engagement from places of public
Trust or Power without their consent, which was demanded by their forces as the
least satisfaction and security before their removal and their proceedings by
public Acts in the pursuance of these two Treaties, to seclude those who had
concurred in the Engagement from power in Judicatories, Armies, or places of
Trust until the determination of a Parliament were lawful in themselves, and
necessary for them according to the condition of affairs. Therefore the Estates
of Parliament did allow, approve of and confirm the Dissent and Protestation
made in Parliament by many Faithful Members of each Estate, whereof the tenor
follows. Whereas the draught of a Declaration has been read concerning the
breaches of the Covenant in matters of Religion, and the Demands to be made for
remedy and reparation thereof, the dangers to Religion, and the duties
whereunto we are obliged by Covenant, for Reformation and Uniformity in
Religion, and the security to be had for the establishing the same: upon which
grounds also a War is principally founded: And whereas we have earnestly
desired and insisted, that there may be no proceeding to any determination
concerning the said Declaration, before the Commission of the General Assembly
be first consulted therein: We do hereby enter our Dissent from proceeding to
the determination of matters so highly concerning Religion, without the advice
and concurrence of the Kirk, as a preparative of most dangerous consequence to
Religion, and destructive to the Liberties of the Church; as contrary to the
National and Solemn League and Covenant, and to the known Laws and constant
practice of this Kingdom. And we do Protest, that we may not be included in any
such Vote or Resolution, but may be free of all the guiltiness, confusions,
distractions, and evils whatsoever that may follow thereupon to Religion, the
King, this Kirk and Kingdom, and the union betwixt the Kingdoms.

And siclike allows the rising of such Shires and others who joined in Arms
for opposing of the said engagement, and rescuing the Kingdom from the
oppression of the forces under the command of the Earl of Crawford, Earl of
Lanerk, and George Monro, and their proceedings in pursuance thereof, and also
ratifies the late Treaty at Stirling and Edinburgh, upon the twenty sixth and
twenty seventh of September last; and siclike allows the Treaty and Engagement
to the Kingdom of England by their answers of the sixth of October last, for
debarring of the ingagers from public trust in this Kingdom without their
consent. Siclike the two Acts of Committee of the twenty second of September,
and fourth of October; and the Act of the ninth of November, all made for
debarring of these who concurred in the late Engagement, from the exercise of
public places or trust until the determination of this Parliament. Likewise
the Declaration of the Committee of Estates concerning their proceedings in
opposition to the late unlawful Engagement against England of the date the
seventh of October last, published to the world; and the Act of the said
Committee for making of the public acknowledgement, and renewing of the
Covenant, and the Act of the Committee of the fourteen of October last: All
which the Estates of Parliment as is aforesaid do allow, confirm, and ratify
in all the Heads, Clauses, and Articles thereof. And this general clause is
declared to be als sufficient for ratifiing and confirming the said Acts and
Clauses thereof, as if the Tenors of the same were here particularly insert;
Wherewith the Estates foresaids do hereby dispense. Follows the list of the
Acts of the Committee of Estates for advancing the Engagement. Act for
displacing of such of the Committee of War as would not take the Oath. Act
for sending the forty thousand pounds to Ireland. Warrant to quarter upon the
deficients in the unlawful Engagement. Letters to several Shires for
advancing the Levy. Letters, Commissions, Desires, and Answers for bringing
the forces out of Ireland. Warand for imprisoning the Magistrates and Counsel
of Glasgow, for their deficiencie in the Levy. The Oath to be taken by the
Committee for maintaining the proceedings of Parliament. Approbation of the
Earl of Callendar and General Major Middleton for their base, cruel and
unnatural proceedings, against the honest and conscientious people that met at
Machline Moore for their own defense, whilk was not done without the baseness
and treachery of some. Protection to the Captain of Clanrainold, and Maclene
excommunicate bloody Rebels. Act for stopping of printing; notwithstanding the
Kirks liberty. Letter to the army in Ireland to proceed against these that
refused to obey their Orders for the Engagement, as enemies to Religion, King,
and Kingdoms. Warrant to Duke Hammilton to Garrison the houses of the best
affected in the West. Warrant to the Marquess of Argyle to deliver Lamond.
Commission to the Earl of Crawford to command the forces that come out of
Ireland. Act for drawing Dittayes against the Ministers, and for continuation
of their process until a new citation. Commission to Sir Robert Douglas of
Blakerstone (a prime classed malignant, for having hand in the rebellion of
James Grahame) to uplift the fines of the honest men in the West, for being at
Mauchlin Moore. Commission to young Maclene who had been in the Rebellion to be
a Collonell. Declaration anent the Lord Inchiquin and his army. Warrant to Duke
Hammilton to invade England. The Declaration of the Committee of Estates anent
the necessity of invading of England. Act for repaying moneys advanced for the
Engagement. Letters to Lambert to join with Duke Hammiltons army. Warrant to
Mr. George Halyburton to borrow money in England upon public faith unlimited.
Letters to the King and Parliament of England showing their intentions in the
Engagement, lent with Mr. George Halyburton. Act taking of Sir John Drummonds
restraint. Commission to Lauderdale to secure Berwick. Several answers of the
Committee of Estates, and messages to the General Assembly most
unsatisfactory. Protection of Patrick Leslie from the censure of the General
Assembly. Imprisonment of Greenhead and Colonel Scot. Approbation of the Lord
Cochrane, and Lord of Garthlands proceedings in Ireland. Act allowing of
twenty thousand pounds to Lord Cochrane, and Lord of Garthland. Act for the
new Levy of one thousand five hundred horse, under pretext of ane Guard to the
Prince. Commission to Macintosch for ane Garrison to the house of Innerlochie.
Warrant to levy Troops for advancing the Engagement. Commission to Duke
Hammilton to be Governor of Berwick, and the Earl of Calendar of Carlisle.
Precept to General Major Robert Monroe for ane thousand pound sterling.
Warrant to the Commissioners to deliver victual to Seaforth, Machlene, and
Macdonald, who were in the former rebellion for entertaining of their force.
Warrant to discharge the Garrisons of Dowart Moy, and others; whereof the
Marquess of Argyle had the keeping. Commission to Macconnel to depute another
in his place, himself and all his friends being in the Rebellion. Macconnel
discharged of his former Rebellion, and employed without finding caution. Act
pardoning Macleane, notwithstanding of the Acts of the third and eight of
February 1648. whereby he is declared to have forfeited their pardon. Charge to
the Marquis of Argyle to deliver Lamond under the pain of Rebellion, and his
escheat to fall. Warrant for removing all out of the Abbey. Act approving the
cashiering of Sir Dugald Campbell of Auchinbreck, and William Campbell from
their places in Argyles Regiment, and placing others therein, for their not
concurrence in the Engagement. Act discharging the Presbytery of Linlithgow
from the exercise of their calling, in admitting a Minister, and ordaining the
Kirk doors to be locked. Letters relating to the Engagement. Letter for raising
of the Atholl men, who had been in the Rebellion. William Gordon of Monymore,
an active and bloody Instrument in the Rebellion, set at liberty freely.
Warrant for publishing the Committees Observations. Princes Declaration and
Information of public proceedings. Earl of Airlie discharged of seventeen
months Maintenance. The Petition from the Committee of Stirling Shire, anent
their Ministers committed. New Commissions and Warrants, Earl of Seaforth,
Makgleud, Sir James Macdonell, contrary to standing Acts of Parliament.
Commission to the Earl of Lanerk to be General. Several Letters expressing
they would not live, and out live that Engagement. Lauderdails instructions, to
bring Foreign Forces out of France, Holland, or elsewhere. Letters to the
Cardinal of France. Blank Commission to Lauderdail. Warrant to engage the
Public faith of the Kingdom for money abroad, and for Arms and Ammunition. A
strict union with Holland, for assisting the prosecution of the Engagement.
Promise to restore the Queen. Landerdails instruction to the Prince. Letters to
the Queen, inviting her to return and to interpose. Letters to the Prince of
Orange and States of Holland, requiring Foreign assistance. Commission to the
Earl of Seaforth, Sir John Mackenzie, and all other Commissions for levying
Forces. Act made at Stirling and other places, for bringing out all betwixt
sixty and sixteen for their assistance. Act for giving to Sir Hary Gib two
thousand pound Stirling. Commission for Innercauld his Regiment and watch. Act
for assignments upon several Shires, for Maintenance and Excise, and specially
Air and Galloway, and all others in that kind. Disposition of the forfaultry
of Midkeltoun. Warrants to admit to the Committees of War these that were in
the first and second Classes. Act for repaying money that was disburst for the
Engagement. Assignation of the Excise to Captain Maine and Master Mauld. All
others Acts done by these Members of the Committtee, who had taken the Oath
before or after the first of September at Stirling, or any where else, in
prosecuting of the said Engagement, and opposition to the Covenanted Forces,
risen in defensive Arms. And Ordains the same presently to be published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and thereafter to be printed.

William Scot, Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

