royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Against the owning of the Late King James, and Commanding
Public Prayers to be made for King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh April 13. 1689.
THE Estates of this Kingdom of Scotland having Proclaimed and Declared William
and Mary, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, to be King and Queen
of Scotland; They have thought fit by Public Proclamation, to Certify the
Leiges, that none presume to own or acknowledge the Late King James the
Seventh, for their King, nor obey, accept, or assist any Commissions or Orders,
that may be Emitted by him, or any way to Correspond with him; and that none
presume upon their highest Peril, by Word, Writing, in Sermons, or any other
manner of Way, to Impugn, or Disown the Royal Authority of William and Mary,
King and Queen of Scotland; But that all the Leiges render their Dutiful
Obedience to Their Majesty's; And that none presume to Misconstrue the
Proceeding of the Estates, or to create Jealousies, or Misapprehensions of the
Meeting of the Government; but that all the Ministers of the Gospel, within the
Kingdom Publicly Pray for King William and Queen Mary, as King and Queen of
this Realm: And the Estates do Require the Ministers within the City of
Edinburgh, under the pain of being deprived and losing their Benefices, to Read
this Proclamation publicly from their Pulpits, upon Sunday next, being the
14th. Instant, at the end of their Forenoons Sermon; And the Ministers on this
side of the River of Tay, to Read the same upon Sunday thereafter, the 21st.
Instant; And those be-north Tay, upon the 28th. Instant, under the pain
aforesaid: Discharging thereby the Proclamation of the Council, Dated the 16th.
of September 1686. to be Read hereafter in Churches. And the Estates do
Prohibit and Discharge, any Injury to be offered by any Person whatsoever, to
any Minister of the Gospel, either in Churches or Meeting Houses, who are
presently in the Possession and Exercise of their Ministry therein, they
behaving themselves as becomes, under the present Government: And Ordains this
Proclamation to be Published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, with all
ordinary Solemnities, that none may pretend Ignorance. Extracted forth of the
Records of the Meeting of the Estates, by me,

To. Mckenie, Cls.

Licensed according to Order.


