EDINBVRGH, 4. June 1650.
THE Estates of Parliament now presently conveenned, Taking into consideration
the necessary duty lying upon them to use their best endeavors for securing of
Religion and the peace of the Kingdom, And in order thereunto, having weighed
how dangerous it would be to the good of Religion, the peace and security of
the Kingdom, And to his Majesty's honor and happiness, That the prime
instruments of the late and former defections and divisions in this Kingdom
respective, should remain within the same without warrant of the Estates of
Parliament, And that any who are comprehended within the first and second
Classes of the Acts made at St. Andros in the year 1646, and at Edinburgh 1649
respective, should be permitted to have access to his Majesty's Person, or to
come within the verge of the Court, They do Statute and Ordain, that William
Duke of Hammiltoun, George Earl of Seaforth, John Earl of Lauderdail, William
Earl of Dumfries, John Earl of Traquair, James Earl of Calendar, Patrick Earl
of Forth, John Lord Sinclair, James Lord Carnegie, (...) Lord Napier, James
Lord ^ithan, Sr. George Monro Sr. John Charters of Hempsfield, Sr. James
Lockhart of Lie, Thomas Daliel of Binnes, and Colonel John Cochrane prime
instruments of the last and former detections and devisions within this
Kingdom, shall not return to this Kingdom, nor stay therein without the resse
warrant of the Estates of Parliament, And that all such as are guilty of the
crimes and faults contained in the first and second ^^^^sies of the Acts of
Parliament made in the said years 1646 and 1649 respective, be debarred from
having access to his Majesty's on, and shall forbear to come within the verge
of the Court without the express warrant of the Estates of Parliament, And in
case of the said persons abovenamed, or comprehended in the first and second
Classes of the Acts aforesaid, shall transgress herein, or ^n the contrary of
this present Act, in either of the said cases respective above specified, that
the persons shall be imprisoned, and that ^^^ording to their several ranks and
conditions, they shall be liable to the penalties mentioned in the tenth Act of
this second session his triennall Parliament of the date the 26 of January
1649. And shall be censurable as disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom, And
^^^ceeded against as the Parliament or their Committee shall think fit, And it
is hereby specially provided and declared that nothing in contained shall be
prejudicial to, or derogate from any process intended or to be intended
against any of the foresaids persons any former contravention preceding the
date hereof, And the said Estates of Parliament Ordains Sheriffs of Shires,
Stewards, BaiMagistrates of Burghs, Committees of War, and Commanders of
Troops or Companies, to put the same Act to execution, imprison the persons of
the contraveeners hereof where ever they be found, And that none pretend
ignorance, Ordains the said to be printed and to be openly proclaimed at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, Which is declared als sufficient as if it were
proned at the Merket Crosses of the head Burghs of this Kingdom.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
Anno Dom. 1650.


