ACT, ^estoring the Presbyterian Ministers who were thrust from their Churches
since the first of January, 1661.
Edinburgh, the twenty fifth day of April 1690 years.
FOrasmuch as by an Act of this present Parliament, relative to, and in
prosecution of the Claim of Right, Prelacy and the Superiority of Church
Officers above Presbyters, is Abolished, and that many Ministers of the
Presbyterian persuasion, since the first of ^anuary One thousand six hundred
and sixty one, have been de^^ived of their Churches, or Banished for not
conforming to ^relacy, and not complying with the Courses of the time;
Therefore Their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent of the estates of
Parliament, Ordain and Appoint, That all those ^resbyterian Ministers yet
alive, who were thrust from their ^harges, since the first day of January One
thousand six hun^^ed and sixty one, or Banished for not conforming to Prelacy,
and not complying with the Courses of the time, have forth^ith free access to
their Churches, that they may presently ex^^cise the Ministry in these
Paroches, without any new Call ^^ereto, and allows them to bruik and enjoy the
Benefices and ^tipends thereunto belonging, and that for the whole Cropped One
thousand six hundred eighty and nine, and immediat^^ to enter to the Churches
and Manses, where the Chur^^es are Vacant: and where they are not Vacant, then
their ^^try thereto is Declared to be to the half of the Benefice and ^tipend,
due and payable at Michalmals last, for the half year ^mmediatly preceding
betwixt Whitsunday and Michalmass; De^^aring that the present Incumbent shall
have right to the other ^^lf of the Stipend and Benefice, payable for the
Whitsunday ^^st by past; And to the effect that these Ministers may meet ^ith
no stop or hinderanre in entering immediately to their Char^^s, the present
Incumbents in such Churches, are hereby Ap^^inted upon Intimation hereof, to
desist from their Mini^^^y in these Paroches, and to remove themselves from the
^anses and Gleibs thereunto belonging, betwixt and Whit^^nday next to come,
that the Presbyterian Ministers formerly ^^t out, may enter peaceably thereto;
and Appoints the Pri^^ Council to see this Act put to Execution.

Extracted forth of (...) Records of Parliament, by me ^. MAY (...). Reg.
William and Queen Mary.
(...)nburgh, Printed by the H^^^ of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Parliament,
1690.


