royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT of Parliament, For a Solemn Fast.
Edinburgh, May 16. 1695.
THE Estates of Parliament taking to their Consideration, the great Important
War, wherein His Majesty continues to be necessarly Engaged, for Defense of
the True Reformed Religion, the Safety of this and His other Kingdoms, and the
Recovery and Establishment of the Rights, Liberties and Peace of the rest of
Christendom, so much at this time Invaded and Disturbed with the continual
Hazards, to which His Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby exposed; As likeways
the Dangers which do thence threaten this Kingdom, and all that can be dear to
His Majesty's good Subjects therein, either as Christians, or Men, both by
Invasion from abroad, and the froward Disaffection and restless Machinations of
evil and unnatural Contrymen at home; And how much it is the Duty and
Interest of all good Men, for these Causes, and on this Occasion, to implore
the Mercy, Favor and Blessing of Almighty GOD, for Preservation of His
Majesty's Royal Person, and Directing, Assisting and Prospering Him in all His
Counsels and Undertakings: And more especially, that GOD would countenance and
assist Him in the present War, give Him Success to His Arms by Sea and Land,
and defeat all the Designs, Counsels and Practices of His secret and open
Enemies, both at home and abroad, for the Preservation of the True Protestant
Religion, securing the Safety of these Kingdoms, and the happy restoring the
Peace of Europe. And the Synod of Lothian and Tweeddale, now met at Edinburgh,
having made Application to my Lord Commissioner for this end: Therefore His
Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, does hereby
Command and Appoint, That the second Thursday of June next, being the
thirteenth day of the said Month, be set apart as a day of Solemn Fasting and
Humiliation, for making Prayers and Supplications to GOD, for the ends
abovementioned; and that the said day be Religiously and Strictly Observed by
all Persons within this Kingdom: And Ordains all Ministers to read these
presents publicly in their Congregations a Sunday at least before the said
second Thursday of June next, appointed for keeping the said Fast; Certifying
such of the Leidges who shall not give due Obedience, or shall Contemn or
Neglect the Keeping and Observing the said Day and Duties, that they shall be
proceeded against by Fyning, not exceeding One hundred Pounds Scots Money: And
Warrands and Commands the Sheriffs, Stewarts of Stewartries, Lords and Baillies
of Regalities, and their Deputs, Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Burghs within
their several Jurisdictions, to proceed against the Persons guilty, and exact
the Fines accordingly, to be applied, the one half to the Judge, and the other
half to the Poor of the Paroch: And certifying such Ministers as shall fail in
their Duty, in not Reading this Proclamation, and observing the duties therein
prescribed, they shall be Processed before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council. And hereby requires all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords and Baillies of
Regalities, and their Deputs, Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Burghs, and
their Clerks, to make Report to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, of
these Ministers who shall fail of their Duty herein. And Ordains these Presents
to be Printed, and Published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and hail
remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, that none may pretend Ignorance: And that
Copies be dispatched in the usual manner, to the Sheriffs and Stewarts,
Baillies of Regalities, or their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs; as likewise
to all Ministers, that they may seriously exhort all Persons to a sincere and
devout Observance of the Premises.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT, Cls. Registri.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1695.


