At Edinburgh October 11. 1648.
WHereas the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England have been pleased
to offer assistance to us for suppressing the common Enemy, we have thought fit
that some Regiments of their Horses do stay in this Kingdom for a short time,
And whereas diverse abuses has been lately committed, and for preventing of
which abuses that may be done to any of the Soldiers under the Command of
Major Genesis Lambert, We do Command and Ordain the Committees of War of the
Shires where the said Forces are now or shall be hereafter quartered to take
special care that the Country people do readily afford them the best quarter
and accommodation they can during their stay, And we do further declare that
whosoever within this Kingdom shall do any wrongs or injuries in taking away
their Horses or Arms, or shall offer violence to their persons, that Order
shall be given to the Troops that are kept up for the service of the Kingdom,
that their whole moveable goods shall be confiscated and themselves imprisoned
or punished with death according as they shall deserve, and if any of the
Country people receive wrong or injury from any of the English Forces, they
are to address themselves and complain to this Committee, or Major Genesis
Lambert, from whom they shall receive due satisfaction. Ordains their presents
to be published a(...) (...)he Market Cross of Edinburgh, Haddingtoune,
Dunbar, Linlithgow, Peebles, that none pretend Ignorance.

Mr. THO. HENDERSON

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
16^^


