ACT Anent Deficients of the Levy, one Thousand, six Hundred and Ninety five.
Edinburgh, 5th January, 1697.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council considering, That several of the
Shires within this Kingdom have not furnished their Proportions of the Levy
appointed by the Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred and ninety five;
Have therefore appointed, and do hereby order and appoint the Sheriff of the
Shires deficient as said is, and as they shall be advertised by Sir Patrick
Hume His Majesty's Solicitor, by transmitting to them an Extract of this Act,
with the particular Number of their deficient Men thereto subjoyned, to conveen
the Commissioners of Supply within the same; and signify to them, that it is
their Lordships perremptory Command, that they take an effectual Course, for
Furnishing and putting out their respective Numbers of Men wanting, with all
Diligence: And that tho it may happen, that in some of these Shires, different
Methods have been taken from these prescribed by the said Act of Parliament;
yet they must still make good their Number: And if in the method of the said
Act. Lots have been drawn for persons out of the Kingdom, which ought not to
have been done, these liable in the respective Shires where the same was done,
must supply them, if not returned: And the said Commissioners are to deliver
their Deficient Men to the Officers appointed, to receive them at the
Head-Burgh of their Shire upon the respective days following, viz. For the
Shires on this side of Tay, the twenty fifth of January instant, and for the
Shires be north Tay, the tenth day of February thereafter. And farther, The said
Sheriff and Commissioners are to certify such as are liable to put out the said
deficient Men within their Bounds, that if they failzie to do the same, the
Lords of Council will decern them to pay the Sum of two hundred Merks for each
Man deficient to the said Officers that should have received them; and that
Letters upon a simple Charge of six days, at the instance of His Majesty's
Solicitor, shall be direct against them for that effect. And the Sheriffs and
Commissioners of Supply, in all Shires are hereby appointed to inquire
diligently anent all Deserters, and whether any of the Men put forth by them be
returned, and reset within their Bounds; and for encouragement of such as shall
apprehend these Deserters, to be brought up with the said Deficients, at the
foresaid Day and Place; The Sheriffs are to give advertisement, that the
Officers will be careful to pay them Liberally. As likewise they are to certify
on the other hand, that all guilty of Reset, shall be prosecute for the paying
of the hundred pounds, and other pains contained in the Proclamation of Council
against Resetters, of the date the fourth of April, one thousand six hundred
ninety four with all Rigor. And the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, do
hereby Require and Command the foresaids Sheriffs to give an particular and
exact Account of their Diligence in the Premises to the Clerks of Council,
betwixt and the twenty fifth day of February next to come, that further course
may be taken therein, as their Lordships shall judge needful for His Majesty's
Service; Certifying the said Sheriffs, that if they failzie in the Premises,
either as to due Returns, or exact Diligence, they shall be Called and
Conveened before the Privy Council, to be punished according to their Demerit.

And ordains these presents to be Printed, and to be transmitted bhe Solicitor
to the several shires.

Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1697.


