A DISSENTER from those (by some) called Foxonian Quakers, having lately put
forth a Paper for the Exaltation of the LORD's Christ, etc. which a certain
Person having read over again and again, and hoping it may be profitable to
many, has caused it to be reprinted as following, that so it may be more
universally spread abroad for its further Service.
A Tender SALVTATION of endeared LOVE, to all that sincerely believe in, and
unfeignedly love our Blessed LORD, and for ever to be admired SAVIOVR and
adored Advocate JESUS CHRIST. With something of Christian Advice and seasonable
Counsel, for the encouraging of the Faithful, to be Noble in their confessing
to, and owning of their glorious Captain; and to contend earnestly for the
Faith which was once delivered to the Saints.
Mat. 10.32. Whosoever (said Christ) shall confess me before Men, him will I
confess before my Father which is in Heaven. (But) whosoever shall be ashamed
of me, and of my Words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes
in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels.

Mark. 8.38.
Dear Friends;
IN a deep Sense of the unspeakable Love of GOD, through his dear Son Christ
JESUS, are you often brought before me, and in the lasting Fellowship and
glorious Gospel of Life and Salvation, are you right dear and near unto me, and
in true Humility of Soul there is many times a weighty Concern and Exercise
upon my Spirit, that we may travel on all together, being steadfast in the
precious Faith of our Elect and Holy Head, glorious Advocate, and everliving
High Priest, who is for ever worthy to be dearly owned and reverently confessed
unto, as being the Author of Eternal Salvation unto all them that do obey him.

And indeed, He is most worthy of all our Love, who with a victorious Patience
endured from Sinners, those wicked Scoffings and reproachful Revilings; His
most pure Head being crowned with a Crown of Thorns, His undefiled Hands and
Feet nailed to the Cross, His lovely Face spit upon, and His precious Side
pierced through with a Spear, bearing our Sins in His own Body, died the most
reproachful and shameful Death His Enemies could either imagine or inflict; and
so He that was wholly without Sin, and was, and is the immaculate Lamb of GOD,
was made a Curse for our Sins, according as it is written, Cursed is every one
that hangs upon a Tree, Gal. 3.13. It is He who has redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons, which is by Faith
in Him who laid down His precious Life for us: For, as said the Holy Apostle,
Ye are all the Children of GOD by Faith in Christ Jesus: And the Scripture has
concluded all under Sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be
given to them that believe.

And surely (we may well say with the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 53.4, 5.) He
has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows; He was wounded for our
Transgressions; He was bruised for our Iniquities, the Chastisement of our
Peace was upon Him, and with His Stripes we are healed.

The living Commemoration of these things, in the opening Power and Spirit of
GOD in the Soul, is truly very precious and comfortable; and many times arises,
in a daily renewed Sense thereof, a holy Admiration of the unspeakable Height
and Depth of the Riches of the Love of GOD in Christ Jesus, which Saints and
Angels will admire to all Eternity.

And, dear Friends, it is my earnest Desire, that we may be an inward retired
People to the Measure and Manifestation of the Spirit, the Apostle spoke of in
his Day, which is given to all to profit with; and to keep in the daily
Exercise of it, and so grow in the Grace of GOD, and in the experimental
Knowledge of our blessed LORD and Savior Jesus Christ, that our Understandings
may be opened more and more, savingly to know and understand the great
Mysteries of GOD and of CHRIST, as they are revealed and discovered by the
Divine Light of the glorious Son of Righteousness, the great Enlightner of all
Mankind: For it is in His Light we shall see more Light; and by a diligent
keeping to it, and following of it, it will lead to the glorious Sun which is
in Heaven, even as certainly as a Beam or Ray of the Natural Sun in the
Firmament, if it be followed by the Light of the outward Eye, will lead
naturally to the body of the Sun it self, which as it cannot be confined to any
one particular Place here upon Earth, but universally sends forth its Inthences
of Light and Heat to all the World, so cannot this be contained in any one
place. And as none can have a true discerning where the outward Sun is, but by
his own Light, so none can have any true spiritual Sight of the Celestial Sun,
but by a Divine Beam and Ray of his own Light, that shines into the Souls of
all, and flows from that rich Fullness which is in the Man Christ, the one only
Mediator betwixt GOD and Men, who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right Hand
of God in the glorified Nature of Man; Angels, Authorities and Powers being
made subject unto Him, and by His Death and Sufferings, and shedding of His
precious Blood without the Gates of Jerusalem, together with His most perfect
Obedience, Patience and Resignation to the Will of GOD, and by His glorious
Resurrection, Ascension and Intercession, He has both procured, and also does
dispense all Good unto us, and all Blessings spiritual and temporal, that we
enjoy: It is for His sake, and through and by HIM, that we receive them, and
are conveyed to us; who is our great High Priest that is passed into the
Heavens, which is touched with the feeling of our Infirmities. And this Man, (
viz. Jesus the Son of GOD) because He continues for ever, Heb. 7.24, 25. has
an unchangeable Priesthood, wherefore He is able also to save us to the
uttermost that come to GOD by Him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession
for us.

Therefore as He is the true and proper Object of Faith, He is most worthy to
be owned and confessed unto; and it is those that confess Him before Men, that
He will confess before His Father which is in Heaven. This was spoke by Him
concerning those that should confess to Him as he was and is an undivided
Christ, and reverently own Him as he was, and as He now is, and as He is to
come, and daily do express their sincere Love toward Him, by keeping of His
Commandments, which He does injoin all his Disciples to, according to that
Saying of His, If ye love me, keep my Commandments; and ye are my Disciples, if
ye do whatsoever I command you. Telling them also, how they should be enabled
to keep them, by the Comparison He made of the Branches abiding in the Vine, or
else they could not bear Fruit; No more (said he) can you, unless ye abide in
me. And it is plain as by many Scripture-Testimonies, so also the true
Believers in Christ Jesus have Experience, that all Evangelical Fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness are brought forth by the Virtue and Power of Christ,
and that whatever Obedience any may bring forth [by the Light within] or be
found in from a bare Conviction of Sin, which is from GOD's Love and first
Dispensation to all Mankind, and is a Preparative for the second and more
glorious Ministration, yet it is all but legal, and as from the Servant's
State; and it is said, The Servant abides not in the House for ever, but the
Son.

Wherefore (said the Apostle, Gal. 3.24, 25.) the Law was our Schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. But after that Faith
is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. And the Law of old, although it
was truly observed and strictly kept, yet we know that made not the Comers
thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, but the bringing in of a
better Hope did; which Hope is Christ, which was to the Ancients as an Anchor,
(Heb. 6.19.) most sure and steadfast, and was the Ground and Foundation of the
Faith of all the Generations of the Just, from rightcous Abel unto this very
Day; and it was in this Faith Abel offered to GOD a more excellent Sacrifice
than Cain. And when the Author to the Hebrews had mentioned many of the
Worthies of old, which Time would fail to mention; but, says he, They all died
in the Faith, not having received the Promises, but having seen them afar off,
and were persuaded of them, and embraced them with Joy, (Heb. 11.13.) as
faithful Abraham did, who by the Eye of Faith saw the Day of the fulfilling of
them, for it is said, that he rejoiced to see Christ's Day, and he saw it, and
was glad. And says he, ver. 39, 40 All these having obtained a good Report
through Faith, received not the Promise; GOD having (observe) provided or
foreseen some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect. Which is to be witnessed in and by our blessed Redeemer Christ Jesus,
and through the powerful Operations or his Divine Spirit in the Hearts of all
sincere Believers.

And as it was of absolute Necessity, and of great Benefit and Comfort to all
GOD's People, that were before our Blessed Lord Jesus was born of the Virgin
Mary, to look forward to his outward Coming, Death and Sufferings for the
Remission of Sins, Peace and Reconciliation, etc. So is it likewise now no less
necessary for all true Believers to look back with the Eye of Faith, unto the
blessed Day that the Lord Jesus Christ offered up himself freely once for all,
as a most acceptable and all-sufficient Sacrifice of Atonement unto GOD for our
Sins, and Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, by which his Wrath was
appeased, and divine Justice satissied. For it was by his own Blood He obtained
eternal Redemption, and having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross, by
Him to reconcile all things unto Himself, whether they be things in Heaven, or
things in Earth; by which Blood He has made us night to GOD who sometimes were
afar off; and by the Merit and Virtue of which precious Blood of the immaculate
Lamb, even that which was shed without the Gates of Jerusalem, are we both
justified and sanctified, as we come to have a living Faith therein; and as the
divine Virtue and Efficacy thereof is opened and applied to us by the Holy
Spirit: For GOD commended his Love toward us, in that while we were yet
Sinners, Christ died for us: Much more then being now justified by his Blood,
we shall be saved from Wrath by HIM, Romans 5.8, 9. Wherefore Jesus also, that he
might sanctify the People with his own Blood, suffered without the Gate, etc.
Heb. 13.12.

It is indeed a Mercy greatly to be prized, that we have the Knowledge of these
things, as they are left upon Record in the Holy Scriptures, which were written
for our Instruction and Learning; the Spirit of the LORD also in our Hearts
evidencing to the Verity thereof, by which they are made very useful and
comfortable to us in our serious diligent reading of them, which ought to be
preferred before all other Books whatsoever.

Let us therefore, as with one Mouth, bless the LORD, and say with holy David,
(Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3.) O my Soul, bless the LORD, and all that is within me bless
His Holy Name: Bless the LORD, O my Soul, and forget not all His Benefits, who
forgiveth all thine Iniquities, who heals all thy Diseases, etc. Let us
remember all His Mercies, and tender Dealings, and His manifold renewed Tokens
of His Love and fresh Visitations, by which we have been encouraged to travel
on toward that everlasting City of eternal Repose, where all Tears shall be
wiped away, and all Sighing shall come to an end; there the Wicked cease from
troubling, and there the Weary be at Rest, Job. 3.17. We have cause to say with
his Servant of old, THOU have granted me Life and Favor, and thy Visitation
has preserved my Spirit, Job 10.12.

We are under great Obligations to walk with all Circumspection before Him,
adorning the glorious Gospel of our Blessed LORD and Savior Jesus Christ, in
Holiness of Life and Conversation, that so none may have any just Occasion to
speak evilly of us; but if they will through Prejudice or Malice, let it be for
JESUS sake, who said, Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of Evil of you falsely for my sake; rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you.

And as He has graciously promised, He will also faithfully perform it, to all
His true Followers, who have no sinister or by-end in professing Him, but
sincerely love Him, and have Him in their Hearts, and that in all Respects, in
all his Offices, as He is King, Priest and Prophet in Heaven, without us, as
well as he is within us; owns both his outward and inward Appearance; they dare
not divide the one from the other, nor set the one in opposition to the other,
which GOD in His insinite Wisdom has so necessarily joined together as the
great Means of the Salvation of Mankind.

And upon Christ, thus undivided, even upon the same Jesus of Nazareth, whom
the Jews slew, and hanged on a Tree, and whom GOD by His mighty Power raised up
again the third Day; even Him whom GOD has exalted with His right Hand, to be
a Prince and Savior for to give Repentance unto Israel, and Forgiveness of
Sins; I say, on this Jesus, who was crucisied for us, and is now sat on the
right Hand of the Majesty on high in the Heavens, do they depend (as all
sincere-hearted Christians do) for Life and Salvation, and not upon any Works
of Righteousness, or even any Obedience, or the best Service we are enabled to
do by the gracious Assistance of his Spirit; as He said (by way of Caution,
lest they might imagine that they merited Life by their Service, or be too much
self-conceited, etc.) Luke 17.10. When (...) shall have done all those things
which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable Servants, we have done that
which was our Duty to do. So here is all Vain-boasting excluded, and by all our
Performances, there is to be no claiming a Right or Title, by way of Merit, to
the Kingdom of God; for it is by Grace (free unmerited Grace) that we are saved
through Faith, in our LORD JESUS, and that not of our selves, it is the Gift of
GOD; not of Works, lest any Man should boast. Ephesians. 2.8, 9.

Such, as before is said, who sincerely love our dear LORD JESUS, and nobly
confess Him, for His dear Names-sake, and can say, that they count all things,
even all their own Righteousness, as the Apostle did, ( Phil. 3.9.) but as Dung
and Dross in comparison of Christ, and to be found in him, not having our own
Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, etc.

It is for you, Friends, that Christ is gone before to prepare a Place in the
heavenly Mansions of Glory, whom He will own and confess (as you persevere
faithful to the end) in that great and last Day of general Account, when all
Nations shall stand before Him, and He will separate one from another, as a
Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats, setting the Sheep on his right
Hand, and the Goats on his left Hand, and will say to the Sheep, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation
of the World.

With undaunted Courage therefore, and with a Holy Boldness, let us hold fast
the Profession of our Faith, looking unto Jesus, who is the Author, and the
Finisher thereof He will be, as we continue in his Word, (Heb. 12.2.) Who for
the Joy that was set before Him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is
set down at the right Hand of the Throne of GOD: Whom although we have not seen
(with our bodily Eyes) we love, in whom tho now we see Him not, yet believing,
we rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, (1 Pet. 1.8.) Who is not
entered into the Holy Places made with Hands, which are the Figures of the true,
but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the Presence of GOD for us, Heb.
9.24. And He has made the same Jesus whom the Jews crucified, both Lord and
Christ, Acts 2.36. And as said the Apostle to the believing Corinthians, unto
whom he zealously preached Christ crucified: and among whom he determined not
to know any thing (1 Cor. 2.2.) save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified: for says
he in 2 Cor. 8.9. Ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that tho He was
rich, yet for your sake (and ours too) He became poor, that ye through His
Poverty might be rich.

And when He shall change our vile Bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto
his glorious Body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all
things to Himself, Phil. 2.21. Then shall we and all Saints be completely rich,
and everlastingly happy in all respects. And this Riches which our Blessed Lord
Jesus will give unto all his faithful Followers and true Believers in Him (and
which now in time does give an Earnest of) is truly worthy our diligent seeking
after, above all things visible: it being a Portion that none can deprive us
of; and the real Enjoyment of it in any measure is very comfortable and
supporting in the time of great need, when we shall leave this World, and
launch into the boundless Ocean of Eternity: O then, no bare Profession of
Religion, tho never so resined, will stand us in any stead, but only the real
Possession of the Life thereof; as blessed be the LORD, I can speak something
by Experience, having been often much visited with bodily Weakness; which
through Mercy I have been helped to bear, and esteem it as that which my
heavenly Father saw best for me. And when I have been weak and low, not knowing
whether the Lord would be pleased to restore me to bodily Health again, (which
blessed be His Holy Name I now enjoy) far beyond what I have often expected, I
can truly say, that the inward Meditation of the unspeakable Love of GOD to the
Children of Men, through His dear SON, has very deeply affected my Soul: And I
hope, without any Self-boasting at all, but to the Praise only of the most
worthy Name of my dear LORD, be it spoken, He has been pleased of late time,
to reveal and demonstrate to my Understanding, both immediately and
instrumentally, diverse weighty precious Gospel Truths, necessary to Salvation;
and they are more clearly opened to me than formerly; tho the LORD knows I have
in the Sincerity of my Heart desired, and that in the deep Humility of my Soul,
the true and living Knowledge of those things which appertain to our eternal
Peace and everlasting Well-being with him for ever.

Now, Friends, being right sensible that the time hastens on apace upon us all,
that nothing can stand in any stead, but a true Interest in Christ, and a full
Assurance through His Spirit in our Hearts, that we have a Right to that
incorruptible Inheritance which is received through Faith in Him: And now,
through his great Love and Mercy, He has brought me truly to esteem HIM, His
Doctrine and Truth, more than ever; I trust it shall be my greatest Concern,
while I have a Being, through his divine Aid and Assistance, to exalt Him over
all, and to confess Him, and to follow Him whithersoever he leads, whatsoever
Oppositions or Discouragements I may meet with in the way.

So being, through the great Goodness of GOD, in a true Sense of these things,
my Heart is opened in tender Love to the whole Flock and Family of Christ,
wherever dispersed, and under what Denomination, or by what Profession soever
distinguished, even all who sincerely love our blessed Lord Jesus, and truly
believe in Him, and depend only upon Him for Life and Salvation, who are given
up to honor Him in their Day, by a sober and Christian Life, in Faithfulness
and Obedience to the Measure of Light and Dispensation of Grace, and Knowledge
they have received, desiring to advance further, and come nearer to the LORD.
Unto all such, without respect to Persons, is the Salutation of unfeigned Love
universally extended in that never-dying Life of our blessed and only supreme
Head, and glorious Captain of our Salvation, the Lord Jesus Christ; in some
measure of whose pure Life and heavenly Presence, I have felt a Concern upon me
for some time to write these things, for the stirring up the pure Mind in all,
by way of Remembrance, of the many Obligations we are under, that so we all
together may persevere to the end, and join together as one Man, in contending
(...) for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints, with holy Zeal, but
truly qualified by the Spirit of LOVE and MEEKNESS; and so fight the good Fight
of Faith, and finish our Course with Joy; and in the End receive the
everlasting Crown of Life and Glory, which GOD has laid up in store for all
who truly believe in, and sincerely love the blessed Appearance of our dear
LORD and Savior JESUS CHRIST; to whom be Glory both now and for ever. Amen.

Reading, [ the Month called July,] 1696. M. S.

London, Printed in the Year 1696. and are to be sold (with the other
Impression) at George Keith's at the Golden Ball in White-chappel.


