ACT And Intimation anent this Current Parliament.
At Edinburgh the fifteen day of November, School Years.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Considering that His Majesty by the
last Act of this last Session of this Current Parliament had Adjourned the same
to this fifteenth day of November instant: And that His Majesty being now
Abroad forth of His Kingdoms, has not as yet signified His Pleasure, either by
sending a Commissioner for holding thereof at the said day, nor His Royal Order
for Adjourning the same to a further day; And seeing both by the nature of the
High Court of Parliament, and by express Acts of Parliament, Parliaments are
Current without the necessity of a special Continuation, until they be
Dissolved by His Majesty's particular Warrant, whose sole Prerogative it is to
Dissolve als well as to Call, Hold, and Prorogue the same. Therefore, the said
Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council in expectation of His Majesty's express
Orders; And to prevent the unnecessary trouble of the Members, and other Good
Subjects who may be Concerned to repair to the Meeting of Parliament, have
thought fit to Ordain Intimation to be made, that all Members of Parliament be
ready to meet and attend in this present Current Parliament, so soon as His
Majesty's Will and Pleasure shall be signified to them for that effect; And
that none may pretend Ignorance: Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and to
be Published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh by the Lion King at Arms, and his
Brethren Heralds and Pursevants, and at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs
of the several Shires within this Kingdom by Macers or Messengers at Arms.

Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT, Clericus Secreti Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. School.


