An ACT of Parliament passed in the First Parliament of King Charles the Second
in Scotland, concerning the League and Covenant, and Discharging the Renewing
thereof without His Majesty's Warrant and Approbation.
FOrasmuch as the power of Arms, and entering into, and making of Leagues and
Bonds, is an undoubted Privilege of the Crown, and a proper Part of the Royal
Prerogative of the Kings of this Kingdom, and that in Recognisance of His
Majesty's Just Right, the Estates of Parliament of this his most Ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, have declared it high Treason to the Subjects thereof, of
whatsoever Number, less or more, upon any pretext whatsoever, to rise, or
continue in Arms, or to enter into Leagues and Bonds, with Foreigners, or among
themselves, without His Majesty's special Warrant and Approbation, had and
obtained thereto, and have Rescinded and Annulled all Acts of parliament,
Conventions of Estates, or other Deeds whatsoever, contrary to, or inconsistent
with the same; And whereas during these Troubles, there have occurred diverse
things, in the making and pursuance of Leagues and Bonds, which may be occasion
of jealousy in, and betwixt His Majesty's Dominions of Scotland, England and
Ireland. Therefore, and for preventing of all Scruples, Mistakes or Jealousies
that may hereafter arise upon these Grounds, the King's Majesty, with Advice
and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, does hereby Declare, that there is no
Obligation upon this Kingdom by Covenant, Treaties or otherwise, to endeavor
by Arms a Reformation of Religion in the Kingdom of England, or to meddle with
the public Government and Administration of that Kingdom. And the King's
Majesty with Advice and Consent foresaid, does Declare, That the League and
Covenant, and all Treaties following thereupon, and Acts or Deeds that do, or
may relate thereto, are not Obligatory, nor do infer any Obligation upon this
Kingdom, or the Subjects thereof, to meddle or interpose by Arms, or any
Seditious way, in any thing concerning the Religion and Government of the
Churches of England and Ireland, or in what may concern the Administration of
His Majesty's Government there. And further, His Majesty, with Advice and
Consent of His Estates, does hereby Discharge and Inhibit all His Majesty's
Subjects within this Kingdom, that none of them presume upon any Pretext of any
Authority whatsoever, to require the renewing or swearing of the said League
and Covenant, or of any other Covenants, or public Oaths concerning the
Government of the Church, or Kingdom, without His Majesty's special Warrant and
Approbation; And that none of His Majesty's Subjects offer to renew and swear
the same, without His Majesty's Warrant, as said is, as they will be answerable
at their highest Peril.


