C R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT Against the Importation of some Bibles.
Edinburgh, the twelfth day of October, 1676.
FOrasmuch as the KING's Majesty, by His Gift, dated the twelfth day of May,
one thousand six hundred and seventy one, Did grant and dispone to Andrew
Anderson, His Majesty's Printer, now dece^^^^ his Heirs, Assignayes or
Substitutes, to be His Majesty's sole, absolute and only Master-Printer, for
the space of forty one years after his entry to that Office; with power, not
only to print His Majesty's (...) of Parliament, Proclamations, and other
Papers relating to the public Affairs of this Kingdom, (...) also to print and
re-print Bibles in all Volumes, with the Psalms therein till, Third Parts of
the Bible (...) New Testaments in all Volumes, all Books of Divinity,
Commentaries, Concordances, Books of the Common or Civil Law, all sorts of
School-books, School-authors, Grammars, Rudiments, Psalms, Confessions of
Faith, Catechis^^^ and shorter, Callendars, Primars, etc. Discharging all
others so to do, without Warrant and Order from Hi^ (...) Printer, under the
pain of confiscation of all such Books, the one half thereof to the King, and
the other ha^^ (...) use of His Printer and his foresaids, besides such other
penalties as the Council shall think fit to inflict, in(...) failie. And
whereas the Relict and Heir of the said deceast Andrew Anderson, have exhibited
and presented (...) Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Bibles of three
several Volumes and Sizes, Printed by the said deceas^^ Anderson, one thereof
on a Letter called the Peril Letter with Notes, in the Volume of Twelve,
printed in the y^^^ (...) thousand six hundred and seventy three; another
printed in the said year, on the same Letter, without Note^ (...) Volume of
Eighteen; and the third printed in the year, one thousand six hundred and
seventy six, on a Letter (...) Nonperil, with Notes, in the Volume of Eight: Of
which Bibles, they have printed such a considerable num^^^ (...) their very
great expenses) as may be able sufficiently to serve His Majesty's Lieges, and
to the advantage of the (...) by hindering the export of considerable sums of
money which are daily taken forth thereof, for the import of (...) Bibles; and
have undertaken to serve the Lieges sufficiently, at als easy rates in far
better work, as any (...) can afford. The said Lords of Council do therefore,
conform to His Majesty's Gift aforsaid, prohibit and (...) any person
whatsomever, after the first day of November next, to import, vend or fell into
this Kingdom (...) Bibles of the foresaids Letters and Sizes; Declaring hereby,
all such Bibles as shall be imported after the (...) confiscable, the one half
thereof for His Majesty's use, and the other half for the use of the Relict and
He^^ (...) Majesty's said Printer: With full Power and Warrant to them, or any
having their Order, to seize upon, (...) confiscat the said Bibles, wherever
the same can be found, they being always countable for His Majesty's. (...)
said seizure, to the Lords of the Thesaury: Ordaining and Commanding hereby,
the Tacks-men and (...) of the Customs and Excise, their Deputes and Waiters,
to confiscate any of the said Bibles that shall (...) imported after the said
day, to the use aforesaid; which is to be by and attour any other punishment or
p^^^ (...) Majesty's Council shall think fit to infl^^^, or impose upon the
contraveeners. And Ordains these preen^^ (...) printed, and published at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, Glasgow, and other places needful, that none (...)
ignorance.

Tho. Hay, Cl. Sti Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His (...)
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1676.


