ACT OF PARLIAMENT Anent The Excyse of Ferrintosh.
AT Edinburgh, the Sixteenth day of July one Thousand Six Hundred Nintie and
five years.
For as much as upon the second day of July one Thousand Six hundred and Ninty,
their Majesty's and the Estates of Parliament Did, by their Act, for the
Reasons therein memtioned Ferm the Excyse of Ferrin-tosh, to Duncan Forbes of
Cullodden, and his Successors Heretors thereof, for the yearlie Tack duty of
four hundred Merks; which sum, is expressly declared, by the said Act, to be
the yearly proportion of annexed Excyse, payable out of the said Lands, to His
Majesty's Exchequer. And now although the said annxed Excyse, be to raised off
of the Liquor, and not off of the boll; Yet seeing, the quota or value of the
said annexed Excyse is still the same, as it was formerly, and so can infer no
ground for alteration of the Act already made in favors of the said Duncan
Therefore His Majesty, with Consent of the Estates of Parliament do declare
That, by the present Act anent the Excyse upon Liquor, there is nothing
altered, or innovat, of the set formerly made to the said Dnucan, of the
Excyse of his Lands of Ferrintosh; Excepting only that the said Lands are
liable, to their just proportion, conform to the foresaid set, of what
additionall Excyse is or shall be imposed by Law upon the Kingdom. Ordaining
hereby, Any general Tacks of Excyse, that shall be here after granted by our
Thesaury, and Exchiequer, to be with the Exception of the foresaid Act.
Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament by George Viscount of Tarbat, Lord
Mc. Leod and Castle-haven etc. Clerk to the Parliament, and to His Majesty's
Exchequer Registers and Rolls

Tarbat Cl: Register.


