I7 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT of SEDERUNT* OF THE Lords of Council and Session,
Upon their Decree Declaring who are Members of the College of Justice; And
what are their Privileges within the Town of Edinburgh, and Liberties thereof.
AT EDINBVRGH the twenty third day of February One thousand six hundred and
eighty seven years,
The LORDS of Council and Session having Considered the Summons of Declarator,
Raised at the Instance of the Members of the College of Justice, of their
Privileges AGAINST the Town of Edinburgh; The Suspension Raised by them of the
Charges given at the Instance of the Town, for Payment of the Annuity; And the
Bill of Suspension given in of the Charges for their proportions of His
Majesty's Supply: The Answers made thereto for the Town, and whole Dispute
proponed for either Party, with the Acts of Parliament, and other Acts and
Writs founded on hinc inde in the Debate; THEY SUSTAIN the foresaid Declarator,
as to the Members of the College of Justice, their Immunity and Exemption from
payment of the Annuity, for the Ministers Stipends, And DECERNS and DECLARES
them free thereof, both as to by gones and in timecoming; AND SUSPENDS the
Letters simpliciter for the same. And Likewise SUSTAINS the Declarator as to
their Immunity from Watching and Warding, and any Impositions for the same; and
from payment of any Customs, Causeymaills, Shore-dues, and other Impositions
laid on their Provisions of Meat and Drink for their Families, and their other
Goods, carried to, or from the Town, and Collected at the Ports, or other
places within the Liberties of the Town. AND DECLARES that the producing a
Certificat Subscribed by a Member of the College of Justice, bearing, that the
Goods or Provisions, do properly belong to him, shall be sufficient for freeing
them from paying the said Customs and Impositions, the Certificat being
renewed once in the half Year at least; AND SUSTAINS the Declarator as to the
Pursuers Exemption from the Civil Jurisdiction of the Magistrates of Edinburgh;
AND DECLARES that upon their proponing Declinator thereof, the Magistrates ought
to Desist from any Procedor against them, without necessity of Advocation: And
before ANSWER as to the Criminal Jurisdiction, and to that Point of the
Declarator, concerning the Pursuers Employing Vnfree-men within the Town, THE
LORDS DECLARES they will take Trial what has been the former Custom as to both
these Points, and particularly what was done in the Cases mentioned in the
Debate; And the LORDS ORDAINS, That where a Taxation or Cess is Imposed by Acts
of Parliament, or Convention of Estates; To which the Members of the College
of Justice are, or shall be liable, that there be a special and distinct Stent
made upon the Town and Suburbs for the Quota Imposed, and so much more only as
may defray the incident Charges of Collecting the same, wherein no Exemption
shall be given to the Magistrates, Stent-masters, or other persons, but that
they be Stented for their proportions of these Impositions, als well as other
Inhabitants; And likewise, that the Tenements belonging to Trads be Stented,
and the Towns Common-Good, where the same consists in Land, or Feu-duties, and
does not bear burden with the Shire: BUT PREJUDICE to the Town of Edinburgh, if
they think fit to lay on the proportions of these who have been in use to be
exempted upon their own Neighbors, but not upon any Members of the College of
Justice. AND to the end, these Impositions Warranted by public Authority, may
be equally laid on, and these of the College of Justice who are Heretors, not
burdened beyond their just proportions, THE LORDS DECLARES, that they will from
time to time Nominat one Advocat, and one Writter to the Signet, for each
Quarter of the Town, to Meet with the Stent-Masters, who shall be appointed by
the Magistrates, at their taking of the Survey and Valuation of the whole
Tenements within the Burgh and Suburbs, and of the Trade of the Burgers, which
is in use to be Stented, and to bear a part of the Burden of the Cess, and to
be present at all their Meetings for Imposing of the Stent, and to see that the
Valuation be justly and equally made, and the Stent laid on accordingly; AND
for that Effect, APPOINTS the Magistrates to make Intimation of the time of the
Stent-Masters Meeting, to the Lord President of the Session, the Dean of
Faculty, and the Keeper of the Signet, ten days of before, in time of Session,
and twenty days in time of Vacans: And APPOINTS this Method of Stenting to
begin and take effect for that Term of His Majesty's Supply, due and payable at
Martinmas next, One thousand six hundred and eighty seven years, but prejudice
to the Town of Edinburgh to use Execution for that Terms Supply, which was
payable at Martinmas last, One thousand six hundred and eighty six years, and
the Whitsundays Term now ensuing, according to the Stent already Imposed for
these two Terms. AND THE LORDS DO DECLARE the persons following to be Members
of the College of Justice, who are to Enjoy the Privileges abovementioned,
VIZ. the Lords of Session, Advocats, Clerks of Session, the Clerks of the
Bills, the Writers to the Signet, the Deputs of the Clerks of Session who Serve
in the Outter-House, and three Substitutes for Registrations, being one in each
Clerks Office, the three Deputs of the Clerks of the Bills, the Clerks of
Exchequer, the Directors of the Chancellary their Deput and two Clerks thereof,
the Writer to the Privy Seal and his Deput, the Clerks of the General Registers
of Seasins and Hornings, the Macers of the Session, the Keeper of the
Minut-Book, the Keeper of the Rolls of the Inner and Outter-Housses. AND THE
LORDS Do extend the Privileges foresaids to the persons following, VIZ. One
actual Servant of each Lord of the Session, one Servant of each Advocat, four
Extracters in each of the three Clerks Offices of the Session, two Servants
employed by the Clerk of Register in Keeping the public Registers, the Keeper
of the Session-House, and the Keeper of the Advocats Library. IT IS ALWAYS
hereby DECLARED, That if any of these Servants and others to whom the foresaids
Privileges are extended, shall Keep Merchant-Shops, Taverns or Alehouses, or
exercise any other Trade within the Burgh, they shall not enjoy any of the
Privileges abovementioned. And ORDAINS these Presents to be Recorded in the
Books of Sederunt, and to be Printed, Sic Subscribitur, G. Lockhart, I. P. D.
EXTRACTED forth of the Books of Sederunt, by me George Viscount of Tarbat, Lord
Mcleod and Castle-haven, etc. Clerk to His Majesty's Council, Register and
Rolls.

Tarbat Cl. Rgr.

Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty,
and to the City and College of Edinburgh, Anno DOM. 1687.


