EDINBURGH, 22. September. 1648.
Whereas diverse Persons in the Isles and Highlands of this Kingdom, under
pretense of Commissions issued to the Captains and Chieffs of Clanns by the
Duke of Hamiltoune, or others who Authorized the late unlawful engagement
against England. And are now in Arms in this Kingdom for prosecution of the
same, Have combyned themselves and entered into a confederacy, to invade, fall
upon, and destroy the Lord Marquess of Argyles Lands, And to spoil, ruin and
lay waste other places of this Kingdom, by exercing all Acts of Hostility
against the well-affected. To the end therefore, that all such persons may
berightly informed, and not misled, by entering into so horrid a Rebellion, of
following such desperate Counsels and Courses, tending to their own
destruction, and the disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom; Especially in
the present condition of affairs, When the Army which lately invaded England
is wholly dissipated and routed, and considerable Forces already raised, and
more to be leavyed for suppressing the remainder thereof now in this Kingdom,
and others whosoever shall adhere to them, or join with them in Arms to the
promoting of that Engagement and continuance of Our troubles; When the
Parliament of Englands. Forces are also presently lying before the Towns of
Berwick and Carlyle, for reducing the same to the Kingdom of England, whereby
the Kingdom was in a fair way to attain an end of troubles, and ^l
obstructions of the union betwixt both the Nations to be happily removed. The
great desires that we have of the Peace and quiet of the Kingdom; And that all
such who are or shall be ensnared by false suggestions, may be reclaimed and
drawn off such Rebellious interprizes, which will kindle the flams and
combustion of the Kingdom, and retard the establishment of a desired Peace,
Have made us to exhort; likeas we do require and Charge all such Captains and
Chieffs of Clanns and others who are now in charge, or adhere to them in this
their Rebellion: To show themselves good and dutiful subjects, forthwith to
lay down Arms, to forsake that Rebellion, and to behave themselves in all quiet
and peaceable manner, Certifying them and each of them, that if they persist
and continue to commit any rapins, do any violence, or Acts of Hostility under
any pretense or Authority whatsoever. They shall be esteemed as enemies to
Religion, King and Kingdoms, and pursued and punished accordingly; And hereof
they are to take special notice and give obedience under all highest pains.
And we ordain these presents to be published at the market Cross of Edinburgh,
and other places needful, and also to be Printed, that none pretend ignorance.

Mr. THO. HENDERSON.

Printed by Evan Tyler Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1648.


