NEMO ME IMPUNE LACESSET

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT, Concerning Summons of VVakening.
At Edinburgh, the sixth day of November, One thousand six hundred eighty nine
years.
THe Lords of Council and Session Considering, the Expense that must arise by
Summons of Wakening of the whole Processes depending before the Lords, and the
Executions thereof through all the Corners of the Kingdom, if the ordinary Form
of Wakenings were necessary to be observed in this extraordinary Case; And
withal Considering, that the Lords in extraordinary Cases, have allowed Edictal
Citations at the Mercat-Crosses, Do therefore, for the ease of the Liedges,
appoint the Keeper of the Signet to Expede three Summons of Wakening, for each
Shire of the Kingdom, leaving a large blank, for inserting Processes therein;
And Do hereby Ordain the Sheriff Clerks of each Shire, and the Clerks of the
Stewartries of Kirkudbright and Orknay, and in case of their absence, or
neglect, the Town Clerks of the Head-Burghs of the said Shires and
Stewartries, to insert all Processes whereof he shall receive a Note before the
second Mercat-day, after the said blank Summons comes to his hand; and that he
cause Cite all Persons, and Parties Residing within that Shire, or Stewartrie,
upon six days, to appear before the Lords, for Wakening of the said Processes,
and that he cause Read the said Summons publicly at the Mercat Cross, between
ten and twelve on the said Mercat-Day, after three several Oyesses, and that he
affix a Copy of the said Summons, so filled up upon the Cross, and that he
return the said Summons with Executions several, and particular, for each
Process insert therein, with all possible Diligence, to one of the principal
Clerks of Session; And that he make the like Citation upon the second blank
Summons, sent to him upon the next Mercat-day, in manner foresaid, for all the
Processes, whereof he shall receive a Note for the second before the said
Mercat-day; and that he do the like on the next Mercat-day thereafter, as to
the third Summons sent to him, and that he cause the Executor Sign all the
several Executions, with the Witnesses that he imployes therein, respective;
Providing always that he receive six shilling Scots with each Note of the
Processes, to be insert as aforesaid, for doing the Duties above-written, and
for returning the Processes to the Clerks. It is hereby Declared, that this is
without prejudice to any party that pleases to make use of Wakenings in the
ordinary Form, and that it is only to be extended to such Processes as were not
Sleeping the first of November 1688. and since that time have not been Called
through the Surcease of Justice; and that there is no necessity to Waken
concluded Causes, the same having never been in use to be Wakened, which the
Lords will Advise, and proceed in according to the Books of Inrolement. Likeas,
the Lords appoint the Pursuers, who have benefit by this Order, to have their
several Executions delivered to them by the Clerks of Session; And appoints
them to present Copies of the said General Summons, to be formed by the
Writers, and pass the Signet, as is usual in taking Summons off the Signet. And
it is hereby Declared, that where Summons were formerly Execute for the first
Diet, and the second Citation not given, that in that case a new Summons may be
Raised in Name of Their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary, which shall
suffice in place of a second Citation; And if the Summons have been Execute for
both Dyets, but not Called, that the same may be Wakened in the same manner, as
is appointed by this Act for Summons, which have been Called. And Ordains this
Act to be Printed, and Published by Macers, or Messengers at Arms, at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh; And appoints the several Sheriff-Clerks to cause
publish the same at the Mercat Cross of the Head-Burgh of the Shire, upon the
next Mercat-day, after the same shall come to their hands, betwixt ten and
twelve a Clock in the forenoon.

Extracted out of the Books of Sederunt, by me

Alexander Gibson, Cls.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of the Lords of
Council and Session, 1689.


