C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
AT EDINBURGH, The tenth day of April, one thousand six hundred and sixty two.
FOrasmuch as by diverse Acts of Parliament, and particularly by an Act of King
James the sixth of ever blessed memory, Parliament seventh, Cap. one hundred
and twenty sixth, all Taverners are discharged to take upon hand to make any
mixture of old Wines with new Wines, or put any water within the same; or that
the buyers of Wines to be tapped again, take upon them to hoord or hide such
Wines, so bought by them, in their houses and other private places, but that
they put the same in their common Taverns and Vanits, for the service of the
Lieges, under the pain of confiscation of the Wine so mixed, and of all other
Wines belonging to them, and the loss of their liberty and freedom for ever.
And that notwithstanding of all these Statutes and laudable Acts of Parliament,
not only Wine Merchants and Vintners by themselves, but others hired and
conduced by them, abuse the Wines by drawing the same off the lie, and mixing
the new Wine, brought home this year, with the old Wine and water, and
sophisticating the same with brimston, chalk and other poisonable ingredients,
to the great prejudice of our Sovereign Lords Lieges. Therefore the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council do Ordain the said Acts of Parliament to be put in
execution; and discharges all Merchants or Vintners of Wine, and other persons
whatsoever, to bring home, vent or sell any Wines so abused, sophisticated or
mixed as is above-written, or any other manner of way to the prejudice of the
Lieges. And Ordains the Sheriffs of the several Sheriffdoms and Magistrates of
Burghs and Baylies of Regalities, to see the same put to due execution, as they
will be answerable upon their peril, conform to the said Acts of Parliament
in all points. And Declares, that whosoever shall delate the contraveeners,
shall have a part of the penalties that shall be inflicted. And Ordains these
presents to be printed, and published at the Market Crosses of the several
Burghs of this Kingdom, that none may pretend ignorance.

Ja. Wright, Depute.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1662.


