C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
AT HOLYRUD-HOUSE, The tenth day of September, one thousand six hundred and
sixty two.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, having, in pursuance of His
Majesty's Royal Pleasure and Commands, by the Proclamation dated at Edinburgh
the ninth day of January last bypast, Discharged all Ecclesiastical Meetings
in Synods, Presbyteries and Church-sessions, until they be authorized and
ordered by the Archbishops and Bishops in their respective Sees. And
considering, that the Lords Archbishops and Bishops, have, all this Session of
Parliament, been engaged to attend the service thereof, and now are to repair
to their respective Sees, for exercising of the Government, and ordering the
affairs of the Church, according to that Authority and Jurisdiction which is
settled and established upon them by the Name, and for that effect, have
resolved to hold their diocesian Assemblies in the Diocesses of St. Andrews,
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dunkell, Brechan and Dunblain, upon the second Tuesday of
October next; and to hold the Assemblies in the Diocesses of Galloway,
Aberdeen, Murray, Ross, Caithness, Isles, Argyl and Orknay, upon the third
Tuesday of the said month. Therefore, the Lord Commissioner his Grace, and the
Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, do think fit, by open Proclamation, to
make publication hereof to all persons concerned; And to command and require,
that all Parsons, Vicars, Ministers, in Burgh or Land within these respective
Diocesses, do repair to the said diocesian Meetings, upon the foresaid days
and in time coming, as they shall be required to give their concurrence in
their stations, for the exercise of ministerial Duties, for the Order and Peace
of the Church: With certification, That whosoever shall presume not to give
their presence and dutiful attendance upon these diocesian Assemblies, and
shall not concur in other Church-meetings as they shall be appointed and
authorized by the respective Archbishops and Bishops, shall be holden as
contemners of His Majesty's Authority, and incur the censures provded in such
cases. And it is hereby always provided, that no Minister or Ministers, upon
whitsoever cause or pretense, shall presume to keep any Ecclesiastic Meetings,
who shall not submit to, and own the Ecclesiastic Government by Archbishops
and Bishops; with certification, that all such Meetings shall be holden,
henceforth, as seditious. And Ordains these presents t^ be printed, and
published at the Market Crosses of the head Burghs of the Shires, that none
preend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti. Consilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1662.


