J R

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT Of His Majesty's Privy Council of Scotland, for a solemn and public
Thanksgiving throughout the Kingdom, upon Her Royal Majesty's being with Child.
Edinburgh, the seventeenth day of January, 1688.
SInce it has pleased Almighty GOD, the Fountain of all Life, by whom Kings
Reign and Kingdoms are established, to grant unto the Kings most excellent
Majesty, fresh hopes of Royal Issue, by his most Serene Consort, Our Gracious
Queen Mary, who (through the great Goodness and Blessing of God) is now with
Child; And considering that the multiplying of the Branches of the Royal Family
(especially Issuing from our present Sac^ed Sovereign, James the Seventh, under
whose Auspitious, Wise and Clement Government, We enjoy so much Prosperity,
Peace and Plenty) Is a most Desirable Blessing, a Native Support and
Strengthening of the Crown, and by just Consequence a public Blessing to this
Kingdom, Tending to the further Security of the Peace and Happiness thereof:
His Majesty Therefore (At the Humble and Earnest Desire, and by the Advice of
his Privy Council) Has thought fit upon this important Occasion, to set apart,
and appoint a time, for rendering Devout and Solemn Thanks to GOD, for this
great Mercy and Blessing, and for offering Public and Hearty Prayers, to his
Divine Majesty, To Bless and Preserve the Sacred Person of our Dread Sovereign
Lord, the King, to Prosper his Reign with Honorable and Glorious Successes,
and to Prolong his Life, that he may see his Childrens Children, and his Throne
may be as the Sun; As also that he may Bless, Preserve and Strengthen, His
Royal Consort the Queens Majesty, and make perfect his Work begun for Her, may
Save and Defend Her from all Dangers and evil Accidents, that what She has
conceived, may be Preserved and Happily brought forth, to the Joy of our
Sovereign Lord, the King, the further Security of his Crown, and the Happiness
and Establishment of this Kingdom.

For this end, His Majesty, with Advice foresaid, Does Appoint and Ordain, that
the foresaid Thanksgiving and Prayers, be Devoutly and Solemnly performed, in
all the Paroch-Churches within the City and Diocese of Edinburgh upon the
twenty ninth day of January instant, and in all the other Churches, within this
Kingdom, upon the ninteenth day of February next. And His Majesty accordingly
Requires and Commands, the most Reverend, and right Reverend, the Archbishops
and Bishops, to take care, that in all the Paroch-Churches, within their
respective Diocesses, these Prayers and Thanksgivings be accordingly Celebrate,
by all the Ministers and Presbyters under their Jurisdiction, and that they
cause intimation be made hereof, by reading of the same, from the Pulpits in
the several Paroch-Churches, the Lord's Day, Immediately preceding the said
Solemn days of public Thanksgiving, respective, And finaly, His Majesty
Charges and Commands all his Loving Subjects heartily, to join and concur in
these Religious and Dutiful Performances, as they would show their Piety and
Loyalty, in praying for the Life of the King, the Increase of his Royal Issue,
the further Security of the Crown, and the Estbalishment of Peace, and
Happiness in this His Ancient Kingdom. And that these Presents may be made
public and known, His Majesty Ordains His Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren
Heralds, the Macers of the Privy Council, and Pursevants, to pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and there, by open
Proclamation, and with all accustomed Solemnities on extraordinary Occasions,
make publication of the Premises, that none may pretend ignorance. Extracted
forth of the Records of Privy Council, by Sir William Paterson Baronet, Clerk
of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,

WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1688.


