EDINBURGH, The 16. day of June, One thousand six hundred seventy and four
Years. ACT Assuring a reward to any who shall apprehend some Rebels and others.
FOrasmuch as the keeping of Field-Conventicles, and the intruding upon, and
invading of Pulpits, are most unlawful and disorderly practices, tending to the
disturbance of the Peace, and to the affront of His Majesty's Authority, and
notwithstanding the Laws and Acts of Parliament prohibiting the same, under
high pains therein mentioned, the Ringleaders, Promoters, and other persons
guilty of the said disorders, are emboldned to commit the same, presuming that
they will not be discovered and brought to trial and punishment: Therefore the
Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council for the encouragement of all His Majesty's
good Subjects to discover and apprehend all such persons as is after-mentioned,
do hereby offer, declare, and give assurance, that if any person, being of His
Majesty's standing Forces, or of the Militia, or any other His Majesty's
Subjects, shall seiz upon, and apprehend any person or persons, who since His
Majesty's late gracious Proclamation of the 24. of March last, has Convocated
any number of persons to Field-Conventicles, or at any (...) persons thereto,
or shall apprehend any Heretors or others being at Field-Conventicles, while
the said persons are present at, or coming from the same, so that the said
persons apprehended shall be brought to a trial, and shall be found guilty and
convict of the said offenses, that the apprehenders of such persons shall have
the gift of the Fines of the said persons given to them: And incase any person
or persons be cited for the said crimes and offenses, and after certification
is granted against them for their contumacy and not appearing, shall be
apprehended, the apprehenders of such persons shall have the gift of their
Escheats, and benefit arising from the said certifications. And whoever of the
standing Forces, Militia, or others His Majesty's good Subjects, shall
apprehend any Minister or other person Preaching at any Field-Conventicle, or
who has Preached since the said Proclamation, or shall at any time hereafter
Preach at Field-Conventicles, or any of them. And whatsoever person or persons
shall apprehend and seiz upon any Outed Minister who are not licenced by the
Council, or any other person not authorized nor tolerat by the Bishop of the
Diocese, who since the time foresaid have invaded, or shall invade any Pulpit
or Pulpits, the person or persons apprehending any of the Ministers or other
persons foresaid guilty of Preaching at Field-Conventicles, or invading of
Pulpits, shall for their reward have paid to them the sum of an thousand
Merks: And for the persons after-named, viz. Mr, John Welsh, Mr. Gabriel
Sempil, and Mr. Samuel Arnot, the apprehenders shall have the sum of 2000 Merks
paid to them. And His Majesty's Subjects are not only warranted to seiz upon,
and apprehend the said disorderly persons in manner foresaid; But it further
declared by the said Lords of Council, that upon consideration of the
condition of the persons who shall be apprehended according as they have been
more stickling and active in the said disorders, and the pains and diligence of
the apprehenders and other circumstances, they will also consider what further
reward shall be given to them for their service. And ordains these presents to
be Printed, that none pretend ignorance.

Tho. Hay, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBURGH, Printed by His Majesty's Printers: Anno DOM. 1674.


