ACT Appointing Collectors of Shires to receive Clipped Merk-pieces from the
Parish-Collectors of the Polemoney, and ordaining diligence against
Parish-Collectors.
Edinburgh, January 28. 1696.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council do hereby appoint the Collectors of
Shires for the Pole Money, to receive from the Collectors of particular
Parishes, all such clipped old Merk-pieces, and their Fractions, as the
Parish-Collectors shall deliver to them, the said Parish-Collectors first
giving their Oaths in presence of one of the Commissioners of Supply within the
Shires where they are Collectors, that they offer or deliver no other clipped
Merk-pieces and their Fractions to the said Collectors of Shires, but such as
were truly received in by them the Parish-Collectors, in payment of the
Pole Money which they give in to the said Collectors of Shires, and that before
the Proclamation discharging the said Merk-pieces and their Fractions was
promulgat in the respective Shires where the Deponents lives: And the Council
declares, that no Pole Money is to be exacted for any persons who died before
the Term of Martinmass last, being the first Term appointed for uplifting the
Pole Money: And the Council do hereby ordain all such diligence to pass at the
instance of the Collectors of Shires, against the Collectors of particular
Parishes, for giving in of Lists of Poleable persons in their Bounds, and
payment of the Pole Money Collected by them, as is allowed to pass, and to be
direct against the Poleable persons themselves. And ordains their presents to be
Printed, and appoints His Majesty's Solicitor to send Printed Copies hereof to
the several Collectors of Shires.

Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


