ACT Discharging Privy Counselors and others in public Trust to remove out
of the Kingdom.
FOr as much as, it has pleased His Majesty, by his Letter to the Lords of His
Privy Council, of the Date the fourteenth day of August instant, upon
Consideration, that it may be inconvenient and prejudicial to his Service, if
any of the Members of the Privy Council, Commissioners of Thesaurie or
Exchequer, Officers of the Army, or others employed in Public Trust, should be
absent from their respective Trusts, To authorize the said Lords to intimat
and make known in the most usual and convenient manner, that none of these
abovementioned, remove out of this Kingdom, upon any pretense whatsoever,
without leave and allowance obtained first from His Majesty for that effect,
until His Royal Pleasure be further declared thereanent. Therefore the said
Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council, do hereby give Warrant and Command to
their Macers, or Messengers at Arms, to make Intimation of the Premises, by
public Proclamation at the Mercatcross of Edinburgh; As also, they Ordain all
Sheriffs and their Deputs, to cause intimate the same, by way of Proclamation,
at the Head-burgh of the respective Shires within this Kingdom, with all
convenient diligence, that all concerned may give due Obedience thereto, and
none pretend Ignorance, and Ordains their Presents to be Printed.

Given at Edinburgh the twenty ninth day of August 1693. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti.
Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's Anno Dom. 1693.


