C R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
Edinburgh, the third day of January 1678.
Instructions given by His Majesty's Privy Council, to the persons appointed by
them, to be common Tasters of Ale and Drinking beer within the City of
Edinburgh, and Suburbs thereof, Cannon-gate, Leith, and the Burghs Royal in the
Shires of Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Haddingtoun, etc.

IT is ordered, That the Tasters, who are appointed for each Bailies respective
quarter, in the City of Edinburgh, shall change their Quarters each month:
These who are appointed for the eldest Baylies Quarter the first month, shall
before the youngest Baylies Quarter the next; and these appointed for the third
Baylies, shall be for the second Baylies the next month: And soforth by turns
monthly, which the Magistrates are to see done accordingly.

All Brewers are discharged to give out any Ale or Drinking beer out of any of
their Breweries, until the same be tasted by one of the ordinar Tasters who
are ordered to taste every Browst after the same is tunned, and before it go to
the Tapster, and the like to be done for such Drink as shall be both browen and
tapped by any particular person, before they shall tap any thereof. And the
Tasters for Edinburgh, Leith, and Cannon-gate, are ordered weekly to give up
the names of the contraveeners, to the Clerks of the Council, to be communicate
to the Committee; and the Tasters of the rest of the Burghs to give the same up
to the Commissioners of the Excise of the Shire.

It is ordered that the several Brewers give up a list to the Tasters of the
Tapsters to whom they sell their drink in their respective bounds weekly, that
the Tasters may know what Tapsters sells the same, and the Tasters are ordered
to taste the Ale in the several houses of the Tapsters at least twice a week;
and the Tapsters are to give up to the Tasters the Brewers names from whom they
receive their Drink: And in case, either the Brewer or Tapster refuse, the
Tasters are appointed to give up their names as aforesaid.

It is ordered that the Tasters take particular notice at what price each
Brewer and Tapster sells their Ale and Drinking-beer, and give a particular
account as aforesaid weekly of the names of such Brewers and Tapsters as they
shall find do brew and tap Ale and Drinking-beer, which is not sufficient, and
sells the same at higher rates than is allowed by the Proclamation. And if the
drink, sold now at sixteen pennies the pynt, be als good and strong, as the
drink, at two shillings the pynt, immediately before the first of January last.

The Tasters appointed for the West port, Potteraw, Pleasants, and Yeard heads
of Leith, are ordered to taste the Ale and Drinking-beer of all Brewers, not
only, these that vent the same in these places, but also of these that brewes
there, and vents the same in the Burgh of Edinburgh; as a so of the Brewers of
Gorgie-milne, Dalry, Dam-head, Dalry-milnes, Water of Leith, Dean, Colt-bridge,
Gorgie town, Merchiston, Cannon-milnes, and all other places within a mile and
a half of Edinburgh, except Dudding stoun, and Restalrig. That the Tasters in
the Yeard-heads of Leith do the sike, as to the Brewers and Brewries in that
part of the Shire, that either vents their Drink themselves, or imports the
same to the town of Edinburgh, or any other place within a mile of Leith, and
the Tasters in Restalrig and Dudding stoun are to do the like in their bounds
as to what is consumed in the place, or imported, as aforesaid.

The Tasters sworn and received for the bounds foresaid are to continue in that
service from the first day of January, 1678. to the first day of January, 1679.
In which trust they are required to be exact and diligent, as they will be
answerable.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1678.


