ACT, Requiring the Lists, and Original Subscriptions of these who have taken
the Indemnity, to be instantly Transmitted to the Clerks of Privy Council.
EDINBURGH, January 19. 1692.
FOr as much, as by a Printed Act of Council, of the date the twelfth day of
January instant, the Sheriffs Principals of the several Shires of this Kingdom,
their Deputs, and Clerks are Ordained to Transmit to the Clerks of Privy
Council, not only the Lists of the Persons, who have taken the benfite of Their
Majesty's Gracious Indemnity; but likewise the Oaths already Sworn, and Signed
by the Takers thereof, with their original Subscriptions, and that before the
Persons, and in the precise Terms mentioned in the said Act, betwixt and the
twenty fifth day of January instant; for such as are on this side of the River
of Tay, and the tenth day of February next, for those on the other side
thereof. And the Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council Considering, that the
present State of Their Majesty's Affairs does require, that the forsaids Lists,
and Oaths, with the Original Subscriptions, be transmitted to the Clerks of
Council, before the days above set down: Therefore They hereby Require and
Command the said Sheriffs Principals and their Deputs, and Clerks instantly,
upon their receiving of a Printed Copy of this Act, to Transmit to the said
Clerks of Council, without any delay, the said Lists, and Oaths with the
Original Subscriptions: And appoints Their Majesty's Solicitor, or his
Assistants, immediately to dispatch Expresses to the several Shires, with
Coppies of this Act to the Sheriff-Clerks of the several Shires, to be by them
intimate to their Sheriff-Principals, and Sheriff Deputs, with Certification to
such as shall failie in not giving punctual Obedience to this Act, that the
same shall be accounted a malversation in their Office, and shall infer the
punishment of deprivation, and they shall be deprived accordingly. And Ordains
these presents to be Printed.

Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council, by me GILB. ELIOT, Cls Sti.
Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's. Anno Dom. 1692.


