C R

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
EDINBVRGH, May 14. 1679.
FOrasmuch as His Majesty by a Proclamation of the fourth of this instant, did,
for Discovery of the Horrid Murder of the late Archbishop of St. Andrews,
Require and Command all the Heretors and Masters of Fyfe and Kinross, to bring
their Tenants, Cottars, and Servants, and others dwelling on their Lands, to
the respective places and dyets therein mentioned; And whereas by the Neglect
of the Post, entrusted for Delivery of the Printed Copies of the said
Proclamation to the Sheriff-Deputs, in the said Shires, for publication
thereof, the same have not been timeously proclaimed and intimate at the
several parish Kirks: The Lords of His Majesty's privy Council, for supplying
of the foresaid Defect and Neglect, Do hereby Ordain the whole Heretors and
others foresaids, within the Presbetry of St. Andrews, to bring their Tenants,
Cottars, Servants, and others, dwelling on their Lands to the Town of St.
Andrews, upon the twenty day of May instant; those within the Presbetry of
Cowpar, to bring their Tenants and others foresaids, to the Town of Cowpar,
upon the twenty third day of the said Month; those within the Presbetry of
Kircaldy, to bring their Tenants and others foresaids, to the Town of Kircaldy,
upon the twenty seventh day of the said Month; those within the Presbetry of
Dumfermling, to bring their Tenants, and others foresaids, to the Town of
Dumfermling, upon the thirtieth day, to the effect mentioned in the
Proclamation, and under the Certifications therein specified: And the said
Lords do hereby sist and supercede all Execution upon Letters of Caption, or
Intercommuning, or any other Warrant, for securing any persons for any cause,
for the space of forty eight hours, before and after the said Dyets of
appearing, that they may safely come and go, without any trouble or impediment
whatsomever: And appoints the foresaid Proclamation with this present Act, to
be read at the several parish Kirks of the Shire of Fyfe, upon Sunday next, the
eighteenth of this instant, immediately after the time of Divine Service, in the
Forenoon. And Ordains these presents to be printed and published.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1679.


