DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT OF PRIVY COUNCIL, For calling out the Heretors, etc.
Edinburgh, December 24. 1688.
THE LORDS of His Majesty's Privy Council, Considering the great Fears and
Jealousies of the Kingdom, from the Apprehensions His Majesty's Leidges
generally have, of the Papists being in Arms in Galloway and other places, and
the Suspicions there may be of the Irishes, and other Papists from England and
Ireland, in this dangerous Conjuncture, their joining with them, to the
manifest hazard of the Protestant Religion, and the endangering the peace and
quiet of this his Majesty's Ancient Kingdom; Have therefore thought fit, that
all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects may put themselves in their best Posture
of Defense, for security of the Protestant Religion, and securing their own
Lives, Liberties, and Properties: In pursuance of which, The said Lords do
hereby Require and Command the whole Heretors within this Kingdom (Armed, and
Provided, according to their Conditions, and Qualities) to Repair to the
Head-Burghs of their respective Shires, and Stuartries, or such Convenient
Places, as the respective Commanders after-mentioned shall appoint, and there
to be Rendezvouzed, under the Command of the Persons following, viz. The Shire
of Nithisdale, and Stuartry of Annandale, under the Command of the Duke of
Queensberry, or such as he shall appoint; the Shire of Air, comprehending all
its Jurisdictions, under the Earl of Cassills; the upper Waird of Cliddisdale,
under the Marquis of Douglas, or such as he shall appoint; the neither Waird,
under the Duke of Hamilton, and in his absence, the Lord Carmichael; the Shire
of Galloway under the Lord of Logan; the Stuartry of Kirkcudbright, under the
Viscount of Kenmuir; the Shire of Renfrew, under the Command of Sir Archbald
Stuart of Black-hall Barronet; the Shire of Dumbarton, under the Command of the
Lord of Ardincaple; the Shire of Tiveotdale, under the Earl of Louthian; the
Shire of Berwick, under Sir Archibald Cockburn of Langton Barronet; the Shires
of Forest and Peebles, under the Lord of Drummelier; the Shire of East
Lothian, under the Command of Charles Master of Yester; the Shire of Edinburgh,
under the Earl of Lauderdale; the Shire of Linlithgow, under the Earl of
Linlithgow, Lord Justice General; the Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan, under
the Earl of Mar; The Shire of Kinross and Western Division of Fife, under John
Bruce Fiar of Kinross; The Eastern Division of Fife, under Sir Charles Halket
of Pitfirren; The two Divisions of the Shire of Perth, under such Commanders,
as they shall think fit to choice; The Shire of Forfar, under the Earl of
Southesk; The Shire of Kincardin, under the Lord Keith; Marishalls part of
Aberdeen, under the Earl of (...), ^^d in his absence the Lord Inverury; The
rest of Aberdeen Shire, under the Master of Forbes, or such as he shall
appoint; the Shire of Bamff under the Earl of Finlater; all betwixt Spey and
Ness, under the Lord Duffus; The Shire of Ross, under Sir Rory Mckenie of
Findon; The Shire of Sutherland, under the Lord Strathnaver, and in his
absence, by Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonstoun; The Shire of Caithnes, under the
Lord Glenurchy; The Shire of Bute under the Sheriff of Bute. And Authorizes and
Requires the said Heretors so Met and Rendezvouzed, to Act and Do every thing
lawful and necessary for the Security of the Protestant Religion, and Peace and
Quiet of the Kingdom; with Power to the said Commanders abovementioned, to
keep together, or dismiss them, as they shall see cause, unless they have
particular Orders from the Council to the contrair. As likeways hereby
Authorizes and Impowers the Magistrates of the whole Royal Burrows within this
Kingdom, to Rendezvous the whole Fencible Persons, Inhabitants within the same,
for the great and laudable ends abovementioned. Likeas the said Lords do
hereby Advertise and Require the whole Militia of Foot in this Kingdom, to be
in readiness to be Rendezvouzed, whenever His Majesty's Privy Council shall
have occasion for their Service; and that at the respective places of their
Rendezvous, and under their respective Commanders; And Ordains the Heretors
abovementioned, to be Rendezvouzed at the places of Rendezvous, within their
respective Shires, at the Dyets following, viz. All the Shires be-south the
River of Tay upon Tuesday the first day of January next: The Shires betwixt the
River of Tay and Spey, upon Tuesday thereafter, the eight day of the said
Month; And the whole other Shires benorth Spey, upon Tuesday the fifteenth day
of the said Month of January. And grants Personal Protection to all who may be
herein concerned, from all Execution of the Law, for Personal Debts, and that
for the space of one Month after the respective days appointed for their
Rendezvous, in manner abovementioned But prejudice always of Quartering, or
other Legal Diligence to be done for the In-bringing of the Excise, Supply, and
other Public Burdens. And Ordains the Sheriffs of the Sheriffdoms, Baillies of
Regalities, and Bailliaries, and Stewarts of Stewartries, and their Deputs, to
cause make Intimation hereof in the usual way and manner accustomed; And these
presents to be Published at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the whole
Shires, and Stewartries abovementioned, that none pretend ignorance. Extracted
forth of the Records of His Majesty's Privy Council, By me,

WILL. PATERSON. Cls. Sti. Consilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, City and University: Anno Dom. 1688.


