LAWS AND ORDINANCES, Touching Military Discipline.

Translated into English by I. D.

crown (possibly a printer's device)

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, 1691.

Laws and Ordinances touching Military Discipline.
Whereas by daily experience, many disorders are found, to grow amongst those
that bear Arms, tending to the great damage of those Countries, and prejudice
of the Government thereof, which notwithstanding, are not any where so punished
as in reason they ought, because there is no certain Order, or Law touching
like matters as yet Decreed and Published: The States General of the United
Provinces, have therefore (with the Advice of the Council of State of the same)
ordained, appointed, and decreed, Do by these Presents Ordain, Appoint, and
Decree the Orders or Laws here ensuing, which, their will is, to give from
point to point strictly observed and followed by all those that bear Arms in
their Service; To which end it shall be every where Published, and accordingly
Sworn to by the Soldiers.

1. FIrst, he that shall take the Lords Name in vain, or blaspheme the same,
shall for the first time make an honorable amends, and be kept three days in
Prison at Bread and Water: The second time shall have a glowing Iron thrust
through his Tongue, then be stripped to his Shirt, and so banished out of the
United Provinces.

2. The like Penalty shall they incur, for the first and second times, who
shall either do or say ought in despite, or derision of God's Word, or the
Ministers of the Church.

3. All wilful Murders, Raps, Adultery, Firing of Houses, Thievry, Violence,
Outrage, Falsehood, and other like bad Facts, and open offenses, or unnatural
Abuses, shall be punished with Death.

4. None shall any way Outrage, Strike, Knoke, Beat, Threaten or dishonestly
touch any Widows, Married or Unmarried Women, such as are in Childbed, or with
Child, or any young Children, on pain to be Discharged without Money or
Pasport, or else punished Corporally, according to the quality of the offense.
Likewise all common Whores shall for the first time be expulsed out of the Camp
with shame, and being found there the second time, soundly Whipped and Banished.

5. He that shall have done or conspired ought against the States, the
Country, Towns, or other places thereof, or against any Governors, or
Captains in the same, whereby the public State of the Land may be in any sort
endammaged, or endangered: As also, whosoever shall consent thereunto, shall
without any mercy be Hanged.

6. The like Punishment shall they also incur, whosoever coming to the
knowledge of any such matter, shall not reveal it to their Captain, or chief
Officers.

7. None shall raise any Mutiny, or make any unlawful Asse^bly, on whatsoever
secret, cloaked, or other purposes: Nor for what cause soever it be, without
Order from their Commanders, on pain of hanging,

8. In like sort shall they also be punished, that shall be present at such
Assemblies, or call, stir up, and incite any to be present thereat. And is to
be understood also, that such Officers as shall be at the like Seditious
Meetings, shall receive punishment before all other Soldiers, except those (that
are no Authors thereof.)

9. He that shall speak ill of the States General, or particular, the Council of
State, or other Superiors, or shall speak ought to despise or deride any of
them, shall without mercy be punished with Death.

10. He that shall have spoken any words tending to Sedition, Mutiny, or
Disobedience, or that having heard such words, and shall not presently acquaint
his Captain therewith, shall be punished with Death.

11. In like sort shall they also be punished, who rehearse any such words in
presence of private Soldiers, either of themselves, or by suggestion of others,
or practice ought, whereby any Mutiny or Sedition may grow.

12. No man being out of Guarded, or Besieged places, or in other like cases,
shall use any Speech or Correspondence with the Enemy, nor send him any
Messages, or Letters, nor receive any from him, nor deal in like sort with any
of his Confederates, be it in secret or public, without the Consent first had
of his Governor or Captain, or that he make it forthwith known unto him,
unless he be thereto authorized. Neither shall any man be adherent, or in any
sort assistant to the Enemy, on pain of death.

13. Likewise none shall Confer or Converse with any Trumpet or Drum of the
Enemies, or any other sent on Message from him, but they only who are thereto
appointed, on pain of death.

14. None shall in going, departing, lying still, Mustering, or in Garrison, do
Outrage, or Spoil to the Inhabitants of these Countries, their Favorers or
Confederats, or take from them any Victuals, Money or ought else, without
paying duly for the same, nor yet throw down, or spoil any Water-Milns, or
Waterworks, nor set on fire the same, or other Houses, or else the Camp, at
the breaking up thereof, without special Command from the General, or other
chief Officers, on pain of Death.

15. Likewise none shall either do or practice ought against any Persons, Towns,
Villages, Forts, Havens or whatsoever Goods warranted by Pasports, or other
Assurances from the Generality, on pain of Death.

16. He that will depart from one Company to another, or elsewhere, or will
leave the Colors under which he serves, is to have a sufficient Pasport from
his Captain, or Commander, and failing therein, shall be punished with Death.

17. Whatsoever Captain shall entertain Soldiers without a lawful Discharge from
their former Captain, shall be punished with Death.

18. If any Soldier (serving on Horse or Foot) shall knock or strike his Host,
Hostess, their Man or Maidservants, he shall for the first time be kept three
days at Bread and Water; the second, make an honorable amends, and before the
whole Watch be disarmed, and then banished out of the Company. And if the party
so stricken be maimed, or Blood drawn, then shall the Soldier offending have his
Hand stricken off.

19. Whosoever shall have taken or stolen any Victuals, or other Provisions
brought up, toward the Camp, Garrison, or any Towns, or Places under the
Jurisdiction of the States General, shall be Hanged.

20. Likewise, none shall out of the Camp or Garrison forcibly take, or else buy
up before hand, any Victuals or Goods bound thitherwards, before the same shall
be brought to a fit place for sale, and Taxed: Neither shall he Rob any Cabin,
Shop, Tent, Victualer, or Merchand that is there, for the help of the Camp or
Garrison, on pain of Death.

21. He that shall go out of the Quarter from his Colors, or Garrison, further
than a Canon Shot, without his Captains leave, shall be punished with Death.

22. Whosoever shall go out of the Camp, Besieged-Town, Fort, or other place,
without the special consent of his Captain, or Officer, for any cause, be it
for Forage, or ought else, shall be Hanged.

23. Whosoever shall take any Cattle, or Beasts within the Lands that ly under
the obedience of the Generality, shall be punished as a Thief.

24. He that in Marching by Land toward the Field, or in returning thence,
shall forsake his Colors, or Cornet, shall without any mercy be punished with
Death.

25. And whosoever (not being visited with manifest Sickness, and the same
known to his Captain, or Commander) shall keep along with the Baggage, or ride
on the Wagons, shall be disarmed before the whole Company, and then banished
without Money or Pasport.

26. If any shall neglect his Watch, or Service committed unto him, he shall be
punished with Death.

27. It any Soldier shall be found sleeping on his Sentinel, he shall without
any mercy be punished with Death.

28, Whatsoever Soldier shall, either by day or night, depart from his
Sentinel, where he has been placed by his Corporal, unless he be called
thence, or relieved by the said Corporal, shall receive punishment of Death
without any mercy.

29. None shall declare or make known the Watchword to the Enemy, or any other,
nor give any other Word than is given him by the Officer, on pain of Death.

30. Whosoever shall absent himself out of the Court of Guard above two hours in
the daytime, or any within the night, without his Corporals leave, shall be
punished with Death.

31. None shall without lawful cause raise any Tumult, or alarm, nor Discharge a
Piece by night, nor make any noise, nor do ought else, whereby the same may
grow (without cause) on pain of Death.

32. He that shall presume within the Camp, Quarter, or place, where he lies in
Garrison, as also after the Watch is set, to draw his Weapon shall forfeit his
Life: As also if he do it out of the Camp, Town, or place, without leave of his
Officer.

33. He that shall strike any man with his Sword undrawn, or with a Cudgel,
Stone, or otherwise, that Blood follow, shall lose his Hand.

34 He that shall give any one a Box on the Ear, shall in presence of the
Company take the like Box again of the party so wronged, and besides be
Disarmed and Banished the Company.

35 No Soldier shall without Order from their chief Captains, or Commanders,
hold any common Meeting, or gathering together, be it to demand Money or ought
else, nor yet be present at such Assemblies, on pain of Death. Provided always,
that such Captains, or commanders as shall suffer the same to happen at undue
Seasons, and in unlawfulwise, shall (for an example to others) be punished with
Death before all the Soldiers.

36. If any shall call for Money as they are Marching in the face of the Enemy,
or upon any Enterprise, they shall receive punishment of Death without any mercy.

37. If it chance that the Monthly Entertainment be not paid on every day, or
that it cannot be sent unto the Soldiers for some cause, be it through any
hinderance of the Enemy, or otherwise, none shall therefore make any Tumult, or
speak Seditious Words, or seek to force his Captain to the payment thereof,
neither yet any whit the less Discharge, and have care of his Marches and
Watches, but contenting himself with a reasonable Loan, until the Money be
come, or may come, shall fully perform the Duty required of a good Soldier. And
whosoever does the contrary, or accompany those that do it, shall be punished
with Death.

38. No Captains, Lieutenants, or Ensigns, shall depart out of their place where
their Companies ly in Garrison, whether it be to solicit for payment of their
said Companies, or for their own business, without leave of their Commanders or
Governor, on pain of Death.

39. He that shall in any Quarrel, fight, or otherwise call those of his Nation
to help, or gather an Assembly; shall be hanged.

40. He that shall be found by day or night out of the Camp, or place Besieged,
without his Captains leave, shall be punished with Death.

41. Whosoever shall go on Free-booting, and commit Spoils, Extortions, and
Theft, shall be hanged.

42. If one Soldier challenge another into the Field, without leave from him
that commands in that Quarter, he shall be punished with Death.

43. If any Corporal, or other commanding the Watch, shall suffer two Soldiers
to go forth to fight, he shall without mercy be punished with Death.

44. Any Soldier being wronged by Word or Deed, he shall repair to him that
commands in the Quarter, who after the hearing of both Parties^t shall cause
satifaction of the wrong to be made unto the Party interessed, with bare head,
and in presence of the whole Watch: And if he find cause, shall also disarm the
Wrong-doer, and banish him out of the Company.

45. And if there be no Witness of the Quarrel, then shall the said Commander
cause the Parties to agree in his presence, whereto if they will not
condescend; then both, or he that denies it, shall be disarmed, and banished
out of the Company.

46. Whatsoever Soldier or Commander shall go out of the Camp, Town, or Fort, or
enter thereinto by any other way than at the Ports and ordinary Entrances,
shall be hanged.

47. If any Soldier shall refuse the Command of his Captain, or any other who
Commands over him in the service of the States General, and not perform the
same, he shall be punished with Death; as he likewise shall, who transgresses
any of the Generals Commandments published by sound of Drum or Trumpet.

48. At the sounding of any Alarm, every one shall resort to his Ensign, or
Cornet, and whosoever comes not thither (unless it be on apparent necessity) or
runs to another place without consent and special order from his Commander, or
comes not so soon as his Ensign, shall be punished with Death.

49. Every* Soldier shall aid and defend his Colors by day and night, and on
the first warning repair unto them, not departing thence, until it be brought
into a place of safety, on pain of death.

50. If any shall depart out of the Order, or Rank wherein he is placed, unless
it be on necessary occasions, and that he had therewith acquainted his Officer,
he shall be punished with death.

51. He that shall first begin to flee in Battle or Assault, may lawfully be
slain thereupon by any one; and if he escape, he shall be declared a Villain,
and receive punishment of death without mercy.

52. None that is appointed to the defense of any Breach, Trench, or Skonce, be
it a Captain or Soldier, shall willingly forsake the same, or through any false
or colored occasions or excuses, absent himself from thence, without
sufficient order, or warrant allowed by the Council of War, on pain of death.

53. None shall surrender or deliver to the Enemy any place, the keeping whereof
is committed unto him, on pain of death.

54. Likewise none shall run from his Quarter, in a Besieged place, cry for
Composition, or speak thereof, be unwilling to fight, labor, or defend their
Quarter, or make others unwilling thereunto, or do ought else in such a place,
whereby the defense thereof may be hindered, on pain of death without any mercy.

55. If any man run away to the Enemy, or in such his flight be taken by the
Enemy, he shall be punished with death.

56. No captains shall seduce, or entice away each others Soldiers, on pain of
death.

57. Whosoever shall by word or deed busy himself with the Sergeant. Major
doing his Office, be he Captain or Soldier, shall withou mercy be punished with
death; as he also shall, who will not content himself with that Quarter or
Lodging, whereto he shall be appointed to be Quartermaster or Furrier, or who
will disturb another man in his place.

58. If any Soldier having the Watch, shall come to his Colors not fully Armed,
to March with the rest into the Watch, he shall for the first time be kept three
days at bread and water, the second disarmed, and banished for three Months out
of the Company, and the third time affer death.

59. Every one of what condition soever he be, shall forthwith, or before the
evening bring before him that Commands in the Quarter, all such Prisoners as
shall be taken of the Enemy, on pain of forfeiting the said Prisoners, and to be
punished besides with death.

60. And if any shall take Prisoner a General Commander, or other man of account
of the Enemy, he is forthwith to present, or cause to be presented the said
Prisoner unto the States General, or Council of State, and withal to deliver
him over, as also whatsoever other Prisoners they will take to themselves,
receiving therefore a reasonable reward, according to the quality and ability
of the Prisoner; provided that it exceed not the sum of 5000 Gilders: And so
the said Prisoner shall be at the disposing of the aforesaid States, and he that
took him pretend no further interest in that behalf.

61. Likewise none shall kill any Prisoner, or set his ransom, or after the
payment of the said Ransom, suffer him to depart without leave of the General,
or him that commands the Quarter, on pain of being disarmed, and banished out
of these Countries.

62. And if any Prisoner be found walking along the Campeso, place of Garrison,
without leave of the General, or him that commands there, he to whom the
Prisoner belongs shall forfeit him to those who shall first lay hands on the
said Prisoner.

63. Concerning lawful Prizes, whosoever bring in the same, shall acquaint
therewith the General, or him that commands in the Quarter, within three hours
after their return, to the end they may be accordingly Registered, on pain of
forfeiting the same, and to be besides punished on the body.

64. Whosoever shall have gotten any thing upon the Enemy, and gives not notice
thereof, as aforesaid, that it may be Registered, and after sold in the Camp or
place of Garrison, but shall sell, or cause it to be sold in the Places or Towns
near thereunto, shall without any mercy be punished with death, to the end that
better order be held in all, and no man wronged in his Right.

65. When a Soldier shall have done any offense or fault, his Captain shall be
bound (on pain of three Months suspension from his Charge) to deliver the said
Soldier into the Generals hands, or his that commands in the Quarter, who with
the Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns then present, shall upon the information,
which he shall cause to be taken thereof, Judge according to these Orders and
Laws.

66. He that is drunk on his Watch day, shall be cassiered, and banished out of
the Company.

67. If any one drink himself drunk and in his drunkenness commit any ill, or
ought forbidden, he shall not thereby be excused, but so much the more sharply
punished.

68. If any Captain or Soldier shall refuse the Muster or Review, he shall be
Cassiered.

69. None shall at the Muster let himself be entered by a changed, or other name
than his own, nor pass Muster with a borrowed Horse or Arms; neither shall any
on the Muster day lend the like, on pain of being disarmed, and banished out of
the Company.

70. None shall let himself be entered, or Muster under two Companies, on pain
of death.

71. None shall diminish or pawn his Arms, which are appointed him by his
Captain, on pain of being disarmed, and banished for six Months out of the
Company.

72. None shall likewise take or pawn any Soldiers Arms, on pain of losing
double the worth of the Pawn.

73. None shall play away or quite his Arms, but keep the same always clean and
serviceable, on pain of being Cassiered out of the Company without Passport.

74. None shall by cousenage get away his Fellows Provisions, Victuals, or Arms,
on pain of being disarmed, and banished for three Months out of the Company or
else besides, of sustaining corporal punishment, according to the quality of
the offense.

75. He that shall presume to set upon a Commissary of the Musters, or wrong him
either in word or deed, shall be punished with death.

76. If any Captain give his Soldiers less than the Pay allowed him by the
States, he shall be disgraded.

77. If any Soldier proffer to draw his Weapon against his Chief, or Commander,
he shall be punished with death.

78. If the Provost or his Officers apprehend one or more Soldiers, none (of
what degree soever) shall oppose himself there against, or rescue, or attempt to
rescue the said Prisoners, on pain of death

79. Furthermore, no Officer nor Gentleman of any Company of Horse or Foot, nor
any common Soldier, shall victual in any Camp, without the Generals special
consent, on pain of being disarmed

80. Likewise all Victuallers that victual in the Camp, shall be subject to the
aforesaid Articles, and the Council of War there being, on the penalty herein
contained, and shall not draw any Wine or Beer for any one in the evening, an
hour after Suns setting or in the morning as much before the rifing thereof, on
pain of forfaulting 3 Gilders for every time they shall be found to have done
so: The said Forefault to be converted, the one half thereof to the Provosts
behove, and the other to the relief of the Poor.

81. All other abuses and offenses not specified in these Orders, shall be
punished according to the Ordinances, Laws, and Customs of the War.

82. And if any Soldiers should not be present at the proclaiming of these
Orders and Laws, they shall notwithstanding be as much bound to the observation
of them, as the other who were present. But to the end none may pretend
ignorance, and every one have notice thereof, the States General have given
Order, that the same shall be every where published on the Muster-day, and
charged the Commissaries to cause all the Soldiers to swear accordingly
thereunto.

THus done and decreed at Arnhem, after sundry Conferences had hereupon with
the chiefest Commanders of these united Provinces; It being further appointed,
that these Orders and Laws shall be published both in the Camp, and wheresoever
else it shall be meet and requisite, and that at every Muster the Commissaries
shall read and propound the same again unto the Companies. August 13. 1590.

By Order of the Council of State, Chr. Huygens.

Edinburgh, August 31. 1691.
THe Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council, Do hereby Ordain The Articles and
Rules for the better Government of the Forces in this Kingdom, Printed by Order
of His Royal Majesty King Charles the Second, in the Year One thousand six
hundred seventy five, to be of new Reprinted, as the same are Altered and
Amended by Their Lordships. And likewise Ordains The Laws and Ordinances
touching Military-Discipline, which are Printed at the Hague in Anno One
thousand six hundred seventy six, and by Order of the Council of Scotland
Reprinted at Edinburgh in Anno One thousand six hundred eighty nine, to be
again Reprinted. For doing of all which, these Presents shall be to all
Persons Concerned, a sufficient Warrant. Extracted forth of the Records of
Privy Council, by me

GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

FINIS.

