ACT Condemning a Pamphlet, called, An apologetick Relation of suffering
Ministers.
Edinburgh, the eighth day of February, one thousand six hundred and sixty six.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council considering, that by diverse ancient
and laudable Laws and Acts of Parliament; and particularly by the tenth Act,
Parl. tenth, the hundred and thirty fourth Act, Parl. eigth, of King James the
sixth of blessed memory, and by several other Laws and Acts, the Authors,
Printers, Venders or Dispersers of infamous and scandalous Lideis, are
punishable by death, confiscation of movables, and diverse other high pains and
punishments. And the said Lords bring informed, that there has been a
Pamphlet, of the nature fortsaid, entitled, An apologetick Relation of the
particular sufferings of the Ministers of the Kirk of Scotland, since August,
1660. which is printed and dispersed into several parts of this Kingdom; and
upon examination and perusal thereof, is found to be full of seditions,
treasonable and rebellious Principles, contrived of purpose to traduce the
Kings Authority and G^^^^ment the proceedings of the ^ats Parliament and of the
Kings Privy Council, contrait to the (...) of the Prote^^^nt Religion professed
within this Kingdom and established by Law, and (...) the Lieges from their
all^^giance and obedience, and to strengthen the disaffected in their (...)
Principles and Practisies. Therefore, to vindicat the honor of this Kingdom,
and to witness and (...), that such Principles and Tenets, as are contained in
the said Pamphlet, are detested and abhorred by them as treasonable and
seditious, and are contra^^^ to the Laws of the Kingdom, and destructive of the
Kings Authority and Prerogative Royal, under which this Kingdom has flourished
for many ages, and that they may show How much they abominat such Tenets and
Principles; They ordain, that upon the fourteenth day of February instant, the
said Pamphlet be publicly hurnt on the high Street of Edinburgh, near to the
Mercat Cross, by the hand of the Hangman: And that all havers of the said
Pamphlets, residing besouth the water of Tay, shall bring in and deliver the
same to the Sheriffs of the respective Shires, or their Deputes, to be
transmitted by them to the Clers of (...) Privy Council, betwixt and the last
day of February instant; and benorth the said water, betwixt and the twenty
first day of March next: With certification, that if thereafter any person, of
whatsoever (...), quality or ser they be of, shall have any of the said
printed Copies in their custody or possession, th^^ ^^ey shall be liable in
payment of the sum of two (...) Scots money, to be exacted (...) any (...) or
defalcation. And further, if they or any other person shall be found hereafter
to be (...), (...) or Assister to the making up, printing, publishing or (...)
of (...) shall be proceeded (...) Authors, Printers, (...) of (...) and all
(...) and penalties (...): And (...) of the (...) of Edinburgh to cause burn
out of (...) in (...). And (...) printed, and (...) the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh; and other places needful, (...).

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY,
1666.


