C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
EDINBURGH, The seventh day of December, one thousand six hundred and sixty
five.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council finding it now, after a long and
tender forbearance, necessary, that their Acts of the third of December, one
thousand six hundred and sixty two, and thirteenth of August, one thousand six
hundred and sixty three years, against such Ministers as entered in, or since,
the year, one thousand six hundred and forty nine, and had not since obtained
Presentations from their lawful Patrons, and Collations and Admissions from
their Ordinaries; be, upon some weighty grounds and considerations therein
mentioned, extended against all such other Ministers, who being entered before
the year forty nine, have, since the restitution of the Government of the
Church by Archbishops and Bishops, relinquished their Ministry, or been deposed
therefrom by their Ordinary, Do therefore command and charge, all such
Ministers, within forty days after publication hereof, and all such Ministers
as shall hereafter relinquish their Ministry; or be deposed therefrom by their
Ordinary (within forty days after their relinquishing and deposition) to
remove themselves, their families and goods belonging to them, out of these
respective Pardches where they were Incumbents, and not to reside within twenty
miles of the same, or within six miles of Edinburgh or any Cathedral Church, or
three miles of any Burgh Royal within this Kingdom, or to reside two of them
within one Paroch; with certification, if they failie to remove themselves as
said is, and to give exact obedience hereunto (unless they have the permission
of the Lords of the Privy Council, Lords of His Majesty's Commission for Church
affairs, or of the Bishop of the Diocese) they are to incur the penalties of
the Laws made against movers of sedition, and to be proceeded against with that
strictness which is due to so great contempt of His Majesty's Authority over
Church and State. And do hereby inhibit and discharge all Heretors and
Householders in Burgh or Land, to give any presence or countenance to any one or
more of these Ministers, removed by this present Act, to preach or exercise any
act of the Office of a Minister; with certification, if they after publication
hereof shall presume so to do, they are to be proreeded against according to
Law: And commanding and requiring all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Magistrates of Burghs
and Justices of Peace, to make diligent search and inquiry within their
respective Jurisdictions, if any such Ministers, as fall within the compass of
this or the other two Acts of Conncil aforesaid, do reside within the bounds
therein prohibited, and to seize upon and imprison their persons, ay and while
they find sufficient caution to compear before the Lords of His Majesty's
Council or Commission, betwixt and such a short day, as the said Sheriffs,
Stewarts, Magistrates of Burghs, and Justices of Peace, shall upon
consideration of the distance of the place, judge convenient: And in case of
not meeting of the Council or Commission at the day foresaid, to compear the
next meeting day thereafter; certifying all Sheriffs, Magistrates of Burghs and
Justices of Peace, that His Majesty will account their neglect and remissness
in this Affair, an high contempt of His Authority and Commands, and punish the
same accordingly. And Ordains these presents to be printed and published, that
none pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1665.


