At EDINBVRGH, the ninth day of October, one thousand six hundred and sixty
seven.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, in pursuance of His Majesty's
gracious pleasure contained in His Royal Proclamation above mentioned, do give
Power, Warrant and Commission to the persons following, within the several
Bounds and Jurisdictions underwritten, viz. To the Lord Lie, the Lairds of
Raploch, Corhouse, Cambusnetham, Sir John Whitefuird and Mr. John Hamiltoun of
Raith, Sheriff-Depute, for the Sheriffdom of Lanerk, the Mr. of Cochran, Sir
John Cochran, the Lord Stair, Sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie, Mr. John
Cunninghame Advocat, Mr. James Cunninghame Sheriff-Depute of Air, Mr. Hugh
Montgomery Sheriff-Depute of Renfrew, and William Cunninghame late Provost of
Air, for the Sheriffdoms of Air and Renfrew. The Mr. of Hereis, the Sheriff of
Galloway, the Lord of Baldoone, (...) Maxwel of Munshes, and (...) Maxwel of
Woodhead, for the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun and Stewartry of Kircudbright, James
Crichton of St. Leonards, the Lairds of Craigdarroch and Wester-raw, (...)
Douglas of Mousehill, and (...) Carruthers of Howmaynes, for the Sheriffdom of
Dumfrice and Stewartry of Annandale, or any two of them for ilk Shire and
Stewartry above specified, and to the Lords of Session, or any two of them for
all the other Bounds and Shires of the Kingdom: to meet and conveen at the Head
Burghs of the respective Shires and Stewartries, and the Lords of Session to
meet at Edinburgh, upon the twenty two and twenty ninth of October instant, and
the first and last Tuesdayes of both the months of November and December
thereafter; And there to receive Bonds for keeping of the Peace, from all such
persons as have been accessory to the late insurrection, and are now to have
the benefit of His Majesty's Pardon, in manner contained in His Majesty's
Proclamation; that is to say, Bond and Caution from all such as are able to
find Caution, and that under such pains, as the said Commissioners, or
respective quorums thereof shall appoint. And for such as shall make faith,
that they are not able to find Caution, that they accept from them their own
Bonds, conform to the tenor of the Bond hereunto subjoyned: And upon the said
persons subscribing of the said Bonds, that the said Commissioners give a
Testificate under their hands, bearing, that they have signed the same, and are
thereby to have the benefit of His Majesty's Pardon, contained in the foresaid
Proclamation: And ordains all such Bonds as shall be subscribed by the said
persons to be returned by the said Commissioners to the Clerk of His Majesty's
Council, that they may be insert and registrat in the Books thereof, betwixt
and the fifteenth day of January next. And ordains these presents, with the
said Proclamation and Bonds underwritten, to be printed, and published by
Macers, or Messengers of Arms, at the Mercat-crosse of Edinburgh, and at the
Market crosses of Lanerk, Air, Renfrew, Wigtoun, Stewartry of Kircudbright,
Dumfrice, and other places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

Follows the Tenor of the Bond to be subscribed by such of the Rebels as are
able to find Caution.
I A. B. Bind and obliege me, That I shall keep the Public Peace, and that I
shall not rise in Arms, against, or without His Majesty's Authority, under all
highest pains that may follow, in case I shall do any thing in the contrair.
And for further surety, C. D. does bind and obliege himself, as Cautioner, for
me, for my keeping of the Peace, and performance of the Obliegement foresaid,
under the pain of (...) to be paid in case I contraveen the same. Likeas, in
the case foresaid, the said C. D. my Cautioner, binds and oblieges him, his
Heirs and Successors, to pay the foresaid sum to the Commissioners of His
Majesty's Thesaury, Thesaurer, or Thesaurer-Depute that shall happen to be for
the time, for His Majesty's use. And I the said A. B. binds and oblieges me, my
Heirs and Successors, to relieve my Cautioner of the Premises, and of all
damnage he shall happen to sustain there-through, in any sort; Consenting these
presents be Registrat in the Books of Privy Council, that all execution
necessary may pass hereupon, in form as effeirs: And constitutes (...) our
Procurators; In witness whereof, written by (...) we have subscribed these
present, at (...)

Follows the Bond to be subscribed by such as are not able to find Caution.
I A. B. bind and oblige me, That I shall keep the Public Peace, and that I
shall not rise in Arms against, or without His Majesty's Authority, under all
highest pains that may follow, in case I shall do any thing in the contrair;
Consenting these presents be Registrat in the Books of Privy Council, that all
execution necessary may pass hereupon, in form as effeirs. And constitutes
(...) my Procurators; In witness whereof, written by (...) I have subscribed
these presents, at (...)

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAjESTY,
1667.


