C R
royal English blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

EDINBURGH, The last day of January, 1673.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council considering, that by the tenth Act of
the third Session of the second Parliament, Entitled, Act concerning Apparel,
they are empowered to take such course, as they shall think fit, to make the
said Act effectual; And they being fully resolved to see the said Act put in
execution, have thought fit, to cause the said Act of Parliament to be printed
apart, and published at the head Burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom,
that all His Majesty's Subjects may have timous notice thereof, and give
obedience thereto, and that no person pretend ignorance of the same. Of which
Act of Parliament, the Tenor follows.

Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

ACT Concerning APPAREL.
Edinburgh, 26. of July, 1672.
OUr Sovereign Lord, considering the great prejudice which this Kingdom does
sustain, by the sumptuousness and prodigality which all sorts of Persons use in
their Apparel, without regard to, or distinction of, their several degrees and
qualities; considerable sums of money being (...) upon that occasion,
unnecessarily exported out of the Kingdom, and the Native Commodities and
Manufactories thereof being thereby neglected, and not improven for the use and
advantage of the Inhabitants: For remeld whereof, His Majesty, with advice and
consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, that none of His
Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom, of whatsoever degree, condition or quality,
shall, after the first day of June, One thousand six hundred threescore
thirteen Years, wear any Clothes or Apparel wherein there is any Gold or
Silver; or wear any Gold or silver Laces of whatsoever kind, Buttons, Ribbands,
Tracings, Fringes or Louping made of Gold or Silver; Or have any Imbroide^ing
of Gold or Silver upon their Apparel, Sword belts or any other manner of way:
Excepting always Buttons, Buckles and Hilts of Swords of Gold-smithwork, which
the Privileged Persons after-exprest are allowed to wear, and no others: And
that none wear any Flowred Stuffs, Stripped Stuffs, or Brocado's of Silk, or
have any Silk-lace, Gimp-lace, or any other kind of Lace or Imbroidering of
Silk upon their wearing Clothes: And that no person presume to import into this
Kingdom, or make, or sell therein any of the Commodities above-exprest after
the date hereof; Certifying such as shall contraveen, that they shall be liable
in the pains following, viz. The Importer, Maker and Seller, shall be fined in
One thousand pounds Scots, by and attour the Confiscation of the Goods so
imported, made or sold: And the Wearer thereof in Five hundred merks Scots,
toties quoties, by and attour the Confiscation of the Clothes. And it is hereby
Declared, that the Importer of such prohibited Goods shall not have Action, for
the price thereof, against the Merchant, for whose use the same were imported;
Nor the Seller thereof against the Buyer, albeit Bands be given for the same,
if it can be made appear that the Bands were given for that cause: Excepting
always from this present Act, Comedians, as to the Clothes which they make use
of upon the Stage; Heralds, as to their Coats, and His Majesty's Trumpetters,
And also excepting Pages and Lacqueys of the privileged Persons afternamed, as
to Silk-laces and Pasments allanerly, which they are hereby allowed to wear
upon their Livery-clothes. And His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Does Statute
and Ordain, that none of His Subjects shall after the first of June next, wear
any Clothing or Apparel of Velvet, Satin or other Stuffs of Silk, or wear any
Beaver-hats, under the pain of Five hundred merks; to be paid by the
Contraveener, toties quoties: Except Noblemen, Prelates, His Majesty's
Counselors, Lords of Session, and such Barons, Knights, or Gentlemen, who have
of yearly valued Rent Two thousand pounds Scots money; And the Provosts of the
principal Burrows within this Kingdom; Or these that have been Provosts, and
such also as shall before the time, or have been Provosts, Baillies, Dean of
Gild or Theasurer within the Town of Edinburgh: Excepting also Rectors of
Universities, and the Wives of the said Privileged Persons, their eldest Sons
and eldest Daughters unmarried, and all the Children of Noblemen. And that none
wear any Ribbands or Louping made of Silk upon their Apparel, or any white
Lace, or Po^nt made of Thread, under the pain of Five hundred merks Scots,
toties quoties; Excepting the Privileged Persons aforesaid, who are hereby
allowed to wear plain Taffety-ribbands upon their Apparel, and to wear white
Lace, or Point made of Three upon their Linnings only. And all Persons
whatsoever are hereby prohibited to wear Feathers, except Soldiers, under the
pain aforesaid: But prejudice always to all ranks of Persons (except those of
the Yeomanry) to wear plain Taffety Ribbands upon such parts of their Apparel
where they may have occasion of the same for Ties; and to Women to wear Hoods
and Skarfs of Taffety: And but prejudice to domestic servants to wear their
Masters or Mistrisses old Clothes, allowed to them by this Act. And for the
better effectuating hereof, His Majesty with advice foresaid, Ordains all
Collectors of Assessment and Excise, and their Sub-collectors, Farmorers and
Collectors of Customs, and Waiters in Burgh or Land, at every Term to give up,
upon Oath, to the Commissioners of Excise in the several Shires and Burghs, and
to the General Collectors of the Customs and Excise, Lists of all those whom
they have seen and observed to transgress this Act: And it is hereby Declared,
that the one half of the penalties aforesaid shall belong to themselves, and
the other half shall be collected by them for His Majesty's use; Trial being
first taken, and the Persons found guilty, by the Commissioners of Assessment
or Excise, Justices of Peace, or other ordinary Magistrate of the place: And
such Contraveeners as they shall not give information of, that the one half of
their Fynes shall belong to any other person who shall discover them. And in
case the said Collectors of Assessment and Excise, Farmorers and Collectors of
Customs, or Waiters, shall failzie to give up the said Lists as aforesaid,
They shall thereby lose their places, and be incapable of that Service for
ever. It is always provided, that no persons contraveening this Act, shall be
liable to the said penalties, unless their names be given up within the space
of three months after their incurring thereof: But prejudice always to any
other person, who shall discover the Contraveeners in manner foresaid, of the
one half of the penalties, whenever they shall discover them. Likeas, the
Commissioners of His Majesty's Justiciary are hereby required to give Order, at
their Circuit Courts, to take up Dittays against the Transgressors of this Act;
and to proceed against them, by fyning them in the sums abovementioned, and to
exact the same. Likeas, His Majesty, with advice foresaid, Does hereby
Authorize and Empower the Lords of His Privy Council, to take such further
course for making this Act effectual, as They shall think fit.

EDINBURGH, Printed by His Majesty's Printers, Anno Dom. 1673.


