I7 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn
LETTERS of PUBLICATION In favors of THOMAS WEIR Surgeon in Edinburgh.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith,
To Our Lovits. Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, and to
all and sundry Our Liedges and Subjects, whom it effiers, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We having, by Our Royal Gift, Given and Granted to Thomas Weir
Surgeon in Edinburgh, the sole and only Privilege aftermentioned, and
contained in the said Gift and Signature, and past under the Great Seal of this
Our Ancient Kingdom; Of which Gift and Signature, the Tenor follows, Sic
suprascribitur. JAMES R. Our Sovereign Lord, considering, that the Medicinal
Pill, invented by the deceast Doctor Patrick Anderson, Physician to His
Majesty's dearest Father, King Charles the First, of ever blessed Memory, has
by Experience been found to be a most useful and safe Medicine, which has
recommended that Pill not only to His Majesty's Subjects in the Kingdom of
Scotland, but likewise, it has been used in the Kingdoms of England, Ireland,
and other places in Europe; and that it is very much the interest of His
Majesty's Subjects and others, that the Skill and Art of Preparing and
Compounding that Pill be preserved entire, and that Counterfeit, Sofisticat,
and Adulterat Pills be not imposed upon Persons, under the notion of this Pill,
which is so universally known and used; And His Majesty considering, that the
Secret and Skill in preparing this Pill, was only communicated by Doctor
Anderson to his two Daughters, with power only to the Surviver of them to
communicate and transmit that secret to some fit and qualified Person; and that
the deceased Katharine Anderson, the said Doctors surviving Daughter has
communicate to Thomas Weir, Surgeon in Edinburgh, the whole Secret and Skill,
in Preparing and Compounding the aforesaid Pill, and has sufficiently
instructed and seen him Prepare, and Compound, and make up that Pill, as well
as ever it was by Doctor Anderson, or his Daughters aforesaid; And that the
said deceased Katharine Anderson, has by her Assignation, dated the Fifeteen
day of December, last bypast Assigned and Disponed to the said Thomas VVeir
her Stamp, for the Directions, and Seal for the Boxes, with all other Vessels,
Materials, and Instruments, for Compounding, Preparing, and Making up the said
Pills; and that the said deceast Katharine Anderson does thereby declare, that
she has communicated and transmitted that secret of Preparing and Compounding
the said Pill to the said Thomas Weir, and no other person: And considering
that there is none else to whom that secret is communicated, or the Art of
Preparing and Compounding the said Pill is committed: and that notwithstanding
thereof, there are several persons, who have already, and are of intention to
feinie and counterfeit the said Pill, and to disperse the same with Printed
Papers, and otherways, under the name of the said Pill, commonly called Doctor
Andersons Pills; Albeit the secret of Preparing and Compounding thereof was
never communicated to them, or to any other person now on life, except the said
Thomas Weir, which (if not prevented) might prove very dangerous and
prejudicial to His Majesty's Liedges and others, through making use of any
counterfeit Sofisticat and Adulterat Pills, and would much discourage the said
Thomas Weir, who has only the secret of Preparing and Compounding thereof to
him communicated by the said Katharine Anderson, who Assigned and Disponed to
him the said Stamp and Seal, with all other Vessels and Instruments for
Compounding and Dispensing of the said Pill in manner foresaid: Therefore His
Majesty Ordains a Letter of Gift to be past and exped under His Majesty's Great
Seal of His Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, Giving, Granting and Disponing, as His
Majesty for Himself and His Royal Successors, Gives, Grants, and Dispons to,
and in favors of the said Thomas Weir, the sole Power, Right and Privilege to
Prepare, Compose, Dispense and Vend the aforesaid Pill, called Doctor Andersons
Pill, with power to him to use the said Stamp and Seal formerly used by the
said Katharine Anderson, for Attesting and Marking the Printed Papers and Boxes
belonging to the said Pills, for all the days and years of the said Thomas
Weir his Lifetime; And His Majesty does hereby Discharge all other Person or
Persons whatsomever, during the said space, directly or indirectly, to Prepare,
Compound, Make up, Dispense, or Vend any Pill or Pills under the name of the
said Pill, invented by the said deceast Doctor Anderson, or Papers r^lating
thereto, without the special License of the said Thomas Weir, under the penalty
of One Thousand Merks Scots for each Contravention. And His Majesty does hereby
Recommend to His Privy Council, and other Judicatories of the said Kingdom of
Scotland, to see His pleasure concerning the Premises rendered effectual, and
the Contraveeners fined or punished, to the terror of others; Providing always
that the said Thomas Weir shall be bound and obliged, not only to continue the
faithful and true preparing, composing, making up, and dispensing of the said
Pills, as was formerly done by the said deceast Doctor Anderson and his
Daughters, but likewise to communicate the secret thereof, and instruct any
qualified person he shall think fit, to prepare, compose, and make up the said
Pill, (that the Invention be not lost,) who shall have no benefit, privilege,
or liberty to compose or vend the aforesaid Pill, during the full time and
space above-written: And His Majesty Ordains the said Gift to be further
extended, with all Clauses needful, and to pass the Great Seal per saltum,
without passing any other Seals or Registers, in order whereunto, these
presents shall be to the Director of His Majesty's Chancellory for writing out
the same, and to the Lord High-Chancellor for causing the Great Seal to be
appended thereto, a sufficient Warrant. G^v^n at the Court at Whitehall, the
nineteenth day of May, one thousand six hundred and eighty seven, and of His
Majesty's Reign the third Year. By His Majesty's Command. sic subscribitur,
MELFORT. And whereas there having been an Address made to Our Privy Council by
the said Thomas Weir, humbly entreating, that Our Letters of Publication of Our
foresaid Gift and Signature, now past under Our Great Seal, might be direct in
manner, and to the effect underwritten. The Lords of Our privy Council, in
consideration of the said Address, by their Act of the date of these presents,
have ordained these Our Letters to be direct accordingly, as the said Act in it
self more fully purports. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly, and
Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, and whole remanent Mercat-crosses of the Head burghs of the
Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and there in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of Our Gift and Signature
above-written past under Our Great Seal as said is, in favors of the said
Thomas Weir, that all Our Leidges may have notice thereof, and give obedience
thereto, under the Pains and Certifications therein-mentioned, and being
further answerable, as Our privy Council shall think fit, in case they
contraveen: According to Justice, as ye will answer to Us thereupon. The which
to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally Our full Power by these Our
Letters, delivering them by you duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the second day of August 1687, And of Our
Reign the third Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON,
Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1687.

THese are to give Advertisement to any person or persons whatsomever, That the
Pill called Doctor Andersons Pill, with the printed Papers for instructing the
use the eof, with his Tallideus Picture at the head thereof, and the Boxes
being all sealed with his own Seal, which bears his own Nam^ ^ce and Arms, with
K. A. for his Daughter Katharine Andersons Name that last composed and sold the
same; are composed, and now to be (...) only by Thomas VVeir Surgeon, at his
Dwelling House in Edinburgh, on the South side of the High Street of the same,
in the Stone Land, and Third Door of the Fore-Turnpike thereof, (...) ^pper
Well or Conduit, commonly called the Cas^le-Well, a little belo^ the
Weigh-House of Ed^nburgh.


