HONI SOIT (...) MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

ACT For Naturalization of STRANGERS. Edinburgh, the 8. of December, 1669.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY, 1669.

ACT For Naturalization of STRANGERS.
Edinburgh, the 8. of December, 1669,
OUR Sovereign Lord, out of His Innate bounty and Royal inclination to favor
and protect Strangers, and for the increase and promoving of Trade and
Manufactories, being graciously pleased and willing to give encouragement to
Strangers to repair to, and dwell and reside within this Kingdom; Has
therefore thought fit, Likeas, His Majesty, with advice and consent of His
Estates of Parliament, does hereby Statute, Ordain and Declare, That all
Strangers, being of the Protestant Religion, either such who having Estates
shall think fit to bring the same to this Kingdom, to dwell and inhabit within
the same; or who shall come to set up new Works and Manufactories therein, and
shall repair to, and settle their abode, dwelling and residence within this
Kingdom; shall be, and are hereby naturalized as native born Subjects of the
Kingdom of Scotland, and are to enjoy His Majesty's Royal Protection, the
benefit of the Law, and all other Privileges which a Native does enjoy, als
freely in all respects, as if they themselves had been born within the same;
and that they shall have liberty and freedom of Trade, and freedom to buy and
purchase Lands, Heretages, and other Goods moveable and immovable, and to
enjoy the same by possession, purchase or donation, or any other way; and to
dispose thereof and transmit them to their Heirs and Succesors, who are to
succeed thereunto: And to enjoy all other Liberties, Privileges and Capacities
which do belong to, and are competent, or may and shall belong to any native
Subject born within this Kingdom. And further, His Majesty does Declare that
upon applications to be made unto Him by these Strangers, He will grant unto
them the free and public exercise of their Religion in their own Languages,
and the liberty of having Churches within this His Kingdom. It is always
hereby provided, that no person or persons shall have the benefit of this Act,
until first by petition to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council,
containing an exact designation of their names, places of their birth and
former residence, and that they are of the Protestant Religion, it be found by
the Council, that they are qualified according to this Act, and ought to have
the benefit thereof. And it is hereby Declared, that these presents, with an
extract of the Act of Council, in favors of the said persons to the effect
aforesaid, shall be unto them a sufficient naturalization to all intents and
purposes. Which Extract shall be given to them freely, without payment of any
money or composition; save only the Fee of nine pounds Scots money to the
Clerks of Council and their Servants.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1669.


