HONI SOIT (...) MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

COMMISSION, For executing the LAWS IN CHURCH AFFAIRS.

Sealed, the twenty fourth of February, 1664.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL P PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAjESTY, 1664.

COMMISSION, FOR EXECUTING THE LAWS IN CHURCH AFFAIRS.
CHARLES R.

Our Sovereign Lord Ordains an Commission to be past and expede, under His
Majesty's great Seal of the Kingdom of Scotland; making mention, that in
consideration of the multiplicity and weight of the Affairs of State, incumbent
upon the Lords of the Privy Council, so as they cannot attend the due execution
of the Laws against Popery, Separation and Disobedience to Ecclesiastical
Authority; And to the effect, that the disorders and contempt of Authority, and
the Laws, in the Provinces of St. Andrews and Glasgow, may be timeously
suppressed, and the scandalous and disobedient may not, through impunity or
connivance, be imboldened to violate and affront the Laws, to creat
disturbances, to foment sedition and disaffection to the Government of Church
and State, upon pretense of any Engagements: His Majesty, by virtue of His
Prerogative-royal, and Supremacy in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, has given and granted, like as His Majesty, by the
tenor hereof, gives and grants full Power and Commission to the Archbishop of
St. Andrews, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Archbishop of Glasgow, Duke
Hamiltoun, Marquess of Montrose; the Earls of Argyl, Athol, Eglintoun,
Linlithgow, Murray, Hume, Galloway, Annadail, Tweddail, Leiven; the Bishops of
Edinburgh, Galloway, Dunkell, Aberdeen, Brichen, Argyl and the Isles; the Lords
Pitsligo and Fraser, Drumlanerick, Cochrane, Hackertoun, and the Lord
Ballenden; the President of the Session, the Clerk of His Majesty's Registers
and Rolls, His Majesty's Advocat, Sir John Hume Justice Clerk, Charles Maitland
of Hattoun, the Lord of Philorth elder; Sir Andrew Ramsay Provost of
Edinburgh, Sir William Thomson, the Provosts of St. Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen
for the time, Air and Dumfries, Sir James Turner and the Dean of Edinburgh, or
to any five of them, (an Archbishop or Bishop being one of the number) to use
their utmost endeavors, that the Acts of Parliament and Council made, for the
Peace and Order of the Church, and in behalf of the Government thereof by
Archbishops and Bishops, be put into vigorous and impartial execution, against
all and every one within the Kingdom of Scotland, who presume to violate,
contemn or disobey these Acts and the Ecclesiastical Authority now settled. To
summon and call before them, at whatsoever place or time they shall appoint,
all Popish-traffikers, Intercommuners and Ressetters of Jesuits and
Seminary-priests; all who say or hear Mass, all obstinat Contemners of the
Discipline of the Church, or for that cause suspended, deprived or
excommunicated; all keepers of Conventicles; all Ministers, who contrary to the
Laws, Acts of Parliament and Council aforesaid, remain in, or intrude
themselves upon, the exercise of the function of the Ministry, in those
Paroches and Bounds inhibited by the said Acts, all Preachers who come from
England or Ireland without sufficient Testimonials, or leave of the Bishops of
the Diocese; all such who preach in private houses or elsewhere, without
License of the Bishop of the Diocese; all such persons who keep meetings at
Fasts, and the administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which are
not approven by Authority; all who speak, preach, write or print, to the
scandal, reproach, or detriment of the Estate and Government of the Church or
Kingdom, as now established; all who contemn, molest or injure Ministers, who
are orderly and obedient to the Laws; all who do not ordinarily attend the
divine Worship, administration of the Word and Sacraments, performed in the
respective Parish Churches, by Ministers legally authorized, for taking the
Cure of those Parishes, in which those persons are Inhabitants; all such, who
without any lawful Calling, as busiebodies, do go about houses and places for
corrupting and disaffecting people from their alleagiance and respect, and
obedience to the Laws. And generally, without prejudice of the particulars
above-specified, all who express their disaffection to His Majesty's Authority,
by contraveening Acts of Parliament or Council, in relation to Church Affairs.
With power to the said Commissioners, or any five of them, (an Archbishop or
Bishop being one of the number) to appoint Ministers to be censured, by
suspension and deposition; and to punish by fining, confining, committing and
incarcerating them, and all other persons, who shall be found transgressors as
aforesaid, according as they shall judge the quality of their offense to
deserve, they always not exceeding the fines and punishments enjoined by the
Acts of Parliament and Council. Commanding the Captain of His Majesty's Guards,
the Officers of the standing Forces, or Militia, the Sheriffs, Bailies of
Regalities, Justices of the Peace, the Provosts and Bailies of Buroughs, to
search, seek, take and apprehend all such delinquents, and present them before
the said Commissioners, upon the warrant of any five of them as aforesaid:
Commanding likewise, the Constables and Captains of His Majesty's Castles,
Keepers of Prisons, and other places of firmance, to receive and detain those,
who shall be directed unto them by the said Commissioners, upon warrant as
said is, as they will answer upon their obedience and utmost peril: Ordaining
further, the Lords of Privy Council, upon Certificat subscribed by the said
Commissioners, or any five of them as aforesaid, to direct Letters of Horning
for paying of the fine imposed by the said Commissioners, in case of the
delinquents disobedience or refusal, to compear where they are cited before
them: Of which Letters and Charges, no Suspension or Relaxation shall be
granted, without the testimony of the Archbishop or Bishop, bearing their
obedience to the Commissioners, and satisfaction according to Law. And His
Majesty does make, constitute and ordain Mr. Thomas Young, Clerk to the
Commission for plantation of Kirks, to be Clerk to this Commission. With power
to him to appoint Officers and other attenders necessary; and to direct Summons
or Precepts, in His Majesty's name, for citing whatsoever parties or persons,
in any of the cases foresaids; which Precepts shall be sealed by the Signet,
and subscribed by the said Clerk. With power to summon witnesses under the
pains prescribed by Law or Practice: And if the said witnesses refuse to
compear, or the said persons decerned in a fine, delay to make payment of the
same, His Majesty Ordains the Lords of His Secret Council, to direct Letters
and Charges, upon the Certificat of the said Commissioners, as is
above-specified: Of the which fines to be collected and uplifted by Alexander
Keith, Vnder-clerk to the Council, the one half shall be employed for defraying
the charges necessary, for executing of the said Commission at the sight of the
said Commissioners; the other half shall be employed for pious uses, according
as His Majesty shall appoint. And generally, the Commissioners aforesaid are
authorized and empowered, to do and execute, what they shall find necessary and
convenient for His Majesty's service, in the premises; for preventing and
suppressing the seeds of Schism and Separation, for planting of vacand
Churches, and for procuring Reverence, Submission and Obedience unto the
Ecclesiastical Government now established. And to the end, that a business of
so great importance to the peace and well-being of Church and Kingdom, may take
a speedy and successful effect, as His Majesty has thought fit to make choice
of such persons, in whose judgment and affection to His service and the
Churches good, He does repose special trust; So it is His pleasure, that this
Commission shall endure till the first of November, one thousand six hundred
and sixty four, and after, till it be discharged by His Majesty: and that the
first meeting thereof be kept at Edinburgh, the first Wednesday of March next
to come; and after, Meetings shall be appointed in such places, and as often as
shall be found necessary, for attaining the ends of the said Commission. And
His Majesty does expect from the Commissioners, an exact report of their
proceedings therein, from time to time, as of a service, whereof He will take
special notice, and its succeeding will be very acceptable to Him. Commanding
lastly, all His Majesty's Lieges, who are, or may be concerned, to answer and
obey the said Commissioners, or any five of them, (an Archbishop or Bishop
being one of the number) under all highest pains that after may follow: and
Ordains these presents to be an sufficient warrant to the Director of the
Chancellary, for writing the same to the great Seal, and for the Lord
Chancellor for appending the Seal thereunto, without any further order or
warrant.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 16. day of January, 1663/4. and of Our
Reign the fifteenth year. LAVDERDAILL.

Past His Majesty's Great Seal, the twenty fourth of February, 1664.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAjESTY, 1664.


