C R

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
At Edinburgh, the twenty fifth day of January, 1677.
Forasmuch; as a considerable number of Brewers for themselves; and in behalf
of the remanent Brewers within the Town of Edinburgh, and the Shires of
Edinburgh and Haddingtoun, have proposed and desired, that they may be allowed
to sell the Ale and drinking beer for this present year, at twenty pennies the
pynt, with the addition of the Excise and Imposition granted in behalf of the
Town of Edinburgh: And, seeing according to the proportion settled by the late
Act of Parliament, and Proclamations, for regulating the prices of Ale and
Drinking-beer, when the Ale and Drinking-beer is sold at twenty pennies the
pynt, with the addition foresaid, the Beer ought to be eight pound the boll.
And the said Brewers have proposed, that in regard they have considerable
quantities of Victual upon their hand bought of the cropped 1675. at high prices,
not yet consumed, so that for this year they cannot come the whole length of
eighth pound, which is the Rule and Standard appointed by the Proclamation: And
therefore desiring the Council might dispense therewith so far, as that they
may be able to brew with some small advantage; And seeing the said Brewers have
consented that the price of the boll of good and sufficient bear, shall be
betwixt seven and eight pounds, and not below seven pound for the boll of all
Bear that is to be browen and made in Malt of the Cropped and year, 1676, last by
past. And it being most just and reasonable, that all Brewers, great and small,
should be in an equal and like condition, as to the price of the drink to be
sold by them, and the price of the Bear of which the same is made; which cannot
be practicable, if they should be permitted to buy Bear at different prices, in
respect, these who buy bear below the foresaid price, may under-sell these that
do buy the Bear at the same: and so may enhance and engrosse to themselves the
trade and benefit of Brewing, to the prejudice and ruin of others; And for
preventing the inconvenience and prejudice foresaid, It is thought necessary,
and is proposed and desired by the said Brewers, that the said price should be
settled as a just and uniform price to be paid for this year by all Brewers and
Malt-men, who shall buy bear for brewing or making of malt within the said Town
and Shires, and that of their own consent they should be obliged, and grant
bonds to the effect foresaid. And because diverse persons, who sell and tap
Wine or are Cooks or Stablers, do brew: and upon occasion of their Trades and
Employments foresaids, do tap and sell Ale and drinking bear, browen by
themselves, whereby they may sell their drink with greater advantage then other
Brewers that must share and divide betwixt them and Tapsters the benefit, that
the said persons will have entirely to themselves, and so may under-sell the
other Brewers, to their prejudice and ruin: And whereas, notwithstanding of
the said Proclamation, the smaller Brewers, whose survey rolls were under two
Bolls, have not given Band to one of His Majesty's Privy Council, and obtained
license betwixt and the day therein appointed, and so have forefaulted the
benefit of brewing. The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, in Prosecution of
the said Act of Parliament and Proclamations foresaids, do hereby discharge any
person or persons, Brewers great or small within the Burgh of Edinburgh, Leith
and Cannongate, or Suburbs thereof, or within the said Shires of Edinburgh or
Haddingtoun to take upon them, upon pretext of any former license granted to
them, or upon any other pretext or ground whatsoever, to brew any Ale or
Drinking-beer, until they first subscrive the said Bond; and upon subscriving
thereof, obtain a license for that effect from the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, or Committee appointed by them, which persons, subscriving the said
Bond, and receiving license as aforesaid, are hereby allowed, not only to brew
single Ale at the price of twenty pennies the pynt, with the addit on as
aforesaid, but also to brew double or three shilling Ale; provided, that they
who brew the double Ale, shall be obliged also to brew the single Ale, In which
case, The said Lords have in so far dispensed with the said Proclamation in
the behalf of the said Brewers, upon the considerations foresaids, until the
first day of January, 1678. And whereas Malt-men and others, who take upon them
to make Malt within the said bounds; do exact far greater rates, betwixt the
price of the Boll of Beer, and the Boll of Malt, then what is allowed by the
ancient Laws made in that behalf; The said Lords do hereby discharge any
person whatsomever within the said bounds to make Malt, until they find
caution acted in the Books of Council, that they shall buy the Bear at the
price foresaid for this present year: and that they shall take no more but half
a mark betwixt the Boll of Bear and the Boll of Malt, conform to the Acts of
Parliament, and obtain license for that effect as aforesaid, as they will be
answerable on their peril: And in regard, that diverse persons within the City
of Edinburgh, Leith, Cannongate, Abbay, Caldtoun, Craigend, Yeard-heads,
New Haven, Pleasants, and St. Niniansraw, who are Ventiners of Wine, Cooks or
Stablers do both brew, and tap and sell Ale and Drinking-bear browen by
themselves, whereby they may sell their drink with greater advantage then other
Brewers; and so may undersell the other Brewers to their great hurt and
prejudice* The said Lords do hereby discharge any Ventiners of Wine, Cooks or
Stablers in the said Bounds, to vent or retail any Ale or Drinking-beer, or if
they continue in retailing, to quite their Brewing as they will be answerable
at their peril. And whereas both Brewers, Ventiners and the Leidges sustain
great damage by the unequal measure of Barrels, some being above measure, and
some under, occasioned chiefly by the neglect and fault of Coupers: The said
Lords do hereby ordain all Coupers that makes any Brewers Casks, to make their
Casks no bigger, nor with the addition of a Chopin to each Gallon: Ordaining
every Couper to put his own mark upon his own work, that the Contraveeners may
be known; and that all Casks already made be justed and made equal, betwixt and
the first day of May next, as the said Coupers and Brewers will be answerable
at their peril: And ordains these presents to be printed and published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none pretend
ignorance.

Al. Gibsone, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most
Sacred Majesty. 1677.


