ACT Anent the Pole Money.
Edinburgh, March 23. 1699.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, as being empowered by the Twelfth
Act of the last Session of this current Parliament, Entitled Act anent
Pole Money, to Order and Appoint such other Methods and Courses as they shall
judge fit, for stating and In-bringing of the Pole Money imposed by the said
Act: Do hereby Order and Appoint the Commissioner of Supply in each Shire, to
meet with all convenient Diligence at the Head-Burgh or other usual place of
Meeting, within the said Shire by their Conveener; or if they have none, by the
Sheriff for that effect; And there to Order one of their Number per vices, to
Attend or keep Court Weekly two days at least, viz. Tuesday and Thursday each
Week at the said Burgh. As also, That the Magistrates of Burghs Royal, Appoint
one of their Number to Attend and keep Court Weekly per vices within their
Burgh at least two days each Week, to the effect the said Commissioner or
Magistrate so to be appointed, may give out Warrands for Citation, at the
Instance of the Tacksmen of the said Pole, or any having their Order, against
the persons liable in payment of the said Pole, Single, Double, or Quadruple,
the Single and Double being always included in the said Quadruples, being the
highest and outmost wherein any person can be liable by the said Act; and
sustain Process and Administer Justice, and pass Decreets against the said
Persons liable, conform to the said Act of Parliament. As also, that Process be
sustained in the case foresaid, upon a Citation to one Diet, whereupon the
Persons cited, if personally apprehended, may be likewise holden as Confessed,
and that upon the Decreets to be given by the said Commissioners or Magistrates
of Burghs against the Persons liable in the foresaid Pole; The like summar
Execution may be directed as upon Decreets for Supply or Excise, Quartering
only excepted: And farther, that a Precept or Letters may be directed against
all these that shall be decerned for the said Pole, within one Shire or Burgh,
and that the several Persons and Sums therein contained shall not make several
Causes, but shall only be paid for as one Cause: And the said Lords do hereby
appointandordain all Clerks of Shires and of Burghs Royal, to exhibit and make
patent to the said Tacksmen, or any having their Order, their respective
Valuation and Stent-Roll when required, in order to particular men's Stents or
Valuation, whose Poles are not other ways determined; As likewise, that the
Inhabitants of Burghs Royal give Lists when required, of such as Reside within
their Families; and that the Magistrates give the necessary Orders for that
effect: and the foresaid Clerks of Shires and Burghs, and also their
Collectors, are hereby Ordained to give to the said Tacksmen or these having
their Orders, Notes or Abstracts of what Instruments may be taken in their
hands by any Person liable in the said Pole, anent their Listing or paying. And
lastly, the said Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Require and Ordain the
Commissioners of the said Shires, to cause their Clerks give Extracts of their
Collectors Bonds to the said Tacksmen, or any having their Order; And if need
beis, that they give also summar Processes and Execution at the Instance of the
said Tacksmen and their foresaids, against the said Collectors and their
Cautioners, upon their said Bonds as Accords. And the said Commissioners and
Magistrates of Burghs, and all others concerned, are hereby strictly Commanded
and Required to Observe and Perform the Premises as they will be answerable.
And these Presents are Ordained to be Printed and Published at the
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of Shires, and of all Burghs Royal in the
usual Form.

Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1699.


