C R

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's GRACIOUS PROCLAMATION, For the encouraging the Subjects of the
United Provinces of the Lovv-Countries, to transport themselves with their
estates, and to settle in his Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, KING of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To all and sundry whom these may concern, Greeting.
Forasmuch as We, out of Our Innate Bounty and Royal Inclination, to favor and
protect Strangers, being witting to give all due encouragement to them to
repair to, and reside within, this Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland; Did, in the
Year 1669. with Advice and Consent of Our Estates of Parliament of that
Kingdom, Ordain and Declare, That such Strangers who having estates, should be
willing to bring the same into this Our Kingdom, and to dwell and inhabit
within the same; or who should come to set up Works or Manufactories, to be
Naturalized, as Naturall-born Subjects thereof; And to enjoy Our Royal
Protection, the benefice of Our Laws, and all other Privileges which a Native
does enjoy, als freely in all respects as if they themselves had been born
within the same: and that they should have freedom of Trade, and freedom to buy
and purchase lands, heritages and other Goods moveable and unmovable; and to
enjoy the same by succession, purchase or donation, or any other manner of way,
and to dispose thereof, and to transmit the same to their heirs and successors,
and to enjoy all other liberties and privileges belonging to our natural-born
Subjects. And We continuing in, and being willing to prosecute, this Our
Gracious Inclination, as we have by a former Declaration invited the
Inhabitants of the United Provinces to come into Our Kingdoms; So We have
thought fit hereby to Declare, That, whoever of the Subjects and Inhabitants of
the United Provinces of the Low Countries, out of their affection to Us and Our
Government, or because of the oppression and troubles they meet with at home
from their Governors, shall come into this Our Kingdom of Scotland, they shall
be protected in their persons and estates, and shall fully possess and enjoy
the benefit of this Naturalization, to all intents, purposes and effects, and
shall have the free exercise of their Religion and Worship, with all other
privileges and advantadges enjoyed by, or belonging to, the Naturall-born
Subjects of that Our Kingdom. And as they shall be free from all trouble,
hazard or seizure in their Transport; So all the Ships and Vessels which shall
transport them, their families, estates, goods or merchandise, or which shall
belong to any persons so transporting themselves, shall have the same
privileges and immunities in matter of Trade, Navigation and Customs, as if
they had been built in Scotland: And shall not pay not be liable to any
Customs, Payments or other Duties, whatsoever, other than are paid by the
Naturall-born Subjects of that Our Kingdom.

Given at Edinburgh, the twenty ninth day of June, and of our Reign the twenty
fourth Year, 1672. Tho. Hay, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBVRGH. Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1672.


