At Haly-rude-house, the seventee^nth day of January, 1678.
FOrasmuch, as a considerable number of Brewers for themselves, and in behalf
of the remanent Brewers within the Town of Edinburgh, and the Shires of
Edinburgh and Haddingtoun, have proposed and desired, that they may be allowed
to sell the Ale and Drinking-beer for this present year, at twenty pennies the
pynt, with the addition of the Excise and Imposition granted in behalf of the
Town of Edinburgh: And seeing, according to the proportion settled by the late
Act of Parliament, and Proclamations, for regulating the prices of Ale and
Drinking-beer, when the Ale and Drinking-beer is sold at twenty pennies the
pynt, with the addition foresaid, the Bear ought to be eight pounds scots the
boll. And the said Brewers have proposed, that in regard they have some old
Victual upon their hand not yet consumed, so that for this year they cannot
come the whole length of eitht pounds, which is the Rule and Standard appointed
by the Proclamation; and therefore desiring the Council might dispense
therewith so far, as that they may be able to brew with some small advantage:
and seeing the said Brewers have consented that the price of the boll of good
and sufficient rough Bear, shall be seven pounds scots money, for all rough
Beer that is to be browen and made in Malt of the Cropped 1677. last by past; And
it being most just and reasonable, that all Brewers, great and small, should be
in an equal and like condition, as to the price of the drink to be sold by
them, and the price of the Bear of which the same is made; which cannot be
practicable, if they should be permitted to buy Bear at different prices; in
respect, these who buy Bear below the foresaid price, may under-sell these that
do buy the bear at the same, and so may inhance and engross to themselves the
trade and benefit of brewing, to the prejudice and ruin of others; and for
preventing the inconvenience and prejudice foresaid, It is thought necessary,
and is proposed and desired by the said brewers, that the said price should be
settled as a just and uniform price to be paid for this year by all Brewers and
Malt men, who shall buy Bear for brewing or making of Malt within the said Town
and Shires, and that of their own consent they should be obliged, and grant
Bonds to the effect foresaid. And because diverse persons, who sell and tap
Wine, or are Cooks or Stablers, do brew; and upon occasion of their Trades and
Employments foresaids, do tap and sell Ale and Drinking beer, browen by
themselves, whereby they may sell their drink with greater advantage ^han other
Brewers, that must share and divide betwixt them and the Tapsters, the benefit
that the said persons will have entirely to themselves, and so may undersell
the other brewers to their prejudice and ruin: and whereas, notwithstanding of
the said Proclamation, the smal^er brewers, whose ^urvey rolls were under two
bolls, have not given bond to the Commissioners of Excise of the said Shire to
that effect, and obtained license betwixt and the day therein appointed, and so
have forfeited the benesit of brewing. The Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, in prosecution of the said Act of Parliament and Proclamations
foresaids, do hereby discharge any person or persons, brewers great or small
within the burgh of Edinburgh, Leith and Cannongate, or suburbs thereof, or
within the said Shires of Edinburgh or Haddingtoun, to take upon them upon
pretext of any former license granted to them, or upon any other pretext or
ground whatsoever, to brew any Ale or Drinking-beer, until they first
subscribe the said bond; and upon subscribing thereof, obtain a license for
that effect from the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, or Committee
appointed by them, which persons, subscribing the said bond, and receiving
license as aforesaid, are hereby allowed, not only to brew single Ale at the
price of twenty pennies the pynt, with the addition as aforesaid, but also to
brew double or three shilling Ale: provided that they who brew the double Ale,
shall be obliged also to brew the single Ale, in which case, the said Lords
have in so far dispensed with the said Proclamation in the behalf of the said
Brewers upon the considerations foresaids, until the 1. day of August next to
come, in this instant year, 1678 And whereas Malt-men and others, who take upon
them to make Malt within the said bounds do exact far greater rates, betwixt
the price of the boll of Bear, and the boll of Malt, than what is allowed by
the ancient Laws made in that behalf; The said Lords do hereby discharge any
person whatsomever within the said bounds to make Malt, until they find
caution acted in the Books of Council, that they shall buy the Bear at the
price foresaid for this present year: and that they shall take no more but half
a Merk betwixt the boll of Bear and the boll of Malt, conform to the Acts of
Parliament, and obtain license for that effect as aforesaid, as they will be
answerable on their peril. And in regard, that diverse persons within the City
of Edinburgh, Leith, Cannongate, Abbey, Caldtoun, Craigend, Yeard-heads,
New Haven, Pleasants, and St. Ninians-raw, who are Vintners of Wine, Cooks or
Stablers, do both brew, and tap and sell Ale and Drinking-beer browen by
themselves, whereby they may sell their drink with greater advantage then other
Brewers, and so may undersell the other brewers to their great hurt and
prejudice; The said Lords do hereby discharge any Vintners of Wine, Cooks or
Stablers in the said bounds, to vent or retail any Ale or Drinking-beer, or if
they continue in retailing, to quite their brewing as they will be answerable
at their peril. And whereas both Brewers, Vintners and the Leidges sustain
great damage by the unequal measure of barrels, some being above measure, and
some under, occasioned chiefly by the neglect and fault of Coupers: The said
Lords do hereby ordain all Coupers that makes any brewers casks, to make their
casks no bigger, than with the addition of a chopin to each Gallon: Ordaining
every Couper to put his own mark upon his own work, that the contraveeners may
be known; and that all casks already made, be justed and made equal, betwixt
and the first day of May next, as the said Coupers and Brewers will be
answerable at their peril. And ordains these presents to be printed, and
published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none
pretend ^gnorance.

Al. Gibson.Cl. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1678.


