C R

(...) royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT FOR securing the public Peace.
At Hally-rude-house, the 14. day of February, 1678.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council considering seriously, that the
greatest part of the disorders of this Nationare occasioned by a seditious and
schismatic humor in some Western and other Shires, which upon all occasions
inflames them into great Irregularities, and remembering how, albeit it might
have been expected after His Majesty's happy Restoration, that the fresh
remembrance of these insolencie^ which we suffered under a Tyrannick
usurpation, (drawn upon us by the same sediti^us Principles, which begin now to
revive ^n those places) would have inclined all His Majesty's good Subjects to
live with great satisfaction quietly un^^^ His happy Government, and to believe
that the Laws made by His Majesty, and their own Representati^es, were both the
(...)g remedies of these bygone distempers, and the safest means for preventing
the like for (...) Shires did, by a most remarkable principle of disloyalty,
rise in rebellion against their Native (...) He was ingadged in a foreign war:
And though after the beating of their forces, His Majesty had (...) even to
these Rebels, and had so far gratified those Shires, as to grant them an
Indulgence; (...) they continued still to disturb the Peace their infection
over the neighboring Shires, by assembling themselves in field Con^^^ticles,
these Rendezvouses of rebellion, ressent^^g (...)g, and hearing Intercommuned
Preachers, and declared Traitors, who infused in them (...) and boldly
rebellious and treacherous Princi^^^^, (...) ^nvading the persons, usurping the
Pulpits of the Orthodox Clergy, threatening, affron^^^g, and injuring both them
and such as adhered to them (...)d by disobeying and deforceing with armed men
in a Hostile manner, and even wounding and killing such as offered in His
Majesty's name to put (...)s in execution: And to let the world see that they
were fixedly resolved to adhere to these principles in spite of Authority, and
that they had ^^^ed themselves in a permanent form of Government (as they
imagined) They did hold Sessions, Presbyteries and Assemblies, established
correspo^de^cies, and for perpetuating the Schism, Ordained and granted
Missions to Preachers, built Meeting-places, and taxed His Majesty's Subjects
for their maintenance: And that they might cut off their Proselytes from all
dependence upon their Native Prince, against whose Person and Government they
railed upon all occasions; they at last arrived at so great a height of
rebellion, as to persuade the people, that it was unlawful to take the Oath of
Alleadgeance: Whereupon the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, upon design
to prevent these growing disorders, or the just severity which the Authors
thereof had deserved, Did Ordain the Commissioners of Excise, Militia, and
Justices of Peace within these Shires, to meet and to propose such means as
might effectually secure His Majesty and the Peace of the Country; With
certification that if they did not, His Majesty behoved to reduce them to
their duty by force, and would look upon the Heretors therein who refused to
secure the peace (as said is) as involved in, and fautors of, those seditious
and disorderly courses. To which they returned no other answer, save that these
disorders were grown to such a height, that it was not in their power to
redress them; whereupon it was thought high time to acquaint His Majesty with
the present state of these His Affairs here, Who to vindicate His own
Authority, and from a tender Care of His People, whose security with that of
His Laws, He did foresee to be under-mined by such pernicious contrivances and
practices; Did by His Royal (...), dated the eleventh day of December, 1677.
declare His resentment against, and His detestation of these courses: And for
suppressing thereof, commanded and authorized His said Privy Council, to
proceed by force and arms, to reduce that Country to their obedience, and to
obliege them to give bands for their own, and their tenants, living Regularly
and Obedient to the Laws; And particularly, that they should not go to
Conventicles, harbor nor commune with Rebels, or persons intercommuned, and
for keeping the persons, families, and goods of their regular Ministers
harmless; and that under such penalties as they should think fit. In obedience
to which Letter, a band was accordingly drawn, only oblieging the Heretors
alternatively, either to present their tenants, or to remove them; and
declared, that they should be only answerable for their said tenants, if they
were convict within a year after the committing of these delinquencies. All
which couries proving ineffectual, His Majesty has just reason to suspect the
designs of such as have, or shall refuse or delay to take the said band, as
tending to overthrow His Majesty's Authority, to subvert the established Order
of the Church, and to disquiet the Peace of His Majesty's good Subjects: And
since every private Subject may force such, from whom they fear any harm, to
secure them by Lawborrows, and that it has been the uncontroverted and Legal
practice of His Majesty's Privy Council to obliege such, whose peaceableness
they justly suspected, to secure the peace for themselves, their Wives, Bairns,
Men, tenants, and Servants, which are the very words of all such bands, and
that under such penalties as they find suitable to their contempt, guilt or
occasion, upon which (...) and suitable to the qualities of such from whom
caution is craved. Therefore, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Cou^^^^ (...)
^^^^y has declared His just suspicion of those who refuse or delay to take the
said band in the terms foresaids; And the said Lords, bes(...)e series
foresaid justly suspicious of the practices and principles of such as refuse
the same, do Ordain, That all such persons as refuse the (...) shall be
obliged to Enact themselves in the books of Secret Council, that they, their
wives, bairns* men, tennants, and servants, shall keep His Majesty's s Peace,
and particularly, that they shall not go to field Conventicles, nor harbor nor
commune with Rebels, or persons intercom^^^^ed ^^d that they shall keep the
persons, families and goods of Regular Ministers harmless; and that under the
double of every man's valued yearly ^^^t, (if he have any) and of such other
penalties as shall be thought convenient by the ^^^rds of His Majesty's Privy
Council, or their Comm^^^^, if they have no valued rent: ordaining Letters to
be direct for charging all such per^^^^ (...) refuse to take the said band^, to
Enact themselves (...) the books of Privy Council, to the effect foresaid, and
that within six days (...) the charge, under the pain of rebellion, and p^^^^g
of them to the horn; With certification to them if they if they fail, the said
space being (...)d bypast, that they shall be denunced Rebels, and put to the
horn for their contempt and disobedience: And Ordains these presents to be

Extracted by me, Al. Gibsone. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most
Sacred Majesty, 1678.


