royal blazon or coat of arms C R

LETTERS OF INTERCOMMUNING Against Persons declared Fugitives for not
compearing to answer for CONVENTICLES, etc.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To Our Lovits, (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting; Forasmuch as, upon the twenty fifth, twenty seventh, twenty eight,
twenty ninth, and thirty days of July, one thousand six hundred and seventy
four years, the Persons underwritten were at the Market Crosses of Haddingtoun.
Lanerk, Cowper, Perth, Dumfermling, Stirling, Glasgow, Linlithgow, and
Edinburgh, successive and respective orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to
Our Horn, by virtue of letters of denounciation raised, used and execute at the
instance of Our trusty and well-beloved Councellor, Sir John Nisbet of
Dirletoun Knight, Our Advcat, for Our interest, for their not compearing
personally before the Lords of Our Privy Council upon the sixteenth day of
July, the said year 1674. to have answered and underlyen the Law, for their
keeping, and being present at House and Field-Conventicles, at the places
following, and convocating people thereto, Viz. at Enderask, Edmonstoun Chapel,
Wolmet, Corstorphine, Magdalen Chapel, and other places, or one or other of
them, or near to them; and for their contemptuous invading and intruding
themselves in the Pulpits and Churches of Cramond, Forgune, Kirkmahoe, and
others, in the months of April, May, and June, the said year 1674. contrair to
the Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereagainst, in manner and at length
specified in the principal complaint raised against them thereanent; Viz: Mr.
David Williamson, Mr. Alexander Moncrief, Mr. William Wishart, Mr. Thomas Hog,
in Rosse, Mr. George Johnstoun, Mr. Robert Gillespy, Mr. (...) Mckillikin in
Rosse, Mr. John Rosse, Mr. Thomas Hog in Stirling Shire, Mr. William Erskin in
Tiviotdale, Mr. James Donaldson, Mr. Andrew Anderson, Mr. Andrew Mortoun, Mr.
Donald Cargill, Mr. Robert Maxwels elder and younger, and James Frazer of
Braes. And siklike, upon the fourth and sixth days of July, the said year 1674.
the persons underwritten were at the Market Crosses of Cowper, Falkland, and
Perth, successive and respective orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to Our
Horn, by virtue of Letters of denounciation, raised used and execute at the
instance of Our said Advocat for Our interest against them, for their not
compearing personally before the Lords of Our Privy Council, upon the twenty
fifth day of June, the said year 1674. to have answered and underlyen the Law,
for their keeping and being present at House or Field Conventicles, at
Pitscottie, Mure, Rauenshugh, Kinkell, Balmeanoch and other places, and
convocating persons thereto, and for resetting and entertaining outed Ministers
in the Parochs of Stramiglo, Abernethy, and Auchtermuchty, in the month of
April, May and June, the said year 1674. contrair to Laws and Acts of
Parliament m^de thereagainst in manner and at length specified in the principal
complaint raised against them thereanent; Viz. Sir John Kirkaldy of Grange
elder, (...) Hamiltoun of Kinkell, James Hamiltoun his brother, John Geddy in
Falkland, John Arnottes of Pitgrumzies elder and younger, Archibald Arnot in
Newburgh Mr. Thomas Arnot in Collessy, Andrew Arnot Merchant in Kirkaldy,
Thomas Shaw elder of Gospitrie, David Shaw his Son, Hary Shaw in Balognie,
George Fleming in Balbuthie, William Shethrum in Lundimil^e, John Miller in
Dinork, Andrew Kinnier Merchant in St. Andrews, John Thomson in Fawfeild, (...)
Gowan in Criel, Robert Herbertson in Tarbet, and (...) Douglas portioner of
Colsey. As also upon the fifeeen, and sixteen days of July, the said year 1674.
the persons underwritten, were at the Market Crosses of Cowper and Forfar
successive and respective orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by
virtue of Letters of denounciation, raised, used and executed, at the instance
of Our said Advocat, for Our interest, for their not compearing personally
before the Lords of Our Privy Council, upon the ninth day of July, the said
year 1674. to have answered and underlyen the Law, for their keeping and being
present at House and Field-Conventicles, at Dumfermling, Cleish, Orvall, and
others; and for their inviting and countenancing outed Ministers in their
invasion, and intrusion upon the Kirks and Pulpi^s of Forgune, Balmerinoch
Collessey, Moonsey, and Auchtermuchty, and hearing them preach and pray
therein, and for harboring, resetring, and entertaining Mr. John Welsh, a
declared and proclaimed traitor, in their Houses and elsewhere, and conducting
and convoying him through several places in Fyffe, in an hostile manner, and
threatening these who should apprehend, molest and interrupt the said Mr. John
Welsh and others in his company; in the months of April, May and June, the
said year, 1674. contrair to the Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereagainst,
in manner and at length specified in the principal complaint raised against
them thereanent, Viz. Thomas Blyth, heritor in Kennoway Paroch, (...) Weymes,
Lady Colvill, John Adam Baily of Stramiglo, James Pride in nether Vrquhart,
David Coventrie in Arlary, John Henderson there, Robert Stark in the Milnes of
Forth, William Page in Cowper of Fyffe, John White there, Richard Clidsdale
there (...) Lady Balcanquell, Colonel Robert Halket, John Smith in Dundie,
John Balfour in Lethum, Alexander Walker in Friertous, George Spence in Fordel,
Patrick Melvill in the Burnside, (...) Wardlaw heritor in Kirktoun, (...)
Colvill, Lady Baily in Dininuo Paroch, James Grieve in St. Andrews, Andrew
Kenneir there, James Louthian in Kings-barns, Mr. James Bonner of Greigstoun,
John Scot in Lathones, (...) Lady Collerny, and David and Alexander Cambels in
Kirkaldy. And siklike upon the twenty ninth day of July, the said year 1674 the
persons underwritten, Viz. William Livingstoun of Greenyards, (...) Ferquharson
of Shielbrae, were at the Market Cross of Stirling orderly denounced Our
Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by virtue of Letters of denounciation raised, used
and execute at the instance of Our said Advocat, for Our interest; for their
not compearing personally before the Lords of Our Privy Council upon the
sixteenth day of July, the said year 1674. to have answered and underlyen the
Law, for their keeping and and being present at House and Field Conventicles,
at Torwood, Cowie, Airth, Frosk, Carbrock, or in or about one or other of these
places, where they heard Mr. John Welsh, Mr. Gabriel Sempil, Mr. Samuel Arnot,
and some other outed Ministers, or one or other of them; And for inviting and
convocating diverse persons to the said Conventicles, and for supplying,
harboring, entertaining or corresponding with the said outed Ministers and
diverse others Our Rebels, in the months of May, and June 1674. Contrair to the
Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereagainst, in manner and at length
mentioned in the principal complaint raised against them thereanent: As also
upon the twenty two, twenty seventh and twenty ninth days of August, and second
day of November, the said year 1674 The persons underwritten were at the Market
Crosses of Edinburgh, Dumbartoun, and Perth, orderly denounced Our Rebels and
put to Our Horn, by virtue of Letters of denounciation, raised, used and
execute at the instance of Our said Advocat, for Our interest; for their not
compearing personally before the Lords Commissioners of Our Privy Council at
Stirling, upon the eigteenth day of August, and ninth day of September, the
said year 1674. To have answered and underlyen the Law; for their being present
at House and Field Conventicles, and withdrawing themselves from the public
ordinances in their own Paroch Churches, for having had their children baptized
at these disorderly meetings, or for having invited outed Ministers to intrude
and invade Pulpits, and having convocat people to hear them therein, or having
heard them themselves; At the least, for harboring, resetting, supplying or
corrosponding with Mr. John Welsh, and other declared Rebel, and Traitors, in
April, May, June and July, the said year 1674. Contrair to the Laws and Acts of
Parliament made thereagainst, in manner and at length mentioned in the
principal complaint raised against them thereanent, Viz. James Sumervail at the
boat of Cardross, Hary Dow of Westerpolder, Mr. John King Chaplain to the Lord
Cardross, John Doik portioner of Murdistoun, the Lady Pettendr^ich in Logi^
Paroch, Robert Fork portioner of Kilpatrik, James Muir portioner of Burdistoun,
and John Starks elder and younger, of Balknock. As also upon the twenty
seventh, twenty eight and twenty ninth days of October 1674. the persons
underwritten were at the Market Crosses of Cowper in Fyffe, St. Andrews and
Dumfermling orderly denounced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by virtue of
Letters of denounciation, raised, used and execute at the instance of Our said
Advocat, for Our interest, against them, for their not compearing personally
before the Lords Commissioners of Our Privy Council at Cowper of Fyffe, upon
the fifteenth day of September, the said year 1674. To have answered and
underlyen the Law; for their being present at House and Field Conventicles, and
their withdrawing from the public ordinances in their own Paroch Churches, for
having had children baptized at these disorderly meetings; at the least, for
having invite d^outed Ministers to intrude and invade Pulpits; and having
convocat people to hear them therein, or having heard them themselves, at the
least, for harboring, resetting, supplying or corrosponding with Mr. John
Welsh, and other declared Rebels and traitores, in April, May, June and July,
the said year 1674. Conetrar to the Laws and Acts of Parliament made
thereagainst, in manner and at length mentioned in the principal complaint,
raised against them thereanent Viz. (...) Symer of Brathnes, William Crawford
of Powmilne, John Lundy of Baldestard, Mr. James Lentron and Helen Inglis his
spouse, John Collier of Lochgelly, Dame Anna Riddel, Lady Collerny. (...)
Ladies Vnthankes elder and younger, John Fairful of Kinloch, and Dame Margaret
Ferquhard, Lady Halhill. And siklike upon the twenty fourth day of September
the said year 1674. The persons underwritten, Viz. (...) Hamiltoun relict of
Francis Galloway of Todshough, Simeon Alexander fewar and tennent in
Kirklistoun, and James Wilkie tennent in Cliftounhal, were orderly denounced
Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by virtue of Letter of denounciation, raised
used, and execute, at the instance of Our said Advocat, for Our interest,
against them; for their not compearing personally before the Lords
Commissioners of Our Privy Council at Edinburgh, upon the sixteenth day of
September 1674. To have answered and underlyen the Law, for their being present
at House and Field Conventicles, and withdrawing from the public ordinances in
their own Paroch Churches, and having had their children baptized in these
disorderly meetings, and for their inviting outed Ministers, to Preach thereat,
and convocating people thereto, and for harboring, resetting, supplying and
corrosponding with certain outed Ministers, declared Rebels and traitors, in
April, May, June, July, August and September, the said year 1674, Contrair to
the Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereagainst, in manner and at length
mentioned in the principal complaint raised against them thereanent; as the
said respective Letters of denounciation above written duly execute and
registrate (conform to the Act of Parliament) produced in presence of Our Privy
Council, bears. At the process of which Horn the forenamed persons lie and
remain, taking no regard thereof, nor of Our Authority and Laws; and are
encouraged to continue in their Rebellion, by the reset, supply and
intercommuning, which they have with several of their friends and
acquaintances, to the high contempt of Us, Our Authority and Laws. OUR WILL is
herefore, and We charge you straightly, and Commands that in continent their Our
letters, seen ye pass to the Market Crosses of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Lanerk,
Cowper, Perth, Dumfermling, Stirling, Glasgow, Linlithgow, and other places
needful; and thereat in Our Name and Authority, command and charge all, and
sundry Our Leiges, and Subjects, that they, nor none of them presume nor take
upon hand to reset, supply, or intercommune with any of the foresaids persons
Our Rebels, for the causes foresaids; nor furnish them with meat, drink, house,
harbor, victual, nor no other thing useful, nor comfortable to them; or have
intelligence with them by word, writ, or message, or any other manner of way,
under the pain to be repute and esteemed airt and part with them, in the crimes
foresaids, and pursued therefore with all rigor, to the terror of others.
Requiring hereby all Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailies of Regalities, and Bailiries,
and their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, to apprehend and commit to prison
any of the persons above written, Our Rebels, whom they shall find within their
respective jurisdictions, According to justice; as you will answer to Us
thereupon. The which to do We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full
power; by these Our letters, deiivering them by you duly execute, and indorsed
again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixth day of August, one thousand six
hundred seventy and five years, and of Our Reign, the twenty seventh year. Per
Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii.
God save the King.
Edinburgh, Reprinted by Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty:
Anno DOM. 1675.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.


