C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
AT EDINBURGH, The twelfth day of December, one thousand six hundred and sixty
one.
FOrasmuch as by an Act of Privy Council, of the date the sixth day of
September last, His Majesty's Royal pleasure to restore the Church of this
Kingdom to its right Government by Bishops, as it was by Law before the late
troubles, during the reigns of His Majesty's Royal Father and Grandfather of
blessed memory, and as it now stands settled by Law, was made known to all the
Subjects of this Kingdom by open Proclamation at the Market Crosses of all
Buroughs Royal: And that it is Statute by the first Act of the twenty one
Parliament of King James the sixth, that all Presentations to Benefices should
be directed thereafter to the Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese, within the
bounds whereof any vacant Church lies. So that since their restitution to
their former Dignities, Privileges and Powers settled upon them by Law, and
Acts of Parliament, No Minister within this Kingdom should be admitted to any
Benefice but upon Presentations directed as said is. And yet, notwithstanding
thereof it is informed, that upon Presentations directed to Presbyteries, they
do daily proceed to admit Ministers to Kirks and Benefices, albeit the
Archbishops and Bishops are restored to their Dignities; some of them already
consecrated, and all of them within a very short time will be invested in their
Rights and Benefices, and empowered to receive Presentations and grant
Admissions thereupon: Therefore the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council
prohibits, and by these presents discharges all Patrons to direct any
Presentations to any Presbyteries; as also, discharges all and sundry the
Presbyteries within this Kingdom to proceed to the Admission of any Minister to
any Benefice or Kirk within their respective bounds, upon any such
Presentations, as they will be answerable; with certification that if they do
other ways, the said Presentation and Admission shall be void and null, as if
they never had been granted. And ordains these presents to be printed, and
published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh and other places needful, that none
may pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1661.


