LETTERS OF PUBLICATION, of a COMMISSION, Under the great SEAL: Anent the
security of the PEACE of the HIGH-LANDS OF SCOTLAND.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrw Aderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, 1682.

LETTERS OF PUBLICATION; of a Commission anent the Security of the PEACE OF THE
HIGH-LANDS.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We having for the security of the Peace of the High-lands,
emited several Acts and Orders, and particularly, granted a Commission of
Justiciary, with several Powers therein mentioned; whereof the Tenor follows:
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To all and sundry, Our loving and good Subjects, to whom
these Presents shall come, Greeting: Forasmuch, as the quieting of the
High-lands and Isles, and the Dutiful and Peaceable Carriage, and Deportment of
the Inhabitants within the same, is of great concernment, not only as to the
Peace and Interest of the Shires and Bounds where they live, being a large and
considerable part of Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland; but also of the
Neighboring and Adjacent Countries and Shires, which ly open, and are subject
to the Incursions, Depredations, and the barbarous cruelty and oppression of
Thieves, Sorners and Broken-men, when the High-lands are in Disorder; and upon
the consideration aforesaid, We, and Our Royal Ancestors, have been most
careful to preserve, and secure the Quiet and Peace of the said High-lands and
Isles; and in order thereto, from time to time, with Advice of the Estates of
Parliament, and of their Privy Council, have made and omited diverse good Laws,
Statutes, Acts of Parliament, and Council, Proclamations and Orders, yet
standing in full Force; nevertheless the Inhabitants and Broken-men, within the
High-lands and Isles, being inured and accustomed to liberty and
licentiousness, upon occasion of the late Troubles, and by reason, that during
the same, the said Laws, have not been observed, and put in execution, do
still presume to Sorn, Steal, and oppress, and to (...) other Insolences and
Disorders; and especially within the Shires of Caithness, Sutherland, Ross,
Inverness, Cromarty, Nairn, Elgine, Bamff, Aberdeen, Kincardine, Forfar,
Pearth, Striveling, Dumbarton, Argile and Tarbot, and other adjacent Shires, to
the high contempt of Our Authority, and to the great hurt, prejudice and
discouragement of Our good and peaceable People and Subjects: Therefore We
being careful to provide for the Good, Estate, Security, Peace and Quietness of
Our said good Subjects: As also, to repress such offenders, in due course of
Law; and putting singular Trust and Confidence in the care and circumspection
of the Persons after-mentioned, for the Punishment and Prevention of any of the
Offenses aforesaid, already committed, or to be committed hereafter; Do
therefore grant full Power, Authority and Commission, express bidding and
Charge to Our Officers of State, for the time being; as also to the Persons
afternamed, viz. Sinclar of Durbeath. Sinclar of May. Robert Gordon younger of
Gordonstoun. Sir George Monro. Robert Gray of Shibo. Captain William Mccay.
Ross of Balnagoun. Sir Alexander Mckenzie of Coal. Mckenzie of Red castle. Sir
Rodorick Mckenzie of Findon. Hugh Frazer younger of Belladrum. James Frazer of
Auchpagaig. Mcintosh of that Ilk. Lodovick Grant of that Ilk. Mcdonald of
Glengarie. Sir Ewing Cameron of Lochyell. Baillie to the Marquess of Huntly.
Hector Mcclane of Torloysk. Alexander Chisholme, Sheriff Depute of Inverness.
William Mcintosh of Borlum. Mcintosh of Killnespik. Sir Robert Innes of
Kinerminie. Alexander Innes of Cockstoun. Alexander Cuming of Logy. Tulloch of
Tannachie. Ross of Kilravock. Sir George Gordoun of Edinglassie. Patrick Grant
of E^shies. Alexander Duff younger of Braco. James Anderson younger of
Westertoun. John Gordon of Kn^kespek. Francis Gairden of Midstrath. Farquharson
of Finzean. Robert Ross of Anchlessan. Andrew Fraser of Kinmundy. John Gordon
of Braichlie. Sir John Forbes of Craigivar. James Gordon younger of Lesmore.
Adam Gordon of Glenbuket. Alexander Bannerman of Eisick. Sir Alexander Falconer
of Glenfarquhar. Alexander Carnegy Sheriff Deput of Forfar. Sir David Ogilby of
Clova. Ogilvie of Pit^^ni. Carnegy of Balna^^on. Lindsey of Edgel. James Ramsay
of Bamff. John Drummond Sheriff Deput of Monteith. Liutennent General William
Drummond of Cromlix. Sir Steuart of Go^rntullie. Sir John Stirling of Keir. Sir
James Cambel of La^ers. Sir Patrick Murray of Auchtertyre. Sir John Drummond of
Machanie. John Drummond Stewart Deput of Strathern. James Graham of Orchyel.
Mungo Halden of Glenegies. Patrick Steuart of Ballechen. Menzies younger of
Weem. Alexander Robertson of Strowan. Andrew Spalding of Ashintillie. Colquhoun
of Luss. John Graham of Killane. John Graham of Dougalstoun. John Buchannan of
Arapryor. Buchannen of Drumakil. Mckean of Kinsheal. Mcnaughton of that Ilk.
Steuart and Tutor of Appine. Mcallaster of Tarbet. Conjunctly and severally, to
pursue, follow, take, apprehend, imprison, and present to Justice, all Persons
within the said Shires, guilty, or suspected to be guilty of Theft, resset of
Theft; Robberies, Depredations, Sorning, exacting of Black-meal, Communing with
Intercommuned Persons, Harboring and Ressetting of Outlaws and Fugitives,
hounding out, or ratihabiting Thieves, Robbers, Murderers, Sorners, or others,
guilty of the foresaid Crimes; and in case the said Persons cannot be
apprehended, and presented to Justice, We do give Warrant to Our said
Commissioners, or any one, or two of them, to issue forth Precepts, direct to
Sheriff-officers, Stewart, or Bailie-officers, Mayors, or Constables, to Charge
them to compear before the said Commissioners, or any three of them, at the
next Justice-court, to be holden by them, in manner aftermentioned; and where
there are not already, a sufficient number of Sheriff, and other Officers, with
Power to the said Commissioners, to appoint Officials in all the High-land
Paroches; which Officials, are to have the same Powers, given to Constables by
the Act of Parliament, in the year 1661. and who are to give an account on all
occasions, to the next adjacent Commissioners, and to cite Persons before them,
as Precepts shall be directed to them by the said Commissioners: as also, with
Power to Our said Commissioners, or any one, or two of them, to cause cite
before them, all Persons within the said bounds, malae famae, and suspected of
Theft, or of corresponding with Thieves, that they may be tried by an Assyze,
and be either purged by an Assyze, or Imprisoned, until they find sufficient
Caution; And do declare, that a Citation to be used at the Paroch Kirk, and
Market Cross of the Head-burgh of the Shire, where they have most frequently
haunted, against the said Thieves, their Ressetters, and others guilty of the
Crimes aforesaid, to compear before Our said Commissioners, who have no
dwelling-houses, shall be as sufficient as if they were personally Charged, in
regard of the uncertainty of their Residence, and difficulty of access to them;
and where they have places of Residence, they are to be cited personally, or at
their Dwelling-houses, and Market Cross of the Head Burgh of the Shire where
they dwell, with Power to Our said Commissioners, or any three of them, which
is declared to be a quorum, to affix and hold Justice Courts, at such times and
places as they shall think most fit, and expedient to Create Fiscals,
Sergeants, Dempsters, and all other Members of Court needful, except Clerks,
who are to be appointed by the Justice-Clerk, wherein, if he failie, Our said
Commissioners, or their quorum, are empowered to choice their own Clerks; with
power to Our said Commissioners, or their quorum, to cite Witnesses, to call
persons to pass upon Inquests, out of any six Paroches adjacent to the place
where they hold their Court; absent Witnesses and Assizers, to Unlaw, and
amerciat the Unlaws and Amerciments, to uplift and execute, to be applied by
Our said Commissioners, for defraying some part of the Expenses and Fees of
the Commissioners and Members of Court, and in the said Courts, to call the
persons, either cited and not imprisoned, or imprisoned as guilty, or suspected
to be guilty of the foresaid Crimes, or any of them; And to declare such as
are absent, Fugitives from Our Laws, and to issue forth their Precepts, for
Denouncing them Our Rebels, and putting them to Our Horn; and ordaining all
their Moveable-goods to be Escheat, and in-brought to Our use, for their
contempt and disobedience; and such as shall compear, or be brought before them
as Prisoners, to put them to trial, and the knowledge of an Assize, and
according as they shall be found Innocent or Guilty, that they cause Justice be
done upon them, conform to the Laws and Acts of Parliament, of Our said Realm,
providing always, that when any Landed-man is cited, or brought before Our
said Commissioners, as guilty, or suspected to be guily of the said Crime of
Theft, or resset of Theft, if he compear and be put to the knowledge of an
Inquest, Our said Commissioners, before pronouncing of Sentence, shall be
obliged to report the State of the Process to Our Privy Council, that they may
give such Direction therein as they shall think fit; but if they compear not
and be declared Fugitives, that their Movables shall be intremetted with, and
Escheated as other Fugitives. And Do hereby give Power and Commission to Our
Commissioners, in the respective Shires aforesaid, to intromet with, receive
and uplift the Escheat-Goods of such as shall be declared Fugitives, in the
said respective Shires; the two parts whereof are to be applied for defraying
the Expenses of Our Commissioners and Members of Court, in the Execution of Our
said Commission, and a third part thereof to be paid to Us; With Power to them
to nominat and appoint Collectors, for uplifting of the same, for whom Our
said Commissioners shall be answerable, that they shall make count, reckoning,
and payment of Our said third part. And do ordain Our said Commissioners,
living within the Shires of Caithness and Sutherland: Item, these living within
Ross, Inverness, Cromartie, Nairne, and Elgine; Those within Bamff, Aberdeen,
Kincardine and Forfar; And those living within Pearth, Striveling, Dumbartoun
and Argile, to meet at least twice in the year, viz. once upon the second
Tuesday of October, and once upon the first Tuesday of June yearly; and that
the place of meeting of Our Commissioners of the said Shire of Sutherland and
Caithness, these two days be at Lochnaver: The place for Ross, Inverness,
Nairne, Elgine and Cromarty, at the head of Lochness The place for the
Commissioners of Bamff, Aberdeen, Kincardine, and Forfar, at Kincardin of Neil:
The place for the Commissioners of Pearth, Striveling, Dumbartoun and Argile to
be at the Kirk of ^^^^bidder: At which places, and times; Our said
Commissioners shall be obliged to stay and keep together, at the least for the
space of two days, for doing of Justice; without prejudice to these
Commissioners, to meet oftener, or any three of them, to meet at any other time
and place they shall think meet for holding of Courts: Or for the Commissioners
of any Shire, to meet with the Commissioners of any other Shire, as they shall
think expedient: And with Power to Our said Commissioners, or any one, or more
of them, in case of Convocations, or open Depredations, to call and require Our
Leidges to their Assistance, and give Warrant to pursue any Fugitives, to any
place within the said Shire, for apprehending them; and presenting them to
Justice: As also, to require all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies of Royalties,
Regalities, and Barrones, to be aiding and assisting to them therein, as they
shall be required by Our said Commissioners, or any one or more of them, for
apprehending Fugitives, and rescuing and recovering Goods, taken by Herships,
and De^^^dations, wherein they are not to fall, as they will be answerable upon
their Duties and Offices: And the said Sheriffs and other Judges Ordinary, are
ordained, not only to give Concurrence and (...) to Our said Commissioners, as
they shall be required; but to (...) them Prison Houses in Burghs, and
Court-houses or keeping their Meetings, And upon all occasions, the said
Sheriffs and Magistrates of Burghs Royal, are hereby differed to receive any
Prisoners sent to them by Our said Commissioners, or any one, or more of them,
with a Mittimus under their hand, for that effect, and to keep and detain them
in sure Prison, until they be brought to a Legal Trial, or dismissed by Order
of any three of the Commissioners, in Writ. And the Commissioners of the
several Shires, shall be obliged to give their concurrance, when they shall be
required, by any one of the Commissioners, against any Person, who is
Condemned, or declared Fugitive by any Quorum of their number. And if they
shall happen to the out of all the foresaid Shires; They are to acquaint the
Judges Ordinary of the Shire, to which they fly, who are hereby Ordained to
apprehend, or pursue them out of their Jurisdiction. And to the effect, such
Transgressors may be (...) known, The Commissioners, who declare any Fugitive,
shall make intimation of their Names, and Designations, to the Sheriffs of the
next adjacent Shires of the Place, where such a Court is holden, and the
Sheriffs are to cause Intimate the same at the Paroch Churches within their
Respective Jurisdictions, That no Person presum to Resset, Supply, or Harbor
them. And do hereby appoint, That the Clerks of the Respective Courts, shall
give accounts to the Clerks of Our Privy Council, what Persons are Condemned,
what Fines are imposed, what Persons are declared Fugitives, what Escheats are
fallen, and the Value thereof: And that twice in the Year, viz. Once in the
Month of August, and once in Month of December, That Our Privy Council may
know the Condition of these Shires, and what diligence Our said Commissioners
use, in the Prosecution of Our said Commission, upon stealling of any man's
Goods, and Addresses made by the Parties Injured, or any in their Name, to Our
said Commissioners, or any one of them, for assistance, to Discover, or Recover
the Goods; Each Commissioner, to whom the Address shall be made; shall be
obliged to give his Assistance within twenty milnes of the Commissioners
House. And all Heritors are required to obey Our said Commissioners, in giving
such Assistance. And for making distinction betwixt Peaceable and Honest Men,
and Thieves and Broken Persons; No Person living within any part of the
Highlands, of the said Shires, are to bring any Cowes, or Horses to any
Mercats, without a Testificate in Writ, from a Landed Man, bearing the Number,
and Designation of the Beasts, the name, and place of residence of the
Merchand, and attesting, that they are leilie come, under the pain of Seasure,
and Confiscation thereof, as stolen Goods, And if such Testificats shall be
granted, and that afterward it shall be found, that any of the said Beasts
have been stolen; the Landed Man Attester shall be liable, as if he were
guilty: In so far as may be extended, to Restitution and Damage, of what the
Law provides, without any favor. And Masters, and Magistrates, who have power
of Mercats, and Clerks thereof, are discharged to permit any Beasts, to be
sold, or bought, at any Mercats, till the Seller deliver in to them his said
Testificat, with Certification, That the Magistrate, Master, or Clerk of the
Market shall be liable for any Beasts, so sold, and whereof the Clerk keeps not
the Certificats aforesaid, as if they were Art and Part of the Thieft
themselves. And it is hereby declared, That it shall not be lawful for any
Person in the Highlands, to travel with Fire-armes, the distance of Seven Miles
from the ordinary place of their residence, without a Pass under the hand of
some Landed Man, bearing the Name of the Person, the Place of his Residence,
and the Place to which he is to Travel, and the occasion thereof, which is to
bear a particular Date, and is to continue only for that Journey, with power to
Our said Commissioners, or any one of them, or any having their warrant, to
Seiz upon, Apprehend, and Imprison all such Persons wanting Passes, as
aforesaid: as Thieves, Sorners, and Vagabonds, till they find Caution, for
their good behavior, and Answer to any accusation, that can be brought against
them. It is likewise, hereby declared, That this Our Commission, is, and shall
be nowayes prejudicial to the Right, and Jurisdiction of Sheriffs, Stewarts,
and Baillies of Regalities, who, notwithstanding thereof, may proceed against
Persons guilty of Thift, Reset of Thift, and of other Cryms aforesaid, in the
same way, and manner as they were in use to do formerly, conform to the Laws,
if they be first Attachers, and shall Prevent Our said Commissioners in
diligence. And this Our Commission is to continue, and endure ^ay, and until
We shall think fit to recall it, by a Writ under Our great, or Privy Seals.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the fourth of July, 1682. And of Our Reign
the thirtieth and fourth Year. And to the effect the said Commission may be
made public, and known to the said Commissioners, and all other Persons
concerned, We, with advice of Our Privy Council, have though fit, That these
Our Letters of Publication, should be Past and Published in manner
underwritten. And in regard, the said Principal Commission under Our great Seal
cannot be conveniently produced, in the Respective Places, and Meetings of the
Commissioners; We have thought fit, That the Principal Commission shall remain
in the hands, custody and keeping of Our Chancellor: And hereby Ordain, and
Appoint, That a printed Copy thereof, Signed under the hand of the Clerk of
Council, and under the Council Signet, shall be as sufficient a warrant for the
said Commissioners to meet, as if the Principal Commission under the greal Seal
were produced at their meetings, to all Intents and Purposes. And it is hereby
specially provided, That conform to the late Act of Parliament, the said
Commissioners, and their Clerks, and other Members of Court, shall at their
first meeting; at the least, before they Act in that capacity; take and sign
the Test, the Extracts whereof, the Clerks in the Respective Courts, are to
send in to the Clerks of Our Council with all convenient diligence, at the
least, within the space of forty days after taking thereof. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and Command, That in continent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, Market Crosses of the
Head Burghs of the Shires of Catheness, Sutherland, Inverness Cromarty, Nairn,
Elgine, Bamff, Aberdeen, Kincardine, Forfare, Perth, Dumbartonn, Striviling,
Argyl, Tar^^t, and other places needful: And there in Our Name and Authority,
by open Proclamation, make Publication hereof, That Our said Commissioners may
proceed, and Act, conform to the Tenor of Our said Commission. And that all
Judges, and Magistrates concerned, may give their Concurrance, and Assistance to
them, as they are thereby Ordained: And that all other Our Leiges, and Subjects
may have notice thereof, and give due obedience thereto. As also, That ye cause
Read these presents at the several Paroch Kirkes within the Respective Shires
foresaids, upon Sabbath Days, after Divine Worship, that the same may be more
publicly known. And Ordains these presents to be printed, The which to do, We
commit to you conjunctly and severally, Our full Power, by these Our Letters,
delivering them, by you duly execute, and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh; the ninth day of August, one thousand
six hundred and eighty two. And of Our Reign the thirtieth and fourth Year. Per
Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL PATERSON, Cls. Sic. Concilij.



GOD save the KING.

