C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
AT EDINBURGH, The ninth day of January, one thousand six hundred and sixty
two.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council having considered His Majesty's
Letter, of the date at Whitehall the twenty eight of December last, one
thousand six hundred and sixty one; bearing, that whereas by the advice and
consent of the Parliament, His Majesty did allow the administration of the
Church Government of this Kingdom by Sessions, Presbyteries and Synods,
notwithstanding of the Act Rescissory, until His Majesty should take care for
the better settling of the Government thereof. And that having, by a late
Proclamation, of the date the sixth of September, one thousand six hundred and
sixty one, declared His Royal pleasure for restoring the ancient and legal
Government of the Church, by Archbishops and Bishops, as it was exercised in
the year, one thousand six hundred and thirty seven; and that in pursuance of
that resolution, His Majesty has nominated and presented persons to the
several Bishoprics of this Kingdom: of whom some have been lately consecrated
and invested with the same Dignities, Church Power and Authority, which was
formerly competent to the Archbishops and Bishops of this Church, in the
reigns of His Royal Grandfather and Father of blessed memory; and that the
allowance of the administration of this Church, in the way it has been, since
the violent interruption of Episcopal Government, being inconsistent with the
same now established, is now of it self void and expired, as being only for a
time till His Majesty should settle and secure Church ^^^^^ment in a frame most
(...) to Monarchy, and complying with the peace of the Kingdom; and so the said
allowance should be of no further (...) and continuance, but the jurisdiction
and exercise of Church Government should be ordered in the respective Synods,
Presbyteries and Sessions of this Church, by the Appointment and Authority of
the Archbishops and Bishops thereof, according to the standing Laws and their
known Privilege and Practice conform thereto. And that special care be taken
that all due reverence and respect be given by all the Subjects to the
Archbishops and Bishops of the Church, and that they have all countenance,
assistance and encouragement from the Nobility, Gentry and others, in the
discharge of their Office and Service to His Majesty in the Church. And that
strict notice be taken of all and every one who shall presume to reflect or
express any dis-respect to their Persons, Function or Authority, with which
they are invested: which His Majesty requires to be intimate to the whole
Lieges by Proclamation, discharging all Ecclesiastical Meetings in Synods,
Presbyteries or Sessions, until they be authorized and ordered by the
Archbishops and Bishops upon their entry unto the Government of their
respective Seas, which is to be done speedily. Therefore in obedience of, and
conform to, His Majesty's Royal pleasure and command, have Ordained, and by
these presents Ordain the Lion King at Arms and his brethren Heralds,
Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, to pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and there by open Proclamation to make publication of His Majesty's Royal
pleasure foresaid, discharging all Ecclesiastical Meetings in Synods,
Presbyteries and Sessions, until they be authorized and ordered by the
Archbishops and Bishops, upon their entering unto the Government of their
respective Seas, as said is; and to require all His Majesty's Subjects of
whatsoever rank, quality or degree they be, to give all due reverence and
respect unto the Archbishops and Bishops; and that all the Nobility, Gentry and
Borroughs, Sheriffs of Shires, Stewarts of Stewartries, Baylies of Regalities,
Magistrates of Burghs, Justices of Peace, and other public Ministers within
their respective bounds and jurisdictions, at all times, give all countenance,
assistance and encouragement to them, in the discharge of their Office and
Service to His Majesty in the Church; with certification, that if any shall
presume to reflect or express any dis-respect to their Persons, Function or
Authority, with which they are invested, they shall be severely and exemplarly
punished, according to the nature and quality of their offense. And Ordains
these presents to be printed, and published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
as said is, and other places needful, that none may pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1662.


