C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
AT EDINBURGH, The second day of January, one thousand six hundred and sixty
two.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council considering, that the late Act of
Parliament, entitled, Act For encouraging of Shipping and Navigation,
Ordaining no Goods nor Commodities whatsoever, that are of Foreign growth,
product or manufactury, be brought into this Kingdom, but only from those
places where the said Commodities do grow, are produced or made, or from the
Ports where usually they have been shipped for transportation, and from no
other Country; and that the said Commodities be transported in no other Ships
or Vessels, but such as truly belong to the Natives and Inhabitants of this
Kingdom (excepting English or Irish Vessels, providing Scots Vessels enjoy the
like benefit within the Dominions of England and Ireland) As also, that all
Ships and Vessels belonging to this Kingdom, shall be navigated only by Scots
men dwelling in Scotland, at least the Master and three four parts of the
Mariners being such, under the pains therein contained; Has never as yet been
put in execution, to the great prejudice of Trade and Commerce, and of the good
of the whole Kingdom. Therefore they command and charge all and sundry whom it
may concern, after the first day of March next, in this instant year of GOD,
one thousand six hundred and sixty two, punctually to observe and obey the
foresaid Act, and the foresaids, and all other Clauses therein contained, under
the pains therein expressed. And Ordains these presents to be published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh; Peer and Shore of Lies, and all other places
needful, that none may pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1662.


