COMMISSION For Examining Witnesses anent the Importation of Irish Victual.
EDINBVRGH, the 4th Day of February, 1696.
THE LORDS of His Majesty's Privy Council Considering, That they by their
former Commissions granted by them to David Crawfurd of Drumsuie, and to his
Deputs and Servants, and others to be appointed by him, for whom (by the Tenor
of the said Commissions) he is to be answerable, they have given full Power,
Authority and Commission to seize and apprehend all Irish Victual imported into
this Kingdom, within the Bounds specified in the said Commissions, and to
Stave, Sink and Destroy the Victual, and to take the Boats, Barks and other
Vessels wherein the same shall be Imported, and dispose thereupon at their
Pleasure. And the said Lords being informed, that the said David Crawfurd of
Drumsuie, and his Deputs, Servants and others Employed by him, and for whom
(conform to the Tenor of the Commissions) he is answerable as said is, have
been remiss and negligent in exercising the Power committed to them by the
said Commissions, and that he or his said Deputs and Servants, has (contrair
to the Tenor of the said Commissions, and Bonds given by him and his
Cautioners at the granting thereof,) suffered and permitted diverse and sundry
persons to Import Irish Victual into this Kingdom, at least have connived at
the Importation thereof; Therefore, and to the effect the truth of this Matter
may the better appear and be known, They hereby give full Power and Commission
to the persons afternamed, and ilk ane of them, for their respective Places and
Bounds after-specified, Viz. To the Magistrates of Glasgow for the Town of
Glasgow and Suburbs thereof. To the Magistrates of Renfrew for the Town and
Paroch of Renfrew. To the Magistrates of Dumbartoun for the Town and Paroch of
Dumbartoun. To the Baillie of the Regality of Lenox, (...) Noble of Ferme, and
Claud Hamilton of Barns for the Paroches of Cardross and Kirkpatrick. To Sir
John Campbell of Carick for the Isle of Rosneath. To John M^carter of Milntoun
for the Paroch of Dinnoon. To the Sheriff-Deput of the Shire of Argile, and
Magistrates of the Burgh of Inverrary for the Town of Inverrary and places
adjacent thereto. To John Campbell of Kildalin and the Baillies of Loch-head
for the Town and adjacent Bounds of Kintyre. To Sir James Stuart Sheriff of
B^te, (...) Bannatine of Kaims and the Magistrates of Rothesay for the Isle of
Bute. To the Duke of Hamilton's Baillie of Arran for the Isle of Arran. To the
Baillie of the Regality of Glasgow for the Town and Paroch of Govan. To the
Lord of Houstoun younger and the Town of Glasgows Baillie at New-Port Glasgow
for the Town of Newark and Paroch of Kilmacomb. To the Lairds of Greenock and
Crawfurdsburn for the Paroch of Greenock. To the Lord of Blackhall, the Lord
of Kellie younger, and William Cunninghame Brother to Gilbertfield for the
Paroch of Innerkip. To the Lairds of Kelburn, Bishoptoun younger, Hunterstoun,
Kellie elder, and Auchinnames for the Paroches of Largs and Cumrayer. To the
Lairds of Hunterstoun, Aslimyard, and John Park of Littledub for the Bounds
from the Largs to Kilwinning. To the Magistrates of Irwine Sir William
Cunninghame of Cunninghame-head, and the Baillie of Cunninghame for the Towns
and Paroches of Irwine and Kilwinning. To the Lairds of Corsbie, Adamtoun
younger, and William Baillie of Muncktoun for the Bounds from Irwine to Air. To
the Magistrates of Air William Cunnnghame of Brounhill, and William Mctaggart
Merchants there for the Town and Paroch of Air. To James Ross of Garvan, and
John Muir late Provost of Air, for the Bounds from Air to the Town of Girvan.
To James Agnew younger of Lochnam and Mr. William Fullertoun from the Bounds
from the Mule of Galloway to Ballantree. To the Magistrates of Strenrawer for
the Town of Strenrawer; To call before them and examine, and take the
Declarations of all such persons living within the respective Bounds foresaids,
as they shall think fit, and to interrogat them upon the Interrogators
following, viz. Primo, If it consists with their knowledge, that Drumsuie or
his Deputs did grant any Licenses for importing Victual from Ireland, and if
they did, that they declare what Composition or good Deed he or his Deputs ^
take for the granting of the said Licenses. Secundo, If Drumsuie or his Deputs
did connive at, and know of the importing of Victual from Ireland, and if th^^
did not Transact and Agree with the Persons who did import the same. Tertio, If
they did not exact Sums of Money from the Boat-men, and Owners of t^^ Boats, in
which the Irish Victual was imported, and did deliver back the said Boats, and
if they did not make Transactions of this Nature for the same Boat ^^ner than
once. Quarto, If Drumsuie and his Deputs, or any of them did know where the
Victual imported was, and did not make Seasure thereof. Quinto, T^ they Declare
in general what they know concerning the Exactions imposed by Drumsuie or his
Deputs upon Merchants or others who did import the said Irish V^ual. Sexto,
That they be special as to the precise time, that is, That they condescend upon
the Month and Year, Persons and Sums, and the Witnesses who will prove the
matter of Fact condescended upon. And Lastly, upon such other Interrogators as
the said Commissioners, or any of them shall think fit, to propose to the
persons who shall appear before them anent Drumsuie and his Deputs, Servants
and others employed by him, their Malversation in suffering the Importation of
Irish or other Foreign Victual into this Kingdom by Collusion, or otherways,
and what Exactions of Money by way of Composition or otherways they have made
upon any of His Majesty's Liedges, upon pretense of their having Right to the
Boats, Barks or Vessels employed in importing the said Victual, or as Fines for
the Causes foresaids, or Transactions upon that account: With POWER to the
said Commissioners to issue forth Precepts for citing of the persons foresaids
within their respective Bounds above-set down, to appear before them upon such
days as they shall appoint betwixt and the fifteenth day of March next to come;
With Certification to the persons cited, that if they failie to appear before
the said Commissioners, or compearing shall refuse to give Information, and
declare what they know in the Matters foresaids, that they shall be called and
conveened before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, and be punished as
Controveeners of the Laws and Acts of Parliament made against the importing of
Irish or other Foreign Victual; With Power to the Commissioners foresaids
within their respective Bounds above-set-down, to put the Refusers under
sufficient Caution to appear before the said Lords of Privy Council, upon the
first Tuesday of the Month of April next; With Power likeways to the said
Commissioners to Elect and Choi^e their own Clerk within their respective
Bounds, for whom they shall be answerable: And Appoints the said Commissioners
their Clerk, to draw up the Examinations and Declarations of the persons
foresaids, within their respective Bounds authentickly in Write, and cause the
Parties subscribe the same, and transmit the same Subscrived also by the
Commissioners, and their Clerk in their respective Bounds to the said Lords of
Privy Council, betwixt and the first Tuesday of April next to come. And the
said Lords of privy Council do hereby Declare, that the Examinations or
Declarations to be emitted by the persons foresaids, shall no ways militat, nor
be made use of against the said persons themselves at any time coming: And
allows their Presents to be Printed, and Appoints His Majesty's Solicitor to
send printed Copies thereof to the several Commissioners therein-contained.

Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God save the King.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.


