ACT In Favors of the Brevvers of Edinburgh, and Liberties thereof; and other
adjacent Brevvers.
Edinburgh, August 6. 1695.
THE Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, Having considered a Supplication
given in to them, be the Brewers within the Town of Edinburgh and Liberties
thereof; and other adjacent Brewers, Representing, that the Honorable Estates
of Parliament, having by their Act, Dated the sixteenth day of July last,
annexed to his Majesty's Crown, three pennies Scots upon the pint of all Ale
and Beer, brown to be vented and sold, and that over and above the former two
pennies imposed thereon: As also three shill, more upon ilk pint of Aquavitae
or strong Waters, not made of Malt, and having ordained the Ale to be sold at
twenty eight pennies per pint, as the least price thereof, and having
Authorized and Empowered the said Lords to prescribe such Methods and Orders as
they shall judge necessary, in relation to the foresaid Act: The Supplicants
humbly crave liberty to make the Representation following. 1. That the Excise
being laid upon the Brewers, and thereupon the price of Ale being raised which
is paid to the Vintner, it is just and reasonable that the Brewer should be
allowed to raise his price proportionally, as was done when the Ale was cried
up formerly to two shill, the pint otherwise the Ventner will reap the whole
Benefit, and the Brewers carry the whole Burden, which is humbly conceived was
never the Design of the Act of Parliament. 2. If the Neighboring Vintners in
Abbey, Yeard-heads of Leith, Caldtown, and other adjacent Places to the
Petitioners, should take upon them to sell their Ale at two shill, per pint,
being so near and contiguous to the Petitioners, the samen will not only
evacuat the Design of the Act of Parliament, by drawing all the Consumpt to
them. But likewise will tend to the Petitioners ruin, and so consequently to
his Majesty's loss, which is hoped their Lordships will take into their
consideration: And therefore humbly Supplicating, to the effect underwriten, as
the said Supplication bears. The said Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council do
hereby Ordain and Allow the Supplicants to raise the price of all Ale to be
vented and sold within the Burgh of Edinburgh, Sub-urbs and Liberties thereof,
and Yeard-heads of Leith proportionally, as the Vintners are allowed to raise
the same: and discharges the Neighboring Ventners within the Abbey, the
Yeard-heads of Leith, Caldcoun and other adjacent Places to the Petitioners, to
sell their Ale at a lower rate, than the price appointed to the Petitioners,
with, and under the same Certification and Penalty appointed to Vintners within
Burgh: and appoints their presents to be printed and published at the Market
Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful.

Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695.


