ACT Explanatory, Of the Proclamation of the 27 July last, for Collecting and
Inbringing of the Pole 1695: With Additional instructions to the Commissioners
of Shires there anent.
Edinburgh, August 8. 1695.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, in pursuance of the Proclamation of
the twenty seventh of July last, for Collecting and Inbringing the Pole Money
1695, and for farther Explanation thereof, Do in the first place Ordain, that
the Commissioners of Shires that shall happen not to meet on the second Tuesday
of this Month, conform to the Act of Parlialiament, do meet by the Call of the
Sheriff, (who is hereby required to give timeous Advertisement for that end) on
the first Tuesday of September next, for dividing themselves, or appointing
other Heretors into the several Parishes, to the Effect specified in the said
Act. And that the Magistrates of Burghs, who shall happen not to meet the third
Tuesday of this Instant, conform to the said Act, do meet the said first
Tuesday of September. Secondly, Where the Sub-commissioners for the Parishes
are Ordered by the Proclamation, to choose a fit and responsal Person, to be
both Clerk and Collector of the Pole of that Parish, they are hereby farther
required, to take sufficient Caution of the foresaid Person, nominat to be
Clerk and Collector, Thirdly, The said Sub-commissioners for the Parishes, are
hereby farther Empowered, if they shall find it needful, to Call, and cause all
Heretors, or Tutors and Curators, or Chamberlanes of Minors and Absents, to
give up, upon Oath, to the best of their knowledge, the Names of all Persons,
with their Degrees and Classes, living and residing within their Bounds.
Fourthly, That the Commissioners of the Shires set down and prescribe to the
Sub-collectors for Parishes, such a Method and Schem, for taking up the
foresaids Lists of Persons, with their Qualities and Degrees within every
Parish, as may be most clear and distinct for the effectual Ingathering of the
said Pole, and for comptrolling the said Lists. And Fifthly, That in place of
the penalty of ten Pounds Scots imposed on every Heretor who shall not attend,
and do duty in manner prescribed in the said Proclamation, the Certification
be, and is hereby appointed to be as they will be answerable at their highest
perril: With power to the said Commissioners, when met to Enact themselves,
of consent in such Penalties as they shall judge meet, for their punctual
attending, and careful performing of what is required of them by the foresaid
roclamation. And Ordains their presents to be printed and published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful.

Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printe^ to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1695.


