ACT Anent the Half Ducatdouns and Old Scots Merk-pieces.
July 25. 1695.
FORASMVCH as, by a Proclamation of the Date the twelfth Day of July Current;
the Rate of the Ducatdouns was Raised to Three Pound Fourteen shilling, and the
Scots Four Merk-piece, and sundry other Species of Money, with their Halfs and
Quarters Proportionally, were Declared and Ordained to be Current at the Rates
therein-mentioned, and all Persons obliged to Receive the same in all Payments
whatsomever, at the said Value, as the Current Coin of this Kingdom; And seeing
sundry of His Majesty's Leidges, either through Ignorance, or Mistake, do
scruple and demur to receive the Half Ducatdouns at the proportional Value
foresaid; and the old Scots Merk-pieces at the Value and Rate of the
Quarter-pieces of the Scots four Merk-piece, whereby many of the Meaner sort of
People are thereby Prejudged: And the Obedience due to His Majesty's Commands
and Intention, for having the said old Merks Current, at the Rate and Value of
the Quarter-pieces of the said four Merk neglected: Therefore the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, Declare the half Ducatdouns to be Current at the Value
of One Pound seventeen shilling Scots; and the old Scots Merks, to be Current
at the Value of the Quarter of the Scots four Merk-pieces; and Ordains the same
to be Received in all payments accordingly, and that Conform to the foresaid
Proclamation in all Points. And Ordains their Presents to be Printed and
Published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful.

GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1695.


