The old ancient form of Imbattailing a Regiment.
Lieut. Colonel. Colonel. Ser: Mayor. Lieut. Lieut. Lieu. 3 Capt. 1 Capt. En.
Ensig. En. 2 Cap. 4 Capt. 5 Capt. Lieu: Lieut. Drum Drum Drum Drum Ser.
sssssssssssssssssssssssssss ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp
ssssssssssssssssssssss Ser. sssssssssssssssssssssssssss
ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp ssssssssssssssssssssss
Ensign. Ensign. Ensign. Ensign. Ensign. Ser. sssssssssssssssssssssssssss
ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp ssssssssssssssssssssss Ser.
sssssssssssssssssssssssssss ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp
ssssssssssssssssssssss sssssssssssssssssssssssssss
ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp ssssssssssssssssssssss
sssssssssssssssssssssssssss ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp
ssssssssssssssssssssss sssssssssssssssssssssssssss
ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp ssssssssssssssssssssss
sssssssssssssssssssssssssss ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp
ssssssssssssssssssssss sssssssssssssssssssssssssss
ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp ssssssssssssssssssssss
sssssssssssssssssssssssssss ppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp
ssssssssssssssssssssss 1 Ser. 3 Ser. 5 Ser. Dr: Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. 6 Ser. Dr:
4 Ser. 2 Ser. Dr:

Place this Battle in folio 46.

EDINBURGH, April 5th. 1694.
THE Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council being informed, that the day
appointed for the first Diet of meeting of the Commissioners nominat by Their
Majesty's, for security of the peace of the High-lands, is elapsed, and that
the Commissioners have not met together before elapsing thereof, they hereby
assign and appoint the first Diet of meeting of the said Commissioners to be
upon the Twenty second day of May next to come, and that at the Town of
Inverness, and not at Inverlochie, as was formerly appointed; and appoints
Intimation hereof to be made by the Solicitor, at the Mercat-Crosses and
Paroch-Kirks within the bounds of the said Commission, timeously, before the
said Twenty second day of May next to come; and if need beis, that their
presents be Printed for the effect foresaid.


