A PROCLAMATION Against Importing of Irish Cattle, or Resetting thereof.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith: To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms
Our Shireffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute
Greeting: Forasmuchas, by the fourteenth Act of the Parliament holden in the
Year one thousand six hundred eighty six, it is expressly enacted and ordained,
that no Horse, Mare or Cattle whatsomever shall be imported from Ireland to
this Kingdom, under the pain and Penalty of Forefaulture of the Horse, Mares or
Cattle that shall be imported, and further of paying the Sum of one hundred
Merks Scots for each Beast, that shall be so imported, the one half of both the
Beast and Fines, to belong f^ the Seizer and Discoverer, and the other half to
his Majesty, As likewise, that no Person within this Kingdom reset or buy any
Horse, Mares or Nolt, that they know to be imported out of Ireland, under the
pain of one hundred Merks Scots, for each Beast, besides the Forefaulture of
the Beasts themselves, the one half to belong to the Discoverer, (he alwise
pursuing and instructing the Importation within six Months after) and the
other half to his Majesty: And We being resolved, that due and exact obedience
shall be given to the foresaid Act of Parliament for the time to come, and that
the same shall be execute, with all rigor against such as transgress the same.
Therefore, We with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council in pursuance
of, and conform to the foresaid Act of Parliament, strictly prohibit and
discharge the importing of any Horse, Mares, Cows or other Cattle from Ireland
into this Kingdom, either by the Natives thereof or Inhabitants in Ireland, or
any other Forraigners whatsomever, and all Persons to buy or reset any Horses,
Mares or Nolt, that they know to be imported out of Ireland, after the Day and
Date hereof under the pains abovementioned respective, contained in the
foresaid Act of Parliament, for importing buying or resetting any Horse, Mares
or Nolt imported from Ireland contrary thereunto. Likeas, We with advice
foresaid for the more effectual Execution of the Premises, Require and Command
all Collectors, Surveyers, Waiters or others employed in uplifting and
collecting Our Customs and foreign Excise, at the several Seaports of this
Kingdom, and all Officiars of the Law whatsomever, to seize upon all Horse,
Mares and Cattle whatsomever imported from Ireland after the date hereof, or
bought or reset by whatsomever Person or Persons within this Kingdom who knew
the same, to have been imported, and to detain and confiscat the same, comform
to the foresaid Act of Parliament, and to pursue and exact from the several
persons who shall Import, Buy or Reset, any Horse, Mares or any other Cattle
imported from Ireland contrair to the foresaid Act of Parliament, the Sums and
Penalties respectively abovementioned, incurred by them through the foresaid
Transgression, the one half thereof to be applied for His Majesty's use, and
the other half to be detained by themselves, in manner specified in the said
Act. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you straightly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the Market Crosses of the several Head-Burghs and Sea-port-touns within
this Kingdom, and make Public Intimation thereat of Our pleasure in the
Premises, that none may pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these presents to be
Printed; And Our Solicitor to transmit Copies thereof to the Shireffs of the
several Shires and Stewarts of the Stewartries, their Deputs or Clerks, and to
the Magistrates of the several Sea-port-tounst, to be by them published
accordingly.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the eleventh day of May one thousand six
hundred ninety and eight years, and of our Reign the tenth Year. Per Actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilii GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii

GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the KING'S Most Excellent MAJESTAY, Anno. Domini School.


