C R
(...) (...) royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Anent JVS POPVLI.
Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of February, one thousand six hundred and seventy
one. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly
and severally specially constitute, Greeting.
Forasmuch as, albeit by the Laws and Acts of Parliament made concerning
seditious and scandalous Libels, Speeches and Writings, against the King for
the time, His Person and Government; the uttering, writing, venting and
dispersing, hearing, having, concealing and not revealing the same, are
straightly prohibit, and the contraveeners Ordained to be punished with the pain
of death, and the other pains therein contained. Notwithstanding whereof, there
being a most wicked and seditious Pamphlet, Entitled, Jus Populi vindicatum,
etc. lately printed and dispersed, containing and asserting pernicious and
treasonable principles, and false and scandalous aspersions and reflections
upon Our Person and Government, and the Authority and Proceedings of Our
Parliament and Council, and justifying and vindicating the late Rebellion in
the West, and stirring up Our People and Subjects to the like practices, and
containing other matters of dangerous nature and consequence; which upon
examination, is found to be a most seditious and scandalous Pamphlet and Libel,
containing pernicious and damnable principles of Treason and Rebellion against
Us and all supreme Magistrates, and the rights of Monarchy itself, to the great
hazard of Our Person and Government, and to the great reproach and scandal of
the Nation and the Reformed Religion, if the poison of so horrid and detestable
principles should be suffered to be vented and diffused, by these who pretend
to be of the same. Wherefore, We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Do Ordain, That upon the twenty two day of February instant, the said
Pamphlet be publicly burnt in the high street of Edinburgh, near to the
Mercat-crosse thereof, by the hand of the Hangman: And do hereby discharge the
importing, printing, having, venting, dispersing, or concealing of that Book,
or any other Books of that nature, or of the Authors and Dispersers thereof;
and Ordain the Acts of Parliament to be put in execution against all persons
whatsoever that are guilty, or have had, or shall have any accession to the
writing, printing, importing or dispersing of the said Book, or any other Book
of that nature: And hereby Require and Command all persons, who have or shall
have any of these Books, residing besouth the water of Tay, to bring in and
deliver the same to the Clerks of Council, or any of them, betwixt and the
sixteenth day of March next; and benorth the said Water, betwixt and the last
day of the said Month: With certification, that if thereafter any person of
whatsoever degree, quality or sex they shall be of, shall have any of the said
Books in their custody or possession, that they shall be fined in the sum of
the thousand pounds Scots, to be exacted without any favor or defaul^ation,
without prejudice of the other pains contained in the Acts of Parliament; And
Ordains all persons who knows, or who shall know the Authors, Importers,
Printers, Dispersers, or any of them, that they immediately reveal them upon
their utmost peril. And for the better discovery of these who are or shall be
guilty of the premises, and for encouraging others to do their duty in that
behalf, We do hereby assure and promise to these who shall discover any that
art, or shall be guilty of selling or dispersing the foresaid Book, or any
other Books of that nature, so as they may be apprehended, shall have paid to
them the sum of fifty pounds Sterling; and these who shall so discover the
Authors or Importers thereof, shall have one hundred pounds Sterling; and if
the discoverers be guilty themselves, they shall have impunity granted to
themselves, by and attour the said Reward, upon their discovery of any others
guilty thereof. And Ordains the Magistrates of Edinburgh to see this Act put in
execution; And that the same be printed and published, that none pretend
ignorance.

Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1671.


