C R
(...)QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Anent keeping the Dyets of the Commission of the Kirk.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers and Messengers of Arms; Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, Specially, Constitute, Greeting:
Whereas, by the fifteenth Act of the third Session of Our second Parliament,
Dated at Edinburgh, the twenty eight day of August, one thousand six hundred
and seventy two years, Entitled, Commission for plantation of Kirks, and
valuation of Teinds, It is declared, That if any of the Commissioners be unable
to attend that Service through Death, Sickness, or other known impediment, We
should be careful to fill their places with other persons qualified: And also,
considering that Our Officers of State for the time, were nominated
Commissioners, and that some of the Commissioners, viz. The Earl of
Dumfermling, late Lord Privy Seal, and Sir James Loc^^^^^ of Lee, late Justice
Clerk, (Officers of State) are deceased, and that the Marquess of Athol is
preferred to be Lord Privy Seal, and Sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie to be
Justice Clerk; And which two were also nominate Commissioners by the said
Commission: And likewise considering, that Sir Charles Erskin of Cambo, Sir
William Lockhart of Lee, Sir William Thomson and Thomas Calderwood, four of the
Commissioners therein mentioned, are dead; So that there is a Vacancy of six of
the said Commissioners: And being well satisfied with the qualifications and
abilities of the Persons afternamed, for discharge of that Trust, and being
confident of their Integrity; We have therefore nominated, added, made, and
appointed Alexander Earl of Murray, as one for the Nobility, Sir George Mckenie
of Tarbit, John Drummond of Londie, and Richard Maitland of Gogar, as three for
the Barrons, Francis Kinloch of Gilmertoun, Lord Provost of Edinburgh, and Mr.
James Rocheid, Town Clerk of Edinburgh, as two for the Burrows, Commissioners
in place of the foresaids persons, to the effect foresaid. And it being Our
Pleasure, that the usual Diets and Meetings of the said Commission, should be
exactly attended, for the speedy dispatch of Justice to Our Leidges, in their
Affairs before that Court; Our Will is Herefore; And We charge you straightly,
and Command, that incontinent, after sight hereof, Ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and there, by open Proclamation, in Our
Name and Authority, make intimation of this Our Royal Pleasure, requiring the
forenamed Commissioners, and all others named in the said Commission, to give
due and exact attendance upon the usual Diets and Meetings thereof, for the
speedy dispatch of Justice to Our Leidges, in their Affairs, before that Court,
as they tender Our Service, and will be answerable for their neglect.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the twenty one day of October, one thousand
six hundred and seventy eight, and of Our Reign the thirtieth year. Per Actum
Dominorum Commissionis. Hugh Wallace, Cls. Com.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
MAJESTY. 1678.


