PROCLAMATION Scotsfor each Imported Boll thereof.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally specially Constitut Greeting,
Forasmuch as the growing Necessity of the Poorer sort of our Subjects, in many
parts of this Kindom, do require our special care for their Relief; And albeit
several methods have been laid down, and Measures Prescribed by former
Proclamations of our Privy Council, to have supplied and provided them at
reasonable and easy Rates, by the native product and Grouth of this Kingdom:
Yet through the present Scarcity there being several places in the Country,
not able to Subsist upon the Grouth and Victual within their own Bounds, and in
other places the Poorer sort not able competently to provid^ themselves at the
Current Rates. All which does necessarly require that both there may be a free
Course of Buying and Selling Victual through the whole Kingdom, And likewise
all Incouragment given for Importing Victual from any Foraign Country or
Kingdom to this Nation, during the space aftermentioned; And that this hopeful
Season gives good ground to expect ane early Harvest, so that a small Supply
from Abroad, may afford great Relief, and keep the Mercats at a Moderat Rate:
Therefore, and to the Effect the Mercats may be duly Supplied and furnished
with Victual that is yet within the Country, and likewise with Foraign Victual
by any who shall Import the same. We with advice of the Lords of our Privy
Council, not only ratify and approve all former Proclamations, Acts, Orders,
and Commissions against Regraters of Victual, and Forstalers of the Mercats,
And ordain and require the same to be punctually observed, and put to Execution
according to the Tenor thereof, and Acts of Parliament made thereanent, In so
far as may extend to or concern Regrating of Victual, and Forstalling of
Mercats. But likewise we with advice foresaid, do hereby grant License, and
full Liberty to all persons whatsoever, Forraigners or Natives, to Import
Victual or Corns of all Sorts, either by Sea or Land, from any other Kingdom or
Country whatsomever, until the fifteenth day of August next to come, and that
free of Custom, Excise or other Impositions, for all that shall be Imported,
after the date hereof, during the time foresaid, and recomends it to the
Commissioners of our Thesaury, to Discharge the exacting of any such Custom,
Excise or Imposition for the said Victual, to be Imported; Notwithstanding of
any Act of Parliament or Book of Rates Imposing the same. And for a farther
Encouragement and invitation, to all such who shall Import and bring in to this
Kingdom, Victual or Corn of any Sort, betwixt and the day foresaid. We with
advice of the Lords of our Privy Council, do hereby Appoint and Ordain the Sum
of twenty shilling Scots, for each Boll of the said Foraign Victual Imported
after the day and Date hereof, and before the said fifteenth day of August
next, to be immediately given and paid out of our Customs to the Importer
thereof, upon his Oath of Verity of the number of Bolls Imported by him, taken
in presence of any of the Sheriffs of the Several Shires of this Kingdom,
Baillies of Regalities, or Bailliries, Stuarts of the Stewartries or their
Respective Deputs, Magistrates of Burghs, or any one of the Commissioners of
Supply, or Justices of Peace, within the same, Subscribed with their Hand, and
attested by the foresaids Judges, and of which twenty shilling Scots, We with
advice foresaid, Require and Command the Tacks-men and Farmers of our Customs,
and their Collectors and other Receavers at the Respective Custom-Houses, to
make present and immediate payment for each Boll of Foreign Victual Imported by
Sea or Land, to the Importer thereof, upon his Recept to be given upon the Back
of the foresaid Subcribed Oath of the Number of Bolls Imported; And which
Recept, We with advice foresaid, declare and ordain to be a sufficient
Exoneration to the said Tacks-men and Farmers of our Customs, and their
Collectors of their said Tack-duty, and to be allowed to them in the fore-end
thereof pro tanto. Certifying such of the said Collectors or other persons
Employed to receave money at the Respective Custom Houses, by the Tacks-men and
Farmers of our said Customs, That if they Failie to make due and punctual
payment of the said twenty shilling Scots for each Boll of Imported Victual, or
post pone and delay the Impoters thereof, in the ready payment of the said Sum,
when the said Subscribed Oath, and Recept is offered to them, they shall not
only be declared and ipso facto thereby become Incapable to serve or be
Employed by our said Farmers in any Office or Trust under them, in uplifting
our said Customs, but be farther liable in the double of what they shall so
refuse or Postpone the Payment of as Penalty and Damnages to be recovered from
them by the party, by their presents, and the foresaid Subscribed Oath upon
Process to be Intented therefore, and verified by Instrument taken against the
said Collectors or Receavers, requiring payment in manner abovementioned. And
further to the effect all our Subjects within this Kingdom may be supplied and
releaved out of the Native Product and Grouth of this Kingdom with all possible
quality and proportion; in the mean time, We with advice foresaid, give full
Liberty and Permission to a free course of Mercats for Selling Victual through
all parts of the Kingdom, whether the said Victual or Corn was the Grouth of
the Shire where it is sold or not, and that at what Rates and Prices either of
ready Money, or to a day the Buyers and Sellers can best agree upon, and hereby
Discharges all Persons whatsoever from troubling and molesting any Persons
whatsoever, in the Transporting Victual to Mercats or otherwise from one Shire
to another, under their Highest Peril. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and we Charge you
strickly and Command, that Incontinent these our Letters seen ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and Remanent Market Crosses of the Head-Burghs of
the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and thereat, in our Name
and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation hereof, That none pretend
Ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Ninth Day of June, and of Our Reign
the Eleventh Year, 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIO T.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1699.


