royal blazon or coat of arms C R
(...) A PROCLAMATION, Against the Importation of Irish Victual and Cattle.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lovites, (...) Messengers, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We and Our Estates of Parliament, by several Acts, have (upon
diverse weighty considerations,) discharged the Importation of all Irish
Victual and Cattle into this Kingdom, under the pains, and certifications
therein contained: And whereas the Lords of Our Privy Council have emitted
several Acts and Proclamations in pursuance of the said Acts of Parliament,
notwithstanding whereof, and of all the care and endeavors taken, to hinder
and prevent the importing of Irish Victual and Cattle, finding the same is
imported into this Kingdom: And considering the best and firtest way for
preventing thereof, might be to commissionat some persons of Power and
Authority in the several places of the Country where the said Victual and
Cattle is ordinarily brought in and landed. We therefore, with advice of the
Lords of Our Privy Council have thought fit, to grant full Power, Authority,
and Commission to Our Right trusty and well beloved Cousins and Counselors,
Archibald, Earl of Argyle, and George, Lord Rosse, and to Our well beloved,
Richard Murray of Brughtoun, by themselves, their Deputs, Servants, and such as
they shall think fit to appoint (for whom they will be answerable) to search
for, seize, and apprehend all Irish Victual and Cattle, and Salt-beef made
thereof, that shall happen to be imported from Ireland unto this Kingdom in the
particular places after-specified, viz. The said Earl of Argyle in all places,
from Lechlung to the Mule of Kintyre, and round about the same. The said Lord
Ross in all places, from the Burgh of Glasgow, to the March of Galloway on the
South, and from Glasgow, to Lochlung on the North: and the Isles of Arran, Bute
and Comray: and the said Richard Murray, from the March of Galloway, to the
March of Nithsdale. And for the more ready and effectual prosecution of the
said Commission, have granted full Power and Authority to the said Earl of
Argyle, Lord Ross and Richard Murray by themselves, their Deputs, servants, and
such as they shall think fit to entrust in the respective bounds foresaids, to
secure all Barks, or traveling Boats whether Scots or Irish, until the
Skippers or Owners shall find Caution that they shall import no Irish Victual
or Cattle hereafter. The said Commissioners or their foresaids are thereby
authorized to search all Barks, Boats, or other Vessels, wherein any Irish
Victual or Cattle are suspected to be; and to seize and secure the same, incase
they find the said prohibited Goods therein; And for better discovery thereof,
all Merchants, Skippers, or Owners of Boats, Barks, or other Vessels traveling
to and from the places foresaids, are thereby ordered before they break bulk,
or liver any goods, to advertise the said Commissioners, or these entrusted by
them at one or other of the Ports following, viz. at the Point of Garvel near
Greenock, the Towns of Largs, Irving, Turnberry, Dumbarton, Rothesay, Brodick,
Dinnon, Tarbet, Campbletoun, Innerarey, Portpatrick, Glenluce and Kirkudbright
(at which Ports, Offices are stablished to receive these Advertisements;) under
the pain of Confiscation of the said vessels and goods, and being holden as
confessed Importers of Irish Victual: Provided that the Skippers or Owners, shall
not upon such occasion be obliged to wait longer then one Tides water. If upon
pregnant presumptions the said Commissioners, or these entrusted by them shall
suspect any person or persons guilty of importing Irish Victual or Cattle, they
are thereby authorized to conveen any such person or persons before the nearest
Magistrate in Burgh or Landwart, and to lead all manner of probation against
them for proving thereof: whereupon the said Magistrates are to give present
and ready justice. All Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailyes of Royalties, Regalities,
and Baronies, and all Heretors are thereby ordered to give their speedy and
ready assistance to the said Commissioners, or these entrusted by them, when
ever they shall be required, either as to the searching of vessels by night or
day, making open and patent doors, searching of sellars, or other suspect
places for Irish Victual or Cattle, which they are thereby authorized to do. As
also the Officers of any Garrison are obliged to concur, and assist them with
a Party of soldiers as they shall be desired upon any extraordinary occasion.
In case any seizure be made by the said Commissioners, or these entrusted by
them; The Heretors next adjacent to the said place are thereby required to
cause carry the Victual to some convenient place nearest, until Our Council
shall give order thereanent: And these so employed shall be paid by the person
who makes the seizure for each horse carriage; not exceeding two shilling scots
the mile. The said Commissioners, or these entrusted by them are thereby
empowered with consent of the Magistrate of the place to send any person or
persons to prison who shall be found guilty of contraveening the said Laws, or
shall be contumacious in refusing to depone; The Magistrates of the place being
always free of the prisoners charges: In which case, the Magistrates are to
secure the prisoners and their vessels, and to be comptable for them: And in
case any person or persons shall make open resistance against the said
Commissioners, or these entrusted by them in the execution of Our said
Commission, and that there shall happen bloodshed, mutilation or slaughter to
follow, through the said resistance; It is declared that the said
Commissioners, and these entrusted by, or giving assistance to them, shall never
be called in question, or pursued therefore civily or criminally in time
coming. And further, by the said Commission, it is declared, that the same
shall no ways free or liberat the Importers or resetters of Irish victual or
cattle, or Heretors upon whose ground the same shall be imported, but that they
shall continue still liable to the pains and penalties appointed by the said
Acts of Parliament and Council; As if the said Commission had never been
granted: Which Commission is to begin and take effect, from, and after the
first day of January next, and to continue until the first day of January, 1678
years. And to the effect, all Our Leidges and others concerned, may have due
and timeous notice thereof, We have thought fit, that these Our Letters of
publication of the same should be direct in manner underwritten. Our Will is
herefore; and We charge you straightly, and command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen ye pass, to the Mercat-crosses of Edinburgh, Glasgors
Dumbariours, and other places needful: And thereat, in Our Name and Authority,
by open Proclamation, make publication of the Premises; to the effect, that
all Our Leiges, and others concerned, may have due and timous notice of Our
pleasure in the Premises, and may give ready obedience to Our Commands
therein, as they will be answerable at their highest peril.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourteen day of December, and of Our
Reign, the twenty eighth year, 1676. Per actum Dominorum Secriti Concilii. Tho.
Hay. Cl. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most
Sacred Majesty. 1676.


