A PROCLAMATION Against Profaneness.
WILLIAM by the Orace of God, King of Great-Britan, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute,
Greeting: FORASMUCH as, notwithstanding of the many good Laws and Acts of
Parliament made against Profaneness, and for the restraining and suppressing
of Vice and Immoralities, the same do still abound to the great dishonor of
God, the Reproach of the true Protestant Religion, and to the Hurt and
Prejudice of the Peace and Government of the Realm; And We being resolved, as
it has alwise been Our Care, to have these Laws and Acts of Parliament put to
due and vigorous Execution; And conceaving that the Printing and Publishing of
an Abreviat of the said acts duly collected, and laid together for the better
Information and Instruction of all Our Judges, Officers and Ministers of the
Law, and also of Our other Good Subjects, may be of special Use and Advantage,
for their better Observation and Execution, according to their full Tenor and
Intent: THEREFORE, and in Answer to an Address presented to the Lords of Our
Privy Council, by the Commissioners of the late General Assembly of this Church
for that effect; We with Advice of the said Lords of Our Privy Council, have
thought fit, and do hereby appoint the Abbreviat and List of the said Acts
hereto subjoyned to be Printed, and duly published at all the Mercat-Crosses
of the Head-Burghs of the Shires, Stewartries, Regalities and Bailliaries of
this Realm: And farther, that in all time coming, this present Proclamation,
with the Abbreviat and List thereto subjoyned, be publicly read twice every
Year in all the Paroch Churches and Congregations within this Kingdom, to wit,
on the first Lords Day after each Term of Whitsunday and Martinmass yearly,
after the Forenoons Sermon, and before the dissolving of the Congregation; and
that all Presbytries be careful to have this Publication constantly and
solemnly made in all Churches within their Bounds, with suitable and pertinent
Exhortations, as they will be answerable; And We peremptorly Command and
Charge, all Judges, Magistrates and Officers of the Law whatsoever, each of them
within their Bounds and Jurisdictions, and as they are thereto respectively
empowered, to be careful to put the foresaids Laws above and aftermentioned, to
due and exact Execution upon their highest perril. Follows the List and
Abbreviat of the Laws against Profaneness, and for suppressing of Vice and
Immorality. Imprimis, Act 21. Charles second, Parliament first, Session first,
Entitled, Ast against the Crime of Blasphemy, that whosoever not being
distracted in his Wits, shall rail upon, or Curse GOD, or any of the Persons of
the Blessed Trinity, shall be processed before the Chief Justice, and being
found Guilty, shall be punished with death: As also whosoever shall deny GOD,
or any of the Persons of the Blissed Trinity; and obstinately continue therein,
being processed and found Guilty, shall be punished with Death. Item, the Act
of Our first Parliament, Session fifth, cap. Eleventh, ratifying the foresaid
Act; And farther Statuting, that whoever hereafter shall in their Writing or
Discourse, Deny, Impugn or Quarrel, Argue or Reason against the Being of GOD,
or any of the Persons of the Blessed Trinity, or the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, or the Providence of GOD, in the
Government of the World, shall for the first Fault be punished with
Imprisonment, ay and while they give public Satisfaction in Sackcloath to the
Congregation in which the Scandal was committed; And for the second Fault, the
Delinquent shall be fined in a vears valued Rent of his real Estate, and the
twenty part of his free personal Estate, the equal half of which Fines to be
applied to the poor of the Paroch where the Crime shall be committed, and the
other half to the Informer, besides his being imprisoned, ay and while he again
make Satisfaction as above; And for the third Fault, he shall be punished by
Death, as an obstinat Blasphemer; And all Magistrates and Ministers of the Law,
and Judges in this Kingdom, are Authorized and Required to put this Act in
Execution as to the first Fault, as are all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of
Bailliaries and Regalities and their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, to put
the same in Execution as the second Fault; Remitting the Execution thereof as
to the third Fault, to the Lords of his Majesty's Justiciary: Secundo, All Laws
and Acts of Parliament made against Cursing and Swearing, as Act Queen Mary,
parliment fifth, Cap. sixteenth, whereby it is Statute, that whosoever Swears
abominable Oaths, and detestable Execrations, shall be punished with the
pecuniary Mulcts, and other pains contained in the said Act: Act James sixth,
Parliament seventh, cap one hundred and third, ratifying the foresaid Act, with
an Augmentation of the Pains; and that Censors be appointed in the Market place
of all Burrows, and other public Fairs, with Power to put the Swearers of
abominable Oaths in Ward, while they have paid the said Pains, and find
Surety to abstain in time coming, and that by Direction and Commission of the
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies, Provosts, Baillies of Burrows Lords of
Regalities, and other ordinary Officers; And that all House-holders delate to
the Magistrates, the Names of the Transgressors of this present Act within their
Houses, that they may be punished under the pain to be esteemed and punished as
Offenders themselves; And that if the said Magistrates be remiss or negligent in
the Execution of this Act, they shall upon Complaint be called before us, and
our Privy Council, and committed to Ward during pleasure, and find Surety under
great Pains, at our sight, for that exact Diligence in executing the said Act
thereafter, Ast Charles. 2d. Parl. 1. Session first, Cap. nineteenth, ratifying
and approving all Acts of Parliament against all manner of Curfing and
Swearing. And farther declaring, that each person who shall Blaspheme, Swear or
Curse, shall be liable in the pains following; each Nobleman in twenty pound
scots, each Baron in twenty Merks, each Gentleman, Heretor or Burgess in ten
Merks, each Yeoman in forty shilling scots, each Servant in twenty Shilling
toties quoties, each Minister in the fifth part of his years Stipend, and if
the party Offender be not able to pay the Penalties foresaid, then to be
exampl^ry punished in his Body, according to the Merit of his Fault: And this
Act is again Ratified, Charles second, Parliament second, Session Third, Cap.
twenty two, which contains a distinct and particular Method, how and by whom,
it shall be execute. Tertio, All Laws and Acts of Parliament for Observation of
the Sabbath or Lords Day, As Act James fixth, Parliament sixth, Cap seventy
one; That there be no Mercats nor Fairs holden upon the Sabbath Day, nor yet
within the Kirk or Kirk-yards that day, or any other day; and that no
Handy-Labour be used upon the Sabbath Day, under the pain of Ten shilling
Scots; and that no Gaming, Playing, passing to Taverns and Ale Houses, or
selling of Meat or Drink, or wilful remaining from the Paroch kirk in time of
Sermon, or Prayers, upon the Sabbath Day be used, under the pains of Twenty
shilling Scots, and who refuse, or are unable to pay the said pains, shall be
put and holden in the Stocks, or such other Ingyne devised for public
punishment by the space of Twenty Four Hours; And this Act as to the
discharging of Fairs and Mercats holden on Sabbath Days, Ratifyed James the
Sixth, Parliament Thirteenth, Cap one hundred and fifty nine, and again
Ratified against these who profane the Sabbath Day, by Selling or presenting
Goods to be sold upon the said day, and the pain of the Third Transgression,
declared to be Escheat of their haill Goods and punishment of their Persons at
Our Will; James sixth, Parliament Fourteenth, cap. one hundred and ninety
eight. Item, Act eighteenth Charles second, Parliament first, Entitled, Act
for the due Obsarvation of the Sabbath Day, Ratifying and Approving all former
Acts of Parliament made for Observation of the Sabbath Day, and against the
Breakers thereof, and discharging all going of Salt-pans, Milns or Kilns, under
the pain of twenty pounds scots, to be paid by the Heretors and Possessors
thereof; and all Salmond-fishing, hyring of Shearers, carrying of Loads,
keeping of Mercats, or using of Merchandise on the said Day, and all other
Prophanations thereof, under the pain of Ten pounds scots, the one half whereof
to be paid by the said Fisher, and Shearer hired, and the other half by the
persons hyring, and if the Offender be not able to pay the said penalties,
that he be examplary punished in his Body, according to the Merit of his Fault;
and this Act ratified Charles 2d. Parliament second, Session third, cap. twenty
two. Quarto, The Act Charles second, Parliament first, Session first, Cap.
twenty, Entitled, Act against Cursing and Beating of Parents, whereby it is
Statute, that whosoever Son or Daughter above the age of sixteen years, not
being distracted, shall beat or Curse either their Father or Mother, shall be
put to death without Mercy, and such as are within the age of sixteen years,
and past the age of pupillarity, to be punished at the Arbitriment of the
Judge, according to their deserving. Quinto, All Acts against Drunkards and
excessive Drinking, such as the Act James Sixth, Parliament twenty two, Cap:
twenty, whereby it is Statute, That all persons convict of Drunkenness, or of
Haunting of Taverns and Alehouses after Ten Hours at Night, or any time of the
Day, except in the time of Travel, or for ordinary Refreshment, shall for the
first Fault pay Three pounds, or if unable, or refusing, be put in Joggs or
prison for the space of six Hours; For the second Fault five pounds, or if
unable, or refusing, to be keept in Stocks or prison for the space of twelve
Hours; And for the Third Fault, to pay Ten pounds, or in case foresaid to
kept in Stocks or Prison for the space of twenty four Hours: if they
transgress thereafter, to be committed to Prison till they find Caution for
their good Behavior. Item, the Act Chapter 2d. Parl. 1. Sess. 1. cap. 19.
Ratifying all former Acts against the Crime of excessive Drinking, Declaring,
That whosoever shall drink unto Excess, shall be liable, each Nobleman in 20
lib. scots, each Baron in 20 Merks, each Gentleman, Heretor or Burgess in 10
Merks, each Yeoman in 40 shilling, each Servant in 20 shilling scots, toties
quoties; each Minister in the fifth part of his yearly Stipend, and that the
Offender unable to pay the foresaids Penalties, to be examplary punished in his
Body, according to the merit of his Fault. Sexto. The Laws and Acts of
Parliament made against Adulterers, as Q. Mary. Parl. 5. cap. 20. whereby it is
Statute, That manifest and incorrigible Adultries after the process of
Haly-kirk, swafar as the samen may extend is used upon them, for their
Disobedience and Contemption, be denunced Rebels and put to the Horn, and all
their Moveable inbrought as Escheat, and no Appellation interponed frae the
said Censures of Haly-kirk to suspend the Horning. Act Q. Mary, Parl. 9. cap.
74. That all notour and manifest Committers of Adultrey be punished with all
rigor unto the death, as well the Woman as the Man, after due Monition made to
obstain frae the said nottour Crime, and that for other Adultrey the Acts and
Laws made thereupon off before be put to Execution with all rigor. And the Act
Ja. 6. Parl. 7. cap. 105. whereby it is declared, That it shall be judged
nottour and manifest Adultry wordie of the pain of death, whoever has Bairns
one or more procreat betwixt the persons Adulters, or when they keep Company in
Bed together notoriously known, or when they are suspect of Adultery, and duly
admonished by the Kirk, to abstain and satisfy the Kirk by Repentance and
Purgation, yet contemptuously refusing, are Excommunicat for their Obstinacy.
Septimo. All Laws and Acts of Parliament made against Fornication, as Act Ja.
6. Parl. 1. cap. 13, Statuting, That who shall commit the filthy Vice of
Fornication, shall for the first Fault, as well the Man as the Woman, pay the
Sum of forty pounds, or then both he and she shall be imprisoned for the space
of eight days, their Food to be Bread and small Drink, and thereafter presented
to the Mercat-place of the Town or Paroch bare-headed,shall there stand fastened,
that they may not remove for the space of two Hours; For the second Fault, the
Sum of one hundred Merks, or then the forenamed days of their Imprisonment
shall be doubled, their Food to be Bread and Water alannerly, and thereafter
shall be presented to the Mercat-place, and the Heads of both the Man and the
Woman to be Shaven, And for the third Fault, one hundred Pounds, or else the
above Imprisonment to be Triplyed, their Food to be Bread and Water allennarly;
And thereafter to be taken to the deepest and foulest Pool of Water of the Town
or Paroch, and there to be thrice Doucked, and then Banished the said Town and
Paroch for ever, and how often any person shall be Convict thereafter of the said
Vice of Fornication, that so often the third penalty be execute upon them. Item,
The Act Charles second, Parliament first, Session first, Cap. Thirty Eight,
Impowering the Justices of Peace to put in Execution Acts of Parliament, for
punishing the persons Guilty of Fornication, and that they cause them pay the
pecunial Sum following: Each Nobleman for the first Fault, Four hundred Pounds;
Each Barron Two hundred Pounds. Each other Gentleman or Burgess, one hundred
Pounds. Every other person of inferior Quality Ten Pounds Scots Money, and that
these Penalties be doubled toties quities, according to the Relapses, and
Degrees of the Offense, and Quality of the Offenders; And that they be paid
not only by the Man, but also by the Woman man according to her Quality, and
the Degree of her Offense, the one without prejudice of the other. Item, the
said Act Charles second, Parliament first, Session first, Cap: thirty eight,
Statutes; That the Justices of Peace put in execution all Acts of Parliament
for punishing all persons who shall be Mockers or Reproachers of Piety, or the
exercise thereof, and cause them pay the Penalties contained in the
forementioned Act of Parliament, against profane Swearing. Item, the Act of
our first Parliament, Session fifth, Cap: Thirteenth, Entitled, Act against
Profaneness, strictly requiring and enjoining, that all Sheriffs and their
Deputs, Stewarts and their Deputs, Baillies of Bailliaries and Regalities, and
their Deputs, Magistrates of Burghs-Royal and Justices of Peace within whose
bounds any of the said Sins of Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, Fornication,
Profanation of the Lords Day, and Mocking and Reproaching of Religion shall
happen to be committed, to put the said Acts to exact and punctual Execution
at all times, without necessity of any Dispensation, and against all persons,
whether Officers, Soldiers or others without Exception; Certifying, that such
of the said Judges as shall refuse, neglect, or delay to put the Laws made
against the said Sins in Execution, upon application of any Minister or
Kirk-Session, or any person in their Name offering Information, and sufficient
Probation, shall toties quoties be subject and liable to a Fine of an hundred
pounds Scots, for which they may be pursued at the instance of the Agent for
the Kirk, or Minister of the Paroch by summar Process, without the Order of the
Roll. Item, The twenty one Act of the 2d: Session of the current Parliament,
dated the nineteenth of July one thousand six hundred ninety, Entitled, Act
anent murdering of Children, whereby it is Statute, That if any Woman shall
conceal her being with Child during the whole space, and shall not call for,
and make use of Help and Assistance in the Birth, the Child being found dead or
amissing, the Mother shall be holden and repute the Murderer of her own Child,
though there be no appearance of Bruise or Wound upon the Body of the Child: All
which Acts above mentioned, are hereby ordered to be published only for
superabundance, and the better Information of our Leidges, without the least
derogation to other Acts or Laws not published in this matter. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and we charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent
Mercat-crosses of the Head-burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within
this Kingdom, and in Our Name and Authority make publication hereof, that none
may pretend Ignorance; And We Ordain Our Solicitor to dispatch Copies hereof,
to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts of Stewartries and their
Deputs or Clerks, to be by them published at the Mercat-crosses of the
Head-burghs upon Receipt thereof, and immediately sent to the several Ministers,
to the effect the same may be read and intimat at their Paroch Churches, upon
the Lords Day immediately following the Publication hereof at the said
Mercat-crosses. And Ordains these presents to be Printed and Published in
manner foresaid.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty fifth day of January, and of
Our Reign the ninth Year School.
Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
his most Excellent Majesty, Anno. Dom. School.


