PROCLAMATION Against Importing Victual from Ireland.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute
Greeting; Forasmuch, as the Importing of Victual, of any sort, whether, Wheat,
Bear, Barley, Oats, Meal, Malt, Pease, Beans, or Rye, from the Kingdom of
Ireland, into this Kingdom, is Prohibit by diverse Laws, and Acts of
Parliament; And highly prejudicial to the Native Product of Scotland; And gives
occasion to the Unwarrantable Exporting of much Money forth of this Our Realm;
wherethrough, the poorer sort of People are altogether Destitut of the
Necessary Means of Buying, and Providing themselves in the Daily Mercats of
this Kingdom. For the better obviating the Inconveniences that may follow
thereupon; We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do, hereby
Prohibit, and Discharge all Persons whatsoever, to Import, or Bring into this
Kingdom, or any of the Ports, Harbors, Towns, or Places thereof, from the
Kingdom of Ireland, any sort or Quantity of the Victual abovementioned, From,
and after the First Day of September nixt to come, under the Pain of
Confiscation of the said Victual; The one half thereof to the Person, or
Persons who shall make Discovery of, and Sease upon the same; and the other half
thereof, with the Ships, Barks, or Boats, wherein the samen shall be Imported,
to Our Thesaury for Our use; And other Punishments to be Inflicted upon them,
conform to the Acts of Parliamens made thereanent: And Ordains all Our
Collectors, Surveyors, and Waiters within this Kingdom, at the respective
Ports, Harbors, and Places where they Serve, to see this Act punctually
Observed, as they will be Answerable at their highest Peril, with Certification
to such as shall be sound Negligent therein, they shall Incurr the Loss of
their respective Offices. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and
Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several
Shires within this Kingdom; And thereat, make Publication of Our Pleasure in
the Premises, that none may pretend Ignorance: And Ordains these Presents to
be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fifth Day of August, and of Our Reign
the Ninth Year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM, 1697.


