royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE PROCLAMATION Against the Importation of Irish
CATTLE, etc.
Edinburgh, the first day of Feb. 1667. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith.
To all and sundry Our Liedges and Subjects whom it effeirs, Greeting:
For So Much as by an Act of Our late Parliament, Entitled, Act asserting Our
Prerogative in the ordering and disposal of Trade with Forraigners; It is
declared, that the laying on of Restraints and Impositions upon foreign
imported Commodities, does belong to Us and Our Surcessors, as an undoubted
Privilege and Prerogative of Our Crown; And that by virtue thereof We may so
order and dispose upon foraign Trade, as We shall judge most fit for the good
of that Our Kingdom. And whereas many humble addresses have been made to Us by
the Convention of Our Estates, in August, 1665. And by the Lords of Our Privy
Council, for restraining of Irish Cattle, Corn, and some other Commodities,
from coming in to this Kingdom, as being most prejudicial thereto, by reason
that Our Subjects are more then sufficiently provided within themselves; And
incase of Trade with foreign Kingdoms and States (which is now for the most
part stopped) are able to spare and export considerable quantities of all these
Commodities, and We being most willing to gratify the Subjects of that Our
ancient Kingdom: Therefore, and in testimony of Our just resentment of their
loyalty and affection to Our service, We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, have discharged; and by these presents discharges the importation of
all Irish Cattle (except Horses) as also, Irish Salt Beef, and Corns of
whatsoever Grain, or Meal made thereof, to any Town, Port, or Harbor, or any
other place of that Our ancient Kingdom, in any Ship or Vessel whatsoever,
after the first day of March next to come. As also, discharges all persons
whatsoever to receive or Pasture any of the said Cattle upon their Lands or
Pasturage, or to sell and dispone thereupon, or to reset or receive any
quantities of the Victual so prohibited, or to conceal the same within their
Houses or Cellers: And do hereby authorize and command all Magistrates of Our
Burghs Royal, Sheriffs, or Justices of Peace in all Shires where the Goods or
Vessels shall arrive, to prohibit the unloading thereof: And incase of
contravention, to seize, or cause seize upon the samine, to be confiscat, the
one half thereof for Our use, and the other half for the use of these who shall
attach and seize upon the same. And further, requires the said Magistrates, or
either of them, to apprehend the persons of the contraveeners, and to secure
them by imprisonment till they advertise the Lords of Our Privy Council, that
order may be given to proceed against them as contemners of Our Royal
Authority, that all condign punishment may be inflicted upon them without
mercy. And ordains these presents to be printed and published at the Market
Cross of Edinburgh, Pear and Shore of Leith, and at the Market Crosses of all
Burghs Royal, and Burghs of Regality and Barony lying in the Western parts of
this Kingdom, where the said Goods and Victual are ordinarily imported, and
other places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evin Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAjESTY,
1667.


