PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament to the Twenty ninth day of October
instant 1700.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
Whereas, We by Our Letter to Our Commissioner and the Lords of Our Privy
Council, of the Twenty sixth day of July last by past, did order the
Adjournment of Our Parliament to the Two and twentieth instant, We were fully
resolved it should have met on the said day, but Our necessar Affairs having
detained Us longer Abroad than We at first intended; And We judging it still
fit We should be in Britain before the Meeting of Our said Parliament; We
therefore with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have Adjourned, and
hereby Adjourns Our said present current Parliament from the said twenty two
day of October instant, to the twenty ninth day of the said Month and Year; And
do hereby Order and Require all the Members of Our said Parliament to attend at
Edinburgh the said twenty ninth day of October instant, in the usual manner,
and under the Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament made
thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the Mercat-crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and thereat in Our Name and Authority, make
public Intimation, that Our said Parliament is Adjourned from the said twenty
two day of October instant, to the said twenty ninth day of the samen Month;
And Ordains these presents to be Printed and Published.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the fifteenth day of October, and of Our
Reign the Twelfth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King-
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1700.


