royal blazon or coat of arms C R
(...) A PROCLAMATION, against Field-Conventicles.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Herald, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute Greeting:
Forasmuch as Field-Conventicles, which were in Our Laws, by the universal
consent of all the Representatives of this Our Kingdom, declared to be the
Rendezvouses of Rebellion; are now found, by the undeniable experience of all
sober men, to have bred up the unwarry Commons unto a most atheistical
giddiness, to the owning of those murdering principles, which are a reproach to
the Protestant Religion, and inconsistent with the security of every private
man, and to the contemning of their own Master and Landlords; We therefore,
with advice of Our Privy Council, Resolving to secure, not only Our Government,
and such of Our Subjects, as live peaceably under it, but even to restore these
very Masters and Landlords to their just Rights, over these their Tenants and
Servants, which they so justly lost by suffering them to frequent
Field-Conventicles, in which they were so debauched in their duty to them; Do
hereby Command and Ordain, that how soon soever any Field-Conventicle, or other
Conventicles, understood to be Field-Conventicles by construction of Law, shall
be kept, the Heretor in whose Lands or House the same is kept, whether the
Lands belong to them in Propperty or Commonty, if they be present, or their
Baliffs or Factors if they be absent, or their Tutors or Curators, and their
Baliffs or Factors if they by Minors, shall immediately advertise the Sheriff
of the Shire, Lords of Regality, Stewart of the Stewartry, Bailiff or Bailirie,
and the Magistrates of the Burghs, within whose Jurisdiction the said
Field-Conventicle was kept, within three days after the same is kept;
certifying them, if they fall to give the said Advertisement, they shall be
fined in the fourth part of their valued yearly Rent; Upon which Information,
the said Sheriffs and other Magistrates foresaids, shall be obliged, and are
hereby commanded and required, to order the Heretors of the Paroch to meet, and
to take trial who were at, or in accession to the said Conventicle. And to the
end, they may be the better able to proceed in the said trial, the the said
Heretors are hereby Empowered to Examine upon Oath, such as they shall suspect,
or who shall be best able to give Information therein, and to return to the
Sheriff, or other Magistrates foresaids, the trial so taken by them, and that
with all possible expedition; and which trial, the said Sheriffs and
Magistrates, or there Deputes, are hereby required immediately to cite before
them, those contained in the said return, or any others whom they have reason
to suspect to have been at the said Conventicles, and to fine such of them as
compear, and amerciat such as are absent, as accords of the Law: upon which
Sentences, Hornings and Captions being raised, under the Signer of Our Privy
Council, by the said Sheriffs, and the other Officers foresaid, (to whom the
half of the s^ids fines and amerciam (...)s, are for their pains and expenses,
hereby declared to belong) the Heretors and Masters of the said Rebels, are
hereby oblidged to concur with the Sheriff or other Officers, their Deputs or
others whom they shall name, to the poinding the said Rebels Goods,
apprehending their Persons, and that under the pain of being liable to the
fine, and penal^i^s inposed upon the Delinquents. Likeas, the said Sheriffs
and others foresaids, are hereby required to give an account of their diligence
in the Premises, to Our Privy Council, upon the first Council of July and
December yearly, under the pains contained in the eighteenth Act of the third
Session of Our second Parliament; all which shall be with or prejudice to Us;
and Our Officers of State in Our Name, to raise pursuits before the Lords of
Our Privy Council against such who have been present at Field-Conventicles
(though without Arms) for an Arbitrary punishment, or to insist before Our
Criminal Court, against such who have been thereat in Arms, for underlying the
Crime of Treason, conform to the fifth Act of the first Session of Our first
Parliament, and Our Proclamation, dated the thirdenth day of May, one thousand
six hundred seventy and nine years. And to the effect, Our Pleasure in the
Premises may be made known; Our Will is, and We charge you strictly and
Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and Market Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires
within this Kingdom, and other places needful, and therein Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Promises, that none
pretend ignorance, according to Justice, as ye will answer to Us thereupon; the
which to do, We commit to you cojounctly and severally, Our full Power, by their
Our Letters, delivering them by you duly execute, and ind^^^ again to she
bearer. And ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the eight day of April, One thousand six
hundred eighty and one, And of Our Eaign, the threity three Years. Per actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON. Cl. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, 1681.


