ORDER anent the Rebels of the Bass. April 13. 1693.
THE Lords of their Majesty's Privy Council being informed, that there are
several Persons gone into the Bass, since the Rebels therein were Charged to
Deliver up the same for their Majesty's Service, and themselves to their
Majesty's Mercy; Therefore the said Lords Do hereby give Order and warrant to
an Herald, with his Coat Disolayed, and a Trumpeter to go to the Bass, or as
near as he can safely, and in their Majesty's Names and Authority, Command and
Charge the Persons presently within the said Island, to Deliver up themselves
and the Island in manner foresaid, within the space of six Days, next after
they are Charged, under the pain of high Treason; And appoints Sir James
Ogilvy, their Majesty's Solicit or to dispatch the Herald and Trumpeter, with
famous Persons to be Witnesses, and cause furnish a Boat to them; and in case
they obey not, then to Denunce them, and thereafter that Letters of
Intercommuning be direct against them as effeirs: And in the mean time the
said Lords Do hereby promise a Reward of Fifty Pounds Sterling, to any Person
or Persons who shall seize upon, and deliver to any of their Majesty's Judges,
Magistrates, or Officers of their Majesty's Forces, the persons of Lieutenant
Colonel Grahame, or Michael Middleton Governor of the Bass, two of the Rebels
in the said Island; and the sum of Twenty Pounds Sterling, to any person or
persons, who shall seize upon, and deliver in manner foresaid, any of the
persons after-named, Rebels in the said Island, viz. James, John and William
Middletons, the Governors Brothers, Duncan Mcqueen, Thomas Hepburn, John
Turine, Mr. (...) Hentison, John Mcclean, (...) Morine the Chyrurgeon, an
Englishman, (...) Nicolson, John Gladestones, Gawin Johnston, Lieutenant John
Hacket, John Hacket Seaman, two Irish Seamen, another Irish Seaman, two
Hoyboyes that belonged to the Earl of Leven, Colonel Grahames Servant, three
or four more Servants, and John Manderson, Charles Maitland Servant, detained
against his will. And Appoints their Present to be Printed, and Published at the
Market. Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
Ediburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most
Excellent Majesty's, 1693.


