A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the eighteenth day of April, to
the ninth day of May 1695.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britane, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
to Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as, We by Our Proclamation of the date the ninth day of March last
bypast, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did Adjourn the Current
Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom to the eighteenth day of April then next
to come, now instant; And whereas We are informed, that such frequent
Adjournments has begot an Opinion that Our Parliament is not to meet, which
makes the Members more slow to come at the time appointed; And therefore a
timeous positive Advertisement is necessary, We have thought fit that the
Adjournment of Our said current Parliament shall be continued from the said
eighteenth day of April instant, to the ninth day of May next to come; At which
time, We are fully resolved Our said Parliament shall meet: Therefore We with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby Adjourn Our said current
Parliament until the said ninth day of May, next ensuing the date hereof,
requiring all the Members of Our said current Parliament to attend precisely at
that day* in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the
several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge
you strictly, and Command, that incontinent their Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent
Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and there by
open Proclamation, make Intimation, that Our said Parliament of this Kingdom is
Adjourned till the said ninth day of May next to come. And Ordains these
presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the seventeenth day of April, and of Our
Reign the seventh Year, 1695. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1695.


