A PROCLAMATION Against Persons returning from France without Passes.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
Constitute, Greeting: FORSOMUCHAS, several Persons denounced Rebels for High
Treason, and others dangerous and dissaffected, who have presumed contrary to
the Act of Parliament, either to stay in, or go to the Kingdom of France, or
one or other of the Dominions subject to the French King, during the time of
the late War, have since returned, or may be designed to return to this Kingdom
without Our Permission, which if not prevented may tend to disturb the Peace
and Quiet thereof. Therefore, We with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, have thought fit not only to prohibit; Likeas, We hereby expressly
prohibit and discharge all such Persons, either Denounced, or who contrary
tothe said Act of Parliament have stayed in, or gone to the said Kingdom of
France or any of the Dominions subject to the French King, to return to this
Kingdom, unless they first obtain Our Pass and Liberty for so doing, under the
Certification contained in the said Act; But also have appointed, and hereby
Appoint and Command all Sheriffs of Shires, Lords and Baillies of Regalities,
and other Baillies, Stewarts of Stewartries and their Deputs, and all
Magistrates of Burrows and either Magistrates and Officers whatsomever, furthwith
to Search for, Seize and Apprehend within their respective Bounds, such of the
foresaids Persons as have already presumed toreturn, or shall hereafter return
from France or the Dominions foresaid, without our Pass and Liberty, first
obtained for that effect, and to commit them Prisoners, in their respective
prison, and immediately acquaint the Lords of Our Privy Council therewith, and
detain them in sure Firmance till further Order, as the said Shiriffs and other
Magistrates and Officers will be answerable on their Highest Peril; And farther
We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby peremptorly enjoin and Charge all
Collectors, Survevers, Waiters and other Officers at Sea ports or upon the
Borders, that they take careful Nottice of the foresaids Persons liable as said
is their coming in to this Kingdom and that they use their utmost Diligence to
discover, and cause Sease and Apprehend them, as is above appointed. OUR WILL
IS HERFORE, And We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent
Market Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within
this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make
Intimation hereof, that none may pretend Ignorance; And ordains these Present
to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Ninth Day of December, And of Our
Reign the ninth Year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1697.


