PROCLAMATION Against Regraiting of Victual, and Forestallers, and Allowing the
Importation of Victual free of Public Burden.
WILLIAM by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland;
Defender of the Faith, To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially,
Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as by Several Acts of Parliament, the keeping
up of Victual to a Dearth, is strictly Prohibited, and particularly, it is
Statute by the Acts, James the Second Parliament Cap. sixth, twenty two and
twenty three, that for the Efcheuing of Dearth: Sheriffs, Bailies and other
Officers both to Burgh, and to Land; inquire what Persons Buys Victual, and
holds it to a Dearth; And that the said Sheriffs and Officers make such known,
that in case they hold more than will Sustain them, and their Meinzie to
New-Corn they may be Punished, and Demeaned as Ockerers and Usurers; and the
Victual Escheated to Us; and that the same be Presented to Mercats, and Sold as
the Price goes. And by the Act James the Second Parliament ninth, Cap. thirty
eight and thirty ninth, it is Ordained that no manner of Victual be holden in
Girnals by any man to a Dearth, but allanerly what is needful for their own
Persons, and Sustentation of their Households; and that the said Persons
present all that they have more to the Market, under the Pain of Escheat
thereof: And Searchers are appointed in Edinburgh and Leith to make the said
Acts Effectual; As likewise, the Crime of Forestalling is forbidden by several
Acts and Statutes, and particularly by the Act, James the sixth, Parliament
twelfth, Cap. one hundred and forty eight, it is Declared, that who Buys any
Merchandise, or Victual coming to Fair or Market, or makes any Contract or
Promise for the Buying of the same, before the said Merchandise or Victual
shall be in the Fair or Mercat-Place ready to be Sold, or shall make any Motion
by Word, Writ, or Message for raising of the Prices, or Dearer Selling of the
said Merchandise and Victual, or who shall Diswade any from coming, and
bringing the foresaid Merchandise and Victual to Fair or Market, shall be
Esteemed and Judged a Forestaller; And it is Ordained that all such
Forestallers may be Pursued before the Justices, or Magistrates of Burghs, and
that without a special Libel; but only upon Forestalling in General, and the
Persons convict to be Fined for the first Fault in Forty Pounds, for the
Second in one hundred Merks, and for the Third to Incurr the Tinsel of
Movables. And Seeing that through the not due Observance, and the Execution of
the foresaids Acts: The Calamity of the Country, by the present Scarcity and
Dearth is greatly Increased. THEREFORE We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, have thought fit to Revive the same, and Ordain them to be put to
Strict Execution, and for that Effect; to Empower and Require all Sheriffs of
Shires, Steuarts of Stewartries, Lords and Baillies of Regalities, and their
Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, as likewise all Commissioners of Supply, and
Justices of Peace, to cause Inquire, and Search to be made, who holds up, or
Girnels Victual or keeps Stacks contrary to the foresaid Laws, And to Command
and Charge the Keepers up of the said Victual in Girnels, Stacks, or otherways
Contrary to the said Statutes; either to Thresh out, bring, and Expose the
same for Sale, in open and ordinary Mercats, or otherwise to open their
Girnels, and other Houses where the Victual is kept, and there Sell the same,
as the said Sheriffs, Steuarts of Stewartries, Lords and Baillies of
Regalities, and their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, or any two of the said
Commissioners, shall find the ordinary Price to Rule for the Time in the
Country, not below the last Candlemass. Fires, with Certification that if they
Failzie therein; they shall be Proceeded against; and the Pains of the
foresaids Acts of Parliament Execute upon them with all Rigor: And in the Mean
time the Victual Girneled, and Unlawfully kept up as said is, Arreested and
Sequestrat by the foresaid Sheriffs and others as Escheat. And further We with
Advice foresaid, Command and Charge all Magistrates of Burghs, and other
Officers of the Land to take Care that all Mercats and Fairs be duly Regulat,
conform to the Laws, without Extortion, and to cause put the foresaid-Acts of
Parliament against Forestallers to due and vigorous Execution: Certifying the
foresaids Sheriffs, Magistrates, and others, who shall fail in their Duty in the
Premises, that upon Information given to the Lords of Our Privy Council, they
shall be therefore severely Punished, as the Lords of Our Privy Council shall
see Cause. And further, for the better Releif of the Country under the present
great Scarcity, whereby the Prices of Victual are arisen above the Rates
mentioned in the Act of Parliament for prohibiting the Import of Foreign
Victual; We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby grant License and full Liberty to
all persons to Import Victual and Corns, of all sorts, from any Foreign
Kingdom or Country, and that free of Custom, Excise, or other Imposition; and
for that effect Recommends it to the Commissioners of Our Thesaury, to
Discharge the Exacting thereof for the said Victual to be Imported as said is,
after the day and date hereof, and that notwithstanding of any Act of
Parliament or Book of Rates Imposing the same; Declaring, that this License and
Liberty, is to Endure until the First Day of September next to come, and no
longer. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly and command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the Mercat-crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Intimation hereof, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains
these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Ninth Day of June and of Our Reign the
Eight Year, 1696 Ex deliberatione Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB, ELIOT Cls.
Sti. Concilii

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.


