A PROCLAMATON Adjourning the General Assembly till the twenty of November,
1695.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, Weby Our Proclamation of the Date the twenty eight day of March
last by past, did for the Causes therein-specified Adjourn the present Current
Assembly of this Church to the eleventh day of July instant; And seeing the
Meeting and Continuing of this present Session of Parliament for so long a time
together with Our Absence in Flanders, and several other Reasons, do oblige us
to continue the said Adjournment from the said Eleventh of July instant, to the
twenty of November next to come; Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council, do hereby Adjourn the said General Assembly until the said
twenty day of November next to come, appointing the same to meet at that time
at Edinburgh, and requiring all the Members of the Assembly to attend that day.
OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent
their Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and whole
other Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires within this
Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof, that
none may pretend ignorance: And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the nineth day of July, and of Our Reign
the seventh year 1695. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT.Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1695.


