C R
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Against the Rebels in Arms, in the Western Shires.
CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To all and sundry Our good Subjects, Greeting:
Whereas by the clear and express Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Kingdom,
it is declared to be High Treason, for the Subjects of the same, or any number
of them, more or less, upon any ground or pretext whatsoever, to rise, or
continue in Arms, without Our special Authority and Approbation: Yet
nevertheless, a party of disloyal persons, disaffected to Our Government and
Laws, who have formerly tasted of Our Royal Bounty and Clemency, whereunto they
owe their Lives and Fortunes, having forefaulted the same by their former
rebellious practices, under the clock of Religion, the ordinar color and
pretext of Rebellion, have risen in Arms, in great numbers, and upon the 29. of
May, came to the Town of Ruther-Glen, Head Burgh of the Shire, where they
proclaimed their rebellious Covenant, and brunt Our Acts of Parliament, and at
Lowdoun-Hill, upon the first of June Instant, they did Actually Oppose, and
Fight Our standing Forces, and thereafter did pursue them to, and assault them
within the City of Glasgow, and have seized upon the persons of diverse of Our
good Subjects, plundered, and robbed them of their Horses* Arms, and other
Goods, and have done and committed many other Outrages, and Treasonable Deeds
and Attempts, against Our Authority (...) Loyal Subjects: And We, out of Our
Royal tenderness, for the (...) being careful to Repress the said Rebellion;
and that simple and unwarry people be not ensnared by the said Rebels, and
their Emissaries, and involved in their Rebellion: And to take off all pretense
of ignorance, or excuse, Do therefore, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Declare the said Insurrection to be an open, manifest, and horrid
Rebellion, and high Treason, and that the Authors, and Actors in the same, and
their Adherents, are, and ought to be pursued, as professed and declared
Traitors to Us. And do hereby Command and Charge all persons who are in Arms,
against, or without Our Warrant and Authority, to desist from their Rebellion,
and to lay down their Arms, and to render and present their Persons to the Earl
of Lin^ithgow, Our Major General, and Commander in Chief of Our Forces, or some
other of Our Officers, or Magistrates, within twenty four hours, after
publication hereof; With certification to them, if they continue in Rebellion
after the said time, they shall be holden, and proceeded against as
incorrigible and desperate Traitors, and that they shall be incapable of Mercy
and Pardon: And We do hereby prohibit and discharge, any person or persons to
aid, abate, assist, harbor, resett, or any ways supply the said Rebels, or
any of them, under the pain of Treason; and that they do not keep
correspondence, or commune with them, without Warrant of Our said Major
General, under the pain foresaid. And We do expect in this Juncture, and do
require and Command all Our Subjects to be assisting to Our Major General, and
Our Forces under him; and being required by him, or others having Authority, to
that effect, to rise in Arms with all their power, and to join and concur with
them, for suppressing the said Rebels, under the pain of Treason, if they
refuse or disobey: And farther, We do strictly enjoin, and Command all Masters
of Families, Heretors, and other Landlords, that they be careful and vigilant,
that their Children, Servants, Domestics, and their Tennents, and others under
their power, do not break out, and join with the said Rebels, certifying them
if they be found negligent in their duty, or otherwise culpable in that behalf,
they shall be looked upon, and severely punished, as disaffected persons, and
favoring and complying with Rebels. And hereby We give Warrant, and Command to
Our Lion, King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, or
Messengers at Arms, to pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places
needful, and make publication hereof; And that these presents be Printed, that
none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signer, at Edinburgh, the third day of June, One thousand six
hundred and seventy nine Years. And of Our Reign, the thretty one Year. Tho.
Hay, Cl. Sti. Concilii.


