royal blazon or coat of arms C R
(...) A PROCLAMATION against fighting of Duels or single Combats.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
to our Lovits, (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as the fights of Duels, and single Combats are most unlawful, and a
dangerous practice, contrar to the Law of GOD, and the principles of the
Christian Religion and policy, and prohibited by the Laws of this Our Kingdom,
and of other well governed Kingdoms and Nations: And especially by the twelfth
Act of King James the sixth, Our Royal Grandfather of blessed memory, His
sixteenth Parliament; whereby it is Statute, that no person thereafter, without
His Highness license, fight any singular Combat, under the pain of death, and
the escheit of their movables, and the Provoker to be punished with a more
ignominious death then the Defender: Nevertheless, the said abuse and
wickedness is become so ordinary, and grown to that height, that frequently,
upon mistakes, and escapes of words uttered inconideratly in company, by
persons otherwise in freindship and acquaintance, and upon the least shadow
and apprehension of any other injury (whereof if there were any ground, the
persons concerned might, and ought, to have and seek redress from Our Council,
or Our other ^udicatories) They presume and pretend, that they are concerned in
honor, to take reparation at their own hands in the said wicked, and
consequentially most dishonorable way of fighting Duels, and do give and accept
appeals and challenges, and do go to the Fields and fight Duels; To the great
contemptand and affront of Our Authority, and the great hazard of both Parties,
their Friends, and Seconds, and destruction of their Souls and Bodies, if they
should dye in so unlawful an action and occasion. And though they should
survive; if they should be brought under Our just displeasure, and the compass
of the Law, and capital punishment. For restraining and preventing whereof, We,
with advice of Our Privy Council, do ordain, That the said Act of Parliament
shall be put in punctual execution: And whenever Our Council shall have
information, or notice that any Duel is fought, That they shall be careful, and
give order to seize upon the delinquents, and imprison them, until they be
brought to their trial and punishment according to Our Laws; and to that effect
shall give special order to Our Advocat, to prosecute and pursue them. And seeing
the granting of pardon and mercy to persons guilty of the said crime, and the
hope of impunity may be an occasion of cruelty, and imbolden others to
adventure upon, and commit the like wickedness; Therefore such persons, who
shall be guilty of the said crime, are not to expect that remissions shall be
granted to them hereafter: And We declare and ordain, That if the fighting of a
Duel, or single Combat shall be designed and undertaken by ^y Persons, and upon
notice and discovery the same shall be prevented, and that they shall be
hindered and restrained from fighting; yet the Challenger, and also the
Defender, who shall accept any such challenge, shall be severely punished,
albeit they be hindered and restrained from going to, or fighting in the
Fields. And likewayes the Seconds of any party respective, and these who shall
carry any such challenge or appeal, shall be punished in manner aftermentioned;
That is to say, The Provoker and Appealler shall be imprisoned during the
pleasure of Our Council, and fynned, if he be a Nobleman, in the sum of six
thousand pounds Scots: And if he be a landed Gentleman, in the sum of three
thousand pounds money foresaid: And if he be of any other inferior quality,
that he shall be punished as Our Council shall think fit; and the party
appealled, and the seconds on either side respective, and these who shall carry
any such challenge, shall be imprisoned during Our Councils pleasure, and
fynned, if they be Noblemen, in the sum of three thousand pounds money
foresaid; If they be landed Gentlemen, in the sum of one thousand five hundred
pounds; And if they be of any other inferior quality, as Our Council shall
think fit; Beside what other pain or punishment Our Council shall think fit to
inflict. And ordains these presents to be Printed, and published at the Market
Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, That none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Holy-rood-house, the nineteenth day of March, one
thousand six hundred and seventy four; and of Our Reign the twenty sixth year.
Al. Gibson Cl. Sti Concilii.

God save the King.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY. Anno Dom. ^


