PROCLAMATION Against Exporting of Wool and Importing of Woollen-Cloath, etc.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
Part, Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitut, Greeting;
For As much, as by the fourtieth Act of the Parliament One thousand six hundred
sixty one, Entitled ACT for Erecting of Manufactories, and relative to many
former Acts of Parliament and Council; It is expressly provided, that in regard
of the great prejudice to the Kingdom, by Exportation of Wool; Therefore all
and every person whatsomever, Native or Stranger, are Discharged to Export out
of this Kingdom any Wool, under the Declaration contained in the said Act:
Certifying such as do in the contrary, they shall Forefault such Wool, or the
just Value thereof, the one half to Us, and the other half to the Informer who
shall Discover, Apprehend, and Prosecute the same before Our Exchequer:
Besides, that the Persons and Estates of such Contraveeners, shall be liable to
such Punishments and Fynes for the same, as Our Exchequer shall Appoint. And
further, the foresaid Act Discharges all Regraiters and Forestallers of Mercats
of Wool, and that no Merchant or other person whatsomever, buy and keep up Wool
unto Dearth, but that they bring the same to be sold in open Mercats, under the
Pains contained in the Acts of Parliament, made against Regraiters and
Forestallers. Likeas, by the 12th Act of the Parliament 1681, Entitled ACT for
encouraging Trade and Manufactories, all Merchants and other persons
whatsomever, are striclty Prohibited and Discharged to Import into this
Kingdom, any Foreign Clothes and Stuffs made of Wool, (no ways Comprehending
Flannel, Arras-Hangings, and Foreign Carpets) As also Foreign
Woolen-Stockens; with Certification, that all such Foreign Clothes, Stuffs and
Woolen-Stokens, as shall be Imported contrary to the said Act, shall be Burnt
and Destroyed; and the Importers and Resetters thereof, Fined in the Value of
the said Goods and the Tacksmen and Collectors of the Customs, Surveyors,
Collectors, Waiters or their Servants, are thereby strictly Commanded to Search
for, Seize upon, Apprehend, Burn any Destroy and of the said prohibited
Woollen-Cloaths, Stuffs or Stockens that shall be Imported contrary to this
Act; with Certification to them, if they failzie and suffer the said
prohibited Goods to be Imported, either by Tollerance or Connivance, they shall
not only amit and lose their Places, and for ever be incapable to serve in that
or any such public Charge, but also Fined in the Value of the said Goods,
that through their Fault or neglect shall happen to be Imported: and any
Merchant or other person who shall Inform against any of the Farmers,
Collectors, Surveyers or Waiters, for neglect of their Duty in the Premises,
and prove the same, shall have their Fynes for their Reward. Which Acts of
Parliament being most advantageous or the Good of the Kingdom, and the
Improvement of Manufactories, and at this time more especially necessary for
the Employing of idle Persons, and of the poorer sort, in the Work of the said
Manufactories, and for their necessar Clothing and Subsistence. We with Advice
of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to Revive, and do hereby
Revive the same, and Ordains them to be put to strict and vigorous Execution
for the Discharging of the said Export of Wool, and for Discharging the
Forestaling and Regraiting the Mercats of Wool: As also for the Discharging of
the Import of all Foreign Clothes and Stuffs made of Wool, (Flannel,
Arras-Hangings and Foreign Carpers only excepted) and of all Foreign
Woollen-Stockens, and that from and after the Day and Date hereof, and with and
under the Certifications and Penalties mentioned in the said Acts of
Parliament: which We with Advice foresaid. Do hereby Ordain to be most strictly
Observed and Executed in case of Contravention. And further, for the more
effectual Observance of the Premises, We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby grant
the same Encouragement to any Merchant, or other person who shall Inform
against the Importers of the said Goods hereby prohibited to be Imported, that
is granted by the said Act of Parliament. to these persons, who inform against
any of the said Farmers and others Neglecters of their Duty in the Premises,
viz. That they shall have their Fynes for their Reward. Our Will is herefore,
and We Charge you strictly, and Command, That incontinent these Our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of
the Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Kingdom, and make
Publication hereof. And appoints his Majesty's Solicitor to Transmit Copies
hereof, and to take Care that the same be Published at the Mercat-Crosses of
the several Seaport Towns within this Kingdom, and at the Custom-Houses, or
Offices within the same. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty third Day of June, and of Our
Reign the Eleventh year, 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, GILB.
ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1699


