royal blazon or coat of arms I R
(...) A PROCLAMATION, Against Field Conventicles, and offering a Revvard for
apprehending James Renvvick, Alexander Shiels, and Houstoun, Seditious Field
Preachers.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith
To Our Lovits (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severaly, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as We having by Our gracious Proclamation of the Twentieth eight of
June last, given so full and comprehensive a Tolleration and Indulgence to
tender Consciences, that there can be no pretense left for Field Conventicles,
these Readezvouzes of Rebellion, against which, by the foresaid Proclamation,
We have left all Our Laws and Proclamations of Council in full force and
vigor, and have thereby of new again, strictly Required and Commanded all Our
Judges and Officers, Civil, Criminal and Military, to surpross the said Field
Conventicles or Seditious Assemblies in the Fields, and to punish all persons
Preachers or Hearers thereat, conform to the outmost rigor of Our Laws; Yet
nevertheless, one James Renwick, a flagitious and scandalous person, (whom We
by Our Royal Proclamation of the Ninth day of December last bypast, have
Declared an open, notorious and avowed Traitor, and Discharged all Our Leidges,
all manner of Intercommuning with him) Having with Alexander Sheils, and (...)
Houstoun, and some others their Associats, Shaken off all fear of GOD, as well
as Alledgiance to Us His Vicegerent, Do presume to keep numerous Conventicles
in the Fields, and in their Preachings disown Us and Our Authority,
endeavoring to Seduce some of Our unwarry Commons, from their Duty and
Allegiance to Us their native Monarch, and expressly Teaching the Doctrine of
Rebellion and Resistance; We therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Do
hereby Prohibit and Discharge all such Rebellious Assemblies in the Fields, and
strictly Require and Command all Our Judges, and all in Authority under Us,
particularly the Officers and Soldiers of Our standing Forces, to surpress the
said Rebellious Field Conventicles with all rigor, and all Our Judges and
others concerned, to punish all persons present thereat, conform to the
prescript of Our Laws; Requiring hereby, and Authorizing all Our Officers,
Civil or Military, and all Our other good Subjects, to apprehend and secure in
Firmance the Persons of the said James Renwick, Alexander Sheils, and (...)
Houstoun, wherever they can be found; For whose encouragement in this Our
Service, We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Promise and Ensure to them, the sum
of One hundred pound Sterling money for each of the said three persons who
shall be apprehended and secured in manner foresaid, forth of Our Thesaury, as
a Reward; And to the end these Presents may be made known, Our Will is, and We
Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the
Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and there,
in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of Our Royal
Will and Pleasure in the Premises, that none pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the eighteenth day of October, One
thousand six hundred eighty seven, And of Our Reign the third year. Per actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1687.


