A PROCLAMATION Against Regrating of Victual, and Fore-stallers, and allowing
the Importation of Victual free of Public Burden.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, to (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute, greeting: Forasmuch as by several Acts of Parliament, the keeping
of Victual to a dearth, is strictly prohibited; and particularly, it is Statute
by the Acts James the Second, Parliament Sixth, Caput Twenty two and Twenty
three, that for the eschewing of Dearth, Sheriffs, Baillies, and other
Officers, both to Burgh and to Land, inquire what persons buys Victual, and
holds it to a Dearth, and that the said Sheriffs and Officers make such known,
that in case they hold more than will sustain them and their Meinie to new
Corn, they may be punished and demeaned as Ockerers and Usurers, and the
Victual escheated to Us, and that the same be presented to Mercats, and sold as
the price goes: And by the Act James the Second, Parliament Ninth, Caput Thirty
eighth and Thirty ninth, It is ordained that no manner of Victual be holden in
Girnels by any man to a dearth, but allennarly what is needful for their own
Persons, and sustentation of their Households; and that the said Persons
present all that they have more to the Mercar, under the pain of Escheat
thereof: And Searchers are appointed in Edinburgh and Leith to make the said
Acts effectual. As likewise, the Crime of Fore-stalling is forbidden by several
Acts and Statutes, and particularly by the Act James the Sixth, Parliament
Twelfth, Caput One hundred and forty eight, It is declared, that who buys any
Merchandise or Victual coming to Fair or Market, or makes any Contract or
Promise for the buying of the same before the said Merchandice or Victual shall
be in the Fair or Mercat-place ready to be Sold, or shall make any motion by
Word, Writ, or Message, for raising of the Prices, or dearer selling of the
said Merchandice and Victual, or who shall dissuade any from coming and
bringing the foresaid Merchandice and Victual to Fair or Market, shall be
esteemed and judged a Fore-staller: And it is ordained that all such
Fore-stallers may be pursued before the Justices or Magistrates of Burghs, and
that without a special Libel, but only upon Fore stalling in general, and the
persons convict to be Fined for the first fault in Forty Pounds, for the
second in One hundred Merks, and for the third to incur the tinsell of
Movables. And seeing that through the not due observance, and the execution of
the foresaids Acts, the calamity of the Country by the present scarcity and
dearth is greatly increased: Therefore We advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, have thought fit to revive the same, and ordain them to be put to
strict execution; and for that effect to empower and require all Sheriffs of
Shires, Stewarts of Stewartries, Lords and Baillies of Regalities and their
Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, as likewise all Commissioners of Supply, and
Justices of Peace, to cause inquiry and search to be made who holds up, or
Girnels Victual, or keeps Stacks contrary to the foresaids Laws, and to command
and charge the keepers up of the said Victual in Girnels, Stacks, or otherways,
contrary to the said Statutes, either to Thresh out, bring and expose the same
for Sale in open and ordinary Mercats, or otherwise to open their Girnels, and
other Houses where the Victual is kept, and there sell the same, as the said
Sheriffs, Stewarts of Stewartries, Lords and Baillies of Regalities and their
Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, or any two of the said Commissioners shall
find the ordinary price to rule for the time in the Country, not below the
last Candlesmass Fires; with certification if they failie therein, they shall
be proceeded against, and the pains of the foresaid Acts of Parliament execute
upon them with all rigor: And in the mean time the Victual Girnelled, and
unlawfully kept up as said is, Arrested and Sequestrat by the foresaids
Sheriffs and others, as Escheat. And further, We with Advice foresaid, Command
and Charge all Magistrates of Burghs, and other Officers of the Law, to take
care that all Mercats and Fairs be duly regulat conform to the Laws, without
extortion, and to cause put the foresaids Acts of Parliament against
Fore-stallers to due and vigorous execution, certifying the said Sheriffs,
Magistrates and others, who shall fail in their duty in the premises, that upon
information given to the Lords of Our Privy Council, they shall be therefore
severely punished as the Lords of Our Privy Council shall see cause. And
further, for the better relief of the Country under the present great scarcity,
whereby the prices of Victual are arisen above the rates mentioned in the Act
of Parliament for prohibiting the Import of Foreign Victual: We with Advice
foresaid, do hereby grant license and full liberty to all persons to Import
Victual, and Corns of all sorts, from any Foreign Kingdom or Country, and
that free of Custom, Excise, or other Imposition; And for that effect
recommends it to the Commissioners of Our Thesaury, to discharge the exacting
thereof for the said Victual to be Imported as said is, after the day and date
hereof: And that notwithstanding of any Act of Parliament, or Book of Rates
imposing the same, declaring that this license and liberty is to endure till
the first day of October next to come. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of
the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and thereat in Our Name
and Authority, make Publication of the Premises, that none pretend ignorance:
And ordains these presents to be Printed.

Geven under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fourteenth Day of July, and of Our
Reign the Tenth Year, School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT
Cls. Sti. Concili.

GOD save the King.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, School.


