royal blazon or coat of arms W R
(...) SOIT QVI MAL (...) (...) A PROCLAMATION Against Resetting or Assisting
Thomas and Capt. Simeon Frasers Elder and Younger of Beaufort, and their
Accomplices.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, to (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute, greeting: Forasmuch as Thomas Fraser of Beaufort, and Captain
Simeon Fraser his Son, with their Associats of their own Name, and other broken
men their Accomplices; have presumed wickedly and traitorously to Convocat,
Conveen, and rise in Arms, and by open force and violence, did seize upon, and
apprehend the persons of the Lord Saltoun and the Lord Mungo Murray, and others
of Our free Liedges, and carry them away, and detain them Prisoners during
their pleasure; And farther did Occupy and Possess certain Houses and Strengths,
and Fortify and Stuff the same with Armed Men, Ammunition, and other Warlike
Provisions: As likewise, most Villainously Seiz upon, and detain Captive the
Person of the Lady Dowager of Lovat, treating her with un-heard of Insolences,
and carrying her about with them by open force, and in a most Villainous and
cruel Captivity; for which attrocious and unparalled Crimes they having been
Charged in Our Name and Authority, by an Herald in his Formalities, to lay
down their Arms, and render themselves, and enter their Persons Prisoners, to
underly the Law, under the pain of being Denounced Fugitives and Rebels: And
having for their high Contempt and Disobedience, been actually Denounced
Rebels, and put to Our Horn, do nevertheless continue and persistin their
foresaid Rebellion, and Traitorous and Wicked Practices, and do daily add new
Insolences to the same; so that we have been necessitate to give Commission to
Our Sheriffs and their Deputs; as also to the Officers of Our Forces, and
Soldiers under their Command, to March against them in Feir of Weir, as open
and declared Enemies. Wherefore We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, have thought fit to prohibit, likeas We hereby most strictly
prohibit and Discharge all Our Liedges and Subjects whatsoever, especially
these Neighboring with the said Beauforts Elder and younger, and their
Accomplices, that they on no ways Reset, Affist, Abett, or Aid, with Meat, Drink,
or any other Provisions, or any other manner of way, whatsoever the faid
Beauforts, or any of their Accomplices; certifying all such as shall presume to
do or act in the contrary, they shall be held and repute as Partakers, Art and
Part with the said Rebels, and punished accordingly with all rigor. And
farther, We do hereby Command and Charge all Our good Subjects, to withdraw and
withhold from, and drive out of the way of the said Rebels, all manner of
help, comfort and relief; as also, all their Horses, Cattle, and other Goods,
whereby they may be any ways helped, comforted, or relieved, under all highest
pains. Likeas, in farther detestation of the said Crimes, and for the better
punishing thereof, We do hereby with Advice foresaid, promise to any of Our
good Subjects, whether Officers, Soldiers, or others, or even to any of the
Accomplices of the said Beauforts, who shall bring in the said Beauforts, or
either of them, dead or alive, the Sum of Four Thousand Merks Scots Money of
Reward, to be punctually paid by Our Thesaury, on the Warrant of these
presents, with an Indemnity also to any of the said Accomplices, who shall
perform this good service; declaring that whatever Slaughter, Mutilation,
Blood, Fire-raising, or other Violence shall happen to be acted, done, or
committed by all, or any of the foresaids persons hereby authorized to March
against the said Rebels, in siezing, reducing, and subduing them, as said is,
the same shall be holden lawful, and warrantable, and good service to Our
Government, and the Actors and Accessories thereto, shall be, and are fully
Indemnified and secured to all intents and purposes. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and
We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen,
ye pass to the Mercat-Crosses of Edinburgh, and Inverness, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this
Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make
Intimation hereof, that none pretend ignorance: And ordains these presents to
be Printed.

Geven under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Seventh Day of July, and of Our Reign
the Tenth Year, School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls.
Sti. Concili.

GOD save the King.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, School.


