A PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament till the Fourteenth day of March next.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuchas, by the last Act of the last Session of Our current Parliament of
this Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, the same was Adjourned to the Fifteenth
day of November last bypast: And whereas the present State of Our Affairs did
not require the Meeting of Our said Parliament so soon as the said day to which
it was Adjourned: Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
have ordered, and hereby orders the Continuation of the Adjournment of Our said
Parliament to the fourteenth day of March next ensuing and that the Members of
Our said Parliament may not be put to unnecessary Trouble and Charges before
that time; We do hereby Order and Require all the Members of Our said
Parliament, to attend the said fourteenth day of March next to come, at
Edinburgh in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the
several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge
you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent
Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Our ancient Kingdom,
and thereby open Proclamation, make Intimation, that our said Parliament is
Adjourned to the said fourteenth day of March next to come, and Ordains these
presents to be printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty day of December, and of Our
Reign the Tenth year. School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God save the King.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. School.


