A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the eighth of April, to the
ninth of September. 1684.
CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms: Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas, We, by Our Royal Proclamation, of the fifth day of November last,
Adjourned the Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom, to the eighth day of
April thereafter, next ensuing, and seeing the present state of Our Affairs do
not yet require their meeting so soon, and We being unwilling, that the Members
should be put to the trouble and charge of Meeting at that time, Have
therefore, with advice of Our Privy Council, thought fit by this Our Royal
Proclamation, to continue the Adjournment of Our said Parliament from the said
eighth day of April, to the ninth day of September next ensuing the Date of
these Presents: We being always resolved to continue Our dearest Royal Brother
to be Our High Commissioner in all the Sessions, and until the end of that Our
Parliament: And to the effect, all the Members thereof may attend that day, in
the usual way, and upon the accustomed Certifications, and that Our Pleasure
may be known in the Premises, OUR WILL IS, and We Charge you strictly, and
Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and remanent Market Crosses of the Burghs of this Kingdom, and
thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of
the said Adjournment of Our said Parliament, from the said eighth day of April,
to the said ninth day of September, next ensuing; Requiring hereby all the
Members of that Our Parliament to attend that day, in the usual way, and upon
the accustomed Certifications. The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and
severally, Our full Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you duly
Execute, and Indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the twentieth seventh day of March, one
thousand, six hundredth and eighty four Years, and of Our Reign the thirtieth
six year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti.
Concilij.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred
Majesty: Anno DOM. 1684.


