J R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION
Anent the Sumptuary Law.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, As albeit We have by Our several Proclamations, and Our Act of
Parliament, dated the (...) day of (...) Ratifying and Approving the same,
Given all Encouragement to Manufacturs within this Kingdom, by Prohibiting the
Importing of these things which might Discourage the same, and for Promoving
the Interest thereof, in manner at length mentioned in these Proclamations and
Act of Parliament; Yet understanding that the same has not received that due
Obedience which was required, and by Us designed to the end foresaid: As We
hereby with Advice of Our Privy Council, Revive and Renew, all the foresaids
Laws, made in favors of Manufacturs, and for Prohibiting and Discharging the
Importing or Wearing what is thereby prohibited; So We also strictly Require
and Command the same to be put to due and vigorous Execution, every manner of
way, as is thereby prescribed. And for further clearing of Our Subjects, as to
what may be worn or not (besides what is already Allowed,) We with Advice
foresaid. Do hereby Prohibit and Discharge, all Embroderies of Hair, Thread,
Buggle, except what is embroidered within this Kingdom, to be made use of any
manner of way; as also the wearing of any new Invention which may render Our
said Proclamations and Act of Parliament elusory, and likewise the Importing
or Wearing of all English-Cloath, save where the same is brought in, being made
and worn Abroad for some time, or where Clothes are already made thereof within
this Kingdom; as also the wearing of all Stuffs, or prohibited Clothes abroad,
or in the Streets, under the pretense of Night-Gowns, or Un Dresses, under the
Pains and Certifications contained in Our said Proclamations and Act of
Parliament. And for the more effectual prosecution of this Our Pleasure, We
hereby Require and Command all Our Judges and Magistrates within this Kingdom,
to see this Our Proclamation, now, as formerly, duly put in Execution. And as
a further Addition to what is already allowed to be worn, We hereby allow the
wearing of all Dropped, Spotted, Figured and Chequered Stuffs within this
Kingdom, where the same does not exceed Seven Shillings Sterling the Yard, at
most, without incurring any Penalty or Hazard upon that account. And that Our
Pleasure herein may be known, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly and
Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, and all other places needful, and there in Our Royal Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of Our Pleasure in the
Premises, that punctual Obedience may be given thereto, and none pretend
Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Sixteenth day of September, 1686. And
of Our Reign the second Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL.
PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1686.


