A PROCLAMATION Discharging any Persons to travel with Arms without License.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To (...) our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as the bearing of, and shooting with Firearms, such as Hagbuts,
Culverings, and Pistols, without License from Us, is prohibited and discharged
by several Acts of Parliament, under diverse great pains and penalties,
especially by the eighteenth Act of the first Parliament, eighty seventh Act of
the sixth Parliament, and the sixth Act of the sixteenth Parliament of King James
the sixth; And We, taking to Our consideration what Attrocious Facts are
committed by rebellious and disorderly persons, who go in Arms to Field
Conventicles, these Rendevouzes of Rebellion, and presume to make resistance to
Our Forces when they offer to dissipate them: Therefore We, with advice of the
Lords of Our Privy Council, do prohibit and discharge all Our Subjects of this
Kingdom, except the Officers and Soldiers of Our standing Forces, and of the
Militia, to travel with any Firearms, as Muskets, Hagbuts, Culverings and
Pistols, unless they have a License from One of Our Privy Council, or the
Sheriff of the Shire where they dwell, under the pains and penalties contained
in the said Acts of Parliament. Likeas, We with advice foresaid, do hereby
Authorize and require, all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies, Magistrates of Burghs,
Justices of Peace, and Officers of Our Forces, that they take notice of all
persons whom they find traveling, not only carrying the said Firearms, but
also carrying Swords, Durks, Whingers, Halbards, Poll-axes, or any other
Weapons invasive; that they seize upon the said Firearms, and secure the
persons carrying the same, not having License from one of Our Privy Council, or
from a Sheriff, or Stewart granted to these within their Jurisdiction, until
they give Bond and Caution to compear before Competent Judges, and answer for
their transgression of the said Acts of Parliament; and in case the said
Travelers be found to carry any of the said Arms, they not being Noblemen,
Landed-Gentlemen, or their Children, or Servants traveling with them or their
Children, and not having passes expressing whence they came, and whither they
go, under the hand of one of Our Privy Council, Lords of Session, Sheriff,
Stewarts, Bailies of Royalties or Regalities, Magistrates of Burghs, Justices
of Peace, or Commissioners of Excise granted in favors of these within their
Bounds; that the said persons be examined by Our said Judges, and Officers in
whose Bounds they shall be found; and in case they cannot give a sufficient
account of themselves, that they are none of these vagrant persons, disturbers
of the peace, and committers of the said Insolences; We do Command Our said
Judges, and Officers to seize upon their Arms, and secure their persons in the
next prison, and with all diligence to send an account of their Names and
Examination to Our Sheriff-Deputs, specially Commissionate for punishing of
Conventicles, and other disorders of that kind; that without delay they may
proceed to the trial of the said persons, according to their Commissions and
Instructions. And We Ordain these presents to continue and endure until the
first of November next. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straightly and
Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and there make publication of the
Premises, that none may pretend ignorance. And Ordains these presents to be
printed.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh the eight day of May, 1679, and of Our
Reign the thretty one Year. Alexr. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

God save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1679.


