design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose
PROCLAMATION Anent old Fourteens, and their Halfs, Cobbs, and Forty
Penny-pieces.
WILLIAM by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
to (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially, constitute, Greeting;
For as much as by the Act past in the last Session of Our current Parliament,
anent the old fourteen shilling pieces and their halfs. It is Statute, That all
old fourteen shilling pieces weighing two Drops and twenty seven Grains, and
their halfs weighing proportionally, shall be received in all Payments at their
present current Rate: and that the other old Fourteens and their halfs under
the said weight, shall pass in all Payments at the rate of three Pounds four
Shilling the Ounce, being a Groat for the Drop: Therefore, and in pursuance of
the said Act of Parliament, and for removing any difficulty that may arise
about the Weight; We with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Have
declared, and hereby declare and ordain, That the weight at which the said old
Fourteens and their halfs are to pass, is the Lanerk Troy Weight, That is the
weight of the Stone and its Fractions, committed to the Custody of the Burgh of
Lanerk, and known to be the Standart of the Weight within this Kingdom,
according as the said Weights are, or shall be marked by the Deans of Guild of
the Royal Burrows in the usual manner: And further, for the better facilitating
the Currency of Money, We with advice foresaid, Declare and Appoint all the
pieces of Money, commonly called Cobbs, and their Fractions of whatever kind
they be, to pass without distinction by Weight, That is such of them as weigh
fourteen Drop or above, at the Rate of fifty six shilling, and such as weigh
less, at the Rate of four shilling Scots per Drop of the foresaid weight of
Lanerk: And lastly, We with advice foresaid, Ordain all Scots forty
penny-pieces, to pass and Be current in all Payments, at three shilling and six
pennies per piece: Certifying such as shall refuse the said old Fourteens and
their halfs, or the said Cobbs and their Fractions, or the said Scots forty
penny-pieces, at the Rate above-appointed, they shall be liable in the double
of what shall be refused, to be summarly exacted at the instance, and for the
use of the Offerer, by all Judges Ordinary without delay: OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority by open
Proclamation make intimation hereof, that none pretend Ignorance; and ordains
these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the thirty one day of December, and of Our
Reign the eight Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB:
ELIOTCls: Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1697.


