C R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION
Anent the Rendezvouses of the Militia, for the year 1683.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as by reason of the not timous Intimation of the Dyets of the
general Rendezvouses of the Militia of this Our Kingdom, the last Summer, there
was no General Rendezvouses thereof kept; and We finding it necessar for Our
Service, that the said Rendezvouses be punctually kept for this year, and
hereafter; Have with Advice of Our Privy Council, thought fit to appoint the
said Rendezvouses, for this year, to be at the Dyets and Places after
specified, viz. The two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse, of the
Shires of Fife and Kinross, to be at Edinsmoore, the twenty two day of May
next: The two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse, of the Shire of
Perth, to be at Perth, the twenty third day of the said Month: The Regiment of
Foot, and two Troops of Horse, of the Shire of Forfar, at Forfar, the twenty
fourth day of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the
Shire of Kincardine, and Marischals part of Aberdene, at Aberdene, the
thirtieth day of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot, of the Shire of Bamff,
and Errols part of Aberdene, and two Troops of Horse; there at Turreff, the
first day of June next: The Regiment of Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the Shires
of Elgin, Nairn, and part of Inverness, at Elgin, the fifth day of the said
Mouth: The Regiment of Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the Earl of Seaforth, and
Lord Lovets part of Inverness, at Inverness, the seventh day of the said
Month: The Regiment of Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the Earl of Seaforth, and
Lord Lovets part of at Dornoch the tenth day of the said month: The Regiment of
Foot, of the Stewartry of Orknay, at Kirkwa, the fifteenth day of the said
month: The Regiment of Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the Shires of Linlithgow
and Peebles, at Celem-moore, the first day of the said month: The Regiment of
Foot, of the Town of Edinburgh, at the Links of Leith, the second day of the
said Month. The Regiment of Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the Shire of
Edinburgh, at Musselbu^gh, the fifth day of the said Month: The Regiment of
Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the Shire of Hadingtoun, at Beinstour-moore, the
sixth day of the said Month: The Regiment of Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the
Shire of Bervick, at Foggomoore, the seventh day of the said Month: The two
Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse, of the Shires of Roxburgh and
Selkirk, at Ancrum Bridge, the eigthth day of the said Month. The Regiment of
Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the Shire of Drumfreis, the twelfth day of the
said Month: The two Troops of the Shire of Wigtoun, at Milntoun of Orr, the
thirteenth of the said month: The three Troops of Horse, of the Shire of Air
and part of the Shire of Renfrew, at Air, the fifteenth of the said month: The
rest of the Shire of Rensrew at Renfrew, the eighteenth day of the said month:
The three Troops of the Shire of Lanerk, at Hamiltoun, the twenty two of the
said month: The Regiment of Foot, and Troup of Horse, of the Shire of Serivling
and Clackmannan, at Sauchin foord, the twenty sixth of the said month: The
Regiment of the Shires of Argile, Bute and Dumbarton, at Dumbarton, the
nineteenth day of the said month, for the Shire of Dumbarton and Bute, and at
Inverara the twenty fifth of the said Month, for Argile Shire. And We Ordain
the hail Officers of Foot and Horse, to attend their Charges, at the said
Dyets of Rendezvouses, and the Heretors and others Out-Reikers of the Sojors,
to have their men present, (habile) according to Law; with certification to the
said Officers and Heretors, if they neglect their Duty herein, they shall be
proceeded against, and fined conform to the Laws and Instructions made
thereanent. And appoints the Muster-master General, by (...) to be present at
the several Rendezvouses, and to return an Account to Our Council, of the
Absents and Deficients, that they may be proceed^^ against according to Law.
Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent,
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh and several
Market Crosses of the Head Burghs of this Kingdom and Burghs of Regality, and
several Paroch Kirks within the same, upon a Sunday after Divine Service, and
other places needful; and there, in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make publication of the Premises, that none pretend ignorance.
And We Ordain the Sheriffs of the respective Shires, to cause duly publish
these Presents.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the twenty third day of March, One
thousand six hundred eighty and three: And of Our Reign, the thirtieth fifth
year. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilij.


