royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Anent Recruits, and Regulating the Seizing of Deserters.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, there are several Scots Officers come over for raising Recruits
to Our Scots Troops in Flanders; And We Considering on the one hand, how much
it is both for the Honor of this Our ancient Kingdom, and the good of Our
Service, that these Forces in Flanders be effectually Recruited, and being no
less sensible on the other hand, both of the Accidents that have lately
happened, and that Abuses are ordinarily committed upon such occasions, Have
thought fit by a Letter under Our Royal Hand, to recommend to the Care and
Prudence of the Lords of Our Privy Council, to give Our Officers all necessar
Countenance and Assistance, in making of the said Recruits, but withal to
keep them within the bounds that the Law prescribes: In Order whereunto, We
with Advice of the said Lords of Our Privy Council, Require and Command all
Sheriffs and their Deputs, Lords of Regality and their Baillies, Justices of
Peace, Magistrates of Our Royal Burghs, and other Magistrates whatsomever,
Commanders of Our Castles and Forts, Officers of Our standing Forces, and all
others Our Good Subjects, to give their best assistance in this matter, and to
Cause secure all Seaports and other ways, and Passages out of the Kingdom, to
prevent the escaping or withdrawing of Deserters; And for that end, that no
person be suffered to pass out of Our said Kingdom, either by Sea or Land, at
any time betwixt and the first of March next, except they have Passports duly
subscribed by one of the Members of Our Privy Council. And We with Advice
foresaid, strictly Prohibit and Discharge Our said Officers, come for Recruits
from Flanders, to seize any as Deserters, but such as have Deserted from Our
Scots Regiments in Flanders since they were there, and none others: And allow
the Officers of Our standing Forces in this Our ancient Kingdom, to seize upon
none upon the head of Desertion, but such as have Deserted from one or other of
the said Regiments, of which they are at present Officers, and Discharge any
person to be seized upon on pretense of Desertion, before Our accession to the
Crown; And Discharge the Officers of the standing Regiments in this Our
Kingdom, to Recruit till such time as the Officers for Flanders shall have
shipped their Recruits; and that violence be done to no Man to make him engage in
Our Service, but that such as do voluntarly engage, be not allowed to retract;
but if they offer to do the same, they be considered and secured as Deserters:
And for the greater encouragement of such as shall engage to go to Flanders for
Our Service, We with Advice foresaid Do Declare, that after three years Service
in Our Armies Abroad, they shall have their Passes with full freedom to leave
Our Service in their option, with this proviso only, that if their said Passes
shall fall due, and be by them desired in the beginning of a Campaign, they
shall only be delayed till the end of the said Campaign, after which they shall
immediately have their said Passes and freedom, as is above declared: And if
any of those who shall go to Flanders, shall happen to be Wounded or Maimed, so
as to become unfit for Service, the same care shall be taken of them that is
taken of all others on English Pay; And this Our Royal Will in the particulars
abovementioned. We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Ordain to be
duly Published, and punctually observed. And further, We with Advice foresaid,
Do hereby Ratify and Revive the Proclamation of the date the sixteenth Day of
December, One thousand six hundred ninety two years, for Regulating the Levy of
Recruits, Willing and Ordaining the same to be strictly observed in all Points,
and the Pains thereof upon Transgression duly exacted. OUR WILL IS herefore,
and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Market Crosses of
the Head Burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom, and there in Our Name
and Authority by open Proclamation, make intimation hereof, that none pretend
ignorance.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the eighteenth day of December. And of Our
Reign the sixth Year, 1694. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
their most Excellent Majesty's, 1694.


