(...) QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, by the sixth Act of the Fourth Session of Our current
Parliament. It was Statute for a further Security to the Protestant Religion,
and Our Government in this present Exigence; That both the persons therein
particularly specified, and all other persons, whether ranked in the said Act
or not, who shall not Swear the Oath of Alledgiance, and Subscribe the same,
and Assurance subjoyned to the said Act, should not be allowed to keep any
Horses above a hundred merks Scots, or any sort of Arms, more than a
Walking-Sword; Certifying such as shall be found to have Horses and Arms
contrary to this Provision, either in their own, or in the keeping of others,
that both the Owner and the Keeper shall incur the Penalty of a Thousand Merks
Scots, the one half to the Informer, and the other to Us. And the Lords of Our
Privy Council are Authorized and Empowered, to take such further effectual
Methods for Dis-arming these Persons, and seizing of their Horses above the
foresaid Value, as they shall judge necessary; And We being resolved, that the
foresaid Act be put effectually to Execution: Do therefore with the Advice of
Our Lords of Privy Council, Command and Charge, all persons of whatsoever
Degree or Rank, without Exception, who have not already qualified themselves,
by duly Swearing and Subscribing the foresaid Oath of Alledgiance, and
Subscribing the foresaid Assurance, or who shall not qualfie themselves by
Swearing and Subscribing as said is, before the Sheriffs Stewarts, Baillies,
Justices of Peace, or other Judges ordinary of the Jurisdiction within the
which they Live, or their Deputs, betwixt and the Third and Eleventh days of
April next, viz. These one this side of the water of Tay, betwixt and the said
Third day, and these on the other side, betwixt and the said Eleventh day, and
report an Authentic Certificat thereof, subscribed by the said Judge and his
Clerk; To deliver up all their Horses above the foresaid Value of a hundred
Merks the Head, whether in their own keeping, or in the keeping of any others,
with all sorts of Arms that they have, either in their own keeping, or in the
keeping of others, more than a Walking-Sword, betwixt and the foresaids days to
the same Judge, at the Tolbooth of the Head-Burgh of the foresaid Jurisdiction,
within which they live, which Horses and Arms so delivered, are to be Rouped by
the said Judge, the first Mercat-day thereafter, to the best Avail, and the
Price is to be given to the Deliverer and Owner foresaid, certifying all such
as shall Contraveen, and not give ready Obedience hereunto, by keeping either
their own, or other men's Horse or Arms, contrary to the Provision foresaid,
betwixt and the foresaids days, they shall incur the foresaid Penalty of one
thousand Merks, the one half to Us, and the other half to the Informer, and
that over and above the loss of the Horses and Arms; with this Provision
nevertheless, that the said Horses and Arms amitted as above, are also to be
Rouped to the best Avail, in manner above-prescribed, and the Price reckoned
and compted in part of payment of the foresaid Penalty pro tanto. And it is
hereby Declared, that it shall be sufficient for the Informer, to Challenge the
Keeper or Haver of the said Horse or Arms, contrary to the foresaid Act, and to
Conveen them summarly upon a Charge of six days, before the Judge Ordinary of
the Bounds, and to refer if he think fit, the foresaid Having or Keeping to
their Oaths, instead of all further Probation, whereupon Decree shall be
pronounced, unless the foresaid authentic Certificat be produced without
further delay: And We with Advice foresaid, Discharge all Advocation, or
Suspension to be given in the Premises, upon any pretext; And further, do
hereby require all the foresaid Sheriffs, Baillies, Justices of the Peace, and
other Judges ordinary, and their Deputs, to make diligent Inquiry within their
respective Bounds, for the said Horse and Arms, and the Keepers and Havers
thereof contrary to the foresaid Act, and to cause execute the same against
them, as they will be answerable to Us upon their highest peril. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly and Command, that Incontinent their Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this Our
Ancient Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation,
make public Intimation hereof, that none may pretend Ignorance. And Ordains
these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of March, and of Our
Reign the Fifth Year, 1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
Their Most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM, 1694.


