W R
HONI SOITQUI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms A
PROCLAMATION, Calling out the half Foot Militia in some Shires, the Fencible
Men in others, and the whole Horse Militia in the Northern Shires.
WILLIAM by the grace of GOD, King of Great-Britains France and Ireland,
defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren, Heralds, Macers of Our
Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, greeting:
Forasmuch as the present preparations made by the French King, and the
implacable malice he has upon all occasions expressed against Us, Our people,
and the Protestant Religion, gives Us just ground to apprehend there is an
Invasion intended by bloody Papists and disaffected Subjects from France upon
this Our ancient Kingdom, of purpose (if possible) to make the same the Seat of
a bloody War, for defeating and opposing whereof, it is necessary to put the
Kingdom in a suitable Posture of Defense: And We considering that by sundry
Acts of Parliament, there is a regular Militia established within this Kingdom,
expressly to be employed in opposing any Foreign Invasion, or suppressing any
intestine Trouble or Commotion that may happen within the same: Have thought
fit at this time to appoint the one half of the Foot Militia to be Listed, and
in readiness to be called out upon twenty four Hours advertisement; and in the
mean time to be exercised within the Shires after specified, and the hail
Militia of Horse appointed by the twenty sixth Act Parliament one thousand six
hundred sixty three, for the Shires Underwritten, to be Rendevouzed upon the
days at the places, and under the Command in manner after mentioned: And to the
effect, the said half of the Foot Militia, and whole Horse Militia of the
Shires respective afternamed may be the more speedily Listed, Modelled and
Trained in Military Discipline, whereby they may be in greater readiness and
fitness for Our Service when they shall be called for. We with Advice of the
Lords of Our Privy Council, Nominat Appoint; and constitute the Commissioners
of Supply of the said respective Shires, and the Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, and Majors of Foot, and the Captains and Lieutenants of
Horse, appointed, or to be appointed to Command the half Foot, or whole Horse
Militia of the said Shires to be Our Commissioners, for Listing and Ordering
the same, and to that effect, do hereby Require and Authorize the said
Commissioners of Militia to meet at the Head-Burghs of their respective Shires,
upon the days following viz. the Shires of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Fife and
Kinross, and the Town of Edinburgh, upon the Seventeenth day of December
current, The Shires of Berwick, Roxburgh, Selkirk, Peebles, Linlithgow,
Stirling, and Clackmanan upon the twenty second day of the said Month, and the
Shires of Perth, Drumfries, Dumbarton and Bute upon the twenty fourth day of
the samen, and the Commissioners for the Stewartrie of Orkney and Zetland upon
the sixteenth day of February next to come, one thousand six hundred ninety
seven years; and there to proceed, nominat and appoint persons well affected to
Our Government, for Captains and Lieutenants of Foot, and an Ensign to the
Colonels Company, and Lieutenants and Coronets of Horse, and to cause
intimation presently to be given to them; of the Service and Command they are
chosen, to which Officers of Horse and Foot respective, We hereby Require and
Command to accept and attend their Charges, under the Pains following, viz.
each Captain of Foot, or Lieutenant of Horse one thousand Merks, a Lieutenant
of Ensign of Foot, or Coronet of Horse five hundred Merks, conform to the first
Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred seventy two; And that the said
respective Officers take the Oath of Allegiance, and Subscribe the Assurance to
Us, in presence of the Commanding Officer, the first day the Regiment shall
Rendevouz together, under the pains contained in the Acts of Parliament made
thereanent: With power likeways to the said Commissioners, to List the half of
the said Foot Militia, by filty in each Company, and eight Companies in every
Regiment, to be Outreiked by the Divisions following, and Commanded by the
Colonels, Lieutenant Colonel, and Majors after-named, viz. The one half of the
Foot Militia of the Shire of Edinburgh, consisting of four hundred Men, and
eight Companies to be in one Regiment, Commanded by the Earl of Lauderdale as
Colonel, and Sir John Clerk of Penniecook as Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain
William Ogilvie in Colonel Robert Mackay's Regiment in Flanders as Major, the
one Regiment of four hundred Men, as the half of the Foot Militia of the Shire
of Haddingtoun, to consist of eight Companies, and be under the Command of the
Lord Yester as Colonel

Nisbit of Dirletoun Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain William Bailie of
Hardingtoun as Major, the one Regiment of four hundred Men consisting of eight
Companies, as the half of the Foot Militia, for the Shyre of Berwick, to be
Commanded by the Lord Polwarth, Our Chancellor, as Colonel, Captain John Home
of Manderstoun, as Lievetnant colonel, and Captain George Home of St. Leonards
as Major: The one Regiment of four hundred Men, as the half of the Foot
Militia, of the Western Division of Roxburgh-Shyre, with a part of the half of
the Foot Militia of the Shyres of Selkirk and Peebles to consist of Eight
Companies, under the Command of the Earl of Dalkeith, as Colonel, Sir Francis
Scot of Thirlstone Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain (...) Irvin in the Royal
Regiment as Major: The three hundred nyntie and nine Men, as the half Foot
Militia, of the easter Division of Roxburgh-Shyre, and the rest of the half
Foot Militia of the Shyres of Selkirk and Peebles, to be in one Regiment,
consisting of Eight Companies under the Command of the Earl of Roxburgh, as
Colonel, Captain William Bennet of Grubet Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain (...)
Cunningham, in the Royal Regiment, as Major: The four hundred nyntie nine Men
of the half Foot Militia, of the Shyres of Linlithgow, Stirling and
Clackmannan, to be in one Regiment, consisting of ten Companies, under the
Command of the Earl of Annandale as Colonel, Patrick Murray of Livingstoun as
Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain Walter Sharp, in Colonel Robert Mckay his
Regiment, as Major: The four hundred Men, as the half of the Foot Militia of
the Town of Edinburgh, Leith and Cannongate to be in one Regiment, consisting
of Eight Companies, under the Command of the Lord Provost of Edinburgh for the
time, as Colonel, Major George Monro as Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain Samuel
Fullarton as Major: The four hundred Men, as the one half of the half Foot
Militia of Fyfe, and Kinross to be in one Regiment, consisting of Eight
Companies, under the Command of the Lord Leslie, as Colonel, Alexander Douglas
of Strathendrie, as Lieutenant Colonel, and Lieutenant Robert Young in
Brigadeer Maitlands Regiment as Major of the western Regiment of the said
Shyre: The other four hundred Men of the said half foot Militia of Fyfe and
Kinross to be in one Regiment; consisting of Eight Companies, under the Command
of the Lord Elcho, as Colonel, (...) Balfour of Dunbug, as Lieutenant Colonel,
and (...) Arnot of Auchinmoor as Major of the eastern Regiment of the said
Shyre: The four hundred Men as the eastern Regiment of the half Foot Militia of
Perth Shyre, consisting of Eight Companies, under the Command of the Earl of
Tallibairdin, Our Secretary of State, ^s Colonel, (...) Thomas Hay of Balhousie
as Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain Walter Murray in Colonel Lauders Regiment,
as Major: And the four hundred Men, as the western Regiment of the said half
Foot Militia of Perth-Shyre, consisting of Eight Companies, to be Commanded by
the Lord Ruthven, as Colonel, Adam Drummond of Megginsh as Leiutenenant
Colonel, and Captain John Campbel as Major. The four hundred Men, as the half
Foot Militia of Drumfries Shyre to be one Regiment, consisting of Eight
Companies, under the Command of the Duke of Queensberry, as Colonel, the Earl
of Carnwath as Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain William Maxwell in Brigadeer
Maitlands Regiment, as Major: The three hundred and thirty three Foot, as the
half Foot Militia of the Stewartry of Orkney to be in one Regiment, in fix
Companies, under the Command of Mr. Robert Douglas* Brother to the Earl of
Morton, as Colonel, Sir William Gragie of Gairsie Lieutenant Colonel, and
Captain (...) Moodie of Melstar as Major: The half Foot Militia of the Shyres
of Bute and Dumbartoun, to be divided in three Companies, the first to be
Commanded by Archibald Mccaulay of Arnacaple, and the second by (...)
Bannantyne of Kames, and the third by (...) Buntin younger of Airdoch, as
Captains. And We with Advice foresaid, require and Command the said
Commissioners of Militia, for the respective Shyres and Stewartries above
named, with their utmost diligence, to proceed and List the said respective
half Foot Militia, and how soon, or whenever they have Listed the said
respective Companies, under the Command of the Captains, and other Inferior
Officers to be named by them (except the Captains for Bute and Dumbartoun)
comform to the Methods and Rules formerly observed in the out-rick of the
Militia, and allowed by the Acts of Parliament made thereanent, That imediately
they design and appoint particular places, and days of Randevouz for each
Company to meet, and be exercised upon, at least for one day every week, until
further Orders be direct to them thereanent. The first of which days for each
Company to meet, and Rendevouz upon, within the ^aroch, or Bounds out of which
it is raised, is hereby appointed to be within Eight days after the Captains
and Lieutenants shall be named, and the List of the Bounds for their respective
Companies given to them, by the said Commissioners. And We with Advice
foresaid, appoints the several Heretors to pay to each Foot Militia Man of the
said respective Companies, six shillings Scots per diem, for each day they
shall be Exercised, and Randevouzed, during the space foresaid, reserving to
them their Relieff thereof, from the Men Tenants, and Servants, for whom the
said Foot Men are to be put out, and who are not listed in the Militia,
requiring hereby, the Officers and Soldiers punctually to attend the
Particular days of Randevouz, with their best Arms, under the pains contained
in the first Act of Parliament, 1672. being now double in the time of War: And
for the better encouragement of such who shall be Listed for Our Service, in the
said Militia. We do hereby Declare, that all such pesons who shall be introlled
and admitted in this Trust and Service of the Militia, shall be entirely
reserved for that Employment, and during their Service in it, ^^al be freed and
exeemed from all other Levies, and shall have the benefit of and be subject to
the whole other Advantages and Orders set down and provided to the Militia by
the first Act of Parliament 1672 and other Acts made thereanent; Certifying
withal, every Heretor liable in Outreik of any Footman, who shall fail in the
punctual and timely putting out of sufficient Men with their best Arms, and
every Footman Listed in the said Service of the Militia, who shall be absent
from any day of Rendevouz shall be Fined in, and bell yable to the Penalties
thereanent provided by the first Act of Parliament 1672. And We with Advice
foresaid, Require and Command the Majors of the several Regiments respective
above named, to be present with one or other of the Companies of the said
Regiments every Rendevouz day, and to Train and Exercise the same in Military
Discipline. And for his encouragement in the said Service: We have appointed
thirteen shillings sterling per diem to be paid to each Major for their Pains
and Service for each day they shall be present with, and attend the Exercising
and Training of any of the Companies of the said respective Regiments, with
four shillings sterling per diem to the Lieutenants of each Company, and three
shillings sterling money foresaid to the Ensign of the Colonel's Company per
diem, and six pence money foresaid for each Drummer and Sergeant, besides the
like Sum payable to them by their Outputters, for each day the said Companies
shall be brought together for Exercise and Discipline: Which Sums respective
forsaids, We with Advice and Consent foresaid Require and Command the
Collectors of Our Supply in the several Shires upon an Attestation from the
said Commissioners of the several Shires, under the hands at least of three
thereof, with their Clerk who is to record the same in the Commissioners Books,
bearing the Number of the Days Pay, due to the said Officers, Sergeants and
Drummers upon an Receipt of the same by them respective to the Collector, upon
Payment punctually to pay, which Attestation and Receipt. We hereby Require and
Command Our General Receivers to Accept of, and receive from the several
Collectors as good Payment of so much of the Supply of the said Shire, and
sufficient Exoneration to them pro tanto, as they will be answerable for the
same upon their highest Peril And Appoints the same to be Allowed by the Lords
of Our Tresaury to the said General Receivers. And for the more effectual
defeating and opposing of the said Invasion: We with Advice foresaid Require
and Command the haill Fencible Men within the Shire of Wigtoun and Stewartry of
Kirkcudoright, and within the Sheriffdoms of Air, Argile, Lanerk and Renfrew,
to Meet and Conveen upon the Seventh Day of Jannuary next, and Rendezvous with
their best Arms within their several Paroches under the Command of the Officers
formerly nominated and appointed, or who shall be nominated or appointed for
that effect, and there to exercise themselves. and be in readiness to march
with necessar Provisions as they shall be required by further Orders from Us or
Our Privy Council; And for the better Reinforcing Our Standing Troops to make a
vigorous Opposition to any such Invasion, and timely to suppress any Intestine
Trouble that may happen thereupon, We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command
the several Heretors within the Shires after-mentioned to Provide their
respective Numbers of Militia of Horse, according as the samen shall be
appointed to be furnished by the several Leaders, to be named by the said
Commissioners of Militia, Authorized in manner abovementioned, and to have the
samen in readiness, with a sufficient Rider and Arms, to Meetand Rendezvous at
the Places, upon the Days, and under the Command of the Persons respective
after-mentioned, viz, the Shire of Forfar One hundred and three Horse, at the
Rate of Ten Pound Sterling each Horse, besides sufficient Furniture and Arms,
conform to the first Act of Parliament One thousand six hundred and seventy
two, to meet at Forfar the Seventh Day of January One thousand six hundred and
ninty seven Years, under the Command of the Earl of Strathmore as Captain
thereof, the Shire of Kincardin and Mareschals Part of Aberdeen Seventy four
Horse, at the Rate foresaid to veet at Aberdeen the said Seventh Day of
Jannuary, under the Command of the Earl of Kintore as Captain thereto, and the
rest of Aberdeen and Bamf Shire, One hundred and seventy six Horse at the Rate
foresaid to Meet where the Captains and Commissioners foresaids shall Appoint
the said Day under the Command of the Earl of Errol and Lord Saltoun as
Captains thereto, the Shires of Bigine, Nairn and this side of Ness Eighty
eight Horse of the Pride foresaid, to Meet the said Day where the Commissioners
and Captains shall Appoint, under the Command of the Lord of Grant as Captain
thereto, the Earl of Seaforth and the Lord Lovat their Division of Inverness
Eighty eight Horse to meet as the said Commissioners and Captains shall
appoint under the Command of the Lord of Balnagouan as Captain thereto, the
Shires of Sutherland and Caithness Eighty eight Horse at the rate foresaid, to
meet where the Commissioners and Captains shall appoint day foresaid under the
Command of the Lord Rae as Captain thereto, all of them with ten days Provision
at eighteen Shilling per diem to be Rendevouzed upon, the days abovementioned,
and to be daily exercised during the said space; and thereafter to be duly and
regularly quartered, during the space they shall be kept together in the next
adjacent Towns and Villages upon payment of ready Money for their Quarters until
they shall receive further Orders thereanent: And we with Advice foresaid
Require and Command the Commissioners of Militia for the foresaids several
Shires last abovenamed upon this side of Spey to meet and conveen upon the said
Twentieth fourth day of this present Month of December, and these upon the
other side thereof upon the Twentieth ninth day of the samen Month; and with
Advice of the said respective Captains to make choice of fit and sufficient
persons qualified according to Law to be Lieutennants and Corronets for the
said respective Troops of Horse, and to intimat the same to the said
Officers, and require them to attend their Duty and Commands under the Pains
above-exprest; Declaring hereby that all such persons who shall be Listed for
the said Horse Militia shall be freed and exeemed from all other Levies
whatsomever during their Service in the said Militia: And We with Advice
foresaid Require and Command the said Commissioners of Militia to cause the
several Fractions for each Militia Horse, and Ordain the same within what short
space they think meet, to be duly paid into the respective Leaders thereof,
and in case of Failzie to exact the Pains, and use the Execution for the same
mentioned in the Act of Parliament one thousand six hundred and sixty nine and
that they take care that good and sufficient Horses Arms and Furniture be
provided, able and fit for the Service, conform to the Acts of Parliament and
former Practice in the like cases: and further We with Advice foresaid Require
and Command the Commissioners of Militia for the said respective Shires to
cause provide at the Charge and Expenses of the said Shires a Drum for each
Company of the said Foot Militia and one pair of Colors for the Colonels
Company, and a Standart, and Trumpet for each of the said Troops of Horse and
to cause the said Charge and Expense thereof to be laid on the respective
Shires, and raised in that same manner as the Supplies imposed by Act of
Parliament for Our Service, are conform to the second Act Parliament One
thousand six hundred and sixty nine, or to call for the Drums, Colors,
Standarts and Trumpets heretofore provided for that use, at the Charge of the
several Shires, and to Conveen the Havers thereof before them, and to compel
them to deliver up the same by Imprisonment or what other Execution they think
fit* Our Will is Herefore, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burgns of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom; and there in Our Name and Authority by open
Proclamation make Intination hereof that none pretend Ignorance, and Appoints
Our Solicitor to Transmit Printed Copies hereof to the Sheriffs and Stewart
Clerks of the haill Sheriffdoms and Stewartries within this Kingdom, with
Copies to be Transmitted by the said Sheriff and Stewart-Clerks to the
Ministers of the several Paroches within their Bounds, and Ordains the said
Sheriff and Stewart-Clerks to cause Publish this Proclamation at the
Mercat-Crosses, upon the first Mercat-day after it shall come to their Hands;
and Appoints this Proclamation to be intimat in the said Paroch-Churches upon
the Forenoon after Sermon, the first Lords Day, immediately after the same shall
come to their hands: And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Tenth day of December, and of Our
Reign the Eight Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Seereti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii,

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


