A PROCLAMATION Anent Seminary Priests, Jesuits and Trafficking Papists.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lovits (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting:
Forasmuch as, notwithstanding the many good and laudable Laws made against
Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and Trafficking Papists, Adversaries to the true
Religion professed within this Realm, And particularly the Acts following, viz.
Par. 7. K. J. 6. Cap. 105. That no Subjects nor Strangers, Adversaries to the
said true Religion, remain within this Realm, unless they obey the Low, anent
giving their Confession of Faith. Act Ja. 6. Par. 11. Cap. 24. That any
Seminary Priest, when found within this Realm, incur the Pain of Death, and
Escheat of Movables; and that the Resetters and Supplyers of such by the space
of three Days and three Nights, tyne their Liferents. Act Ja. 6. Par. 12. Cap.
120. That the Resetting of Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and Trafficking Papists,
against the King and the present Religion, inser the Crime and Pain of Treason,
both against the Persons Reset, and their Resetters. Act Ja. 6. Par. 16. Cap.
18. That all Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Excommunicat and Trafficking Papists,
common Enemies to all Christian Government, be apprehended and committed by all
Magistrates, until they be put out of the Kingdom, or punished conform to the
Acts of Parliament; and that none Reset them, under the Pains therein-exprest.
Act Charl. 2. Par. 1. Sess. 1. Cap. 8. That all Jesuits, Priests, and
Trafficking Papists remove forth of the Kingdom, under the Pain of Death: And
Act Charl. 2. Par. 3. Cap. 6. Requiring all Judges and Officers, to put the
Laws against Popery and Papists, to full and vigorous Execution; Yet
nevertheless, several Popish Priests, Jesuits and Trafficking Papists, presume
to Resort within, and Infest this Kingdom: Therefore We, with Advice of the
Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to Command, and hereby strictly
Command and Charge all Sheriffs, Lords of Regality, Stewarts and Baillies, and
all their Deputs, and all Magistrates of Burghs, Justices of Peace, and other
Officers of the Law whatsoever, to cause Search for, Seek and Apprehend, within
their respective Bounds, all Jesuits, Priests and Trafficking Papists, that
shall be found within the same; and that they immediately cause Transport them,
when apprehended, under sure Guard from Sheriff to Sheriff, as use is, to the
Tolbooth of Edinburgh, where the Magistrates of Edinburgh, and Keepers of the
said Tolbooth, are to receive and detain them Prisoners, until they be
Punished, or Banished conform to the said Act, as Our Privy Council shall
appoint. And further, We with Advice foresaid, Command and Charge the said
Sheriffs, Magistrates, and other Officers of the Law, to take up the Names of
all Resetters of Priests, Jesuits, and Trafficking Papists within their Bounds,
with their Designations, and the Names of such Witnesses as can give Evidence
against them: As also, that they take up the Names and Designations of all
Popish Pedagogues, Schoolmasters and Mistrisses within their Bounds, and
Transmit the same to the Clerk of Our Privy Council with all Diligence:
Certifying the said Sheriffs, Magistrates, and other Officers of the Law, that
if they failie in the Premises, and to give a Return of their Diligence to the
Clerk of Our Privy Council, betwixt and the first Day of June next to come,
they shall be Summoned to appear, and severely punished according to their
Demerit, OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and we Charge you straightly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the remanent Market Crosses of the several Head Burghs within this
Kingdom; and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make
Publication hereof, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to
be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourth Day of March, and of Our Reign
the ninth Year, School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anne DOM. School.


