A PROCLAMATION Discharging English Clipt-Money.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith to (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms,
Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting; Forasmuch as, the Leidges of this Our Ancient Kingdom, do sustain a
great and growing Prejudice, by the Inbringing and Passing of English Clipped
Money, which is far under the true Value. Therefore, and for Remedy of the
foresaid Abuse, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought
fit to Discharge, likeas We hereby Discharge the said English clipped Money to
pass in payments, from, and after the Twentieth day of this instant Month of
May, except by Weight, conform to the Standard of this Kingdom, at the Rate
after-mentioned, viz. The Crown Piece at the Rate and Weight of fourteen Drop
and an half, the Half Crown Piece, at seven Drop and nine Grains, the Shilling
Sterling Piece, at two Drop, thirty two Grains, and the Sixpence Sterling
Piece, at one Drop and sixteen Grains; declaring, that none of Our Leidges
shall from and after the said day, be oblidged to take the same in payments,
save by Weight, as said is, providing, nevertheless, that all English Money
Vnclipt, shall pass after the same manner, and at the same Rate as it was in
use to pass, before the emitting of this Proclamation. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE,
and We charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent their Our Letters
seen, ye pass, to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-crosses of
the hail Head-burghs of all the Shires within this Kingdom; and there by open
Proclamation, make Intimation hereof, that none may pretend Ignorance; and
ordains these presents to be printed.

Given under our Signet, at Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of May, and of Our
Reign the seventh Year. Per Actum Dominorun Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1695.


