PROCLAMATION Discharging the Export, and allowing the Import of Victual.
WILLIM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjuctly and severally, specially Constitute,
Greeting: For asmuchas, through the Goodness of GOD in the last seasonable
Harvest, there wants not sufficiency of Victual for subsisting of all Our
Liedges at reasonable and easy Rates, if on the one hand, the Exporting of
Victual to Foreign Places, and on the other hand, the ill Practices of
Forstallers and Regraters, do not hinder so great a Benefit. Therefore, and
for preventing these Inconveniences, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, hereby most strictly prohibit and discharge the exporting forth of
this Kingdom by any Person whatsoever, either by Sea or Land, All, or any Kinds
of Victual, either Meal, Wheat, Rye, Oats, Pease, Barley or Bear, Malted or not
Malted, or any other Grain or Victual whatsoever ( Except what shall be found
necessary to be exported for the use of the COMPANY trading to AFRICA and the
INDIES) after the Day and Date of these presents, under the pain of
forefaulting the Victual offered to be exported, for the use of the Poor of the
Bounds where the samen shall be Attacted and Seized, or the value thereof, when
the same is proven to be Exported, and of the Horse, Ship, Boat, or other the
Veessels whreeby the samen shall be attempted to be exported, with the Sum of
Ten Pounds Scots for each Boll that shall be proven to be exported, or seized
when transporting, to be paid by the Owner, Skipper, or Transporter; And We
hereby Require and Command all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies and their Deputs,
Magistrates of Burghs, Justices of Peace, or other Officers of the Law, to see
and cause these Presents to be put to strict Execution, in all Points as they
will be answerable, And farther, We hereby Authorize and Require Our Customers,
and all Collectors, Surveyers, Waiters, and other Officers at Seaports, and
generally all Our Liedges, to discover and sease the Victual that shall be
Exported, or offered to be Exported, Promising and Allowing them the half of
the pecunial Pains abovementioned for their Reward, and that they themselves
shall be subject to the like Pains as the Skipper or Owner for the Victual that
shall be found exported through their Default, Neglect or Connivance. And
farther, We with Advice foresaid, for the more effectual disappointing of the
foresaid ill Practices of Forestallers and Regraters, do hereby permit and
allow the importing of all sorts of Foreign Victual, whether by Natives or
Strangers from any foreign Kingdom or Country whatsoever, and that ay and
while this present License shall be discharged or Recalled. Our Will is
herefore, and We charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Market cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-crosses of the haill Head-burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries
within this Kingdom, and to all the several Sea-Port-Towns within the same, and
make Publication hereof, and Appoints Our Solicitor to transmit a sufficient
Number of Copies hereof to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, Stewarts of
Stewartries; Baillies of Regalities, their Deputs or Clerks, to be published at
their several Burghs, and likeways sent by them to the Magistrates of the
several Sea Port Towns, there to be published by them under the Certification
foresaid; As also Appoints Our Solicitor to deliver a sufficient Number of
Copies of their presents to the Taxmen of Our Customs, to be sent by them to the
several Ports and Places of this Kingdom, where they keep Offices for
collecting and in bringing of Our Customs, to be published thereat by the
Collector or Surveyer residing there for the time, and Ordains these Presents
to be Printed that none pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the fourteenth day of December, and of Our
Reign the Eleventh Year 1699. Ex deliberatione Dominorum Secreti Concilii.
GILB. ELIOT. Cli. Sti. Concilii.

God save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1699.


