royal English blazon or coat of arms W M R R
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

A PROCLAMATION, Anent the Militia.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren
Heralds, Pursevants, Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute Greeting:
Forasmuch as by the thirty second Act, Parliament One thousand six hundred and
eighty five, The ordinary Rendezvouze of Our Established Militia, was
Discharged for the Ease of Our People, during Our Pleasure; And now We having
thought fit for the good of Our Service, and for the better preserving the
Peace and Security of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and preventing the further
progress of the Unnatural Rebellion, which has of late been maintained within
the same; and Defending Our good Subjects and Government, from all unjust
Attempts that may be made thereon by the Barbarous- Irish-Papists, or any other
Our Enemies, That three parts of four of the Established Militia respective
after-mentioned, should be in readiness for Our Service, conform to the Laws
made thereanent, And for the better Ordering, and more timely sending out, and
furnishing the said Militia, We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby
Nominat, and Appoint such Commissioners of the Assessment, Imposed by Our Act
of Parliament of the Date the seventh day of June last bypast, who have, or
shall qualify themselves for, and accept of the said Trust, by taking the Oath
of Allegiance and Assurance, conform to the Acts of Parliament made thereanent,
betwixt and the respective Days hereby appointed for their Meeting, inclusive,
with the Colonels, Lieutenant-Collonels, Majors, Captains, and Lieutenants of
the said Militia, to be Commissioners of Our said Militia; And hereby require
and Command them to meet at the Head-Burghs of the respective Shires within
this Kingdom, in manner, and upon the Days following, viz. The Shires of
Elgine, Bamff, Nairn, Ross, Inverness, and all be north the same, upon the
eleventh Day of June next, at ten a Clock in the forenoon; and the rest of the
Shires within this Kingdom, upon the fourth Day of the said Month of June, and
hour foresaid, There to Deliberat upon, and follow forth, such Methods as they
shall judge most conduceable for timely Out-reik of the said Militia,
sufficiently provided for Our Service, specified in the Acts of Parliament,
made thereanent. And We, with Advice foresaid, Nominat and Appoint, the Persons
following, to be Conveeners of the said Commissioners, in the Shires
respective after-mentioned, Declaring the plurality of these, who shall Conveen
in each Shire, to be a Quorum, to wit, For the Shire of Haddingtoun, Sir Robert
Sinclar of Stevinson, Sheriff thereof; For the Shire of Edinburgh, Sir John
Maitland of Ravelrig, one of the Senators of the College of Justice; For the
Shire of Berwick, Sir John Hume of Blackader; For the Shire of Roxburgh, the
Earl of Tarras; For the Shire of Selkirk, John Scot of Well; For the Shire of
Peebles the Larid of Blackbarony elder, and in his absence Richard Murray of
Spittlehaugh his Brother. For the Shire of Lanerk William Baillie of
Lammingtoun; For the Shires of Nithisdale and Drumfreis, Sir Thomas Kilpatrick
of Closeburn: For the Shire of Wigtoun, Sir Andrew Agnew of Lochnaw: For the
Shire of Air, the Earl of Cassils, and in his absence the Master of Cathcart;
For the Shire of Dumbartoun, John Campbel Captain of Carrick: For the Shire of
Argile, the Earl of Argile, and in his absence Sir Colin Campbel of Ardkinles;
For the Shire of Bute (...) Boyd of Kelburn: For the Shire of Renfrew the Lord
Blantire; For the Shire of Stirling, Sir Alexander Hope of Kerse, and in his
absence William Cunninghame younger of Buquhan: For the Shire of Linlithgow
(...) Dundass of that Ilk; For the Shire of Perth, Adam Drummond of Maginsch;
For the Shire of Kincardin, the Viscount of Arbuthnet: For the Shire of
Aberdene the Earl of Kintore, and in his absence Sir John Forbes of Cragivar*
For the Shire of Inverness, Lodowick Grant of that Ilk, and in his absence
(...) Cuthbert of Castlehill, For the Shire of Nairn, Sir Hugh Campbel of
Calder: For the Shire of Cromarty William Urquhart of Braelangwell: For the
Shire of Fife, Mr. James Melvil of Cassingray; For the Shire of Kinross. Robert
Douglas of Kirkness; For the Shire of Forfar (...) Erskin of Dunn; For the
Shire of Bamff, Sir James Baird of Achmedden: For the Stewartry of
Kirkcudbright, the Viscount of Kenmure; For the Shire of Southerland (...)
Gordon younger of Embor; For the Shire of Caithness, Sir James Sinclar of May;
For the Shire of Elgine (...) Dumbar Sheriff of Murray; For the Shire of
Clackmannan, John Keiry of Gogar; and for the Shire of Ross, the Lord of
Balnagoun: Requiring and Commanding the said respective Conveeners, to cause
the Clerks to the Commissioners of Supply, who are hereby also Appointed Clerks
to the Commissioners of Militia, to cause due and punctual Intimation to be
made of their Presents at the Doors of the several Kirks and Meeting Houses
within the respective Shires, before the Days of Rendezvouze afternamed, upon
a Sunday in the Forenoon, after Divine Service, and that the said
Commissioners Do and Perform every other thing requisite and necessary, for the
speedy and effectual sending out of the said three fourth parts of the said
Militia, conform to the Laws and Acts of Parliament made thereanent; and that
all persons liable in the Out-reik of the Horse Militia within the Shires
afternamed, Do peremptorly send out their respective proportions of the said
three fourth Parts of their Militia Horse, with their best Arms and Furniture
to be Rendezvouzed, upon the Days, at the places, and under the Command of the
Persons after expressed, To wit, The Shire of Edinburgh, their proportion of
Horse, to be Rendezvouzed at the Links of Leith, the sixteenth day of June next
to come, at ten hours in the forenoon, under the Command of (...) Earl of
Lothian as Captain, Sir John Clerk of Pennicook as Lieutenant, with power to
the said Earl to make choice of one to serve as Coronet, and report his Name to
the Council: The Shire of Roxburgh, their proportion of Horse to be
Rendezvouzed at Ancrum-Bridge, the sixteenth day of June next to come, at ten
hours in in the forenoon, under the Command of Walter Earl of Tarras, as
Captain (...) Ker of Cherritrees as Lieutenant, with power to the said Earl to
make choice of one to serve as Coronet, and report his Name to the Council, to
be approven of by them; The Shires of Peebles and Selkirk their proportion of
Horse, to be Rendezvouzed at Selkir the said sixteenth day, and hour foresaid,
under the Command of Sir Archibald Murray of Blackbarrony as Captain, and James
Pringl^ of Torwoodlee as Lieutenant; The Shire of Berwick, their Horse at
Fogo-muir the said day and hour, under the Command of Patrick Lord Polwart
Captain, Sir John Hume of Blackader Lieutenant; The Shire of Haddingtoun, their
Horse at Beenstoun-muir, the said day and hour, under the Command of the Lord
Belhaven Captain, John Sinclar ^ounger of Stevinson Lieutenant, and William
Hepburn of Beinstoun Coronet; The Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan, their
Horse at Stirling, the said day and hour, under the Command of Sir Alexander
Hope of Kerse Captain, and William Cunninghame younger of Boquhan Lieutenant;
The Shire of Perth, their proportion of Horse at Perth, the said day and hour,
the one Troop thereof to be Commanded by the Lord Rollo as Captain, and
Alexander Spittal of Leuchat as Lieutenant, and the other of the said Troops
to be Commanded by Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffin as Captain: The Shire of
Forfar their Horse, at Dundee the said day and hour, under the Command of (...)
Erskin of Dunn as Captain, and Alexander Duncan of Lundie as Lieutenant; The
Shires of Kincardin, Aberdene and Bamff, their Horse at Aberdene the said day
and hour, one Troop thereof under the Command of the Earl of Kintore, another
under Sir Thomas Burnet of Leyes, and a third under the Command of Sir James
Gordon of Lesmore as Captains, and John Hume of Ninewells as Lieutenant to the
Troop from the Shire of Kincardine; The Shires of Elgin, Nairn, Ross,
Crommarty, and both divisions of the Shire of Inverness their Horse, at
Inverness the twenty fourth day of the said Month of June next, and hour
foresaid, one Troop thereof under the Command of David Ross of Balnagoun as
Captain, and Sir Alexander Mckenzie of Coul as Lieutenant, and the other of the
said Troops by (...) Dumbar Sheriff of Murray as Captain. And We with Advice
foresaid, Do hereby Authorize and Empower the Officers of Horse abovenamed, to
elect and make choice of such Persons as they think meetest to supply and serve
as Officers of Horse under them, where they are not named, they always sending
in Lists thereof to Our Privy Council, to be approven of by them. And sicklike,
We with Advice foresaid, hereby strictly Require and Command, That all persons
liable in the Outreik of Militia, in the Shires after-named, do peremptorly
send out their respective proportions of the three fourth parts of their Foot
Militia, with their best Arms, to be Rendezvouzed upon the days, at the
places, and under the Command of the persons after-mentioned, viz. The Town of
Edinburgh, Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and Shire of Linlithgow, their Foot,
to be Rendezvouzed upon the Links of Leith, the sixteenth day of June next, at
ten in the forenoon, under the Command of Henry Lord Cardross, as Colonel of
that Regiment, and such a Lieutenant-Collonel as shall be named by the
Magistrates of Edinburgh; The Shire of Wigtoun and Stewartry of Kirkcudbright
their proportion of the said Foot at Wigtoun the sixteenth day of June next,
and hour foresaid, under the Command of the Viscount of Kenmuir as Colonel,
William Gordon of Craig as Lieutenant Colonel, James Dumbar of Mochrum as
Major; The Shire of Nithisdale and Drumfreis, their proportion of Foot, the
said day and Hour at Drumfreis, under the Command of Sir Thomas Kilpatrick of
Closeburn, as Lieutenant Colonel, and (...) of Eccle as Major; The Shires of
Air and Renfrew, their proportion of Foot, at Air the said day and hour, under
the Command of the Earl of Cassils as Colonel, the Master of Cathcart
Lieutenant ^ollonel, and Major Hugh Buntine as Major; The Shires of Argile,
Bute and Dumbartoun their proportion of Foot at Dumbartoun, the said day and
hour: For the Shires of Dumbartoun, and Bute, and for Argile-Shire at Inverary
the said day and hour, under the Command of Sir Colin Campbel of Ardkindles as
Colonel, John Campbel Captain of Carrick Lieutenant Colonel; The Shires of
Fife and Kinross, their proportion of the said Foot at Edinsmuir, the said day
and hour, the West Regiment thereof to be Commanded by James Earl of Mortoun as
Colonel, (...) Douglas of Strathendrie Lieutenant Colonel, and (...) Young of
Kirktoun as Major, and the other Regiment to be Commanded by Robert Master of
Burligh as Colonel, Sir David Arnot of (...) as Lieutenant Colonel, and
Robert Douglas of Kirkness Major; The Shire of Lanerk, their proportion of the
said Foot at Hamiltoun, the said day and hour under the Command of the Duke of
Hamiltoun as Colonel, John Lord Carmichael as Lieutenant Colonel, and (...)
as Major; The Shires of Southerland and Caithness, their proportions of the
said Foot at Dornoch, the twenty fourth day of June next, and hour foresaid,
under the Command of the Lord Strathnaver as Colonel, John Gordon younger of
Embo Lieutenant Colonel, and Adam Gordon of Dalfollie Major; The Foot within
the Shires of Orknay and Zetland upon such days, and at such places as Robert
Elphingstoun of Lapness, Our Stewart of Orknay (whom We with Advice foresaid
Appoint to Command the same as Colonel) shall make Public Intimation of, at
the several Church-Doors for that effect, that they may be in readiness when
required, or called forth to Our Service. And We, with Advice foresaid, Do
hereby Authorize and Empower, the Officers of Foot abovenamed, to elect and
make choice of such persons as they think meetest to supply and serve as
Officers of Foot under them, where they are not named, they always sending in
Lists thereof to Our Privy Council, to be Approven of by them. Hereby strictly
Charging and Commanding, all Heretors, Liferenters, and others, any manner of
way liable in Outreik of the said Horses and Foot, to give punctual obedience
to this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, under the pains contained in the Acts of
Parliament anent Our Militia: Hereby likewise Requiring and Commanding, all
Persons, whether Officers or Soldiers of the said Horse and Foot, to give
cheerful and ready Obedience to those entrusted by Us in this Command, as they
will be Answerable at their highest Peril. And to the effect the said Militia
Troops of Horse and Foot may be furnished with a due Subsistence so long as We
think fit to keep them together; We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Declare,
that We will take care the Officers of the said Troops and Regiments be duly
paid by Us, sicklike and in the same manner as they were in use to be paid by
Our Royal Predecessors when Employed and made use of by Them. And We hereby
Require and Command, under the Pains abovementioned, all Persons liable in
Outreik of the ordinary Troopers and Foot-Soldiers of the said Militia now to
be sent forth by them, to Advance and put in the Hands of the several
Collectors of the respective Shires Forty Days Payment, at the rate specified
in the Act of Parliament for the number of Horse or Foot, according as they are
now to be sent out by the said Shires, which the said Collector is to pay
forth to the said Troops of Horse or Foot from time to time, during their
continuance together in Our Service, and how far the said Forty Days Pay shall
not be expended by the Collectors, they shall be bound and obliged to give
allowance thereof in the fore-end of the Cess due and payable by the Heretors
and others liable in Outreik of the said Militia; and that the said Troops of
Horse and Regiments of Militia Foot may be accommodat, and suitably furnished
with Trumpets, Standards, Drums and Colors formerly provided by the Shires,
We hereby Require and Command, all and sundry Heretors, Officers and others, in
whose Possession, Custody or Keeping, any of the said Trumpets, Standards,
Drums or Colors are, to deliver up the same to any of the respective Officers
abovenamed, upon their Receipt therefore, to be made use of by them in their
several Troops or Regiments for Our Service, and made furth-coming upon the
like Occasions in time coming; with Certification to such as shall refuse or
delay the delivering up thereof, they shall be looked upon as disaffected
Persons to Us and Our Government, and Obstructers of Our Service, and pursued
and punished therefore accordingly. And We with Advice foresaid, Ordain the
whole Officers of Foot and Horse abovenamed, and others to be chosen by them,
to attend their Charges at the said Dyets of Rendezvouze, and the Heretors and
other Outreikers of the Soldiers, to have their Men present, Furnished and
Habile according to Law, and advance the said Forty Days Pay in the hands of
the Collector of the Shire; with Certification to the said Officers, Heretors
and others, if they neglect their Duty herein, they shall be proceeded against
by Fining, Poynding and Quartering, and other Pains, conform to the Laws and
Instructions made thereanent, and Ordains the Commissioners of Militia to order
Parties for Poynding and Quartering immediately after the said days of
Rendezvouze, upon such as shall be deficient therein. And We with Advice
foresaid, Appoint the Muster-master-General by himself or his Deputs, to be
present at the several Rendezvouze, and to return an account to Our Council of
the Absents and Deficients, that they may be proceeded against accordingly. OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and several
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Kingdom, and Burghs of Regality and
Stewartrie, and several Paroch-Churches within the same, upon a Sunday in the
Forenoon after Divine Service, and other places needful, and there in Our Name
and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of the Premises, that
none pretend Ignorance. And We Ordain Our Solicitor to transmit Copies hereof
to the Clerks of the Commissioners of Assessment of the several Shires
abovementioned, to be by the said Clerks communicate to the Conveeners
respective, and Intimat at the several Church and Meeting Houses Doors in
manner above mentioned, as ye will Answer to Us thereupon. The which to do, We
Commit to you conjunctly and severally Our full Power by these Our Letters,
delivering them by you duly Execute and Indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty Ninth Day of May, And of Our
Reign the Third Year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOMINI. 1691.


