C R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the levying or transporting of Soldiers without
License.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith
to (...) Macers or Messengers at arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly
and severally, specially, constitute, Greeting;
forasmuch, as, We by Our Proclamation, dated the twenty third day of July, one
thousand six hundred, and seventy four years, did prohibit and discharge any
person or persons to Levy any men in this Kingdom or to take or transport any
of Our Subjects thereof into the service of any foreign Prince or State,
without Our special License: and discharged all Masters of ships to receive on
board, or transport them under all highest pains to be inflicted on the
contraveeners. Requiring thereby the fermorers of Our Customs and Excise their
collectors and waiters, to take special notice of any such persons whom they
should find passing forth of this Kingdom upon the foresaid account; and to
stop them in their passage, as they would be answerable: And if need were, that
they require the concurrance of the Magistrates of Burghs and others in
authority under Us, to be aiding and assisting to them therein. Likeas, We by
another Proclamation, of the date, the first day of October, the year foresaid
did renew Our said Proclamation; and further, did prohibit and discharge all
masters of ships to receive on board or to transport to any foreign country
any subjects of this Kingdom, who had been levied without Our special license,
or any other (...) who are not (...) or seamen, unless they had a pass under
the hand of any one of Our (...) authorize and require any of Our privy
Counselors upon information given, that any of Our subjects of this Kingdom,
soldiers or others were taken on to serve in any foreign country without
warrant as said is, to cause stop them in their passage and imprison them and
to cause seize upon and secure the persons who had engaged them, or should be
known to have been dealing with and seducing them thereto, until they should
find caution, to answer for the some, and that they should not levy nor
transport any of Our subjects to any foreign service with power to any Privy
Counselor to give such orders as should be necessary for that effect to the
magistrates of Burghs or any of the standing forces, who are thereby required
to put these orders inexecution as they will be answerable at their highest
peril; and it is thereby declared, that such persons as had already
contraveened the foresaid Proclamation should be proceeded against and consored
conform to the tenor thereof, as at length is contained in the said
Proclamations. And whereas upon diverse important and weighty considerations,
We have thought fit again to renew Our said former Proclamation. We therefore,
with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do (...) Proclamations
aforesaids and ordains the same to continue and stand in full force and to be
punctually observed and put in execution in time coming after the form and
tenor thereof, and under the pains and certifications therein contained in all
points. And ordains these persents to be printed, and publication to be made
thereof at the market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places that none pretend
ignorance. The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally Our full
power be their Our Letters, delivering (...) duly execute and (...) again to
the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the tenth day of June, one thousand six
hundred and seventy (...) and of Our Reign, the (...) ^eventh year. Al. Gibson
Cl. Sti. Concilii.

(...) to the King's most Excellent MAJESTY


