A PROCLAMATION
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as We Understanding that there are Copper-Coyn, Imported from
Abroad, and passing in this Our Kingdom, which is a great abuse to the Nation,
and prejudice to Our Mint: We therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council, for
preventing thereof, Do hereby strictly Prohibit and Discharge, all Merchants,
Skippers, Mariners and others, To Import into this Kingdom, after Publication
hereof, any Doyts, or other Copper-Coyn, from France, Holland, or any place
from Abroad, under the pain of Confiscation thereof, the one half to Our Use,
and the other half to the Discoverer, or Informer, besides what other
punishment We, (...) Our Council shall think fit to Inflict upon the
Contraveeners. And further, We Do hereby Prohibit and Discharge the foresaid
Doyts, or other Copper-Coyn, from France, or Holland, or any Copper-Coyn, but
what is under Our Royal Stamp, to pass within this Kingdom hereafter, or any of
Our Subjects to receive the same ^s Coin, as they will be answerable: And
Authorize, and hereby Require all Customers, Waiters, Collectors and others, To
seize upon, and appropriat to their own use, any of the said Foreign
Copper-Coyn, wherever they can find, or discover the same; Requiring all
Magistrates, Officers and Soldiers of Our Forces to be concurring and assisting
hereto, when required, as they will answer at their perril; And to the end Our
Pleasure in the Premises may be made Notour and Known; Our Will is, and We
Charge you strictly, and Command, That incontinent, these Our Letter seen, ye
pa^s to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and thereat,
in Our Royal Name and Authority, make open Proclamation, and publication of the
Premises, that none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twentieth day of May One Thousand six
hundred eighty six Years. And of Our Reign the second Year. Per actum Dominorum
Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1686.


