C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the Importing of Foreign Linen, or Woolen Cloth,
Gold and Silver Thread, etc.
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute Greeting:
Forasmuch as the Lords of Our Privy Council, having for increase of Money, and
improvement of the Manufactures of this Kingdom, appointed a Committee, who
with advice of the Merchants, and other Persons experienced in these Affairs,
have agreed upon several Conclusions, which are with all possible convenience
and expedition, to be Formed into a Mature and Digested Proclamation, for
Regulation of the Manufacture and Trade of this Kingdom: But because several
Merchants may either by mistake, or upon a sinister design, give order for
Importing of these Goods which are Prohibited, Therefore to prevent all
inconveniences which may arise to this Our Ancient Kingdom, by the Import of
those Commodities, which are either to be debarred, as superfluous in
themselves, or supplied by Domestic Manufactures, or private Industry of Our
own Subjects, and to make the Importers thereof inexcusable; We with Advice of
Our Privy Council, Do hereby discharge the Importation of all Silver and Gold
Thread, Silver and Gold Lace, Fringes, or Tracing, all Buttons of Gold and
Silver Thread, all manner of Stuffs, or Ribbons in which there is any Gold or
Silver Thread, all Philagram Work: as also, all Foreign Holland-Linen,
Cambrick, Lawn, Dornick, Damesk, Tyking, Bousten, or Damety, Tutted or Stripped
Holland, Calligo, Musline, Selesia and East India Linen, and all other
Clothes, made of Linen or Cotton: As also, all Foreign Clothes and Stuffs
whatsomever, made of Wool-Yarn, o^ Wool and Lint: all Foreign Silk, and Woolen
Stockings: all Foreign Laces made of Silk, Gimp, or Thread, and all manner of
Laces and Point of any sort or Colors: all Foreign made Gloves, Shoes, Boots
and Slippers; And do hereby discharge all Merchants and others whatsomever, to
import into this Kingdom any of the foresaid Commodities, after the date
hereof; excepting only such as can be made appear upon Oath, to have been
ordered by preceding Commissions, and Shipped before the tenth of March
Instant; which time they have to recall their Commissions, if any such have been
given: With certification, that all such Goods which shall be Imported, shall
be burnt and destroyed, and the Importers and Ressetters shall be fined in the
value of the Goods so Imported: and that if any Tacksmen of the Customs,
Collectors or Waiters, shall connive at the inbringing thereof, they shall be
likewise punished by payment of the value of the Goods Imported, and by being
removed from all Charge relating to Our Customs, or any Employments depending
thereupon. And We ordain these Presents to be Printed, and Published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, that none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the first day of March, One thousand six
hundred eighty and one, And of Our Reign, the thretty three Year. Per actum
Deminorum Secreti Concilij. PAT. MENZIES. Cl. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.


