PROCLAMATION Pole Money, and other Points relating thereto.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privvy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuchas, the Pole money for two years granted to Us by the 12, and 25th.
Acts of the last Session of Our current Parliament, is set in Tack, and fermed
with the benefit of the Acts of Parliament imposing the same; And considering
that the time of payment of the said first years Pole Money, does now approach
and draw near, and that sundry of Our Leidges by Negligence or otherways, may
be obnoxious and in hazard of incurring the Penalty contained in the foresaid
Act of Parliament, if they shall not make due and punctual payment of their
respective Pole Money, in manner, and within the time therein prefixed, to such
Collectors, and at such places as shall be appointed for that effect. For
preventing of which Inconveniency, and that none may pretend Ignorance; We with
Advice of the Lords of Our privy Council, hereby Require and Command the
Sheriffs of the several Shires within this Kingdom, and their Deputes, to cause
Intimation be made at the several paroch Kirk-Doors within this Kingdom, after
the Forenoons Sermon, upon the last Lords Day of this current Month of
December, to all Our Leidges liable in payment of Pole Money, that without
faill they make payment of the Sums of Money wherein they are liable as
Pole Money to the Collectors of our Cess and Supply, within the several Shires
respective, at the Head-burgh of the said Shire, upon the first day of January
next to come, or within thirty days thereafter, certifying such as shall not
make punctual payment at the said first day of January, or within the said
thirty days thereafter, they shall be liable in the double, if paying within
other thirty days thereafter; Or if faileing after both the said thirty days,
in the Quadruple of their Pole. And We with Advice foresaid, Require and
Command the Commissioners of Supply and Assessment within the several Shires
of this Kingdom, to meet and conveen betwixt and the first day of January next
to come, at their ordinary place of Meeting, and there to Call and Conveen
before them the Collectors of the Cess and Supply within their respective
Shires, and require them within eight days after the said Meeting, to find the
same Soverty and Caution, or such other alse sufficient Caution for whom they
shall be answerable, for their faithful collecting of the foresaid Pole Money
conform to the Books and Lists to be given to them by our said Farmers, of the
poleable Persons within the said respective Shires; and that they shall make
good faithful and timeous payment of the said Pole Money, and of what shall be
uplifted and collected by them of the same any manner of way, to William
Cochran of Fergusly Farmer of the said Pole Money, or any having his Order, and
that at the end of each thirty Days of grace given by the Act of Parliament,
and with a list of the particular payments made in each of the said thirty
Days, subscribed by the said Collectors, and to be by them given in to the
said William Cochran of Ferguslie and his foresaids; Certifying the said
Collectors of Cess and Supply, who shall fail to find Caution for the effect
foresaid within the time above-prefixt, they shall ipso facto cease to be
Collectors of our Cess and Supply, and shall beutterly incapable to be
continued any longer in the said Office; But the said Commissioners of Cess
and Supply, are hereby Authorized, and required immediately after the elapsing
of the foresaids Days, to meet and make choice of, nominate and appoint some
other sufficient and responsal person to be Collector of the Cess and Supply
within their Shire, and of the Pole Money imposed by the foresaid Act of
Parliament, who shall find good and sufficient Caution in manner foresaid not
only for collecting our Cess and Supply, but for the effectual collecting and
paying in the foresaid Pole Money to the said William Cochran Fermer thereof,
in manner abovementioned: And We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the
said Collectors, finding Caution in manner foresaid, to give their Attendance
at the Head-burghs of the several Shires, from and after the first day of
January next to come, for Collecting, Receiving and uplifting the said
Pole Money, in the same way and manner that they give their Attendance for
receiving the Cess and Supply, and that during the two Months of January and
February next to come, and to grant Discharges gratis, but always of true Dates
to the several persons concerned, upon payment of the Pole Money, expressing
the Sums paid by them and the said several Collectors of Supply within the
several Shires, are hereby allowed to retain in their own Hands One per Cent of
the whole Pole Money collected and uplifted by them within their respective
Shires, for their Pains and Travel in the Premises: And We with Advice
foresaid, Require and Command all persons liable in Pole Money, to make due and
punctual payment thereof at the Head-Burghs of the several Shires, to such
persons who shall be Collectors of Supply within the s^men, after the first of
January next to come, under the Pains contained in the said Act of Parliament,
and herein expressed, and the Discharges to be granted by the said Collectors in
manner abovementioned, shall be als sufficient to the Receivers thereof, as if
the samen had been granted by the said William Cochran of Ferguslie Our Fermer
himself. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and remanent Mercat-crosses of the haill Head-burghs o^ the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in our Name and Authority make
Publication here of, and We ordain our Solicitor to transmit a sufficient
Number of printed Copies hereof to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, Stewarts
of Stewartries, to be by them sent to the Ministers of the several Paroches
within their Bounds to be published after Divine Service in the Forenoon upon
the said last Lords day of December current. And ordains these presents to be
printed and published, that none may pretend Ignorance.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the fifteenth day of December, and of Our
Reign the Tenth year School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concili. GILB. ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. School.


