C R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION
Anent the REBELS, who have not yet taken the Bond.
CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lovits (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally specially constitute, Greeting:
We being desirous to satisfy, not only the reasons, but to take off the
pretexts of such Our rebellious Subjects as are reclaimable, Have, upon
information given to Us, that some of these who were ignorantly engaged in the
Rebellion against Us at (...)bridge, did not know of the Proclamation
concerning the Indemnity offered by Us, Resolved, to the end both Our Justice
and Clemency might appear yet more convincingly to all those of this Our
ancient Kingdom who have not accepted of Our former Indemnity, To grant them a
further Diet for taking the Bond therein mentioned; And in order thereunto, We,
with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby declare, that
whosoever of the said Rebels (not being Heretors, Ministers, or Ringleaders)
shall, betwixt and the first day of March next, appear before the persons
afternamed, The Sheriff-principal of the respective Shires, or their Deputes,
or the Clerks of the Council, and declare, that they are heartily sorry for
their being engaged in the said Rebellion, and subscribe a Bond, that hereafter
they shall not take up Arms against Us or Our Authority, and thereupon obtain a
Certificat recorded in the Books of Council, That they shall be hereby fully
indemnified for their engagement in, or accession to, the said Rebellion;
Providing always, that this Our Indemnity shall not be extended to such as
were accessory to the horrid and barbarous murder of the late Archbishop of St.
Andrews, nor to any Ministers, Heretors or Ringleaders; And with this express
Provision and Declaration likewise, That this Our Indemnity shall not extend to
such as are already taken prisoners, or shall not have taken the Bond before
they be apprehended, if they be not apprehended six weeks after intimation has
been made hereof in the respective Shires where they dwell. And because this is
to be the last Diet that Our Clemency can allow in this case, We do hereby
strictly command and require Our Privy Council and Commissioners of Justiciary,
to proceed according to Law against such of the said Rebels as shall be found
not to have taken the said Bond betwixt and the said first of March, though
they have not been apprehended within that time, or such as being apprehended,
have not taken the Bond within six weeks after the said intimation in the
respective Shires. And to the effect, all persons concerned may have notice
hereof, Our will is, and We charge you strictly and command, that incontinent,
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other
places needful, and there, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation,
make publication of the premises, that none pretend ignorance. And we Ordain
these presents to be printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the seventh day of October, one thousand
six hundred and eighty, and of Our Reign, the two and thirtieth year. AL.
GIBSON, Cl. Sti. Concilii.
Follows the names of these appointed to take Bond from the Rebels in the
respective Shires following.

For the Shire of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Linlithgow, Perth, Roxburgh, Selkirk,
Lanerk, Dumfreise, Air, The Lord Collingtoun. The Earl of Wintoun. The Earl of
Linlithgow. The Marquess of Montrose. The Earl of Roxburgh. The Lord of
Haining. The Earl of Carnwath. The Earl of Queensberry. The Earl of Glencairn.
Dumbarioun, Fise and Kinross, Wigtoun, Stewartry of Kirkoudbright, Peebles,
Stirling, Renfrew, Berwick, The Earl of Wigtoun. The Lord Chancellor. The Lord
of Burghtown. Earl of Nithisdale. Sir William Murray of Ste^hope. The Earl of
Mar. The Lord Ross. The Earl of Home.

GOD save the KING.
EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson Printer to his (...).


