J R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION
Discharging the Exporting of Meal and Oats off the Kingdom till further Order.
Edinburgh, the 25th of May, 1685.
FOrasmuch as His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Lords of Privy Council,
Finding it necessary in the present juncture of Affairs, when His Majesty has
called out all Heretors, and the Militia, and His standing Forces, to attend
His Host, against His Enemies, That Victual should be secured for their use,
and not Exported abroad; Do therefore hereby strictly Prohibit and Discharge
any person or persons, upon what pr^t^xt soever, To send abroad from this
Kingdom, into any other Kingdom or place, any Meal or Oats whatsomever, until
further Order, notwithstanding of any real or pretended Contracts made to that
purpose, since His Majesty in the present Service, may have use for the same
(the owners being to be paid at the ordinary and reasonable Rates) And
discharges all Masters of Ships, Skippers, Mariners, and others, to suffer any
Meal or Oats to be Transported in their Ships, Boats or Barks, off this
Kingdom, during the space foresaid, as they will be answerable at their highest
peril; and Ordains all Collectors, Waiters and Custom^rs, to see obedience
given hereto, as they will answer in mannerforesaid; And these Presents to be
Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none
pretend Ignorance. Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council, by me

COL. McKENZIE, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anne Dom. 1685.


