royal blazon or coat of arms PROCLAMATION Discharging Export and allowing
Import of Victual.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as through the extraordinary unseasonableness
of the Weather for some Months past, and the misgiving of this Years Cropped and
Harvest; the Scarcity of Victual is Increased to that height, as threatens a
General distress and Calamity; So that it is most necessary that the
Prohibition of the Export of Victual made in the Month of May last, be renewed
and extended with all Severity, against all who shall presume to contemn Our
Authority, in a matter so just and Indispensiblie requisite for the relief of
the Poor, and Good and welfare of the Kingdom. Therefore We with Advice of the
Lords of our Privy Council, have thought fit to Prohibit, and hereby most
strictly Prohibit and Discharge the Exporting forth of this Kingdom by any
Person whatsoever, either by Land or by Sea, of all kinds of Victual, either
Meal, Wheat, Rye, Oats, Pease, Barley or Bear, Malted or not Malted, or any
other Grain or Victual whatsoever, after the day and date of these Presents,
under the pains following, viz. The Forfaulture of the Victual offered to be
Exported for the use of the Poor of the Bounds, where the same shall be
attached and seized, or the value thereof, where the samen is proven to be
Exported: As likewayes of the Forfaulture of the Horse, Ship, Boat or other
Vessel whereby the same shall be attempted to be Exported, and also of the pain
of ten Pounds Scots over and above for each Boll that shall be found to be
Exported or offered to be Exported, and proven or attacked and seized as said
is, to be paid by the Owner, Skipper or Exporter; And that such as shall be
found transgressing, and have not to pay the forsaid pains, shall be Punished
in their Bodies by Imprisonment, to be Fed with Bread and Water, or Scourging
at the discretion of the Judge. And We hereby require and charge all Sheriffs,
Steuarts, Baillies and their Deputs, Magistrates of Burghs, Justices of Peace,
and other Officers of the Law; to see and cause these Presents to be put to
strict Execution in all Points, with certification, if they shall be found
negligent or remiss, they shall be Punished by the Lords of Our Privy Council,
as Despisers of Our Authority, and Betrayers of the Trust reposed in them. And
Further, We do hereby Authorize Our Customers and all Collectors, Surveyers,
Waiters and other Officers at Seaports, and Generally all Our Leidges to
Discover, Attach and Sease the forsaid Victual that shall be Exported or
offered to be Exported as said is, promising and allowing them the half of the
Pecunial pains Abovementioned for their reward, with this certification, that
if they or any of them be remiss or negligent in the due Execution of the
Premises; So that Victual be Exported by Sea or Land, within the Bounds of
their Respective Precincts, they shall not only lose their Commissions, but be
themselves liable to the pains and Penalties for each Boll Exported, as the
Owner and Exporter are declared liable in manner Abovementioned: Likeas, We
hereby require all our said Judges, Magistrates and Officers of the Law, and
all Our said Customers, Collectors and their Officers Abovenamed, imediatly
to cause search to be made into all Ships, Boats and other Vessels within the
Ports and Roads of this Kingdom, for Victual to be Exported, and that they
Arreast and Stop the same, and the forsaids Vessels by taking away their Sails,
and otherwise, and cause the said Victual be instantly unloaded and brought on
Shore, for the use of the Owner, and to remain within the Country, and in case
any Victual already put on Board, or which shall be put on Board, shall be
pretended not to be Exported, but only Transported from one Port or Place to
another within the Kingdom, then and in that case, the Owners shall first find
sufficient Caution, under the pain of twenty Pounds Scots for each Boll, Acted
in the Books of the next Burghs Royal, and the Skippers shall give their Oath
before the Magistrates thereof, that they shall not Export, but only Transport,
as said is; And that they shall report a Certificat thereof upon it is Arrival
from the Port or Place to which it shall be Transported, certyfeing that what
Victual shall be offered to be otherways Transported from Port to Port within
this Kingdom, shall be held to be offered to be Exported contrary to this
Prohibition, and Liable to the pains thereof. And We with advice foresaid, for
the better ease and relief of the Country, do hereby permit and allow the
Import of all forts of Victual from all Foreign Parts, free of all Custom or
other Public Duty, and these presents to endure ay and while they be recalled.
OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries, and to
all the several Seaport Towns within this Kingdom, and make Publication
hereof, and appoints Our Solicitor to transmit a sufficient number of Coppies
hereof to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, Stewarts of Stewartries, Baillies
of Regalities, their Deputs or Clerks, to be Published at their several Burghs,
and likewayes sent by them to the Magistrates of the several Seaport Towns,
there to be Published by them, under the certification foresaid, as also
appoints Our Solicitor to deliver a sufficient Number of Coppies of their
Presents, to the Tacks-men of Our Customs, to be sent by them to the several
Parts and Places of this Kingdom, where they keep Offices for Collecting and
Imbringing of our Customs to be Published thereat by the Collector or
Surveyer, residing there for the time: And ordains these presents to be
Printed, that none pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Ninth Day of November, and of Our
Reign the Tenth Year, School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Auno Dom. School.


