PROCLAMATION Discharging all English Vnmilln'd-Money to pass, except by
Weight, and Allowing and Crying-up the English Milln'd Crown to Three Pound
five Shilling, with it is Fractions proportionally.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and severally, specially
Constitute, Greeting: For as much as, this Our Ancient Kingdom is much
prejudged by the importing of great Quantities of Light unmilln'd English Money
into the same, and that the Inconveniency thereby arising, is likely to
increass, since that kind of Money is no more current in the Kingdom of
England, except by Weight; And also We considering how expedient it is, that
the Milln'd-Money of England be raised, to a Proportion with other Coyns
presently current within this Kingdom: Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords
of Our Privy Council, have Discharged, and hereby discharge all English
Unmilln'd-money to pass in payments otherways than by Weight, at Four Shilling
Scots the Drop, making three Pounds four Shillings Scots for the Ounce, and so
proportionally upwards and downwards, according to the lesser and greater
Weight than the said Drop and Ounce; Providing, that in great payments the
weighing be by single Ounces, and their Fractions, and no greater Weight: And
We with Advice foresaid, peremptorly Require and Command all our Subjects to
receive the said English Unmilln'd-Money in all Payments, as current Money,
according to the Rate of Four shilling Scots the Drop-weight, and no otherwise,
under the Pain of being liable to the Double of what shall be refused, to be
summarly exacted, at the Instance, and for the use of the Offerer, by the
Determination of any Judge ordinary, to be given without any Process of Law; As
also, We with Advice foresaid, have Ordained, and hereby Ordain the Silver
Milln'd-Crown of England, to pass, and be received in all Payments, at Three
Pound five Shilling Scots, and the milln'd Half crown, milln'd Shilling, and
milln'd Sixpence of England, as the Fractions of the said milln'd Crown, to
pass, and be current in all Payments within this Our Kingdom, according to the
said Rate of the Crown proportionally to their Value, under the pain foresaid,
to be determined in manner above mentioned, and that none refuse to receive
Payments in the respective Species of Money from the Day and Date hereof, at
the Rates above-specified, under the Pains foresaids, as they will be
answerable. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the Mercat-crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and thereat in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Publication hereof that none pretend Ignorance: And Ordains
these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty third day of January, and of
Our Reign the eight year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno 1697.


