C R

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION,
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council Pursevants, and Messangers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Albeit by the blessing of Almighty God, upon Our Royal endeavors, the many
attempts of His and Our Enemies (made most impiously under pretense of Religion
and Zeal, against the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, and of this Our
Kingdom, designing the overthrow of Religion, Government, Liberty and Property,
have been frequently disappointed and defeated, and their malice turned upon
their own heads, and that the many Acts, both of Mercy and Justice, exerc'd by
Us, conform to the Laws of God and the Kingdom; and the great prudence,
vigilance, moderation and justice, of Our dearest and only Brother, during his
abode in, and Government under Us, of this Our Ancient Kingdom, have had such
happy success, as to bring Our good Subjects to further abhorrence of Fanatics
and their Impieties, and most of these who were misled by the lying Spirit of
some of their pretended Ministers, are shrunk from these ways, whereof they are
justly ashamed, so that Our People are brought nearer to that dutiful and
peaceable deportment which becomes Christians and Subjects: yet some are so
indefatigable in malice, as to continue and stir up others to disturb that
peace and tranquillity, which Our People may enjoy under Our Reign: in so much
as of late, some Traitors, Runnagats, and Fugitives, have convocat toward the
number of Eighty, with forbidden Weapons, and in unlawful manner, near to Tala
lin, in the Shire of Peebles, and the people in that Country, have been so
defective in the duties of loyal Subjects, or good Contrymen, as to neglect
giving timous notice of such Meetings or Actings, either to Our Council, the
Sheriff of the Shire, or the Commanders of Our Forces, who were nearest to
them; and this neglect of theirs being not only a breach of duty in them, but
of very bad example, and dangerous consequence, if practiced by others on such
emergments; We therefore, by Our Royal Authority, and also in conformity to the
whole course of Our Laws, particularly to the 144. Act of the 12. Parliament;
King James the 6 and 7. Act, Parl. 1. King James 1. Do hereby strictly Require
and Command, all the Subjects and Inhabitants within this Our Kingdom, whether
in Burgh or Land, upon knowledge or information, that any number of men do
convocat unlawfully in Arms, or appear in company in any place, or where any
one or two of such, as are declared Traitors or Fugitives from Our Laws, or
treasonable accounts, shall repair, that they shall with all diligence give
intimation thereof to Our Chancellor, and such others of Our Secret Council, as
shall be at Edinburgh: as also, without delay, that they give information to
any Commander of Our Forces, who shall be nearest to the place where the said
unlawful convocation, or such Traitors and Fugitives are, and to the Sheriff of
the Shire, Steward of the Stewardry, Bailie of the Regality, or Magistrates of
Burghs, where the said Meeting or Persons appear, or are informed to be, and
that within the space of one hour at most, for every three miles distance they
are at the time from Edinburgh, or from the nearest Commander of the Forces,
Sheriffs, and other Magistrates foresaid. And further, We do hereby Require and
Command Our said Sheriffs, Bailies and Magistrates, upon any such information
given to them, that they call together competent numbers of Our good Subjects,
and with these, do exact diligence, at the utmost of their power, to search,
seek, and apprehend these who are so met, and to present them to Justice, and
to follow them until they be apprehended, or expelled out of their
Jurisdiction, and on their flight, they are immediately to acquaint the
Magistrates of the next Shire, whether they are fled; who are hereby required to
do the like diligence, and so from Shire to Shire, until they be apprehended,
or expelled forth of this Realm: And in case any hurt or skaith fall out in the
pursuit, or in apprehending of these so unlawfully convocat, the actors thereof
are to be free, and unpunished in any manner of way; With certification, that
these whoever fails in their said respective duties, whether it be the
Magistrates, in not pursuance, or Our other Subjects, in not giving timous
information within the space foresaid, or in not rising with, and assisting the
Magistrates in their forementioned duties, they shall be held and repute as
disaffected to Our Government and Service, and as art and part, and connivers
with them in their said unlawful designs and convocations, and undergo the
punishment due to these who were of the said unlawful Convocation, by the Laws
of this Our Kingdom. And We hereby of new, intimate to all Our Subjects, that
whoever shall intercommune with, reset, supply, shelter, or give any comfort to
any declared Traitors or Fugitives; or who shall conceal, reset, or shelter any
who do convocat in manner foresaid, that such resetters or assisters, shall be
proceeded against, as if they were guilty of the Crimes whereof these Traitors
and Fugitives are guilty, according to the just rigor of Our Laws. Our Will is
herefore, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent, these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and hail the
Mercat-crosses of the Head-Burghs, and hail Paroch Kirks of this Kingdom, and
other places needful, and there, in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make publication of Our Royal Will and Pleasure in the Premises,
that none may pretend ignorance, but give cheerful and punctual obedience
thereto: The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally, Our full
Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you duly execute, and indorsed
again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Eighth day of July, One Thousand Six
Hundred Eighty Two Years. And of Our Reign the Thirtieth and fourth Year. Per
actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls.(...)
save the KING

