PROCLAMATION Discharging Bonfires and Illuminations.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuchas it is found, that on the occasion of
Illuminations, and other Expressions of public Joy, by Bonfires or otherways,
several Inconveniences and Abuses happen, no ways to be suffered or tollerat
under any civil Government: Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords, of Our
Privy Council, have thought fit to Prohibit and Discharge; Likeas, We hereby
prohibit and Discharge all Illuminations or Bonfires used for Expressions of
public Joy to be made in any Burgh within this Realm, or any pretense
whatsoever; Certifying all such as shall do on the contrair, or be accessory
thereto, that they shall be repute and punished as guilty of a Riot, and
Breakers of the public Peace; And farther, we with consent foresaid, do hereby
empower, and strictly Require all Magistrates of Burghs, and other Officers of
the Law that may be concerned, to do their outmost diligence, and if need beis,
to call for, and use the Assistance of such of Our Forces as shall be found
within their Bounds, for preventing and repressing thereof, and Seizing and
Apprehending the Contraveeners, as they will be answerable on their highest
perril. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Intimation of the Premises, that none pretend ignorance,
and Ordains these Presents to be Printed and Published.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty second day of June, and of Our
Reign the Twelfth year 1700. Per actum Dominorum secreti Consilii. GILB. ELIOT
Cls. sti. Consilii.

God save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anne Dom. 1700.


