PROCLAMATION Crying down the English Milned Crowns and Half-Crowns: Ordaining
the Old-Merk and Half-Merk-Pieces to Pass, and stopping the taking of Bullion,
at the Mint house.
WILLIAM by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland;
Defender of the Faith, To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially,
Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as by a Proclamation of the Date the twelfth
Day of July, one Thousand six Hundred and Ninety five Years: The rate of the
silver Milned Crown of England, was raised to three Pound six Shilling, and the
English milned Half Crown proportionally: And it being found prejudicial to the
Nation, that the said English Crowns and Half- Crowns should pass at a greater
Rate in this Kingdom, than they do in England. Therefore, We with Advice of the
Lords of Our Privy Council; have thought fit to Cry down the said Milned
English Crowns and Half- Crowns to the former Rate of Three pound, and one
pound ten shilling Scots respective, and ordains the samen only to pass at the
said Rates, and Discharges our General Master and other Officers of our Mint
to receive or take in the said English Crowns or Half-Crowns, as Bullion, or
any other Bullion to be Coined, after the Day and Date hereof, until further
Order from the Lords of Our Privy Council, under the pain of Tinsel of their
respective Offices, in case they Contraveen, and to be otherwise punished as
Our Privy Council shall think fit. And Prohibits and Discharges all Goldsmiths
and others to Melt down the said English Crowns and Half- Crowns, under the
pain of double of the Value of the said Money that shall be so melted down: And
Ordains the Magistrates of Royal Burghs, and Burghs of Regality, and others
within whose Bounds and Jurisdictions, there is any Goldsmiths or others
Melters of Money; To take Bond from the said Goldsmiths and others, that they
shall not melt down the said English Crowns and Half- Crowns, under the pain
foresaid: And impowers the said Magistrates to take the Oaths of the Goldsmiths
and others foresaids, that dwells within their respective Burghs and
Jurisdictiors, once every half year, and oftener if they see cause, or when
Persons Informs against them, if they have melted down any of the said Milned
English Crowns, or Half-Crowns, that they may be punished in manner
Abovementioned; the one half of the value of what shall be Proven to be melted
down to be applied for the use of the Burgh within which the said Goldsmiths,
or other Person who shall Contraveen dwells, and the other half to the
Informer. And forasmuch as, that notwithstanding of a former Proclamation, of
the date the twenty eight of January last, Ordaining the Old Scots Merk, and
half Merk Pieces to Pass amongst all Persons within this Kingdom as current
Money, yet many presume to refuse the said Old Merk and Half-merk pieces in
payments, upon pretense that by long use they are become Barer, and appears
Thinner, albeit they be not Clipped, and it being necessar that the said Abuse
should be obviat: Therefore, and in Pursuance of the said Proclamation, We with
Advice foresaid, Require and Empower all Magistrates of Burghs, Sheriffs,
Baillies of Regalities, Stewarts and their Deputs, and all Justices of Peace to
cause to pass the said old Merk and half Merk-Pieces, which are only worn Barer
and Thinner through time, and are not Clipped, and to be received in all
Payments within their Respective Jurisdictions, and to judge of all Debates
arising thereanent; and to punish the Refusers of the said Old Merk and half
Mark Pieces, by fyning them summarly for their Disobedience, not exceeding the
double of the Money wrongously refused to be paid to the Party who offers to
pass the samine. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command,
that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-burghs of the several
Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation make Intimation hereof, that none pretend
Ignorance: And Ordains these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Twenty one Day of May, and of Our
Reign the Eight Year, 1696. Ex deliberatione Dominorun Secreti Concilii. GILB,
ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Ano DOM. 1696.


