royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For a National Humiliation upon the account of the QVEENS Death.
WILLIAM by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Macers of our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs, in that
part, Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting;
FORASMUCH as, it has pleased Almighty God, to Visit Us and Our people, with
the sad and never enough to be lamented loss of Our dear Consort, and their
Gracious Sovereign Queen Mary: And that in such a Calamity, it becomes Us and
them to be deeply humbled before the Lord, to obtain his Pardon and Peace, and
Gracious Favor and Assistance, for Our Support and Relief: And that the
Ministers and Brethren of the Commission of the late General Assembly, have
Addressed the Lords of Our Privy Council, that a Day may be solemnly set apart
for that Effect. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
have thought fit to Appoint the eighth day of January Instant for the Town of
Edinburgh and the three Louthians: and the fifeteen day of the said Month for
all on this side of the River of Tay: and the twenty second of the said Month
of January Instant, for all the rest of the Kingdom, to be kept as solemn Days
of deep Humiliation and Fasting, by Prayer, Preaching, and other sacred
Exercise, and a most strict Surcease from all ordinary Employments and
Handy-labour: to the Effect, that by the humble and earnest Confession of our
sins to God, we may obtain his Pardon and Peace, and his Face and Favor
graciously reconciled to Us and Our people, and that it may please Him more
especially, to comfort and support Us, and to preserve Our Person for the good
of his People, and of the whole Protestant Interest, and to bless Us and Our
Government, with such Aid, Countenance, and Assistance, as may best contribute
to the same. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command,
that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, and remanent Market Crosses of the whole Head Burghs of the several
Shires within this Kingdom, and of the Stewartries of Kirkcudbright, Annandale
and Orkney, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof, that
none may pretend ignorance. And ordains Our Solicitor, to cause send printed
Copies hereof to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts of the
Stewartries foresaids, whom We ordain to see the same published: and appoints
them to send Doubles hereof, to all the Ministers both in Churches and
Meeting Houses, within their respective Jurisdictions, that upon the Lords Day,
immediately preceding the said days respective above mentioned, the same may
be intimat and read in every Paroch Church and Meeting House; Certifying all
such who shall contemn or neglect so religious and important a Duty, as the
Humiliation hereby appointed is, they shall be proceeded against, and punished
as Contemners of Our Authority, and as highly disaffected to Our Person and
Government; And ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the second Day of January, And of Our
Reign the sixth year, 1695. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1695.


