PROCLAMATION Anent the Excise after the first of March next, 1699.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;

To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially Constititut Greeting;
Forasmuch as, the Annexed-Excise, as Converted by the Twenty Eight Act of the
first Session of this current Parliament, from Two Merks upon the Boll of Malt,
to an Excise of Three Pennies upon the Pint of all Ale and Beer Browen to be
Vended and Sold with the Excises of other Liquors mentioned in the said Act,
are now Set in Tack by the Lords of Our Thesaury and Exchequer, to William
Menies late Baillie of Edinburgh, and Alexander Wood Merchant there, for the
space of Five years, to commence from the first of March next to come
inclusive: And that the Lords of Our Privy Council are Authorized and Empowered
to prescribe such Methods and Orders, besides these mentioned in the Acts of
Parliament; as they shall judge necessary, for the better Uplifting and
Inbringing of the said Excises: Therefore, and for Determining all Differences
that may arise betwixt the Brewers and the Tacksmen of the said Excises, and
their Sub-Tacksmen or Collectors, during the Space and Years of the foresaid
Tack. And for the due and timeous making of Entries of all Liquors Browen or
Imported Liable to the said Excise: We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Do, Require and Command the Commissioners of Supply of the several
Shires within this Kingdom, Qualified according to Law, and residing within the
Shire; And who by the said Act of Parliament are Appointed Commissioners of the
said Excise, to Meet at the Head-Burghs of the respective Shires, upon the
first Tuesday of April next to come, and at their said Meeting, to Divide
themselves as is prescribed by the said Act, and to Settle, and Appoint Places
at convenient Distances, where the public Excise-Offices may be best kept,
for the Brewers and Retailers to Enter, and give up the Quantities of Liquors
Browen and Retailed by them, liable in Payment of the said Excises, and
Appoints the said Commissioners, immediately after Designing Places for the
said Offices, to cause make public Intimation at all the Church Doors within
the respective Shires of the particular Places designed by them for the several
Excise-Offices, with Certification to the said Commissioners or any of them
residing within the said respective Shires, who shall Failie to meet the said
first Tuesday of April next to come, and to Appoint and Design the particular
Places for Excise-Offices in manner above-exprest, their Names shall be
returned by their Clerks to the Lords of Our Privy Council, to the effect they
may take such Course therewith as they shall see Cause: And We, with Advice
foresaid, Require and Command the said Commissioners to Meet the first Tuesday
of every Month thereafter, during the Continuance of the foresaid Tack, for the
Ends prescribed, and set down in the Acts of Parliament: And We, with Advice
foresaid, Require and Command the whole Brewers and Retailers within the Bounds
alloted for the said Excise-Offices, to Attend the Commissioners thereat, upon
the said first Tuesday of April next, without any farther Charge, Citation or
Intimation to them for that effect, but allanerly upon the Publication hereof;
And there to Give in, and Make, and the said Commissioners to Receive from
them an true Account of their Names, place of Residence, and the Time when they
did begin to Brew, what ever the Quantity may be: And likeways, full and
faithful Entries of all Liquors Browen or Retailled by them, liable in Payment
of the said Excises after the first Day of March next to come inclusive,
Declaring hereby, and Certifying such Brewers and Retailers as shall not
Compear and Attend the said Commissioners the first Tuesday of every Month,
for Giving up their Names, Places of Abode, and Time when they did begin to
Brew; And for making Entery of the precise Quantities of all Liquors Browen and
Retailed by them, liable to Excise for the preceding Month, they shall be
holdenas Confessed, and Decreets given against them for the Quantities contained
in the Claims and Complaints to be given in by the Tacksm^n, or their
Sub-Tacksmen or Collectors against them, providing nevertheless, that if the
said Brewers or Retailers holden as Confessed, as said is, shall at any time
within Three Months thereafter. Compear before any Two of the said
Commissioners, afterhaving made due Intimation to the Tacksmen, or their
foresaids, and there make Faith as above, and report a Certificat under the
hands of the said Commissioners, They shall be Reponed against the said
Certification, upon punctual Payment of what they shall be found due. And We,
with Advice foresaid, Appoint and Ordain, that no Brewer or Retailer within
Burgh of Royalty, Regality or Barrony, Vend or Sell any part of their Browst,
until first, they make Entery thereof at the Excise-Office there, (if any be)
and obtain a Sufferance for the Quantities Browen, or upon their hand, which
the Keeper of the Excise-Office is to give without delay Gratis; And that in
case of none-entry, or wrongous Entry, the Brewer or Retailer within Burgh, be
liable in the Sum of Ten Pounds Scots, toties quoties, and to all Execution
competent for payment thereof. And it is hereby declared, that the said
Entries or Claims in Absence, may nevertheless be disproven before any
Magistrate, Justice of Peace, or Commissioner of Excise, by Witnesses or Oath of
Party, notwithstanding of any Survey made by the Surveyers and Walters,
Poviding, the same be done within ^ight days thereafter; and that all Brewers
Barrels be for hereafter marked with their own name, and the Seal of the next
Office, which shall be furnished to them gratis. As also that no Person who
has foreborn to Brew for the space mentioned in the Act one Thousand six
Hundred and ninety three, shall begin, unless they first get License from the
Tacksmen foresaid, and that no Person presume to Reset any Ale or drinking Beer
in their Houses, in order to the imbazling the Excise thereof, under the Pain
of ten pounds toties quoties, to the forsaids Tacksmen their Sub-tacksmen or
Collectors; And farther, that all Tapsters, and Venders of Ale and drinking
Beer, shall from the said first day of March next inclusive, before they Tap or
Vend the same first make Entry of what they have upon their hand, at the next
Excise Office of the bounds now in being, and at the same time take a License
there: And in regard the Excise of strong Waters, Aquavity and Foreign Beer
and Ale, is ordered by Act of Parliament to be paid by the Retailers;
Therefore We with advice forsaid, Require and Command all Brewers of Aquavity
or strong Waters, to make Monthly Entries of the quantities of strong Liquors
Browen by them, and give in subscribed Lists to the next Excise Office, of the
names of the Persons to whom they Sell their Aquavity or strong Waters, to be
again sold by Retail; As likewise that all Retailers of Brandy, foreign
Aquavity and strong Waters, make the like Entries of what quantities of Brandy,
Foreign Aquavity and strong Waters they have upon their hand unretailed the
said first day of March, to the effect that they may be liable for the Excise
thereof, at six shilling per Pint: As also that the Collectors, Clerks, or
Surveyers at Seaports, give up a particular account to the said Tacksmen or
their Sub-tacksmen and Collectors of the said Excise, of the quantities of
Foreign strong Waters, Brandy and Foreign Beer and Ale, imported from time to
time, and who is the Importer, that the said Importer may pay the Excise of
Brandy conform to the (...) Act of the (...) Session of this current
Parliament: As also that the said Merchant importer, and all other Persons
importing the said Foreign Aquavity and strong Waters, who pretend to Sell the
foresaid Liquors in haill Sale, that is to say above a Pint, as the Act of
Parliament has determined, be liable and oblidged to give and deliver
subscribed Lists to the said Tacksmen, and their Sub-tacksmen or their
Collectors, of the Persons names to whom they Sell the said strong Waters, or
Foreign Beer or Ale, and of the quantities Sold to them, to the effect the
Retailer may be liable for the Excise thereof, and in case the said
Commissioners or at least two of them shall fail to meet, and attend the said
respective Excise Offices upon the said first Tuesday of April next to come, or
upon the first Tuesday of any subsequent Month during the continuance of the
said Tack, the whole division, and each of them residing within the said Shire
under the Certification foresaid, and after Instruments taken against them of
their Failie; We with advice foresaid Require and Command the Sheriffs and
their Deputs, or such as the said Sheriffs or Deputs shall substitute to each
particular Diet for that effect allanarly, to repair to the said respective
Offices within three days after they shall be desired by the Tacksmen, or their
Sub-tacksmen, or Collectors of the said Excises, there Summarly to Judge upon
what occurs within the Bounds of that Office, in reference to the said
Excises, certifying the said Sheriffs and their Deputs or Substituts, if they
failie: they shall be punished as the Lords of Our Privy Council shall think
fit. And farther, We with advice foresaid, Prohibit and Discharge any of the
Commissioners of Supply, or other inferior Judge or Officers of the Law within
this Our Realm, to stop or hinder either Quartering, Poynding, Imprisoning, or
any other lawful Execution that shall be used by Our Tacksmen, or their
Sub^tacks^ and Collectors of the said Excites, against the respective Brewers
and Retailers, conform to the Entries that shall be made by them, or according
to the quantity of the Liquor Retailed by them, or whereupon they shall be
holden as Confessed in manner, and before the Judges above mentioned, except they
crave to be Reponed within three Months in manner above provided, under the
Pain of being not only liable for the Charges and Damnages Our said Tacksmen,
their Sub-tacksmen and Collectors shall sustain and incurr there through, but
also to such further Pains, as the Lords of Our Privy Council shall think fit:
And lastly, it is hereby declared, that all the Penalties toties quoties above
mentioned, are not to be understood for every Delinquency or Fault, but
allanarly for every Conviction, and the Transgressions to be therein found. OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-crosses of the whole head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries
within this Kingdom, and there in Our name and Authority by open Proclamation,
make Intimation hereof, that none pretend Ignorance, and Ordains Printed Copies
hereof to be sent to the Sheriffs of the several Shires and Stewarts of the
Stewartries within this Kingdom, whom, and heir Clerks, We Ordain to see the
samen Published, and Copies hereof Affixed at the said Mercat-crosses; and
appoints them to send Doubles thereof to all the Ministers, both ^n Churches
and Meeting Houses within their respective Jurisdictions, that upon the Lords
day immediately preceding the said first Tuesday of April next, the same may be
Re^d and Intimat in every Paroch Church and Meeting House, and Copies of the
same Affixed upon the most Public Doors thereof; and Ordains these Presents to
be Printed,

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty third day of February and of
Our Reign the tenth year. 1699, Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1699.


