PROCLAMATION, Discharging the base Copper Money, Coined in Ireland by the late
King James, in 1689, and 1690.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute
Greeting: Forasmuch as, it is Informed that there are great quantities of base
Brass or Copper-Coyn, Coined in Ireland, by the Command of the late King James,
in the years One thousand six hundred and eighty nine, and one thousand six
hundred and ninety, to pass for Shillings, Half-Crowns, and other species,
bearing upon one of the two sides of the Shillings, the number of twelve marked
thus, XII. with the mark of J. R. The Half-Crowns the number of XXX. with the
said mark J. R. and so of other species: Imported into this Kingdom, and vented
for six penny Scots Pieces, or otherwise, whereby Our Leidges are greatly
abused: Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Have
thought fit to Discharge, and hereby Discharges the Importing of the said base
Coin of the foresaid species or marks, or any other whatsoever: As also the
Vending thereof, and giving or taking thereof by way of Change, under the pains
following, viz. That the Importer thereof into this Kingdom in any quantity
exceeding a pound weight, shall be imprisoned by the Judge ordinar of the
Bounds; where he shall be apprehended, and liable to the punishment by Law
inflicted on Venters of False Coin: And that any other Importers, Venters or
Outgivers of the said base Coin, in any quantity greater or smaller, shall be
liable in the pain of twenty pounds Scots toties quoties, half to the Informer,
and half to the Poor of the Parish, to be exacted by the Judge ordinar of the
Bounds with all rigor. OUR WILL IS herefore, and We Charge you strictly and
Command, that incontinent these our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the whole Head-Burghs of all
the Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there make public
Intimation of the Premises, that none may pretend ignorance. And Ordains these
Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the seventh Day of March, and of Our
Reign the sixth Year, 1695. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB: ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, anno Dom. 1695.


