J R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Discharging the Importing, Vending, Dispersing, or Keeping
Seditious Books and Pamphlets.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith.
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as we being informed, that there are many Impious and Scandalous
Books and Pamphlets printed in Holland, and elsewhere, Inciting Our Subjects to
Murder and Assassination, as well as Rebellion, to the great reproach of the
Christian-Religion, and the ruin of all Humane Society; in which also Our
Government, and the Actions of Our Royal Predecessors, and Our own, are
represented as Cruel, Barbarous, and Tyrannical, and all such as have Served
and Obeyed Us, are railed at as Enemies to GOD, and their Native Country:
Notwithstanding of the great Care We have always taken to Tolerate all
different Persuasions, and the Clemency We have shown in Pardoning the greatest
Criminals; which Books are brought Home into this Kingdom, and Vended, and
Spread here; and we being most desirous, on this, as on all other Occasions, to
prevent any of Our Subjects being brought into a Snare. We have thought fit
hereby to Intimat, and make Known, that if any of Our Subjects shall hereafter
bring Home, Vend or Sell, Disperse or Lend any of the Books underwritten, viz.
All Translations of Buchanan de Jure Regni, Lex Rex, Jus Populi, Nephtali, The
Cup of cold Water, The Scots Mist, The Appologetical Relation, Mean Techel, The
Hynd let loose, The treasonable Proclamations issued out at Sanquhar, and these
issued out by the late Duke of Monmouth, and the late Earl of Argile, or any
other Books that are, or shall be hereafter Written or Printed defending these
Treasonable and Seditious Principles, they shall be liable as if they were
Authors of the said Books; and all other Our Subjects are hereby Commanded to
bring in any of the said Books they have, and deliver them in to any Privy
Counselor, Sheriff, Baillie of Regality, or Bailliaries, or their Deputs, or
any Magistrates of Burrows, to be transmitted by them to the Clerks of Our Privy
Council, to the end the same may be destroyed, with Certification, that whoever
(except Privy Counselors) shall be found to have any of the said Books, and
not to have delivered them up, shall be Fined, for Our Use, in such a Penalty,
as Our Council shall appoint, for each of the said Books, that he or they have
not delivered up. And appoints the said Books and Pamphlets to be brought in
betwixt and the Dyets following, viz. these in the Town of Edinburgh, and
Suburbs thereof, betwixt and the first Tuesday of September next to come, and
all others within this Kingdom, betwixt and the first Tuesday of November next
to come. And to the end Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises may be made public
and known, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and whole remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this
Kingdom, and other places needful, and there in Our Name and Authority, make
Publication of Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises. And recommends to the Most
Reverend the Archbishops, and Right Reverend Bishops, to cause read this Our
Royal Proclamation, in all the Pulpits of this Kingdom, upon some convenient
Lords Day, in the Forenoon, immediately after Divine Service, that none pretend
Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Fifteenth day of August, One thousand
six hundred eighty eight Years. And of Our Reign the Fourth Year. Per Actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, 1688.


