A PROCLAMATION, Appointing Masters for preserving the Game.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Brittain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally specially constitute, Greeting,
We taking to our Consideration the great prejudice the Kingdom does sustain,
in the Decay of Deer, Roes, and Wild-Fowl, Notwithstanding of the Care taken by
our Royal Progenitors thereanent; and of the many good and useful Laws made for
preserving the Game, to prevent and repair this Evil and Mischief, and against
the destroying of Smouts and Trouts with Criels and other Engines anent Cruives
and airs, steeping of Lint in Rivers, Lochs, and Burns, where Fishes are: And
Particularly, that by the 31, Act, of the 23, Parliament of King Ja. 6th. All
Persons who are not Heretors are prohibited to Hunt or Hauk; and that neither
Heretor or other Shoot, Deer or Roe, in time of Snow. As also that by the 11th,
Act. of the 4th Parliament, K. Ja: 5th, and 210th, Act, of the 14th Parliament,
K. Ja: 6th. Letters are ordained to be direct, charging all Keepers of our
Forests to permit no Pasturage within the Marches thereof; But that they Sieze
and Escheat them, under the pain of loss of their Office. And that Forresters
of Forests belonging to private Men, shall apprehend such as Travel with Guns
or Dogs in Forests, and carry them to the nearest Sherriffs, Stewarts of
Stewartries, Baillies of Bailieries, and Regalities, or Justices of Peace to be
secured; to answer as accords of the Law. And that all such of the Liedges who
shall be required to concur to apprehend such Persons, give ready obedience as
is ordained by the Forest Laws, Cap. 15. and Cap. 22: And those who conceal
them to be fined as art and part of the foresaid fault. And sicklyke, that all
Persons are Commanded to forbear, to slay any Muirfowl, Heathfoul, Partridge,
Quaill, Duck, or Mallard, Tale, or Atail, or Tormicgan, from and after the
first day of Lent, to the first day of July yearly according to the 108. Act,
Parl; 7th. K. Ja, 1st, excepting Waterfowl, with Hauks in Dreidge-ing time.
And that the Killing of Muir-Fowl, Powts, before the first of July,
Heath-poutts before the first of August, or Partridge, or Quale before the
first of September, yearly, is forbidden by the 23, Act, Parl. 16, K. Ja: 6th,
Item, that by the 48, Act. Parl, 4th. K, Ja. 4th. Moor-burn, after the last of
March, is discharged, and the Masters are thereby to be liable for all upon
their Land. Item, That by the 210, Act, Parl, 14, K. Ja, 6th, Shooting,
Hunting, or Haulking within six miles of our Palace, are prohibited under the
pains therein contained, without express License of the Masters of the Game,
Item, That by the 23 Act, Parl: 16, K. Ja, 6th. All selling or buying of Deer,
Roe, Hairs, Muirfoul, Tarmicgan, Heathfouls, Partridge or Quails are discharged
under the pains contained in the said Act. Item, That by the 51, Act, Parl,
6th. Queen Mary, Hunting is forbidden on other Men's grounds without leave of
the Owner. And whereas by the 11th Act, Par. 1st. K, Ja: 1st, Cruives, and
airs, set on fresh water without express Infeftment of Salmond Fishing are
ordained to be destroyed and put away for ever, and that where Cruives are
allowed by infeftments, that ilk heck be three inch wide, which is Ratified by
the 73, Act, Parl, 10th. K. Ja, 3d. And that by the 87. Act. Parl. 14th. K, Ja,
2d, It is statute, that no man set Vessels, Creils, Weyrs, Netts, or any other
Ingine to hinder Smouts from going to the Sea; And that Coups, Masses, N^tts,
Prines set on waters that has course to the Sea, be destroyed, and who holds
them up to be liable as destroyers of Red-fishes. Item, That all Millers that
slayes Smouts or Trouts, with Criels or with any other Engine, or any who Dames
or Leaves shall be punished as slayers of Red-fish, conform to the 73 Act,
Parl: 5th, K. Ja, 3d. And where the transgressors has no means, they are
appointed to be put in Prison, Irons, or Stocks for the space of one Month
upon their own expenses. And if they have it not of their own, To be fed on
Bread and Water conform to the 89th, Act, Parl. 6th, K. Ja. 6th. And by the
13th, Act, Parl. 18th. K, Ja, 6th. The steeping of Lint in Rivers, Lochs, or
Burns, where Fishes, are, is discharged, and that under the pain of Forty
Shillings Scots Toties Quoties, and confiscation of the Lint. And likewise the
shootting of Hares, or Herron, at any time, is expressly prohibited and
discharged under the pains contained in the Acts of Parliament made thereanent.
And we also considering that by the 20th Act of the Parliament holden at
Edinburgh, in the year, One thousand, six hundred, and Eighty five, all the
former Laws and Acts of Parliament made for preserving of the Game, and an Act
of King Charles the second, with advice of his Privy Council of the date the
ninth day of June, One thousand six hundred, and Eighty two years, with the
whole Laws and Acts of Parliament abovementioned therein narrated, are
Revived, Renewed, Ratified and approven, and whereby also all persons are
prohibited and discharged to have or use setting-Dogs, unless he be an Heretor
of an thousand pounds of valued Rent, and have express license of the Masters
of our Game, within their several bounds under the pain of five hundredth Merks,
Toties Quoties, in case of Failie; and that all Common-fowlers and Shooters of
Fowl, or any Persons, except they be Domestic servants to Noblemen or
Gentlemen, who are Heretors of an thousand pownds Scots of valued Rent, are
discharged to have or make use of Setting-Dogs, or Fowl-ing Pieces, under the
pain of escheat of such Dogs, or Guns, and Imprisonment of their Persons, for
the space of six weeks, Toties Quoties. And that the Selling or Buying of Deer,
Roe, Hares, Moor-Foul, Tarmicgan, Heathfouls, Partridge, or Quails, is
discharged for the space of seven Years next ensuing the Twenty of June, One
thousand, six hundred, and Eighty two years, (which we hereby think fit to
prorogate and continue for the space of Five years commencing from the dait
hereof.) And we ordain the pains and Penalties contained in the 23d, Act, Parl,
16th, K. Ja, 6th, to be exacted from the transgressors, during the space
foresaid) And by which Proclamation Ratified and approven as said is, for the
better discovery of the Contraveeners, Warrant is given to the Masters of our
Game, their Deputs or others empowered by either of them in their respective
bounds, to make search for any of the said Deer, Roe, Hares, Moorfoul,
Tormicgan, Heathfoul, Partridge, or Quails so killed in any suspect place
within or without Burgh, als well the Buyers as sellers in Market or outwith
the samen, or Foulers. And to Seize, Search, Secure, and confiscat the same for
their own use: And by which Proclamation so ratified as said is. The Masters of
our Game are ordained to require all Heretors and others, To throw down all
Cruives and airs, set on fresh waters without express Infeftments of Salmond
Fishing betwixt and the first day of July thereafter, under the Pain of an
hundred Pound Scots; to be uplifted off these who refuse. And the Sherriffs and
their Deputs are appointed to give speedy Justice therefore, when desired by
the Masters of the Game or their Deputs. And the several Sherriffs and their
Deputs, Stewarts of Stewartries, Bailies of Regalities, and their Deputs and
Magistrates of the next adjacent Burrows are ordained to concur with the
Masters of the Game, for throwing down of the said Cruives, Criels, Netts, and
Engines, when they shall be required. And if the said Judges shall be found
negligent, that the foresaid Penalty be uplifted off themselves, according to
the 68th. Act, Par. 9th. of Queen Mary. And albeit that the Masters of the Game
were appointed to have put the said Laws to full and due execution, conform to
the power and warrant granted to them, yet the same has hitherto been
altogether slighted and neglected. And we being most desirous to follow the
Laudable example of our Royal Ancestors, who in their Reigns have made so many
good Laws for preserving the Game; And to the end the samen may receive the
more vigorous execution, We with advice of our Privy Counsel, do hereby revive
all the former Laws and Acts of Parliament made for preserving the Game. And
Commissionat the Persons Following to be Masters of Game within the respective
Bounds after specified. viz. The Earl of Lothian, for the Shire of Edinburgh,
and Town thereof; the Earl of Linlithgow, for the shire of Linlithgow and
Bathgate: The Earl of Tweddale Lord high Chancellor, for the shire of
Haddingtoun: The Earl of Callander, for the shire of Stirling: The Earl of Mar
for the Shire of Clackmannan: The Earl of Melvil, Lord Privy Seal for the Shire
of Fife: The Master of Burlich, for the Shire of Kinross: The Lord Ruthven for
the shire of Perth, Be-west Tay, And the Lord Kinaird, for that shire on the
east side of Tay: The Marquis of Athol, for the Stewartries of Strathern,
Monteeth, and Ballwhidder: The Earl of Srathmore, for the Shire of Forfar: The
Earl of Marishal for the Shire of Kincardine, and for all below Mormouth-hill
and the Water of Eugie in Bamff-shire: Sir James Ogilvie of Church-hill for all
the rest of Bamff-shire: The Earl of Kintore for all betwixt Crathus, Bannachie
and the Sea in Aberdene-shire: The Master of Forles in all above that in the
said Shire: The Lord Duffus for all from Spey to Ness, high and low,
comprehending Elgin, Nairn, and Inverness-shire, to Loch-ness: Lord Lovat from
Ness to Conon, high and low, excluding Cromarty-shire: The Viscount of Tarbatt,
Lord Clerk-Register, from Conon to Portnaculter and Okell Water, and on the
West from Lochew, Cuiliscuack, including Cromarty-shire: The Earl of Sutherland
for Sutherland, excepting Assine, which is in the last Division: The Earl of
Broad-Albine for the Shire of Caithness: The Stewart of Orkney, for Orkney: The
Earl of Argyle for the Shires of Argyle and Bute: The Lord Polwart for the
Shire of Berwick: The Earl of Roxburgh for the Shire of Teviotdale: The Duke of
Hamilton for the Shire of Lanerk: The Lord Montgomery for Cunninghame: The Earl
of Cassils for Carrick: The Master of Cathcart for Kyle, within the Shire of
Air: The Lord William Dowglass for the Shire of Peebles. The Earl of Glencairn
for the Shire of Renfrew: The Lord of Luss for the Shire of Dumbarton: The
Viscount of Stair for the Shire of Wigtoun: The Earl of Galloway for the
Stewartry of Kirkcudbright: The Duke of Queensbersy for the Shire of Dumfreis,
and James Murray of Philiphaugh, one of the Senators of the College of
Justice, for the Shire of Selkirk: Hereby Impowering and Warranting them to put
the standing Laws in execution, in so far as concerns the preserving of
Forests, Wild-foul, and Fishing; especially the Laws and Ordinances
above-specified: And We require all our Judges ordinar in their respective
Bounds and Jurisdictions, to give speedy Justice thereupon, in favors of the
said Masters of Our Game, or their Deputs, when they delate or pursue
Delinquents before them, as they will be answerable upon their Duties and
Offices. And all Sheriffs, Mayors, and other Officers and Fiscals of their
respective Courts, are ordained to Cite Delinquents before these Courts, as
they shall be informed thereof, and Witnesses to prove the samine, and to
prosecute the samine, until final Sentence be pronounced against them, and
thereafter see these Sentences put to due and lawful execution, the expenses
whereof is to be paid out of the first and readiest of the Fines of the
Delinquents so uplifted, at the sight of the respective Masters of Game, under
the pain of Deprivation, and further Censure, in case of neglect, as Our
Council shall find cause. And for further enabling Our said Masters of Game,
We empower them to appoint Deputs, one or more, for whom they are to be
answerable, as well for their Diligence as Fidelity, and that their said
Deputs themselves, nor none by their connivance, take upon them to contraveen
this Proclamation, and destroy the Game. And to encourage them in so good
service to Us and Our People, We hereby allow Our parts of all Fines and Unlaws
due to Us by Our Laws, for the Crimes relating to Forests, Game, and Fishing,
in favors of the said Masters of Our Game, within their respective Bounds,
and during the time We shall think fit to employ them in the said service;
withal Certifying them, that if they be remiss or negligent in their duty, they
are to be discharged of their Offices, and Fined by Our Privy Council, as they
shall find cause. And We declare Our said Commission to continue and endure for
the space of seven years after the date hereof, and until We or Our Privy
Council think fit to recall the same. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
straightly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other Mercat-Crosses of the head Burghs of the
several Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and there by open
Proclamation make Publication of the Premises, that none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Ninth day of August, and of Our Reign
the Fourth Year, 1692, Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, in Supplementum
Signeti. DA. MONCRIEF. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1692.


