A PROCLAMATION, For a General Fast.
At Edinburgh, the twenty fourth day of August, One thousand six hundred eighty
nine years.
Present in Council,
E. Crafurd P. M. Douglas. E. Southerland. E. Leven. E. Annandale. L. Ross. L.
Carmichell. Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder. Sir James Montgomry of Skelmorly. Sir
Arch. Murray of Blackbarrony. James Brodie of that I^k. Sir John Hall L.
Provost of Edinburgh.
FOrasmuch as the great and long abounding of Sins of all sorts amongst all
Ranks of Persons, with the continued Impenitency under them, and not Reforming
therefrom; The falling from their first Love; and great Faintings and Failings
of Ministers, and others of all Ranks, in the hour of Temptation, in their Zeal
for God and his Work; and that although there be much cause to Bless God for
the Comfortable Unity and Harmony amongst the Ministers, and Body of Christian
Professors in this Church; Yet that there are such Sad, and Continuing
Divisions amongst some, is also matter of Lamentation before God; The great
Ingratitude for his begun Deliverance of this Nation from Popery and Slavery,
and unsuitable Walking thereunto; The Contempt of the Gospel, not Mourning for
former, and present Iniquities, nor turning to the Lord by such Reformation and
Holiness, as so great Work calls for; The many Sad and long continued Tokens of
Gods Wrath, in the hiding of his Face, and more especially in his Restraining
the Power and Presence of his Spirit, with the Preached Gospel, in the
Conversion of Souls, and Edifying the Converted; and the Lord's Threatening the
Sword of a Cruel and Barbarous Enemy, in the present great Distress of Ireland,
by the prevailing of an Antichristian Party there; and Threatening the Sword of
the same Enemy at home, and the great and imminent Danger of the Reformed
Protestant Religion, not only from an open Declared Party of Papists, Enemies
to the same, but from many other professed Protestants, who join Issue with
them in the same Design, befides the Sad Sufferings, and Scatterings of
Reformed Churches Abroad; Having Seriously, and Religiously moved the
Presbyterian Ministers, Elders and Professors of the Church of Scotland, Humbly
to Address themselves to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, for a
General Fast and Day of Humiliation, to be kept throughout the whole Kingdom,
The said Lords, Do out of a Pious and Religious Disposition, approve of the
said Motion, as Dutiful and Necessary at the time; and therefore in His
Majesty's Name and Authority, Do Command a Solemn and Public Fast, and Day of
Humiliation, to be Religiously and Sincerely Observed throughout this Kingdom,
both in Churches and Meeting Houses, as they would avert Wrath, and procure and
continue Blessings to this Kingdom; and that all persons whatsomever may send
up their Fervent Prayers and Supplications to Almighty God, that he would pour
out upon all Ranks, a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, that they may Mourn for
all their Iniquities, and more especially, that God would pour forth upon King
WILLIAM, and Queen MARY, and upon all inferior Magistrates, and Counselors, a
Spirit of Wisdom for Government, and Zeal for God, his Church, and Work in this
Land, as the present case of both do Call for, and that God may preserve Them
for Carrying on that great Work, which he has so Gloriously and Seasonably
begun by them; and that God would Countenance, and Bless with Success, the
Armies by Sea and Land, raised for the Defense of the Protestant Religion; and
more especially, that God would pour forth a Spirit of Holiness upon them, lest
their Sins, and ours may provock God against them in the Day of Battle; and
that he would Bless all Means for the Settlement of Church and State: That God
would Bless the Season of the Year, and give Seasonable Weather for Cutting
Down, and Gathering in the Fruits of the Earth, that the Stroke of Famine,
which God has frequently Threatened the Nation with, may be averted. And the
said Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Do, in Name and Authority foresaid,
Command and Charge, That the said Solemn and Public Fast, be Religiously, and
Devoutly Performed, both in Churches and Meeting Houses, by all Ranks and
Degrees of Persons within this Kingdom, on this side of the Water of Tay, upon
Sunday the fifteenth day of September next to come; and by all others be-north
the same, upon Sunday thereafter, the twenty second day of the said Month of
September: And to the End that this part of Divine Worship, so pious and
necessary, may be punctually kept upon the respective Days abovementioned,
They Ordain Sir William Lockhart Solicitor, in the most convenient and proper
way, to Dispatch, and send Copies hereof to the Sheriffs, their Deputs, and
Clerks of the several Shires of this Kingdom, to be by them Published at the
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs, upon Receipt thereof, and immediately sent to
the several Ministers, both of Churches and Meeting Houses, that upon the Lords
Day immediately preceding the Fast, and upon the respective Days of the
public Fast, and Humiliation, the Ministers may Read, and Intimat this
Proclamation from the Pulpit, in every Paroch-Church, and Meeting House; and
that they exhort all Persons to a Serious and Devout Performance of the said
Prayers, Fasting and Humiliation, as they regard the Favor of Almighty God,
and the Safety and Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and expect a
blessed success to the Carrying on of that Great and Glorious Work of this
Nations being Delivered from Popery and Slavery, so seasonably begun, and as
they would avoid the Wrath and Indignation of God against this Kingdom, and
procure, and continue manifold Blessings to the same: Certifying all these who
shall contemn, or neglect such a religious and necessary Duty, they shall be
proceeded against, and punished as Contemners of his Majesty's Authority,
Neglecters of Religious services, and as persons disaffected to the Protestant
Religion, as well as to their Majesty's Royal Persons and Government. And
Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published by Macers, or Messengers at
Arms, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places abovementioned, that
none may pretend ignorance.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Secret Council,
Anno Dom. 1689.


