PROCLAMATION For Completing the Levy for the thousand Men, for the Year 1697.
And in case of deficiency to poynd the Leaders.
WILLIAM By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith: To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms; Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and severally; specially Constitute
Greeting; Forasmuch, as We by Our Proclamation, of the Date the sixteenth day
of December last by past, did Require and Command the Commissioners of Supply
within the several Shires of this Kingdom, to have Met upon the Days, and at
the Places mentioned in the said Proclamation; And there and then to have
Designed and had in Readiness in manner, and Conform to the twenty third Act
last Session of this current Parliament; and Method therein set down; The
respective Numbers of Men particularly mentioned in the foresaid Proclamation,
or Twenty four Pound Scots for each Man not delivered to, or received by the
Officers sent by Order of Our Privy Council, or of Colonel George Hamilton
Colonel to one of Our Regiments of Foot in Flanders, at the head Burghs of the
several Shires and Stewartries of this Kingdom, at the Days particularly
mentioned in the foresaid Proclamation: And albeit Officers did attend at the
head Burghs of the said respective Shires and Stewartries at the Time and upon
the Days prefixed in Our former Proclamation, to have received the Men from the
said respective Shires and Stewartries which they were to Furnish for this
year, or Twenty four Pounds for each undelivered Man, conform to the foresaid
Act of Parliament: Nevertheless in many Shires, neither Men nor Money were
delivered, to the great Detriment of Our Service; and Disappointment of Our
Officers, who thereby were to make the Recruits necessary for Our Troops in
Flanders, and to the great Expense of the said Officers and their needless
Attendance; Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Require
and Command the Commissioners of Supply, of all the Shires and Stewartries
within this Kingdom, to Meet, and timeously design Leaders for the respective
Proportions of Men to be Furnished by their said Shires or Stewartries; and
which Leaders so designed for all the Shires and Stewartries upon this side of
Tay, We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command to Provide and have in
Readiness the respective Numbers of Men, which they as Leaders are appointed to
Furnish; or Twenty four Pounds Scots for each undelivered Man; Which Men or
Money foresaid, are to be delivered or paid in by them, at the head Burghs of
the respective Shires or Stewartries, to such Officers or others as shall be
sent by the Lords of Our Privy Council, or the said Colonel George Hamilton,
sufficiently Empowered by written Orders and Warrands upon the Twentieth day of
this Instant Month of February. And the respective Leaders for all the rest of
the Kingdom, to deliver or pay their Men or Money, at the respective head
Burghs of their Shires or Stewartries, to the Persons to be sent and Empowered
in manner foresaid, upon the First day of March next to come; with
Certification to the said Commissioners, who shall not design Leaders within
their respective Bounds, they shall be liable to the Penalties for their
Failour therein, mentioned in the Acts of Parliament made anent the Militia.
And We with Advice foresaid, Certify, Declare and Decern, that such of the
Leaders who shall faill to deliver the Men, or pay the Money to the Persons so
to be sent and Empowered in manner foresaid, at the Places, and upon the Days
respective abovementioned, they shall be liable to the said Persons Empowered
to receive the same, in the Sum of One hundred Pounds Scots for each Man that
shall not be delivered, or the said Sum of Twenty four Pounds Scots in Money
paid for him, in manner foresaid; which hundredth Pounds is presently to be
Exacted and Raised from the respective deficient Leaders in manner specified,
and appointed for Deficiency in the Outreicks to the Militia, by the second
Act, second Parliament King Charles the Second: Conform whereunto, We with
Advice foresaid, Authorize and Empower the Commissioners of Supply, or any two
of them, after Trial taken, that the respective Leaders, or any of them have
been Deficient in the delivery of their Men, or Payments foresaids, to give
Order and Warrant to any Person whom they shall think fit, (whom We hereby make
and Constitute Our Sheriff in that part to that effect allenarly) to Poynd and
Destrinie, the readiest Goods and Gear of the said deficient Leaders, wherever
the same may be found; Appryse and make Sale thereof toward the payment of the
said hundred Pounds for each undelivered Man to be specified in the said
Warrant, and the Charges and Expenses of the Poynding and Apprysing, (these
Charges always not exceeding the Sum of ten Pounds Scots Money for each hundred
Pounds,) for which the Poynding shall be used, with power to our said Sheriff
in that part, by virtue of that Order, to Poynd the Goods, without necessity of
carrying the same to the Paroch-Church, or Mercat Cross of the Head-Burgh of
the Shire, or Stewartry to be Apprysed, and to do and act in the Execution of
the said Order, sicklike as a Messenger at Arms may do by the Law, in Execution
of Letters of Poynding and Apprysing given under our Signet: Providing always,
that the Goods Poynded be Valued and Apprysed by two honest Sworn Men, whose
Oaths, the said Sheriff in that part, is Authorized to take for that effect.
And Declares that it shall be leisum to the Party, from whom the Goods shall be
Poynded, to redeem the same within six days after the Poynding, by payment of
the Sums for which the Poynding shall be used, Expenses of the Poynding
foresaid, and forty Shilling Scots Money for each day during the not
Redemption. And in case the Goods be not redeemed within the space foresaid,
Declares, that it shall be lawful to the said Person, Officer, or other, to
whose Behove the Goods are Poynded, to retain the Goods, or sell the same, he
satisfying the Party, from whom the Goods were Poynded, of the superplus Price,
if any be, after Deduction of the third of the Sum to which they were Apprysed,
and forty Shilling Scots for ilk day during the space the Party had power to
redeem: And Declares the said Warrant, Signed by two of the said
Commissioners, to have the Force and Strength of a Decree; and that there is
no necessity of any Precept, or Charge to follow thereon; but that the Poynding
and Apprysing so used, by virtue of the said Warrant is and shall be as lawful
and valid, as if all the Solemnities requisite and usual in Poyndings, were
observed conform to the foresaid Act concerning the Militia, in all Points
according to which, the Numbers of Men to be Outreiked for Our Service in this
present year, were to be furnished. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
strictly and Command, that incontinent these our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent
Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and
there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation hereof,
that none pretend Ignorance. And We hereby Ordain Our Solicitor to Transmit
Copies hereof to the several Clerks to the Commissioners of Supply of the
several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom. And We Require and Command
them to give Advertisement in Writing, to the several Leaders within their
Bounds, of the days prefixed for Delivery of their said Men, or the said twenty
four Pounds Scots, and of the Certification and Penalty above-set-down, in case
of failie, with the Execution to follow hereupon, for exacting thereof, as they
will be Answerable. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed and Published.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the tenth Day of February, And of Our
Reign the eight Year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1697.


