A PROCLAMATION For Collecting and In-bringing the Pole Money, appointed to be
paid at Martinmass, 1695. by an Act of the last Session of Parliament.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith: To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch
as, We have thought good, that the Pole Money Imposed by an Act of the last
Session of Our Current Parliament, shall be Uplifted and In-gathered by way of
Collection. Therefore We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, and conform to the
Reference made to them by the said Act, have Ordained, and hereby Ordains, that
the foresaid Pole Money be Uplisted, Collected and brought in at the sight, and
by the direction of the Commissioners for Supply, throughout the whole Shires
of the Kingdom, in manner following, viz. That the said commissioners, or
their Quorum, appointed by the forsaid Act of Parliament, to meet and subdivide
themselves for taking up Rolls and Lists of all the Poleable persons within
their respective bounds, the days, and in the manner mentioned in the said Act,
do at the said days sub-divide themselves, appointing two, either of their own
number, or of the Heretors of every Paroch, for each Paroch, with power to the
said Sub-commissioners at their meeting in the said Paroches, for taking up
Lists and Rolls as said is to choose and nominat a fit and responsal person to
be both Clerk and Collector of the Pole of that Paroch; as also to call the
Elders or Deacons, or other fit persons within the Paroch, and cause them give
up upon Oath, to the best of their knowledge, the names of all the persons
within the Paroch, and to cause every Housekeeper give up the number, names,
and quality of all within House, which names, with the qualities and degrees of
the persons, and the condition of their Estate, as they stand Poleable by the
said Act of Parliament, are to be set down by the said Clerk in a List or Roll,
at the sight of the said two Sub-Commissioners for that end, and the same with
the Sum that the whole Pole amounts to, is to be Subscribed by the said
Commissioners (who are hereby fully empowered to control the same, and to
determine all questions arising thereon) and their Clerk, and then to be given
in to the Collector of the Supply within the Shire, who is to Registrat the
same in a Book to be kept by him for that effect, and Extracts of the Roll of
every Paroch are to be Subscribed, and given out by the Collector of the Shire
to the Sub-Collectors of the Paroch, for uplisting and in-gathering of the Sums
therein contained; and the List and Rolls of all the Paroches within the Shire
being brought in, and Booked and Recorded as said is the Books shall be
Subscribed by the Commissioners of the Shire, or their quorum, and an
Authentic double thereof under the Commissioners and their Collectors hands,
sent in to the Lords of the Thesaury, betwixt and the day appointed by the said
Act of Parliament: And the foresaid sub-Collector of the said Paroches getting
Subscribed Extracts of the Rolls, as said is, are to uplist the Pole Money from
the persons liable therein, conform to the said Extract the time, and in the
manner prescribed by the said Act of Parliament; And for the discharge of the
persons making payment, the Sub-Collectors are to have another Roll or Book,
bearing this Title, BOOK or ROLL of the Poleable persons within such a Paroch,
who have made payment of their respective Poles, set down, with their names in
manner subjoyned. Which Title being Signed by the said two Sub-commissioners,
and the persons making payment getting their Names and Sums set down in the
said Roll or Book by the Sub-collector of the paroch, shall be to them a
sufficient acquittance, without the necessity of any Discharge apart, in case
the party shall not require a Discharge: And this Book or Roll containing the
names and proportions of the Deficients after the number of Thirty days allowed
to the persons liable to come in and make payment, shall be given in, with the
Money collected in every Paroch, to the Colletor for Supply of the Shire, who
is immediately, to give to the Sub-Collectors an Extract of the said Roll of
payments for the Paroch, with his Discharge at the foot thereof, Registrat in
the Books of the Commissioners of Supply, and an Extract of the same is to be
returned and kept in the Kirk Session Records of the Paroch: And the Collector
for the Shire is further to insert the said Rolls, after first being compared
by two of the Commissioners with the former Rolls, in another Book, to be kept
by the said Collectors, and Subscribed by the Commissioners of the Shire, or
their quorum, as the Register of payments, of which second Book or Register an
authentic double subscribed as above, is also to be sent in to the Lords of
Our Thesaury, within Fifteen days after the expiring of the said Thirty days,
and within the same space the foresaid Collectors of Supply for the Shires, are
hereby ordained to make payment to the Receiver-general of the Total received
by them for the Paroches of every Shire, for which they are to have the General
Receivers Discharge so the Shire relative to the foresaid Book and Register of
payments brought in to the Thesaury, as said is, and which Discharge is to be
Registrat in the Books of Exchequer, and an Extract thereof given to the
Collector of the Shire, to be carried back and kept in the Records of the
shire, and the foresaid Clerks and Sub-Collectors of the Paroches, for their
whole pains in the premises, are to have an allowance from the Commissioners
of the Shire out of their Collection, not exceeding two per Cent of the Money
by them collected, and are hereby also declared to be punishable and fyneable
for their neglect or fraud in the said Trufts by the Commissioners of the
Shires, as they shall see cause. Likeas, the said Collector of Supply for the
Shire, is for all his pains in the hail permisses, to have an allowance from
the Commissioners of the Shire, not exceeding Two per Cent. of the Money to be
paid in to him by the Sub-Collectors and the said Collectors of Supply, is
likewise hereby declared to be punishable and fynable by the Commissioners of
the Shire, for their neglect and fraud, as they shall see cause: And the
foresaid Commissioners of the Shires are hereby commanded to attend and do
their duty in the premises, in manner prescribed by the said Act of Parliament
for Pole Money, and by this proclamation under the pain each of them of Ten
Pounds Scots toties quoties, to be given to the Commissioners that do meet; and
the Clerks of Supply for the several Shires, are hereby ordained to send in
Lists to the Clerks of our Privy Council, of the Commissioners that do not
meet, or keep the meetings, either for the Paroches, or for the whole shire,
Within the space of Fifteen days after the elapsing of their respective Dyets,
to the effect Letters may be direct against the said Commissioners, failzieing
to meet, for payment of their said Fines. And further, the said Commissioners,
in case of their other neglects and failzieurs in the premises: As also, the
said Collectors of Shires failzleing in their parts, are hereby declared
punishable by Our Council, as they shall see cause: And what is hereby
appointed as to Commissioners of Shires within their bounds foresaid, is also
appointed and enjoined to Magistrates within Burgh, and their Sub-Collectors,
and under the same pains in all points, with this express provision, that the
Sub-Collectors for Burghs give in their whole Lists to the Collector of Supply
of the Shire whereof they are apart, to be by them Registrat: And to the effect
the Commissioners of the shire may inspect and see how the same are made and
managed. And lastly, It is declared, that the foresaid Sub-Collectors and
Collectors shall have power to exact the doubles and quadruples, in case of
failzie, either by omitting, wrong up-giving, not payment, or otherwise,
conform to the said Act of Parliament, in which doubles and quadruples in the
cases forsaids, the foresaid Sub-Commissioners for Paroches, and Commissioners
for Shires, are hereby empowered to decern the persons failzieing, and to
direct Execution against them in all points, conform to the Act of Parliament.
OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and command that incontinent,
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Our ancient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation,
make Intimation hereof, that none may pretend ignorance. And ordains these
presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty seventh day of July, and of
Our Reign the Seventh Year, 1695. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the His most Excellent Majesty Anno DOM, 1695.


