A PROCLAMATION For Adjourning the Parliament.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith: To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds,
Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitut, Greeting: Forasmuch
as We, by Our Proclamation of the Date the third day of December last by past,
did Adjourn Our present Current Parliament, to the Eighteenth day of March then
next to come, now Instant; And whereas the present State of Our Affairs does
not reqnire the Meeting of Our Parliament so soon as the said Day to which it
was Adjourned: Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do
continue the Adjournment from the said Eighteenth day of March Instant, to the
Eighteenth day of August next to come: And being desirous to Prevent the
unnecessary Trouble and Charges that the Members of Parliament may be put to by
Attending the said Eighteenth day of March Instant, Do hereby with Advice
foresaid, Adjourn Our said Parliament until the said Eighteenth day of August
next; Requiring all the Members of Our said Parliament to Attend that Day in
the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the several Acts of
Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge you Strictly,
and Command, That incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent
Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Our Ancient Kingdom;
And there by open Proclamation, make Intimation that Our said Parliament is
Adjourned to the said Eighteenth day of August next to come: And Ordains these
Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Fifteenth Day of March, and of Our
Reign the Eighth Year 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. D A.
MONCREIFF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's Most Excellent Majesty, Anne Dom. 1697.


