HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENS


Edinburgh, the 25. of March, 1667.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith. To Our Lovits, (...) Messengers, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as it
is more then high time, to prevent the rising of disaffected persons, who,
during the continuance of the War with Our Foreign Enemies, are ready to break
out in open Rebellion, and rise in Arms against Us, and Our Authority, by
disabling them from putting themselves in a military posture, and in a
condition to make any sudden marches, or attempts upon Our well affected
Subjects, or any part of Our standing Forces, or to join with these, who are of
there own pernitiousand disloyal Principles, who live at a distance from them.
Therefore, We with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, command and charge
all persons within the Shires of Lanerk, Air, Renfrew, Wigton, and Stewartry of
Kirkcudbright, of whatsoever quality, who have refused to accept of any public
trust, or have deserted the same, being in place: As also, all those who
withdraw from public Ordinances, and do not keep their own Paroch Churches, or
do not submit to the present Government of Church and State. As likewise all
those who being warned to rise, and join with Our Forces, for suppressing the
late Rebellion, did not give obedience, unless the said persons will take the
Oath of Allegiance, and subscribe the Declaration appointed by the late Act of
Parliament. That after the fifteenth day of May next, they, by themselves, nor
no persons to their use and behove, do not keep any serviceable Horses, above
the rate of one hundred merks Scots, under any pretext whatsoever: with
certification, if the failzie, that upon information of any person well
affected, the Sheriff, or any two of the Justices of Peace within the Shire,
shall cause value such horses, and finding them above the rate foresaid, shall
cause deliver them to the informer, and that without any payment, or
satisfaction to be made therefore. And requires all Sheriffs and Justices of
Peace, within their respective bounds, to issue orders, for conveening the
Contraveeners of this Act before them, and causing Apprize any such horses, by
indifferent persons, that it may be known, if they be above the rate foresaid.
And, in case that the persons who compear, shall offer to purge themselves of
any suspicion of disaffection to our Government, upon the accounts foresaids;
That they administer to them the Oath of Allegiance, and offer the Declaration
to be subscribed by them, which being taken, and subscribed by them as said is,
then we enjoin them, to dismiss the said persons, with their horses, to be
kept by them, without any farther trouble or molestation: Otherwise, that they
proceed as said is. And ordains the Sheriffs of the said Shires, to cause
intimat these presents by public Proclamation, at the Market Crosses of the
Head Burghs of the said respective Shires and Stewartry: And cause read the
same at all the Paroch Churches of the said bounds, upon a Sunday before noon,
after Divine Service, with all Diligence. And that these presents be printed,
that none pretend ignorance.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
Anno Dom. 1667.


