C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For a public general Fast thorowout the Realm of SCOTLAND.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scoland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and sundry Our good Subjects, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as We considering the eminent Danger Our Royal Person and
Government, and the Protestant Religion have been of late, and are still
exposed unto, through an Damnable and Hellish Plot, contrived and carried on by
the Papists, for taking away Our Sacred Life, and for the subversion of the
Protestant Religion, and of the Government of these Kingdoms (which GOD of His
Infinite Mercy has hitherto prevented and disappointed, and We hope will
prevent and disappoint for the future) And being very sensible of the Fatal
Consequences of such an Horrible and Sanguinary Conspiracy and Design; We, out
of Our Religious Disposition, have readily approven of an Humble motion made to
Us for commanding a General Fast, to be Religiously kept throughout this whole
Kingdom, to Implore the Mercy of Almighty GOD for the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, as it is by Law established, and for the protection of Our
Royal Person and Government; As also, to pray that GOD will more and more bring
to Light, and confound all Secret Contrivances and Machinations against Us, and
in Us, against all Our Loyal Subjects; We, with advice of Our Privy Council,
have therefore thought fit by this Our Proclamation, to Indict a General and
Public Fast and day of Humiliation, that all Our loving Subjects may send up
their fervent Prayers and Supplications to Almighty GOD, to, and for, the
purposes aforesaid. Our Will is herefore, and We strictly Command and Charge,
that the said Fast be Religiously and Solemnly kept throughout this Our whole
Kingdom, by all Subjects and People within the same, upon the third Wednesday
of December next, being the eighteenth day thereof, to the end that so
necessary and Religious and Exercise may be performed by all at one and the
same time. Requiring hereby the Reverend Archbishops, and Bishops, to give
notice hereof to the Ministers in their respective Dyocesses, that upon the
Lord's Day immediately preceding the said eighteenth day of December, they
cause Read and Intimate this Our Proclamation from the Pulpit in every Parish
Church, and that they Exhort all Our Subjects to a Serious and Devout
performance of the said Prayers, Fasting and Humiliation, as they tender the
Favor of Almighty GOD, and the Safety and Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and of Our Sacred Life and Government, and as they would avoid the
Wrath and Indignation of GOD against this Kingdom: Certifying all those who
shall contemn or neglect such a Religious and necessary Duty, they shall be
proceeded against, and punished as Contemners of Our Authority, and Persons,
Disaffected to the Protestant Religion, as well as to Our Royal Person and
Government.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fifteenth day of November, one
thousand six hundred and seventy eight, and of Our Reign the thirtieth year.
Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Al. Gibson, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBURGH, prited by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, 1678.


