WR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For Seizing the Horses and Arms of Papists, and Persons above
the Degree of Commons, not Qualified according to the Act of Parliament.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as by the Sixth Act of the Fourth Session of this Our current
Parliament, It is Statute and Ordained, that all Persons who shall not swear
the Oath of Allegiance, and subscribe the same, with the Assurance to Us, shall
not be allowed to keep any Horses above an hundred Merks Price, nor any sort of
Arms more than a Walking-Sword, certifying such as should be found to have
Horses and Arms contrary to that Provision, either in their own or in the
keeping of others, that both the Owner and Keeper should incur the Penalty of
an thousand Merks, the one half to the Informer, and the other to Us. And by
the foresaid Act, the Lords of Our Privy Council are Authorized and Empowered
to take such further effectual Methods for Disarming these Persons, and seizing
of their Horses above the foresaid Value, as they should judge necessary. And
We Considering how requisite and needful it is at this time, that all Papists,
and Heretors, and others, above the degree of Commons within this Kingdom, who
have not sworn the Oath of Allegiance, and subscribed the same, with the
Assurance to Us, should be Disarmed, and their Horses above the Price foresaid
seized and employed for Our Use, to oppose and withstand the Invasion now
threatened from France. And for the better securing the Peace and Quiet of this
Our Kingdom from all Disturbance and Commotion, that may be moved or made
within the same, in case any such Foreign Invasion should happen, have
therefore thought fit, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, to
Require and Command; likeas, with Advice foresaid, We hereby peremptorly
Require and Command the Sheriffs of the several Shires of this Kingdom,
Stewarts of Stewartries, Baillies of Regalities, and their respective Deputs,
and the Magistrates of Burghs within their several Jurisdictions, immediately
after Publication hereof, to pass through every Paroch within their respective
Bounds, and call before them all the Papists, and the Heretors and others above
the degree of Commons within the same, who have not taken, or will not take the
Oath of Allegiance, and subscribe, the same with the Assurance to Us; and
Require and Command them upon Oath to Declare, what Horses they had since the
first of January last, or presently have above the Price of an Hundred Merks,
and in whose Custody they are, and what Arms more than a Walking-Sword, they
since the day foresaid had, or presently have belonging to them, and immediately
to deliver into the Custody and Keeping of the said Sheriff, or their Deputs,
or other Magistrates respective foresaid, before whom they shall Depone the
said Horses and Arms in their Custody, to be kept by the said Sheriffs and
other Magistrates foresaids, in sure Custody, until they make report of the
Number thereof to the Lords of Our Privy Council, which they are hereby
Required to do, betwixt and the Second day of April next for all upon this side
of Tay, and for all the rest of this Kingdom betwixt and the Fifth Day of May
next, under the pain of Five Hundred Merks Scots; and where either the said
Heretors, and others foresaids, do not Compear and Depone, or do not instantly
deliver the said Horses and Arms, acknowledged by their Oath to belong to
them. We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the Sheriffs and other
Magistrates respective above named, within their several Jurisdictions, to seize
upon the Horses and Arms belonging to the said Persons, and take the same into
their Custody and Keeping, wherever they can be found, and make report
thereof betwixt and the day foresaid, under the Pains above-set-down. and for
the more effectual Execution of the Premises, We with Advice foresaid, Empower
and Authorize any of the Magistrates respective abovenamed, to call for, and we
hereby Require and Ordain the Commander in Chief of Our Forces, to grant
sufficient Parties of Our Troops whenever they shall be required, to go along
with, and be assisting to the said respective Magistrates, in feising upon, and
searching for the said Horses and Arms to be delivered to, and detained by the
said respective Magistrates, and reported to Our Privy Council, in manner
abovementioned; And We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the said
respective Magistrates, in the Report to be made by them to Our Privy Council,
and likewise the Officers of Our Troops that shall be employed for their
Assistance, to Declare upon Oath, that they have not restored or given back any
Horses above the price of one hundred Merks, or Arms more than a Walking-Sword
to any of the foresaids persons not qualified according to Law, or others
belonging to them, but that they have effectually Seized, and Reported all the
Horses above the price foresaid, and Arms more than the said Walking-Sword
belonging to any of the said unqualified Heretors, and others foresaids within
their respective Bounds, conform to the foresaid Act of Parliament, and the
Orders here set down, and how soon soever the said Report shall be made; We
with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, will send the necessary Orders
to the Sheriffs and other Magistrates respective abovenamed, how to dispose
upon the said Horses and Arms to the best Advantage for Our Service, which
they are punctually to observe and obey, as they will be answerable. OUR WILL
IS HEREFORE, and we Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent their Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within
this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make
Intimation hereof that none pretend Ignorance, and Ordains these presents to be
Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of March, and of Our
Reign the seventh year 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.


