PROCLAMATION For the more easy and effectual In-bringing of the Pole Money.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britan, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute, Greeting: Forasmuchas the two Poles imposed by two Acts of the last
Session of this present current Parliament, are now set in Farm, and that it is
of special concern, for making the said Poles effectual, that the
Commissioners of Shires and others required by the said Acts, for making up
the Lists, Rolls and Books of Persons, and returning of the same; Do diligently
Meet and Attend, and Perform what is incumbent to them for Clearing, and for
the more easy raising and levieing of the said Poles by Our said Farmers; We
with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, and conform to the reference
made to them by the said Acts of Parliament, have Ordained, and hereby Ordains
for the first of the said Poles, the hail Commissioners of the several Shires
and Stewartries within this Kingdom, residing within the same respective, to
meet upon the second Tuesday of October next to come, at the ordinary place of
their Meeting and there to subdivide the hail Bounds of the said Shires and
Stewartries, amongst the Commissioners residing for the present within the
same, whether present at or absent from the said Meeting, for making up the
Lists of the poleable Persons, by virtue of the foresaid Act, and that at such
Places as they shall appoint upon the first Tuesday of November thereafter; and
there to proceed in completing the said Lists and Rolls of poleable Persons,
and taking in their several Degrees and Qualities in manner specified, in the
said Act: And appoints Advertisement to be given to the said Commissioners
residing within the said Shires and Stewarties timeously by the several
Shireffs and Stewarts or their Deputs, for their Meeting upon the said second
Tuesday of October next, to the effect foresaid; And likewise, that
Advertisement be timeously given to the Commissioners absent and appointed to
particular districts, and that Intimation be made at the several Paroch
Churches within the Shires a competent time of before of the particular places
to which the poleable persons are to repair for giving in of their Degrees,
Characters and Qualifications, according to which they are liable in Polemony,
under the pains contained in the Act of Parliament. And further, We with Advice
foresaid Require and Command the Magistrates of Burghs, to meet upon the Days
appointed by the foresaid Act of Parliament; and to proceed in making up the
Lists and Rolls of the persons poleable within their Burghs, and to make
Intimation in manner abovementioned; As also, We with Advice foresaid, Command
and Appoint the said Commissioners of Supply, Magistrates of Burghs and their
respective Clerks, to complete the foresaids Rolls, and Lists of the poleable
persons within their respective Bounds, and to transmit the samen or an
abstract thereof to the Lords of our Thesaury, betwixt and the first day of
December next, to the effect the said Lists and Rolls may be delivered by them
to Our said Farmers, betwixt or upon the third Tuesday of December next to
come: And We with Advice foresaid, do hereby certify the said Commissioners
and Magistrates respective foresaid, if they shall either fail to meet or attend
the said Days for making up the said Lists and Rolls; or in transmitting the
same or Abstracts thereof in the Terms of the Act of parliament, betwixt and
the Day foresaid, they shall be conveened and processed before the Lords of Our
privy Council at the instance of Our Advocat, and of the said Tacksmen for
their Negligence in the premises and for Damnages, and to be punished for the
same with all Severity; And We ordain the Chamberlains, Factors, Doers and the
Tutors and Curators of such of the said poleable persons as are Absent, or
Minors, to give np the respective Qualities and Degrees of the said persons
absent, or Minors, and make payment of their polemoney at the Days and under
the Certifications and pains contained in the foresaid Act of parliament: And
lastly, We with Advice foresaid Declare, that all persons liable in polemoney
by this present Act, shall be obligid to give up upon Oath their Names,
Qualities and Degrees, and values of their Estates, if required thereto at
least that it shall be leisome and competent to our said Tacksmen to control
the Qualities, degrees and Values of Estates that shall be given in by the Oath
of the Ingiver thereof, if they think fit, for making the Ingivers thereof
liable for the single Pole, Doubles or Quadruples, according to the foresaid
Act of Parliament. OUR Will is herefore, and We charge you strictly, and
Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the hail Head-Burghs of the
several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the Premises, that none
pretend ignorance; And We Ordain our Solicitor to dispatch Copies hereof to the
Sheriffs of the several Shires and Stewarts of Stewartries, and their Deputs,
and Magistrates of Burghs, or their Clerks, to be by them published at the
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs, upon Receipt thereof, and immediately sent to
the several Ministers, to the effect the same may be intimat and read at the
several Paroch-Churches upon the Lords Day, at least preceding the said second
Tuesday of October next to come: And Ordains Our Solicitor to transmit printed
Copies of the said Act of Parliament, with this present Proclamation, to the
Sheriffs of the several Shires, Stewarts of Stewartries, and Magistrates of
Burghs, to be delivered to them, and made use of by them as they shall find
needful: And Ordains these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twentieth day of September, and of Our
Reign the Tenth Year, School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. School.


