CR

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For establishsing Lieutenents in the Shires of Argyle and
Tarbet, for securing the Peace of the High-lands.
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
to Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
greeting;
Forasmuch, as We understanding that Archibald late Earl of Argyle has not
only consulted and concurred with English conspirators, in their late
treasonable Plot against Our Person, Our dearest and only Brother, and Our
Royel Government, but has been eminently active therein, encouraging his
Accomplices, by undertaking to raise a considerable Force in this Our Ancient
Kingdom, for beginning, and carring on of that villainous Conspiracy; And We
being obliged by the Law of GOD and Man, to endeavor by all just means to
disappont those Hellish Machinations, and to prevent the ruin of Our good
People, which necessarily would ensue, if the malicious designs of the said
late Earl of Argyle, and others his Accomplices, should take any effect; And We
having in order thereto, established Lieutenents in the Shires of Argyle, and
Tarbet, for preventing and suppressing the Projects and Seditions intended by
the said late Earls descending in these places, and his Convocating others, who
are ill-principled, and disaffected to Our Government; And it being fit that
the said Lieutenents should be assisted by Our other good Subjects, in case of
such traitorous attempts: We therefore, by virtue of Our Royal Authority, and
with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Command and Require,
that the persons after-named, have in readiness with all convenient diligence,
the respective proportions, and number of Men after-mentioned, well provided,
in Feir of Weir, well Armed, and with thirty days Provision, for concurring
with, and assisting our said Lieutenents, in maintaining Our Royal Authority,
and executing of Our Laws, and preserving the Peace of this Our Realm, as they
shall be required by Our said Lieutenent, on any necessary occasion, viz. The
Earl of Monteith two hundred Men, and the Lord Luss one hundred Men, for
assisting the Lieutenent of Cowel, when they shall be required: The Marquess of
Athol three hundred Men, and the Earl of Braid-Albin three hundred Men, to
assist the Lieutenent of Inverrary: The Sheriff of Boot two hundred Men: The
Lord of Mcclean two hundred Men: (...) Mccleud of Harris two hundred Men: And
(...) for Ila two hundred Men, for assisting the Lieutenent of Sadell or
Kintyre: The Marquess of Huntley, and Earl of Perth three hunderd Men: The
Lord of Mckintosh two hundred Men: The Lord of Mckinnen one hundred Men, And
the Lord of Appine one hundred Men, for assisting the Lieutenent of Craigness:
The Marquess of Huntley, and Earl of Perth three hundred Men, The Lord
Lochyell two hundred Men: The Captain of Clanronnald two hundred Men, And the
Lord of Glengarry one hundred Men: for assisting the Lieutenent of
Dunstaffnage; The Earl of Mary three hundred Men: The Lord Weem one hundred
Men, The Earl of Seaforth three hundred Men, And Sir Donald Mcdonald of Slait
two hundred Men, for assisting the Lieutenent of Tarbet: And all the person
abovenamed, are hereby required to have their foresaids number in readiness,
and to certiorat Our Chancellor thereof, with all convenient diligence, and to
have their said Numbers fitted and prepared to march with all diligence to the
said respective Lieutenents, as they shall require the famine: And to the
effect the ill-affected people may be the more terrified from attempting any
thing to the prejudice of Us, or of Our good Subjects: We hereby Command and
Require all Our Liedg-men, betwixt sixty and sixteen, within the respective
Shires after-mentioned well provided, in Feir of Weir, to march on six days
warning, with thirty days Provision, to the assistance of the several
Lieutenents, when they shall require the same; and there to act and do as they
shall be commanded by the said Lieutenents, or others having command from Us;
To wit, all within the Shires Dumbartoun, and Stirling, and Stewartry of
Monteith, for to answer the Lieutenent of Cowall: All within the Shire of
Perth, to answer the Lieutenent of Inverrary: All within the Shires of Forfer
and Kincardine, and Stewartry of Strathern, to answer the Lieutenent of
Craigness: All within the Shires of Aberdene and Bamff, above Kincairn of
Neill, Kildrummie, and Keith, to answer the Lieutenent of Tarbet: All within
the Shire of Boot, Isles of Mull and Ila, to answer the Lieutenent of Saddel or
Kintrey: And all within the Shires of Inuerness, Elgine, Nairn and Ross, to
answer the Lieutenent of Dunstaffnage, And all Our Leidges are hereby required
to give obedience to the said Lieutenents, to act, assist, and concur with
them in manner foresaid, under the pain of tinsel of Life, Lands, and Goods;
And thereby, and attour, all the Fencible Men within ilk respective Division,
are hereby required to give obedience to said Lieutenents, in manner, and to
the effect above-written, under the foresaids pain. And to the effect Our
special pleasure in the premises may be made known, that all persons concerned
may give exact and punctual obedience thereunto. Our Will is, and We charge you
strictly, and command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pas to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Market Cross of the Head Burghs of the
Shires of this Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make Publication of the
premises, that none may pretend ignorance. As also, We ordain these presents
to be affixt on the several Paroch Kirk-doors within the High-lands, and the
several Sheriffs of the Shires foresaids, to see the same done accordingly, as
they will be answerable.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fifth day of May, One thousand six
hundred eighty and four. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and sixth Year, 1684.
Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL PATERSON. Cls. (...)


