A PROCLAMATION, For Adjourning the Parliament from the eighth of October next,
to the twentieth of December thereafter.
At Edinburgh, the first day of October, One thousand six hundred eighty nine
years.
WHereas His Sacred Majesty Considering, that by the last Act of the present
Current Parliament, of this His Ancient Kingdom, Holden at Edinburgh, the same
is Declared Current and Adjourned until the eighth day of October next; and
That the present State of His Majesty's Affairs does not Require the Meeting of
the said Parliament, so soon as the said eighth of October, to which it was
Adjourned, Has therefore by His Royal Letter, Dated at Hamptoun-Court, the
twenty fifth of September One thousand six hundred eighty nine, Signified His
Resolution, to Continue the Adjournment from the said eighth of October, to the
twenty day of December thereafter; And that the Members thereof may not be put
to the Trouble and Charge of Meeting upon the said eight of October; Has
likewayes Authorized and Required the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to
IssueF forth this Proclamation, in His Name, to the Effect after-mentioned
Therefore the said Lords of Privy Council, Do, in His Majesty's Name, and by
His special Command and Authority, hereby Adjourn the said Current Parliament,
to the said twentieth of December next; And Require and Command the Lion King
at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Privy Council, Pursevants,
Messengers at Arms, Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, that
incontinent, their Presents seen, they pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Kingdom, and there,
in His Majesty's Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Intimation of
the said Adjournment of the Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said eighth
day of October, to the twentieth day of December next ensuing; Requiring hereby
all the Members of the Parliament to attend that day, in the usual way, and
upon the accustomed Certifications. The which to do, the said Lords commits to
them, His Majesty's full Power, by these Presents, Delivering the same, by them
duly Execute, and Indorsed again to the Bearer.

Per Actum Dominerum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls, Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Secret Council,
Anne Dom, 1689.


