HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

PROCLAMATION For Apprehending Henry Every, alias Bridgeman, and sundry other
Pirates.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute
Greeting, For as much as, We are Informed that Henry Every, alias Bridgeman,
together with several other Persons, English Men, Scots Men, and Foraigners, to
the Number of about One Hundred and Thirty, did Steal, and Run away with the
Ship called the Phausie, alias Charles, of Forty six Guns from the Port of
Corunns in Spain, and Commit several Acts of Pyrracy under English Colors upon
the Seas of India or Persia Contrary to the Law of Nations, and of this Kingdom
in particular; And that the said Henry Every, and severals of his Accomplices,
since, Committing of the said Acts of Pyrracy, having left the said Ship in
the Island of Providence, are Returned to, and have Dispersed themselves within
this Our ancient Kingdom, thinking, and intending thereby to Save and Shelter
themselves from the Punishment and Execution of Law Due to such Heinous and
Notorious Offenders: And We being Resolved, that outmost Diligence shall be
Used for Seizing, and Apprehending the Persons of such Open and Villainous
Transgressors; Do therefore, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
Require, and Command, the Sheriffs of the several Shires, Stewarts of
Stewartries, Baillies of Regalities, and their Respective Deputs, Magistrates of
Burghs, Officers of Our Army, Commanders of Our Forces and Garrisons, and all
others Employed, or Trusted by Us in any Station whatsoever, Civil or Military
within this Kingdom, and Our Good Subjects whatsoever within the same, to do
their outmost lndeavour and Diligence to Seize upon, and Apprehend the Persons
of the said Henry Every, alias Bridgema, together with James Cray, Thomas
Summerton, Edward Kirwood, William Down, John Reddy, John Stroger, Nathaniel
Pike, Peter Soans, Henry Adams, Francis Frennier Thomas Johnson, Joseph Dauson,
Samuel Dauson, James Lewis, Jehn Sparks, Joseph Goss, Charles Falconer, James
Murray, Robert Rich, John Miler, John King, Edward Savil, William Philips,
Thomas Jope, and Thomas Belish, his Accomplices, or any of them, and such
others as were with them in the said Ship (who may be Probably known and
Discovered by the Great Quantities of Person and Indian Gold and Silver which
they have with them) and Deliver him or them Prisoners to the next Magistrate of
any of Our Burghs, to be by them kept in safe Custody until farther Order be
taken for bringing him or them to such Coodign Punishment as their Crime does
Deserve, and out of Detestation to such a Horrid villainy, and to the Effect the
same may not go Un-punished; and for Encouraging the Magistrates abovenamed,
and any other of Our Good Subjects to Search for, and Apprehend such
Nottrorious Rogues: We with Advice foresaid do make Offer, and Assure the
Payment of the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds Sterling for the said Henry Every,
alias Bridgman, and Fiftieth Pounds Sterling Money foresaid for every one of
the other Persons abovenamed to any Person or Persons who shail Seize and
Apprehend them or any of them, and Deliver him or them Prisoners to any of the
Magistrates of Our Burghs, which shall be Truly and Faithfully paid, as a
Reward to the said Person or Persons who shall Apprehend and Deliver Prisoner
to any of Our Magistrates the said Henry Every, or any other of his Accomplices
abovenamed, Indemnifying hereby all and every one of Our Subjects from any
Hazard of Slaughter, Mutilation, or other Acts of Violence which they may
Commit against the said Henry Every, or any of his Accomplices, or any Persons
that shall Assist them, to Hinder and Oppose their being Seized and Taken: And
We with Advice foresaid Peremptorly Inhibit and Discharge all, and every one of
Our Subjects whatsomever to Shelter, Harbor, Conceal, or any ways Assist, or
Supply the said Henry Every, or any of his Accomplices abovenamed upon their
Highest Peril. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you Strictly, and Command,
that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Corss of
Edinburgh, and Remanent Market Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires
and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority make
Intimation here of that none may pretend Ignorance, And Ordains these Presents
to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Eighteenth Day of August, and of Our
Reign the Eighth Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. DA.
MONCRIEFF. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM, 1696.


