HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

PROCLAMATION For bringing in the Lists, and Determining Debates about the
Pole Money.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council,
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjuctly and severally,
specially Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, albeit by the Ninth Act of the
Fourth Session of this Our current Parliament, The Commissioners of Supply
within the several Shires, and Magistrates of the several Burghs-Royal of this
Kingdom, are appointed and Ordained to meet at the respective places, mentioned
in the said Act, and upon the particular Days of the Month of August last
bypast, and take up Rolls and Lists of all the Poleable Persons within their
respective Bounds, containing the Names, Qualities and Degrees of the several
persons, and value of the Estates belonging to them, conform to the said Act.
And We by Our Proclamation of the Date the Second Day of the said Month of
August last, Required and Commanded the Commissioners of Our Supply, to go
diligently about the making up of the said Lists, and Empowered them to
Condescend upon, and design an Heretor above an hundred pound scots of valued
Rent, at least, in each Paroch where no Commissioner or Magistrate lives, who
being to designed, should proceed and make up the Rolls, and state the
Pole Money within, the said Paroch, and report the Lists so made up, to the
Clerk of the Commissioners or Supply, who was to Transmit the same with the
Lists made up by the Commissioners themselves of the several Parochs within
which they Dwell, to the Office of the Pole Money, kept at Edinburgh, betwixt
and the Day appointed by the foresaid Act of Parliament: Yet in many Shires
within this Kingdom, the said Commissioners of Supply, and Magistrates of
Burghs, have either not at all met, or where they have met, did not Nominat
persons in the several Parochs, to make up the Rolls, and state the Pole Money;
or where, persons have been Nominat within the several Parochs, they have been
negligent, and failed in performance of what is Enjoined and Required of them
by the foresaid Act of Parliament anent the Pole Money, and Our former
Proclamation following thereon: Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council peremptorly Require and Command the Commissioners of Supply
within the several Shires, and Magistrates of Burghs, of this Our ancient
Kingdom, to meet and make up Lists and Rolls of the Poleable persons within the
several Parochs where they Dwell, and to Nominat and Appoint one Heretor,
within every Paroch, of an hundred Pounds Scots of valued Rent at least, who
being so designed, We hereby Require and Command them to make up the Lists and
Rolls of the Poleable persons within their several bounds, containing the
Names. Qualities and Degrees of the several Persons, and the value of the
Estates belonging to them, and Transmit the same to the clerks of the
Commissioners of Supply, who are to send them to the Pole-money-office at
Edinburgh, conform to the former Proclamation made thereanent. And We with
Advice foresaid Require and Command the said several Commissioners, and
particular Heretors designed within each paroch by them, to attendat the Paroch
Church within their respective Bounds, upon such a Day in the Forenoon, as
shall be intimate to them by the Farmers of the Pole Money, and to the
Inhabitants within the said Paroch, at the Church Door thereof, upon the Sunday
after Divine Service, preceding the said Day, and there to Judge and Determine
all Debates and Controversies that shall arise betwixt any of Our Leidges
within the said Paroch, and the Farmers of Our Pole Money, or their Sub-farmers
or Collectors, anent the said Pole Money, Lists thereof, Qualities or Degrees
of the several persons within the said Paroch, and value of the Estates
belonging to them, whose Sentences therein shall be sussicient Warrant and
Rule, according whereunto they are to Collect and Levy the said Pole money,
Certifying the said Commissioners, and Magistrates of Burghs, who shall either
fail to meet, or being met, fail to design Heretors of the several Parochs, for
making up the said Rolls and Lists, and the said Heretors being so designed,
and particular Commissioners within the Parochs where they Dwell respective,
who shall not duly make up the Rolls and Lists; and deliver the same to the
Clerk of Supply, in manner foresaid, and who shall not punctually attend at the
respective Paroch Churches, to Judge and Determine in the Cases above-exprest,
upon intimation given, in manner abovementioned: Our Letters of Horning shall
be directed against them, and each of them, at the instance of any of the
Farmers of the Pole Money, their Sub-tacktmen, or Collectors Charging them
thereto, under the pain of five pounds Scots, toties quoties, to be paid to
the Charger And We hereby Require the Clerks of Our Privy Council, to Grant to
them the foresaid Letters of Horning in common form to that effect. And for the
more easy stating the said Pole Money, and uplisting thereof, We with Advice
of Our Privy Council, and conform to the power granted to them by the foresaid
Act of Parliament, hereby Require and Command all Heretors, or at least their
Tutors, Factors and Chamberlains, to give in to the said respective
Commissioner, or Heretor designed for the Paroch in which they Dwell, within
the time contained in the said Act of Parliament, the number and Names of all
Tennents who have taken Lands or Houses immediately of the Heretors and
Proprietars, and all Tennents in Lands or Houses to give in, in manner
foresaid, the number and names of their Sub-tennents and Cottars, under the
pain of Twelve shilling Scots for each Tutor, Factor or Chamberlain, and six
shilling Scots for each Tennent sailing in the Premisss, to be applied to the
use of Our said Farmers, their Subtacksmen or Collectors, by and attour the
said Pole Money, wherein they are respective liable. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and
We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and the remanent Mercat-crosses of the
Head-burghs of the several Shires within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name
and Authority, by open Praclamation, make Intimation of the Premsses, that none
pretend Ignorance.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the Sixth Day of September. And of Our
Reign the Sixth Year 1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Succssors of Andrew Anderson, Printer
Theie most Excellent Majesty, 1694.


