A PROCLAMATION, For a Public Solemn Thanksgiving.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren
Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting: Forasmuch as it has pleased Our Gracious God, of his infinite
Goodness and Mercy, not only to these Nations, but likewise to the common
Interests (both Religious and Civil) of all Christendom, to preserve Our Sacred
Person, and prosper Us in Our Undertakings, this last Summer, against these who
are Enemies to Truth, and Us; and especially to Crown Our Arms with the
complete Reducing of Ireland to Our Subjection and Obedience; and to Restore
and bring back Our Royal Person in Safety to Our Throne, to the Joy and
Satisfaction of all Our good Subjects, after the many eminent Hazards to which
We have been exposed in Our late Expedition; And We Considering, how necessary
a Duty it is, and how much it does import the Welfare of Us, and Our People,
that Signal Blessings be owned and acknowledged, by Public and Solemn
Thanksgivings, are Resolved, humbly to acknowledge Our Thankfulness to the
Infinitely Wise and Good GOD, for such Signal and Seasonable Mercies, conferred
upon Us and Our People, in answer to the frequent and fervent Prayers, poured
forth at the several solemn Fasts and Humiliations, observed and kept
throughout this Our Ancient Kingdom, during Our late Expedition; And the
several Presbyterian Ministers, who were sent to attend the General Assembly of
the Kirk of this Our Ancient Kingdom, Having Addressed themselves to the Lords
of Our Privy Council, to interpose their Authority, for appointing a Solemn Day
of Public Thanksgiving, to be Religiously observed throughout this Our
Kingdom, for the Causes, and to the effect above-specified; Therefore We, with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do Appoint and Command, that the
Twenty sixth Day of November instant, be Religiously and devoutly observed as a
Solemn Day of Public Thanksgiving by all persons within this Kingdom, both in
Churches and Meeting Houses, for returning most hearty and humble Thanks, and
acknowledgment to the Divine Goodness, for his Signal Blessings and
Deliverances already bestowed on Us and Our People, and to Implore the
continuance thereof in the gracious Mercy of Our God, and that a Spirit of
Counsel and Wisdom may assist Us, and the Princes and States Our Allies, in Our
Consultations and Undertakings, for the ensuing Year. And to the effect Our
Pleasure in the Premises may be known, OUR WILL IS, and We Charge you strictly
and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent
Head-Burghs of the several Shires within this Kingdom, and of the Stewartries
of Kirkcudbright, Annandale and Orknay; and there, in Our Name and Authority,
make Publication hereof, that none may pretend ignorance. And ordains Our
Solicitor to cause send Printed Copies hereof to the Sheriffs of the several
Shires, and Stewarts of the Stewartries foresaids, whom We Ordain to see the
same Published, and appoints them to send Doubles thereof to all the Ministers,
both in Churches and Meeting. Houses, within their respective Jurisdictions,
that upon the Lords Day immediately preceding the said twenty sixth Day of
November instant, the same may be Read and Intimat in every Paroch-Church and
Meeting House, Certifying all such, who shall contemn or neglect so Religious
and important a Duty, as the Thanksgiving hereby appointed is, they shall be
proceeded against, and punished as contemners of Our Authority, and as highly
disaffected to Our Person and Government. And Ordains these Presents to be
Printed, and Published as aforesaid.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourth Day of November. And of Our
Reign, the third Year. 1691. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. D. MONCREIFF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1691.


