royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

PROCLAMATION For making up Men deficient in the last Levies.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, To (...) Macers of Our Privy
Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, Conjunctly and
Severally, specially Constitute, Greeting; FOR AS MUCH AS, in Prosecution of
the seventh Act of the fourth Session of this Our current Parliament,
cheerfully offering to Us, a present Levy of two thousand nine hundred and
seventy nine Foot, to be Levied off the several Shires and Burghs of this
Kingdom, effeiring to the Proportions and Numbers set down in the foresaid Act.
The Lords of Our Privy Council, conform to the Power given to them in the
foresaid Act of Parliament, by their Instructions to the Commissioners of
Supply within the several Shires of this Kingdom, of the Date the eighth day of
February last by past: appointed the said Commissioners furthwith, to make
exact Lists of the Heretors and Lands liable in the said Levy, that so it might
be perfectly known who were liable. And in case any men were to be put out by
Fractions, and that they could not agree who should furnish the body of the
man, the said Commissioners should order the Fractions to meet at a certain
day and place, and there determine it by an equal Lot, effeiring to their
respective Numbers of Men, or the quantities of their respective Valuations, as
the use was in every Shire; so that every Lotter was to have as many Lots, as
he had Numbers of Men, or quantities of valued Rent sufficient for the Outreik
of a man: And in case any of the said Fractions should not meet, or should
refuse to Lot, the said Commissioners were authorized to appoint such as they
should think fit, to meet and Lot for them. And in case the person upon whom
the Lot fell to put out a man for himself and his Fraction, should fail in
furnishing the man, or should furnish an insufficient man; then the Tennents
and Possessors of the Lands and Ground belonging to the said persons who
should have put out the man, should be liable; and the person upon whom the Lot
did fall, and who failied to put out the man in manner foresaid, should be
decerned in the Sum of two hundred Merks. To which Act of Parliament and
Instructions foresaid, We expected punctual and exact Compliance and Obedience.
Yet, not only a great many outreicked and furnished to serve as Soldiers in
the said new Levy, are rejected and sent home as Insufficient; but likewise,
many liable to outreick and furnish men for the said Levy, are deficient and
altogether wanting, in sending out the Numbers of men wherein they are liable,
conform to the said Act of Parliament and Instructions foresaids, and thereby
have Incurred the Penalties contained in the said Instructions, by and attour
their being liable for the persons of the men whom they were to have outreiked,
conform to the said Act of Parliament and Instructions. Therefore, and for the
more effectual providing the said men, and completing the number of Soldiers
offered to Us by the foresaid Act of Parliament, and exacting the Penalties
Constitute in the foresaids Instructions; We, with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council, peremptorly Require and Command the Sheriff, of the several
Shires, and their Deputs, Stewarts of Sewartries, Baillies of Regalities, and
their respective Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs Royal, within this Our
ancient Kingdom, as they will be answerable, each of them within their own
respective Jurisdictions, presently upon sight hereof, to call for a List of
the deficient men within their respective Bounds, and of the Persons who should
have put out the same and upon recept thereof, where no Lotting has been made
for Fractions, that he immediately cast Lots amongst the said Fractions, who
shall put out the man one or more, and then shall pass to the Ground of his
Lands upon whom the Lot shall happen to fall, and there immedialy pitch upon,
take and apprehend a sufficient man out of his said men, able to serve Us as a
Soldier, and commit them Prisoners to the Prison of the head Burgh of the
Shire, there to be kept at four shillig Scots per diem, upon the Expenses of
the Officer who is to receive him upon advertisement from the Sheriff, or other
Judge foresaid who causes apprehend and commit him to the said Prison: and
which Allowance is to be refounded to the said Officer, by the Pay of the said
Soldier, which is to be allowed to him for the said person, from the day of
his being committed, as if he had been Listed and Enrolled as a Soldier in Our
Service; and in like manner, shall apprehend sufficient men upon the Ground of
the Lands of these who are deficient, according to the numbers they have not
put out, and are liable to, whether by the Rule of the Militia specified in the
Act of Parliament, or other ways; and deliver them to the next Commanding
Officers, in manner, and to the end above mentioned: and likewise, that they
cause exact the Penallies mentioned in the said Instructions, from all who
have incurred the same, by and attour the apprehending and delivering the man,
in manner foresaid. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and
Command, that in continent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the Remanent Burghs of the whole
Shires of this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make public
Intimation of the Premises, that none may pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the second day of August, and of Our Reign
the sixth Year, 1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELLIOT.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson; Printer to
Their most Excellent Majesty's. 1694.


