A PROCLAMATION For a Solemn National Fast and Humiliation.
WILLIAM By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messenger at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
Part Conjunctly and severally specically Constitute, Greeting.
Forasmuch, as the Continuance of a dangerous and necessar^ War, wherein We and
Our People are engaged, and which inevitably exposes Our Royal Person to great
and continual Danger, and that in the Success and Prosperity of Our Arms by Sea
and Land, the Welfare of our Kingdoms, and of the Churches of God both at Home
and Abroad, are highly concerned, do Call for earnest and fervent Prayer to
God, for Success to Our Arms, Protection to Our Royal Person, and for his
Gracious assisting Us and Our Allies, with a Spirit of Wisdom, Counsel and
Courage, in all our Consults, Designs and Undertakings against the common
Enemy, and that deep Humiliation and Fasting before the Lord, should be Joined,
with Our fervent Supplications for the Causes foresaids; And that a Day should
be solemnly Set apart, to be kept through all the Churches of this Kingdom
for that Effect. And for Appointment of which solemn Fast and Day of
Humiliation; the Ministers and Elders now Met at Edinburgh, Commissioners
Appointed by the late General Assembly, of the National Church of this our
Ancient Kingdom, have also Addressed the Lords of our Privy Council, and that
for the same Causes and Ends foresaids, and others contained in their said
Address, which we have Allowed to be Printed. Therefore We with Advice of the
Lords of Our Privy Council, Command and Appoint a Day of Solemn Humiliation and
Prayer, to be Observed for the Causes foresaids, throughout the whole Kingdom,
upon the Days following, viz In all the Churches upon this side of Tay, upon
Tuesday the sixtenth Day of June current: and in all the rest of the Paroch
Churches within this Kingdom, upon Tuesday the thirtieth Day of the said Month:
Upon which Days of Solemn Humiliation and Prayer, respective foresaids, as We
and Our People are to be deeply Humbled, for Our great and manifold
Provocations, and to Deprecat the Wrath of God for Our Ingratitude for former
Deliverances; so We are Importunatly to Implore the Divine Majesty, for the
continuance of his Protection, and good Hand upon us; and that he would turn
away his Anger and threatened Judgments from Us and Our People, so justly
deserved for Our great Unthankfulness and manifold Provocations. Which Days
respective foresaids, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Require
and Command, to be Religiously and Seriously observed by all Ranks and Degrees
of People; and that the samen be wholly spent and employed upon Preaching, and
hearing the Word, and the other Acts of Devotion foresaid; Certifying such of
the Leiges who shall not give due Obedience hereunto, or who shall contemn or
neglect the Keeping and Observing of the said Days and Duties that they shall
be Proceeded against by Fyning, not exceeding an hundred Pounds Scots. And We
with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the Sheriffs of the several Shires,
Stewarts of Stewartries, Lords and Baillies of Regalities, and their Deputs,
Justices of Peace, and Magistrates of Burghs within their several Jurisdictions,
to Proceed against the persons Guilty, and to Exact the Fynes accordingly, to
be Applied the one half to the Judge, and the other half to the Poor of the
Paroch: and Certifying such Minister^ as shall fail of their Duty, in not
observing the Premises, and in not Reading, and duly Intimating of their
Presents in manner after-mentioned, they shall be Processed before the Lords of
Our Privy Council. And We with Advice foresaid, Require the several Magistrates
abovementioned, betwixt and the twenty second Day of July next to come, to
make Report to the Lords of Our Privy Council, of these Ministers within their
respective Jurisdictions, who shall fail in their Duty and Obedience to the
Premises. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, That
incontinent these Our-Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and in Our Name and Authority, make
Publication hereof, that none pretend ignorance. And We ordain Our Solicitor
to dispatch Copies hereof, to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts
of Stewartries, and their Deputs or Clerks to be by them Published at the
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs upon Receipt thereof, and immediately sent to
the several Ministers, ^o the effect they may Read and Intimat the same from
their Pulpits upon the Lords Days, immediately preceding the Days above
appointed; and Ordains these Presents to be Printed and Published in manner
foresaid.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fifth day of June, and of Our Reign
the eighth Year. 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anne Dom. 1696.


