W R HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

George Barclay.
WILLIAM By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith: To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially,
Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, Sir George Barclay having entered into a
Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, with diverse other Wicked and Traitorous
Persons, to Assassinate and Murder Our Sacred Person, is not yet apprehended
and brought to Justice, but is supposed to have made his escape out of the
Kingdom of England (whers that execrable Villainy was to have been Perpetrat)
and to have fled to, and taken his Refuge in this Our Ancient Kingdom; And We
being resolved to use all endiavours, to bring such a Barbarous Traitor to
Condign punishment. Do therefore, Require and Command all Magistrates, and
Ministers of Our Law, Officers of Our Army, and Soldiers under Our pay: and
all other the good Subjects of this Our Ancient Kingdom, whatsoever, to
Discover, Seize upon; Take and apprehend, the Person of the said Sir George
Barclay, wherever he may be found, and to carry him to the next sure Prison,
where he is to be detained till farther Order, and Our Privy Council to be
immediately acquainted therewith: And for the Encouragement of all Persons, to
be diligent and careful in Discovering, and Apprehending the said Sir George
Barclay, We do hereby Declare, that whosoever shall Apprehend the said Sir
George Barclay, and deliver him to any Magistrate within this Kingdom, to be
detained Prisoner as said is, shall receive, and have paid to them the Sum of
One thousand pounds Sterling as a reward for their good service, which Sum We
hereby require the Lords Commissioner of Our Treasury, to make payment of
accordingly; And in case any of Our good Subjects shall Kill, Mutilator hurt
the said Sir George Barclay, or any person who shall presume to withstand Our
good Subjects in the Apprehending of him, the said Persons who shall Kill,
Hurt, or Wound the said Sir George Barclay or any others who shall stand up
Violently to Defend or withstand his being Apprehended, shall be hereby as
sufficiently Indemnified, as if they had a Remission under Our Great Seal for
the same: And farther, We hereby strictly Prohibit and Discharge all the
Subjects of this Our Ancient Kingdom, to Conceal, Harbor, or Supply the said
Sir George Barclay, under the Pains of being proceeded against with all Rigor,
according to the several Laws and Acts of Parliament made anent Harboring, or
Resetting Fugitives and Traitors. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
strictly, and Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh; and to the Market Crosses of the whole remanent
Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and
There in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the
Premises, that none may pretend Ignorance, And Ordains these Presents to be
Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Seventh Day of May, and of Our Reign
the Eight Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


