A PROCLAMATION For a Solemn National Fast and Humiliation.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part,
Conjunctly and Severally, Specially Constitute, Greetting;
Forasmuch as, the Displeasure and wrath of Almighty GOD, in very visible
against the Land, in the Judgments of great Sickness and Mortality, in most
parts of the Kingdoms; As also of growing Dearth, and Famine threatened, with
the Imminent hazard of an Invasion from our cruel and bloody Enemies abroad,
all the just deservings, and effects of our continuing and a bounding sins, and
of our great security and impenitency under them: And which certainly do call
for our deep Humiliation, under the mighty hand of GOD, and our most earnest
and solemn application, and prayers for his gracious pardon, and the removing
and averting of the foresaid Judgments, upon which consideration, the
Commission of the General Assembly has likeways Addressed the Lords of Our
Privy Council, That a Day of Humiliation may be appointed, and kept for these
Causes, throughout the Kingdom; Therefore, We, with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council, Command and Appoint a Day of Humiliation, and Prayer to be
observed throughout the whole Kingdom, upon the tuenty first day of January
nixt to come; Upon which We are to be deeply humbled before God, for our
manifold sins and provocations, that so openly abound, and in which Men still
continue secure and hardened, notwithstanding of Gods greatmercy and
deliverances wrought for us, and of ourfrequent confessions, and former
Fastings, which yet have produced no amendment, or Reformation: And therefore
to deprecat his deserved wrath, and to implore his Mercy and Grace, that we may
be delivered from the foresaid Judgments already Incumbent; And likewayes from
the Invasion, and other evils wherewith we are so imminently threatened; which
day of Solemn Humiliation and Prayer, above appointed, We, with Advice
foresaid, Require and Command, to be most Religiously and Seriously observed by
all our People, by public Prayer, Preaching and all other Acts of deep
Humiliation, and Devotion suitable to the foresaid Causes and Occasions, OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent
their Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
remanent Market Crosses of the Head Burghs, of the Several Shyres, and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and in Our Name and Authority, make
publication hereof, that none pretend Ignorance. And We Ordain Our Solicitor to
dispatch Copies hereof, to the Sheriffs of the several Shyres, and Stewarts of
Stewartries, and their Deputs, or Clerks, to be by them published at the Market
Crosses of the Head Burghs, upon recept thereof, and immediately sent to the
several Ministers, to the effect that the same may be intimate, and read in
their several Paroch-Churches, upon the Lords Day, immediately preceding the
day above-appointed, and Ordains their presents to be Printed, and allows the
Causes of this Fast, given in to the Lords of Our Privy Council be the
Commission of the General Assembly of this National Church, to be Printed
herewith.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twelfth day of December, and of Our
Reign the eight year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. DA. MONCRIEFF.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


