A PROCLAMATION, For regulating and encouraging of TRADE AND MANUFACTORIES In
the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

Edinburgh, the Eleventh day of April, 1681.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, 1681.

A PROCLAMATION, For regulating and encouraging of TRADE AND MANUFACTORIES In
the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To Our Lovits,
Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council,
Pursevants or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, and to all and sundry Our Leidges and Subjects
whom it Effeirs, Greeting. Whereas, by the Law of all Nations, the laying of
Restraints and Impositions upon Foreign Imported Merchandises, Is acknowledged
to be proper to, and inherent in the Persons of all Sovereign Princes, as an
undoubted Prerogative of the Crown. And that by the 26. Act of the 3. Sess. of
Our first Parliament, the ordering and disposal of Trade with Foreign
Countries, and the laying of Restraints and Impositions upon Foreign imported
Commodities, Is asserted to belong to Us and Our Successors, as an undoubted
Privilege and Prerogative of the Crown; And that by virtue thereof, We may lay
such Impositions, and Restraints upon Foreign Imported Commodities, and so
order and dispose upon the trade of them, as We shall judge fit for the good of
Our Kingdom. And there being several Representations made to Us and Our Privy
Council, by diverse of the most considerable Merchants of this Kingdom, and
others, that by the undue balance of Trade, occasioned chiefly by the Import
of many unnecessary, and superfluous Commodities, consumed upon vanity and
luxury, a great part of the stock of the Money of the Kingdom was Exported, and
the improvement of the native Export, and Manufacture of the Kingdom neglected,
nothwithstanding of the many good and wholesome Laws made by Us and Our Royal
Ancestors for encouragement thereof: And We, being ever ready to improve all
occasions and opportunites for the good and advantage of this Our Ancient
Kingdom, By a Proclamation of the first of March last, with advice of Our Privy
Council, thought fit to put a present stop to several superfluous, unnecessary,
and expensive Commodities, viz. of all Silver and Gold Thread, Silver and Gold
Lace, Fringes, or Tracing, all Buttons of Gold and Silver thread, all manner of
Stuffs and Ribbans, in which there is any Gold or Silver thread and Philagrane
work to be worn upon Apparel; as also all Foreign Holland-Linen, Cambrick,
Laun, Dornick, Damask, Tyking, Bustein or Damety, tufted or stripped Holland,
Calligo, Musline, Silesia and East India Linen, and all other Cloths made of
Linen or Cotton; as likewise, all Foreign Cloths and Stuffs whatsomever, made
of wool-yairn, or wool and lint; all Foreign silk and woolen Stockings, all
Foreign Laces made of silk, gimp, or thread, and all manner of Laces and Point
of any sorts or colors; all Foreign made Gloves, Shoes, Boots, and
Slippers; and ordained, all such Goods as should happen to be Imported, to be
burnt and destroyed, and the importers and ressetters fined in the value of the
Goods so Imported.

And whereas, that Affair concerning the Improvement of the Trade, and the
Manufacture of this Our Kingdom, of so great consequence to the benefit and
advantage thereof, has been frequently and fully considered: We, with advice
of Our Privy Council have thought fit, not only to renew and ratify the said
Proclamation; But farther, We do hereby discharge all Merchants or other persons
whatsoever, to Import into this Kingdom, any manner of Floured, Stripped,
Figured, Checkered, Painted, or Printed silk Stuffs or Ribbans; all made
Clothes Imported from Abroad for men, Night-gowns, Petticoats and other Clothes
for women, and all made Clothes for children, after the date hereof, excepting
only such as can be made appear upon Oath to have been ordered by preceding
Commissions, and Shipped before the twentieth two day of April instant, which
time is allowed to the Merchants or others to recall their Commissions if any
such have been given; With certification, that all such Goods as shall be
otherwise Imported, shall be burnt and destroyed, and the importers or
ressetters fined in the value of the said Goods. It Is hereby declared, that in
this Prohibition, Silk stuffs, or Ribbans, changing colloured, or watered, are
not comprehended, nor plain Silk-stuffs, nor Ribbans. As also, that in the
Prohibition in Our former Proclamation of the first of March, discharging the
Importing of all Manufacture of Wool or Lint, Arras-Hangings and Carpets made
abroad and Imported, are not discharged, but the same may be Imported as
formerly.

And considering the great prejudice, not only the Merchants, who have great
parts of their Stocks in these Goods upon than hands, but others may sustain,
if a total prohibition of wearing at a definit day, were appointed and
prefixed: And, upon the other part, how difficult it may prove to make the said
Proclamation practicable and effectual against the Import and Sale, if the
Merchants be not strictly bound up from any further Import or Sale: We have
therefore thought fit, hereby to discharge all Merchants, or other persons
whatsoever, by themselves, their wives, bairns, or servants, or any having
warrant from them, or with whom they have any interest or share in gain or
loss, To vend, sell, barter, or exchange any of the said prohibited Goods
contained in the said former, and this Our Proclamation, to any persons
residenters in this Our Kingdom, after the fifteenth day of June next; Except
they sign and fend in to Our Council, and give Oath before the Magistrate, at
the times, and in manner following, contained in the Band subjoyned; with
certification to them, if they refuse to give up the said Inventor, and Bond,
and Oath, or give the same unfaithfully, they shall be holden repute, and
esteemed importers, venters, and ressetters of the said prohibited Goods, and
that the said Goods shall be seized upon, burnt and destroyed, and they fined
in the value thereof, Iose their freedom for ever, and be otherwise proceeded
against, conform to the Laws for their contempt. And the Magistrates of the
several Burghs, are hereby ordered from time to time, to search the Shops,
Houses, and Chambers of such Merchants and others, as shall not give up
Inventor, and give the Bond and Oath aftermentioned, (...) burn and destroy the
said prohibited Goods; which Bond and Inventor, the said Magistrates are
ordered to take from the hail Merchants within their Burghs, and send in the
same to the Council, betwixt and the fifteen days of June and November next
respective, for this year, and yearly thereafter in June and November; and
shall send in with the said Inventor, Swatches of the several Stuffs and
Ribbans contained in the same, marked and sealed upon a paper apart, bearing
the same to belong to such a Merchant; And the Magistrates also are hereby
ordained to send in with the said Inventor, Oath, Bond and Swatches, yearly a
report in write upon Oath, that they have truly and honestly performed their
duty, and have spared and past by no Merchant, and a list of such persons as
shall refuse the said Bond and Oath. And We do hereby declare, That whosoever
shall delate any transgressors of this or Our former Proclamation, either as to
Linen or Woolen Manufactures, or prohibited silver and gold Ribbans, or Laces,
or Thread, or prohibited Silk-stuffs and Ribbans, or any otherwise has
transgressed the said Proclamation, shall have the one half of the fines or
other benefit arising thereby, for his encouragement. And the Tacks-men or
Collectors of our Customs, Surveyors, Collectors, Waiters, and their servants,
are hereby strictly required, and commanded, to search for, seize upon,
apprehend, burn and destroy, any of the said prohibited Goods shall happen to
be Imported contrair to the tenor of this and Our former Proclamation, and not
to suffer the same to escape: With certification to them if they failie, and
suffer the said prohibited Goods to be imported, either by tollerance or
connivance, they shall not only amit and lose their Places, and forever be
declared incapable to serve in that or any such public Charge, and be fined in
the value of the Goods, that through their default or neglect, shall happen to
be Imported, but otherwise fined by Our Privy Council, conform to the quality
and nature of their offense. And any Merchant or other person, who shall inform
against any of the Fermorers, Collectors, Surveyors or Waiters, for neglect of
their duty in the premises, and prove the same, shall have their fines for a
reward; and the Tacks-men and Collectors, are to send in their own Oaths, and
the Oaths of there Surveyors, Collectors and servants twice in the year to the
Council, that they have done their duty, as is before prescribed, under the
penalty and certification foresaid, and that at the foresaids diets appointed
for the returning of the Bonds of the Merchants.

And, whereas there are diverse good Laws and Acts of Parliament already made
for the encouragement of the Manufactories of this Kingdom, and for
encouragement of Strangers to come thereto, to set up in their several
Callings, against the export of Linen and Woolen yairn, anent the Weaving and
Bleetching of Linen Cloth. And particularly, by the 4. Act of Our 1. Parl.
Entitled, Act for erecting Manufactures, It is statute and ordained, that the
Privileges following, shall be granted to all such persons as have, or shall
undertake to set up Manufactories, viz. If any stranger shall come, or be
brought into this Kingdom by natives, to set up, work, and teach his Art in
making of Cloth, Stuffs, Stockings, Soap, or any other kind of Manufactury, he
shall enjoy the benefit of the Law, and all other Privileges that a Native
does enjoy, with power to erect Manufactories either in Burgh or Landward, as
they shall think fit, and there to dwell and exercise their Trade without any
stop or trouble. And for their further encouragement, all Oil, dying Stuffs,
Foreign Wool, Pot ashes, or any other Materials whatsoever useful for
Manufactories that shall be Imported, Are declared to be free of Custom and
Excise, and other public Dues; and that all Cloth, Stuffs, Stockings, or any
other Commodity to be made and exported by them, be free of Custom and Excise,
for nineteen years after the Month of January, 1662. And all Customers,
Collectors, Fermorers of Custom and Excise, are discharged to demand any Custom
or Excise, or any other Imposition for such Materials beforementioned,
belonging to Manufactories, as they will be answerable. And if any Stock shall
be employed for erecting or intertaining of any Manufactories, the same is to
be free of all private or public Taxes whatsoever: and of all quarterings or
levying of Soldiers upon Manufactories or the Masters thereof, are discharged;
With power to the Masters, Erectors, or Intertainers of Manufactories, to meet
by themselves for making of Ordinances for the good and advancement of their
Trade, for the right ordering their servants, and for the sufficiency of their
Stuffs, Cloths, and others, and choice one of the most expert of their number,
for visiting their Work.

And by the 43. Act of the same Parliament, The Exporting of Linen yairn forth
of the Kingdom is discharged, under the pain of Confiscation of the same. All
the Weavers are discharged to make any Linen Cloth of the price of ten shilling
Scots the Elne or above, under the breadth of an Elne and two Inches, that the
same be taken up by the Selvedge, and not by the Rig, and be so presented to
the Market, and that the same be bleetched without lime, under the penalties of
Imprisonment and fining.

By the 46. Act of the same Parliament, All Woorsted, Woolen-yairn, raw or
unwaked-Cloths or Stuffs, except Plaiding, are discharged to be exported forth
of the Kingdom, under the pain of Confiscation thereof. And by the 7. Act of
the 1. Session of Our second Parliament, it is Statute and declared, for the
increase and promoting of Trade and Manufactories, That all Strangers of the
Protestant Religion, who shall come to, and set up new Works and Manufactories
in the Kingdom, shall be naturalized as Native-born Subjects of this Kingdom,
and are to enjoy Our Royal Protection, the benefit of the Law, and all other
Privileges which a Native does enjoy; that they shall have liberty and freedom
of Trade, to buy and purchase Lands, Hererages, and other goods, moveable and
immovable, and all other privileges libertier and capacities which do belong
to any Native Subject born within this Kingdom, as these several Acts of
Parliament, containing diverse other privileges and immunities in favors of
persons who shall erect. Manufactories, or set up, and work in the same, more
fully bears. Which several Laws and Acts of Parliament foresaid; We, with
advice of Our Privy Council, have thought fit, for the increase and promoving
of Trade and Manufactories, to ordain to be put to due and punctual Execution
in all points. And We or sain these persons, who have already set up any
Manufactories in this Our Kingdom, to have the whole privileges and immunities
therein expressed. And particularly, We ordain all Materials whatsoever, useful
for Manufactories, that shall be imported, to be free of Custom and Excise, and
other public dues, for the space of nineteen years after the date hereof,
conform to the power reserved to Our Privy Council by the said 40. Act of Our
first Parliament, in case the same be not found to be perpetual, but only
temporary.

And in regard the Execution of the said 40. and 43. Acts of Our said first
Parliament, Is committed to Magistrates of Burghs, Sheriffs of Shires, Lords of
Regalities and Baronies, in their respective bounds: And that by their
oversight and neglect the same has not been put in execution, We ordain and
require, the said Magistrates to put the same to due and punctual execution, to
punish the transgressors, and exact and uplift the penalties. And do declare,
that if the said Magistrates be remiss or negligent in their duty, they shall
be called and pursued before our Council, and fined therefore.

And, considering that the gifting of the Penalties of these Acts may be an
occasion to obstruct the execution thereof, by the Donators componing
therefore, We declare, that we will not hereafter grant any gift of the same,
and recommend to the Lords of Our Thesaury and Exchequer, not to grant any gift
thereof, in prejudice of the execution of these Acts.

And whereas, albeit by the said Acts it is determined, what the breadth of
Linen-Cloth shall be wrought at by the Weavers, to make the same fit for sale,
and have credit abroad; yet nothing is determined as to the length of the
several pieces, We ordain, that hereafter, Linen brought to Market for public
sale, be made up in Pieces and half Pieces, and that the Piece contain twenty
Elns, and the half Piece ten Elns, and that none be made up of shorter nor
longer length for public sale, under the pain of confiscation of the same. And
We ordain the Weavers of all Linen Cloth for public sale, to work the same at
the breadth foresaid, and no otherwise; and betwixt and the first day of August
next, to provide themselves with fine Reeds, Work-looms, and other fit
materials for their Trade, under the penalty of Imprisonment for the space of
fourteen days, and of twenty Pound Scots for ilk fault toties quoties, to be
exacted by Magistrates of Burghs, Sheriffs of Shires, Lords of Regalities and
Burghs in the respective bounds, and Confiscation of the same to the use of the
Attatchers thereof. And the several Magistrates foresaids, are ordained in their
respective bounds, betwixt and the first Thursday of September next, to give an
account of the persons disobedient, that they may be further punished, in which
they are not to fail, as they will be answerable.

And whereas diverse un-free-men and others, who do not bear public burden
within Burghs, are in use to import prohibited Commodities in Noblemen and
Gentlemen's Trunks, to the great prejudice of Trade; The Tacks men or Collectors
of our Customs, Surveyors, Collectors, Waiters, and their servants, are hereby
required to sight the Trunks of any person of what quality soever, at their
landing, and to seize upon, burn and destroy, the said prohibited Goods; with
certification to them if they failie, they shall not only be liable for the
value of the said Goods, to be paid to the use of any Merchant, Master or
Member of any Manufactorie, who shall first discover the same, besides, that
they shall lose and amit their places. And it is hereby declared, it shall be
leisome to the Deacons of the SKINNERS, TAILORS and SHOOMAKERS, upon
information given to them of the importing of any Foreign made Gloves,
Clothes, Shoes, Boots, or Slippers, now prohibited to be imported, to search
for the same wherever they can be found: and in case they find any, to
represent it to the Magistrates, to the effect the Magistrates upon trial and
probation, may cause burn and destroy the same: or in case the same be imported
and concealed, so that they cannot be discovered and seized, to pursue the
importers or ressetters thereof, for the value of the same, which is to be
applied to their own use, for their pains in the discovery.

In regard that by the Book of Rates, the Imposition put upon made Work of
Iron, Copper, and Brass, imported into this Kingdom, is appointed to be by the
Stone weight; We have thought fit for the encouragement of the Manufactorie
thereof in this Kingdom, and for balance of Trade in these Commodities
hereafter, to ordain and appoint five of the hundred for Custom, and as much
for Excise, to be put upon, and exacted by, Our Customers, for each hundred
value of all such imported made Work, and not to be uplifted by the Stone
weight.

Whereas it may be of great advantage to Trade, and improvement of
Manufactorie, that some encouragement may be given for building of Ships within
this Kingdom; We have thought fit to ordain all Materials necessary for
building and rigging of Ships in this Kingdom; such as Timber and Planks for
Shipping, Sails, Anchors, Cables and Towes, to be free of all manner of Duty;
and do prohibit and discharge, the buying or building abroad, any Ships or
Vessels, after the first day of June next, under the penalty of Confiscation
thereof.

And seeing for the encouragement of Fishing and export of Herring, being one of
the greatest Commodities of this Kingdom, albeit Foreign Salt did all pay
Custom and Excise at the the entry; yet, it being intended, that Foreign Salt
employed upon Herring, should be free of Burden; The Act of Parliament in the
year, 1669, ordains the Merchant exporter, to have allowed or repayed by the
Customers, ten Pounds four shilling Scots for the Salt of each exported Last of
Herring; And whereas, by the Act of Parliament in the year, 1673, anent the
taking away the Praeemption of Salt, it is appointed, that the exporters of
Herring shall only be free of Custom at the export, being only twenty four
shillings upon the Last, whereby the Merchants have ever since wanted the
allowance of nine Pounds Scots, being a great detriment to the Kingdom; We have
ordained, and ordain, that in time coming, the Merchant exporter shall have
allowed or repayed by the Customers, ten Pounds four Shillings for the Salt of
each exported Last of Herring, conform to the said Act of Parliament in the
year 1679, and former practice.

And whereas, by diverse Acts of Parliament, and the book of Rates, there are
great Impositions laid upon Foreign Commodities, for the encouragement of
Manufactures of this Kingdom, near to the nature of a Prohibition, and that by
the connivance of the Customers, the said Goods are permitted to be imported
upon Composition; We do hereby ordain the Tacks-men or Collectors of our
Customs, Surveyors, Waiters, and their servants, to exact the Custom and Excise
put upon the said Goods, without any manner of abatement or composition, under
the penalty of losing their Offices, and being fined, and the one half of their
fines to belong to Us, and the other half to the discoverer.

And for the encouragement of Learning and Manufactorie of Book-binding; We
have thought fit, to ordain ten of the hundred to be exacted off all
bound-Books warrantably imported for public sale, conform to the book of
Rates; but that all Books warrantably imported in Sheets not bound, be free of
all manner of Duty.

And whereas upon trial it is found, that the Goldsmiths in the City of
Edinburgh, and other Burrows, do work below the Standart of eleven penny fine,
conform to the 56. Act of the 6. Parliament of Queen Mary; We do hereby Require
and Command the Goldsmiths of Edinburgh, and the rest of the Kingdom, to work
up to the said Standard of eleven penny fine, under the pain of Death and
Confiscation of their Movables, which is the certification of the said Act of
Parliament. And for trial of the Plate, Ordains the Deacon of the Goldsmiths of
Edinburgh, to take Essay thereof, by the Copel-Essay and no otherways, and that
the new made work bear the date, by the A. B. C. And the Deacon for the time is
to be answerable for the Lignet the time of his Deaconry, that it shall be
according to the Standard, and for every particular piece of work marked by
him, under the certification foresaid. And declares, that any Silver Work shall
be found made and tried, and marked otherways, after the first day of June
next, or found in the Goldsmiths Workhouses or Shops, or in their possession,
shall fall under the foresaid certification. And for a Check to the Goldsmiths
of Edinburgh, We ordain the Deacon once in two years, at the end of his
Deacon-ship, to make up a Lignet of the several Essays, and give in the same to
the Master of Our Mint, to be tried by the Essay Master. And We discharge all
Goldsmiths of any other Burghs, to make any Silver Plate hereafter, except of
the fineness foresaid; and appoint the Goldsmiths of each Burgh, to keep and
Essay Box of all Plate made by them; which Box, they are ordained to send in to
OUR GOLDSMITH, or Deacon of the Goldsmiths of Edinburgh for the time, once in
the year, to be tried by them, or either of them, and thereafter by the
Essay-masters of Our Mint, under the pain of Death and Confiscation of all
their Movables, conform to the Act of Parliament foresaid; and the Goldsmith,
or Goldsmiths in other Burghs of the Kingdom, shall set his Name upon his Work,
marked with the A. B. C. as aforesaid, and any Work otherways made or marked by
him, or which he shall have in his Shop, or possession, after the first of June
next, shall fall under the foresaid certification. And we allow the Goldsmiths
to take price for the new Work, conform to the augmentation of the fineness, as
it is now prescribed; and for their Workmanship being plain, or better Work, as
they and the buyers shall agree. And for the encouragement of the Goldsmiths,
and that the Lieges be not deceived and abused by Silver-work, under the
foresaid fineness, imported from other places; We hereby discharge the
Importation of all Silver-work by Merchants, or others for sale, except that
which is marked with the ordinary marks of Silver-work of London or Paris,
under the penalty of confiscation thereof, the one half for Our Use, and the
other to the discoverer.

And seeing by the Prohibition but by Us upon the several Commodities mentioned
in Our former, and this Our Proclamation, and by the execution of Our Laws, for
the encouragement of Manufacturies, the deduction allowed for the Excise of
Salt, employed upon Fishes exported, and materials imported for building of
Ships, the same will considerably diminish Our Customs and Excise. And We
having, with advice of Our Council, fully considered, what imported Commodities
may best bear a further Duty, for ballancing and making up the same, with the
least inconvenience to Trade, and the profit of the Kingdom; We with advice
foresaid, conform to the foresaid 26. Act of Our 3. Session of Parliament, have
ordained, and ordain the additional Excise underwritten, to be put upon, and
exacted off the several Commodities following, viz. That whereas French Wine
now pays of Custom, Excise and Bullion, six Pounds two shillings Sterling upon
each Tun, We ordain each Tun of French Wine to pay eighteen shillings Sterling
more of additional Excise: And each Tun of Brandy, which pays now ten Pounds
Sterling the Tun, that the same pay twenty Pounds Sterling the Tun, with the
burden of Bullion as formerly. And seeing that Tobacco that comes immediately
from the Plantations, pays sixteen pennies Scots of Duty upon each pound
weight, and that which comes from London and other parts, not immediately from
the Plantations, pays now two shilling Scots; We ordain, that the Duty upon
Tobacco, coming immediately from the Plantations, continue as formerly; but that
(...) place pay eight pernies more, be (...) upon each pound weight, in regard
ther^ (...) ^^^modities Transported to the Plantations, but none (...) for
Tobacco, but only ready Money: and (...) beer, and other foreign B^^^ or Ale
imported, to pay (...) shillings Sterling the Tun of Custom and Excise. And
that (...) Subjects may have no ground to murmur of any new burd^^ We do
declare, that the additions foresaids upon Wine, Bra^^, Tobacco, Mum-beer, and
other Foreign Beer and Ale, is on^^ in compensation of the Detriment, Our
Customs and Excise (...) suffer by the said Prohibitions, and are to continue
and end un^^ while the Prohibitions appointed by this and Our former
Proclamations are in vigor, and Our Customs and Excise in Collection and no
longer. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you stri^^ly and Command, that
incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ^^^pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and other places need^^^ and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation make Publication of the Premises, that none pretend ignorant
(...) as also of the Bond hereto subjoyned; the which to do, We commit to you
conjunctly and severally Our full Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them
by you duly execute, and (...) again to the bearer. And ordains these Presents
to be Pri^^ed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Eleventh day of April, One thousand
six hundred eighty and one, And of (...) Reign, the thretty three Year. Per
actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. PAT. MENZIE^ Cl. Sti. Concilij.

GOD save the KING.
Follows the tenor of the Bond to be signed by the Merchants, in the several
Burghs of this Kingdom.
WE the Merchants of the Burgh of under-subscribing, Whereas by His Majesty's
Proclamation of the first day of March last, the Importation of the several
Commodities following are discharged, viz. Of all silver and gold Thread,
silver and gold Lace, Fringes or Tracing, all Buttons of gold and silver
Thread, und all manner of Stuffs or Ribbons in which there is any gold or
silver Thread, all Philagrane work to be worn upon Apparel; as also, all
Foreign Holland-Linen, Cambrick, Lawn, Dornick, Damesk, Tiking, Bustein; or
Damety, tufted or stripped Holland, Calligo, Musline, Silesia and East India
Linen, and all other Clothes made of Linen or Cotton; as likewise, all Foreign
Cloths and Stuffs whatsoever, made of Woollen-Yarn, or Wool and Lint, all
foreign Silk and Woollen Stockings, all foreign Laces made of Silk, Gimp or
Thread, all manner of Laces or Point of any sort or Colors, all foreign made
Gloves, Shoes, Boots and Slippers, after the date of the said Proclamation;
except only such as can be made appear upon Oath to have been ordered by
preceding Commissions, and shipped before the tenth of March now bypast: with
certification, that all such Goods as shall be so imported, shall be burnt and
destroyed, and the Importers and Refference fined in the value of the Goods so
imported. And whereas, by His Majesty's Proclamation, of the date the eleventh
day of April the said Year, not only the importation of the said Goods are
prohibited, but also all manner of flowred, stripped, figured, checkered,
painted or printed silk Stuffs, or Ribbons; all made Clothes imported from
abroad, for Men, Night-Gowns, Petticoats, and other Clothes for Women, and all
made Clothes for Children; Declaring, that Stuffs or Ribbons changing colored
or watered, are not comprehended in the said Prohibition; and excepting from
the said Woollen Manufactory, prohibited to be imported, Arras-Hangings and
Carpets; by which Proclamation, not only the importing of the said prohibited
Goods are discharged, but also the vending and selling thereof by whole Sale or
Retail is prohibited, and there is only allowed the sale of plain silk Stuffs
and Ribbons, and Woollen and Linen Manufacture made within this Kingdom, by
such Persons as shall subscribe a Bond of the tenor following: Therefore to be
bound and obliged, Likeas, we for our own parts, bind and obligeus, our Airs,
Executours and Assigneys, that none of the said Goods, prohibited to be
imported, shall be imported by us, our Wives, Bairns, or Servants, or any
having warrant from us, or with whom we have any interest or share in Gain or
Loss, and that none of the said prohibited Goods shall be vended or sold,
bartered or exchanged to any Persons Residenters in this Kingdom, by us, our
Wives, Bairns, Servants, or any by our Warrant, with whom we have share in Gain
(...) Loss, which at the time of our buying or receiving thereof were kno^^ to
us to have been imported contrair to the said Proclamations, un^^^ the
penalties contained therein. Likeas, we bind and oblige us, and (...)
foresaids, not to buy, vend or sell to any Person residing in this Kingdom, in
whole Sale or Retail, any silver or gold Thread, or any (...) of Stuffs or
Ribbons, in which there is any gold or silver Thread, (...) Philagrane work of
silver or gold to be worn upon Apparel, except only such as are contained in an
Inventor given up by us upon Oath, (...) the same were imported before the time
appointed by the said Proclamation, after which the import or sale of the said
prohibited Goods (...) discharged. Likeas, we bind and oblige us and our
foresaids, to declare upon our solemn Oaths, before one or more of the
Magistrates of the said Burgh, whether we or our forsaids, Wives, Bairns,
Servants and others having commission from, or share with us, have impo^^^ any
of the said prohibited Goods since the terms respective of the (...)
Proclamations, and what the kind, quantity, value and price were which we
bought the same, and what we have vended or sold, bar^^ or exchanged of the
said Goods, known to us to have been imported ^^^trair to the said
Proclamation, when we bought or received the same that we have in our hands
belonging to us, the Goods contained in the Inventor, and no more or less
thereof, and that betwixt and the fifteen of June and November. next respective
for this Year, and yearly the^^ on the second Thursdays of June and November.
respective, that repo^^ be made to His Majesty's Privy Council upon the next
Thursday (...) after; with Certification, that if we failie to depone and
declare Oath as aforesaid, upon the times beforementioned, and each of (...)
that we shall be holden as confessed for transgressing the said Pr^^tions, to
the effect we may be fined by His Majesty's Privy Cou^^ they shall find just;
and that it shall be leisome to the Magist^^^ the said Burgh, or others
empowered by His Majesty's Privy Cou^^ search our Shops, Houses, or Chambers,
at what time, and how they please, for finding the said prohibited Goods, that
the same be seized, burnt and destroyed; and that any Cloths, Stuffs, or (...)
or Woollen Manufactury that shall be found in our Shops, House (...) Chambers,
which we shall not be ready (the time of the said sea^^ to depone upon Oath,
were not known to us to have been imported ^^^trair to the said Proclamations,
the time we bought or received same, shall be holden as unwarrantably imported,
or bought by us, ^^^trair to the said Proclamations, and shall be accordingly
destr^^ Likeas, we bind and oblige us, and our foresaids, to depone upon (...)
Oaths, at all the said Dyets, whom we know to have transgress^^^ said
Proclamations, and whom we know can be witness thereof, (...) what the
particulars are in which they have transgressed, under the ^^nalty of five
hundredth Merks, toties quoties, for ilk one of us, in (...) of failie.

FINIS.

