JR

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For putting the Kingdom of Scotland in a Posture of Defense
against the Enemies of the King and Government.
JAMES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, and Messengers, at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as these Traitorous Conspirators, who designed the horrid and
Sacrilegious Murder of Our Dearest Brother, the late King, of Renowned and
Eternal Memory, and the Destruction of our ancient Monarchy, continuing still
in the same Hellish Project and Fury against Us, and Our Royal Government; Are
now again setting their Designs on Work, to raise Commotions in this Our
ancient Kingdom, as being the last Struglings of them, and their Execrable
Party, and the outmost Effects of their absolute Despair: For preventing
whereof, and bringing these Desperate and Execrable Traitors to just and condign
punishment; We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby strictly Require
and Command, all and every of the Subjects of this Our Realm, That they be in a
readiness in their best Arms concur and assist Us against any the aforesaid
Commotions, or Insurrections, as they shall be advertised; And particularly, We
hereby Require and Command, all and every the Colonels of Our Militia
Regiments of Foot, and Captains of Horse, and the inferior Officers and
Soldiers under their Command, in the Shires respective underwritten, viz. The
Merse Teviotdale, Peebles, Selkirk, East, Mid, and West Lothians, Town
Edinburgh, Stirling Shire, Fife and Kinross Shires; The four Companies of the
Low Country, of the Earl of Perth Our Chancellors Regiment; and the three
Companies of the Low Country, of the Marquess of Athol, Lord Privy Seal, his
Regiment; The Sheriffs of Forfar and Kincardin; and all the Heretors,
Liferenters, Feuars and Wodsetters in the Shires of Air, Renfrew, Clidsdale,
Wigtoun, Dumfreis, and Stewartries and Bailliaries within the same, to be in
readiness with fourteen Days Provision, to March when, and whether Our Privy
Council shall give them Orders; And to that end, to have their Arms fixed, and
their several Companies of Our Militia, presently Mustered, and the Heretors
and others aforesaid, Listed Modelled in Companies, and Mustered for the
putting them in a condition of a greater readiness. And further, We hereby
Require and Command all persons, Fenciblesmen, betwixt sixty and sixteen,
within the Shires of Aberdene, Bamff, Elgin, Nairn, Inverness, Ross, Sutherland
and Caithness, to be in readiness in manner foresaid. As likewise, We hereby
Require and Command all Our Liedges on the Seacoasts of this Kingdom, or near
to them, or to any of the Islands thereunto belonging, so soon as they hear, or
get notice of any Vessels arriving at any place from abroad, or at home into
any Coasts, Ports, Creiks, or Harbors, with Men, Arms, or Ammunition,
forthwith to Convocat, and rise in their best Arms, and to Beat them off, or
seize upon, and secure the Ships or Vessels, and the Men, Arms, and Ammunition,
and give immediate Advertisement to Our Privy Council, And for their Security
in obeying these Our Royal Commands, We hereby fully Pardon and Indemnifie them
forever, of all Slaughter, Blood, Mutilation, Fire-raising, burning of Ships,
or suchlike Warlike Inconveniences as may follow, in case they meet with
Hostile-Opposition: And We hereby Require and Command all Our Collectors,
Customers, or Waiters, to make strict and Diligent Search and Inquiry in all
Ships, arriving in any part of this Kingdom, for Traitors, Rebels, Fugitives,
or Disaffected Persons, and for Arms and Ammunition, and to seize upon the
Ships, Men, Arms, and Ammunition, until they acquaint Our Privy Council, and
receive their Directions thereanent: And to the effect they may the better be
able to perform this Service, We do Require all Our Subjects nearest to them,
as they shall be by them Advertised to Rise, Concur with, Fortify and Assist
them, who, and these so assisting, are hereby Declared to be fully Indemnified
in manner foresaid. And that all the persons aforesaid may know their hazard,
if they fail in any of the Premises. We hereby Declare, That they shall not
only incur Our high Displeasure, but also shall be punished with the outmost of
severity, conform to their Demerit, and the Laws and Practice of this Kingdom,
and that the Heretors which shall be Deficient in sending out their Tennents,
and other Fensible Men, or shall not give advertisement as said is, and of any
Rebels and Traitors appearing on their Lands, that they shall be punished
accordingly. And to the end the said. Desperate Traitors and Rebels may have no
Reset, Harbor, Comfort or Refuge from any of the Subjects of this Our Realm.
We hereby strictly Prohibit and Discharge all and every of Our Subjects
therein, fo furnish House, Meat, Drinks or any other thing comfortable to them,
or to keep Intelligence, or Correspondence with them, by Word, Writ, or
Message, or to Transport them to, or from Ferries, or any ways to be aiding,
abating or assisting to them, under the pain of being Repute and esteemed Art
and Part with them in all their wicked Deeds and Practices, and proceeded
against, Demeaned and Punished accordingly. And that Our Pleasure in the
Premises may be fully known to all Our Leidges, OUR WILL is, and We Charge you
strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other Market Crosses of the Head-Burghs
of the Shires of this Kingdom (and all places else needful) and there by open
Proclamation, in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of Our Royal Will and
pleasure in the Premises, that none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Haly-rude-house, the 28. day of April 1685. And of
Our Reign the first Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON,
Cl. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.


