A PROCLAMATION For Securing the Peace of the High-lands.
JAMES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as We having by Our late Proclamation of the twentieth day of July
last by past, Renewed a Commission granted by Our Dearest and Royal Brother, of
ever Blessed Memory, of the date the ninth day of August, 1682. years, to the
Commissioners therein-mentioned, and for the Districts therein specified, for
seeing to the Peace of the Highlands; And whereas we are Informed, that
notwithstanding of the said Commission, and Our said Proclamation, Thieves,
Sorners, and Robbers do continue full to Infest, Rob, Spoil, and trouble Our
People there; And being Resolved that they should be brought to condign
punishment, both for bygones, and in time coming: We with Advice of Our Privy
Council, Do hereby Require and Command Our Commissioners for the District of
Caithness, and Sutherland, to meet at Lochnaver the first day of October next;
And these for the District of the Shires of Ross, Inverness, Cromarty, Nairn
and Elgin, to meet at the head of Lochness the said first day of October next;
These for the District of the Shires of Bamff, Aberdeen, Kincardin and Forfar,
to meet at Kincardin of Neil, the twenty second day of September Instant; And
these of the District of the Shires of Perth, Stirling, Dumbartoun and Argile,
to meet at the Kirk of Balquhidder, the said twentieth second day of September
Instant: And then, and there, To affix and hold Courts, Call and Conveen before
them respectively, all persons suspect, or that shall be suspect guilty of any
of the Wrongs, Thifts, Robberies, Depredations, or any other Crimes mentioned
in the said Commission, and Our said late Proclamation, and to proceed against,
and punish them according to Our Laws, and as is fully mentioned in the said
Commission, and Proclamation; Declaring hereby, that the persons guilty of the
said Crimes, are not to be understood to be comprehended within Our late Act
of Indemnity, as to restoring of private Damnages, Losses and Injuries; But that
Our said Commissioners may proceed against and punish them, as said is: And
further, we hereby Empower and Authorize Our said Commissioners, in their
Districts respective (after the said first day of meeting) To appoint their own
Dyets, and places of meeting thereafter, from time to time, as they shall find
most convenient for Our Service, and the Peace of the Highlands; and therein to
Do, and Act every manner of way, conform to the said Commission, and Our
Proclamation following thereupon, and the Laws, and Acts of Parliament of this
Our Realm, Promitten to hold firm and stable, etc. And We hereby Require and
Command all Our Sheriffs, and Our other Magistrates within the said Districts
respective; to be concurring and assisting to Our said Commissioners in the
Premises, as they will answer at their highest peril. And that Our Pleasure
herein may be known, Our Will is, and We Charge you, strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to Our Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of Caithness, Sutherland,
Innerness, Cromarty, Nairn, Elgin, Bamff Aberdeen, Kincardine, Forfar, Perth,
Dumbarton, Stirling, Argile, Tarbet, and other places needful, and there, in
Our Royal Name and Authority, make Publication of Our Pleasure in the
Premises; And We hereby Require the Sheriffs, and other Magistrates of the
respective Shires foresaids, to cause this Our Proclamation to be read and
affixed at the several Paroch-kirk-doors, upon the first Lords Day, after the
fame comes to their hands, and after Divine Worship, besides their causing
publish the same at the Market Crosses aforesaid, as they will be answerable.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the third day of September, 1685. And of
Our Reign the first Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON,
Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685.


