A PROCLAMATION, For Raising Pioniers, and providing Baggage-Horses to the Army.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To Our Lovits, Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, and our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute,
Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We and the Estates of Parliament, Have by Our Act, of the Date
the thirty one Day of May last bypast, Empowered the Lords, and others of Our
Privy Council, to provide such a number of Pioniers, as shall be found
necessary to be furnished out of the Countries neighboring with, and nearest
to Innerlochie, in the most convenient Methods, for the ease of the Country,
and effectuating the Design or making a Fortification at the said place; and
Have also Empowered Our Privy Council, to proportion and Impose Baggage Horses,
for transporting of Provision and Furniture, necessary to the Army, as is more
fully expressed in the said Act of Parliament. And We, with Advice of Our Privy
Council, finding that it is requisite and necessary for the more effectual
prosecution of Our Service, in this present Expedition, that there be the
number of five hundred Pioniers raised out of the particular Shires and Burghs
aftermentioned, and sent to the particular places underwritten, the days
after-specified, in order to their March, under the Conduct of Our Forces, to
Work and make up a Fortification at Innerlochie, and that a competent number of
Baggage Horses be sent along with the Forces, under the Command of Major
General McKay, in his March against the Rebels, now in Arms against Us and Our
Authority, to remain and abide with Our Army, during such space as the said
Major General McKay, or in his absence, the Chief Commander of Our Army for the
time shall appoint. Therefore We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Do Ordain
the Sheriffs of the Shires of Sutherland, Caithness, Inverness, Rosse, Nairn,
Cromarty, Elgin, Bamff, Aberdene, and Kincardin to meet, with two or three of
the Commissioners of Supply, within the respective Shires, if more cannot be
had, and to proportion and send out the number of Pioniers aftermentioned, out
of the Shires underwritten, viz. The number of twenty two out of Sutherland,
thirty five out of Caithnesse, the number of an hundred fifty four Pioniers out
of the Shires of Invernesse and Rosse, whereof eighty three out of the Shire of
Rosse, and seventy one out of the Shire of Invernesse, (the Burghs not
included) the number of seventeen out of the Shire of Nairn the number of five
out of the Shire of Crommarty, sixty three out of Elgine, sixty eight out of
the Shire of Bamss, and out of the Shires of Aberdene and Kincardin, the Town
of Aberdene included, because of the great distance, and of their being
otherwise employed in Their Majesty's Service, the number of an hundred
Pioniers, whereof the number of sixty nine out of the Shire of Aberdene,
fourteen out of the Burgh thereof, and the number of seventeen out of the Shire
of Kincardin: And We, with Advice and Consent foresaid, Appoints the Magistrates
of the Burghs after rehearsed, to raise and send out the number of Pioniers
afterspecified, viz. The Magistrates of Week one, the Magistrates of Forress two,
the Magistrates of Dingwall one, the Majistrats of Dornock, one the Magistrates
ot Forterosse two, the Magistrates of Tajn two, the Magistrates of Crommarty two
the Magistrates of Invernesse thirteen, the Magistrates of Cullen one, the
Majistrats of Bamss three, the Magistrates of Nairn one, and the Magistrates of
Elgin six: And We Ordain the Pioniers within the Shires of Kincardin, Aberdene
and Bamss, to be at Strathhogie, upon the eighteenth day of June instant; and
these Pioniers which are to be sent out of the remanent Shires and Burghs
abovementioned, to be at Invernesse upon the said eighteenth day ot June
current, with Certification to such who shall be appointed to furnish, and send
out the said number of Pioniers, that if they shall failie to give ready
obedience to Our Commands, that they shall not only be liable in the sum of
eight shilling Scots a day, during the whole space and time the said Pioniers
shall be employed at the said Fortification, and until they return, but shall
also be otherways punished as Contemners of Our Authority, in such way and
manner as Our Privy Council shall find just; And for the more effectual
prosecution thereof, We hereby allow the Sheriffs of the respective Shires,
with two or three of the Commissioners of Supply, to give order to quarter upon
the Deficients, for payment of the said eight shilling Scots a day, in the same
way and manner as for the Cess; and that the Sheriffs of the Shire shall be
liable to hold count therefore: And We do in the ^anner, Ordain the Leaders of
Militia Horse within the Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan, Fife and Kinrosse,
Perth and Forsar, to send out each of them a sufficient Baggage Horse, for each
Militia Horse they lead, sufficiently furnished and graithed with Sodds and
Sack, an pair of Backels or Creills, and the said Leaders to send out a man
with each two Horse, extending the said Baggage Horses, for the Shires of Fife
and Kinrosse, (the Towns not included) to the number of an hundred seventy six
Horses, for the Shire of Stirling and Clackmannan, to the number of eighty
eight Horses: for the Shire of Perth, to the number of an hundred seventy six
Horses, and for the Shire of Forsar, to the number of an hundred and three
Horses: And We appoint the Magistrates of the several Burghs underwritten, to
send out the proportion of Horse and Men after-mentioned, viz. The Magistrates
of Perth, the number ot ten Horses and five men, the Magistrates of Dundee, the
number of fifteen Horses and eight men, the Magistrates of Stirling five Horses
and three men, the Magistrates of St. Andrews, six Horses and three men, the
Magistrates of Dysart two Horses and one man, the Magistrates of Monrosse five
Horses and three men, the Magistrates of Anstruther Easter and Wester, one Horse
and one Man, the Magistrates of Innerkeithing, one Horse and one Man, the
Magistrates of Brichen, one Horse and one Man, the Magistrates of Pittenweem, two
Horse and one Man, the Magistrates of Dumfermling, two Horse and one Man, the
Magistrates of Aberbrothick, one Horse and one Man, the Magistrates of Culrosse,
one Horse and one Man, and the Magistrates of Crail, two Horse and one man; All
sufficiently furnished with Graith and Furniture; in manner abovementioned.
And We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby give and grant
full Power and Warrant to each of the said Leaders of the Militia, to press
the Horse, or Horses he is liable to furnish within any part of his Locality,
not exceeding the value of forty eight pounds Scots, and We appoint that the
said Leaders cause value and comprise the said Horse or Horses, they shall
send out by three honest Neighbors upon Oath, before the Sheriff of the Shire,
or his Depute, or any two of the said Commissioners, with their Graith, not
exceeding forty shiliing Scots, to the end, that if they shall not return, or
if they do return, in case they shall be pryzed worse, each Heretor within the
Leaders Locality may be answerable, for the Leaders Relief, according to the
proportion of his valued Rent; and if they make not ready payment thereof, We
do hereby Authorize the Commissioners of the Militia, or any two of them, upon
application to grant Warrants to quarter and poynd for the said proportion, and
to cause apprise the poynds according to the manner of poynding for deficiency
of the Militia. And We hereby allow the Heretors to take their relief for the
proportion by Poll off the Tennents, and their Inhabitants within their bounds,
the Cottars and Tradesmen being reckoned to a third. And further, We with
Advice and Consent foresaid, Do hereby grant Warrant to every Leader to press a
Man to go along with every two Horse, out of any part of his Locality, in case
of refusal, And We hereby Require the Leaders of the Militia Horse, and the
Magistrates of the Burghs abovementioned to send their proportion or Horses and
Men so furnished, and raised in manner foresaid, to the Burgh of Perth betwixt
and the twelfth Day of this current Month of June, with Certification to such
as shall failie herein, they shall be liable in payment of the sum of sixty
pounds Scots for each deficient Horse, to be applied for the relief of any
other Horse that shall be pressed through his default; And further, shall be
liable to be punished in his person and Goods at the Councils pleasure, as
disaffected to Us and Our Government. And We Allow and Empower the Majistrats
of the Burghs respective abovementioned, to press the Horses and Men to be sent
out by them within their own Jurisdiction, and to stent the curgesses and
Inhabitants for relief thereof, and of the Graith to be sent along with them,
the value of the Horse, not exceeding the said sum of forty eight pounds;
Scots, and the Graith forty shilling money foresaid. And We Do hereby Declare,
That these Pioniers, as also the men that shall go along with the Baggage
Horses, shall have two pecks of Meal, and twelve shilling Scots a-week, or five
shilling Scots a day, paid and furnished to them by the Commissars and
Paymasters of the Army, they always entertaining themselves, and that from the
day of their arrival at the places respective abovementioned, to which they
are appointed to march in manner foresaid. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge
you straightly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass,
and in Our Name and Authority, make publication hereof, at the Market Crofs of
Edinburgh, and at the Head Burghs of the respective Shires abovementioned, and
at the several Church-Doors within the said Shires upon Sunday after Divine
Service, immediately after receipt hereof, by the Sheriffs of the Shires and
their Deputs, that none may pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to be
Printed.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the third day of June, 1690. And of Our
Reign, the second Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. DA. MONCREIFF,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM, 1690


