A PROCLAMATION, For In-bringing the Account of all the Hearths in this Kingdom.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Fait(...)
To Our Lovits, Macers of our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs
in that part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute Greeting:
Whereas the Estates of Parliament of our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, by their
Act of the date the tenth day of Se(...)tember Current, upon the particular
Considerations therein-exprest; And in Lieu and Recompense of the sixth part of
the Annualren(...) and Annuities for one year, granted to Us by an Act of the
second Session of Our Parliament: Have made an humble Tender and Offe(...) to
Us, of Three Months Supply payable at the Term of Martinmass next, and the Sum
of Fourteen Shilling Scots for every Hearth with in this 0ur Kingdom, to be
paid at Candlmass next to come, one thousand six hundred and nintie one, by
the Inhabitants dwelling in the House where the said Hearths are, without
exception or exemption of any, except the Hearths of Hospitals and poor People,
who are upon the Charity of the Paroch; And where any Houses are not Inhabited,
that the said Hearth-money shall be paid by the Heretors or propper Wodsetters
to whom the sam(...) for the time does belong: And by which Act it is Declared,
that the Hearth-money, and the three Months Supply thereby given to Us, shall
in the first place be Applied for payment of the Sums due to the several Shires
and Burghs of this Our Ancient Kingdom, Furnished, Advanced or Paid by them to
Our Forces, the samen being instructed and liquidat, according to the rule
prescribed by the third Act of the Parliament one thousand six hundred eighty
one; And likewise for payment of the bygone Arriers due to Our Army. And We
Resolving, that the foresaid Imposition of Fourteen Shilling Scots granted to
Us for every Hearth within Our Kingdom, alswell as the said Three Months
Supply, shall in the first place be applied to the Effect above-written. And
Considering, that by an other Act of the Third Session of Our Current
Parliament, of the date the said tenth day of September instant, The Lords of
our Privy Council, are Empowered to give such Orders for Collecting and
Ingathering of the said Hearth-Money granted to Us by the foresaid Act of
Parliament, as they shall judge sit; Therefore, We with Advice of Our Privy
Council, hereby peremptorly Command and Require, the Magistrates of our Burghs
Royal, on this side of the water of Tay, betwixt and the fifteenth day of
October next, and these beyond the same(...) betwixt and the Twenty day of the
said Month of October next, to meet in their several Burghs, and make a true
and exact Trial and Inquiry what number of Houses and Tenements, Milns,
Smiddies, Kills for drying of Grain, Ovens, Furnaces for Brewing,
Salt-pan(...)ap, and Glass-works are within their respective Jurisdictions and
Liberties, as well these Inhabited, as these which are Waste, and who are the
Possesso(...)he houses, and others forsaids Inhabited, and who are the owners
of such as are waste, (excepting always Hospitals, and the houses of poor
People, w(...)e upon the Charity of the sever(...) Burghs) and what number of
Hearths are in each House, Lodging or Tenement and others foresaids, and what
the total Number of these Hearths do(...) mount to, and transmit an Duplicat
thereof under their Hands to the Clerks of our Privy Council, conform to the
said Act Parliament, betwixt and the (...) following, viz. the Burrows on this
side of the water Tay betwixt and the first of November next, and these beyond
the (...) betwixt and the tenth day (...) the said month. And We with Advice
of the said Lords of Our Privy Council, Do in like manner strictly Require and
Command, all the Heretor(...) Liferenters, and proper Wodsetters, and the
Tutors or Curators of such of them as are Minors, and the Factors and
Chamberlains of such as live n(...) on the place, or are absent forth of this
Our Realm, in the several Paroches on this side of the Water of Tay, to meet at
the Paroch-Kirk of the said respective Paroches, at any time betwixt and the
twenty day of October next to come; and the Heretors, and others foresaids
beyond the said Water of Tay, to meet at the Paroch Kirk of the said Parocbes
respective, at any time betwixt and the twenty fifth day of the (...)id Month
of October next and to make true and exact Lists, what number of Hearths are in
the several Houses and others foresaids of the (...)longing to the Heretors
Liferenters and proper Wodsetters themselves, and how many Hearths are in the
several Roums, Steids and Hou(...) each Heretor, set to(...) their Tennents,
Sub-tennents, Cottars and others, or waste and un-inhabited within their
Ground, and the names (...) who are the Possessors, and Proprietars thereof,
(excepting always Hospitals, and the Houses of poor people, who are upon the
Charity of (...)ch in manner foresaid) and what is the total number of the
Hearths as aforesaid of the respective Paroches; And We appoint all, or the
major (...)em who shall be present, to subscribe the said Account, and Transmit
the same to the Commissioners of Supply, or their Clerks, within the res(...)es
and Stewartries, whom We hereby appoint to meet at the Head-Burghs of the
several Shires or Stewartries, where the Stewartries lies nor (...) any (...)
days, after the respective last dyets appointed for Meeting of the Heretors,
and there to examine out of what (...) take the most effectual and speedy
course for making full and true Lists of all the Hearths above specified within
the (...) the Lists to be reported to them, whether by appointing particular
persons for making up the exact Lists of these (...) think sit. And We Ordain
the Clerks of the said, Commissioners of Supply, carefully to Transmit the
said w(...) Council, betwixt and the days following, To wit, These on this
side of the Water of Tay, betwixt and the fifth (...) these beyond the famine,
betwixt and the fifteenth day of the said Month of November. And We do hereby
Decl(...) Liferenters or proper Wodsetters, or others foresaids, who shall meet
the said days, albeit there be but one of them, (...) effect above-written.
And We Command the Magistrates of Our Burrows-Royal, and the Heretors,
Liferenters an(...) said of the Landward Paroches, to give exact and punctual
obedience to Our Commands in the Premises, as the (...) perril; With
Certification to such who shall contemn or neglect the famine, they shall be
Charged to the effect above (...) on; and in case they shall prove Contumacious
and Disobedient, that they shall be Denounced Our Rebels, and (...) be
inbrought to Our use. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straightly and
Command, that incontinent these (...) Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries (...) Our Name and Authority make publication hereof. And We with
Advice foresaid, Ordain the Sheriffs and Stewar(...) Stewartries, and where
there are no Sheriffs or Stewart-Clerks, the Clerks to the Commissioners of
Supply, to ca(...) burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries, and transmit a
Copy thereof to each one of the Royal Burrows, and to (...)risdictions, to be
publicly read the Sabbath following, after the Forenoons Sermon, in the Church
or Meeting-hou(...) otherways, in case there be no Preaching, in the Paroch, to
one of the Heretors thereof, that he may make Intimation (...)retors,
Liferenters and proper Wodsetters, and others foresaids within the Paroch, who
shall be obliged to meet and (...)der the former Certification.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the 29th day of September. And of Our
Reign the secon(...) Per Actum Do(...) GILB (...)

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent (...)


