A PROCLAMATION, For Payment of His Majesty's Cess and Excise.
JR

royal blazon or coat of arms
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith,
To Our Lovits (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, and Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute,
Greeting;
Whereas, We by Our Royal Proclamation of the Third day of October last past,
and by virtue of Our Prerogative-Royal, did Discharge all Personal Execution of
Our Laws against any who comes out to Our Host during their abode therein; And
We understanding, that Our said Royal Favor is so far abused as to be Wrested,
to hinder the payment of Our Cess and Excise, to the great Prejudice of Our
Affairs; Do therefore Declare, that it was not Our meaning, that the said
Immunity should any ways be extended to hinder Execution for Our Cess and
Excise, but that notwithstanding thereof, all liable therefore, in case they
fail of due payment, be proceeded against personally, or otherways, according
to Our Laws and Acts of Parliament; and withal, We hereby Require all and
every Concerned in payment of the said public Burden, to pay in the same to
Our Collectors and Receivers, as they would be esteemed dutiful Subjects to Us
on the present Occasion, And to the end Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises may
be made known to all Persons concerned, that Obedience may be given
accordingly, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and all the other Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Our Kingdom, and
there in Our Royal Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication
of the Premises, that none pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Ninth day of November, 1688. and of
Our Reign the Fourth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. COL: McKENZIE
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1688.


