A PROCLAMATION For the Exercise of the Government in His Majesty's Name only.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To Our Lion King at Arms, his Brethren Heralds, Macers
of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as
it has Pleased Almighty GOD to remove by Death, Our Dear Consort, Queen Mary;
So that the Sole and Full Right of the Crown and Royal Dignity of this Our
Ancient Kingdom, as well as the Exercise of the said Royal Power, is now in Our
Sole Person, and to be Exercised by Us, for hereafter, in Our Name only:
Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Have thought fit
to Intimat and Declare, that for hereafter the foresaid Royal Power is to be
Exercised in Our Name only, and that all Letters, Gifts, Patents, and other
Writs whatsomever, which heretofore were in use to pass in the Name of Us, and
the said Queen Mary, are for hereafter to be Directed, and to pass in Our Name
only. And further, That the Oath of Alledgance is hereafter to be Sworn, and
the same, and the Assurance Subscribed by all concerned to Swear and Subscribe
the same to Us, and in Our Name only: Siklike, and in the same Manner as they
were in use before to be Subscribed and sworn to Us, and the said Queen Mary
Jointly. OUR WILL IS Herefore, and We Charge you strictly and Command, That
Incontinent their Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the whole head Burghs of the respective Shires,
and Stewartries within this Kingdom, And there In Our Name and Authority, by
open Proclamation, make Publication hereof, to the effect all Our Liedges may
regulat themselves accordingly; And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the second Day of January. And of Our
Reign the sixth year, 1695. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. D A:
MONCRIEFF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1695.


