PROCLAMATION For Discovering and Apprehending House-breakers, Thieves and
Robbers, and their Resetters.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as it is certainly informed, that of late there has been many Houses
broken, and that this Crime of House breaking is become is a manner general
over all the Kingdom, by Thieves and Robbers, who have stolen, robbed, and
away-taken, great quantities of Goods out of the said Houses, to the great
loss and damage of many people; and to the effect that the said Thieves and
Robbers may be discovered, and brought to condign punishment: Therefore We,
with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit by open
Proclamation to give notice, that if any person or persons shall discover any
of these Thieves, Robbers, and House-breakers, or their Resetters, so as that
they may be apprehended and brought to punishment, they shall have the Sum of
an hundred Pounds Scots Money as a Reward for every person that shall be
discovered and apprehended, so as they may be brought to punishment, as said
is. As also, if any of these Thieves, Robbers and House-breakers, or the
Resetters, shall discover any of their Accomplices, so as that they may be
apprehended and brought to punishment, as aforesaid, the discoverer shall not
only be indemnified for the Crime, but likewise have the foresaid Reward. And
farther, We with Advice foresaid, recommend to, and empower all Our good
Subjects, to seiz and apprehehend all Idle and Vagrant Persons, or Vagabonds,
and bring them before the next Justice of Peace, or other Magistrates to Burgh
or Landwart, to be by them secured as Law will. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We
Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other remanent Market Crosses of the
haill Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom,
and thereat in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Intimation of
the Premises, that none pretend ignorance. And ordains these presents to be
Printed and Published.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the second day of August, and of Our
Reign the twelfth year 1700. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT
Cls. Sti Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1700.


