A PROCLAMATION For a Solemn Day of Humiliation.
WILLIAM by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially, Constitute, Greeting:
For as much as We and Our People have just reason to apprehend the severest
Judgments of Almighty God, whose Clemency and Goodness We have abused to his
dishonor; which Consideration has also moved the Commission of the late
General Assembly to Address the Lords of Our Privy Council; That a Day of
Humiliation may be appointed and kept for these Causes; Therefore We with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council Command and Appoint a Day of solemn
Humiliation and Prayer to be observed throughout the whole Kingdom upon the
Days following, viz. within the town of Edinburgh, Leith, Cannongate, and the
Paroch of West Kirk upon the Lords Day next, the fifteenth Day of March
Current; and in all the rest of the ParochChurches upon this side of Tay upon
the Lords Day the twenty second Day of the said Month of March; and in all the
other Paroch-Churches within this Kingdom upon the Lords Day being the twenty
ninth Day of the said Month of March. Upon which Days of solemn Humiliation and
Prayer respective forsaids, We and Our People are to express our deep sense of
Our Ingratitude for Our former Deliverances, and Our grateful Acknowledgements
of the signal Providence of God, in Discovering and Defeating the Treacherous
Attempts on Our Royal Person; and to deprecat the Wrath of God, and implore his
Assistance against all Foreign Invasion, and intestine Commotions, which Days
respective foresaids, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Require
and Command to be Religiously and Seriously observed by all ranks and degrees
of People, by Preaching and other acts of Devotion to be done and performed in
all the Churches of this Kingdom, upon the occasion and for the Causes
foresaids. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, That
incontinent, their Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority make
intimation hereof, that none pretend Ignorance: And appoints Our Soliciter to
transmit Printed Copies hereof to the Sheriff and Stewart Clerks of the haill
Sheriffdoms and Stewartries within this Kingdom with Coppies to be transmitted
by the said Sheriff and Stewart Clerks to the Ministers of the several Paroches
within their bounds; And Ordains this Proclamation to be Intimat in the Paroch
Churches of Edinburgh, Cannongate, Leith, and West-Kirk upon thursday next; And
Ordains the Magistrates of Edinburgh, Cannongate, Leith, and West-port to make
Intimation of the same within their respective Bounds, by beating of Drums in
these Places upon Friday next; And Ordains the Sheriff and Stewart Clerks of
all other Places within this Kingdom to cause publish this Proclamation at the
respective Mercat-Crosses within their Bounds, and the Ministers to cause Read
the same at their Paroch-Churches upon the Lords Day immediately preceding the
Days Above-appointed; And Ordains these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the tenth day of March, and of Our Reign
the seventh Year 1696. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls.
Sti. Concilii.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most excellent Majesty. 1696.


