PROCLAMATION For Paying in the Pole Money.
royal blazon or coat of arms
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
Part Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute Greeting,
For as much as, the Pole Money Granted to Us by the Act of Parliament One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Five, does still for the Greater part remain
Unpayed, not with standing of all the Diligence that has hitherto been used
for Uplifting and Inbringing of the same, And it being Unjust and unreasonable
that these Equally Bound, and who have not Paid, should not Pay as others have
done; And because the Term of Martinmass next is Appointed by the said Act of
Parliament to be the last Term for Production of Discharges. Therefore, We with
Advice and Consent of the Lords of Our Privy Council, in Prosecution of the
said Act of Parliament, for the better Ingathering of what Remains of the said
Pole, and to take off all Pretense of Exemption from such as have hitherto
Failied to make Due Payment after the said Term of Martinmass next shall be
Come and bypast, Do hereby Command, and Charge all that have not already made
Payment of the Pole Money due by them respective, to make Payment of the same
to the Collectors of their respective Paroches or Shires, or others to be
appointed for that Effect betwixt and the Fifteenth Day of October next to
come: Like as, for their better Encouragement, We have thought fit to
Discharge, and do hereby Discharge all such as shall make Payment of the Pole
betwixt and the foresaid Day, of the Doubles and Quadruples already by them
Incurred, and still Resting Unpayed, Certifying them withal, that if after so
much For bearance on Our part, and Contumacy on their Part; They shall of new,
Failie to make Payment betwixt and the foresaid Day, They shall Incurr the
foresaid Doubles and Quadruples in manner set down in the Act of Parliament,
Sicklike, as if the foresaid Day had been the precise Day of Payment fixed by
the said Act, which Doubles and Quadruples shall, in case of Failie foresaid be
Exacted with all Rigor. And in regard, the foresaid Clause in the Act of
Parliament Declaring none to be holden to Produce their Discharges of Receipts
of the said Pole, after the said Term of Martinmass was manifestly provided in
Favors, and for Relief of such as should make Due payment, but no ways to
Exempt any who Contemning the Diligence used against them, should Failie in
payment as said is: Therefore, it is farther hereby Declared, that who-soever
(...) Liable to pay their Pole, shall not make due Payment thereof betwixt and
the foresaid Day hereby appointed shall be Reckoned as a Contemner of
Diligence, and still under the Course thereof, and Liable to the same, not with
standing of any Pretense that may be made upon the foresaid Clause of the Act
of Parliament wherein such Failiers are no ways concerned, but Prejudice always
to all who have already made due Payment, and who shall Instruct the same,
either by Receipts, or the Collectors Books, or Oaths; of the Benesite of the
foresaid Clause, and their perpetual Liberation. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And We
Charge you Strictly, and Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the
remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom;
And there in Our Name and Authority make Publication hereof that none may
pretend Ignorance; And We Ordain Our Solicitor so Dispatch Coppies hereof, to
the Sheriffs of the several Shires and Stewarts of Stewartries, and their
Deputs or Clerks, to be by them Published at the Mercat-Crosses of the
Head-Burghs upon Receipt thereof, and immediately Transmitted by them to the
several Paroch-Churches within the respective Shires and Stewartries foresaids,
to be Published at the said Churches. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed
and Published.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the Thirteenth Day of August, and of our
Reign the Eight year. 1696. Per Actum Dominorium Secreti Concilii. D A.
MONCRIEFF. Cls. Sti. Concilli.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM, 1696.


