CR

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For taking the Oaths of Masters of Ships, Boats, Barks, and
other Vessels, Outvvard or Inward bound into this Kingdom, anent their
Passengers.
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, greeting,
Forasmuch as many wicked and rebellious Persons, being conscious of their own
guilt, have fled from this Kingdom into foreign Kingdoms or Countries, where
they continue to carry on their Traitorous and Hellish Designs against Our
Sacred Person, and the Government of this Our Realm, by corresponding and
keeping of Intelligence with their rebellious Accomplices, lurking within this
Kingdom: Therefore, and for preventing of the said Designs as much as can be,
We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby Require and
Command all Masters of Ships going from this Kingdom, or returning to the same,
to present all and every one of their Passengers upon Oath, to the several
Persons to be named by the Customers in the several Precincts following, viz.
All Masters of Ships, Barks, Boats, or other Vessels, going from, or returning
to any place within the Precincts of the Custome-Office of Leith and
Prestoun-Pans, to the Collectore there for the time. All within the Precinct of
the Custom of Borrowstounness, to the Collectors there for the time. Those of
the Precinct of Kirkaldy, to the Collectors there for the time. Those of the
Precinct of Montross, to the Collectors there for the time. Those of the
Precinct of Aberdene, to the Collectors there for the time. Those of the
Precinct of Inverness, to the Collectors there for the time. Those of the
Precinct of Port-patrick, to the Collectors there for the time. Those of the
Precinct of Air, to the Collectors there for the time. Those of the Precinct of
Irving, to the Collectors there for the time. And those of the Precinct of
Port-Glasgow, to the Collectors there, for whom the Tacks-men and Customers are
to be answerable. Declaring hereby, That whatever Matter of Ship, Bark, Boat,
or Vessel, shall do in the contrair, shall lose his whole Goods (the one half
to the Informer, and the other half to Us) his person shall be Imprisoned and
he declared incapable to be a Master of a Ship, Bark, or other Vessel
hereafter, And if any of the said Masters of Ships, or other Vessels foresaid,
shall Import to this Kingdom, any Traitors, Rebels, Fugitives, Intercommuned,
or banished persons, it is hereby Declared they shall be liable therefore
conform to the Laws and Acts of Parliament, and Proclamations made against
Ressetters of Rebels; Requiring also the persons abovementioned, authorized to
take the said Oath, to give an exact account of their Diligence the first
Tuesday of every Month to the Clerks of Our Privy Councils; And We do hereby
Require and Command the Collectors and Clerks of Our several Custom Offices, to
accept of no report Inward from any Master of a Ship, Bark, Boat, or other
Vessel, and the Keepers of the Cocquet-office not to give out the same to any
such Master outward bound, until he receive Testificat from the persons
above-written, authorized as said is, within whose precinct any such Ship,
Bark, Boat, or other Vessel is, That he has made Faith anent his Passengers as
aforesaid, and that he neither has, had, nor has any other Passengers from
abroad, nor outward bound, then these mentioned in his Oath, as they will be
answerable at their highest peril; And further, Declaring that the Master and
Owner shall lose the Ship, Boat, Bark, or Vessel and Goods, in which any person
not given up as said is, shall be in-brought unto this Kingdom, or Transported
forth thereof; and that all Magistrates of Burghs of Royalty or Regality, and
Heretors, on whose Ground such persons shall be Landed, are to be liable and
punished therefore, at Our Privy Council shall think fit, in case they do not
Diligence to prevent the same, or apprehend the persons so Landed: And to the
effect Our pleasure in the Premises may be known, to all persons concerned.
Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontenent, these
Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and the remanent
Market Crosses of the head Burghs of this Kingdom, and other places needful,
and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication
of the Premises, that all persons concerned may have notice thereof, and give
punctual and exact obedience thereto.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fifteenth day of September, One
thousand six hundred eighty and four. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and sixth
Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Conslii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1684.


