PROCLAMATION For Apprehending five Persons declared Fugitives, by the
Commission of Justiciary for the Highlands.
WILLIAM by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and severally, specially
Constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch, as it has been signified to the Lords of Our
Privy Council, by the Commissioners of Justiciary for the middle District of
the Highlands, that Duncan Stuart, alias Shankie, Patrick Mcilglass-Ferguson,
John late Mcgregor in Renneck, Duncan Roy, Mcilphatrick late Mcgregor in
Pollockro, and John Mcclaran Buy in Torray, are all Fugitives from the Law, and
Intercommuned for Stouth-Rieff, and other Capital Crimes; and that therefore it
is fit a Proclamation were Emitted for Apprehending the said five Fugitives
dead or alive, with a competent Reward to the Apprehender. Therefore We with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to Authorize and
Order; Likeas we hereby Order and Authorize, all Our Officers Civil or
Military, and all others, to use all Diligence for Apprehending the foresaids
five Persons alive if possib1e, or in case of Resistance dead or alive: and if
alive, to bring and Secure their Persons in the first Prison, there to remain
till they Underly the Law. And for the Encouragement of the said Apprehender,
Apprehending any, or all the said persons, We do further promise to the said
Apprehender, the Reward of ten Pounds Sterling for each of the said Persons
that shall be Apprehended, as said is; and Requires the Commissioners of Our
Thesaury to make due Payment of the same. And further, it is hereby Declared,
that if any of the said five Persons shall Apprehend, or bring in the other
four, or any of them, he shall for so doing, be Indemnified for the said Crime,
for which he is declared Fugitive, and likewise receive the said Reward
promised to any of Our Leidges in manner foresaid. And lastly, We with Advice
foresaid, do hereby fully Remit, Pardon, and Indemnisie any Person or Persons,
who endeavoring to Apprehend the said Fugitives, shall in case of their
Resistance. Mutilat or Kill any of them, or of their Assistants, assisting them
by Force; of the said Mutilation and Slaughter, to all Intents and Purposes, as
Amply as if they had a Remission Exped under Our Great Seal for the same. Our
Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that in continent
their Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head-Burghs and Stewartries of this Our Kingdom,
and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make public
Intimation hereof. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the third day of August, and of our Reign
the Ninth year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom, 1697.


