monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION For bringing in and paying the Arrears due by the Forces to the
Country.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as; by the Ninth Act of the Fourth Session of this Our current
Parliament, for Pole Money, the same is most strictly Appointed and Destined,
for payment of the Arrears due to the Country and Army, preceding the first
of February, One-Thousand six hundred and ninety one Years, In the first place:
Prohibiting and Discharging the applying thereof to any other use whatsoever,
and Certifying such as shall either give orders for mis-applying thereof, or
intromet with the same, the Mis-applyers and Receivers thereof, shall be liable
conjunctly and severally in the double thereof, at the instance of any party
concerned, and their private Estates subject and liable for the double of that
which shall be so mis-applyed. And further, It is by the said Act Declared,
That where the Arrears due to the Country, by the Forces, shall be first duly
stated for any Burgh or Shire, conform to the Orders and Rules set down
thereanent, the Burgh or Shire to whom the said Arrears shall be found due,
shall have Retention, and get a Discharge of their Pole Money, in satisfaction
of their said Arrears; and where the Arrears due to any Shire or Burgh, exceeds
the Pole Money due by the said Burgh and Shire, then and in that case the said
superplus shall be ordered to be paid by the Lords of the Thesaury, out of the
Pole Money due and brought in from other places, with regard always to the
total of these arrears, and to the total of the said Pole Money, that the
foresaid superplus may be payable, and paid proportionally, as the foresaid
Act of Parliament, Impowering the Lords of Our Privy Council to Determine all
Difficulties thereby undetermined, that may arise anent the Premises, more
fully bears. Likeas the said Lords of Our Privy Council having thought fit,
for the better Ingathering of the foresaid Pole Money, and for the more sure
answering of the ends and uses to which it is Appropriat, as said is, that the
said Pole Money should be set in Tack upon a Roup, for payment of the highest
Tack-duty that should be offered; We in prosecution of the said Act of
Parliament, and Acts of Our Council, for Setting the foresaid Tack, Did by Our
Proclamation of the Date the last of July last by past, require and Command all
Burghs and Shires, to whom any Arrears were due, as said is, and who might
pretend to the benefit of the foresaid Retention, to cause state and bring in
their Accounts thereof to the Clerks of Our Privy Council, to the effect that
they might be there Revised and Approven, and payment ordered accordingly, as
the said Proclamation, bearing an express distinction of the Arrears due by the
English Forces, from these due by the Scots Forces at more length proports And
We being firmly resolved, That notwithstanding that few or none of the said
Shires and Burghs have obtained their the payment of the said Pole Money, to
the effect they might have had the benefit of the Retention above provided: Yet
nevertheless the Destination contained in the foresaid Act, for the payment of
the said Arrears to the first place, shall be strictly and punctually kept,
without any violation, or taking the least advantage of the foresaids Shires
and Burghs, their neglect and omission; Have therefore, and to make the
foresaid Destination more effectual, and the payment of the said Shire and
Burghs more sure and punctual, with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council Ordered, Likeas, We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Order and Appoint
the foresaids Shires and Burghs; As also, all others to whom any Arrears are
due by Our Forces out of the Pole Money, to send in to the Clerks of Our Privy
Council, the Accounts of their said Arrears, duly stated conform to former
Orders, to be Revised and Approven by the Lords of Our Privy Council, and that
peremptorly betwixt and the fifteenth Day of January next to come, Certifying
all such as shall failie herein, that their Accounts shall not be hereafter
received, in respect of their said neglect and Contumacy, and that their
falling shart, or being delayed of the payment hereby for them intended, shall
only be imputable to their own fault. And it is further hereby Declared, That
when ever the foresaids Accounts, hereby ordered to be brought in, shall be
Revised and Approven by the Lords of Our Privy Council, to whom We earnestly
Recommend to dispatch the same with all diligence possible, then the Lords of
Our Thesaury are with all due convenience to give Precepts to the said Shires
and Burghs, and others concerned, upon Our Genetal Receivers for payment to
them of the respective Sums that shall be found due by the said Lords of Our
Privy Council in manner foresaid, to the effect that Our said General Receiver,
to whom the Tack-duty of the said Pole Money, is by the Tack set to the
Farmours thereof, appointed to be paid at the Terms of Candlemass and
Whitsunday next therein specified, may make punctual payment of the said
Precepts, after the foresaids Terms, and as he shall be ordered by the said
Lords of Our Thesaury. And lastly, it is hereby Declared, That these Presents
so exactly calculat, for the furthering of the Countries payment of the said
Arrears, conform to the said Act of Parliament, shall be without prejudice to
the Farmours of the Pole Money, of their uplifting of the same, as also of the
payment, to be made by them of their Tack-duty, therefore, conform to the Tenor
of their Tack in all points. OUR WILL IS herefore, and We Charge you strictly
and Commands, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and, to the Market Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the
several shires of this Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and Authority make
publication hereof, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to
be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixteenth Day of November. And of Our
Reign the sixth Year, 1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Andersson, Printer to
Their most Excellent Majesty, 1694.


