CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For securing the Peace of the Shire of CAITHNESS.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly,
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as notwithstanding by Our Laws and Acts of Parliament, the
convocating of Our Leidges without Our special, Authority and Warrant
therefore, be expressly discharged; Yet We are informed, that certain broken,
and lawless Men, within Our Shir^ of Caithness, have from time to time
convocate themselves in Arms within the said Shire and have most unwarrantably,
first besieged, and then thrown down, the Houses bel^^ging to the Earl of
Caithness, and continues still to exact upon, and oppress his Tenant^ taking
away the Corns out of his Girnels, exacting sums of Money, and free Quarter, t^
the great contempt of Our Authority. And We being resolved to protect all such
as (...) peaceably under Us, and in Obedience to our Laws; Have therefore with
Advice of Our Privy Council, thought fit to Declare and Testify Our Abhorrence
of all such atrocious Crimes of Oppression, and Illegal Procedure; and that We
will with all speed and rigor punish all such as shall be found to have had any
accession to the same, before our ordinar Judicatures. But least in the mean
time, the Rents and Victual payable out of the said Earls Lands should be
transported, so that reparation could not be had: We do therefore expressly
discharge any Merchants, to buy, or any Skippers to transport the Victual
growing upon any of the said Earls Lands, without his own, or his, Chamberlains
License and consent, under the pain of the confiscation of the said Ship,
wherein the said Victual shall be transported. Likeas, to prevent the
transporting of the same, under the name and color of Victual belonging to
private Persons: We do hereby Declare, that any such Persons who shall lend
their Name to such a Transportation, shall be liable to the said Earl, in the
sum of Ten Pounds Scots, for every Boll so transported. And to the end the said
Earl may have peaceable access to his own Estate in Caithness, We hereby
discharge all Our Subjects, of what quality soever, to stop him, his Friends
and Followers in their Journey, to and from Caithness; Commanding also hereby
all such as have Ferry-Boats, to give him the ordinary and speedy Passage, and
Our Subjects upon his Way, to provide him and them with Entertainment at the
ordinary Rates of the Country, as they will be answerable: Commanding hereby
all Our good Subjects to countenance and assist Our Heralds, Pursevants, and
Messengers at Arms, either for citing the Persons concerned in Our Name, or for
executing Our Laws against them, and more especially in the publication hereof.
And ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published at the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, Aberdene, Inuerness, Thurso, Caithness-weik, and other places
needful, that all Persons concerned may have notice of the same.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourth day of March, one thousand six
hundred and eighty Years. And of Our Reign the thirty and two Year. Per actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilii. A L. GIBSON, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1680.


