A PROCLAMATION For Calling out of the Heretors, and Requiring the Flanders
Officers, and other Officers employed since His Majesty's Accession to the
Crown, to come to Edinburgh.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren, Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as by repeated Advertisements, we are informed of an Invasion of
Barbarous and Bloody Papists, Designed from France upon this Our ancient
Kingdom, whereby it may become the Seat of a Bloody War: For preventing
whereof, and Defeating that Design of Our Enemies, We have already, with Advice
of Our Privy Council, Emitted and Published fundry Proclamations and Orders for
putting the Country in a Posture of Defense; and finding it further necessary
for the effectual Repressing any such Invasion, wheresoever it may happen to be
within this Our ancient Kingdom, that the Heretors who have qualified
themselves according to Law, should be in readiness with their best Horses and
Arms, to attend Our Host wherever they shall be employed for Our Service upon
the present Exigence. Therefore, We with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Require and Command all the Heretors within the Shires
after-mentioned, who have, or will qualify themselves according to Law, by
Swearing the Oath of Allegiance, and Subscribing the same with the Assurance to
Us, and the qualified Tutors and Curators of such as are Minors, to send for
their said Pupil or Minor, a sufficient Man and Horse well Armed, who with the
said qualified Heretors, with their best Horse and Arms, are to meet and
Rendezvous for the Shires underwritten, upon the Days, at the Places, and to
be Commanded by the Officers afterspecified, viz. The Heretors and these sent
out for Minors within the Shire of Edinburgh, upon the Links of Leith the
twelfth day of March current: The Heretors and others foresaids for the Shire
of Linlithgow, at Evan-Bridge the said day: The Heretors and others foresaids
of the Shire of Haddington, at Beinstoun-Muir the day foresaid: The Heretors
and others foresaids of the Shire of Bermick, at Fogo-Muir the day foresaid:
The Heretors of the Shire of Selkirk and others foresaids, at the Town of
Selkirk, the said day: The Heretors of the Shire of Peebles and others
foresaids, at Peebles the day foresaid: The Heretors of the Shires of Fife and
Kinross, and others foresaids, at Edins-Muir the said day: The Heretors of the
Shire of Lanerk and others foresaids, at Lanerk and Hamiltonn the day foresaid:
The Heretors of the Shire of Dumbartoun and others foresaids, at Dumbartoun the
said day: The Heretors and others foresaids of the Shire of Renfrew, at
Renfrew-Muir the day foresaid; The Heretors and others foresaids of the Shire
of Wigtoun and Stewartry of Kirkcudbright at Glenluce the day foresaid all at
ten Hours in the Forenoon; and the Heretors of the Shire of Air, and others
foresaids, at the Burgh of Air the said day. And We with Advice foresaid
Require and Command, the Commanders of the said Heretors respective, to make
Lists of such as do appear at the said Rendenzvouz, and to report their Names,
and the condition of their Horse and Arms, to Our Privy Council, with all
possible diligence. And We with Advice foresaid, hereby Nominat and Appoint the
persons after-named, to have the Command of the Heretors within the respective
Shires, and who shall Rendezvous and keep them together, during the space often
Days, until they shall be disposed of by further Orders, directed by Us or Our
Privy Council to them thereanent, Viz. the Lord of Kimerghame to Command the
Heretors of the Shire of Berwick. The Lord of Stevinson younger these of the
Shire of Haddingtoun. Craig of Riccartoun these of the Shire of Edinburgh, Mr.
Henry Balfour of Denbug these of the Shires of Fife and Kinross. Lawson of
Cairnmoor these of the Shire of Peebles. Cornwall of Bonhard these of the Shire
of Linlithgow. Scot of Gilmensclengh these of the Shire of Selkirk. The Lord
of Cleghorn elder, and Hamilton of Arkenhead these of the Shire of Lanerk Muir
of Glanderstoun these of the Shire of Renfrew. Crafurd of Kilbirnie these of
the Shire of Air. Howstoun of that Ilk these of the Shire of Dumbartoun. Sir
William Mackdowgal of Gartland these of the Shire of Wigtoun and Stewartry of
Kirkcudbright. And We considering, that at present, there are fundry Officers
and others belonging to Our Army in Flanders com'd over to, and dispersed
through this Kingdom, for the better making up the Recruits necessary to the
Regiments where they serve, and that they may be very useful at this present
Exigence if Employed upon the occasions and in the places where the said
intended invasion may happen; as also, severals Who have been employed
heretofore as Officers in Our Service, who are now living in several places of
the Country out of Employment, may be very steadable at this Juncture, in
modeling and otherways ordering such Forces as the Country shall afford to
oppose the foresaid Invasion. Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council, Require and Command all the Officers, and others belonging to
Our Army in Flanders now within this Kingdom, and all others who have been
Employed as Officers in Our Service heretofore, and now out of Employment
within this Kingdom with all possible Diligence to hasten and repair to the
Town of Edinburgh, and upon their Arival there immediately to give up their
Names to Our Privy Council, or to Sir Thomas Livingston, Commander in Chief of
Our Forces within this Kingdom, to the effect they may be Employed in such
Service, and put to such Commands as shall be found Necessar, and expedient for
the Advantage and Security of the Government; and Supressing the Attempts of
Our Enemies by this intended Invasion. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
Strictly, and Command, that incontinent these our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remnant Head-Burghs
of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom; And there in our
Name and Authority, make Intimation hereof, that none pretend Ignorance; And
appoints Our Solicitor to transmit Printed Copies hereof, to the Sheriff and
Stewart-Clerks of the haill Sheriffdoms and Stewartries within this Kingdom,
with Copies to be transmitted by the said Sheriff and Stewart-Clerks, to the
Ministers of the several Paroches within their Bounds, and Ordains the Sheriffs
and Stewart Clerks, to cause Publish this present Proclamation at the
respective Mercat-Crosses, upon the the first Mercatday after it shall come to
their hands; And appoints the Ministers of the several Paroches to cause
Intimat this Proclamation at their Paroch-Churches, upon the Forenoon after
Sermon, the first LORDS Day immediately after the same shall come to their
hands. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Sixth Day of March, And of Our Reign
the seventh Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GLIB. ELIOT, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

God Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696


