A PROCLAMATION, For the better Inbringing of the Pole Money, Imposed in Anno
1695.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France (...) Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, to (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
greeting; Forasmuchas, by the Act past in the last Session of Our current
Parliament, Entitled, Act for Pole Money appointing the Lists and Rolls of
Poleable Persons to be made and recorded, in manner therein expressed; it is also
ordered, that an Abstract thereof should be sent to the Lords of Thesaury,
between and the first of this instant Month of October, which day is now past;
and seeing the said day neither was, nor could be observed, because of the
lateness of the present Harvest, and the broken and uncertain Weather of (...)
Season: Therefore We, With advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have
thought fit to prorogat, a^^ hereby prorogates the said day to the first of
November next, Ordaining the foresaid Abstracts to be sent into the Lords of
our Thesaury, betwixt and that day, as if the first of November, in place of
the first of October had been set down in the foresaid Act of Parliament. And
to the effect that the Orders contained in the late proclamation of Our Privy
Council, for Collecting the said Pole Money may be the better observed, and the
Collectors for Shires and Paroches therein-mentioned more encouraged, We have
farther thought fit, with Advice foresaid, to allow for the payment of the said
Collectors Five per Cent. of their respective Collections, (...) wit, Three per
Cent: to the Collectors for Paroches, and Two per Cent. to the Collectors of
Shires, in manner prescribed in the former Proclamation. And because there is a
General Question arisen, anent the ^^ole of Ministers, whether they be only to
pay the single Pole of six pence, or to be reckoned in the Class of, and pay as
Gentlemen: It is hereby declared, with Advice foresaid, that all Ministers of
the Gospel within this Kingdom, are to be reckoned in the Class of, and to pay
as Gentlemen. And because it is informed that several Heretors refuse to give
up Lists, and to make the Division amongst their Tennents of their valued Rent,
conform to the Tennents respective Possessions, in manner prescribed by the Act
of Parliament, alleging it sufficient that they, the Heretors pay for their
respective valued Rent in Cumulo. As likewise, that Elders refuse to give up
Lists, in manner prescribed by the foresaid Act of Parliament, and Proclamation
of Council. And farther that the Tutors and Curators of Minors refuse to give an
account upon Oath, of the value of their Pupils and Minors moveable Estates, in
manifest defraud of the foresaid Pole: Therefore We, with advice foresaid, do
hereby Ordain, that in all and every of the said Cases, the persons refusing as
said is, shall be liable to be charged with Horning, to give due Obedience: and
that Letters be raised at Our Sollicitors instance, and put in the hands of the
respective Collectors of Supply, in the several Shires, to be by them duly
execute, upon Our Expenses, as they will be answerable. And because that in
some Paroches, there may be but one or no residing Heretor, nor Commissioner to
take up Lists within the same and execute the other Orders, conform to Our
former Proclamation; Therefore in such Cases, We here (...) allow and ordain
the Commissioners of the Shires within which the said Paroches lies, to
nominat and appoint an substantial Man or two, within the said Paroches, to
take up the foresaid Lists, and execute the other Orders, proper for
Commissioners of Paroches, mentioned in the former Proclamation. Our Will is
herefore and we charge you strictly, and command, that in continent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Merc^^^ Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-Crosses of the whole Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewa^^ cries
within this Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Intimation hereof, that none may pretend ignorance: And
Ordains these presents to be Printed and Published.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the third day of October, and of Our
Reign the seventh Year, 1695. Ex Deliberation Dominorum Sti. Concilij. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

(...) by the (...) and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
(...) 1695.


