PROCLAMATION For the better Collecting and Inbringing of what is deficient of
the Pole Money Imposed in Anno 1695.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith: To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as by the Tenth Act of the Fifth Session of Our
current Parliament, Imposing the Pole Money therein-contained, Methods and
Rules were prescribed for Uplifting and Bringing in the same; Likeas, the Lords
of Our privy Council are thereby Empowered to Order and Appoint such further
Methods and Courses as they shall judge fit, for Stating and Inbringing of the
said Pole Money. In pursuance of which Act, the Lords of Our privy Council,
have from time to time, made several Acts, and emitted several Proclamations,
for the more effectual Uplifting and Inbringing the said Pole Money, as the
said Acts and Proclamations in themselves more fully proport. And in regard
the foresaid Pole Money, which was then in Collection, is now Set in Tack to
John Campbell of Knockrioch, principal Tacksman, and his Partners, for the
Duty, and in the Terms therein-mentioned, whereby they have Right to the
foresaid Pole Money, and Act of Parliament Imposing the same, as also to the
haill Quadruples, and other Penalties Incurred for not payment thereof. And it
being just and reasonable, that they should have the Benefit of the foresaid
haill Acts and Proclamations concerning the said Pole Money, for making the
said Tack effectual: Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our privy
Council, Do hereby Declare, that Our said Tacksmen have the Benefit of the
foresaid haill Acts and Proclamations, in so far as not Obeyed and Execute,
Allowing the same to be put to further Execution by them, for the more effectual
Ingathering of the said Pole Money, with the Quadruples, and other Penalties
Incurred, to the effect, that all that have not as yet Obtempered, may know
their Hazard, and do what is incumbent for their Exoneration. And We with
Advice foresaid, Do further Require and Command all Collectors of Shires and
Paroches, who have not done their Duty in the premises, by making up and
delivering in exact Lists, and by collecting and paying in the said Pole Money
to Our said Tacksmen, that they be careful to do the same within Fifteen Days
after the publication hereof at the Mercat Cross of the respective Head-Burghs
of the Shires and Stewartries within which they Live; Certifying such of the
said Collectors as shall Failie herein, that they shall Amit and Lose their
Allowances given to them respective by Our said Proclamations, Out of the
Pole Money uplifted and not paid in by them, betwixt and the Day foresaid: As
likeways, We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the Commissioners of
Supply, and others appointed in the several Paroches by them, and their Clerks,
to give up to Our said Tacksmen or Collectors appointed by them, the Bonds and
Securities granted by the said Collectors, for performing their duty in the
Premises; Declaring, that Our said Tacksmen shall have siklike Execution
competent thereon, as was before competent to the Lords of Our Thesaury, or
others by them appointed, to oblige and compel the foresaid Collectors to
Performance, whom we hereby Require to make Count, Reckoning, and payment of
the Pole Money uplifted by them, to Our said Tacksmen and their Collectors
betwixt and the Day foresaid, under the Certification abovementioned: And
farther, We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the Commissioners of
Supply within the several Shires, and all other Magistrates of this Kingdom
within their respective Jurisdictions, or any one of them, Judges Constitute by
the foresaid Act of Parliament for that Effect, to give present and speedy
Justice against all Persons within their respective Bounds, that shall be
Conveened and Convict before them, as Defficient of the foresaid Pole Money, or
being unduely Classed; by Decerning them to make payment to Our said Tacksmen
or their Collectors of the foresaid Quadruples; for payment whereof, all
Diligence and Execution appointed by the foresaid Act of Parliament, and former
Proclamations, is to be prosecute with all Rigor: It is always thereby
provided, that where Books or Lists are already given in, either by Shires or
Paroches, as was Appointed by the foresaid Proclamations, it shall not be
Leisum to the said Tacksmen, or their Collectors, to Trouble any persons Liable
in Pole Money, by Citation or other ways, except such only as they shall First
give up in Roll to the said Commissioners of Supply, or other Judges ordained
by Act of Parliament, as either Deficient in payment, or not given up in any
former List, or not duly Listed; In which Case allenarly, and no other, the
said Commissioners, or other Judges foresaids are Required to Issue out
Precepts for Citation and Process, and Administer Justice as above: And farther,
if the said Commissioners or other Judges, shall find the foresaid Tacksmen, or
their Collectors to be Calumnious in the said Pursutes, they are to Fine them
in the Parties Expense and Damnadges: And also to be Careful that the said
Tacksmen, or their Collectors, do not Oppress the Country in the Execution of
the Premises in any Sort; But that in the case of any Complaint of Oppression,
they Administer Justice to the Oppressed as accords: And Lastly, We Ordain
Letters to be Direct hereupon in Form as effeirs. Our Will is herefore, And We
Charge you strictly, and Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the haill
Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom; And
there in Our Name and Authority, make Intimation hereof, that none may pretend
Ignorance; And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Eighteenth Day of March, And of Our
Reign the Eight Year 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. Anno Dom. 1697.


