A PROCLAMATION For Regulating the Post Office.
Edinburgh, the Twenty ninth day of November, One thousand six hundred eighty
and nine years.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy council considering, That by a Tack of the
Date the fourteenth day of August last by-^ They did Set to John Blair
Post-master-general, therein Designed Apothecary in Edinburgh, his Heirs or
Assigneys, the P^ and Office of General Postmaster, and Overseer of all Posts,
Horse, and Foot within the Kingdom of Scotland, for the spac^ seven years, from
and after the Term of Martinmass One thousand six hundred eighty-nine years,
and have granted Power a^ Warrant to him to appoint and settle Post-masters,
for establishing Horse and Foot Posts, at the several Stages where the (...)
may be necessary, for carrying not only of His Majesty's Dispatches, Letters
and Expresses; But also the Letters and Dispatc^ of all His Subjects, and
others from place to place, for whom he shall be answerable: And that Power is
also granted to him and ^foresaids, to Settle and Appoint a General
Letter-Office within the Town of Edinburgh, from which all Letters, Pa^ and
Dispatches may be sent with all expeditions, to any place or places within this
Kingdom, according to their respective ^rections: And at which Office, all
Letters, and their Answers shall likewayes be Received; As also, such other
particular ^ter-Office at such sit places as shall seem to him most convenient:
And with Power also to him, and such Deputs as should be Nominat by him to pro^
and furnish Horses for Pacquets, and Post, or Journey-Horses, he and they
always exacting such prices a^ly, as is set down and contained in the ^ticles
of the Roup, for each Horse that shall be furnished by them, and for
Transporting the Pacquets and Letters, whereof the Tenor follows; ^ ters from
Edinburgh to Drumfreis, Glasgow, Air, Dundee, Kelso, Fedburgh, Perth and
Striviling, at two shilling (...) single Letter, and (...) the double, and so
proportionally; and the like Rates to Hamilton. 2o. Betwixt Edinburgh and
Carlyle, Port-patrick, Aberdene and Dunkeld (...)ling the single Letter, six
shilling the double Letter, and so proportionally. 3o. Betwixt Edinburgh and
Kirkcudbright, Inverness, and all other (...) beyond Aberdene, four shilling
the single Letter, eight shilling the double-Letter, and so proportionally, 4o.
Item; all by-roads, for bringing L^ from the several Towns and Villages in the
Country, to the next adjacent Post Office, at one shilling per Letter, to the
persons who shall be app^ed to carry the Letters from the Country Villages, to
the next fixed Post Office; and where no Posts are settled, that Carriers may
have freedom (...) bring Letters. 5o. All Pacquets at three Ounce Weight, where
there are no Letters within, shall pay to such places as the Letters pay, two
(...) six shilling each Packet; and where the Letters pay three shilling, each
Packet shall pay nine shilling, And the said Lords of His Majesty's (...)
Council, have thereby Prohibited and Discharged, all Persons, Bodies Politic,
Magistrates of Burghs, and Incorporations, from erecting, or set^ Letter-Office,
or presuming to act in, or meddle with any Post Office within this Kingdom, by
establishing, or sending any way Posts; Horse, or (...) for carrying or
receiving Letters, Pacquets, or Answers, or doing any other thing to the hurt
and prejudice of the said Office of Post-master-general, (...) the time
foresaid; With Certification the Contraveeners, that they should be summarly
Called, and severely punished therefore: And (...) do also thereby Require and
Command, all the Sheriffs of Shires, Magistrates of Burghs, and others, to
concur with, and assist the-said John Blair, (...) his foresaids, in settling
and establishing Posts and Post-Offices, within their respective Jurisdictions;
as the said Tack, containing several other C^ of the Date foresaid, at more
length bears, And the said Lords of Privy Council also Considering, that
erecting and establishing of the said (...) will be of great import to the
whole Leidges, and that it is absolutely necessary, that they be Certiorat of
their danger, in contraveening the Pre^ by a public Proclamation; Therefore
the said Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Do, in Their Majesty's Name and
Authority, Require (...) Command, all the Sheriffs of Shires, Magistrates of
Burghs, and others to concur with, and assist the said John Blair and his
foresaids, in settling (...) establishing Posts and Post-Offices within their
respective Jurisdictions, and Prohibit and Discharge all persons, Bodies
Politic, Magistrates of Burgh^ or Incorporations whatsomever, from erecting or
settling any Letter Offices, or presuming to act, or meddle with any
Post-Offices within this K^dom, by establishing, or sending any way Posts,
Horse, or Foot, for carrying or receiving Letters, Pacquets, Or Answers, or
doing any other thing (...) the hurt or prejudice of the said Offfice of
Posts-master-general, during the space foresaid, With Certification to these
who shall transgress herein, (...) shall be summarly called, and severely
punished therefore, according to the guilt and quality of their Offense; And
because it will be a great diversion (...) the Postmaster general and his
Deputs, from attending upon their Offices, to prosecute and pursue all the
Contraveeners before the Council, who (...) the most part may be only mean and
inconsiderable persons, Therefore the said Lords Declare, that it shall be
competent to the Post-master-general, (...) pursue the Contraveeners hereof
before the said Lords, or the Magistrates and Judges of the respective
Jurisdictions, where any such person Contrave^ing shall happen to be
apprehended, as they shall think most sit and convenient. And they Do hereby
grant power and warrant to such Magistrates (...) Judges, before whom any such
Contravention shall be pursued, to punish them with all rigor, according to
Law, for the same. And the said Lords (...) His Majesty's Privy Council,
notwithstanding hereof, Allow and Declare, that it shall be leisum and lawful
to all Noblemen and Gentlemen within t^ Kingdom, to send to, or from this
place, or elsewhere, their own Servants with Letters, about their own Affairs
and Business allanerly: And (...) Declaring, that until the said John Blair
and his foresaids, have sit and convenient Letter-Offices and Posts-established
for transporting of their Letters and Pacquets, it shall be-leisum and lawful
to all His Majesty's Leidges, where such Letter-Offices and Posts are not
settled, to send their Letters (...) Pacquets as formerly: And also Declaring,
that these Presents are, and shall be without prejudice to the Post-masters
betwixt Edinburgh and (...)wick, who had their Commissions before the decease
John Grahame his Gift of the Office of Post-master-general, to brook and enjoy
the benefit of t^ foresaids Gifts, during the space therein-contained,
unprejudged or molested in any sort; And seeing it will be highly prejudicial to
the interest of His Majesty and the Leidges, if the Horses belonging to the
Post-master-general, or his Deputs, (which must on all occasions be in a
readiness for carrying Pacquets and Expresses) should be pressed, or taken from
them upon any pretext, of occasion whatsoever; Thefefore the said Lords Do, in
(...) and Authority foresaid, strictly Prohibit and Discharge all persons
whatsomever, from pressing any Horses belonging to the said
Posts-master-general his Deputs, and kept at the respective Stages where they
are employed, and made use of, for carrying the Pacquets and Expresses. And
Ordains (...) Presents to be Published at the Mercat-Crosse of Edinburgh, and
whole other Mercat-Crosses of the Royal Burrows within this Kingdom; and (...)
places needful, by Macers of Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, and Sheriffs in
that part, that none may pretend ignorance.

Per actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Privy Council,
Anno Dom. 1689.


