PROCLAMATION, Indemnifying Deserters, and declaring what Passes will be
sufficient.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially
Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, We have allowed and Ordained, that all
Deserters from Our Regiments in Flanders, since their being there, be seized as
Deserters by Our Officers, lately come from Flanders for Recruits; As also,
that such of these Deserters who engaged in any of Our Regiments abiding in
Scotland, be delivered to the said Officers, to be transported again to
Flanders; And least the foresaids Deserters may apprehend that they may still
be liable to punishment as Deserters; Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of
Our Privy Council, Do hereby fully Pardon and Indemnifie all such of the said
Deserters as shall happen to be transported to Flanders in manner foresaid for
their said Desertion, remitting to the said Deserters their foresaid Crime of
Desertion, as fully and freely in all respects, as if the said Crime had never
been committed and incurred, but that all other Deserters may be duly punished,
and none may presume for hereafter to Desert on any pretense. We further
hereby with Advice foresaid, Ratify and Revive all former Proclamations
against Deserters, ordaining the same to be put to execution against all
Deserters not hereby pardoned, or presently engaged in Our Service, with all
rigor; And that for hereafter no question may be moved about Passes, We
hereby with Advice foresaid, Ordain all Colonels of the Regiments in Our
Service, to intimat to their inferior Officers, that none of them presume to
give a Pass to any Soldier under their Command, unless the said inferior
Officer be a Field Officer, and in absence of the said Colonels out of the
Kingdom: Declaring, likeas it is hereby Declared, That all Passes to be
hereafter given contrair to the present Order, shall be void and of no effect
to the persons bearers and users thereof: OUR WILL IS herefore, and we Charge
you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of
the several Shires of this Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and Authority make
publication hereof, that none may pretend ignorance. And Ordains these Presents
to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty sixth day of February, and of
Our Reign the sixth year, 1695. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB:
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1695.


