coat of arms of Scotland C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

EDINBURGH, The seventh day of October, one thousand six hundred and sixty
three.
WHereas His Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, by
their Act and Proclamation, bearing date the twenty two day of February, 1661.
Finding, that many seditious and turbulent persons, Ministers and others in the
Kingdom of Ireland, who, by reason of their phanatick principles could not
comply with the administration of His Majesty's Authority and Government, so
happily established in that Kingdom, were coming over, expecting shelter here;
that they might be the more able to carry on their designs in perverting of the
alleagiance of the Subjects, and subverting the peace of the Kingdom. And that
it did much concern the public peace, that such waspes and unworthy persons,
enemies to all lawful Authority, and to whom it is natural to stir up
sedition, and undermine the peace where ever they are, should have no
countenance in this Kingdom; Did therefore declare, that no persons whatsoever,
coming from Ireland without a sufficient Pass and Testimony in writ from the
Lord Justices Council, or some having power from them, or from the Sheriff of
the County, or Mayor of the City where the said persons lived, of their
peaceable carriage and conformity to the Laws, should be allowed any residence,
receipt or stay within this Kingdom; but that it should be lawful to, like as
all Magistrates and Justices of Peace are hereby required, to seize upon and
imprison all such persons, wanting such Testimony, who should not willingly
remove out of the Kingdom within fifteen days after the intimating of the said
Proclamation to them, (excepting all ordinary known trafficking Merchants)
Likeas, by the said Act and Proclamation, it is ordained, That all such
persons, who should come over with any such Testimony, should, within fifteen
days after their landing, make their appearance before the Parliament, or in
case of their not sitting, before the Privy Council, or such as should be
warranded by them, and there make known the reasons of their coming hither, and
give such security as should be thought fit for their peaceable carriage;
otherwise, to remove off the Country within fifteen days; wherein if they
should failie, Magistrates, Sheriffs, and other public Ministers, are by the
said Act empowered to apprehend, secure and imprison them, till course should
be taken with them as with seditious and factious persons. And seeing, That the
said Act and Proclamation was only ordained to endure for one year after the
date thereof, and longer, as the Privy Council should think fit; and seeing the
same has not as yet been renewed, or prorogat; neither, as yet, have any
person or persons been nominated and empowered, before whom, these coming from
Ireland, in manner aforesaid, should appear and make known the reasons of their
coming hither; and to whom, they should find caution for their peaceable
carriage, in manner mentioned in the said Act: By reason whereof, several
Ministers have presumed to come from Ireland to this Kingdom, without either
owning or acknowledging of His Majesty's Parliament, Privy Council or other
Authority, Civil or Ecclesiastic; some of which have been so bold as to preach
publicly in Churches, and others do privately watch their own opportu^^ties to
stir up the Subjects to sedition, and to alienat their minds from the
Government, so happily established both in Church and State, The Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council have renewed, and by these presents renewes the said
Act and Proclamation, and ordains the same to stand in full force, strength and
effect, and to be put to due execution against the Contraveeners thereof: And
for that effect, have nominated, appointed and empowered, and by these
presents, nominates, appoints and impowers, William Earl of Glencaim, Lord
Chancellor, Hugh Earl of Eglintoun, (...) Earl of Galloway, William Lord
Cochrane, the Provost of Glasgow for the time, the Provost of Air for the time,
(...) Maxwel of Munshes, the Provost of Wigtoun for the time, and (...) Stewart
of Tundergie, or any one of them, to call before them all such persons coming
from Ireland, wanting sufficient Passes and Testimonies from the Lord
Lieutenant, or the persons mentioned in the said Act and Proclamation, who
shall not willingly remove off the Kingdom within fifteen days after the
public intimation of these presents, and to secure their persons in prison,
till His Majesty's Council be acquaint therewith; With power also to the
forenamed persons, or any one of them, to examine all such persons as shall
come over from Ireland, having such Testimony, concerning the reasons of their
coming hither; and to take such security of them for their peaceable carriage
as they shall think fit. And in case they shall not find the said security, to
cause them remove off the Country within fifteen days, otherwise to
apprehend, secure and imprison them, until they be proceeded against as
seditious persons, and disturbers of the public Peace. Moreover, the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council taking to their consideration, that notwithstanding
of the Acts of Parliament and Council published, for preventing and suppressing
the seeds of separation and disobedience to Authority, diverse persons in
several Paroches presume to withdraw and separate themselves from attending
upon the ordinar meetings for divine Worship, in these Paroches where Ministers
are legally planted, to the scandalous contempt of the Laws, and great increase
of disordour and licentiousness; And that some do pervert the true meaning and
intent of the Act of Parliament, Entitled, Act against separation and
disobedience to Ecclesiastical Authority, which appoints every Minister to give
admonition in presence of two witnesses to such persons as shall be given up to
the Council as transgressors of the said Act. Therefore, the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, for explanation of that clause of the said Act
according to the true meaning and intent thereof; do declare, that these
persons shall be proceeded against by the Council as transgressors of the Act,
who withdraw from their Paroch Kirks after three public admonitions given by
the Ministers of the respective Paroches out of the Pulpit in the Church upon
the Lords day after divine Service: And that the Ministers attestation under
his hand, That in presence of two or more sufficient Witnesses, he has from the
Pulpit upon three Lords days intimat the names of such, who ordinarily and
wilfully absent themselves from the ordinary meetings of divine Worship in
their own Paroch Church, shall give an sufficient ground of proceeding against
such persons as transgressors of the said Act. For putting the which into more
effectual execution, as they do discharge such persons, who under pretense of
their being Elders in Kirk-sessions formerly, do go about to leaven the people,
with dissatisfaction and disobedience to the Laws and Ecclesiastic Authority,
upon pain of being proceeded against as seditious persons. So they do require
such persons, as shall be called by the Ministers legally planted, to assist
them for suppressing of sin and disorders in the Paroch, to give their
concurrence for that effect. And farther, they do command and require and
hereby authorize and warrant all Noblemen, Sheriffs, Magistrates of Burghs,
Justices of Peace, all Officers of standing Forces, as they tender His
Majesty's service and the peace of the Country, to give their assistance and
effectual concurrence to Ministers in their respective bounds in the discharge
of their office, and to put the Law in execution, and to exact the penalties
which are expressed in the Acts of Parliament and Council from all and every
person, who are transgressors within their respective Paroches; unless the
Minister of the Paroch where the transgressor does reside, shall give a
sufficient reason, why the said person or persons are not to be proceeded
against: And to take care, that these penalties be employed for the relief of
the poor, and other pious uses within the respective Paroches. And, farther,
all Magistrates, Sheriffs, and other public Ministers are hereby ordained, as
they will be answerable upon their duty, to put this present Act and
Proclamation, with the Acts of Parliament and Secret Council, hereby renewed
and explained, to due execution against the Contraveeners thereof, in manner
therein expressed. And ordains these presents to be printed, and published at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none pretend
ignorance.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAjESTY,
1663.


