A PROCLAMATION, Offering a Reward and Imdemnity to such as shall discover the
burning of the House of Priest-field,
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as the Government of this Our ancient Kingdom, being entrusted to Us
by the Almighty God, we have ever endeavored, with a Royal and Fatherly care,
to preserve it free from Intestine Disorders; and Civil War, the greatest of
all dangers (because Our Subjects must fall therein on both sides) by
repressing all Tumults and Combinations, in their first appearances: In order
whereunto, being informed that some disorderly Boys, as well Students in the
College of Edinburgh, as Apprentices of that Our City, did of late enter into
Bonds and Combinations, and gather themselves in tumults upon the Streets of
that Our City, differencing themselves by cognizances, and threatening to burn
the House of Priest-field, belonging to the Provost of that Our City; Our Privy
Council did only endeavor to secure the Public Peace, and prevent Insolences
against Our Faithful and Loyal subjects, and albeit We delayed any punishment
of so great Disorders, till suitable means should be offered for preventing the
ill consequences which naturally follow such Licenciousness: Yet so far was Our
Clemency abused, that the said House of Priest-field, was, to the great
astonishment of all sober men, burnt down according to these threatenings, which
is clearly proved to Our Privy Council, by most unanswerable proofs; By which,
all Our Loyal and Peaceable Subjects are put in danger, as to their Lives and
Fortunes, and the Protestant Religion defamed by such as use it for a Cloak to
their Impieties: We have therefore thought fit, for discovery of that dreadful
Crime, and to prevent all future mischiefs, by a most exact inquiry into what
is past, to offer; Likeas, We by advice of Our Privy Council, offer a full
Indemnity and Remission to any one who shall first discover the said dreadful
Crime, together with the Sum of two thousand merks for his discovery; Which
Remission We declare to be as sufficient, as if the same were past Our Seals:
And which sum, We hereby Command and Empower the Commissioners of Our Thesaury
to pay to the said discoverer, whom We hereby take into Our special Protection.
And We ordain these Presents to be Published by you, at the Merkat Cross of
Edinburgh, and other places needful, and the same to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the thretteenth day of January, One
thousand six hundred eighty and one, and of Our Reign, the thretty two year.
Per actum Dominorum, Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON. Cl. Sti. Concilij.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.


