A PROCLAMATION. Ordering the Payment of provisions for the Forces, and
Redressing Abuses Committed by them.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God, King, and Queen of great Britain,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith.
To Macers of our Privy Counci1, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
Conjunctly and Severally, Specially Constitute, Greeting.
For as much as by diverse Laws and Acts of Parliament, made by our Royal
Predecessors, all free quartering of Soldiers in Transient or Local Quarters,
and all Localities for furnishing or Carrying Corn, Straw; Hay, or Grass to
Soldiers Horses, is expressly Prohibited and Discharged, and by an
Establishment under Our Royal Hand, There being Measures laid down, and Fonds
appropriat for the exact and punctual Payment of the standing Forces and
Garrisons within this Our Ancient Kingdom, and a Commissary appointed for
making due and Regular Provisions of Corn, Straw, and Grass, for the Horses and
Dragoons presently under Our Pay, and in Our Service within this Our Ancient
Kingdom, by ready Money, or otherwise as be can best Bargain with any of Our
Leidges for their Corn, Straw, and Grass. Whereby the abuses heretofore done
and committed upon any of Our Leidges, by the Illegal exacting Locality or free
Quarter, may be Remeeded and Prevented, and all Mans-meat, and Horse-meat
furnished to any Officers or Soldiers in our Service within this Our Ancient
Kingdom, duly paid. And we considering how necessary it is, that all Our Good
Subjects should know by whom, and in what manner they are to be paid for all
provisions of Corn, Straw, and Grass for Horses, and Meat and Drink to be
furnished to Our Officers and Soldiers, by them or any of them; and that all
Officers and Soldiers within this Our said Ancient Kingdom may Govern and
Regular themselves, and the Troops under their Command accordingly, as they
will be Answerable. We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Require
and Command the Commissary General, appointed and received by the Lords of Our
Thesaurie, to make Due and Timous Provisions of Oats, Straw, and Grass, for all
Horse and Dragoons at present under Our Pay, and in Our Service within this Our
Ancient Kingdom, in their Respective, Transient, and Local Quarter: And that
the same may be the more orderly and effectually done, we Require and command
all Our Officers, who command the said Troops, to give timely Notice to the
said Commssary of their Removal to and from Local Quarters, and of the Rout
appointed for their March in Transient Quarters, that provisions may be ready
accordingly. And in case any parties be called to March, upon sudden Commands,
which may not be fit to Impart to the Commissary: Then We with advice foresaid,
strictly Charge and Require the Commanders of the several. Parties, to buy with
Ready Money the Oats, Straw, and Grass, necessary for their Horses, as any
other of Our Leidges is in use to do, and what he shall depurse or expend
thereon: We hereby Require and Command our said Commssary to refound and repay
the same. And we with Advice of our Privy Council, do hereby expressly Require
and Command Our Commissary General by himself, or Fit Persons employed and
entrusted by him to attend at the Magazins which shall be provided for Our
Troops at their Respective Quarters, two Hours each Day. viz. Betwixt ten and
twelve in the Fore noon, at lest to attend the two Hours abovenamed upon one
or more days of each week, such as shall be particularly agreed upon betwixt
the Commissary and the Officers, to the effect the provisions may be given out
by the Commissary, and received by the Officers or Soldiers timously, and
without disorder or Confusion, and hereby all Officers and Soldiers are
peremptorly Prohibited and Discharged to offer any Injury or Abuse to our said
Commissary, or his Deputs, as they will be answerable at their highest Peril.
And sicklike, We with advice foresaid, peremptorly Require and Command the
Officer Commanding in Chief, in any place of Local or Transient Quarters, to
see the hall Meat and Drink furnished to the Soldiers and Officers under his
Command, by the Landlords of their Quarters, exactly and completely paid at
the ordinary Rates of the Country: And in Case there shall be any exaction or
discharge of free Quarters Extorted, or abatements exacted below the ordinary
Rates, or any other abuse Committed; We, with advice foresaid, Require and
Command the Commanding Officer there for the time, to make payment by ready
Money for the whole Soldiers and Officers on the place, in their Local
Quarters, once every Week ar Farthest, and Trasinent Quarters before Removeal,
if they stay a shorter time then a Week, under the pain of Casheiring and
breaking the said Commanding Officer, upon complaint of his Transgresling the
Premises, to be made by the party Injured to our privy Council, or to the
Sheriff or his Depute, Baillie of Regality, or his Depute, Stewart of the
Stewartrie, or his Depute, or any two Commissioners of Supply of the Bounds and
Shire, where the said Abuse, and Injuries are done and Committed, whom, or
either of whom, We with advice foresaid, Require and Command to receive the
said Complaints, and transmit the same to the Clerks of Our Privy Council,
within ten days after any such Complaints shall be made to them, under the
pain of being liable to repair the party Injured themselves: And which
Complaints, We with advice foresaid, appoint to be pursued by Our Advocat, and
Solicitor upon the public Charge. And in case any private Party shall think
fit to pursue the same themselves, We hereby Require and Command the Expenses
that shall be laid out by them, in prosecution thereof, to be Repayed and
Reimbursed to them by the Lords of Our Theasurie, alse well as the Expenses to
be laid out by Our Solicitor, all which are to be retained and deduced by the
said Lords of Our Thesaurie, out of the Officers pay against whom the said
Complaint is made and verified, And in csse any Inferior Officer in Transient
or Local Quarters, shall transgress any of the premises; We hereby Require
and Command the Commanding Officer, upon Complaint made to him, and Proven,
instantly to pay the Complainer what shall be due to him. And if the Person
complained on be an uncommissionar Office, the said Commander is instantly to
break and Cashiere him, and if he be a Commissionar Officer, who shall to
Transgress; We with Advice foresaid, Require the said Commanding Officer to
suspend him in the mean time, and immediately to Represeni the same to our Privy
Council, that they may give Orders for breaking and Cashiering the Officer
transgressing, providing the Complaints for not payment of Local Quarters, or
Commiting any of the Abuses foresaid therein be made to the said Commanding
Officer, within Eight days after. Weeks Quarters are Resting, or any other
Abuses Committed, and in Transient Quarters, before the parties Removal, with
Certification, if payment be not craved, or Complaints made within the time
foresaid, the Commanding Officer shall be free, but prejudice to the Landlords
and others to seek their payment and Reparation from the Persons Debitors
therein, or Committers thereof, by all other Legal means, and it shall be
sufficient evidence that the Commanding Officer has been complained to, and
Required to make payment of Provisions furnished to Soldiers, Men and Horses
under his Command, or redress abuses Committed by them, if the same be made to
him in presence of a Mgistrate within Burgh, a Justice of Peace or two
Witnesses. And We, With advice foresaid, do declare, that no Discharges shall
be sufficient for exonering the Soludiers and Officers; and Instructing the
Payment of their Quarters, unless they be Subscribed by the Master of the
Ground, or his Chamberlain or the Officer of the Ground before two Witnesses or
a Magistrate within Burgh. And for preventing of a Common Abuse done and
Committed upon Our Leidges, by Soldiers and Officers, in their Marches,
Pressing and Seasing upon Horses for their own private Use and Service. We with
Advice foresaid, do strictly Prohibit and Discharge all pressing or Seasing
upon Horses by any Officer of Soldier for their own Particular and private
Service, under the pain of a Months pay to be retained (upon Complaint to be
made and instructed as aforesaid) off the Officer who Commands, and where
Horses are necessary for carrying Artillery, Ammunition, or Provision, or any
other use of the Army in the Towns, or in the Country, that the same be
employed and made use of, by order of the Commander of the Party, and of the
Magistrates of Burghs jointly, if the Horses be furnished within Burgh: And by
the said Commander, and any one of the Commissioners of Supply within the Shire
where the Horses are furnished and made use of in Land-wart. And We with Advice
foresaid, conform to the third Act, Parliament 1681, ordain that there be paid
for each day that the said Horses shall Travel, three Shillings Scots for each
two Miles to the Man and Horie, and each day that they do not Travel, Six
Shillings Scots to the Man, and as much for the Horse, the Man being obliged to
provide himself and the Horse, which shall be paid by the Magistrates of the
Burgh, if the Horses be taken within a Town, or if in the Country, by the
Collector of the Supply in the Shire, who are to be repayed thereof, Or to have
the same allowed to them by the receiver General. And that the Horses necessary
to be made use of, and Employed for the Service and Use of our Forces above
expressed, may be the more Regularly and Equally proportioned and provided: We
with advice foresaid, Require and Command the Magistrates within Burgh, and
Commissioners of Supply, and Justices of Peace in Land-wart, to cause provide
from time to time a competent Number of Horses, within their respective Bounds,
for the Service of Our Forces, and the Uses foresaids, as they will be
Answerabie at their Peril. And we with Advice foresaid; Prohibit and Discharge
any Officer or Soldier to Seafe upon, or Press any Horses without the
concourle of the Persons abovenamed, or to detain them longer then one Days
March at farthest: But to Restore and give Back the said Horses Employed in
manner foresaid in good Case, under the pain of a Months pay to be retained in
manner foresaid, off the Officer who shall be found to contraveen the
Premises, besides the payment of the price of the Horse to the furnisher, as
the same shall be instructed before the Baillies within Burgh, Sheriffs,
Stewarts, Baillies of Regalities, or Deputs, or Justices of Peace in the
Country: And to the end Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises may be made
public and known. OUR WILL IS, And we Charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and all other Market crosses of the Head Burghs of this Kingdom, als well
Royalty as Regality, and Stewartries and other places needful, and there in our
Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises:
And sicklike, that all our Forces, as well as our Liedges, may have notice
hereof, We do Require and Command these Presents to be publicly Read at the
head of every Troop, and Company of our standing Forces, that none may pretend
Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fourteenth day of February, and of
Our Reign the fourth Year. 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1693.


