A PROCLAMATION, For the Security of MINISTERS.
At Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of June, one thousand six hundred and sixty
seven. CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To Our Lovits, (...) Messengers, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally specially constitute, Greeting.
Forasmuch as We, by diverse Acts of Parliaments and Proclamations, have
expressed and declared Our Royal care and resolution, to protect the Orthodox
and well-affected Clergy and Ministers: And to that effect and purpose, a
Proclamation was issued by Us upon the fifth of March last, commanding all
Heretors and Parochioners within the Western Shires therein mentioned, to
protect and defend the persons, families and goods of their respective
Ministers within their several Paroches, from all affronts and injuries to be
committed by insolent and disaffected persons to the present Government, in
manner, with, and under the certifications and pains therein contained. And
nevertheless, the malice and rage of such persons is so implacable against
loyal Ministers, upon no other account, but that they are faithful and obedient
to Our Laws and Authority, that of late, since the said Proclamation, diverse
outrages have been committed within the said western and other Shires, by
invading and wounding the persons of several Ministers, assaulting them in
their houses, and plundering and robbing their goods, to the great scandal of
Religion, contempt of Our Authority, and discouragement of the Preachers of the
Gospel, and is a great encouragement to such sacraligious and wicked persons,
that within the Paroches where such insolences are committed and done to
Ministers, there is no wanting persons of the same temper and principles, who
do secretly favor and comply with them; and they do presume, that the Actors
withdrawing, the Parochioners will not be questioned, and that they will not
think themselves concerned to prevent or repair the wrongs done to the
Ministers. Therefore We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, command
and charge all Heretors, Life-renters and others, having any real interest and
rent within the several Paroches of the Kingdom, whither they reside within the
same or not, their Bailies, Chamberlains and others having trust under them,
and all other Parochioners, to protect, defend, and secure the persons,
families and goods of their Ministers, not only in the exercise of their
Ministerial Function, but in their dwelling-houses, or being elsewhere within
the Paroch, from all injuries, affronts and prejudices which they may incur in
their persons and goods, from the violence and invasion of any phanatick or
disaffected person: and that upon the notice of any attempt of such, they
immediately repair to any place where they shall beat such injuries are
offered, and seize upon the persons of the committers; and in case that they
fly out of the said bounds, that they give notice to the Sheriff or any
Garrison or Forces that shall be nearest to these places, that they may pursue
them till they be apprehended and brought to trial: With certification, that if
any such outrages shall be committed, the Actors, and all persons who shall
have any accession to the same, and shall aid, assist, or any way comply with,
or shall willingly resset and conceal the delinquents, shall be proceeded
against and punished with all severity, as equally guilty with the invadors.
And farther, if they be not apprehended and brought to trial by the means and
diligence of the Parochioners, Letters shall be directed at the instance of Our
Advocat, to cite the Parochioners to appear before the Lords of Our Privy
Council, at the least to send three or four of their number specially
authorized for that effect, to hear and see the Parochioners decerned to pay to
the Minister for reparation, damage and interest, such a sum and fine as Our
Council shall think fit to determine, (special consideration being always had
of well-affected Heretors and Parochioners, who constantly attend the public
Ordinances, and as they are required by the Ministers, concur with them in the
exercise of Church Discipline, who are to be relieved of the half of the fine
to be imposed, which is to be paid by the disaffected, who are to be tried to
be such by the Justices of Peace, or other Judge-ordinar) and a citation of
Parochioners in general, at the Mercat Cross of the Shire, being intimate at
the Paroch-church upon a Sunday before-noon after divine Service, We declare to
be sufficient; and the said sum so to be modified, shall be divided amongst the
Heretors and Life-renters and others, according to their respective Valuations,
and is to be advanced and paid by them to the Sheriffs, Stewarts, or Bailies
of Regalities and Baileries, who are hereby ordained by themselves or their
Deputes, to uplift the same for the use of the Minister, and to use all lawful
execution for that effect: And for relief of the said Heretors, Life-renters
and others foresaids, their several Tennents are hereby ordained to pay the
third part of the several proportions payable by their Masters; and where any
person has more Tennents then one, the third part payable for relief of their
Master is to be divided and proportioned betwixt their Tennents proportionally,
and according to the duty they pay respective: And if any question arise
thereanent, either amongst the Tennents themselves, or the Tennents and their
Masters, the same is to be determined by the Justices of Peace or Sheriff of
the Shires, or other Judges Ordinar in whose jurisdiction they reside, in the
option of the complainers. And ordains these presents to be printed, and
published at the Mercat Cross of the head Burghs of this Kingdom, and read at
all Paroch-churches upon a Sunday before-noon, after divine Service, that none
pretend ignorance.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1667.


