A PROCLAMATION, Prorogating the Dyets of giving in Lists of Poleable Persons,
and payment of their Pole Money, and prescribing Methods for the exactness and
perfecting of the same.
WILLIAM by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and Severally, specially,
Constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch as, by the Act of Parliament one thousand six
hundred and ninty five years anent the Pole Money, and former Proclamations and
Orders of Our Privy Council thereanent, several days were prefixed for sending
in from the several Shires of this Kingdom to the Clerk of our Thesaury
Abstracts of the Lists and Rolls made up within the respective Sub-divisions of
the said Shires; Nevertheless the said Abstracts are either wholly neglected,
or sent in so defective and Lame, that no distinct Charge can be formed
thereupon, either against the Collectors of the Shires, or Paroch Collectors,
or these liable in payment of the said Pole Money, in so far as in several of
the said Books and Lists there are no Sums drawn out upon either the Stock, or
Rent, or Characters, and Conditions of the persons Poleable, and the Fees of
Servants are condescended on only for half a year, whereas the Master is liable
for the whole years Pole out of the halfyears Fee, and some condescends upon
Persons Merchandising, and Exercising Trades, and keeping Servants, and yet
bears them not able to pay Pole, and the general Pole of six pence is not
adjected to the particular Pole, and the valued Rent is not divided amongst the
Tennents conform to their Possessions but charged in cumulo, and that there are
several other Defects and Omissions in the said Books, for Remeid whereof, and
for perfecting the Lists and Rolls of the poleable persons within the several
Shires of this Kingdom; and for Rectifying and Amending the several Defects and
Mistakes above-written, and to the effect the Pole Money may be fully and
exactly gathered up according to the perfected Lists, We with Advice of the
Lords of Our Privy Council have thought fit to prorograt and continue the days
for completing the said Lists and Rolls, and paying in the Pole Money due by
the several Leidges of this our Kingdom until the Fifteenth day of January next
to come for all upon this side of Tay, except Perth Shire, and to the first day
of February for Perth-Shire and all beyond Tay, hereby Requiring and Commanding
the Collectors of Supply within the several Shires of this Kingdom, betwixt and
the days respective foresaids, to make up exact and complete Lists of all
persons Poleable within their respective Shires, in the Terms of the Act of
Parliament anent the Pole Money, who may be either altogether omitted, or not
Enrolled to their just Avail by the Sub-Collectors of the respective Divisions
and Paroches within the several Shires, for which the said Collectors of
Supply are allowed to retain five per Cent, in their own hands, out of the
Pole Money which shall be Collected by them from the persons either omitted or
not duly Enrolled as said is: And likeways we hereby Require and command the
said Collectors of Supply betwixt and the days respective foresaid to go
through every Paroch within their respective Shires, and there revise and
examine the Lists and Rolls given in to them by the Collectors of the several
Sub-divisions and Paroches, and make Trial of the famen that they be full and
exact, and to make use of the Assistance of the Elders, and Examination Rolls
of every Paroch, and if need beis to Execute our former Letters of Horning
granted to them for that Effect, and to do all other Diligence allowed by our
Laws for perfecting and completing the said Lists and Rolls betwixt and the
days foresaids: And the said Respective Collectors of Supply within the
several Shires are hereby allowed to retain in their own hands two per Cent. of
the whole Pole Money Collected and Uplifted within the respective Shires for
their pains and Travel in the Premises and that by and attour the Allowance
granted to them by this and our former Proclamations and Orders: And We with
Advice foresaid, Require and command all and every one of our Subjects liable
in payment of the Pole Money contained in the foresaid Act of Parliament to
make due and complete payment thereof to the respective Collectors appointed
for that Effect betwrixt and the days respective abovementioned, with
Certification whoever shall be found defficient thereafter shall be liable in the
Quadruple of their Pole Money which we hereby Ordain to be exacted without any
Abatement, ease, ordelay, and we with Advice foresaid Require and Command the
several Collectors of Supply within this Kingdom to make report of their
diligence, by sending in exact and complete Abstracts of the Lists and Rolls of
the Poleable Perssons within their Bounds to the Clerk of Our Thesaury; And
likeways by paying in the whole Pole Money Collected and Received by them,
betwixt and the days respective abovementioned, as they will be answerable.
And to the effect We may be informed of, and understand if there be any
neglect, connivance, or omission in any of the Collectors of Supply within the
several Shires, in the punctual observance and execution of the premises, We,
with advice and consent foresaid, command the Sheriff-Deputes within the
several Shires of this Kingdom, betwixt and the Fifteenth day of February next
to come, for all upon the South Side of Tay, except Perth-Shire; And for
Perth-Shire, and all be-north Tay betwixt and the First day of March
thereafter, to Supervise and Examine the diligence used by the Collectors of
Supply within the said respective Shires, and to make up Rolls of all persons
he shall discover, either to be altogether omitted, and not given up in List,
or not Enrolled to the just avail of their Pole, or who have not made payment
of the Pole Money due by them, and to exact and list the quadruple of the
Pole Money wherein any of the said persons are liable, whereof they shall
retain the one half to themselves, and make payment to Us of the other half,
betwixt and the days last abovementioned, as they will be answerable, OUR WILL
IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and command that incontinent their Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within
the Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority make public Intimation of the
premises, that none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Ninteenth day of December, and of Our
Reign the Seventh Year, 1695. Ex Deliberatione Dominorum Sti. Concilij. GILB.
ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilij.

GOD Save the KING.

