C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Indicting a Solemn and Public Thanksgiving throughout the
Kingdom of Scotland, to be kept upon the ninth of September next, for His
Majesty's safe Delivery from the late Phanatical Conspiracy against His
Majesty, His Royal Highness and Government.
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, and
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting;
To all and sundry Our good Subjects Greeting; Forasmuch as Almighty God in His
Mercy, and by His wonderful Providence, has brought to Light, Defeated and
Confounded a most Un-natural, Traitorous and Diabolical Conspiracy, contrived
and carried on by Persons of Phanatical, Atheistical and Republican Principles,
for taking away Our Sacred Life, and the Life of Our Dearest Brother James Duke
of Albany, Subverting of Our Government, and Involving these Kingdoms in Blood,
Confusion and Miseries* Concerning which Treasonable Conspiracy, We have
Emitted Our Royal Declaration to all Our loving Subjects, at Our Court at
Whitehall, the 28th. of July last, in this 35th. year of Our Reign, which We
have Ordered to be Reprinted here. And We being deeply sensible of the humble
and grateful Praises and Adoration, We owe to the Divine Majesty, for this
great and signal Instance of His watchful Care over Us, whom He has so long
Preserved, and so often Delivered by Miracles, Have out of Our Religious
Disposition, readily approven of an humble Motion made to Us for commanding an
Solemn and General Thanksgiving, to be religiously Observed throughout this
whole Kingdom, to Offer up devout Praises and Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for
this eminent and miraculous Deliverance granted to Us, and in Us, to all Our
loyal and dutiful Subjects; as also, fervently to pray that God may continue
His gracious Care over Us, and His Mercies to these Kingdoms, and more and more
bring to Light, Defeat and Confound all Traitorous Conspiracies, Associations
and Machinations against Us, Our Dearest Brother and Government; We with Advice
of Our Privy Council, have therefore thought fit by this Our Royal
Proclamation, to Indict a General and Solemn Thanksgiving, to be Observed
throughout this Kingdom, that all Our loving Subjects may offer their devout
Praises and Gratulations, and their fervent Prayers and Supplications to
Almighty God for the Purposes foresaid; And We strictly Command and Charge,
that the said Solemn Thanksgiving be religiously and devoutly Preformed by all
Our Subjects and people within this Our Kingdom, upon the ninth of September
next; And to the end this part of Divine Worship, so pious and necessary, may
be uniformly and at the same time offered by all Our loving and loyal Subjects;
We hereby Require the Reverend Archbishops and Bishops to give notice hereof
to the Ministers in their respective Diocesses, that upon the Lords Day
immediately preceding the said 9th. day of September next, as also upon the
said 9th. of September they cause Read and Intimat this Our Royal Proclamation
from the Pulpit in every Paroch Church, together with Our foresaid Declaration,
Dated at Our Court at Whitehall as said is, and that they exhort all Our
Subjects to a serious and devout Performance of the said Prayers, Praises and
Thanksgiving, as they tender the Favor of Almighty God, and the Safety and
Preservation of Our Sacred Life and Government; Certifying all such as shall
contemn or neglect this so religious and important a Duty, they shall be
proceeded against, and punished as Contemners of Our Authority, and as Persons
highly Disaffected to Our Person and Government. And ordains these Presents to
be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Haly-rud-house, the seventh day of August, One
thousand six hundred eighty and three. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and
fifth Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON. Cls. Sti.
Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1683.


