PROCLAMATION, Indemnifying Deserters, who shall return betwixt and the First
Day of January next to come.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, to (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms
Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting; Forasmuch as We are informed, that several Soldiers belonging to Our
Forces within this Our Ancient Kingdom, have Deserted; And We being desirous
rather to reclaim Transgressors by Clemency, than to punish them with the
outmost Severity; Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
have thought fit to Require, and do hereby Require all Soldiers that have
Deserted, to return to their Colors, and to Our Service, betwixt and the First
day of January next to come, promising to Indemnifie, likeas We do hereby fully
Indemnifie for their by past deserting, all that shall return in manner
foresaid; But on the other hand, certifying such as shall not return betwixt
and the day foresaid, that both they and their Resetters shall be prosecute
with the outmost severity, conform to the Laws and Proclamations emitted
against them. And farther, We do hereby Empower and Require all Officers
whatsomever, belonging to Our Forces, either at home or abroad, to seize and
apprehend after the day foresaid, all such Deserters as shall not accept of
this Our gracious offer, to the effect they may be condignly punished, as said
is. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly, and Command that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that none pretend ignorance;
And Ordains these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twelfth day of November, and of Our
Reign the Eighth Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.


