WR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
WILLIAM by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as the Lords of our Privy Council, by their Act of the Day and Date
hereof have Appointed their Clerks to Raise and Give out Letters at the
Instance of Sir James Stuart Our Advocat, for our Interest, in the Matter
underwritten, against all Sheriffs of Shires, Magistrates of Burghs, and
others, who ( by the Act of Parliament, anent Seasing of Horse and Arms from
the Persons not Qualified, and the Proclamation of Our Privy Council following
thereon) are Appointed to Sease the said Horses and Arms, and to make their
Report to the Council, and have failzied, for Citing of the said Sheriffs,
Magistrates and others foresaids, to Give in their Reports, and make payment of
their Penalties, in manner and to the Effect underwritten; as also for
Charging all Sheriffs, Magistrates and others, who conform to the said Act of
Parliament, for Seasing of Horses and Arms, and Proclamation of Council
following thereon, have Seized any Arms so cause Transport them to the
Garrisons after-named, to the Effect after-mentioned, as the said Act of the
Date foresaid, Ordaining their Our Letters to be Direct thereon in manner
after-specified, at more length bears. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
strictly, and Command, that Incontinent their our Letters secn, ye pass, and in
our Name and Authority, Command and charge all and sundry the Sheriffs of the
several Shires of this Kingdom, Stewarts of Stewartries, Baillies of
Regalities, and their Respective Deputs, and the Magistrates of Burghs, within
their several Jurisdictions, to make up, and Give in to the said Lords of our
Privy Council, or their Clerks, the Reports of the Horses and Arms Seized by
them as said is, within their Respective Bounds and Jurisdictions, and that
betwixt and (...) and also Command and Charge the said Sheriffs, Stewarts and
Baillies of Regalities, and their Deputs, and Migistrats of Burghs, to make
payment to George Baillie of Fariswood our General Receiver of the Sum of Five
hundred Merks a piece, and that upon the said (...) in case they failzie to
give in the said Reports for the Bounds within their Jurisdictions, betwixt
and the said Day, under the pain of Rebellion and Putting them to our Horn; and
immediately in case they failzie after the said (...) That ye in Our Name and
Authority, duly, lawfully and orderly Denunce the forenamed Persons Failziers,
our Rebels, and put them to Our Horn, Escheat and Inbring all their Movable
Goods and Gear to our usc for their Contempt and Disobedience, and if need
beis, that ye Fence, Arrest, Compryse, Compel, Poind and Distrenzie the
forenamed Persons, their readiest Movables, Goods and Gear, ay while complete
Payment be made of the Sums or Penalties above written; and also that ye Cause
Registrat their our Letters, with the Executions thereof, conform to the Act of
Parliament; and sicklike that ye Command and Charge all and sundry the said
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Regalities, and their Deputs, and Magistrates of
Burghs within their several Jurisdictions, who conform to the Act of Parliament
for Seasing of Horses and Arms of Persons not Qualified, and Proclamation of
Council following thereon, have Seized any Arms, to cause Transport the Arms
Seized by them, to any of the Garrisons of Edinburgh, Striviling, Dumbarton,
Blackness, Inverness, or Dunnotter, which do ly nearest to the place where the
Seized Arms are lying, betwixt and the said (...) day of (...) and to Report to
the Clerks of Our Privy Council Certificats thereof, that the said Arms may be
made furth-coming for the Service of Us and the Government, whenever the same
shall be called for. (...)

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Sixteenth Day of April, and of Our
Reign the Eight Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii.


