A PROCLAMATION For the Ready In-bringing of the Annexed and Additional Excise.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally specially constitute,
Greeting; Forasmuch as, By the second Act of the sixth Session of this Our
current Parliament, The Lords of Our Privy Council are Authorized, and
Empowered to prescribe such other Methods, and Orders, (besides what is
mentioned in the said Act) as they should Judge necessary, for the better
Up-lifting and In-bringing of the Additional Excise Imposed upon the respective
Liquors specified in the said Act: And specially, for causing the same to be
Raised, and Up-lifted upon the Liquor, and not upon the Malt. And We
considering, how necessar it is, for the better In-bringing the Annexed and
Additional Excise, and for Determining all Differences betwixt the Brewars and
the Tacksmen of the said Annexed and Additional Excise, and their Sub-Tacksmen,
and Collectors, from the first day of March one thousand six hundred and nyntie
seven, to the first day of March, one thousand six hundred and ninty eight,
during which space, the said Annexed and Additional Excise is now set in Tack,
That all Entries of Liquors of whatsoever sort, Brown and Imported, liable to
the said Excise, be duly and timously made. Do therefore, With Advice of the
Lords of Our ^rivy Council, Require and Command the Commissioners of Supply, of
the several Shyres within this Kingdom, Qualified according to Law, and
Residing whithin the Shyre: And who, by the said Act of Parliament, are
appointed Commissioners of the said Annexed Excise, to meet at the Head-Burgh
of the respective Shyres, the first Tuesday of September next to come, and at
their said Meeting, to Settle and Appoint Places, within six Miles where the
Brewers lives, where the public Excise Offices shall be most conveniently
keept for the Brewers to Enter, and give up the Quantities of the Liquors
browen by them, Liable in Payment of the said Excise. And appoints the said
Commissioners, immediately after designing places for the said Offices, To
cause make public Intimation at all the church Doors, within the said
respective Shyres of the particular places, designed by them, for the several
Excise Offices. With Certification to the said Commissioners, or any of them,
residing within the said respective Shyres, who shall failie to meet the said
first tuesday of September, nixt to come; and to appoint, and design the
particular places, for Excise Offices, in manner above expressed, Their Names
shall be returned by their Clerk to the Lords of Our Privy Council: To the
effect they may take such Course therewith, as they shall see Cause. And We,
with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the said Commissioners to meet the
first tuesday of every Month thereafter, during the Continuance of the said
Additional Excise, in manner, and for the ends prescribed, and set down in the
foresaid Act of Parliament; And We, with Advice foresaid, Require and Command
the whole Brewers within the Bounds, alloted for the said respective Excise
Offices, to wait upon the said respective Commissioners thereat, upon the
first tuesday day of September above expressed, without any further Intimation,
Charge or Citation to be given to them, by the said Tacksmen, Sub-tacksmen, or
Collectors of the said Annexed and Additional Excise, but the publication
hereof, allen^rly: And there to give in, and make, And the said Commissioners
to receive from them full, and faithful Entries of all Liquors browen, or
Retailed within the said Bounds, Liable in payment of the said Annexed and
Additional Excise, since the first day of March last inclusive, to the said
first tuesday of September, one thousand six hundred nyntie seven. And because
the Brewers, and others Liable to the said Excise, for want of timous
Intimation, for the said Month of March, and thereafter, may pretend, that
they cannot give their Oaths, if required, upon the precise Quantity of their
Brewing, or Liquors Retailed by them, during the said space, They are
therefore, here by allowed to give their Oaths in these Terms, That their said
Brewing, or Retail, has not exceeded such a Quantity, which is hereby held as
sufficient, to make them Liable for the same. Declaring hereby, and Certifying
such Brewers and Retaillers, who shall not Compear, and attend the said
Commissioners, the first tuesday of every Month, for making the Entry of all
Liquors Browen, or Retailed by them, Liable to the said Excise, for the
preceding Months, they shall be holden as Confessed, and Decreets given against
them, for the Quantities of Liquors Lyble to the foresaid Annexed and
Additional Excise, which shall be contained in the Claims, and Complaints to be
given in by the Tacksmen, Sub-tacksmen, and Collectors against them. Providing,
nevertheless, that if the said Brewers, who shall failie, and be holden as
Confessed, shall at any time within three Months thereafter, Compear before any
Two of the said Commissioners, and having first made due Intimation to the
Tacksmen make Faith as above, and Report a Certificat thereon, under their
hands, they shall be Reponed against the said Certification, upon punctual
payment of what they shall be found due; And We with Advice foresaid, appoint
and ordain, that no Brewer within Brough of Royality, Barrony or Regality,
Vend or Sell any part of their Browsts, until first they make Entry thereof at
the Excise Office, within the Respective Burghs, and there obtain a Sufferance
for the quantity Brown, which the keeper of the Office is to give gratis, and
without delay; and that in case of non-entry, or wrongous entry, the Brewer
within Burgh to be liable in the Sum of Ten Pounds Scots toties quoties; And
all Execution competent shall be made use of by Our Tacksmen, their
Sub-Tacksmen, or Collectors against the respective Brewers for the same; And
which Entrys may be disproven before any Magistrate, Justice of Peace, or
Commissioner of Excise by Witnesses, or Oath of Party, notwithstanding of any
Survey made by the Surveyers, and Waiters; And that all Brewers Barrels be for
hereafter Marked with their own Name, and the Seal of the next Excise-Office,
which Seal shall be Furnished to them gratis: As also, that no Person presume
to Reset any Ale, or Drinking Beer in their Houses, in order to the Imbazling
of the (...) under the pain of Ten Pounds Scots toties quoties, to be paid to
the foresaids Tacksmen, their Sub-Tacksmen or Collectors. And farther, that all
Tapsters, and Vintners of Ale and drinking Beer, shall for hereafter, before
they Tap, or Vend the same, take first a License from the nixt Excise-Office,
and there give Bond and Caution, that they shall not Tapp nor Sell, for less
Prices than these appointed by the Act of Parliament, under the Penalty of ten
pounds Scots toties quoties, it being always in the power of the Commissioners
of Supply and Excise, to modifie the said Penalties, when Incurred as to all
brewers not Living in Burghs of Royallity, Regality or Barrony: And in regard,
the Excise of strong Waters, Aquavity, Brandy, and Forregin Beer and ale, is
Ordered by the said Act of Parliament to be paid by the Retailers; Therefore
We with Advice of the Lords of our Privy Council Require and Command, all
brewers of Aquavity and Strong Waters, to make monthly Entries of the
quantities of the said Liquors Browen by them, and give in subscribed Lists to
the nixt Excise-Office, of the Names of the Persons to whom they Sell their
Aquavity, or strong Waters to be again Sold by Retail; As likeways, that the
Collectors, Clerks, or Surveyers at Sea ports, give up a true and particular
Account to the said Tacksmen, their Sub-Tacksmen, or Collectors of the said
Excise of the Quantities of Foreign strong Waters, Brandy and foreign Beer and
Ale Imported from time to time, and who is the Merchant Importer. As also, that
the said Merchant Importer, and all other Persons who now pretend to Sell the
foresaids Liquors in haill Sale conform to the late Act of Parliament: That is
to say, above a Pint, be liable and Obliged to give and Deliver subscrived
Lists to the said Tacksmen, or their Sub-Tacksmen Deputes, and Collectors of
the Persons Names to whom they Sell the said Brandy, strong Waters, or Foreign
Beer and Ale for Retail, and of the Quantities Sold to them, to the effect that
the said Retailers may be still liable for the Excise thereof, And in case the
said Commissioners, or at lest Two of them shall fail, yet to Meet and Attend
the said respective Excise Offices upon the said first Tuesday of September
nixt, or upon the first Tuesday of any subsequent Month during the continuance
of the said Additional Excise; The whole Division, and each of them residing,
within the said Shire under the Certification foresaid; and after Instruments
taken against them, of their Failie to Meet and Attend as said is; We with
Advice foresaid require and Command, the Sheriffs and their Deputes, or such as
the said Sheriff shall Substitute to each particular Diet for that effect,
allanerly to repair to the said respective Offices, within Twenty four-Hours
after they shall be desired by the Tacksmen, their Sub-Tacksmen, or Deputies,
and Collectors of the said Annexed, or Additional Excise; there Summarly to
Judge upon what occurs within the Bounds of that Office in reference to the
said Annexed or Additional Excise, Certifying the said Sheriffs, their
Deputes, or Substitutes, if they Faill, they shall be Punished as the Lords of
Our Privy Council shall think sit: And further, We with Advice foresaid,
Prohibit and Discharge any of the Commissioners of Supply, or other Inferior
Judges, or Officers of the Law within this Our Realm, to stop or hinder, either
Quartering, Poynding, or any other lawful Execution that shall be used by Our
Tacksmen, their Sub-Tacksmen, Deputes and Collectors of the said Annexed, or
Additional Excise, against the respective Brewers, and Retailers conform to the
Entries that shall be made by them, or according to the Quantities of Liquors
Retailed by them; or whereupon they shall be holden as Confessed, in manner, and
before the Judges abovementioned, except in the Case foresaid, under the pain
of being, not only liable for the Charges and Damnages Our said Tacksmen,
their Sub-Tacksmen and Collectors shall sustain and incurr there through; But
also, to such further pains as the Lords of Our Privy Council shall think sit.
And lastly, It is hereby Declared, that all the Penal toties quoties
abovementioned, are to be understood not for every Delinquency, but allanerly
for every Conviction, and for one single Transgression to be therein found. OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Market-(...) of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within
this Kingdom; And there in Our Name and Authority by open Proclamation, make
Intimation hereof that none ^^^tend Ignorance; And Ordains Printed Coppies
hereof to be sent to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts of the
Stewartries within this Kingdom, whom, and their Clerks, We Ordain to see the
samen Published, and Coppies thereof Affixed at the said Mercat-Crosses, and
Appoints them to send Doubles thereof to all the Ministers both in Churches and
Meeting Houses within their respective Jurisdictions; that upon the LORDS Day
immediately preceding, the said first Tuesday of September nixt, the samen may
be Intimate and Read in every Paroch-Church and Meeting House; And a Coppie of
the same Affixt upon the most Public Door thereof; And Ordains these Presents
to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Third Day of August and of Our Reign
the Ninth Year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno (...)


