CR

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Indicting a solemn and religious Fast, to be kept and
observed throughout the whole Kingdom of Scotland
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To all and sundry Our good Subjects, Greeting: Forasmuch
as Almighty God, after a sinful abuse of the holy Gospel, and of the never to
be forgotten Deliverance of this Our ancient Kingdom, from the Yoke of Bondage
and Usurpation, and of Our Royal Person and Government, from the open
Rebellions, and secret Plots and Conspiracies of Traitorous and Phanatical
Enemies; and after a long and impious despising of Peace and Plenty, does by
his righteous Judgments, manifestly discover his Anger and Displeasure against
the grievous sins of this Kingdom; and particularly, by the long continuance of
the Rigor and Storms of the last Winter, and the severity and unnatural
Coldness of the present Spring, whereby not only a great part of the Cattle
and Bestial are already destroyed, and the remanent in apparent danger; but
even the ordinary Season of Plowing and Sowing of the Ground, was in danger
almost to be lost, thereby threatening the breaking ^ The Staff of Bread, and
the dreadful Plague of Famine: Which Dispensation, does invite persons of all
Ranks, to sp^^dy and true Repentance, and the National Expression thereof, by
deep Mourning, and solemn Fasting an^ Humiliation. Therefore We, with Advice
and Consent of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do appoint and ordain a Day of
Humiliation to be observed by all Our Subjects of this Kingdom; strictly
Commanding and Requiring them, upon that Day, to cease from all the Works of
their ordinary Callings, and to repair to their respective Paroch Churches, and
there, make solemn Confe^^ion of their Sins, and Implore the Divine Mercy to
Us, and Our Subject^, by Praying, Mourning, Fasting, and su^^ ^ther Devotions,
as are usual upon such Days of publict Humiliation more particularly,
contritely to Confess ^ Mourn for the great neglect and contempt of, and
disobedience to the holy Gospel, for the sinful Separation from the Ordinances
thereof, and for the great and lamentable pre^alency of Atheism, Erro^
Profaneness, and (...)igion occasioned thereby; and for the sinful undervaluing
of the great Blessings of Peace and Plenty, so long ^ontinued under Our
Government: By all which, and many other ^rying Sins, the Lord Anger and
Jealousy are kindled, and his Hand is stretched out to the Destruction of the
Castle, and threatening the Fruits of the Ground, the necessary Provision for
the Life of Man and Beast, that by s^^ious Mourning, and sincere turning from
these provocking Sins, the Lord may graciously pardon them, and repen^ ^im of
the evil threatened, and most right^ously deserved. And for this end, We do
require the Arch-^^^shops of St. Andrews and Glasgow, the Bishop of Edinburgh,
Galloway, Dunkel, Aberdeen, Brichen, and Dumblan^ (...) To cause it to be
Intimated in the several Par^ch Churches of their Diocesses, upon Sunday the
fourth day of M^^^^ and to be Celebrated and observed, on Wednesd^^ thereafter;
and the remanent Bishops, whose Diocesses are more ^^^ote, to cause it to be
Intimated on Sunday the twenty fifth of May, to be observed the Wednesday
thereafter, by R(...)g the same from the Pulpit, after Divine ^ervice, the
Sabbath before the said respective Days of Fasting a^^^umiliation.

^^^en under Our Signet ^t Edinburgh, the seveteenth day of April, One thousand
six hundred eighty four. And of Our Reign, the threttieth and sixth Year. Per
actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edi^^^^gh, Printed by the (...) of And^^w Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1684.


