royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Ordaining all Persons in Public Trust to sign the Certificat
and Assurance.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute,
Greeting;
Whereas by an Act of the second Session of Our Current Parliament of this Our
Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, We with Advice and Consent of Our Estates of
Parliament, Have Enacted, Statuted and Ordained, That all Persons, who in Law
are obliged to Swear and Take the Oath of Allegiance to Us, shall also
Subscribe the Certificat and Assurance mentioned in, and Subjoyned to the said
Act of Parliament, under the Certification therein contained; And We Judging it
Just and Reasonable, That the said Act of Parliament should be put to
Execution, and receive due Obedience, To the effect it may appear, what Persons
are of Integrity, and Dutifully Affected to Us, and Our Government, and that
such as are otherwise inclined, may be discovered; We therefore, with Advice
of Our Privy Council, Ordain and Appoint, all the Sheriffs, Commiss^^^^^^,
Stewarts, Baillies of Royalties, Bailliaries and Regalities, to Sign and
Subscribe the said Certificat and Assurance hereunto Subjoyned, in presence of
one of the Lords, or others of Our Privy Council, being within, or near to
their Jurisdiction for the time, and failying thereof, in presence of one of
the Commissioners of Our Current Parliament, who have Taken, or shall first
take the same themselves, or in presence of a meeting of the Commissioners of
Supply; and all Magistrates of Burghs within their own Fenced Courts, and the
Deputs, Clerks, and Clerk-Deputs, and Fiscals of the whole Courts abovenamed,
and Justices of Peace, and all others in Trust and Office, who by Law are
obliged to take the Oath of Allegiance within this Kingdom, in presence of any
of the persons abovenamed, or the Sheriffs, or their Deputs, and that betwixt
and the days following, viz. These on this side of the Water of Tay, and Shire
of Forfar, betwixt and the twenty day of August current; and all be-north the
famine, betwixt and the first day of September, and these in Orknay and
Zetland, betwixt and the twenty ninth day of September next to come; and to
Record the same in their respective Books, and to Transmit to the Clerks of Our
Council, Extracts thereof under their Clerks hands, betwixt and the days
following, viz. These on this side of the Water of Tay, and Shire of Forfar,
betwixt and the first of September next; and these be-north the same, except
Orknay and Zetland, betwixt and the tenth day of September, and these in Orknay
and Zetland, betwixt and the fifth day of November next to come, under the
Certification contained in the foresaid Act of Parliament. And to the effect
Our Pleasure in the Premises may be known, Our Will is herefore, and We Charge
you straightly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass, and
in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of the
Premises, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and at the whole Mercat-Crosses of
the Head-burgs of the Shires and Stewartries, and also at the Mercat-Crosses of
the whole Burghs-Royal, of the Bailliaries and Regalities within this Kingdom,
that none may pretend ignorance. And appoints the Sheriffs of the several
Shires, to cause Publish the Premises, at all the Mercat-Crosses of the Burghs
Royal, Bailliaries and Regalities. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the fourth day of August, 1690. And of
Our Reign, the second Year. Per actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. D A: MONCREIFF,
Cls. Sti. Concilli.
Follows the Certificat and Assurance.

I (...) Do in the Sincerity of my Heart, Assert, Acknowledge and Declare, That
Their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary, are the only Lawful Undoubted
Sovereigns, King and Queen of Scotland, als well de Jure as de facto, and in
the Exercise of the Government; And therefore I do Sincerely and Faithfully
Promise and Engage, That I will with Heart and Hand, Life and Goods, Maintain
and Defend Their Majesty's Title and Government, against the late King James,
his Adherents, and all others Enemies, who either by open, or secret Attempts,
shall Disturb, or Disquiet Their Majesty's in the Exercise thereof.

God Save King William and Queen Mary.


Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


