DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION Regulating several Particulars anent the Pole, and Intimating the
next Years Pole.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally; specially constitute Greeting:
Forasmuchas the first years Pole Money imposed by an Act of the last Session
of this Our current Parliament, is not duly and completely paid in to the
Tacksmen or Farmers thereof, by sundry Persons liable in Payment of the same,
Notwithstanding of the foresaid Act of Parliament and several Proclamations of
Our Privy Council past and published thereanent; But several Doubts and
Difficulties are alleged and pretended before the several Magistrates and
others appointed as Judges, betwixt the said Tacksmen and Farmers, and any of
Our Liedges, anent the payment of the said Pole Money, whereby the Diligence
allowed by the foresaid Act of Parliament for raising and in-bringing of the
foresaid Pole Money, is very much Obstructed and Delayed: For Remeid whereof,
We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Appoint and Ordain all
Ministers of the Gospel and Women Unmarried, who are of free Stock and Means,
in the Terms of the foresaid Act of Parliament, to be liable in their single
Pole, as well as any other of Our Leidegs; And that where there is a Widow
Liferentrix and Fiar upon one and the same Estate, That the Fiar be liable in
Pole Money, conform to his valued Rent, mentioned in the foresaid Act of
Parliament, and the Widow to be liable to a third part of what her Husband
would have paid, if polled the time of his Decease: And sicklike all Heretors
below Sixty pounds of valued Rent, and of a thousand Merks of free Stock or
upwards, besides their said Lands, should be liable in Pole Money effeirand to
the rate of their said Stock. Item that all persons out of the Kingdom, having
an Estate Real or Moveable within the same, to be liable in Pole Money
according to the value thereof, in the Terms and conform to the respective
Classes and Charecters specified in the said Act of Parliament; And their
Tutors and Curators, Factors or Chamberlands, may be Conveened for payment of
the single Pole, for which the said absent Persons are liable accordingly,
unless the said Persons were out of the Kingdom forty days before the thirty
day of August School, and did not return to the same for forty days after the
first day of March, one thousand six hundred ninety nine years; And sicklike,
that all persons not Writers to the Signet, who Design themselves Writers or
commonly practices Writing of Bonds, Discharges or the like, be liable conform
to the foresaid Act of Parliament: And We with Advice foresaid Require and
Command the Sheriffs of the several Shires, Magistrates of Burghs, Commissioners
of Supply, Stewarts of Stewartries, Baillies of Regalities or Baronies or their
respective Deputes, and allother persons Authorized by any of Our former
proclamations, to proceed and determine in the Cases above-set down, in manner
abovementioned: And that they and each of them keep Courts and hold Dyets at
the Head-Burghs of the respective Shires, Stewartries and Regalities, for
deciding all Differences betwixt the said Tacksmen and Our Leidges anent their
Pole Money, and that how often they shall be Desired and Required by the said
Tacksmen for that effect, and that they shall not proceed to Judge and
Determine any Differences anent the Pole Money, except at the said respective
Head-Burghs allennerly, unless the said Tacksmen, their Subtacksmen or
Collectors shall desire the same or Consent thereto. And Forasmuchas the time
for Stateing and Classing all persons liable in the second years Pole imposed
by the twenty fifth Act of the last Session of this current Parliament does
Approach, and that it is necessary Our Liedges have due Intimation thereof, To
the effect they may prevent their being liable to the Certifications contained
in the Act of Parliament made thereanent: Therefore We, with Advice foresaid,
Require and Command all Our Liedges, whose Conditions or Charecters are
altered, or who did not duly Class themselves in the last years Pole, now to
Class themselves and give in the List: of their Poles, under the Certification
as for the former year, Declaring all persons who duly Classed themselves the
last year, and whose Conditions, are not altered as said is, free of new
Classing and Listing, but still liable as Classed the said last year; And the
Commissioners of Supply are to meet and divide themselves, and do every other
thing anent the Stating, Classing as above, and inbringing of the aforesaid
Pole Money for this ensuing year, as they were appointed by the foresaid Act of
Parliament, anent the last years Pole Money, and this present or any other
former Proclamation past and published thereanent: All which are hereby Revived
and Declared to be in full Force and Effect, in reference to all Persons and
things therein contained, for Stating as above, uplifting and paying the said
Pole Money for this ensuing year, sicklike and in the same manner as they were
for the Pole Money in the year preceding. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge
you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and Remanent Mercat-Crosses of the hail Head
Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and their in
Our Name and Authority by open Proclamation make Intimation hereof, That none
may pretend Ignorance. And Ordains this presents to be Printed and published.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Fifteenth day of September, and of Our
Reign the Eleventh year, 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELLIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1699.


