SERIOUS ADVICE AND DIRECTIONS To ALL, Especially to YOUNG PEOPLE, HOW THEY MAY
HEAR and READ THE WORD of GOD, That it may be the Savor of LIFE and not of
DEATH to them.

4 Mark 24. Take heed What ye Hear.

8 Luke 18. Take heed How ye Hear.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.

THE INTRODUCTION.
AS the Holy Scriptures (which the Apostle tells us, are able to make us wise
to Salvation, if duly prized and improved) are (next the giving of Christ to
die for us) the greatest Gift that ever God bestowed upon a Nation or Terson,
and which advances them above all other Nations and People in the World, Psalm
147.19, 20. so there is nothing will bring sorer Judgments, Spiritual, Temporal
and Eternal, than the Neglect or Misimprovement of these Oracles of God, it
will not only level such Persons with Heathens, but with the vilest of them
another day; as our Savior has forewarned us, Matthew. 11.24. It shall be more
tolerable in the Day of Judgment for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for such who do
not duly receive and entertain the Gospel, for those ends it was given of God;
It is a wonderful thing to consider, how scrupulous and fearful many People are
of Receiving the Lord's Supper, lest they should Eat and Drink their own
Damnation, and yet even these Persons will make nothing of careless and
unprofitable Hearing and Reading the Word of God, or neglecting and slighting
the same, which will as certainly ruin them at last, as unworthy Receiving:
And therefore these Directions are earnestly recommended to all, especially
Young Persons, that they may not be guilty of their own Eternal Ruin, and make
that Word, which, in its own nature, is, the Savor of Life unto Life, to be
unto them, the Savor of Death unto Death.

SERIOUS Advice and Directions to All, Especially to YOUNG PEOPLE.
In Psalm 119.9. the Question is asked, Wherewithal shall a Young Man cleanse
his Way? the Answer is, By ruling himself (or taking heed thereto) according to
thy Word.
IT is plain from hence, that Young Men's Ways or Courses are corrupt and
filthy, and the only Means of cleansing them is Gods Word, by which they must
rule and regulate their Ways, (that is) their Thoughts, Words, and Actions, and
therefore because the Word of God is Spiritual, and contradicts the headstrong
Lusts of young Persons, they do not love to read or meditate on it, how few
will seriously apply themselves to the reading of a Chapter or two in a day,
though they have time enough to read Stories, Romances, or other foolish Books
and Papers, which are agreeable to their Lusts; So if they hear the Word
Preached, which is the ordinary Means that God has appointed for their
Conversion, it is more out of Custom than Love, and when they come home from
hearing, they forget all they have received, by falling into vain and foolish
Talking, and not allowing themselves any time for Meditation, till at last they
grow hardened in their Sins, and the Word of God will have no impression upon
them, and youthful Lusts lead them captive to their destruction.

Therefore as Young Persons would not be guilty of their Souls eternal Ruin,
they must take care, that they do not neglect hearing and reading the Word, or
hear and read to no purpose, which is as bad or worse; To this end I do
earnestly advise such as can write, to keep a Paper Book, and write down the
Heads of every Sermon, with the Text and Proofs, and so much of the rest of the
Sermon as they can well write, an Example whereof, to direct them, I have
hereafter written down in this Paper; also Paterns or Directions for Prayer
before and after Sermon.

A PRAYER before SERMON.
MOst glorious, God, through the Riches of thy Grace, thou have given me
another opportunity to wait upon thee at thy House, and thou have commanded me
to take heed how I hear, I most humbly beseech thee, to make my heart fit to
receive the good Seed of thy Word: Lord* I desire to lay my Soul open to this
Sword of thy Spirit, beseeching thee to make it to me quick and powerful,
sharper than any two-edged Sword, to kill all my Sins and Lusts, especially my
right-eye and right hand Sins, which I pray thee discover to me, and make me
willing freely to deliver up to thee, to be crucified and slain. Be with thy
Servant, upon whose Ministry I am to attend; give him a door of utterance, that
he may Preach thy Word faith fully and plainly, not with enticing words of
men's Wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, and let thy
good Spirit carry it from his Mouth to my Heart, that I may come to be
convinced of the Sins of my Heart and Life, and that these Convictions may end
in true godly Sorrow, that may work Repentance unto Salvation, never to be
repented of, and all for the Merits of Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

The like Prayer may be used before reading of Chapters, with a little
variation.

The HEADS of a SERMON.
1 P. 1.3.4. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who,
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, etc.


ONe of the great Benefits that come to us by the Resurrection of Christ is the
New Birth. Who has begotten us again.

Regeneration is the first Saving Work upon us, it was the first Lesson Christ
taught so Learned a man as Nicodemus*

First. I shall explain what is meant by Regeneration, Secondly, etc. Thirdly,
etc. Application.

It signifies a Moral Change, not of the Substance, but of the Qualities of the
Soul, called in Scripture also Conversion, Sanctification, etc.

It is that great Change wrought upon us by the Spirit of God, whereby God's
Image, lost by the fall, is again renewed upon us, and we are turned from a
state of Sin to a state of Holiness, Acts, 26.18. See Ephesians. 4, 21 I shall
explain it more in six particulars.

1 st, Begetting again, supposes a former Birth, and that we must be twice
born; in our first Birth we were born in Sin, and Children of Wrath; the first
Birth brought us into the World Sinners, the second makes us Saints; our first
Birth makes us Men, our Second Birth makes us Christians.

2ly. This new Birth is the Work of God alone, none can regenerate us but God,
he that made us Creatures, can only make us new Creatures, Jam. 1.18. it is a
work of as great power to make a Sinner a Saint. as to make him a Man, I know
there are some civil Persons, that as our Savior says, are not far from the
Kingdom of God; but yet I say, there is no Man, by the greatest improvements of
Learning, Nature, or Reason; can make himself a Saint no more than a Man can
beget himself*

3ly. Regeneration is a work of free Grace and Mercy; of his own will begat he
us by the word of Truth, as 2 Timothy 2.19. Tit. 3.5*

4ly. Though God alone does regenerate us, yet he makes use of means, which are
two; First the Preaching of the Word. St. James says, Jam. 1, 18. he begat us
by the Word of Truth. And therefore we must attend the Preaching of the Word,
It is not Peoples staying at Home, or walking in the Fields, and saying God can
save them if he will, will do them any good. The other means is Baptism, which
is called the washing of Regeneration, Titus 3, 5.

5ly. The Principal working on God's part, is the Pouring out of the Holy
Ghost, to be the Soul or Principle of this new Life in us, those Graces of the
Spirit whereby the Soul is first healed, and then sanctified, a partaking of
the Divine Nature, as Romans 8 11, Unregenerate persons may have the Gifts, the
Assistances and Motions of the Spirit, but not have the Spirit dwell in them as
a Principle of new Life.

6ly. When God has thus regenerated us, there follows a great Change in the
Soul, just like a new Life put into a dead Body, which is presently followed
with Breathing, Walking and Actions; so he that is new Born has a new
Understanding, a new Judgment, a new Sense of Things; he now sees the
Excellency of Christ, and the Beauty of Holiness, the loathsome Nature of Sin;
he has now new Loves, new Joys, a new end of this Life, and an inclination and
purpose to serve God in every thing, and then a new Life follows a new Heart*

It is called a new Birth, or being begotten again.

1st Because it is an inward vital Change, Life begins first in the Heart, as
Ezekiel. 36.26. and Jer* 31.31.

2ly. Regeneration is an universal Change; when the Soul of Man is infused, it
goes through every Member of the Body; so the Spirit of God sanctifies the
whole Man, and therefore he will not live in any known sin.

3ly. This new birth Implies a constant and prevailing Change; natural Actions
are constant. Regeneration is the distinguishing Act of God's electing Love;
had we died but one hour before we had been born again, we should have been
undon for ever.

APPLICATION.
This should stir you up to examine your selves; you that have not felt this
great work upon your hearts, do you not believe you have immortal Souls, that
must be miserable or happy for ever? do you believe there is no way to Life, but
by the new Birth; what Pillow can you rest upon in an unconverted State? me
thinks that Text of our Savior, John 3^ 3. Except a Man be born again he
cannot see the Kingdom of God, should follow you in all your Callings and
Recreations: Arise therefore and repent of your Sins; make you new Hearts and
new Spirits.

Most Persons that have any readiness in writing, may take thus much of a
Sermon; they that cannot, let them at first take only the Heads of the Sermon,
which begin with 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. this may easily be done; and afterward, when
they grow more expert, they may enlarge farther. When you come home from
Church, read what you have written, and seriously consider it, and meditate
upon it, and then turn your Meditation into some such Prayer as this which
follows.

A PRAYER after Hearing the WORD.
MOST gracious Lord, I, thy poor unworthy Creature, desire in all humility, to
bless thy Holy Name, that notwithstanding my great unthankfulness and
unprofitableness under the means of Grace, thou have given me one opportunity
more to wait upon the in thy House, and to partake of thy Holy Word; O let the
same make a deep and a lasting impression on my Soul, and not be left to the
vanity of my Spirit: I have been now taught the Nature and Necessity of the new
birth that it is a through change of the Heart, wrought by the Holy Ghost, to
turn us from sin to God; that it is the work of him alone that made us, to new
make us; and there is no hopes of Heaven, or escaping Hell, until this great
Work be wrought in my Heart. Lord, I am a poor Ignorant sinful Creature, unable
to conceive this great Mystery of Regeneration, and am ready in my heart to say
with Nicodemus, How can these things be? I beseech thee, let me know by
Experience, What it is to be born again; to be made a new Creature. Oh give me
thy Holy Spirit to work this Great Change in me; let Him Break or melt my hard
Heart into true Contrition and Godly Sorrow, for my Sins; and show me the
necessity of an interest by Faith In the Blood of Jesus Christ, who is the
Savior of all Penitent Sinners* Amen.

Or other ways you may turn the several Heads of your Sermon into a Prayer, and
so you will have the whole Substance of the Sermon, and a Direction for your
Prayer, which will be more easy and profitable; As for example, In the first
Head of the Sermon it is there expressed, that the first Birth brought us into
the World Sinners, the second makes us Saints; the first Birth made us Men, the
second Christians. When I read this I lift up my Heart to God in Prayer after
some such manner:

O Blessed Lord, am I born a miserable Sinner, and do continue such till I am
born again? O let me give no rest to my Soul till this Work be wrought in me.
Oh let me not rest in an Outward Profession, when I have no true Godliness in
my Heart.

So in the second Head I read, that this new Birth is the Work of God alone,
and the same Power that made us Creatures, must make us new Creatures: Then I
lift up my Soul to God in this manner:

O Lord, I beseech thee, put forth that Mighty Power whereby thou made me a
Creature, to make me a new Creature. Lord, I can only wait upon the in the use
of Means, it is the mighty power of thy Grace must make them effectual to the
Convincing and Converting me: Carry on this Work in my Soul, against all the
Oppositions of my wicked Heart, the World and the Devil, and give me Grace to
improve every Motion of thy good Spirit, and never to quench the same.

Thus you may easily go over all the other Heads of the forementioned Sermon,
or of any other Sermon you write, or of any Chapter or Verse you read in
private.

The Spiritual Advantages to such as take this Course of Writting Sermons.
First. IT will be a great Means to make you attend with more diligence upon
the Word, and prevent all wandering Thoughts; this will certainly engage your
Attention, and cause your mind to be fixed, that you may not be guilty of
offering the Sacrifice of Fools, to have your Body present, and your Heart
running after Vanity.

Secondly. This Course will keep your bodily Eyes from wandering, and looking
upon Faces or fine Clothes in the Church, which distractes the Mind,

Thirdly, This Writting and Praying will be an excellent means to furnish your
Soul with Divine Truths, and such as will remain and abide with you, to direct
you in your Life; a man that takes this Course, shall have benefit by a Sermon.
and remember it perhaps many Years after, when a careless slothful Hearer shall
forget all in a few Hours; that Sermon that we do Pray into our Hearts shall do
us good, and none else. For want of this, how many Persons are there that have
been Hearers of good Sermons, it may be 10, 20, 30, or 40 Years, and yet after
all, know no more of their Religion than a mere Heathen, or at least it is but
very general and uncertain, not any thing that has an influence upon their
Hearts and Lives; and no wonder if such as would not receive the Truth in the
love of it, that they may be saved, in a day of temptation, should be given
over to believe lies, that they may be damned.

Fourthly. By this means you will be able to resist all Temptations to Sin and
Errors, that you are always liable to; whether from within, or from without,
you will say to your selves, I remember this or that Sin, or false Doctrine,
was forbidden in such a Sermon, and the Judgments of God denounced against it;
and, as Joseph, when he was tempted by his Mistress, so you will say, How can I
do this wickedness, and sin against God? and this likewise will be a good means
to incite and stir you up to all good Duties, that God requires of you; and
hereby you may be very useful to others with you, by reading the Heads of your
Sermon to them, and promote holy Conference, which is a Duty God Requires, and
will reward: It is said, They that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another:
and by this Course a great deal of Precious time will be redeemed on Lords
days, which many young Persons do vainly squander away in idle and unprofitable
Discourse.

And forasmuch as there are several Persons that can Read, but not write, and
if the Question be asked, what must these do to profit by reading the
Scriptures and hearing Sermons? I answer, (as to Reading) let such or others,
when they read a Chapter, diligently meditate upon it, and turn the several
Verses into holy Ejaculations or Prayers; many of the Psalms are already made
Prayers to their hands, and they may use them in the same form and words as
they lie in the Bible; as for example, Psalm. 139.23.24. Search me, O God, and
know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts. and see if there be any wicked way
in me: and lead me in the way everlasting. And other Verses, that are only
affirmations of truths, they may easily turn into Prayers; As for example, when
I read that passage, Mat. 1.21. where is said, And she shall bring forth a Son,
and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins, I lift up my Heart to God in some such Prayer as this, O blessed Jesus,
it was thy great design and end of coming into the World to save Souls, and to
that end to save sinners from their sins, which are the destroyers of Souls. O
do thou save me from all my sins, especially such and such sins as I am most
inclined to.

And then as to Hearing of Sermons, such Persons as cannot write, may take
their Bibles and turn down the Text and the several Proofs and other
Scriptures that are quoted for the Confirmation or Illustration of the doctrine
that is insisted upon; and when they go home, they may seriously meditate on
them in order one after another, and as they see occasion, turn them into suen
Ejaculations and Prayers as above; and this will also be a means to bring much
of the Sermon to their memories which they have forgotten.

I hope these Arguments are sufficient Motives for such Young Men or other
Persons that are desirous to follow the best Ways and Means for the good of
their Souls, to take up this Course.

Objection. But it may be some young Persons, that are careless of their own
Souls, will object and say, there is too much trouble in this Course.

Answ. It is very plain, that the trouble is very little, and to such as truly
love their Souls, it is a pleasure; if you cannot undergo such a trouble, how
can you forsake all things for Christ.

Object. But some may say again, Do not most People content themselves, without
taking any such course, and may not a man be a good Christian without it?

Answ. If you will follow the Way that Most go in, then I have little hope to
prevail with you in this or any other Matter that concerns your Souls, for the
Most go the Broad Way that leads to Destruction; but I do not say, it is
necessary for all People to take this Course, but I chiefly mean it for Youth,
whose Hearts and Memories are deceitful and treacherous, and cannot keep a
Sermon or the Heads of it with them* so as after to meditate on the same, and
improve it by Prayer; I say therefore, though it be not necessary for all, yet
it is necessary for such, and very convenient and profitable to all others,
that will set themselves to it.

Object. It may be some may say again, I am unskilful, I know not how to set
about it.

Answ. Have but a Will, and in a little time you will have Skill. In short, all
Objections are vain and frivolous, and only show the Backwardness in you to
those things that may advance your Souls good, and that you have so much the
more need of taking up this Course.

If God shall incline your Hearts to undertake this Work, then take this Advice
by way of Caution.

First. Be very serious before you make a beginning, and pray earnestly to God,
that he will make this Course profitable to your Souls health.

Secondly, Having resolved to set upon it, do not suffer your vain deceitful
Hearts, the World or the Devil, to make you give over again, for you will find
opposition from all or some of these, but still hold on, and remember you have,
upon good Reasons, found it very necessary for you, and therefore you will not
give it over, till you have, by the Grace of God, obtained benefit by it.

Thirdly, Have a care you do not rest in a Formal Use of this Course, but
remember, though you should follow such a Course never so long, yet if you find
no Spiritual Benefit, nor that you have been brought by this Means from a State
of Sin and Folly, to a State of Grace and Holiness, all you have done, will do
you no good; remember this is not to be done for it self, but for another end
and purpose, namely, that your Soul may be renewed and changed, that you may be
Born again, and see the Kingdom of God.

Lastly, and especially, I do advise all Persons, as they ever hope for any
Saving-benefit of Hearing or Reading the Word, to Pray diligently and
constantly for a renewed and sanctified Heart, without which, though they
should arrive to some Notional Knowledge in the Head, it would do them little
good, nor will they keep it long. The Word of God is holy, and will not remain
or abide long any where, but in a holy Heart. And therefore Solomon advises,
Prove. 3.1. (My Son, forget not my Law, but let thine Heart keep my
Commandments.) As if he should have said, You will quickly forget all, if you
do not lay it up in your Heart. It is a good Heart that makes a good Memory.

Now I have done; and unless you can give me better Reasons for the Neglect of
this Way, than I have given you for the Observation of it, I do hereby, with
the greatest earnestness, out of a true love to your Souls, and from some good
self-experience, beseech and entreat you, that you would without delay resolve,
in the fear of God, to make a serious and sober Trial, and then I am sure you
will have great cause to thank God for this Counsel. And as a farther Motive,
remember, that God Almighty take care to write down in the Book of his
Omniscience, all the Sermons you ever heard, and Chapters you have read and how
you have remembered and improved them to his Glory, and the good of your Souls.
And what a sad Account will every careless Hearer and Reader have to make in
the great Day of Judgment, when God shall say, Come* Sinner, I gave thee so
many Years to live upon Earth I afforded thee all the means of Grace, and
especially this of Reading and Hearing my Word preached; thou have heard so
many hundred Sermons, wherein thou have been acquainted with the Necessity of a
New Heart, a New Life, now what Improvements and Earnings have thou made of all
these precious Talents? Believe this for a certain Truth, th^se Sermons you
will not now remember to your Salvation, you shall then remember to your
Condemnation, when your remembrance will do you no good.

FINIS.

