A PROCLAMATION For the Ready Inbringing of the Annexed and Additional Excise.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part
Conjunctly and Severally Specially Constitute, Greeting;
For as much as, by the second Act of the sixth Session of this Our Current
Parliament, The Lords of Our Privy Council are Authorized and Empowered to
prescribe such other Methods and Orders (besides what is mentioned in the said
Act) as they shall Judge necessary, for the better Up-listing and In-bringing
of the Additional Excise, Imposed upon the respective; Liquors, specified in
the said Act, and specially, for causing the same to be Raised and Up-listed
upon the Liquor, and not upon the Malt; And We considering, how necessar it is,
for the better In bringing the Annexed and Additional Excise, and for
determining all Differences betwixt the Brewars and the Tacks-men of the said
Annexed and Additional Excise, and their Sub-tacksmen, and Collectors, from the
first day of March one thousand six hundred and nyntie eight, to the first day
of March, one thousand six hundred nyntie nine, during which space, the said
Annexed and Additional Excise is now set in Tack, That all Entries of Liquors
of whatsoever sort Browen and Imported, liable to the said Excise, be duly and
timously made Do therefore, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
Require and Command the Commissioners of Supply, of the several Shires within
this Kingdom, qualified according to Law, and residing within the Shire, and
who, by the said Act of Parliament, are appointed Commissioners of the said
Annexed Excise, to meet at the Head Burghs of the respective Shires, upon the
second Tuesday of Aprile next to come, and at their said meeting, to settle and
appoint places within six miles where the Brewers live, where the public
Excise Offices shall be most conveniently keept for the Brewers to Enter, and
give up the quantities of the Liquors Browen by them, liable in payment of the
said Annexed Excise, and appoints the said Commissioners immediately, after
designing places for the said, Offices, to cause make public Intimation at
all the Church-Doors within the said respective Shires, of the particular
places designed by them, for the several Excise Offices, with Certification to
the said Commissioners, or any of them residing within the said respective
Shyres, who shall failie to meet the said second tuesday of Apryle next to
come, and to appoint and design the particular places, for Excise Offices in
manner aboveexprest, Their Names shall be returned by their Clerk, to the Lords
of Our Privy Council, to the effect they may take such course therewith as they
shall see cause. And We, with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the said
Commissioners to meet the first twesday of every Month thereafter, during the
continuance of the said Additional Excise, in manner and for the ends
prescribed, and set down in the foresaid Act of Parliament, and We, with Advice
foresaid, Require and Command the whole Brewars within the bounds allotted for
the said respective Excise Offices to wait upon the said respective
Commissioners thereat, upon the second tuesday of Aprile, above expressed,
without any further Intimation, Charge or Citation to be given to them by the
said Tacks-men, Sub tacksmen, or Collectors of the said Annexed and Additional
Excise but the publication hereof allenarlly, and there to give in, and make,
and the said Commissioners to receive from them full and faithful Entries of
all Liquors browen, or Retailled within the said bounds, liable in payment of
the said Annexed and Additional Excise since the first of March last inclusive,
to the second tuesday of Aprile, One thonsand six hundred nyntie eight,
Declaring hereby, and Certifying such Brewers and Retaillers, who shall not
Compear, and attend the said Commissioners, the first tuesday of every Month,
for making the Entry of the precise quantity of all Liquors Browen and
Retailled by them liable to the said Excise, for the preceding Month, they
shall be holden as confessed, and Decreets given against them, for the quantities
of Liquors liable to the foresaid Annexed and Additional Excise, which shall be
contained in the Claims and Complaints to be given in by the Tacks-men Sub
tacksmen, and Collectors against them, providing, nevertheless that it the
said Brewers, who shall failie, and be holden as confessed, shall at any time
within three months thereafter Compear before any two of the said
Commissioners, and having first made due Intimation to the Tacks-men, made
Faith as bove, and report a Certificat thereon, under their hands, they shall
be Reponed against the said certification, upon punctual payment of what they
shall be found due, and We, with Advice foresaid, Appoint and Ordain. That no
Brewer within Burgh of Royalty, Barrony not Regality, Vend or Sell any part of
their Broust until first they make Entry hereof at the Excise Office, within
the respective Burgh, and there obtain a Sufference, for the quantity browen,
which the Keeper of the Office is to give gratis, and without delay, and that
in case of Noneentry, or Wrongous Entry, the Brewer within Burgh to be liable
in the Sum of ten pounds Scots, toties quoties, and all Execution competent
shall be made use of by Our Tacks-men, their Sub tacks-men, or Collectors,
against the respective Brewers for the same, and which Entries may be
disapproven before any Magistrate, Justice of Peace or Commissioner of Excise,
by Witnesses, or Oath of Party, notwithstanding of any survey made by the
Survyers, and Waiters. And that all Brewers Barrells be for hereafter marked
with their own Name, and the Seall of the nixt Office, which Seall shall be
furnished to them gratis, as also, that no Person presume to resett any Ale or
Drinking Beer in their Houses in order to the imbazlying of the samen, under
the pain of ten pounds Scots toties quoties, to be paid to the foresaid
Tacks-men, their Sub-tacksmen, or Collectors, and further, that all Tapsters,
and Vintners of Ale, and Drinking Beer shall for hereafter, before they tapp or
vend the same, take first a License from the next Excise Office, (...) there
give (...) and Caution, that they shall not tapp nor sell any, for less Prices
than these appointed by the Act of Parliament, under the penalty of ten pound
Scots toties (...) ways in the power of the Commissioners of Excise and
Supply, to modifie the said penalties, when incurred, as to all Brewers not
living in Burghs of Royalty (...)ny. And in regard the Excise of Strong Water,
Aquavity, Brandy and Foreign Beer and Ale, is ordered by the said Act of
Parliament, to be paid by the (...) We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Require and Command all Brewers of Aquavity, and Strong waters, to
make Monthly Entries of the Q(...) Liquors browen by them, and give in
Subscribed Lists to the next Excise Office, of the names of the Persons to whom
they Sell their Aquavity, or Strong waters, (...) by Retail, as likewayes that
the Collectors, Clerks or Survyers at seaports give up a true and particular
account to the said Tacks-men, their Sub-tacksmen or Collectors of the (...)
of the quantities of Foreign strong waters, Brandy and Foreign Beer and Ale
Imported from time to time, and who is the Merchant Importer: As also, that the
said Merchant Importer, and all other Persons, who now pretend to Seii the
foresaids Liquors in haill fale, conform to the late Act of Parliament, That is
to say, above a Pynt, be liable and obliged to give and deliver Subscribed
Lists to the said Tacks men, or Sub-tacksmen, Deputs and Collectors, of the
Persons Names to whom they sell the said Brandy, Strong waters, or Foreign
Beer and Ale for Retaile, and of the quantities sold to them, to the effect,
that the said Retailers may be still layable for the Excise thereof, And in
case the said Commissioners, or at least two of them shall faill yet to meet
and attend the said respective Excise Offices, upon the said second tuesday of
Apryle next, or upon the first tuesday of any subsequent Month, during the
Continuance of the said Additional Excise, the whole devision, and each of
them, residing within the said Shire, under the Certification foresaid, and
after Instruments taken against them, of their failie to meet and attend, as
said is, We, with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the Sheriffs, and their
Deputs, or such as the said Sheriffs or Deput shall substitute to each
Particular diet, for that effect allenarly, to repair to the said respective
Offices within twenty four hours after they shall be desired by the Tacks-men,
their Subtacksmen, or Deputes, and Collectors of the said Annexed or Additional
Excise, there summarly to Judge upon what occurs within the bounds of that
Office, in reference to the said Annexed or Additional Excise, Certifying the
said Sheriffs, their Deputes or Substitutes, if they failie, they shall be
punished as the Lords of Our Privy Council shall think sit, And farther, We,
with Advice foresaid, prohibit and discharge any of the Commissioners of
Supply, or other inferior Judges, or Officers of the Law within this Our
Realm, to stopp or hinder either Quartering, Poynding Imprisoning, or any other
lawful Execution, that shall be used by Our Tacks-men, their Sub-tacksmen.
Deputes and Collectors of the said Annexed or Additional Excise against the
respective Brewers, and Retailers, conform to the Entries that shall be made by
them or according to the quantities of Liquors Retailed by them, or whereupon
they shall be holden as Confessed, in manner, and before the Judges
abovementioned, except in the case foresaid, under the pain of being not only
liable for the Charges and Damnages, Our said Tacks-men, their Sub-tacksmen,
and Collectors shall Sustain and Incurr there through; But also to such further
pains, as the Lords of Our Privy Council shall think sit: And lastly, it is
hereby declared, that all the Penal toties quoties above mentioned, are not to
be understood, for every Delinquency, but allenarly for every Conviction, and
one single Transgression to be therein found, OUR WlLL IS HEREFORE, And We
Charge you strictly and Command, That in continent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Market Crosses of the Head
Burghs of the several Shires, and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and therein
Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation hereof, that none
pretend Ignorance, And Ordains Printed Coppies hereof to be sent to the
Sheriffs of the several Shyres, and Stewarts of the Stewartries within this
Kingdom, whom, and their Clerks, We Ordain to see the samen published, and
Coppies thereof Affixed at the said Market Crosses, And appoints them to send
doubles thereof, to all the Ministers, both in Churches; and Meeting Houses
within their respective Jurisdictions, That upon, the Lords Day immediately
preceding, the said second twesday of Aprile next, the samen may be Intimat
and Read in every Paroch Church, and Meeting House, and Coppies of the same
Affixed upon the most Public Doors thereof. And Ordains these presents to be
Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourth day of March, and of Our Reign
the nynth Year. School. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELLIOT, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, School.


