A PROCLAMATION, Imposing a further Custom upon Wines and Tobacco, etc.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lovites (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting:
Forasmuch, as by the twenty sixth Act of the third Session of Our first
Parliament, The Ordering and Disposal of Trade with Foreign Countries, and the
laying of Restraints and Impositions upon Foreign Imported Commodities, is
asserted to belong to Us and Our Royal Successors, as an undoubted Privilege
and Prerogative of the Crown; and that by virtue thereof, We may lay such
Impositions and Restraints upon Foreign imported Commodities, and so Order and
Dispose upon the Trade of them, as We shall judge sit for the good of Our
Kingdom: And whereas, by an Act and Proclamation of the eleventh of April last,
upon consideration of the great detriment Our Customs and Excise might sustain
by a Prohibition put upon several Foreign Commodities, deduction of the Excise
of that employed upon Fishes and other allowances, given for the encouragement
of Manufactures and building of Ships; We did for balance of some part
thereof, appoint a further Duty to be put upon Wine and Tobacco, which is found
to be very far short in ballancing and compensing the foresaid loss: Wherefore
We, with advice of Our Privy Council, conform to the Power given Us by the said
Act of Parliament, Ordain, that each Tun of French, Spanish and Rhenish Wine,
which formerly paid thirty pound Scots of Custom, shall hereafter pay thirty
pound Scots more, being in all threescore pounds Scots, with the burden of the
Bullion as formerly, by way of Custom: And each pound of Tobacco coming
immediately from the Plantations, pay hereafter two shilling four pennies Scots
of Custom, and eight pennies Scots of Excise: And each pound of all other
Tobacco, coming from any other place, except the Plantations, pay five shilling
Scots of Custom; and twelve pennies of Excise, making in all six shilling Scots
of Custom and Excise, each pound weight. And whereas, by the Act of Parliament,
Anno 1669. the Merchant exporter is to have allowed or repayed by the
Customers, ten pounds four shilling Scots for the Salt of each exported Last of
Herrings: And that by an Act of Parliament, Anno 1673. anent the taking away
the Pre-emption of Salt, It is appointed that the exporters of Herring, shall
only be free of Custom at the export, being only twenty four shilling Scots per
Last; And that by the foresaid Proclamation following thereupon, the Merchant
exporter is to have allowance according to the first Act of Parliament, without
considering that We did quite the Excise then payable to him upon Inland Salt,
being fifteen shilling Scots per Linlithgow Boll, which would have extended to
much more then what is to be returned to the Merchants for their exported
Herrings; and that the Act 1673. does take away all pretenses thereto.
Therefore We Ordain, that the said Act, 1673. shall stand in full force, and
that no allowance be given for exported Herrings, notwithstanding of the said
Act of Council and Proclamation foresaid, following thereupon, appointing
repayment for exported Herrings, according to the Act of Parliament foresaid,
in the year, 1669. And Ordains the Collectors or Fermorers of Our Custom and
Excise, present and to come, their Deputs, Servants and Waiters, to uplift and
exact the said Custom and Excise upon the said Goods, as the same is now
Imposed in time coming, whether Our Customs and Excise be uplifted by
Collection or Ferm, any former Act to the contrair notwithstanding. And We
ordain these Presents to be Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and
other places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the sixth day of October, one thousand six
hundred and eighty one, And of Our Reign, the thretty three year. Per actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilii. PAT. MENZEIS, Cls Sti. Concilii.

God save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1681.


