Unto the Right Honorable, The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.
The Petition of the Earl of SEAFORT
Shows,
THat where your Lordships have been pleased to find the Deforcement and Riot
Lybelled at the Instance of Pitliver and Tulloch proven; and have decerned me,
as I am informed, in a very great Sum. I do with all respect to your Lordships,
beseech the following Reasons may be considered, for clearing that I cannot be
liable on either of these Accounts.

And First, as to the Deforcement, I do with submission contend there was none:
For there can be no Deforcement, where there is no Messenger: And Robert Dallas
alleged to have been Deforced, was no Messenger. And I did produce an
Attestation from the Lion, for clearing that he was deprived; and his
deprivation Intimat but a few Weeks before his pretended Deforcement.

I know it was urged, 1 mo. That he was Habit and Repute Messenger. 2 do. That
he was deprived only upon a Formality by the Lion, and for no ground of
Malversation. But to these my Answers are plain. And to the First, it is
Answered, that the deprivation, being within a few Weeks before the pretended
Act of Deforcement, and the Deprivation happening to have been Intimat and
published at the Market Cross of Inverness, where the Deforcement is alleged
to have fallen out, there was not time nor pretense of Habit and Repute, which
is inferred from length of time, and frequency of Acts. 2 do. Tho Habit and
Repute may serve the turn in Civil action; yet it is not sufficient to infer a
Crime, or to be regarded, where the Question is to be about Punishment, where
things are to be Real and not Suspposed. 3 tio. I did at the Bar give a new
Libel to the Pursuers: And I do positively offer to prove, That Dallas his
Deprivation was publicly known; which excludes all pretense of Habit and
Repute.

And lastly, the pretense, That he was deprived upon a light occasion. I
answer. whatever was the occasion of his Deprivation, he was deprived, and was
no Messenger: And the Lion Court who gave him his Office and Authority, has
solemnly taken it away: And if he had believed himself lesed, he ought to have
applied to the Lords of Session: But the truth is, he as Messenger having found
Caution for his Office, and to perform certain other Duties conform to the Act
of Parliament, under Condition to be deprived if he should Faill, And having
failled he was most justly deprived and his deprivation was fairly intimate by
the Lion Court: And therefore he was no Messenger; and consequently there could
be no Deforcement. And the Pursuers are to blame, who used such a Messenger
after the legal form of Intimation.

Nor is this all, though in my humble Opinion, this is very much. But further.
it is evident, That the Execution of Deforcement in the essential parts of it,
is not proven. And I must Beg leave to say, That however in Civil Cases the
Execution of a Messenger is probative; yet in Cases inferring punishment, it is
but considered as a naked assertion; unless it be astructed by the Depositions
of the Witnesses unsuspect: Nor is it sufficient to be Subscribed by the
Messenger in such Cases; because even his Oath would be refused, in respect of
the Personal Injury in the Lybel done to himself. And so it is, this Instrument
is not only not astructed; but it is destroyed by the Testimonies. First,
because the Testimonies differing from what they have Subscrived under their
hand, and each from another, do render both the Execution and themselves
suspect: And your Lordships have found it in a Case perfectly parallel to this
within this few days, betwixt the Earl of Tullibardine and Balnagoun. 2 do. It
was to have been proven the Blazon was displayed; that I was Wanded or
Apprehended; and that it had been Intimat by whose Authority, and at whose
Instance: Seeing it was so insert in the Execution, and that some of these,
especially the Displaying the Blazon, as the differencing Badge of a Messenger
from any other Leidge, and so an indispensible solemnity; as McKenie in his
Criminals page 259. And Stair. in his Institut. page 725. Number. 14. and 738. N.
7. expressly hold it as a principal. And Stair. ut supra page 730 hold it as a
principal that an Exauctorat Messenger may be despised, if he cannot prove that
he had Blazon displayed yet of this the Witnesses prove nothing. Nay on the
contrary, they Depone, they did not see the Blazon, They Depone they did not
see me touched with the Wand an of Peace; and none of them did so much as hear
Pitlivers Name mentioned. I desire to know if they can produce the Testimony of
any Lawyer, asserting, that a man without any special Mark or distinction by
Blazon, or even a Messenger with his Blazon Displayed, without so much as a
Warrant, or the Parties Name Intimat verbally, is a Legal Execution of a
Caption: And without a legal Execution of a Caption. there can be no
deforcement 3 tio. Though the Instrument bears other Witnesses to have been
present, beyond all manner of exception; yet the Pursuers has only adduced
Bayn, designed Tullochs Servants, and a very Boy, who did not so much as sign
the Execution, until the Messenger was Dead. And I offer to prove, That other
of the Witnesses being required to sign the Execution, refused it; because it
was not true. So that it remains, Here is a Deforcement upon which I am fined
in a very great Sum, whereupon my Escheat may fall without either Messengers or
Execution. And it was no marvel though the Witnesses should Vary a little from
themselves and the Execution; because I offer to prove. That the Execution was
filled up here in Edinhurgh, even after the Messenger was Dead: And I shall use
no other Witnesses then these already cited, or the Pusuers themselves and
their Agents: And I do contend, That an Execution so redargued, and sent up
blank is not to be considered as an Execution at all.

I omit to tell your Lordships, I had no Accession to the Acts of Violence and
Deforcement, and the Pursuers had only the Confidence to urge the Crime to have
been committed chiefly by my Servants.

As to the Riot, I detest and abhore it: It is neither suitable to the
Character I have the Honor to bear, nor to my Breeding nor Temper. It is
proven indeed, That Mr. William Baily, and other of the Defenders, were guilty
of the Riot: But that I had any Accession to it, I desire the Pursuers frankly
to say, what part of the Probation clears it. They did libel indeed, That
Tulloch was carried to my House, to my Closs, through a Town in Daylight,
ignominiously; and there Beat. But they have not one single Testimony to prove
it; though the Carrying Tulloch through the Town in Daylight, might certainly
have been proven, if it had been True. Nay, I positively offer to prove, That
the Castle of Chanery, was not the ordinary place of my Residence; and that I
was alibi all that Day.

The Pursuers had not the Confidence to allege, I was guilty directly. They
did indeed pretend to have the Matter cleared by their own Oath; which is New,
in Matters Criminal. They did likeways allege, That I should be liable as an
Highland Chief. But I humbly presume, your Lordships did not proceed upon that
Ground. These consequential Hitts, do infinitely more concern the Nation, than
me: It were above measure hard, that I, or Persons in the like Circumstances,
should be exposed for the Riots of their Servants to pay such great Sums, with
Imprisonment, and other great Damnages; especially when these Servants were
never required, till they were out of my power, they having gone out of the
Kingdom long before, and had no residence on my ground. This is not my Case
alone, but is the Case of all Noblemen and Gentlemen in the Highland Countries;
nay, and I may say, in the Nation: For there is a general Clause in the Act of
Parliament founded on. But I am persuaded your Lordships could not extend that
Matter, tho the Pursuers were forced, through the straitness of their Cause, to
urge it.

I am as fully persuaded, That the Odious Misrepresentations against me, had no
influence in the Decision: And therefore I shall not trouble your Lordships
with a long Vindication of my self, as to my General Management and Conduct: I
am perfectly satisfied your Lordships will proceed only on Probation, and the
State of the Case, as is laid before you.

May it therefore please your Lordships to consider these Principles of Law,
and to find there is no Deforcement proven: And that I had no Accession to the
Riot committed: And therefore to Assoilie me, and Liberate me from my
Imprisonment.

And your Petitioner shall ever Pray.

