A PROCLAMATION, Indemnifying such as have been in Arms before the First of
June last.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the faith; To Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren
Heralds, Pursevants, Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting: Whereas We did allow John Earl of Bradalbin, to meet with the
Highlanders, and others in Arms against Us, and Our Authority, in order to the
Reducing of them to Our Obedience, and by a Representation made to Us in their
names, We understand their willingness to render themselves in subjection to
Our Authority and Laws, humbly asking Pardon for what is past, and Our
Assistance for accommodating some (...) and Funds, which do at present, and
have very long troubled these places; And We being satisfied, that nothing
(...) conduce more to the Peace of the Highlands, and Reduce them from Rapine
and Arms, to Virtue and Industry, than making away of the occasions of these
Differences and Feuds, which prevail with them, to neglect the opportunities,
to (...) and Cultivat their Country, and to accustom themselves to
Depredations and Idleness; In order whereunto, We (...) Graciously to Pardon,
Indemnifie, and Restore all that have been in Arms against Us and Our
Government, who shall take the Oath of Allegiance, prescribed by Our Act of
Parliament, before the first day of January next. Therefore We, with the Advice
of Our Privy Council, Do Indemnifie, Pardon, and Forgive all that have been in
Arms against Us or Our Government, before the first day of June last, of all
Treasons, Rebellions, Robberies, Depredations, Seditions, Leasing-making,
hearing and not revealing of Treason; and generally, every thing that can be
objected against any of the persons foresaids, for being in Arms or Rebellion,
preceding the date hereof: Restoring and Reponing, all and every one of the
said persons, who have been in Arms against Us, before the time foresaid, to
their Lives, Estates, Dignities, Fame and Blood, als fully and freely, as if
they had never been guilty, or had never been Condemned for the Crimes
foresaids, and als fully and effectually, as if each of them had particular
Remissions, containing a special enumeration of their Crimes, duly and orderly
expede under Our Great Seal for the same; upon this express Condition always,
that the persons foresaids, who have been to Arms before the time foresaid, and
shall plead and take the benefit of this Our Gracious Indemnity, Swear and Sign
the Oath of Allegiance to Us by themselves, or the Sheriff Clerks subscribing
for such as cannot write, and that before famous Witnesses, betwixt and the
first day of January next to come, in presence of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, or the Sheriff, or their Deputs of the respective Shires, where any of
the said persons live; Requiring hereby, and Commanding the said Sheriffs,
their Deputs and Clerks, before whom any shall Swear the said Oath of
Allegiance, for the benefit of this our Indemnity, to transmit to the Clerks of
Our Privy Council, exact Lists of all persons by their ordinary Designations,
who shall subscribe the said Oath in their presence, and take the benefit of
Our said Indemnity, betwixt and the tenth day of the said Month of January
next, as they will be answerable at their highest peril. And We with Advice
foresaid, Do assure and Declare, all such persons who have been in Arms before
the first of June last, and shall betwixt and the first of January next, take
the benefit of this Our Gracious Indemnity, by Swearing and Signing, as said
is, the said Oath of Allegiance to Us, that they shall be altogether free,
safe, and secure from all manner of Punishment, Pains and Penalties, that can
be inflicted upon them for open Rebellion, or any other of the Crimes
above-specified, and that such as shall continue obst^at, and incorrigible,
after this Gracious offer of Mercy, shall be punished as Traitors and Rebels,
and other ways, to the outmost extremity of Law; And We, with Advice foresaid,
Require and Command, all Judges and Ministers of Our Law, to Interpret this
present Indemnity in the most favorable and ample manner; Prohibiting and
Discharging them to call in question any of the persons forsaids, who shall
take the benefit hereof in manner abovementioned, for any of the Crimes
abovewritten, in time coming. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you straightly
and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the HeadBurghs
of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make intimation of the Premises, as ye will answer to Us
thereupon. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published in manner
foresaid: The which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, as said
is, Our full Power, by these Presents, delivering them by you, duly Execute,
and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty seventh day of August, 1691.
And of Our Reign the third Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Et in
Supplementum Signeti, GILB. ELIOT, Cls Secreti Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1691.


