A PROCLAMATION, Indemnifying Deserters, who shall return to their Majesty's
Service.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith: To Macers of Our privy Council, or
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
specially Constitute, Greeting. Forasmuch as, We understand that a great many
Soldiers of the Forces presently under Our Pay, and in Our Service within this
Our ancient Kingdom and Abroad, have Deserted their Colors, and do Skulk and
hide themselves in obscure Places, being afraid to return to Our Service, out
of Dread of that Justly Deserved Punishment due to Deserters, by the Severity
of Military Laws: For Remeid whereof, and that all Soldiers who have Deserted
as said is, may be Inexcusable and receive chat Condign Punishment due to
Deserters by the Military Laws, in case they shall not give Punctual Obedience
to this present Proclamation. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council, do hereby Peremptorily Require and Command, all Soldiers within
this Our ancient Kingdom, who have been in Our Service, and under Our Pay, in
any of the Regiments, Troops, or Companies now in Our Service, within this Our
ancient Kingdom, or forth thereof, (who have not left the same upon a Pass
granted to them, by their Captain or other Superior Officer,) to return to Our
Service, and present themselves to the Commander in Chief, or any Commissionat
Officer of Our Forces within our said Kingdom. And We with Ad ice foresaid,
Pardon and Indemnifie them and every one of them, who shall return and present
themselves in manner foresaid, within two Months after the date hereof,
Certifying all such who shall not return and accept, and take the Benefit of
this Our Gracious Indemnity within the space foresaid, they shall be Treated as
Deserters, when, and wherever they shall be seized on without Mercy. And We
with Advice foresaid, Require and Command all Magistrates and Ministers of the
Law within this Realm, to Concur with, and be Assisting to the Officers of Our
Forces, and such as shall be employed by them, in Seizing and Securing the
Persons of all such Deserters (in manner specified in the former
Proclamations,) as shall not accept of the Benefit of this Indemnity, within
the space above-written. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and
Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of the whole Head-Burghs within this
Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make Publication hereof, that none may
pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fifth Day of Aprile. And of Our Reign
the Fourth Year 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplementum
Signeti. GILB. ELIOT, Cls Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary,
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, 1693.


