C R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Regulating the Price of the Weigh of Beer proportionally to
the Prices of the Drink.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
defender of the Faith:
To (...) Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as Our Privy Council, in consideration of the exorbitant Price taken
by Brewers and Vintners, for Ale and drinking Beer, without observing any just
proportion betwixt the same and the price of Bear whereof they are made; did,
conform to the power and warrant granted to them by the fifteenth Act of the
first session of Our second Parliament, emit several Proclamations, appointing
just and equal proportions betwixt the Bear and Drink: Notwithstanding whereof,
through the default of the Commissioners of Excise, the same is neglected in
many Shires, to the great laesion and detriment of Our Subjects. Therefore We,
with advice of Our Privy Council, do hereby declare, that these following
proportions are, and shall be constantly observed through the whole Kingdom;
viz. That when the Weigh of Barley consisting of fifteen Stone Trois weight,
(which is now in place of the Boll,)is at seven Merks, and the Weigh of rough
Bear is at six Merks, sufficient Ale and drinking Beer shall be sold at
fourteen penies the Pynt: When Barley is sold at eight Merks, and rough Bear at
seven Merks, the Pynt of sufficient drink is to be sold at sixteen penies: When
the Barley is sold at nine Merks, and the rough Bear at eight Merks, the Pynt
of sufficient drink is to be sold at eighteen penies: When the Barley is sold
at ten Merks, and the rough Bear at nine Merks, the Pynt of sufficient Ale is
to be sold at two shilling Scots: When Barley is sold at eleven Merks, and
rough Bear at ten Merks, the Pynt of drink is to be sold at two shilling two
penies: When the Barley is sold at twelve Merks, and rough Bear at eleven
Merks, the Pynt of drink is to be sold at two shilling four penies: When the
Barley is sold at thirteen Merks, and the rough Bear at twelve Merks, the drink
is to be sold at two shilling six penies Scots: And for every Merk of price
more, two penies to be added to the Pynt of Drink; and the prices foresaids and
to be both for the Drink and Excise: And these prices are appointed to be
observed, under the pains pe(...)es expressed in Our Acts of Parliament, and
former Proclamations relating thereto. And We do hereby grant full Power,
Authority and Commission, to all (...) Privy Counselors in each Shire,
together with the Sheriffs, Commissioners of Excise, (secluding the
Commissioners of Excise of Royal Burrows) Ba(...) Regalities, Stewarts of
Stewartries, or so many of them as shall happen to meet, to put this Our
Proclamation to due execution; with full power to them to call before the whole
Brewers or Malt-men within Burgh or Landwart, in their respective Shires and
Jurisdictions, and to proceed against, and punish the D(...) by Fining, or
Imprisonment, as they shall see cause, conform to the Laws and Acts of
Parliament: And ordains the persons underwritten to be Convee^^^^ of the
Commissioners of Excise and others foresaids, entrusted in the several Shires:
And appoints their first meeting for this Year, to be at the head Burgh of the
Shire, upon the first Tuesday of October next; and that yearly thereafter they
meet peremptorly in April and September, as they will be answerable at their
peril; and thereafter to conveen them at such other Dyets as they shall think
fit, viz. For the Town and Shire of Edinburgh, the Lord Thesaurer Depute, and
the Lord Collingtoun. For the Shire of Linlithgow, the Earl of Linlithgow. For
the Shire of Haddingtoun, the Earl of Wintoun, the Earl of Haddingtoun, Sir
John Nisbet of Dirletoun, Sir William Sharp, John Wedderburn of Gossford. For
the Shires of Fife and Kinross, the Duke of Rothes, Lord High Chancellor of
this Kingdom, the Lord Burnt-Island, the Lord of Lundin. For the Shire of
Perth, the Marquess of Athol Lord Privy Seal, the Earl of Perth, the Earl of
Caithness, Sir George Kinnaird of Rossie. For the Shire of Forfar, the Earl of
Southesk, the Earl of Strathmore, Richard Maitland of Dudop Lord Justice-Clerk,
the said Sir George Kinnaird. For the Shire of Kincardine, the Earl Marischal,
the Viscount of Arbuthnet. For the Shire of Aberd^ne, the Earl of Errol, the
Earl Marischal, the Earl of Dumfermling, the Earl of Kintore, the Lord of
Meldrum. For the Shire of Bamff, the Earl Marischal, the Earl of Airlie. For
the Shire of Elgine, the Earl of Murray, the Lord D^ffus the Lord D^^^us. For
the Shire of Innerness and Nairn, the Earl of Murray, the Lord Down, Sir George
Mckenzie of Tarbet. For the Shire of Ross and Cromarty, Sir George Mckenzie of
Rose^^^ch Our Advocat, Sir George Mckenzie of Tarbet, Sir George Monro. For the
Shire of Sutherland, the Earl of Sutherland, the Lord Duffus. For the Shire of
Caithness, the Earl of Caithness, the Lord of Dunbeth. For the Shire of
Orkney, Captain Dick, Stewart of Oraney, Commissary Mckenzie. For the (...) of
Argyle, the Earl of the Argyle. For the Shire of Striviling, the Earl of
Murray, the Earl of Mar, the Lord Elphingstoun. For the Shire of Berwick, the
Lord of Langtoun, the Lord of Cockburn, Sir William Sharp. For the Shire of
Renfrew, the Earl of Dundonald, the Lord Ross. For the Upper-ward of
Clidd^^^^^^, the Marquess of Douglas, the Earl of Carnwath. For the Nether-ward
of Cliddisdale, the Duke of Hamiltoun, the Lord Ross. For the Shire of Air, the
(...) Dumfr^^s For the Shire of Dumbarton, the Marquess of Montrose, the Earl
of Glencairn, the Earl of Wigtoun. For the Shire of Wigtoun, the Lord P(...)
(...)ion Sir John Dalrymple. For the (...)try of Kirkcudbright* the Earl of
Nithisdale, the Lord of Baldoon, the Lord of Bruchton. For the Shi^^ (...) of
(...)berry. For the Shire of S(...) Walter S^^t of H(...)l For the Shire of
Peebles, the Earl of Tweeddale. For the Shire of (...), the Earl of Mar, the
Lord of Clackmanan. For the Shire of Ro^^^^^^ the E^^^ of (...)h, and Earl of
Haddingtoun, and for the w(...) within the same: Who are hereby appointed to
r(...) an account of their (...)e and the procedor of the said Commissioners
in the premises (...) the Year, viz. once in November, and (...) in June
yearly, under the penalty of being called before Our Council, and punished for
their neglect. And W^ (...) hereby Require and Command the Magistrates of the
several Burghs- Royal, to have their Weights for Weighs in readiness, as is
prescribed in Our former ^^^clamation, betwixt and the first Council day of
October next; with certification to them, if they failie, they shall be called
before Our Council, and (...) ilk Burgh in the sum of one thousand Merks Scots
Money. It is hereby declared, that Our former Proclamations stands in full
force, as to the Weighing of Bear and Meal, as to the quantity of the Casks;
a(...)ting Tasters and Cunsters allowance for Vintners and Malt-men, and Rules
to be observed by (...) all points. And Ordains these presents to be Printed,
and Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that
none (...)nd ig(...) (...)

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the tenth day of August, one thousand six
hundred and eighty, and of Our Reign the thirty two year. WILL. PATERSON, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. (...)


