A PROCLAMATION, Intercommuning the Rebels in the Bass.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council,
Pursevants, Messengers at Arm, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as by clear and express
Acts of Parliament (...) Our Kingdom, It is Declared to be High Treason, To
Stuff Houses, or hold them against Us, or to Assail any Castles or Forts under
Our Command, and to Maintain and hold out the same by open Force and Violence,
especially after they are Charged and Required by Our Heralds, with Our Coat
Displayed in Our Name and Authority to Deliver up, and Surrender the same,
under the Pains contained in the said Acts; Nevertheless James Halyburton,
Michael Middleton, Patrick Roy, and David Dumbar, sometimes Prisoners in Our
Fort and Garrison of the Bass, and certain others, who have associat and joined
themselves with them, have dared, after the Surprysing of the said Garrison
where they were Prisoners, presumptuously to Fortify, and by open Violence
Defend and Maintain Our said Garrison of the Bass, against Us, and Our
Authority, notwithstanding of their being Charged in manner forasaid to deliver
up the same, and thereby have owned themselves open and manifest Traitors; And
We being careful that none of Our good Subjects be ensnared by the said
Rebels, and involved in their Guilt; Do therefore, with Advice of the Lords of
Our Privy Council, Declare the Persons abovenamed, and all who have joined
themselves with them, in Surprising, Maintaining or Defending Our said Garrison
of the Bass, guilty of open and manifest Treason and Rebellion, and ought to be
pursued as Traitors to Us; And We with Advice foresaid, Discharge and Command
all Our Subjects, that no person presume to Aid, Abett, Assist, Harbor, of any
ways Supply the said Traitors, or any of them, under the pain of Treason, and
that they do not keep Correspondence, or Intercommune with them, without
Warrant from Our Privy Council for that effect, under the pains forsaid;
Certifying such who shall do in the contrary, that they shall be holden and
repute, treated, and proceeded against as Art and Part of, and accessory to the
foresaid Crime of Treason and Rebellion against Us and Our Authority, with the
utmost severity of Our Law. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you straightly
and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the head-Burghs of
the several Shires, of Haddingtoun, Fife, Berwick and Clackmannan; and in Our
Name and Authority, there, and at other places needful, make Publication of the
Premises, that none may pretend ignorance, as ye will answer to Us thereupon,
the which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full Power, by
these Our Letters, delivering them by you, duly execute, and indorsed again to
the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the first day of July. And of Our Reign
the Third year, 1691. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, GILB. ELIOT, Cls
Sti Consilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM, 1691.


