A PROCLAMATION Reviving and Renning a former Proclamation against Slanderers
and Leesing-makers.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith,
To Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Whereas We judge it a matter of great Importance to Our Service, that Our late
Proclamation Against Leesing-makers etc. dated the 17 of June last past, and
subjoyned to this Our Proclamation, should be published in the most effectual
method for rendering the same known to the Subjects of this Our Kingdom, so as
none of them may hereafter pretend Ignorance; We therefore with Advice of Our
Privy Council, Require the several Bishops of this Our Kingdom, to Enjoin and
Command all and sundry the Ministers within their respective Diocesses, to read
publicly Our said Proclamation against Leesing makers, etc. in their
respective Churches, (which is to be performed by the Ministers themselves, and
not by their Readers, or Clerks) immediately after ending their Sermons, upon
the Lord's Day, and that Four times in the Year at least, to wit, the Frist
Lord's Day of every Three Months, Commencing the first reading thereof upon the
Lordsday being the twenty fourth of October next ensuing for this Year, and
upon the first Lord's Day of October yearly thereafter, and so forth to continue
yearly, the first Lord's Day of every Three Months constantly in time coming,
to wit, the said first Lordsday of October for the year 1687; after this Year,
the first Lord's Day of January, April, July and October, until the same shall
be discharged by Us, And that Our Pleasure in the premises may be known, Our
Will is, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent, these Our
Lettters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all other
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and there in
Our Royal Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of our
Pleasure in the Premises, and of Our said other Proclamation hereunto
subjoyned, that none may pretend Ignorance thereof, but that all Our Leidges
may give due and punctual Obedience thereto, as they will be answerable at
their highest Peril: And further, We do hereby strictly Require and Command all
Our Sheriffs, immediately after these Presents come to their Hands, to cause
publish the same in manner above-set-down, under such Pains and Penalties, as
We or Our privy Council shall think sit to inflict upon them for contempt and
neglect of their Duty.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Sixteenth day of September 1686. And
of Our Reign the second Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL
PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Follows the tenor of the abovesaid Proclamation bereunto appointed to be
subjoyned.
JAMES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas We are Informed, That diverse Ministers, and others, to promote their
Seditious Designs, do take upon them in Sermons, and other Discourses, To
Allarm the People, and to raise dislike of Our Person and Government in their
Hearts, Defaming and Slandering Our Designs, or at least, meddling in Our
Affairs; All which are highly punishable, and the punishments Declared by Our
Laws and Acts of Parliament; Especially by the seventh Act of the eighth Parl.
of King James the Sixth, Our Royal Grandfather, (of ever Blessed Memory) Cap.
134 Entitled, Anent Slanderers of the King, His Progenitors, Estate and Realm;
And of which, in so far as relates to these Affairs, The tenor follows:
Forasmuch as it is understood to Our Severaign Lord, and his three Estates
Assembled in this present Parliament, What great harm and inconvenient has
fallen in this Realm, chiefly since the beginning of the Civil Troubles,
occurred in the time of His Highness Minority, through the wicked and
licentious, public and private Speeches, and antrue Calamnies of diverse His
Subjects, to the Disdein, Contempt and Reproach of His Majesty, His Council and
Proceedings, and to the dishonor and prejudice of His Highness, His Parents,
Progenitors and Estate: Stirring up His Highness Subjects thereby to Misliking,
Sedition, Unquietness, and to cast off their due obedience to His Majesty, to
their evident peril, tinsel and destruction; His Highness continuing always in
Love and Clemency toward all His good Subjects, and mosts willing to seek the
safety and preservation of them all, Which wilfully, needless and upon plain
malice, after His Highness Mercy and Pardon, oft-times before granted, has
procured to themselves by their I reasonable Deeds, to be cut off as corrupt
Members of this Common-well: I herefore it is Statute and Ordained by our
Sovereign Lord, and His three Estates in this present Parliament, That none of
His Subjects (of whatsoever Function, Degree, or Quality in time coming) shall
presume to take upon hand privately, or publicly in Sermons, Declamations, or
familiar Conferences, to utter any false, slanderous, or untrue Speeches, to
the disdain, reproach, and contemp^ of His Majesty, His Council and
Proceedings; or to the dishonor, hurt or prejudice of His Higness, His Parents
and Progenetors, or so meddle in the Affairs of His Highness, and His Estate
presens, bygone, and in time coming, under the pains contained in the Acts of
Parliament, against makers and tellers f Leesings: Certifying them that shall
be tried Contraveeners thereof, or that hea^ sick slanderous Speeches, and
reports not the same with diligence, the said pains shall be executed against
them with all rigor, in example of others. And to the end that so necessary and
laudable a Law may receive due and punctual obedience; We therefore, with
Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Declare, that the Contraveeners hereof
any manner of way, shall be examplarly punished with all rigor, conform to the
prescript of the said Statute in all points. And that Our Royal Pleasure in the
Premises may be made public and known, Our Will is, And We Charge you
strictly, and Command, That incontinent, these Our Letters setters seen ye pass
to the. Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other Market Crosses of the head
Burghs of the Shires of his Kingdom, And there, in Our Name and Authority, by
open Proclamation, make Publication of Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises,
that all Our Liedges may have notice thereof, and giveobedience thereto, as
they will be answerable at their highest peril.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Seventeeth day of June 1686. And of
Our Reign the second Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. COL. McKENZIE,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anne DOM. 1686.


