A PROCLAMATION, Obliging Heritors and Masters, for their Tennants and Servants.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms or his brethren Heralds, Macers of Council,
Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as notwithstanding of the many good Laws and Acts, made in Our
Parliaments and Privy Council, for securing the Protestant Religion, the Order
and Unity of the Church, and the Tranquillity and Peace of the Kingdom, many do
obstinately continue, through ignorant prejudice, or dissaffection, to withdraw
from the public Worship, and to frequent House and Field. Conventicles, which
We have so often declared to be the Nurseries of Schism, and Rendezvouses of
Rebellion, tending to debauch Our Subjects from that Reverence due to Religion
and that obedience they owe to Our Authority; And Considering, that these
Offenders take encouragement from their supposing a Remisseness in the due and
vigorous Execution of Our good and wholesome Laws and Acts provided against
them: Therefore, We, with advice of the Lords of our Privy Council, in
pursuance of Our late Proclamation, dated the eighteenth day of June, 1674.
years, commanding all Heretors, Landlords, and Liferenters, to require their
Rentallers and Tennents, to subscribe the Bond thereto subjoined; and of the
seventh Act of the second Session of our second parliament, whereby all Our
Subjects were discharged to separate or withdraw from the established Meetings
for Divine Worship, Declaring, That every person who should absent themselves,
without a reasonable Cause, to be allowed or disallowed by the Judges and
Magistrates therein mentioned, should, if they had any Land in Heretage,
Liferent, or proper Wod-set, pay the fifth part of his or her valued yearly
Rent every Tennent six pounds, every Cottar or Servant, forty shilling; As
also, of the sixth Act of the same Parliament, all Our Subjects were prohibited
to cause baptize their Children by any, save their own Paroch Minister, or such
as are authorized by the established Government of the Church, etc. Declaring
that the Parent offender, should pay the fourth part of his valued Rent, if an
Heretor, Liferenter, or proper Wod-setter; fifty pound, if a Tennen twenty
pound, if a Cottar; half a years fee, if a servant. As also, of the thirty
fourth Act of the first Session of our first Parliament, discharging a our
Subjects to procure themselves to be married by Jesuits, Priests, deposed or
suspended Ministers, or any others not authorized by Law: Each Nobleman, under
he peralty of one thousand pounds; each Barron, one thousand merks; each
Gentleman and Bargess, five hundred pounds; and each other person, of one
hundred merks scots: And in pursuance of the other Laws and Acts thereanent
provided, Do with advice foresaid hereby require and Command all Masters of
Families, to cause the Chamberlains, Grieves, Domestic servants, and others
entertained by them, give due and exact obedience to the foresaids Acts; and in
case of their disobedience, to remove them out of their service, under the
pains and penalties contained in the said Acts: Like as, We strictly require
and command all Heretors, Liferenters, Wed setters, and Landlords, to require
their Rentallers and Tennents, to subscribe the Bond hereunto subjoined,
authorizing them hereby to raise Letters to charge them for that effect, upon
six days, and to denounce and registrate them to Our Horn; if they be Tennents
who have Tacks; and if they be moveable Tennents, that they shall upon their
disobedience, recover Decreets of Removeal and Ejection against them. Also We
do hereby discharge the said Heretors, Liferenters, Landlords, etc. to set
their Lands hereafter to any person, by word or write, without inserting the
foresaid Surety in their Tacks, and taking Bonds apart, in case there be no
written Tacks, that their said Tacksmen, Ren^ers, and others, their Hynds,
Cottars and others, woe shall live under them in the said Lands, shall give
obedience in manner foresaid: And in case of their disobedience, that their
Rights, Tacks, and Possessions, shall be void and null ipso facto, without any
Declarator to pass thereupon. It is likewise hereby declared, that if any
Cottars or Servants, for whom the Rentallers or Tennents stand bound, shall be
found guilty, by transgressing the fore said Laws and Acts, the respective
Masters shall have their Relief off the said Contraveeners. And it is further
declared, that all Masters of Families, Landlords;and Heretors, who shall not
give punctual obedience, they shall be liable in the same pains and penalties
due by the Contraveeners; but prejudice always of proceeding against the
Contraveeners, and inflicting upon them the pains contained in the said Acts
of Parliament; and seeing the single and Liferent Escheat, of such as live
within Regalities, belong to the respective Lords thereof, We no ways
intending to prejudge the civil Rights of Our Subjects, do allow them to have
the benefit thereof, according to Law: But with advice foresaid, do strictly
charge and command them to use exact diligence against the Contraveeners of the
foresaids Laws, within their respective Jurisdictions; with certification, that
if they prosecute them not without collusion, within thirty days after their
Delinquence, We will call them before Our Council and punish them for the
neglect of their duty. It is hereby declared, that this presents shall no ways
derogat to the former Proclamation, obliging Heretors and others for their
Tennents, Cottars, and others, but that the same shall stand, and continue in
full force, strength, and effect, to all intents and purposes. And that these
presents may be notified to all concerned, OUR WILL is herefore, and We charge
you strictly and command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and there, with all
due Solemnity, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make
Publication thereof: And for the better Execution of these presents, We require
the several Sheriffs, and their Deputes, with all possible diligence, to cause
read and publish the same upon a Sabbath day, at the several Paroch Kirks,
within the bounds of their Sheriffdomes, albeit some of these Paroches may
belong to other Jurisdictions, intimating to the Heretors and others foresaids,
that they cause their Tennents subscribe these Bonds, and report the same to
the respective Sheriffs or their Deputes, who are ordered to return to Our
Privy Council an account of the diligence within the Bounds reported to them by
the Heretors and others foresaids, within the spaces following, viz. The
Sheriffs of the Sheriffdomes of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Berwick, Roxburgh,
Selkirk, Peebles, Lanerk, Linlithgow, Stirling, Dumbarton, Renfrew, Pearth, and
Forfar, betwixt and the second Thursday of November next, and the Sheriffs of
the remanent Sheriffdoms within this Kindom, betwixt and the second thursday of
December thereafter. And ordains these presents to be printed and published,
that none pretend ignorance. According to Justice, as ye will answer to Us
thereupon. The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally, Our full
power by these our Letters, delivering them by you duly execute and indorsed
again to the Bearer.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the second day of August, 1677, and of
Our Reign, the twenty ninth year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Al.
Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii:

GOD Save the King.
Follows the Tenor of the Bond.
I do hereby bind and oblige me, that I, my Wife, Children in my family,
Cottars, and servants, shall not withdraw from Public Divine Worship, in our
respective Paroch Churches, but shall attend the public Ordinances there, at
the ordinary Dyets thereof, under the pains and penalties contained in the
seventh Act of the second Session of His Majesty's second Parliament; Which is
sx pound scots for every Tennent, and forty shilling scots for every Cottar or
servant: As also, that neither I nor they shall contraveen the sixti Act of
that same second Session of Parliament, in having any children of ours baptized
with any save our own Paroch Ministers or others lawfully authorized, conform
to the said Act, under the penalty of fifty Pound scots, for every Tennent,
and twenty pound for every Cottar, toties quoties. And that neither I nor they
shall be married by Ministers not lawfully authorized, contrary to the thirty
fourth Act of the first Session of His Majesty's first Parliament, under the
penalty of one hundred merks, toties quoties. And that I, my Wife, and my
children in my Family, Cottars, and servants, shall not be present at any
Conventicles, either in houses or in the fields, under the penalties contained
in the Acts of Parliament and former Proclamation of Council. Consenting, for
the more security. these presents be insert and registrate in the Books of
Privy Council, that Letters and Executorials may be direct hereupon, in form as
effeirs. And constitutes, My Procurators, andC.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred
Majesty, 1677.


