CERTAIN SELECT CASES RESOLVED.

Specially, tending to the right ordering of the Heart, that we may comfortably
walk with God in our general and particular Callings.

By THOMAS SHEPHARD, Sometimes of Emanuel College in Cambridge; Now Preacher
of Gods Word in New England.

Reprinted in the Year, 1^^5.

To The Christian READER.
THis holy Letter of that ready Scribe of Christ's Kingdom, [Mr. Shepherd of
New-England] is so full of Grace and Truth, that it needs no other Epistle
commendatory than it self.

Yet seeing the Lot is unexpectedly fallen upon my pen, to give it a
Superscription, that it may pass current from hand to hand; I do heartily in
the first place, dedicate it to thee, thou bleeding, troubled spirit, as a
choice cordial Friend, an Interpreter, one of a thousand, that does not only
speak thy heart, but by the Comforter (whom Christ has promised to send) to thy
Heart.

It may be this paper present is sent on Embassy from Heaven, on purpose, to
set thy House in order, to untie thy bosom knots, to bind the strong man, and
cast him out of thy doors, that thy Heart may be once again set at liberty, to
serve the Lord thy God in thy general and particular Calling, whose service is
thy freedom. What is here sent by this Ambassador of Christ, (who is now the
voice of one crying in the wilderness) to a weary and heavy laden Soul in this
Island. I had rather it should appear to thy judgment in the serious reading,
and to thy conscience in the home application thereof, than from my opinion of
it: Therefore I shall only add (as the Contents of this Letter) certain select
Cases, proposed and resolved in the several Paragraphs thereof, as they lie in
order in the Pages following, viz.

Page 3. Trouble of mind in civil affairs, by the secret injection of religious
thoughts.

Page 5. From what Spirit such suggestions do arise.

Page 10. How to entertain them when they crowd in.

Page 14. Concerning the not being humbled for sinful distractions, that hinder
and imerrupt the spiritual performance of holy duties.

Page 19. How a Christian may be said to be under the Covenant of works.

Page 21. How to conceive a right of that Mystery of Mysteries, the blessed
Persons in the Trinity.

Page 26. The Souls aptness to go to God immediately in holy duties, without
taking Christ Jesus by the hand.

Page 30. How to apply absolute promises to thy self, though they are made
indefinitely without condition.

Page 43. A notable discovery of a secret unwillingness in the Soul, to seek
God in the strictest solemn services, before it enters into them: Weariness of
them, while they last; and a gladness, when they are ended.

Page 47. A sound confutation of that Heretical Arminian Tenet, viz. That the
strength of Grace is to be got rather by Argumentation, than inward
Communication and influence, arising from union with Christ.

Page 49. The experiences of this tried servant of Christ, (who is the Penman
hereof) how he was cured of Atheistical thoughts: whether they did wear out, or
whether by the dint of Arguments they were rationally overthrown.

Page 54. Lastly, whether those changes, which a child of God has sometimes,
and those movings of the spirit are caused by a natural temper, or Gods Spirit.

All which select Cases (and many more, that collaterally issue from their
sides) are judiciously resolved with much perspicuity and brevity in these few
sheets, by the only ju^ge of all Controversies, the two-edged sword of the
Spirit, the Word of God.

Thus humbly beseeching thee, to read over this Epistle of Christ to thee, with
the same Spirit of love, and of a sound mind, which indicted every line in it.

I do desire to leave thee at the Throne of Graee, in the arms of Christ, with
the Father of all Comfort; that thou may receive the Peace of God, which
passes all understanding; and be crowned with joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory.

I subscribe my self Friend, Thine in any Spiritual furtherance of thy Faith,
William Adderley.
Dated from Charter house in London, Febr. 1. 1647.
Dear Sir;
I Dare not multiply many words in acknowledging and professing my own
unfitness and insufficiency to yield your loving and most welcome Letter, that
satisfaction which both your Self desire, and it deserves: Neither yet will I
be so unfaithful to you (seeing your expectation puts me to reply) neither
ought I (I think) be so unserviceable to Jesus Christ, who in you, and by you,
beckens to me to take this call to write to you, and not to neglect so fair a
season, seeing especially it may be possible my dying Letter to you, before I
depart from hence, and return to him, as not knowing but our last disasters and
Sea-straits (of which I wrote to you.) may be but preparations for the
execution of this next approaching voyage. Yet our eyes are to the hills, and
our desires are your prayers; and at this time my endeavor shall be in respect
of your self, to break open that light to you, and to prepare it to you, with
that brevity I may, and with what plainness I am able; beseeching the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who must be when all fails, the wonderful
Counselor, to give you the spirit of revelation, and that after you have
suffered a while by these outward temptations, doubts, fears, desertions,
distractions, which the Letter mentions, he would make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, and settle you. And this I verily think will be unexpected, yet
happy, joyful, and most glorious end of them; For since I have observed and
seen the lamentable ruins of the Soul, and seeming graces of many men, by being
rockt asleep in a quiet, still, calm, easy performance of duties; without such
awaking temptations and tumults within, which it self complains of: I say,
since I have observed what a deal of mud is in the bottom of such standing
Pools, and what a deal of filth is in such Moats, which are inwardly at ease,
and not emptied from vessel to vessel, next unto the donation of the Lord Jesus
to a man, I have accounted such tumultuous heart-storms and uproars, together
with the fruitful strange effects of them, the second mercy. For I never saw
that man kept from secret putrefaction and corruption, that was not usually
salted with such temptations (especially in a Christians first Apprentiship)
which usually preserve him entire till death. And therefore (Dear Sir) faint
not; for Jesus Christ will raise a world of blessings out of your present Chaos
and confusions. But I make haste to answer. Before you reply to my first
Letter, your complaints are many.

Your first trouble is, concerning your disturbances in civil affairs, by the
secret injection of Religious thoughts; so that you know not how to follow the
one, without hazard of grieving the spirit, and breaking your peace, in not
maintaining and nourishing the same time the other: and hence being drawn to go
two ways at the same time (which you cannot well do) your Heart is disquieted,
and your peace much interrupted.

This of yours, puts me in mind of the complaint of an honest, yet plain man,
to an able Minister once, who in bewailing his condition to him, among other
miseries, that was not the least: (viz.) that he was exceedingly troubled with
good thoughts, so that he could not follow his place, unless very often he did
stand still and pray, for fear of grieving the Spirit, (as he thought) and
losing his season of being heard in Heaven: (for said Conscience often unto him)
how do thou know but this may be thy accepted time, and if thou do not take
it, it may be thou shall never have it again? I have forgot the Ministers
answer, but I am sure in these complaints you go not alone: I have lately known
one very able, wise, and godly, put upon the Rack in these kind of thoughts by
him, that envying Gods peoples peace, knows how to change himself into an Angel
of light. For it being his usual course in the time of his health, to make a
diary of his hourly life, and finding much benefit by it, he was in Conscience
pressed by the power and delusion of Satan, to make and take the same daily
survey of his life in the time of his sickness, by means of which, he spent his
enfeebled spirits, cast on fuel to fire his sickness, and had not a friend of
his convinced him of his erroneous conscience, misleading him at that time, he
had murdered his body, out of conscience to save his Soul, and to preserve his
grace; and do you think these were the motions of Gods Spirit, which like those
Locusts, Rev. 9. 9, 10. had faces like men, but had tails like Scorpions, and
stings in their tails?

Your thoughts I know, are not likely to produce the same effects; although you
have the same efficient: and because you say your peace is hereby disturbed by
ignorance, as not knowing what to do in the midst of these Civil actions and
these religious thoughts, I conceive that two things are to be sadly considered
of, for the cure of them, First, how to know when such religious pious Two
things to be considered about motions.
thoughts come from Gods Spirit, and when from the devil transforming himself
into an Angel of light, or from a well-melted stirring conscience, yet blind.
For when you know they come from Gods Spirit, you are bound to nourish them,
but when not, you are bound not to embrace nor comply with them. Secondly,
learn how your Soul is to behave and carry it self in Civil employments: For
when you see how you do, and may honor God in following them, your Spirit will
not be so unquiet, if at any time you embrace not the suggestions of the other.

1. For the first briefly, all good motions and thoughts are not the Spirits
motions, as may thus appear.

There be three things chiefly by which we How to try the motions of Gods
Spirit.
may discern the motions, suggestions, and thoughts which come from Gods
Spirit: all which concurring together in a good action, or thought, or word,
(not one alone) will make discovery whether they are from Gods Spirit or not.

1. If it be suggested for Gods ends, its from Gods Spirit, to act so high as
for a supernatural end, must arise from a supernatural principle, which only is
Gods Spirit, Pharisaical actions were for a double selfish end; and hence, not
from Gods Spirit, but nature, and their own spirit. 1. To be seen of men. 2. If
they did any of them abhor this, yet it was to purchase and gender in their own
minds an opinion of holiness before God, and hence Christ gives them this Item,
in giving Alms, that they should not let the right hand know what their left
hand does: for many men will do good acts, lest they should by the neglect of
them, think them Hypocrites, and so be troubled for them: Christ would have us
not to take notice of what we do for such an end.

If they be animated and quickened from Gods command, for the higher measure of
holiness for glorious ends, without u warrant from the Word, is the more for
did superstition: Christ healed the Leper, when he charged him with anger to
tell no man, he, (no question for a good end) published the miracle the more;
this was a good motion, but it was sinful in him, being cross to Christ's
command: when Christ would have washed Peter's feet, he had many thoughts that
came into h^s head, concerning his own vileness, and Christ's glory; and had a
good end and meaning in his answers; yet his humility crossing Christ's command,
the Lord professes against it, and him for it, that he had no part in him, if
he should go on in it.

3. Gods Spirit sets a man on work in due season; for let the duty be commanded
and rightly directed, yet if it be not done in season; it is not from Gods
Spirit: hence, Psalm. 1. The righteous bring forth fruit in its season: and
hence Solomon speaks of words spoken in season, are as apples of Gold: and
hence we read in Ecclesiastes, of a time and season for every thing under the
Sun: and therefore when there is a season of Gods appointing for civil things
or business, it is not season now to be molested or perplexed in it, by the
injection and evocation of those thoughts which we think to proceed from the
Spirit of God: I know indeed, that the Spirit of God does enable a man to do
whatever good he does; but as Grace makes Nature sometimes to serve, so sin full
Nature brings Grace into captivity, (which Paul complains of, Romans 7.) and
makes Grace to serve it. To exhort and reprove another for sin, is from Gods
Spirit that it is done; but to reprove at an unseasonable time, its from sinful
corruption, abusing Gods grace, and making Sampson to grind. Its from the
excellency of of knife to cut well; but to cut my finger with it when I should
be cutting of my meat with it, arises not from the end of the knife, nor from
the intention of him that made it: so to think of good things, it is from the
spirit, I grant; but to think of them in such a season that God sets you a work
to mind and follow other occasions, its from the enemy of Gods spirit, and your
own peace; for as it is a sin to nourish worldly thoughts when God sets you a
work in spiritual heavenly employments, so it is (in some respects) as great a
sin to suffer your self to be distracted by spiritual thoughts, when Gods sets
you on work in Civil (yet lawful) imploiments: such thoughts (I conceive) are
but the leven of Monkish holiness, if they divert you from your lawful affairs,
when the Lord calls you to follow them. For the Lord never calls you to two
diverse employments at the same time, unless you make the one to be a means to
further the good of the other; which such pious thoughrs in some civil
employments do, it being no piece of Christian wisdom or honesty to turn round
in worldly employments so long till by giddiness we fall down, but by secret
steps ever and anon to look up to heaven, and to behold the face of God, to
whom only there in we are to approve our selves. But yet it seems your thoughts
are so far from being subservient the one to the other, that you are distracted
and molested, and your peace interrupted, and your Christian course made
troublesome, and an heavy but then, which surely cannot be by the yoke of
JesusChrist; therefore you must first bring your troubles in this particular to
this issue, either you may follow your civil affairs, and nourish these
thoughts as helps to maintain your peace, and make you heavenly minded in them,
(and if they serve sufficiently to such an end, why are you troubled with
them?) or else you cannot follow God comfortably in civil actions, unless you
banish from you thoughts which do so miserably distract you; and then why do
you fear you shall grieve Gods Spirit, if at the same time you do not give
entertainment to them, the unseasonableness of which, speaks plainly they came
not from the spirits suggestions, besides their hinderance of comfortably
walking with God, which the employments themselves can never hinder.

But you will say, When is the season of nourishing such thoughts?

I answer, Entertain those thoughts as (it may be) you have done some Friends,
who came to you at that time you have business with strangers, (whom you love
not so well as your Friends,) you have desired them to stay a while, until you
have done with the other, and then you have returned to your Friend, and when
the other has been shut out of the doors, the other has had the welcome, and has
lodged with you all night; and thus you have g^ieved neither, but pleased both.
It is so in this case, Worldly employments are our strangers, yet they must be
spoke with, Religious thoughts and practices are our Friends, these come unto
us while God calls us to parley with the other, you cannot speak with both at
one time, in one place, without much perplexity: Take therefore this course,
make much of the good thoughts, but parley not with them till your business is
done with strangers; and toward evening, which is your season, set some time
apart every day for meditation, and then make them welcome; then consider and
ponder well what was suggested to you in the day time, and sift every good
thought to the bran, for then is your season, and after that let them sup and
lodge with you all night, and keep the house with you every day. And surely,
when the Lord Jesus shall see what a Friend you shall make of his Spirit, and
how wisely you walk therein, you shall not need to fear any grieving of it, or
unseasonable times: nay, (I say) you will most fearfully grieve his Spirit, if
you parley with the conceived suggestions of it at unseasonable times. What
thou do, do it with all thine Heart, says Solomon, Eccl. 9.

Therefore when you are to pray, confer, or meditate, do it with all your mind,
and all your thoughts, and all your strength. So when God calls you to worldly
employments, do them with all your mind and might, and when the season of
meditation comes, take it, which glorious ordinance of God, although many
Christians use it occasionally, and against some good time, or when they have
leisure meeting with them, yet to set some time apart for it in a solemn manner
every day, and that in conscience, as we do for prayer generally, where is the
man to be found that does thus? Those men that thus neglect their season of
musing and entering into parley with Gods Spirit daily, may be well said to
grieve the Spirit, through the neglect of which ordinance, Gods Spirit is as
much grieved by Professors in England, as by any course I know The Lord awaken
us: but I have run too far already in this first part of my answer.

^2 Means. For the second means, viz. how the soul is to carry it self in Civil
employments, that so you may not think you do for better, when you listen to
good thoughts as you mention:

1. I say but two things, 1. Learn to follow them out of an awful respect to
the eye, presence, and command of Jesus Chrift; and to do what you do in Civil
businesses, as the Work of Christ; When you are riding, or making up breaches
between man and man, then think I am now about the work of Jesus Christ.

2. Secondly, seeing your self thus working in worldly employments for him, you
may easily apprehend that for that time God calls you to them, and you attend
upon the work of Jesus Christ in them; that you honor God as much, nay more by
the meanest servile worldly act, than if you should have spent all that time in
meditation, prayer, or any other spiritual employment, to which you had no call
at that time: It is noted therefore by some, of Peter's Wife's mother, that when
Christ had healed her of her Fevor, she sat not down at Table with Christ in
communion with him, which (no question) was sweet, but ministered at the Table,
and ran too and fro, and so served him, and acted for him; wherein she showed
more love, and gave him more honor, viz. in that mean service, and in acting
for him, than in having communion with him: now if the Lord would out of his
abundant goodness, set the Soul in such an acting frame for him, and if it
could do i^s worldly employments, as the Work of Christ, and see how greatly it
honors Christ in attending on him, Oh what peace should a Christian enjoy,
notwithstanding all his dislractions every day! And how easily would such
devout thoughts you speak of, be repelled like darkness before the light, for
the nobleness of those good thoughts you speak of presenting themselves against
the mean and base outsides of Civil affairs, makes you ready to honor the one,
when you are called to serve the other: but now, by seeing, you do the Work of
Christ Jesus in them, you shall hereby see a glory in the meanest service you
perform in Civil affairs, and this will make you cleave unto them But I have
said too much about repelling of good thoughts in these times, wherein men have
to few, though (it may be) little enough to satisfy you.

Quest. 2. Your second trouble is this (viz.) that your Heart is kept from
being humbled for sinful distractions, that hinder and interrupt the spiritual
performance of holy duties, and that for two reasons: First, Because they be
involuntary and accidental. Secondly, Because they cannot break the Covenant
between God and your Soul, being but infirmities.

Answ. For the latter clause concerning breach of Covenant, together with the
other. 1. I say, not only infirmities do not, but the greatest sins cannot make
a breach of Covenant between God and the soul that is once really (not
rationally) wrapped up in the Covenant of grace. Indeed gross scandalous sins,
nay infirmities, when they are given way to, and not resisted, may keep the
soul from the fruition for a time of Gods Covenant, but never from the eternal
jus and right unto it; for as the habit of Faith or Grace gives a man a
constant right to the promise and Covenant (which seed ever remains, which
habit ever lasts, Jer. 3. 9.) so the act of Faith or Grace gives a man fruition
of the Covenant and the benefit of the promise, and hence by the acting and
venting of some sins wherein there is included the neglect of the exercise of
grace, He that is really in covenant with God, may be deprived of the fruition
of it; yet seeing the seed of God, and the habit of grace ever remains, he
cannot by any sin break his covenant; for the covenant of grace is absolute,
wherein the Lord does not only promise the good, but to begin and perfect and
fulfill the condition absolutely, without respect of sin, ex part creaturae:
Indeed if Gods covenant of Grace did (as that of works) depend upon man to
fulfill the condition, having sufficient grace to fulfill it, then gross sin
might well break the Covenant: but seeing God has undertaken to fulfill the
Covenant absolutely, not withstanding all the evils and sins of the soul, no
sin can possibly break that knot and covenant which so firm and resolute love
has once knit. And therefore, if this be a good argument, Infirmities cannot
break covenant: What cause have I to be humbled for them? so as to say, It is
thy mercy Lord that I am not consumed for them (as you write) you may upon the
same ground say so, If the Lord should desert you, or you for Take the Lord,
and so fall into the foulest sin, which I suppose corrupt conscience dares not
be so bold as to think or allow of.

2. Secondly, I say the least sins or infirmities do break the first covenant
of works: and hence you do not only deserve, but are under the sentence of
death, and curse of God, immediately after the least hairsbreadth, swarving from
the Law by the smallest sin, and most involuntary accidental infirmity.
According to the Tenor of the Law, the soul that sins shall die: and cursed
is he that continues not in all things of the Law. Gal. 3. 10. The least sin
being (ex part objecti) in respect of God against whom it is committed, as
horrible and as great as the greatest. For it being an infinite wrong, being
the dishonor of an infinite Majesty, there can be no greater wrong than an
infinite one, unless you can imagine a thing greater than that which is
insinite; and therefore in this respect, there is as much venom and mischief
done against God in the least, as in the greatest sin: And therefore it, and
whosoever commit it, deserve death for it, as if they had committed the foulest
sin in the world: and therefore after the least and smallest infirmities, you
may from hence see what cause you have freely to be humbled, and to confess for
them how worthy you are to be destroyed; yea, even to look upon your self as
lying under the sentence of the Law and death, immediately after the commission
of them, and so to mourn bitterly for them.

Object. But you will say, a Christian that is under the Covenant of Grace, is
not within the Covenant of Works, that Bond is cancelled, the last will must
stand: and therefore he being out of that Covenant, no sins of his can be said
to break the Covenant, for no man can be said to break that Law under which he
is not, and which he is not bound to keep.

Answ. I answer, every Believer has a double being or standing, and so there
may be put upon him a double respect.

1. First, he may be considered as united to, and having a spiritual being on
Christ; and so it is true, he is under Grace, and the Covenant of Grace, and
not under the Law, nor the Covenant of works; and hence not being under the
Law, nor bound to keep it as a covenant of life (though it be a rule of life) no
sin can condemn him, there being no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8. 1. But as Christ is above condemnation, and law, and death, and
curse, so is he. And this truly understood, is the foundation of a Christians
joy and peace, and glory every day; yet so, as though sin does not condemn him,
yet he has good reason to say, it is mercy, and mere mercy, Lord, that I am not
consumed, that I am condemned. For sin is the same; nay grace and Gods love
aggravates sin; for to sin against the law, deserves death without recovery;
but to sin when grace has received me, and loved me; when the blood of Christ
has been shed abundantly, to deliver me from sin; Oh this makes the most secret
silent sin a crying one! So that if you do consider this well, you may see what
little cause there is to have your heart rising against the deepest humilation
for the least sin, though you be in Christ, and under grace: For as Daniel, when
he was put into the Lions den, had not the cause to wonder that he was not torn
in pieces by them; and why? because it was not from any defect on their parts
to tear him in pieces, but from the omnipotent power, and mercy, and grace of
his God, that muzzell'd their mouths; so though no Lion can ^ear, though no sins
can hurt or condemn a Christian, as he is considered in Christ; yet, has not he
cause to confess and wonder, and say, Lord, it is thy mere grace and mercy that
it is not so? (which is the act of humilation your letter says you can hardly
come unto) and why? not because Gods grace puts any less evil in sin, but
because it is merely grace that keeps it from spitting that venom which
otherwise it would.

Secondly, A Christian may be considered in respect of his natural being in
hi^^elf, and thus he is ever under the Law, and as often as he sins, under the
sentence of death (and as the Apostle speaks) by nature even we (justified,
quickened) are the children of wrath as well as others. And thus after the least
involuntary accidental sin, you may easily see what cause you have to lie down
deeply humbled, mourning under the sentence of death, and Gods eternal curse,
as a condemned man going to execution, to feel that fire that shall never go
out, looking upon your self as you are in your self, a forlorn castaway every
moment: and this truly understood is the foundation of a Christians sorrow,
shame, and confusion of face, self-loathing, self-forgetting, self-forsaking,
and condemning every day: and (believe it Sir) it is no small Piece of a
Christians skill and work, to put a difference between himself and himself,
himself as he is in Christ, and so to joy and triumph, and himself as he is
growing on his first root, and so to sorrow, and loath, and condemn himself: so
that (to wind up all that I have said) look upon your self as in Christ, you
may say these involuntary infirmities do not, shall not, condemn me.

But Lord it is grace, Grace that it is not so, and this is Evangelical
humiliation. Look again upon your self, as you stand on your own bottom, and
live in your own nature, and so you may say after the least infirmity, I have
now broken a most holy and righteous Law, and rherefore I am already condemned:
O woe is me, I have already undone my self by mine iniquity: and this is Legal
humiliation, which serves for mortification, as the first for vification. I
know it is very difficult to bring the heart to acknowledge freely it deserves
death after so small an involuntary offense; but when the Lord reveals two
things, First, himself in his glory, Secondly, how the least sin strikes him: I
persuade my self the vilest heart cannot but be forced to confess how just God
should be in his severest proceedings against him. And withal consider, the
more involuntary any sin is, the more strong and natural it is, and the more
natural, the more horrible; as to be a natural Thief is far worse than to be a
deliberat thief, who sometimes steals, and therefore (good Sir) take heed of
looking no deeper, nor seeing no further than the bare act, and unvoluntariness
and accidentalness, and suddenness of your infirmities: for if you do, you look
through the wrong end of the glass, and they will appear so small, that you
will find it a very tough work to bring your heart consentively to say (if I
may say and use your own phrase) It is thy mercy Lord that I am not consumed
for them: but look upon them as indeed they are, in respect of that infinite
glory, you strike doing the greatest mischiefs to God by them, and (which makes
them the viler) as they are so strong, you cannot remove them; and so horrible
as that it is natural to you to commit them, etc. And surely you will not
(through grace) find such thoughts haunt you long, not but that they will be
(happily) rising and tempting, but never always vexing and prevailing. Ans. Satan's
ground reaching as far as the minds of Gods people, and therefore so far he may
come, and there he may walk, (for he came into the mind of innocent Adam, nay
Jesus Christ, by his suggesting temptations) but the heart is Christ's peculiar
possession and purchase; and if he shall still there offer to come in and vex
you, and prevail against you, and to lodge his suggestions this or any other
way with you, you have Law and Christ on your side, by this little light now
given you, to cast him out.

Quest. 3. The third thing that troubles you, is the dis-ranking of the Persons
in the Trinity, for though you think the holy Ghost is God, yet you have not so
high a repute of him, as of the Father and the Son, because the Son addresseth
himself to God the Father in all his prayers and acknowledgmenrs, in a more
immediate manner than unto the holy Ghost, and therefore you would know if the
word Father (as in the Lords Prayer) includes not the Unity in Trinity.

To this briefly consider three things.

1. Without all question, the same God which lies under that relative property
of Father, is the same God with the Godhead of the Son, and the Godhead of
the holy Ghost, there being not three Gods? and therefore the Godhead of the
Son and Spirit, are not excluded, but included in the Godhead of the Father,
when we look upon the Father as God, in the Lords Prayer, or any where else.

2. But secondly, the Father as Father, is never taken for the same holy Ghost
in Scripture, nor the Son as Son, is taken for the Father, nor the holy Ghost
as holy Ghost, is at any time taken for the Son: For it is a rule in Theology,
though the res substrata, the thing that lies under the Relative property (viz.
the Godhead) of every person, be common and communicated, yet the same
Godhead considered as clothed with his Relative property (as Father, Son and
Spirit) it is not common, but peculiar. For the Godhead of the Father as
Fathet, is not the Godhead of the Son as Son, etc.

3. Hence it follows, that when Christ addresseth himself to the Father as
Father in Scripture, it is not because he is either a diverse or greater God
than the holy Ghost, but it is for two other reasons.

1. Because the Father as Father, received primarily the wrong that sin did
against his work of creation; for the Father being the first person in order
and creation, the first transcient act (as election and reprobation were the
best immanent) hence this work is attributed chiefly to God the Father, in
respect of our orderly apprehension; and hence man sinning then when he was
only made, this is chiefly attributed to be against the Father, because his
work appeared to be chiefly there, and not against the Son, for his work
chiefly appears in redemption, he being the second Person, and this the second
main and wonderful work, neither against the holy Ghost, for his work chiefly
appears to us in application, being the third Person, And this the third main
act that ever God will do, or show forth to the world in this life: hence God
the Father receiving to our apprehension, the wrong in creation by sin, he is
the Person that is to be satisfied, and not the holy Ghost. And hence Jesus
Christ in all his prayers has a most special eye to him, and not to the holy
Ghost (as holy Ghost) because he came into the world by his death, and
intercession, and strong cries to satisfy God the Father, and not God the holy
Ghost as a third Person. And hence it is said, 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any sin, we
have an Advocate with God the Father, (not God the holy Ghost) because he was
(to our apprehension) the Person wronged: and hence we are, after sins
committed, chiefly to eye the Father in our prayers, and to go to him for
pardon with our advocate with us, because to whom offense is chiefly offered,
from him chiefly pardon and reconciliation is to be expected.

2. Therefore Christ addresseth himself chiefly in his prayers to God the
Father, because he is the original and first cause of all good, because he is
the first Person in order of subsisting, and therefore first too in the manner
of conveying. I know the Godhead is the original of all good: but consider the
Persons one with another, and so the Father is ever the first in operation, as
the holy Ghost is the last in consummation; for all good comes from the Father,
James 1. 17. through the Son by the holy Ghost. And hence in all our prayers we
are to look for all good from the Father, for his Sons sake, to be conveyed us
by the holy Ghost: and hence it is said, John 6. 10. No man comes to me but
whom the Father draws: Why? It is the immediate office and work of the holy
Ghost to draw and apply the soul unto Christ; why then is it said, Unless the
Father draw? The reason is, because that which was perfected and consummated by
the holy Ghost, was intentionally and by way of purpose and decree begun
originally by the Father; and this is that which Christ's words have chiefly
reference unto (viz.) the Father through the Son by the holy Ghost draws

But I have waded too far in this Divinity, the clear knowledge of which is
reserved for us in heaven: But thus much to satisfy you. Yet the word Father
in the Lords Prayer, I conceive under correction, as it does not exclude any
person of the Godhead, so its chiefly set down there, not so much to denote
the Person of the Father, as the affection of God as a Father to us his Sons by
Christ, which we are to believe in our first approaching to our prayers, to be
as, nay to transcend the affection of any Father to his Son: when we come to
call upon him for those six things which the Petitions set down for those three
ends, Kingdom, Power, and Glory, which the Prayer concludes withal.

Quest. 4. Your fourth trouble is your aptness to go to God immediately,
especially when his graces are most striving in his ordinances, contrary to
that of Christ, Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

Answ. So indeed it is usual for religious nature often to outrun and get the
start of grace; as it appears in many other, so in this case you put; look as
it is with every man when God awakens him effectually, he first seeks to his
kitchen physic to save himself by his duties, praying, (...) reforming,
endeavoring, (...) working, before he will (...) to the Physician, and to
Christ to save him. Because it was natural to (...) to seek to live by his
working, it is natural to every Son and branch of that root, to seek to save
himself by doing as well as he can, or as God gives him the strength and grace.
So it is here. It was natural to Adam to depend upon, and go to God
immediately, as a creature to a Creator, as a Son to go nakedly to God as a
Father: Christ was not then known nor seen: so it is natural to every man when
rectified Nature is stirred up, to go immediately to God. It is grace in the
second Covenant that reveals and draws to Jesus Christ, and to God by Christ,
Heb. 7. 25.

For cure of this distemper, ponder but these three things.

1. Clearly convince the soul that the immortal, invisible, and most holy God,
that dwells in an unapproachable light, his set out himself to be seen, or
made himself only visible in Jusus Christ, so that he would have no man look
upon him any other ways, then as he has revealed himself in his Son: In whom
(though in all other creatures his vestigia and footsteps are to be seen) as he
is God, the face of God is to be seen, which no creature is able to behold, but
there, being the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his Person,
Heb. 1. 3. And as he is man, the very heart of God, both in respect of
affection, and will to be seen; So that in and through Jesus Christ, especially
his human nature, the glory of the great God breaks out like the Sun through
the clouds most brightly, in respect of us, and therefore in and through his
human nature we are only to behold God, in whom all that a Christian desires to
know, is to be seen, which is the face and heart of so dear a friend. 2 Cor. 4.
6. Joh. 14. 9, 10. For we know by too lamentable experience, how the whole
world vanishing in their smoaky thoughts of the glory of God, as he is
considered in himself, and not able to conceive or retain the knowledge of him
did hence invent and set up Images as fit objects for their drunken staggering
understanding to fasten upon, and to be limited with, and hence adored God
before these, (as our Popish Hypocrites do before the Altar) and in these and
at these as Papists do in respect of their Images. Hence the Lord to cure this
inveterate natural malady; has in the second Person, united himself to man
Christ Jesus, through whom we are both able to our everlasting wonderment to
see him, and also here bound only to behold him, who as he is a fi^ handle for
our faith, so he is a fit object for our weak minds to behold the glory of the
most high God in. Wherefore then do you offer to go unto God without Christ,
whenas you are not so much as to look upon God, but as he appears in Christ? Is
not the human nature of the Lord Jesus more easy to be seen and conceived of,
than the invisible unlimited eterual Godhead.

2. Secondly, See evidently that there is not any dram or drop of God you have,
especially in Gods ordinances, but it issues from the blood, and is purchased
by the intercession, and delivered unto you by the hand of Jesus Christ. Ephesians.
1. 7. Hebr. 7. 25. John 5. 22. You should never have heard the sound of the
gospel, nor never have had day of Patience, nor never have heard of Gods
ordinances to find him in, nor never have been comforted, quickened, enlarged,
affected by Gods Ordinances, were it not for Jesus Christ, the efficacy of
whole blood, and power of whose glorious intercession, does at the very instant
you feel any good in Gods Ordinances, prevail with God the Father for what you
feel; for the Father loves the Son, and has put all things into his bands,
John 3. 3 5. that all men might honor the Son: all the three Persons plotting
chiefly for the honor of the second; so that you may see, may you are bound to
believe, at the time you feel your heart savingly affected in any ordinance
now, the Lord Jesus, who is at the right hand of God in heaven, who is now in
his glory, now be remembering me a poor worm on earth, now I feel the fruit of
his death. O what a miserable forlorn wretch had I been, were it not for Jesus
Christ? Mercy could never have helped, enlightened, comforted, quickened,
assured, enlarged me, and Justice could never have relieved my dead, bloody,
perishing lost Soul, had it not been for Jesus Christ, whose Spirit, power,
grace, comfort, presence, sweetness, I taste, drink, and am satisfied
abundantly with, and now do enjoy.

Oh Sir, methinks the sad meditation of this, should make you in all Gods
ordinances, where you are apt to say you go immediately to God, to hasten
suddenly in your thoughts, affections, praises, to Jesus Christ. Nay, methinks
you should speedily have your heart clevated and lifted up to Jesus Christ, and
say, I receive this, and taste this from Jesus Christ. Oh, but this is but a
taste of the honey comb with the end of my nod, and if this presence of Christ's
Spirit I feel now be so sweet, what is himself then?

3. Thirdly, Labor for increase of love and familiarity with Jesus Christ, by
taking notice of him, by coming often to him, by musing daily on his love, as
on a fresh thing, by banishing slavish false fears of his forgetfulness of you,
and want of everlasting love toward you: and then you know love will carry you
speedily to him: amor meus pondus meum: nay, grant that you have been a
stranger to Christ, yet restore the love of Christ to life again in your Soul,
and when you come to his ordinances, where he dwells, your Soul will make its
first enquiry for him, neither will it be satisfied till it has seen him, as we
do them we love, toward whom we have been greatest strangers.

Quest. 5. Your fifth trouble is, you know not how to apply absolute promises
to your self, as in Heb. 8. because they are made indefinitely without
condition. Conditional promises you say you can, if you can find the
qualification that gives you right to the good of the promise within you.

Answ. This useful fruitful question, how to apply absolute promises to ones
particular, deserves a larger time and answer, than now in the midst of
perplexities, I am able, yet willing, to give. For when the Lord says
absolutely without condition, that he will take away the stony heart, and he
will put his fear into his peoples hearts, etc. and these kind of promises are
made to some, not to all, to those only whom the Lord will, and in general to
his people. Hereupon the Souls of many Christians, especially such as question
Gods love toward them, are most in suspense: and therefore when they complain
of the vileness of their hearts and strength of the lusts, let any man tell
them that the Lord has undertaken in the Second covenant, to heal their
backslidings, and to subdue their iniquities, they will hereupon reply, it is
true, he has promised indeed to do thus for some absolutely, though they have no
good in them, but I that feel so vile a heart, so rebellious a nature, will he
do this for me, or no? and thus the Soul floats above water, yet fears it shall
sink at last, notwithstanding all that God has said. I will answer therefore
briefly these two things in general.

1. I shall show you to what end and for what use and purpose Go has made
absolute promises, not only to them that be for the present b^^ people, but to
them that in respect their estates and condition are not:

2. I shall show you how every Christian is to make use of them, and how and
when he ought to apply them. For the first of these.

1. First, I conceive, that as in respect of God himself, there are many ends
which I shall not mention, as being needless; so in respect of man, there are
principally these two ends for which the Lord has made absolute promises.

1. To raise up the Soul of a helpless, sinful, cursed, lost sinner in his own
eyes, to some hope (at least) of mercy and help from the Lord. For thus usually
every man's Soul is wrought, to whom the Lord does intend grace and mercy: he
first turns his eyes inward, and makes him to see he is stark naught, and that
he has not one dram of grace in him, who thought himself rich, and wanting
nothing before, and consequently, that he is under the curse and wrath of God
for the present, and that if the Lord should but stop his breath, and cover his
face, and take him away, which he may easily do, and this to be feared he will,
that he is undon forever. Hereupon the Soul is awakened and falls to his
kitchen physic, as I spoke before, prays, and hears, and amends, and strives
to grow better, and to stop up every hole, and to amend it self of every sin,
but finding it self to grow worse and worse, and perceiving thereby that he
does but stir, and not cleanse the puddle, and that it is not amending of
nature that he must attain to, but he must believe, and make a long arm to
Heaven, and apprehend the Lord Jesus, (which so few know, or ever shall enjoy)
and hereby quench the wrath of God; I say, finding he cannot do thus, no, nor
no means of themselves can help him to this, hereupon he is for saken of all
his self-wisdom and of all his vain hopes, and now sits down like a desolate
widow, comfortless, and sorrowful, and thinks there is no way but death and
hell, and the wrath of a displeased God to be expected. And if any come and
tell this Soul of Gods mercy and pity to sinners, I, says he, its true, he is
even infinitely merciful unto them who are rent from their sins and that can
believe, but that I cannot do; and am sure shall never be able for to do, and
therefore what cause have I but to lie down in my sorrow, and to expect my
fatal stroke every moment? Reply again upon this Soul, and tell him, that though
he cannot believe, or loosen his heart from sin, yet that the Lord has promised
to do it, that he will subdue all his iniquity, and he will pardon all his sin,
and that he will cause men to walk in his ways, etc. True, says the Soul
again, he will do thus for his own people, and for them he has chosen, but I
never had dram of grace in my heart, and there is no evidence that the Lord is
mine own, or that I am his: Here again the Soul lies down, until the Lord
discovers to the Soul that he will do these things for some that have no grace,
or never had grace; for these promises were made to such.

Hereupon the Soul thinks thus: these promises are made for some that are
filthy; for why should God pour clean water upon them? for some that be
hardhearted, for why should he promise to take away the stony heart from them?
etc. and if unto some such, and I being such a one, why may not the Lord
possibly intend and include me, seeing he has not by his promise excluded nor
shut me out? Indeed I dare not say he will, but yet how do I, or men, or Angels
know, but yet I may be one? Hereupon Hope is raised to life again; seeing God
has undertaken the work for the vilest, it is possible he may do it for me, now
when I am vile and can do nothing for my self. And thus you may see the first
end and use of absolute promises, to be as it were, twiggs to uphold the
sinking Spirits of hopeless, helpless, distressed Souls.

2. The Second end and Use of them is this. To create and draw out faith in
Jesus Christ in the promises. For as the Law begets terror, so the promises
beget Faith. Now no conditional promise firstly begets Faith, because he that
is under any condition of the Gospel, in that man there is a presupposed faith.
Its Gods absolute promise that firstly begets faith; for faith is not
assurance, but the coming of the whole Soul to Christ in a promise, John 6. 3
5. And then the Soul believes in Christ, when it comes to Christ: now this God
works in the Gospel. 1. The Soul is raised up by hope. And being raised, it
Secondly comes to Christ, which is faith, by vehement unutterable desire. And
being come to him, it 3. Embraces Christ by love, and thus the match is made,
and the everlasting knot is tied.

Now as you have heard, the absolute promise works hope of relief from Christ:
and if it works hope, it also works a desire, or coming to Christ by desire.
Oh! that thou Lord would honor thy grace, thy power, thy love, thy promise,
in helping me a poor castaway. And thus faith is created (as it were) by this
absolute promise: for it cannot but move the heart of any one that ever felt
his want, to cry mightily to the Lord for help, if he has any hope, seeing the
Lord has promised to do it for some. Oh says the Soul, that thou would do it
for me: And surely, were it not for this absolute promise of God, no Soul would
desire, because he would have ^o hope to be saved, or to seek for any thing as
from the hands of God. And thus you see to what end God makes, and to what use
a Christian may put these absolute promises.

2. For the second thing (viz) How and How to apply Absolute Promises.
when a Christian may apply these promises.

I answer, every Christian is either,

1. Within Covenant with God, and knows it: or

2. Within covenant with God, and knows it not: or

3. Out of covenant indeed, for his present estate and condition, yet he is in
fieri, or making toward it.

1. If he be in Covenant, and knows it, then you may easily perceive how and
when he ought to apply promises unto himself; for he may boldly conclude, If
God be his God, then all the promises of God shall be made good unto him; if he
be a Son of God, he may boldly challengeatall times at the hands of God, (nay,
if in some respects, at the hands of Justice it self) the fulfilling o^ God the
Fathers will delivered in the several Legacies of the promise bought by the
blood, and sealed by the same blood of Jesus Christ, that they may and shall be
made good unto him that is clear.

2. Secondly, If he be in Covenant, and knows it not, and questions hence
whether God is his or not, and consequently, whether the promises belong unto
him: then the rule is to be observed, let him so sue and seek for the good of
the absolute promise, until by reflecting upon his own acts, herein he perceive
himself adorned and dignified with the qualification of some conditional
promise, and then if he can find the condition or qualification within himself,
then as you judge and write, he may conclude, that the conditional promise
belongs to him, and if one promise, then all Gods promises, and therefore that
absolute promises are his own, because at least one condional promise is For no
unregenerate man is within the compass of any one conditional promise of grace,
unless you will say he is under the everlasting love of God, the promises of
grace being but the midway between the eternal purpose and decree of love, and
the glorious certain execution of that love in time. The promise being the
break day of Gods most glorious love, which must shine out in time.

Object. But here you will say is the difficulty, viz. how I should so seek for
the good of absolute promises, as therein to find may self within the compass
of some conditional one.

I answer, It is done chiefly by three acts.

1. By being humbly contented, that seeing the Lord has absolutely promised, to
work and do all for the Soul he intends for to save, even when it can do
nothing for it self, and that he has taken the work into his own hands, so that
it is his promise, offer, office and honor to do all, that therefore you lie
down, not sluggishly, but humbly at the feet of God, and contented to have him
to be your God, and for ever to be disposed of in any thing by God, if he will
fulfill his covenant in you, contented to part with any sin, if he will rend it
from you; contented to know any truth, if he will reveal it to you; contented
to do any duty, if he will enable you; contented to shine bright with all his
glorious graces, if he will create and maintain them in you; contented to bear
any evil, if he will lay his hand under your head, and thereunto strengthen
you; and so seeing the Lord promised to undertake the work for some, put out
the work, and put over your Soul to him, that he would fulfill the good that his
covenant promises in your self. Now when you do thus, which (no question) you
and many a Soul does, many times reflect upon this act, and see if you cannot
or may not find your self by it under the condition of some conditional
promise, and if you do, then are you bound to believe all Gods promises are and
will be Yea and Amen unto you. Now that you do so by this act, it self speaks
plainly; for how many conditional promises are made to the meek? Blessed are
the meek, Mat. 5. and to the humble, whom God will raise up. For this is not
saving meekness, to be quietly contented to be, or to do, or to bear any thing
that the Lord will have me from mine own strength and feeling; but to be, to
do, or to bear any thing that the Lord will have me, if the Lord enable me.
Many a stout heart would gladly have Christ, but if he cannot have him in his
own terms, viz. Christ and his lusts, Christ and the world too, or by his own
strength and power; he will have none of him, but desperately casts him away,
and says, what shall I look after him any more? I cannot pray, I cannot
believe, I cannot break this vile and unruly will, this stony adamant hearr,
thus the pride of a man's heart works. Now he that is truly meekned and humbled,
he is contented gladly to have God his God, and Christ his Redeemer, and that
upon Jesus Christ, his own terms. First, on his own covenant; now what is that?
why it is this, I will give you the good, and work in you the condition to; I
will give you my self, and therefore will not stick to give you an eye to see,
and a heart to receive too. This is the covenant; now hereupon a humbled Soul
accepts of Christ according to his covenant, on his own terms thus, viz. Upon
that condition Lord, that thou will humble me, teach me, persuade me, cause me
to believe, and in every thing to honor thee; Lord, I am contented gladly and
joyfully to have thee; do therefore what thou will with me. Just as a sick man
tells his Physician, who comes not to him on these terms, If you will make your
self half whole, then I will cure you, and do the rest for you; but being
utterly unable to cure, or to know how to cure himself, he tells his Physician,
I am content you should begin and perfect the cure, and so honor your skill
and love in me, to be contented to take any thing if you will give it me, and
if I offer to resist that, you should bind me, and so do any thing with me.

2. The second act is, earnestly to long and come to Christ, to cleave unto
Jesus Christ by fervent and ardent desire, that he would make good those
absolute promises to you, seeing that they are made to some, and that they do
not exclude you; for when you ponder well, and see what wonderful great things
the Lord promises to some, whose heart cannot but be stirred up to say, as
that woman in another case, Lord, give me of that water to drink? and as they
in the fifth of John, Lord evermore give us that bread. Now doing this, reflect
upon this Second act, and see if unto it no conditional promise belongs, and
you shall find an affirmative answer from the word. For what is this longing
afte^ the good, not of some (which many hypocrites do) but of all the promises,
but that which the Scripture calls thirsting, who are commanded to come and
drink of the waters of life freely, Isa. 55. 1, 2. and hungring, to which all
good things are promised, Mat. 5. 6. and which coming to Christ (as I spoke
even now) who has given this as the first fruit of eternal election, and which
kind of people he will never cast away, John 6. 37. Now when you see these
promises belonging unto you, why dare you not conclude but that all these
absolute ones are yours also.

3. The third act is this, Seeing God has promised absolutely such good things
in the Second Covenant, but has not set down the time when, or how much grace
he will give; and seeing only he can help, therefore look up, and wait upon the
Lord in the use of all known means, until he makes good what he has promised
to do, and perform, and work for you. Say as beggars that have but one door to
go to for bread, if none hear, or hearing help not, lay themselves down at the
door, and say, I will wait here, I am sure I perish if I go away, or quarrel
with them in the house, because they help me not so soon as I would, and
therefore ^ will wait, for it may be their compassions may move them as they
pass by to help me. So do you, Many a Soul comes and longs for the good of the
Promises, but if the Lord do not speedily help him, he goes with
discouragements, fears, and discontents, or despair, or sin away, and says one
of these two things, either I shall never have help, or I come not truly, and
hence I feel no help. Oh remember that bread is only to be had at the door, to
be distributed when the Lord sees need, not when we would, or think we have
need, and therefore wait here and say, if I perish here, I will, at the feet of
God, and at the feet of the promises and covenant of God, etc.

Now reflect upon this act, and see if you may not find some conditional
promise annexed unto it, which surely you may, and I will name you but two,
Isa. 40. 29, 30, 31. and Isa. 64. 4. and if the conditional promise belongs to
such a Soul, you may easily conclude the absolute promises are your own, and
the chiefest use you are to make of them when you know them that they are your
own, is to press God to make them good daily to you: and to believe as verily
and really, as if you had the performance of them, that they shall. It may be
you will ask me, how shall I know whether I have these conditions truly in me?
I answer, sincerity is a very witnessing grace, the frequent meditation of the
Scripture will give you much light, to judge of the sincerity of them, and that
which Saint Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 12. I say unto you, We have not received the
spirit of the World, but of God, whereby we know, (or may know) the things that
are freely given to us of God.

3. Thirdly, If he be out of the covenant, but yet God begins to work with some
common work of his grace upon him: all that I would say to him, and all the use
he can make of such absolute promises, consists in these things.

1. Let him consider the freeness of God's promise, whereby he may be stirred
up to conceive some hope it may be made good to him in time. For the promise is
very free and large, excluding none (except those that sin unpardonably) be
their sins and natures never so vile before God, and yet not including any by
name, for that is in the conditional promise: and hence such an one is to make
this use of it, who knows but the Lord may have pity upon me in time; and so
hang thy hope upon him.

2. Let him consider the worth and price of Gods promise bought by blood, and
for which some men would give a thousand worlds for the benefit and comfort of;
and hereby raise up his heart, as by the freeness of it to hope, so by the
price of it to esteem of the thing promised, above pearls, and all the honor
and pomp of the world.

3. Let him consider the fullness of the promise, which is a plaster as big as
his fo^e, just answerable to all his wants, nay infinitely more large than his
wants And surely these three things will draw his heart to long for the
promise, and then you know what is conditionally promised and bequeathed to
them that thirst: For similitude is the ground of love. Now when the fullness of
the Promise is seen, there will appear such a suteableness and fitness of the
promise to his soul, that he cannot but long for it, thus much for the fifth
trouble.

Quest. Your sixth trouble set down in two heads, put into one for brevity,
viz. secret unwillingness to seek God in the strictest solemn services, before
you enter into them; weariness of them while they last; and glad when they are
gone: the reasons which you mention are, partly fear of not using them aright,
together with melancholy, and lastly, the strictness of them.

Answ. It is very true, there is abundance of wildness in our hearts, which
naturally seek to have their liberty abroad, and cannot endure to be pent in
the narrow room of holy performances, extraordinary duties, etc. no more than
children can be pent up from their play. And hence it is weary of them, and
glad to think of their departures and ends. And truly it is one of the most
grievous miseries that a holy heart can feel, and I beseech the Lord of heaven
and earth to keep you, and me, and all his for ever, while we are here in our
valley, under the sense of such distempers as our greatest misery. And
therefore me thought it was a solemn sweet speech of an honest man to his
friend, who seeing him oppressed with such distempers as you mention, and
perceiving him to droop under them, he came cheerfully to him, and suddenly
said unto him, I can tell you good news, the best that ever you heard, viz.
As Soon as ever you are in Heaven, you shall serve Christ without weariness:
Which words well thought on, revived the man. That which I would speak with as
much tenderness of compassion as I am able to you, I refer to these things.

1. That a child of God is never usually weary of the duty, but rather of his
vile heart, to think of, and to look upon, that in the duty Christ's yoke is
easy, and his burden light, to him that takes it on his neck and puts his
Soul under it. The duty nakedly considered in it self, is glorious in his eyes,
and sweet to his Soul, and hence sometimes never well, but when he considers
his dead, blind, barren, and senseless heart that he is to carry to the duty,
and that he fears, and has felt will abide with him in the duty: Oh! this
grieves, here the Soul pincheth. An Hypocrite is weary of the duty, a child of
God rejoices in it, but he is weary of his sin, and unsavouriness and
weariness in the duty. I persuade my self Sir, that you may soon mistake your
spirit herein: you think you are unwilling to come to the duty; and are weary
of it, when indeed, it is your glory, joy, and love; but it is because you fear
you can do it no better, that troubles you, that you have such a vile heart in
it. And if your trouble be from hence, the good Lord increase ir in you daily;
and withal, bless the Lord, and say, Lord, though I am weary of my vile heart, in
these days of humiliation, in these Sabbaths, yet I hless thee; the days and
duties themselves thou know are dear unto me, It is not Lord because I am
weary of thy word, but because I can do it no better, I am weary of my self,
and this vile heart; here is much love in such a spirit to the Lord. And
believe it, Sir, your love wants not its recompenses, and remember that the
Lord respects you not according to your duties done, but according to your love
in them, and to them. And therefore those duties you are ashamed to own, the
Lord will not be ashamed to crown.

2. Consider you must and shall be baited with these distempers of heart,
sometimes more, and sometimes less, as long as you live, It is part of Paul's
body of death which he must carry with him, till he come to bury himself.

3. Those means which may help you to be freed from them (a little at least)
are these among many.

1. Be but truly and really, not by fits and darkly, sensible of them, men in
deep miseries, are not unwilling to be helped out.

2. Judge ye not rigorously of God, although he were a bloody austere God, as he
did of his master, whose talent he had, and hence never improved it; but look
upon God as having a Fathers heart and affection toward you in the meanest and
greatest performances; which is double, either to give you strength to do what
you cannot (I can do all things through Christ) or having come to him for it,
to accept of what you would do for him, as if it were done; and this will make
you joy in the poorest performance, that though it be never so full of vileness,
yet the Lord out of his fatherly love, accepts of it as glorious.

3. Renew morning and evening by sad and solemn meditation, the sense of Gods
love to you in Christ, and in every duty that he sets you about, and love will
love and like the yoke, and make the commandments that they shall not be
grievous to you.

Thus I have briefly done with your new troubles which you mention, you say,
because you may not have the like opportunity of writing again. It may be so,
and therefore I have desired to satisfy you, which I beseech the Lord himself
to do.

Next you come to reply to my first Letter, of which I have kept no copy. as I
never did of any, and hence may and do forget what I writ then unto. So much
light as your Letter lends me to bring things to mind, I will gladly take, and
be more brief in answer.

Quest. 1. You find the strength of grace to be got in you rather by
argumentation, then inward communication and influence arising from the union
to Christ. And this troubles you.

Answ. To which I answer these three things.

1. That as the old sinful nature is communicated from Adam the first to us,
without any argumentation; so the new nature, which is the seed, foundation,
and plot of all grace, is diffused into us by the second Adam when we are
united to him, without argumentation. It is only by divine operation. The Lord
leave not me, nor any friend I have, to a naked Arminian illumination and
Persuasion.

2. That to the increase of those habits, and drawing out the acts of the new
creature, the Lord is pleased to use moral and rational persuasions; as in the
instance you gave, Christ died for us, then hence the love of Christ
constrains: but remember withal, it is not the bare meditation, or strength of
reason or persuasion, that elicits such divine and noble acts in the heart and
affection, but it is the blood of Christ sprinkling these serious meditations,
that makes them work such graces in the Soul; which I might show at large,
which blood is the salve, though argumentation is the cloth or leather to which
it sticks, and by which it is applied; but from such leather comes no virtue,
all of it is from the blood of Christ, which by argumentation heals the Soul.
For if it were nakedly in the argumentation to stir your heart, and to work
strength of grace, what should be the reason that sometimes you are no more
moved by all your argumentations, than a mountain of brass is by the winds? why
should the same truth affect you at one time, and not at another, when you are
as filthily disposed to be affected as at the first? Therefore consider it is
not your reason and argumentation, but Christ's blood that does all, by as
admirable, and yet secret operation.

3. Your union to Christ on your part is begun, and partly wrought by the
understanding, and hence the good that you get by it at any time, it is from
your union, or part of it at lest.

Quest. 2. Again you ask me, whether Calvin does not express fully my thoughts
about our Spiritual union, in his lib. 4. cap. 17.

Answ. I answer, I have forgot what he has writ, and my self have read long
since out of him, and for the present I have no books about me where I am, and
therefore cannot satisfy you in this, neither know I when I shall seek to find
out the book and place; If I have leisure, I will either write to you, or tell
some of your friends before I am gone, what he has said or writ that way, etc.

Quest. 3. Again thirdly, You desire me to tell you how my self came to the
cure of Atheistical Thoughts, and whether they did wear out, or whether they
were rationally overthrown.

Answ. I answer, at first they did wear out, meeting with fruitless and
dead-hearted company, which was at the University.

2. The Lord awakened me again, and bid me beware lest an old sore broke out
again: and this I found that strength of reason would commonly convince my
understanding that there was a God, but I felt it utterly insufficient to
persuade my will of it unless it was by fits, whenas I thought Gods Spirit
moved upon the Chaos of those horrible thoughts; and this I think will be found
a truth.

3. I did groan under the bondage of those unbelieving thoughts, looking up,
and sighing to the Lord, that if he were as his works and word declared him to
be, he would be pleased to reveal himself by his own beams, and persuade my
Heart by his own Spirit of his Essence and Being, which if he would do, I should
account it the greatest mercy that ever he showed me. And after grievous and
heavy perplexities, when I was by them almost forced to make an end of my self
and sinful life, and to be mine own Executioner, the Lord came between the
bridge and the water, and set me out of anguish of spirit, (as she prayed for a
child) to pray unto him for light in the midst of so great darkness; In which
time he revealed himself, manifested his love, stilled all those raging
thoughts, gave return in great measure of them; so that though I could not read
the Scripture without blasphemous thoughts before, now I saw a glory, a
majesty, a mystery, a deprh in it, which fully persuaded, and which light (I
desire to speak it to the glory of his free grace, seeing you call me to it) is
not wholly put out, but remains while I desire to walk closely with him, unto
this day. And thus the Lord opened mine eyes, and cured me of this misery; and
if any such base thoughts come (like Beggars to my door) to my mind, and put
these scrupies to me, I use to send them away with this answer, Why shall I
question that Truth, which I have both known and seen.

Object But you say this remedy is good, viz. of prayer, but that you cannot
use it, especially because you question the truth of God.

Answ. Yet (dear Sir,) give not over this Trade, you will doubtless find it
gainful, when it may be God has laden you more with these thoughts, and made
you loath your self for them. But the thing seems strange to me, if I mistake
you not, viz. that your heart will not be persuaded, but that you must resolve
your doubts concerning the perfection of Scripture, not by seeking to harmonize
those passages that seem to cross one another, but by ascribing some humanity
or error, (if I may interpret you) to the penmen, seeing St. Paul says, We
prophecy but in part, and seeing one of the Evangelists leaves out the
doxology in the Lords prayer.

Sir, if you can take these thoughts, arising from these and the like grounds,
as your burden, I do not blame you, but pity you in that respect; but if your
judgment indeed think so, I am sorry you should harbor such thoughts one hour
within doors: for you know that holy men writ the Scriptures (but so far they
might err, but it is added) as they were inspired, or (as the Original has it)
as they were moved or carried in the arms of the holy Ghost, and so how could
they err? how could God lie? It is true, Paul did prophecy but in part, and is
this an argument, because he did not prophecy fully, therefore in some things
he did not prophecy truly; I am persuaded you will say there are many things
my poor thoughts have suggested to you, as true; and yet I am persuaded I do in
them prophecy (if I may so say) but in part. The Spirit of God directed the
four Evangelists to write, yet so, as they did not all write what another writ,
but in great wisdom left some things doubtful, and short in one, which are more
clear and full in another: and hence the Doxologie is fully set down in one,
and not in another, and many reasons I could set you down why, but that it is
needless: I grant you ought not to put up all with a charitable opinion of
Scripture, but if you can, by reason, reading, and comparing, help your heart
to a full persuasion, this is Scripture: but many things you cannot get
satisfaction for, by that way and means, but still your Spirit will be left
dark and doubtful; What course will you here take for resolution, which is
Scripture? The Papists say it is so, because the Church has christened it for
Scripture; you say you will see reason for it that it is so, or else you cannot
be satisfied, then I fear you will never be sarisfied. (I think) In this case
therefore these two things you are to do.

1. To go to God by prayer, to give you a resolution of all your doubts, and by
some means or other, some light to see whether this is his word or not.
Secondly, if this be his word, then he would persuade your heart of it, that it
is so: For the least resolution which is Scripture, and which is not, is made
by the same persuasion, and sole persuasion of the same Spirit that writ the
Scripture. Concerning the Angels that appeared to Mary, see Gerard, and he
briefly, (I think) will satisfy you, in your answer to the particular scurples
about the Scripture sense, and the dissonancy of them. Only this I will add to
the last clause about these things, that if the Scripture be inspired by the
holy Ghost, and that not in the sum and substance of it, but to every word and
sentence of it, which I think you will not doubt of, when you have considered
it; then I think it will undeniably follow, that the same Spirit of truth is
also a Spirit of order, and hence the method of various penning of it, is from
the Spirit too, which you say you stick at.

Answ. 2. Again, to your third thing, concerning your spirit being burdened
with involuntary infirmities, as burdens, but not as sins. I say nothing now,
because I preceive by one part of your reply that the Lord has done you some
good by the first answer, only it is your grief you cannot fear them, nor
condemn your self for them, as damning sins. For satisfaction of which, I hope
this reply to your second trouble will give you some satisfaction.

Quest. 4. Again to your fourth question, to know whether these changes you
have sometimes, and these movings of the Spirit, are not of natural temper, or
Gods Spirit. It seems I did a little mistake the meaning, because you meant not
the main work of grace, but occasional stirrings and movings of heart, as by
reading some pathetical Letter, your Spirit is moved with joy or sorrow, which
it may be will not be stirred at some other time, as by drinking a cup of wine,
the spirit is made more cheerful and lively, etc.

Answ. I answer these three things.

1. First, That it is very usual for natural affections to be raised by a
natural temper, as by drinking, eating, noveltiness of the Gospel, John's
candle flies were ravished with the Gospel: People are naturally moved
sometimes by a thundering Minister, yet never a whit the more grace, etc. and it
is a good speech of Doctor Ames: Arminian universal grace (as they describe it)
may be the effect of a good dinner sometimes.

2. That though the being of grace depends not upon the temper of the body, yet
the exercise of grace, and many gifts of grace, together with the feeling of it
does. And hence a good dinner, and sometimes wine, to a sad melancholy (if
gracious) heart, may remove rem prohibentem that may keep grace, as joy and
thankfulness from working, and so take the grace and draw it out, not create
and diffuse the grace: The Prophet called (you know) for a Minstril, which some
think, (and that upon good grounds) was to raise up his heavy heart, and make
him cheerful and fit to speak: the body is the instrument, which if it be
broken, the best grace will hardly sound; but if whole, then they will.

3. If you would know when these things only draw out grace, or make a thing
like unto grace in the Soul, I answer, by chese two things chiefly.

1. If it be true grace, it ever makes you more humble and vile in your own
eyes, and say, Lord, why do thou g^ve me any desire to thee, any cheerfulness
in serving thee? etc.

2. It makes you more thankful, and to bless the Lord that he thus remembers
you; for this is a standing rule, what ever comes from nature, and a man's self,
it ever builds up it self, and returns to self again; what ever grace comes
from Christ, it drives a man out of himself, by making him humble and draws him
unto Christ that sent him, by making him thankful; I think all grace, and
stirrings, and movings that have not this double effect in some measure, are to
be suspected, and if they have, it is dangerous to doubt whether they are true
or no.

5. Again, Your fifth thing about providence, you say you cannot see a positive
providence, although you do see a negative providence in all your occasions, and
comforts, and crosses, you meet withal, as namely, you can thank God for not
taking away your life, etc. but you cannot see God giving it.

Answ. 1. I answer, 1. Consider what I writ to you at first about this question
in general.

2. Ponder sadly whether any creature or appurtenance to it, has its being from
it self, or from the will and word of God, viz. I will have such a man to be,
and such a memory to be, etc. I think you will say nothing can make it self,
therefore here is a positive Providence in life, liberty, etc.

3. Consider whether the same will and word that gives it a being, together
with all the appurtenances to it, does not also give it act and motion. That it
is so, I thus demonstrate it. 1. Every creature is made for an end, for no wise
efficient, but works for some wise end. 2. That no creature can lead it self to
its end, if sinful or irrational. 3. God must and does lead it by its several
acts and movings to that end. Hence 4. Every act is determined by God.

And although I grant some creatures move freely, some necessarily, yet it is
from a positive will and providence that they move, act and see. Therefore you
see what cause there is to see a positive providence in every thing.

Concerning the rest of your letter, Oh that I had time and heart to writ more;
yet I hope I have writ enough for this time, and the Lord knows whether ever
more or no. However I thank you heartily for improving me this way of writing,
who have my mouth stopped from speaking. I wish I had more such friends to deal
thus with me, and my self more time, and a more fruitful head and heart to
improve my self this, or any other like way for them: For who knows what
breathings of Gods Spirit are lost for want of writing, especially when there
is no season of speaking. Truly Sir, I meet with few that are much troubled in
that manner as your self, but they go on in an easy, quiet, and very dangerous
way: which troubles (I persuade my self) keep you awaking, when other virgins
are slumbring, and after which (I am persuaded) the Lord intends to use you for
more than common service, if you wade well through them; however as I said
before, be not discouraged, or too much perplexed in sorrow for them. For
surely, as far as I can guess, the Lord is preparing you for himself by them. I
shall not forget you, though I never saw you: and I beseech you if have any spark
of affection toward me kindled by these fewlines, remember when you are best
able to pray for your self, to remember to look after me and mine, and all that
go with me on the mighty waters, and then to look up and sigh to Heaven for me,
that the Lord would out of his free grace but bring me to that good land, and
those glorious Ordinances, and that there I may but behold the face of the Lord
in his Temple, though he never delight to use me there, though I and mine should
possibly beg there; and that if the Lord should call me to my solemn work and
service for the good of his Church and People, and company that go with me, or
are gone before me, that then the Lord Jesus would reveal his secrets to me,
and enable me the little time I have to live, to be fruitful to him, and to
have a larger heart than ever for him, as for yourself I shall desire the Lord
to keep you blameless and unspotted in an evil world, and that as he has begun,
so he would perfect, and crown his divine graces and work in you, and that you
may be perserved from national sins, which shortly bring national and most
heavy plagues.

And the presence of the Lord may abide with you, and in you, until the Lord
call for you. Remember my kind love to your Father, whose name I have forgot,
and by whom I could not send these lines, being then hindered by business. Now
the peace of Jesus Christ be with you, and keep you upright and blameless till
death. And if I never see you more till the last and great day, then Farewell,
Farewell.

Yours in Jesus Christ,
T. S.
The First PRINCIPLES OF THE ORACLES OF GOD.

Collected By THOMAS SHEPHARD, Sometime of Emanuel College in Cambridge; Now
Preacher of God's Word in New England.

HEB. 5 12. For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that
one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God; and
are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

Reprinted in the Year, 1695.

To The Christian READER.
IT is no disparagement at all for this wife Master Builder, [Mr. Thomas
Shephard of New-England] to labor sometimes by the Hammer of the Word, to
fasten these nails of Truth in a sure place, even in the Heads and Hearts of
Infant-Christians.

Neither is it below the highest Scholar in Christ's School, to hold fast the
form of wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1. 13.

The great Apostle himself, (who was wrapped up into the third Heaven) although he
had received a Commission of Christ his Master to make Disciples, yet he was a
Disciple still; for he not only Catechized others, but learned, and that again,
and again, The first Principles of the Oracles of Heb 5. 12. Mat. 13. 11. (...)
1 Cor. 2. 10.
God: which are called The Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the depths
of God: that is, in plain English, those Doctrinal Truths, which are truly
fundamental, and absolutely necessary unto salvation; that we may be able by
sound doctrine both to Tit. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 15.
exhort and convince the gainsayers: and be ready always to give an answer to
every man that asks us a reason, of the hope that is in us.

Thus heartily bes^eching thee, in the name of Christ, to search the
Scriptures, and to Joh. 5. 39. Acts 6. 4.
give thy self continually to Prayer, and the Ministry of the Word: that 2 Pet
3 8. Acts 20. 32.
you may grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. I now commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able
to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
Sanctified. So be it.

Friend, I am thine, if thou do love the Truth, and our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity. WILLIAM ADDERLEY.
Dated, From Charter house in London. February, 1. 16 47.
CHRISTIAN READER,
BEing desired to peruse and give our opinion of the resolutions in this Letter
now presented to thy view; We must confess, they appeared to us very precious;
For we have feldom seen acuteness, profoundness and godliness, so eminently,
equally, and happily matched. There are in Christ's School diverse forms,
elementaries, and men of exercised wits. The Scholar proposing these cases was
no Puny, and he was happy in meeting with a teacher so able for resolution.
Therefore, who ever reads and heeds, will not repent of his labor. But the
more knowing the Reader is, and the more experienced in the Ways of Christ, the
more delight may he take in, and the more profit may he reap by these pious and
profound resolutions. So we are

Thine in Christ Jesus John G^ree, and Will. Greenhil.
Mar. 27. 1648.
THE Sum of CHRISTIAN RELIGION: In way of Question and Answer.
Delivered by Mr. THO. SHEPHARD in N. E.
Quest. WHat is the best and last end of Man?

A. To live to God. Romans 6. 10, 11. Gal. 3. 19. 2. Cor. 5. 3, 15.

Q. How is man to live unto God?

A. Two ways.

First, By Faith in God, Psalm 37. 3. Secondy, By observance of God. E^cl. 12.
13.

Q. What is faith in God?

A. It is the first act of our Spiritual life, whereby the soul believing God,
believes in God, and there rests as in the only Author and Principle of
Life, Heb. 10. 38. Joh. 3. 33, 36. Romans 4. 3. Heb. 11. 13. Heb. 4. 3. Deuteronomy. 30.
20.

Q. What is God?

A. God only knows himself, no man can so kno^ him and live: Yet he has
manifested himself unto us in his back-parts, according to our manner or
measure of knowing things: and we need know no more than these, that we may
live, 1 Timothy 6, 16. Exodus 33. 19, 23.

Q. What are Gods back-parts?

A. They are two; First, His sufficiency, Psalm. 36. 9. Secondly, His
Efficiency, Romans 4. 21.

Q. What is Gods sufficiency?

A. It is his perfect fullness of all good, whereby he is all-sufficient for us
in himself, Psalm. 16. 11. Genesis 17. 1.

Q. Wherein stands and appears Gods sufficiency?

A. First, in his Essence, Psalm. 68. 19.

Secondly, In his subsistence or persons, 2 Samuel 7. 20, 25.

Q. What is Gods Essence?

A. Whereby he is that absolute first Being, Rev. 1. 8. Isa. 44. 6. Exodus 3. 14.

Q. Can you sufficiently conceive of the Glory of this one most pure Essence,
by one act of Faith?

A. No; and therefore the Lord has manifested it unto us by diverse attributes,
Deuteronomy 29. 29. Exodus 34. 6, 7.

Q What are Gods Attributes?

A. That one most pure Essence, diversely apprehended of us, as it is diversely
made known unto us, 1 John 4. 16. Isa. 43. 25.

Q. How many kinds of Attributes are there?

A. There are two sorts of them.

First, Some showing what God is:

Secondly, Some showing who God is.

Q. By what Attributes know you what God is?

A. By these; God is a Spirit, living of himself, Joh. 4. 24. Joh. 5. 26.

Q. By what Attributes do you understand who is God?

A. By his Essential properties, which show to us: First, How great a God he
is, Psalm. 77. 13.

Secondly, What a manner of God he is, Mat. 6. 17.

Q. What Attributes show how great a God he is?

A. First, His infiniteness, whereby he is without all limits of Essence, 2
Chr. 2. 5, 6.

Secondly, His Eternity, whereby he is without all limits of beginning,
succession, or end of Time, Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 27. 1 Timothy 1. 17.

Q. What are those Attributes which show what a manner of God he is?

A. His qualities whereby he acts with, are of two sorts:

First, His Faculties, whereby he is able to act, Isa. 60. 16. and 63. 1.

Secondly, His Virtues of those Faculties, whereby he is prompt and ready to
act, Psalm. 86. 5.

Q. What are his Faculties?

A. First, His understanding, whereby he understands together, and at once
all truth, Heb. 4. 13. Acts 15. 18.

Secondly, His will, whereby he purely wills all good. Psalm. 119. 68.

Q. What are the virtues of those Faculties.

A. First, They are intellectual; the virtues of his understanding, as Wisdom,
Knowledge, and the rest.

Secondly, Moral; the virtue of his Will, as Love, Holiness, Mercy. In the
acting of both which, confists Gods happiness.

Thus much have you seen of Gods sufficiency, in regard of his Essence. Now
follows his subsistence.

Q. What are his subsistences or persons?

A. That one most pure Essence with its Relative properties.

Q What are those Relative properties.

A. They are three.

First, To beget.

Secondly, To be begotten.

Thirdly, To proceed from both.

Q. How many persons learn you from hence to be in God?

A. Three

First, The first, is the Father, the first Person in order, begetting the Son.
Psalm. 2. 7.

Secondly, The Son, the second Person, begotten of the Father. Joh. 3. 6. Heb.
1. 3.

Thirdly, The Spirit, the third Person, proceeding from them both. Joh. 15. 26.

Q. Are these three Persons three distinct Gods?

A. No, For they are that one pure Essence, and therefore but one God. Joh. 1.
1. Romans 9. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Cor. 2. 10.

Q. If every Person be God, how can they be distinct Persons, and not distinct
Gods?

A. Yes, Because one and the same thing may have many Relative properties, and
respects of being, which in the Godhead make distinct Persons. As one and the
same man, may be Father in one respect, a Master in another respect; and a
Scholar in another respect.

Q. If these three Persons be but one God, what follows from hence.

A. That all the three Personr are Co equal, Co eternal, subsisting in one, not
separating from each other, and therefore delighting in each other, glorifying
each other, Prove. 8. 30. Thus much concerning God,

Now concerning the works of God.

Q. Thus much concerning Gods sufficiency. What is his efficiency.

A. Whereby he works all things, and all in all things. Romans 11. 36. Isa. 45.
7.

Q. What of Gsd shines forth, and are you to behold in this Efficiency.

A. Two things

First, Gods Omnipotency, in respect of his Essence.

Secondly, the cooperation and distinct manner of working of the three
Persons. Romans 1. 20. John 5. 17.

Q. What is Gods Omnipotency?

A. It is his almighty power, whereby he is able to bring to pass all that he
does will, or what ever he can will or decree. 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. Phil. 3. 21. Mat
3. 9. Psalm. 115. 7.

Q. What is Gods Decree?

A. It is his Eternal and determinate purpose, concerning the effecting of all
things by his mighty power, according to his counsel. Ephesians. 1. 11.

Q. What attributes or glory of God appear in his Decree?

A. First, His constancy, whereby his Decree remains unchangeable. Number. 23. 19.

Secondly, His Truth, whereby he delivers nothing but what he has decreed.
Jer. 10. 10.

Thirdly, His Faithfulness, whereby he effects whatever he decrees
according thereunto. Isa. 46. 10.

Q. What is God's Counsel.

A. His deliberation as it were, for the best effecting of every thing
according to his Wisdom. Acts 4. 24. Psa. 104. 24.

Q. What is Gods Wisdom!

A. It is the Idaea or perfect platform of all things in the mind of God, which
either can be known, or shall be done, according to the good pleasure of his
will. Hebr. 11. 3. Prove. 8. 12, 13.

Q. What is the good pleasure of Gods will?

A. It is the most free Act of his Will, whereby he wills himself directly,
as the greatest good, and all other things for himself, according to his good
pleasure. Mat. 11. 25. Prove. 16. 4.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. That Gods good pleasure is the first and best cause of all things. Psalm.
115. 3. Psalm, 33. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Q. What are the Co-operations of the three persons in Gods Efficiency?

A. Whereby they work the same thing together unseperably. Joh. 5. 17, 19. and
16. 13, 14.

Q. If they work the same thing together, How is it that some works are
attributed to God the Father, as Creation; some to the Son, as Redemption; some
to the Holy Spirit, as application?

A. This is not because the same work is not common to all the three Persons;
but because that work is principally attributed in Scripture to that person
whose distinct manner of working appears chiefly in the work.

Q. What is God the Fathers distinct manner of working?

A. His working is from himself by the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, Ps. 33. 6.
Joh. 1. 3 and hence the beginning, and so the Creation of all things is
attributed to him.

Q What is God the Sons manner of working?

A. His working is from the Father, by the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 14. 16. and hence
the dispensation of things, and so Redemption, is attributed unto him.

Q. What is the Holy Ghosts manner of working?

A. His working is from the Father and the Son, Ioh. 14. 26. and hence the
consummation of all things, and so application is attributed unto him.

Q. Wherein does Gods efficiency or working appear?

A. In two things.

First, In his creation of the world. Secondly, in his providence over the
world. Esa. 37. 16.

Q. What is his Creation?

A. It is Gods efficiency, whereby he made the whole world of nothing,
origina^ly exceeding good, Psalm. 33. 9. Genesis 1. 31.

Q. Did the Lord make the worlding an instant?

A. No; but by parts, in the space of six days, described at large by Moses,
Gen 1.

Q. When did the Lord make the third heaven, with the Angels their Inhabitants?

A. In the first day, in the first beginning of it, Genesis 1. 1. Job 38. 6, 7.

Q. What is the creation of the third heaven?

A. Whereby he made it to be the heaven of heavens, a most glorious place,
replenished with all pleasure which belongs to eternal happiness, wherein his
Majesty is seen face to face, and therefore called the habitation of God 2 Chr.
2. 5, 6. Psalm. 16. 11. Psalm. 63. 15.

Q. What is the creation of the Angels?

A. Whereby he created an innumerable number of them, in holiness, to be
ministering spirits, with most acuteness of understanding, liberty of will,
great strength, and speedy in motion, to celebrate his praises, and execute his
commands, specially to the heirs of salvation. Heb. 11. 22. Ioh. 8. 44. Heb. 1.
14. 2 Samuel 14. 20. Jude 6. 2 Pet. 2. 11. Esa. 6. 2. Psalm. 130. 20.

Q. When did God create man?

A. The sixth day, Genesis 1. 27.

Q. How did God create man?

A. He made him a reasonable creature, consisting of body, and an immortal
Soul, in the Image of God, Genesis 2. 7. Genesis 1. 28.

Q. What is the Image of God wherein he was made?

A. That hability of man to resemble God, and wherein he was like unto God, in
wisdom, holiness, righteousness, both in his nature, and in his government of
himself and all Creatures. Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 2. 24. Genesis 1. 26.

Q. What became of man being thus made?

A. He was placed in the Garden of Eden, as in his Princely Court, to live unto
God, together with the woman which God gave him. Genesis 2. 15.

Q. Thus much of Gods creation. What is his Providence?

A. Whereby he provideth for his creatures being made, even to the least
circumstance, Psalm. 145. 16. Pro. 16. 33.

Q. How is Gods Providence distinguished?

A. It is either, first, Ordinary, and mediate, whereby he provids for his
creatures by ordinary and usual means. Hos. 2. 22.

Secondly, Extraordinary and immediate, whereby he provides for his creatures
by miracles, or immediately by himself. Psalm. 36. 4. Dan. 3. 17.

Q. Wherein is his Providence seen?

A. First, in Conversation, whereby he upholdeth things in their being and
power of working. Act. 17. 28. Psalm. 104. 29, 30. Nehem. 9. 6.

Secondly, in Gubernation, whereby he guides, directs and brings all creatures
to their ends. Psalm. 29. 10. Psalm. 33. 11.

Q. Does God govern all creatures alike?

A. No; but some he governs by a common providence, and others by a special
providence, to wit, Angels and Men, to an eternal estate of happiness in
pleasing him, or of misery in displeasing him. Deuteronomy. 30. 15, 16.

Q. What of Gods Providence appears in his special government of man?

A. Two things.

1. Man's Apostasy or fall.

2. His Recovery or rising again.

Q. Concerning man's fall, what are you to observe therein?

A. Two things.

1. His transgression in eating the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2. 17.

2. The propagation of this unto all Adam's posterity.

Q. Was this so great a sin to eat of the forbidden fruit?

A. Yes, exceeding great, this Tree being a Sacrament of the Covenant; also he
had a special charge not to eat of it: and in it the whole man did strike
against the whole law, even when God had so highly advanced him.

Q. what are the causes of this transgression?

A. The blameless cause was the law of God, Romans 5. 13. And hence as the Law
did it, so God did it: holy, justly, and blamelesly. Romans 7. 10, 11, 12.

Q. What are the blameable causes?

A. Two principally.

1. The devil abusing the serpent to deceive the woman. Genesis 3. 1.

2. Man himself in abusing his own free will, in receiving the temptation,
which he might have resisted. Ephesians. 7 29.

Q. What is the Devil?

A. That great number of apostate and rebellious Angels, which through pride
and blasphemy against God, and malice against man, becamely ars and murderers
of man, by bringing him into that sin. Luke 11. 18. 1 Timothy 3. 6. 1 loh. 3. 12.
loh. 8. 44.

Q. What are the effects and fruits of this transgression?

A. They are two.

1. Guilt, whereby they are tied to undergo due punishment for the fault. Romans
3. 19.

2. Punishment, which is the just anger of God upon them for the filth of sin.
Romans 1. 18.

Q. What are the particular punishments inflicted on the causes of this sin?

A. Besides the fearful punishment of the devils, mentioned Jude 6. and that of
the Serpent and the Woman, Genesis 3. 14, 16 the punishment of man was first, Sin
Original and Actual. Secondly, death. Genesis 5. 5.

Q. What is sin?

A. The transgression of Gods law. Io. 3. 4.

Q. What is Original and Actual sin?

A. First, Original sin is the contrariety of the whole nature of man to the
law of God, whereby it being averse from all good, is inclined to all evil.
Eccles. 8. 11. Genesis 6. 5. Romans 6. 20.

Secondly, Actual sin is the continual jarring of the actions of man from the
law of God, by reason of original sin, and so man has no free will to any
spiritual good. Esa. 65. 2, 3. Jam. 1. 14, 15. Esa. 1. 11.

Q. What death is that God inflicts on man for sin?

A. A double death.

1. The first death of the body, together with the beginnings of it in this
world, as grief, shame, losles, sicknesses. Deuteronomy. 28. 21, 22. 35.

2. The Second death of the Soul, which is the eternal separation and ejection
of the Soul after death, and Soul and body after judgment, from God, into
everlasting torments in hell.

Q. Is there no beginning of this death, as there is of the other in this life?

A. Yes; as first, Security and hardness of heart, which cannot feel sin its
greatest evil.

2. Terrors of conscience. Heb. 2. 15.

3. Bondage of Satan. Ephesians. 2. 2.

4. The curse of God in all blessings, whereby they are fitted for destruction.
Romans 9. 22.

Q. What of Gods attributs shine forth here?

1. His holiness, whereby he being pure from all sin, cannot away with the
least sin in the best of his creatures. Heb. 1. 13.

2. His Justice, whereby he being most just, in himself, cannot but punish man
for sin, as well as reward him for well doing. 2. These. 1. 6.

3. His Patience, whereby he uses pity, Patience, and Bounty, to his creatures
offending. Romans 2. 3.

Q. Is this sin, and the punishment of it derived to all men's posterity?

A. Yes. Ioh. 3. 3. Ephesians. 2. 3.

Q. How is it propagated?

A. By the imputation of Adams sin unto us, and so the punishment must needs
follow upon it. Romans 5. 13.

Q. Why should Adams sin be imputed to all his posterity?

A. Because we were in him as the members in the head, as children in his
loins, as debtors in their surety, as branches in their roots, it being just,
that as if he standing, al had stood, by imputation of his righteousness, so he
falling, al should fall, by the imputation of his sin.

Q. Thus have you seen man's apostasy from God, what is his recovery?

A. It is the return of man to the favor of God again, merely out of favor,
and the exceeding riches of his free grace. Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. Romans 5. 8.

Q. How are we brought into favor, and what are the parts of this recovery?

A. Two ways:

First, by Redemption. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. 2dly, by Application hereof. Tit. 3. 6.

Q. What is Redemption?

A. The satisfaction made, or the price paid, to the justice of God for the
life and deliverance of man out of the captivity of sin, Satan, and death, by a
Redeemer, according to the Covenant made between him and the Father. 1 Cor. 6.
20. Luke 1. 74. Esa. 55. 10, 11.

Q. Who is this Redeemer?

A. Jesus Christ, God and Man. Mat. 1. 23. Ioh. 1. 14. Col. 2. 19.

Q. Why is he God Man?

A. Tha t so he might be a fit Mediator, to transact all businessess between
God and man, in the execution of his three Offices, whereunto he was anointed
of the Father. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Esa. 42. 12.

Q. What are those three Offices of Christ?

A. 1. His Prophetical Office, whereby he does reveal the will of the Father.
Act. 3. 22. Col. 2. 3.

2. His Priestly Office, whereby he makes full atonement with the Father for
us. Col. 1. 20.

3. His Kingly Office, whereby he governs his people whom he had taught and
reconciled, subduing their enemies, and procuring their eternal peace. Psalm. 2.
6. Esa. 9. 6.

Q. How has Christ Jesus made satisfaction?

A. By his humiliation, whereby he was made subject throughout his whole life
and death, to the strict Justice of God, to perform what ever the same might
require for the redemption of man. Gal. 4. 4, 5.

Q. What did Gods Justice require of man?

A. 1. Death, for the breach of the Law, and that Christ tasted, in his bitter
sufferings, both of body and Soul, by being made sin, and so abolishing sin;
and this is called his Passive Obedience. Heb. 2. 9. Ephesians. 1. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Gal. 3. 13.

2. Perfect Obedience, in fulfilling the Law perfectly, both in his Nature and
Actions: for the procuring and meriting of life; and this is called his Active
Obedience. Heb. 7. 26.

Q. What follows Christ's Humiliation?

A. His Exaltation, which is his glorious victory, and open Triumph over all
his and our enemies, sin, Satan, and death, in the several degrees of it. Luke
24. 26. Phil. 2. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 15. 5, 7.

A. What is the first degree of Christ's Exaltation?

A. His Resurrection the third day, whereby his Soul and body by the power of
the Godhead, were brought together again, and so rose again from death,
appearing to his Disciples for the space of 40 days. 1 Cor. 15. 4. Ioh. 2. 19.
Act. 1. 3.

Q. What is the second degree of Christ's Exaltation?

A. His Ascension into Heaven, which was the going up of the Manhood into the
third heaven, by the power of the Godhead, from Mount Olives, in the sight of
his Disciples. Act. 1. 11, 12.

Q What is the third degree of his Exaltation

A. His sitting at the right hand of God, whereby he being advanced to the
fullness of all glory, in both natures, governs and rules all things together
with the Father, as Lord over all, for the good of his people. Mark. 16. 9.
Psalm. 110. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 25. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. 1 Pet. 3. 22.

Q. What is the fourth and last degree of his Exaltation?

A. His return to Judgment, which is his second coming into this world with
great glory and Majesty, to judge the quick and the dead, to the confusion of
all them that would not have him rule over them, and to the unspeakable good of
his people. Mat. 19. 28. 2 Timothy 4. 1. Acts 17. 31. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9.

Q. Thus much of Redemption, the first part of his Recovery. What is
application?

A. Whereby the Spirit by the Word and Ministry thereof, makes all that which
Christ as Mediator has done for the Church efficacious to the Church, as her
own. Ioh. 16. 14. Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7. Ioh. 10 16. Romans 10. 14, 17. Ephesians. 5, 25, 26.

Q. What is the Church?

A. The number of Gods Elect. Heb. 12. 23 Ioh. 17. 9. 10, 11. Ioh. 10. 16. Ep.
1. 22, 23.

Q. How does the Spirit make application to the Church?

A. 1. By union of the Soul to Christ. Phil. 3. 9, 10.

2. By Commnnion of the benefits of Christ to the Soul.

Q. What is this Union?

A. Whereby the Lord joining the Soul to Christ, makes it one Spirit with
Christ, and so gives it possession of Christ, and right unto all the benefits
and blessings of Christ. 1 Cor. 6. 17. Ioh. 17. 21. Romans 8. 32. 1 Ioh. 5. 12.

Q. How does the Spirit make this Union?

A. Two ways, first, By cutting off the Soul from the old Adam, or the wild
Olive Tree, in the work of preparation. Romans 11. 23, 24.

2. By putting or ingrafting the Soul into the second Adam, Christ Jesus, by
the work of vocation. Act 26. 18.

Q. What are the parts of the preparation of the Soul for Christ?

A. They are two.

1. Contrition, whereby the Spirit immediately cuts off the Soul from its
security in sin, by making it to mourn for it, and separating the Soul from it,
as the greatest evil. Isa. 61. 1, 3. Jer. 4. 3, 4. Mat. 11. 20, 28.

2. Humiliation, whereby the Spirit cuts the Soul off from self-confidence in
any good it has or does. Especially by making it to feel its want, and
unworthiness of Christ, and hence submits to be disposed of as God pleases.
Phil. 3. 7, 8. Luke 16. 9. Luke 15. 17, 18, 19.

Q. What are the parts of vocation of the Soul to Christ?

A. 1. The Lords call and invitation of the Soul to come to Christ, in the
Revelation, and offer of Christ and his rich Grace. 2 Cor. 5. 10.

2. The receiving of Christ, or the coming of the whole Soul out of it self
unto Christ, for Christ by virtue of the irresistible power of the Spirit in
the call, and this is Faith. Jer. 3. 22. Ioh. 6. 44, 45. Ioh. 10. 16. Esa. 55.
5.

Q. Thus much of our Union, What is the communion of Christ's benefits unto the
Soul?

A. Whereby the Soul possessed with Christ, and right unto him, has by the
same Spirit fruition of him, and all his benefits. Ioh. 4. 10. 14.

Q. What is the first of those benefits we do enjoy from Christ?

A. Justification, which is the Gracious Sentence of God the Father, whereby
for the satisfaction of Christ apprehended by Faith, and imputed to the
faithful, he absolves them from the guilt and condemnation of all sins, and
accepts them as perfectly righteous to eternal life. Romans 3. 24, 25. Romans 4. 6,
7, 8. Romans 8. 33, 34.

Q. What difference is there between Justification and Sanctification?

A 1. Justification is by Christ's righteousness inherent in Christ only;
Sanctification is by a righteousness from Christ inherent in our selves. 2.
Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 3. 9.

2. Justification is perfected at once, and admits of no degrees, because it is
by Christ his perfect righteousness: Sanctification is imperfect, being begun
in this life. Rev. 12, 1. Phil. 3. 11.

Q. What is the second benefit next in order to Justification, which the
faithful receive from Christ?

A. Reconciliation, whereby a Christian justified is actually reconciled; and
at peace with God, Romans 5. 1. Ioh. 2. 12. and hence follows his peace with all
creatures.

Q. What is the third benefit next unto Reconciliation?

A. Adoption, whereby the Lord accounts the faithful his Sons, crowns them with
privileges of Sons, and gives them the Spirit of Adoption, the same spirit
which is in his only begotten Son. Ioh. 3. 2. Romans 8. 11, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Q. What is the fourth benefit next to Adoption?

A. Sanctification, whereby the sons of God are renewed in the whole man, unto
the Image of their heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, by Mortification, or their
daily dying to sin by virtue of Christ's death: and by Vivification their daily
rising to newness of life, by Christ's resurrection. 1 These. 5. 23, Ephesians. 4. 24.
Jer. 31. 32. Romans 6. 7, 8.

Q. What follows from this Mortification and Vivification?

A. A continual war and combat between the renewed part assisted by Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, and the unrenewed part assisted by Satan and this evil world
Romans 7. 21, 22, 23.

Q. What is the fifth and last benefit next unto Sanctification?

A. Glorification, which has two degrees. The one in this life and the other
in the world to come.

Q. What is the first degree of Glorification in this life?

A. Lively expectation of Glory, from the assurance and shedding abroad Gods
love in our hearts, working joy unspeakable. Romans 5. 2, 5. Tit. 2. 13.

Q. What is the second degree in the world to come?

A. Full fruition of Glory, whereby being made complete and perfect in
Holiness, and Happiness, we enjoy all that good eye has not seen, nor ear has
heard, in our Immediate and Eternal Communion with God in Christ. Heb. 12. 23.
1 Cor. 15. 28. Thus much of the first part, of living to God by Faith in God.

Q. What is the second part, viz. our observance?

A. It is the duty that is to be performed to God of us, through the power of
his Holy Spirit, working in us by Faith, according to the will of God. Ephesians. 6.
6, 7. Psalm. 139. 24. Romans 6. 1. Luke 1. 74.

Q. Wherein consists our observance of God?

A. It is either Moral, or Ceremonial.

Q. Wherein consists our Moral observance of God?

A. In two things.

1. In suffering his will, whereby a believer, for the sake of Christ, chooses
rather to suffer any misery, than to commit the least sin. Heb. 11. 26. Act.
21. 13.

2. In doing his will, whereby a Believer in sense of Christ's love performs
universal obedience to the Law of God. Romans 7. 22. 1 Ioh. 5. 3. Luke 1. 6.
Phil. 3. 12.

Q. Is there any use of the Law to a Christian?

A. Although it be abolished to a Christian in Christ, as a Covenant of life;
(for so Adam and his posterity are still under it) yet it remains as a rule of
life, when he is in Christ, and to prepare the heart for Christ. Romans 6. 14,
15. Mat. 5. 17, 18, 19. 20. Ezekiel. 10. 11. Romans 9.

Q. Why is not a Christian so under the Law as a Covenant of life, so as if he
breaks it by the least sin, he shall dye for it?

A. Because Jesus Christ has kept it perfectly for him. Romans 8. 3, 4. To. 5.
20, 21.

Q. Can any Man keep the Law perfectly in this life?

A. No; for the unregenerate wanting the Spirit of Life, cannot perfect an act
of life in obedience to it. The regenerate having the Spirit but in part,
perform it only imperfectly. Romans 8. 7. Romans 7. 21.

Q. What befalls the unregenerate upon their disobedience unto it?

A. The eternal curse of God for the least sin, and the inctease of Gods fierce
and fearful secret wrath as they increase in sin. Gal. 3. 10. Romans 2. 5.

Q. What befalls the regenerate after their breach of the Law, and imperfect
obedience unto it?

A. The Lord may threaten and correct them, but his loving kindness (incovering
their sins in their best duties by Christ; and accepting their meanest services
so far as they are quickened by his Spirit) is never taken from them. Psalm. 89.
31, 32, 33. Zach. 3. 1. to 8. Isa. 56. 7. Romans 7. 20.

Q. What is that imperfect obedience of Believers which is accepted?

A. When they so observe the will of Christ, as that therein

1. They confess and lament their sins. 1 Ioh. 1. 9. Romans 7. 24.

2. They desire mercy in the blood of Christ, and more of his Spirit. Phil. 3.
9, 10, 11.

3. They return him the praise of the least ability to do his will. P^ 50. 23.
Cor. 15. 10.

Q. How is the Law, or ten Commandments, divided?

A. Into two Tables. The first, showing our duty to God immediately in the four
first Commandments. The second, our duty to man in the six last Commandments.

Q. What rules are you to observe to understand the Moral Law?

A. These.

1. That in whatsoever Commandment, any duty is enjoined, there the contrary
sin is forbidden: and where any sin is forbidden, there the contrary duty is
commanded.

2. That the Law is Spiritual, and hence requires not only outward, but inward
and Spiritual obedience.

3. Where any gross sin is forbidden, there all the signs, degrees, means, and
provocations to that sin are forbidden also; and are in Gods account that sin.
And so where any duty is commanded, there all the signs, means, and
provocations to that duty are commanded also.

4. That the Law is perfect, and therefore there is no sin in all the
Scripture, but is forbidden in it; nor no duty required (if moral) but it is
commanded in it.

Thus much of our Moral observance of God.

Q. What is our ceremonial observance?

A. The celebration of the two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. It is an holy ceremony, wherein external sensible things by the appointment
of Christ, are separate from common use, to signisie, exhibit and seal to us
that assurance of eternal life by Christ Jesus, according to the covenant of
his grace. Genesis 17. 9, 10.

Q. Which are the Sacraments?

A. They are two, Baptism and the Lords supper.

Q. What is the external sensible part of Baptism?

A. Water, John. 3. 23.

Q. What is the inward and spiritual part of Baptism, signified, exhibited, and
sealed thereby?

A. Christ's Righteousness and his Spirit.

1. Washing away our sin, and so delivering us from death.

2. Presenting us clear before the Father, and so restoring us again to life.
Romans 4. 1 Cor. 2. 11. Mat. 3. 11.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. 1. That it is a Sacrament of our new birth, and ingrafting into Christ.
John 3. 5.

2. That as we are perfectly justified at once, and being new born once, shall
never die again. Hence this Seal is to be Administered but once.

Q. What is the external and sensible part of the Lords Supper?

A. Bread and Wine, with the Sacramental actions about the same.

Q. What is the inward and spiritual part of it, signified, sealed, and
exhibited thereby?

A. The body and blood of Christ crucified, offered and given to nourish and
strengthen believers, renewing their faith unto eternal life. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
Joh. 6. 54, 55.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. 1. That it is the Sacrament of our growth in Christ, being new born,
because it is food given to nourish us, having received life.

2 That therefore it is to be administered and received often, that we may grow.

3 That children and fools, and wicked, ought not to partake of the Sacrament,
because they cannot examine themselves, and so renew their Faith. 1. Cor. 11. 28.

Q Ought not the Sacrament to be administered to carnal people, if they have
been baptized?

A. No, because such as are not within the Covenant, have no right to the Seal
of the Covenant.

Q. Where are believers, who have right unto this Sacrament, to seek fruition
of it?

A. Because it ought not be administered privately, [as the Papists would,]
Hence Gods people are to seek to enjoy their right to it in some particulat
visible Church, in joining with them, as fellow members of the same body. I
Cor. 11. 20, 22. 1 Chronicles. 10. 17. Act. 2. 42.

Q. What members ought every particular visible Church to oonsist of?

A. Christ being head of every particular Church, and it his body, hence none
are to be members of the Church but such as are members of Christ by faith. 1.
Cor. 1. 2. 1. These. 1.

Q. But do not Hypocrites, and no true Members of Christ, creep in?

A. Yes; but if they could have been known to be such, they ought to be kept
out, and when they are known, they are orderly to be cast out. Mat. 25. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 5. Rev. 2. 20. Tit. 3. 20.

Q Are these Members bound only to cleave to Christ their head by Faith?

A. Yes, and to one another also by Brotherly love, which they are bound to
strengthen and confirm, (as well as their Faith) by a solemn Covenant. Ephesians. 4.
15, 16. Col. 1. 4. Ier. 50. 4. Isa. 56. 45. Zach. 11. 14. Zeph. 3. 9. Psalm.
119. 106.

Q. What benefits are there by joining thus to a particular Church?

A. 1. Hereby they come to be under the special Government of Christ in his
Church, and the Officers thereof. Isa. 30. 20.

2. Hereby they have the promise of specia^ blessing, and on their children
also. Psalm. 133 3. Exodus 20. 6.

3. Herein they have the promise of God special presence.

1. Revealing unto them his will. Psalm. 27. 4. Psalm. 63. 2, 3.

2. Protecting rhem. Isa. 44. 6.

3. Hearing al their Prayers. Deuteronomy 4. 7. Mat. 18. 19

Q. Are there not some who never find these benefits

A. Yes; because many knowing not how to make use of Gods Ordinances, nor
feeling a need of Gods presence only in them, their sin also blinding, and
partly hardening their hearts, and polluting Gods house, they then become worse
when they have best means. Mat. 11. 23. Ier. 17. 5, 6 Heb. 6. 8. 1 Samuel 5. 8,
9. Ezekiel. 14. 4. 1 King. 8. 21.

Q. What are the miseries of those who carelessly and wilfully despise, and so
refuse to join to Gods Church

A. Besides the loss of Gods presence in the fellowship of his people, it is a
fearful sign (continuing so) God never intends to save their souls. Ast. 2. 47.
Isa. 60. 12. Rev. 2. 23. 24.

Q. What therefore ought people chiefly to labor for, and to hold forth unto
the Church, that so they may be joined to it?

A. A threefold work.

1. Of Humiliation, under their misery, death, and sin, as their greatest evil.
Ast. 2. 37. Mat. 3. 6.

2. Of Vocation, or their drawing to Christ, out of this misery, as to their
greatest and only good. Act. 2. 38, 41.

3. Of new Obedience, how they have walked in Christ since called. Act. 9. 26,
27. Mat. 3. 8.

FINIS.

