To his Grace, Their Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament.
The PETITION of The Principalls and Regents of the University of S. Andrews,
in behalf of the said University and Colleges thereof.
Humbly shows,
THat where it is notourly known, that the foresaid University, is the first
and most ancient University within the Kingdom, and was from the beginning
endwed with the greatest Rents and Privileges, and has ever since been so
respected and cared for; so that King Charles the first, after the suppression
of Bishops in the year 1637. did give to the said University, a Charter of
Mortification of the whole Priory and Bishopric of St. Andrews, with a few
Reserves; which yet would have amounted to at least, One thousand Pounds
Sterling yearly, for the use thereof; as the Charter dated in the year 1641,
(ready to be produced) testifies: Which Donative, though ratified in Parliament
the third of November the said year, and many years possessed, was not only
taken away by the restoring of Bishops in the year 1662. But by the said
Restitution, the University was further laesed without Remedy, in as much as,
several Kirks which belonged before to its Patrimony, were upon the account of
the said Donative taken from the University, and Augmentations granted to their
Incumbents: And yet when the Donative was taken away, the loss of the Kirks was
not repaired. And for any other Provision that was made afterward, either by
the gift of vacant Stipends of five considerable Bishoprics, (whereof to this
day, nothing has been received) or by the King's Bounty and Benevolence out of
his own Exchequer, of 200 lib. Sterling yearly, (whereof very little has been
received to this day, and the present Incumbents have gotten nothing thereof as
yet;) and though what is yet gotten of the half months Cess, has made some
little Stock, yet no ways suitable to the necessity of that University; whereby
it is but too well known, that this famous University, once the most frequent
and most convenient for Study, and best provided of all the Universities, both
for variety of Professions, the number of Professors, and a competent allowance
for those, is at this day the worst provided of all the Universities: And what
for want of public Professors, and what for want of due Encouragment to those
that are, it is like to become desolate. And albeit it has pleased His Majesty
of late, to give the four Universities of the Kingdom, the sum of 1200 pounds
Sterling amongst them, out of the Bishops Rents, by a Signatour under his Hand,
yet the same is to Foreign Professors, and has taken no effect, and is likely
to take no effect until the Signatour be further explained and perfected. And
seeing, that for the visible Good, both of Church and State, these things
deserve a Parliamentary Consideration,

May it therefore please your Grace, and the right Honorable the Estates of
Parliament to recommend our deplorable condition effectually to his Majesty's
Bounty, in restoring us to the Bishopric and Priory of St. Andrews, in as full
and ample a way as it was granted by his Majesty, in the year 1641, and
confirmed by the Estates of Parliament November thereafter, that this ancient
and renowned University may be restored to its former Integrity, and provided
with Professors, and other founded persons according to the foundation, and may
no longer continue in such a Necessitous Condition, and the Professors exposed
to such Straits, for want of Provision. And may it also please your Grace, and
the Honorable Estates of Parliament, that the late Gift of 1200 lib. Sterling,
may be explained, and applied to the present Exigence of the Universities.

And your Grace and Lordships Petitioners shall everpray, etc.


