REASONS FOR CONFORMITY TO THE Church of England, AS BY LAW ESTABLISHD.
19. Aug. 1699.
By R. SHERDLEY, who was formerly a Presbyterian Minister in the City of
Kilkeny, in Ireland.
THE Actions and Designs of all Men have their Ultimates: So has the Author in
this small Tract: It is not to be accounted Famous or Learned; neither does he
hope to banish Schism, (that cursed Title which all Men hate, yet nourishd by
many) out of a Kingdom where the Church of God is so eminently Glorified; but
he is a Stranger here, and all Men that see him have their private Sentiments
of him; some by Information, believe him a Cheat, and an Impostor; others, one
of the Regular Priests crept out of Ireland, pursuant to a late Act of
Parliament made there; but it is commonly reported of him thus, especially by
such who have some Knowledge of him: That he did really conform to the
Establishd Church at Kilkeny, in Ireland, by reason of his irregular and
immoral Life: For had he not left the Presbyterian Party when he did, he would
have been Excluded their Societies in an open Synod or Convention of
Presbyters. To this the Author Answers, That this Opinion is false and
groundless; for he has it under the Hands of the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and
Protestant-Inhabitants of the City of Kilkeny, affirming him to be a Man of a
sober Conversation; nay, he is not only thus fortified against malevolent
Censure, but he has the Hands of the very Presbyterians themselves (who are
still Inhabitants in Kilkeny) declaring him to be a Man of an honest and
regular Life: And further, the Provost and Senior Fellows of Trinity-College,
near Dublin, in Ireland, have given him their own Hands to the like Truth.

Object. Now it may be objected, why the Author did not stay in a Kingdom where
he was so well known for a Sober and Pious Man?

Answ. Ireland was a Country very pernicious to the Author, as the Eminent Dr.
Gwither of the College of Dublin can justine, he never enjoyd Six Weeks of
Health successively in Five Years Time: Moreover, England is the Land of his
Nativity, and a Place where he enjoys a considerable Measure of Health, which
Argument is sufficient: But now it is reported, that he chiefly converses with
Dissenters; and since the Church of England takes not that Care of him he
expected, he is endeavoring to sement himself with those of his former
Factious Acquaintance. Now he does hereby endeavor to satisfy the World, that
notwithstanding all disrespect whatsoever shown him by the Established Church;
yet, as he has never done any Thing to cast him beyond the Pale of that Church,
he is, and hopes always to remain a Member and Well-wisher of the Churches of
England and Ireland, as by Law Establishd.

Now to conclude he only mentions Two or Three of the Reasons which induced him
to Conformity.

I. Because the lawful Commands, of a lawful Authority, are and ought to be
obeyed in Things lawful.

II. The Commands and Injunctions of the Establishd Church are grounded upon a
lawful Authority and enjoins nothing sinful, or in themselves unlawful.

III. If so (granting Validity of the former Positions) to dissent from this
Authority, were to draw a Church out of a Church, which is positive Schism.

Now the Author desires the Reader to take Notice, that he does not pinch or
squeeze too narrowly on the Term lawful, but freely allows the full Sense the
Term will bear.

FINIS.

