TO My Lord Commissioner, HIS GRACE AND THE HONORABLE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT
PRESENTLY CONVEENED. The Humble PETITION of Mr. JAMES SMITH.
SHOWS,
THat there being a Mortification, made by Umquhile, Thomas Mudie, for the
building of a Church in the Grass-Market which Money does now extend to the
Sum of Fifty or Sixty Thousand Merks Scots, or thereby, And there being a
Representation made to the Estates of Parliament that it was neither Neceslar
nor Convenient to build a Church in that place, they by their Act, of date the
(...) day of (...) 1685: years, did remit to the Lords of His Majesty's Secret
Council, to Appoint the said Money to be Disposed off, as they should find
Cause; And the said Lords ot secret Council, Considering that the Abay-Church
which was locally within the precinct of Holy Rood-house, was designed by His
late Majesty, to be his own Chapel, and no longer to continue a Parish Church;
They appointed as much of the said Mortified Money as should be necessary, to
be applied for the Building of a Church, for the Inhabitants of the Canongate,
in the most convenient place that could be had for that purpose: And did
recommend to the then Lord Commissioners of the Thesaurie, to see the same done
accordingly. Whereupon, the said Lords did enter in an Agreement with your
Petitioner, to build a Church in the Canongate, conform to a certain Model or
Draught, which is depositate in the hands of Sir Thomas Moncrief of that llk,
Clerk to their Majesty's Thesaurie, for the building of which Church, conform
to the said Model, Your Petitioner was to get the Sum of 25000 Merks Scots;
besides what was given for purchassing the ground, for the said Church and
Churchyard. And according to the said Agreement, Your Petitioner did set about
the Work with all the Care, and Diligence possible, so as the same does appear
to be come a great length. Yet considering the Roof and Kirk-yeard dykes, and
other things unfinished. There will be a fourth part of the Work yet to do.
Albeit I be able to instruct that the whole price is already expended upon
Materials and Workmen, besides my own pains. And that it was not possible for
any Man to do it cheaper than Your Petitioned (...) (...) sufficiency of the
Work. And being confident that this great Court (in whom does principally
Recide the Nobile Officium of iceing Justice done to all Men, and who has power
to Relax from the Rules of Common Law, when Equity requires the same,) will not
suffer any Man to be ruined, by the undertaking so pious a Work; Seeing the
Mortification is sufficient to Defray the whole Charge; And a considerable part
yet remains to be Employed upon some other pious Use. And, Your Petitioner is
able to make his Loss most evidently Appear, upon the grounds following, viz.
1mo: By Reason of the badness of the ground (which Your Petitioner could not
foresee) I was necessitate to Found 12 Foot deeper, as the Model whereby the
Agreement was made, which at the cheapest that any Work can be wrought in
Edinburgh, will amount to the sum of 1800. Ponnds Scots. 2 do. The Timber since
the Agreement has risen in the price a full Third and more, occasioned by the
War, which was not under Consideration the time of the Agreement, whereby your
Petitioner is a clear Losser, in upwards of 1200: pounds Scots Money. 3 tio. By
the Contract it will appear, That in the Agreement made with Your Petitionr,
there is no mention made of Scaffolding, it being altogether foregot: which is
so Considerable (the Fabrik being a Church, which has no Joysting) that the
Timber of the Scaffolding alone with Nails, and Workman-ship, does stand me the
Sum of 1200 pounds Scots more, as any Skilful Men will value the Timber to be
worth when the Work is ended: And it were hand to make a Tradesman loss so
much, by an Oversight, in a Bargain. 4 to. By the Agreement the two Rows of
Pillars were only to be Roughstones, and Plaistered over; But in respect that
the making them so, would have occasioned the Pillars to have been so Great,
that they would have rendered a great part of the Church useless; upon
Consideration whereof, Your Petitioner was persuaded to make all the Pillars of
Neat hewn Work; As likeways to make a Handsome hewn Entry, form the Street to
the Church yeard (which by the Contract I was not oblidged to do) both which
mat extend to the Sum of 1000: Pounds Scots Money. So that I am able to
Demonstrate, to any who shall be Appointed to enquire in the Matter, that I
will be upwards of 5: or 6000: Pounds Scots Money Losser, upon the whole
Bargain which is sufficient to Break a Man of a greater Stoke as ever I had.
And I must yet use an Argument, to induce this HONORABLE COURT to do me
Justice, which is, That albeit, I have been several Years in good Employment,
and Engadged in many Bargains, this is the first time that ever I Claimed any
more than my first Agreement, not would I have Begun now, if my Loss had not
been so great, that I am not able to sustain it; And that several of the
Articles are such as might be Recovered by the ordinary Course of Law, as being
things profitably done over and above Agreement.

MAY IT THEREFORE PLEASE YOUR GRACE, and the Remnant Members of this Honorable
Court of Parliament, to Order Your Petitioner's Loss to be paid out of the
Remnant of the foresaid Mortified Money; or to Appoint any of Your Number to
Examine, the Verity of the Grounds above Represented, and to Report, that Your
GRACE, and the Honorable Members of Parliament, may do therein as Your find
Just: And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc.

EDINBURGH, Printed the Year, 1690.


