A short RELATION of the happy VICTORY, obtained by His Majesty's Fleet against
the Dutch, upon the third and fourth of June, one thousand six hundred and
sixty five.
UPon the first appearance of the Dutch, which was on June 1. at two of the
clock, it cost his Royal Highness but little time to make ready; his precedent
care and the cheerfulness of our men, having prevented all possibility of
disorder, and the happy arrival of the Collier-fleet at that instant, having
supplied the only want he had of men; which the Dutch Fleet no sooner
perceived, but they stood off to sea, keeping the wind of us, sometime standing
off again, to see whether indeed we durst follow them, keeping themselves in
good order. Their number was one hundred and ten Sail, and ten Fireships. The
first good Omen that showed it self on our side, was the firing of a great Ship
of theirs as we followed the next day, being Friday the 2. instant in the
evening, then believed to be one of their Flag-ships, which we since know was a
great Fire-ship so disguised to do more mischief.

June 2. We followed them till night, endeavoring by several tacks to get the
wind quarter, which his Royal Highness happily effected, being not full two
Leagues further into the Sea then we were the evening before.

Saturnday morning at Sun rising, finding they could not get from us, they bore
up to Vice Admiral Mims and gave him a broadside, who received them
accordingly; and so their whole Fleet passed by ours, firing at every Ship as
they went, and receiving returns from them, not one of either side being out of
play at the first encounter. Immediately upon which, his Royal Highness made his
sign for the tacking, that we might still keep the wind of them, which was as
happily executed; notwithstanding that, the enemy also strove for it. In the
second pass, the Swiftsure bore the first brunt, which was performed on both
sides as the former. In the third, wherein we also kept the wind, Prince Rupert
and Captain Mims led the way: but the enemy endeavoring to get the head of our
Fleet, were engaged in a line; and as we bore toward them, they still bore
off, yet steering the same course; So that it was not then a fight of board and
board, but offending one another with great shot, we being at too great a
distance to make use of our small shot. Which way of fighting seeming tedious
to us, about one of the clock we pressed so near to the middle of them, that we
divided their Fleet. About three of the clock Opdam's Ship was blown up, as we
suppose by a lucky shot, which amazed their whole Fleet, as it encouraged ours;
so we fell in pell mell with them: after which it will be hard, till stories
are well compared, to give a particular account of what happened upon the whole
matter. GOD has been pleased to give His Majesty a glorious and signal
Victory, our enemy being driven into the Texel, as far as the draught of water,
and the condition of our Ships could permit, that day being also very far
spent. The sum of all is, the enemies whole Fleet is defeated, the great part
of them gone into the Texel, others into the Maes, about thirty sunk and taken;
Opdam with his Ship blown up, Cortenaer, Schram and Stellingwerf killed, and
all the seven Admirals, but John Evertson; with many more of their principal
Officers, and according to the general computation, near eight thousand Seamen
and Soldiers. On our side, only one single Ship (the Charity) lost, Sir John
Lawson a slight hurt on the Knee, my Lord of Malborough, my Lord of Portland,
Rere-Admiral Sanson, Captain Atleton of the Guinny, Captain Kirkby of the
Breda, my Lord of Falmouth, my Lord Muskery and Mr. Boil killed, these three by
an unhappy shot aboard his Royal Highness, and close to his own Person. GOD in
heaven be praised, for having preserved him so to be the great instrument of so
signal a success, to the honor of His Majesty, and good of His people.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY, 1665.


