AN ANSWER TO A LETTER To a Gentleman in the COUNTRY, Giving an Account of the
Two Insurance-Offices; THE Fire-Office and Friendly-Society.
I Have received yours of the 26th of January, being an Account of the Two
Insurance Offices, the Fire Office, and the Friendly Society; and, according to
your desire, return you this Answer.

Wherein to observe your Own Method, I shall consider, 1. The Securities of
each Office. 2. The Charge of Insuring.


And in Comparing them one with another, the Arguments I use, shall arise from
those you make in your Letter to me, and the Insurers of the Fire Office, have
formerly made in their Papers directed to the City.

The Insurers of the Fire Office have, as you say, settled in Ground Rents to
the value of Fifty thousand Pounds, (which admitted) tho I fear Rents of 2100
l. per Annum, a great part of them lying in Marine Square, Well-Street, near
Ratcliff, and other Places thereabouts, would hardly yield 24 years Purchase.

On this Security by their Deed of Settlement, they have Liberty to Insure 5000
Houses, which the Insurers themselves (in the said Printed Papers to the City)
have valued at 400 l. a House one with another; which does charge their
Security of 50000 l. with no less than Two Millions of Pounds.

But you say when any Loss happ^ns to the Fire Office, it is Paid out of the
Bank of the Office, and the Land which is the Fund is never the Less.

This indeed were a great Argument, if the Proemiums received by them were Paid
into a Bank, and that Engaged for the Payment of their Loss; but there is no
such thing, neither is any Personal Security given, but especial Care taken
that nothing in their Settlement should Charge their Persons; so that they may
Pay, or not Pay, as they please; which (...)

Insurers, yet in Aftertimes it is not unlikely but it may so happen, when the
whole Number is Insured, that they may find it their Interest not to pay away
their ready Money, but leave the Loss to be Paid out of the Rents.

But it can never be the Interest of the Insurers in the Friendly Society to
stop Payment; because their Office becomes thereby Immediately dissolved, but
whilst they continue to make good Payment, the several Persons in the Society
(if Solvent) are engaged to Pay it them again. Therefore there is no reason to
fear a Default which must be so pernicious to them if they do not Pay, and of
so little hazard (as you say) if they do.

And tho from thence it be true that they are not so Personally concerned to be
at the Charge to keep Men to put out the Fire, yet they are now setting them
out, and did so Propose from the Beginning; which although they may be Raw at the
present, may soon become as well Disciplined as the others.

And whereas you say the Fund of the Fire Office is so large, That Considering
the Houses Insured, are dispersed at several Distances, it is very Improbable
(unless the whole City be Destroyed) that any Loss at one time should exceed
the Fund.

Wherefore to put this on the Trial, I will suppose that for the Future, as
well as in the Three last Years (as you say) there will be Seven thousand Pound
to be Paid out of these Rents, to answer the Loss by Fire, then at that rate,
in 31 Years (for, for that time as many as pleased of the first Three thousand,
might have Secured their Houses; as by the Table of their first Printed Rates
appear) there will be Paid Seventy thousand Pounds, which is Twenty thousand
Pounds more than their whole Stock amounts to tho valued at 24 years Purchase.

But not to attend so long a Time as 31 Years for the Event of this Trial,
suppose only that when the first Seven thousand Pound comes to be Paid by the
Trustees, out of the said Rents, the rest of the Five thousand Persons whose
Houses are Insured and not Burnt, should prefer their Bill in Chancery, and
desire the Court that an Injunction may be Granted, that the Ground Rents may
not be Sold right out; but that they whose Houses are Burnt, may be Satisfied
out of the growing Rent, lest in some time they should be wholly left without
Remedy, and some be Paid all, and others none at all; which, if the Court
thinks fit to Grant, (as to me seems very Equal and Just) pray let us then see
how the Case will stand, in the Fire Office, which will undoubtedly be thus,

The whole Ground Rents being but 2100 l. per Annum, will not Answer the said
7000 l. in less than Three years and a half, and then if 7000 l. more be Burnt,
whilst the first is receiving, the Owners of the Houses Burnt must stay (I
cannot say how long) for the Second Payment. But the Third or Fourth Loss will
scarcely be Paid (for ought that I can foresee) in this Generation.

The Security given by the Undertakers in the Friendly Society, and settled in
the Hands of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and others, as Trustees,
amounts to the Value of 16000 l. in Land of Inheritance, Rent Charge of
Inheritance, and some few Houses; and they do likewise give their Personal
Security for all the Money deposited in their Hands to be Repaid after the
several Terms of Insurance Expire, which is Five Parts of Sir, of the whole
Money Paid down to the Insurers.

Now to prove that this Security is abundantly Sufficient to Answer any Loss
may probably happen, I argue thus.

Since the Beginning of September last, which was the Time they first Opened
their Office; Suppose there were but a Thousand Houses Insured in the Friendly
Society (tho there are some Hundreds more) which at Three hundred Pound a House
one with another, raises a Stock of Four thousand Five hundred Pounds, at
thirty Shillings for every 100 l. and if the Number increase at that Proportion
for Three years, the Stock will be Twenty seven thousand Pound, to Answer the
Loss of every single Fire; besides the Sixteen thousand Pound settled on the
Trustees.

Whereas the Fund in the Fire Office will not Answer above Five thousand Pound
for the Loss that shall happen in the whole Three years, which is most apparent
by the former Calculation; Now if this be truly stated, (as I firmly believe it
is,) I do not understand why you Assert so Positively, that their Security in
the Fire Office, is better than that of the Friendly Society.

And now having done with the Validity of the Securities given in each Office
let us (...) ready) make my Trial from what has been Matter of Fact, and
allowed in their Papers, and not by Dark, Foreign, and Unreasonable
Computations, things barely possible, but never (I hope God) likely to happen.

First, to Insure Three hundred Pound on a Brick House in the Fire Office for
Twenty one years, will cost Seven Pound Ten Shillings in ready Money, the hare
Interest of which comes to Nine Shillings per Annum.

And had you Insured Three hundred Pound on a Brick House in the Friendly
Society, for Fifteen years next after the Great Fire, the whole Charge to the
Loss by Fire, and the yearly Payment to the Insurers would have Cost but Six
Shillings per Annum, as by the following Computation (formerly inserted in
their Printed Proposals) will most plainly appear. Suppose then the City and
Liberries were Insured by the Friendly Society.

In London and the Liberties, in the said Fifteen years, there were Ninety
seven Houses Burnt; (the several Numbers and Streets are mentioned in their
Printed Papers to the City) but to avoid a Fraction in the Account, I suppose
them a Hundred; which at Threee hundred Pound a House, one with another, the
whole loss amounts in the Fifteen years to Thirty thousand Pound; and Divided
into Fifteen Parts, makes two thousand Pound Loss every year; to Answer which
Loss, suppose that in London and the Liberties, there were but Twenty thousand
Houses (but there are really Twenty four Thousand) and they all Secured at
Three hundred Pound a House, then must the Insured Pay to Discharge the Thirty
thousand Pound by Two thousand Pound per Annum, the Sum of Two Shillings per
Annum, and no more.

From whence you may observe what unreasonable Calculations you have made, in
Supposing a Loss will exceed Thirty Shillings for a Hundred Pound, when in that
Fifteen years, the real Losses did amount but to Eight Pence per Annum for a
Hundred Pound, which I hope will case you of the Fears, you have, that many
will leave the Society on that account.

But admitting the Loss of the said Fifteen years had amounted to Seventy five
Thousand Pound, instead of Thirty thousand Pound, it had yet kept within the
Interest of the Money paid in the Fire Office (viz.) Nine Shillings per Annum;
because if Two Shillings per Annum Paid for Thirty thousand Pound Loss, then
Five Shillings per Annum (which with the Four Shillings to the Office, makes
Nine Shillings per Annum, the Interest of the Money Paid to the Fire Office)
will Pay for Seventy five Thousand Pound Loss.

And whereas that you may object that the Friendly Society Insure but for Seven
years, and you for Twenty One, that makes no Difference in the Charge, because
in the Friendly Society a House of Three hundred Pound may be Insured for the
same Money (viz.) Four Shillings per Annum as long as you please; but in the
Fire Office, when the Twenty One years are expired, they must Pay Seven Pound
Ten Shillings more, and then instead of Four Shillings a year Paid to the
Friendly Society, the Interest of their Money will amount to Eighteen Shillings
per Annum and Fifteen Pounds besides out of the Purse to the Insurers own Use.

By this time (I hope) you are Convinced that the Fund in the Fire Office is
neither Greater, nor the Insurance Cheaper than in the Friendly Society, which
has been made plain to you, not barely by Guess and Imagination, but by Matter
of Fact.

There rests only, that I should clear some Things unjustly laid to the Charge
of the Insurers in the Friendly Society, (viz.) That the Sixteen Thousand Pound
Security in Land, is not Security for the Losses, but only for the Insolvent.
To which I answer, that (admit it were so) If the Solvent Pay for themselves,
and the Insurers Pay for the Insolvent: pray where is the Loss, or what is the
Inconveniency?

But I wonder in Reading the Settlements of the Friendly Society, you should
overlook the most Material Articles in it: where it is carefully Provided, That
if the Money Insured on any House, Burnt, Blown up, or Demolished, be not paid
by the Insurers within fifty days after the Rate is Set, the Trustees by
Mortgage, or sale of the Lands or Rents, are empowered to Pay the same.

And likewise (with some Complements to the present Insurers) you say they may
(as sometime the Parish Assessors) Rate those that are Solvent, something the
more, to Pay for those that are Insolvent: Whereas in another Article it is
provided, That the Rate shall be made by such Persons as the Trustees (who are
Members of the Society) shall (...) appoint; who will not (I suppose) over-tax
themselves for the Advantage of the Insurers. The like mistake (I fear a wilful
one) you make about losing the Money Deposited, and being Cashiered out of the
Society; as if there were no more to be done, in case they once omitted to Pay,
what became Due to the Insurers, but present Cashiering them.

It likewise is affirmed by you, That the Protfis of the Insurers in the
Friendly Society, are greater than in the Fire Office. I cannot Imagine how you
Compute it; For in the Paper directed to the City, they Estimate the Charge of
Executing their Office at a Thousand Pound per Annum; and it is plain that Two
thousand Houses Insured in the Friendly Society at Three hundred Pound a House,
brings in to the Insurers but Four Hundred Pound per Annum, notwithstanding the
Execution of their Office, must needs be more Chargeable than that of the Fire
Office in getting in their Money.

And to make your Letter all of a piece, you affirm, That the older the Fire
Office, the better; but the Friendly Society the worse, (whose contrary is
true) for any one that can count his fingers, must know that if 300 l. is to be
paid by the Society, it will be easier sure to have it paid by 1000 Persons
than by 500; and every 100 l. Insured adds 30 s. to their Fund, which (if
occasion requires) must be answered either by the Insured or the Insurers,
which may satisfy all concerned, that besides the great charge of their
Office, they have not their small Proemium of 16 d per Annum only for holding
Stakes.

You argue also, That when a Loss happens to the Friendly Society, it being
paid out of the Proemiums, lessens the Security, when any Man has paid 10 s.
or 15 s. Which is another Mistake, for the Security is the same after any
Payment, as it was before; but these things may serve to amuse, tho not to
convince any.

As for your Discoveries that a Thousand Hundred to One, makes One Hundred
Thousand to One, and that Four times Eight makes Two and thirty, with a great
deal more, I cannot tell to what purpose, I thank you for it; but I know not at
present what use to make of it, but will remember it if Occasion serve
hereafter.

But in the next Computation; you are very unmerciful in Seven years time to
Burn a Fourth part of the Houses Insured by them, destroy their little Town,
blow up their Office, and dissolve the Society.

But since it cannot be helped, but so you will have it, let me turn the Tables,
and see if a quarter of the Houses secured by the Fire Office, be Burnt in the
same time (for I believe the Fire will not be Partial) whether Matters would be
much mended.

The Fourth part of the Houses Insured in the Fire Office, are as you confess,
a Thousand; to Answer the Loss of which when Burnt, will require (by your own
Estimate of Four hundred Pounds a House,) Four hundred Thousand Pound, which
being taken out of Fifty thousand Pounds (the Fund so magnified by you) what
will remain to Answer the Losses of the Three thousand Houses by them Insured,
and not Burnt.

Having now made it appear, (by arguments raised from your Letter, and their
own Papers) That no less than Twenty hundred Thousand Pounds will be Charged on
the Fund of the Fire Office, when their 5000 Houses are Insured, and that no
payment can reasonably be expected from thence, but out of the growing Rent,
(there being no Bank settled to make other payment as is pretended,) And that
the Charge of Insuring in the Friendly Society, had not (though the Loss had
been more than Double in the 15 Years before mentioned) exceeded the Bare
Interest of the Money given to the Fire Office. And that it cannot be the
Interest of the Insurers in the Friendly Society to stop payment; but may be of
the Fire Office. I may now with great Reason resolve to Insure my Houses with
the Friendly Society; and the rather, because Sir Francis Pemberton, Sir
William Dolben, and Mr. Trinder, who Drew and Perused their Settlement, bedfie
a great Number of Eminent Lawyers and Persons of Honor and Quality, have
already made themselves Members of the said Society.

Sir, I am your Humble Servant H. S.

LONDON, Printed by William Horton, 1685. These Papers to be had Gratis, at the
Office in (...) Court over against S^. Dunstan's Church in Fl^^^ (...)


