Printed for H. Bonwick at the Red Lion in St. P. Chapter yard. I. Savage sculp.


A Practical DISCOURSE OF THE SIN against the Holy Ghost: Showing Plainly, I.
What it is. II. How any Person may certainly know, whether he has been Guilty
of it.


DESIGNED To bring Encouragement to the Faithful Penitent, Tranquillity of Mind
to the Obedient, Joys to them that Love; and the Returning Sinner from
Desperation.

Nihil ardet in Inferno nisi propria Voluntas.

S. Bernard. LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red-Lyon in
St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCV.

THE Author's DEDICATION AND PRAYER.
Blessed TRINITY,
FRom an Affectionate and willing Spirit, from a Heart desiring to please Thee,
and to be in all things right toward Thee; I humbly Dedicate this Discourse to
the Uses of thy Glory, Love, and Obedience; begging this only for my self, That
I may not Preach to others, and be my self a Castaway: For thy Faithful
People, begging Pardon and Peace, That they may be cleansed from all their
Sins, and serve Thee with a quiet Mind; through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen, Amen.
St. MATTHEW. xij. 31, 32. Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of Sin and
Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
shall not be forgiven unto men.

And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven
him: but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect I. THE Occasion of this Discourse. Sect. II. What the Sin, or Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost is. Sect. III. The Blasphemy of the Pharisees,
unpardonable no longer than wilfully and impenitently continued in. Sect. IV.
How any Person may assuredly know, whether he has been guilty of the Sin
against the Holy Ghost. Sect. V. The great Likelihood that the Christian Reader
has not yet been Guilty of this Sin. Sect. VI. The First Practical Inference,
or Instance of Application; from the Consideration of the Nature and Meaning of
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, viz. That it is Matter of Encouragement for the
faithful Penitent to go on cheerfully, but yet very sincerely in his
Repentance. Sect. VII. The Second Practical Inference, from the Consideration
of the Nature and Meaning of this Sin, viz. That it is just Matter of Reproof
and Terror to the Careless, and the Profane Person, that goes on any known
Sin and takes no Care to come in, and Return to God by Repentance; and to
labor for the Virtue that is contrary to his Sin, and live in it. Sect. VIII.
The Third Practical Inference, from the Consideration of the Nature and Meaning
of this Sin: It is Matter of Consolation to all Sincerely, Humble, Holy, Devout
and Obedient Persons, to encourage them to persevere and go on a little longer,
with a Holy Joy, and with a Religious Peace.
The CLOSE.
Sect IX. Two Things necessary to the Holding out in a Christian Course; which
you (Christian Reader) that are assured you have not yet committed the
unpardonable Sin, should by all Means presently resolve upon; which if you did,
you would be very safe and happy. Sect. X. Three Aspirations; or, Emotions of
the Soul, that being joyfully Apprehensive it has not Committed this Sin, is
desirous henceforward to please God in a Life of faithful Obedience, and
Penitential Love.
A Practical Discourse OF THE Sin against the Holy Ghost.
SECT. I. The Occasion of this Discourse.
BEfore I come to the more particular Enquiries, in showing what the Sin
against the Holy Ghost is, and the several Uses, which I would draw from the
Consideration of the Nature, and the Meaning of this Unpardonable Blasphemy,
and leave them upon the Affectionate Thoughts of those who have not yet quitted
all their future Hopes and Expectations; nor desire to do so: I will stop a
little to mention some of the Reasons, and charitable Designations and
Intentions of my Publishing a Discourse on this Subject.

I am persuaded (and perhaps I have observed) That there are some devout
Christians, who, for want of a Right and True Account, and a full Knowledge of
what this Sin is, have been discouraged from a Christian Course; or else have
gone on heavily in their Devotions and Obedience; and in accomplishing (with
Sincerity) those few Duties to God and Man, which our Ascended Savior was
pleased to leave us in Charge, when he went away; Fearing that They have been
Guilty of this Sin: And therefore that all that they do, or suffer, is to no
Purpose.

And, though they truly aim at Immortality; at a Blessed and Joyful Resurrection;
and at the Divine Glory, Love and Obedience; and from an affectionate and a
willing Spirit, and a Heart right toward God, Desire nothing so much as to
please him; and to be trained up, and fitted, and trimmed and disciplined for
an Admittance to a New World of Blessed Spirits; and to come away and spend a
Rapturous Eternity at the Feet of Jesus; yet all this while are afraid, they
may have committed this Sin.

And this cools their Love of God, Hinders the Liveliness and the Cheerfulness
of their Duties, and keeps them off from a Religious Peace; and from the
Prosecution of some Christian Actions, which they would otherwise cheerfully
Perform.

For their Sake therefore, in the first Place, and to invite them to persevere
with a Holy Constancy and Joy in the Commands of their Ascended Savior, I will
show plainly and truly what this Sin is.

A Second Sort of Men there are, That by the Prevalency and Power of a Strong
Temptation, have made some dismal Recessions from their Baptismal Innocence;
and are Sensible that they have fallen into a Sin, and have displeased their God.

But they would quickly and humbly return to their offended Father, with the
Penitent Prodigal, were they not afraid they had been guilty of the
Unpardonable Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost: And for this Reason they are
discouraged in their Repentances, and their Return to the Ways of God; or at
least go on very heavily in them; with no Joy or Cheerfulness, or holy Purposes
and Resolutions: Which they say, they would Quickly, and Thankfully and
Sincerely do, were they sure they had not been Guilty of this Sin. For their
sakes also, will I plainly show what it is.

A Third Sort I find there are, that have been very great Sinners; Have long
lived in a State of great Inconsideration, and Carelessness; Profaneness and
Neglect of the Soul and Immortality. And they conclude, That among so great a
Heap and Conjugation of Sins, which they have committed, it is ten to one, but
they have been guilty of this too: And therefore, That it is to no manner of
Purpose to return and seek a Reconciliation with their God; For their day (they
think) is over: And if they should return to the Ways of God, and choose
better; and live the Holy Life, which is much the easier, and the sweeter Life
of the two, yet they suppose all is in Vain; They have committed this Sin; and
the Door of Mercy is shut against them: And that now they had even as good let
all run against the Rocks, and let alone the Soul, and take no more Care about
it; But take their fill of Sensuality and Wickedness, and lie down in a State
of Inconsideration and Profaneness.

And for the Sake of these also, will I plainly, truly, and clearly show, what
this Sin is.

That so the one Sort may see infinite Cause to return to their offended Father
quickly: And though it be with Fear and Trembling, yet may do it also, with a
holy Hope, great Encouragements, and a Religious Cheerfulness too; provided, it
be with a Present, Universal, and Permanent Change.

And the other Sort, Namely, the Person of a sincere Probity and Sanctity of
Life, may go on in a Course of Faith and Devotion, Piety and Charity, Divine
Love and Obedience, with a Holy Joy and a Religious Peace.

SECT. II. What the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is.
THat I may make the present Discourse as Satisfactory as I can, to every
Reader; and as Useful as I can for the Designs and Purposes, and Needs and
Desires, of every Christian; That the Sinner may be encouraged and invited to
return to his God, and his own truest Interest, by a Speedy, a Sincere, and a
Persevering Repentance; and all may be encouraged, and endeared to go on
cheerfully in a Religious Course, in the Ways of Pleasantness, and the Paths of
Peace; ( Prove. 3.17.) I will plainly insist on these three Things:

I. First, Show what this Sin is. II. Secondly, Give a Rule how any Person may
assuredly know, whether he has been Guilty of it or not. III. Thirdly, Show the
very great Likelihood, that you (Christian Reader) have not yet been Guilty of
this Sin.
From all which three Particulars, I shall draw three Practical Inferences, or
Instances of Application.

1. Show, What this Sin is.
The Sin, or Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, was (as appears in this Chapter,
St. Matthew. 12.) the Sin of the Pharisees; and in short, 'twas this:

They Blasphemed the Holy Ghost, in affirming, That those Miracles which the
Holy Jesus wrought by the Power of the Holy Ghost, were done by the Power of
the Devil: And consequently denied him who did them, to be the Christ.

And the Heinousness of it consisted in This: By these Miracles which he
wrought (by the Power of the Holy Ghost) he designed to convince them that he
was the Messiah; And would by this Light, manifest to them plainly, that he
acted by the Power of the Holy Spirit of God: He charitably designed those very
Miracles which they reproachfully imputed to the Devil, to be a convincing
Testimony from God, that he must be the Messiah, the Christ, the Savior of the
World.

No; they would not be persuaded; would not come in to his Faith, and his Love,
and his Obedience, but would wilfully resist and oppose the Power of his
Doctrine, and his Miracles; The convincing Light of which, plainly and clearly
manifested, that he acted by the Power of God.

And rather than they would acknowledge them to be done by the Power of the
Holy Ghost, they affirmed, That he did them, by the Power of the Devil, v. 24.

Upon this, Christ to convince them, is pleased to tell them, That the Miracle
of Casting out Devils (which he had wrought just before) could not be done by
the Power of the Devil; For a Kingdom divided against its self could not stand,
v. 25. And therefore 'twas not likely that Satan should cast out Satan: And if
Satan could not, or would not cast out Satan, then surely it must be by the
Power of the Holy Spirit of God, that he cast out Devils, and wrought Miracles.

And if so, how could they choose, when they saw the Miracles that he did, but
be convinced that he acted by the Power of God? And consequently, how could
they Resist and Oppose, Deny and Disown him to be the Christ, the Messiah, the
Savior of the World.

'Twas all as one: They would not be convinced by the holy Doctrines which he
Taught, by the Miracles that he wrought, and Wonders that he did: And rather
than believe on him, and become Wise and Happy, they obstinately affirmed, That
what he did by the Finger of God, and the Power of the Holy Ghost, was done by
the Power of the accursed Spirits of Darkness.

Now, this was not only a Great Blasphemy indeed against the Holy Ghost; But,
'twas a wilful shutting their Eyes against the Light: Against the Light (I say
it again) of that Doctrine, and those Miracles, which were done on Purpose to
Convince them that he was the Christ; whom notwithstanding they Denied and
Disowned, Resisted and Opposed.

Upon this, Christ tells them, That if they continued in this Blasphemy, and
would obstinately go on, to impute those Miracles, to the Devil, which were
done by the Power of the Holy Ghost, and would not be Convinced and come in,
and Receive and Believe on the Lord of Glory, but deny and oppose him, and
maliciously and with a wilful Blindness, hold out against the visible Work of
God; That this must needs be to them that continue in it, unpardonable.

And well indeed might it be unpardonable, when the Apostle says, Act. 4.12.
There is none other Name under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.
That his Name and Person; His Revelation, and his Love; His Message, and his
Designs; His Doctrine, and his Miracles, should be Denied and Disowned, Opposed
and Rejected, and their Eyes obstinately shut against all the convincing
Arguments of his Doctrine and his Miracles, that he was the Savior of the
World.

But here may be one Material, and Important Question asked.

How comes it to pass, that it is said, in the Text, Whosoever speaks against
the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; But whosoever speaks against the
Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven: How comes it to pass that the Speaking
against Christ, should be more Pardonable, than the Speaking against the Holy
Ghost?

To this, I Answer.

To speak against the Son of Man, i. e. against Christ, only before he was
manifested to be the Messiah, by the holy Spirit of God, and the convincing
Miracles which he did: This might be a Sin of Ignorance, and therefore
Pardonable upon a general Repentance.

But to speak against the Holy Ghost, i. e. to resist the holy Spirit of God,
which manifestly appeared in the Miracles which Christ wrought on Purpose to
convince them, this could be no excusable Ignorance; but must be a willful
Blindness. Nay, to impute them to the Devil, on Purpose, because they would not
be convinced by them, to come in to Christ, and receive and own him: Surely,
such an Opposition and Resistance; such a contradicting and crossing his
gracious Ends, and merciful Designations to them, could be no other than an
obstinate, willful Blindness, and a shutting their Eyes against the Light: And
therefore (if continued in) could not but be Unpardonable.

And that is the Difference between speaking barely against the Son of Man,
before he was manifested to be so, by Miracles, and by the Power of the Holy
Ghost; and the Speaking against him, after he was manifested to be so, by
Miracles, and by the Power of the Holy Ghost.

The one (as I said) might be a pardonable Ignorance; But the other must be an
inexcusable willful Blindness.

SECT. III. The Blasphemy of the Pharisees, Unpardonable no longer than
wilfully and Impenitently continued in.
BUT now consider, Christian; neither was the Blasphemy of the Pharisees an
unpardonable Sin, any longer than 'twas wilfully and impenitently continued in.

This I prove from their very Case here, who were guilty of this Sin.

None could deny our Lord more, or oppose him more than his very Crucifiers:
yet even of them his very words are to God; Father, forgive them; That is, Deny
them not the means of Forgiveness, which is Repentance: and deny them not
Forgiveness, if they shall Return and Repent. And no doubt Christ was heard, in
all that he prayed for.

So that even they that at first resisted and opposed Christ, if afterward
they received and acknowledged him, by the convincing Considerations of his
Doctrine and his Miracles; and with a sincere and humble Conformity of Heart
and Life, to his Faith and Doctrine, laid hold on God's Mercy in Christ, even
to these, Pardon and Remission is not denied by the Gospel.

Something of an Example of this, we have in St. Peter, in that shameful, and
wretched, and dismal fall of his, in denying our Savior. Here was no
Ignorance; for he knew him, and owned him to be the Messiah, or the Christ.

But yet being prevailed upon by a sudden Fear; He denied him: and not only
denied the Lord that bought him, three Times, but swore him away too. St. Matt.
26.74.

Here was a disowning and denying of him indeed; and That too, after he had
been convinced, that he was the Messiah, by the Power and Influence of the Holy
Ghost; and had upon That, received him, and acknowledged him; and owned him: A
Denial of them therefore, against his own Light, Knowledge and Conviction.

And what, (you will say) was not this a Sin against the Holy Ghost?

To this I Answer:

Had he obstinately persisted in it; wilfully continued in it; and lived and
died in it; it had been the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

But in St. Peter's Case, there are always three Things very Considerable.

First, 'Twas by a sudden Fear, (a sudden Surprise of That Passion) that he
fell.

Secondly, The Quickness and Bitterness of his Repentance. His Master looked
about upon him, and He considered what he had done; and recalled himself, and
went out and wept Bitterly.

Thirdly, What was most considerable; The truth of his Repentance, appeared by
the Truth, and Perseverance of his Reformation: For, no Fears could afterward
any more prevail upon him; For he had the Courage to die for him, whom he had
before denied.

These were three Things that were infinitely Considerable; And here (Dear
Christian) give me leave to stop a little, to bring them home to your own Case,
even yours in particular.

Perhaps, with St. Peter, thou have fallen; and fallen too, Knowingly and
Wittingly; against Knowledge, Light and Conviction: If so, Consider what he
did, and go, do thou likewise; and, like him, do it Quickly, Sincerely and
Perseveringly, and you shall not fail of Mercy.

Perhaps a sudden Fear, or a sudden Passion, or a sudden Surprise has betrayed
thee to a Sin: Nay, perhaps 'thas not only been sudden, but deliberate; with
open Eyes, and a full Consent of the Will: However, do thou as he did: Return
to thy offended Savior with Penitential Sorrows; By Faith lay hold on God's
Mercies in him; Show him the Truth of thy Repentance, by the Sincerity of thy
Reformation; Crown (...) Perfect thy Repentance, by (...) to obtain the
Contrary Virtue, (...) Living in it: But withal, do it (...) as he did, and
persevere sincere^^ too; and doubt not of the Mercies of Eternity.

He did it Quickly; He did not stay till his Deathbed filled him with variety
of Distractions, Pains and Agonies, and unfitted him for it: He did not stay
till the worst of his days, those which lay upon his hands and were good for
Nothing: He did not keep those for God, which he knew not what to do with
himself; but He did it Quickly.

He did it Sincerely, next: As appeared by the Shower of Penitential Tears;
which could not have dropped so soon, had he not been in good Earnest with his
dearest Lord; and had they not proceeded from a heart swollen equally with
Grief and Love. And,

Last of all he did it Perseveringly; And in this Respect, go and do thou
likewise: Show him thy Love in the sincere Permanency of thy Reformation as he
did: who having thrice following, denied him, did in a little time after say to
him thrice following these Affectionate words (and made them good too) Lord,
thou know that I love thee, St. Joh. 21.15, 16, 17.

Have thou fallen? Why, oh why will thou for any Hopes or Expectations; Any Fears
or Desires, any Delights or Advantanges, continue a day longer in thy Sin?

Do but look yonder in a holy Meditation, to that Lovely Futurity which so many
wise Men have been content to live, and content to die for; and then see if you
can be the Person, that can think fit to venture so much for so little?

Look, in a quick and a piercing Thought, Look yonder, to what eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor the Heart of man conceived; and think then whether a
wise Man should be able to find it in his Heart, to venture all this for some
unsatisfactory and dishonorable Iniquity.

Once more do but raise your Meditations (Dear Christian) to the lovely Regions
of beatified Spirits; Regions which cost thy Savior an Agony and a Bloody
Sweat, a Crucifixion and Death it is self, to purchase you the Hopeful
Possibility of them; and then see in That Thought if you can always be content
they should cost you Nothing? Nothing of Penitential Sorrows; Nothing of the
Pains of Subduing a Temptation; Nothing of the Self-denial of being without the
Pleasures of a Sin; Nothing of the Diligence, and Watchfulness, and Care, of a
Reformed State?

Come then, O come, my Soul, say, Seeing our Case is yet Hopeful, at least not
Desperate, let us from this moment be content, that one short Life should cost
us as much as (...) to, till all be over and ended, (...) we are consigned to
our N^w, (...) unknown, and eternal State, and Condition.

SECT. IV. How any Person may assuredly know, whether he has been Guilty of the
Sin against the Holy Ghost.
HAving seen what the Sin against the Holy Ghost is; That is, what it was in
the Pharisees: I shall Presently show what it is, in them who have been
baptized, and have been Believers.

But before I come to That, I will stop a little; to show how any Person may
assuredly Judge, whether he have committed this Unpardonable Sin, or not.

Now, That no Man may mistake, or, be at a loss in This, and dwell in the
uncomfortable State of Irresolution and uncertainty, take This Rule:

It Is certain, no Man commits a Sin against the Holy Ghost, if he be afraid he
has, and desires he had not. And the Reason of it is this: Because such
Penitential Passions, Desires and Affections are against the very Definition,
or Nature of this Sin.

For, wherever these are found; These, Humble, Holy Fears to offend God, and
Desires to Please him; these Penitential Passions and Affections; There has not
yet and cannot have been, a Witting, a Willing, a Malicious and total
Apostasy, or falling off from the Faith of Christ, and the Gospel.

And yet such an Apostasy, or Falling off it is; such an Opposition and Denial
of our Savior it is, that makes it the Unpardonable Sin; to one that is, or has
been a Believer.

1. It must be Knowingly, and not of Ignorance. 2. It must be a Willing
Apostasy, or Denial; and not of Force, or Compulsion. 3. It must be Malicious;
and not of Infirmity. 4. It must be a total Falling of; and not some particular
Sin:
It must be all These to make up the full Measure of the Unpardonable Sin.

So that as I before said, all Penitential Passions and Affections; All your
Doubts and Fears lest you should have been guilty of it, and your Desires that
you had not; are against the very Nature of this Sin.

These Things (as I shall hereafter show) are infinite Encouragements to the
Poor, Humble, Faithful Penitent; to go on, earnestly, and cheerfully, and with
Great Resolutions in his Repentances; And in all his Faithful and Affectionate
Desires to fit himself for the Merits and Satisfaction of his Savior.

And with all, they are an infinite encouragement to the Devout, yet humble
Christian, to go on with a great joy, even in the midst of his Fears and
Tremblings; To persevere a little longer, (till his Day of Probation be once
over) in all the Parts and Instances, and Duties of a holy Life; In the
Conscientious Performance of These few Commands which our Ascended Savior was
pleased to leave us in Charge, when he went away.

Come then, (Dear Christian) Arise, and go on Quickly and Perseveringly in thy
Penitential Resolutions; and in thy Faithful Desires and Purposes, to cleanse
thy polluted Soul by the Waters of Repentance; and to fit it for the Healing
Blood of thy Savior.

Perhaps, Thou have fallen from thy Baptismal Innocence, by some Known Sin; and
with Grief and Love, you do easily remember some dismal Instances of
Ingratitude and Disobedience to your Master; But yet whilst you own there is
Salvation in none other; and can allow your self in no one Instance of that
Disobedience; but desire nothing more than to reconcile him to you, by the Ways
and Methods of his own Appointment: Why, Consider, though you have been a
Sinner, you have been no Apostate; you have neither fallen off from him, nor
disowned, or opposed the Faith of your Savior, and his holy Religion.

And till this be done; Till thou Knowingly, Willingly, Maliciously and Totally
fallest off from him, opposest and deniest him; thou have not filled up the
Full Measure of This Unpardonable Blasphemy.

How true, and how great an Encouragement this should be to the Quickness, the
Sincerity, and the Permanency of thy Repentance; and thy Return to him, and the
Peace and Ease, and Serenity, and Delicacies of a Holy Life, you will see
presently.

SECT. V. 3. The great Likelihood that you (Christian Reader) have not yet been
Guilty of this Sin.
BY the Trial of your Self (Dear Christian) by the foregoing Rule, you will be
able to make a Right Judgment of your State, in this Particular; and will find
great Likes that you have not yet drawn upon your Self the Guilt of the
Unpardonable Blasphemy.

And if not; what Infinite Encouragement have you, (even you in Particular,
whatever others intend to do) to go on, in a Cheerful Probity and Sanctity of
Life; a cheerful Love and Obedience to your dearest Master.

And what infinite Encouragement has the Sinner to become a Penitent? Provided
he do it Seasonably and Quickly; Sincerely and with Perseverance.

What infinite Encouragement has the Poor, Humble, Trembling, Doubting
Christian, to take cheerfully upon him henceforward the Easy Yoke, and Light
Burden of his Savior; In the Faithful Discharge of these few Commands and
Duties, to our God, our Selves, and Neighbors, which he was pleased to Leave
with us.

And for him who has sincerely begun for Heaven and Immortality; for a blessed
and a joyful Resurrection: How great an Encouragement is it to continue to be
all that is Holy, Just, and Good; a little longer, till his day be over; and he
be called to lay aside his Business here, and come away to a New, and a Better
World.

To think, and to be assured that you have not yet been guilty of the
Unpardonable Sin: But may yet, if you persevere (through the Merits of your
Savior) fill one of the vacant Seats of the fallen Angels.

That you, even you too, may yet, (if you persevere) be one of those Beatified
Spirits that shall pass away with him in a rapturous and a pleasurable Eternity.

That you, even you too, are not yet so far gone; but may, if you please,
(through the Divine Grace; always ready for those that beg, and those that use
it) be one of those Souls that may Cause joy in Heaven, by a quick and a
persevering; and a sincere Return to the Commands and Laws, the Faith and Love
of your Crucified Master.

For, do but give me Leave to Examine your Case, as to this Sin, a little
further.

Perhaps you have been a Sinner, in some dismal Degrees and Instances.

And this, even This, has been infinitely unkind and ungrateful; to have been
so, toward a Tender Father, and a Compassionate Redeemer: This, even This has
been dismal; to Affront and Abuse so much Goodness; and to hazard thy own
Future Hopes and Expectations, by any known Actual Sin; and much more by any
Habitual one.

But come Christian, Though this be sad and dismal, can you have a better
Encouragement quickly to Return, than This: That you have not been guilty of
the Unpardonable Sin.

Oh come, let this melt Thee into Love, and endear Thee to Obedience. Let This
melt Thee into Penitential Tears; Tears of Grief, as well as Tears of Love;
Tears of Hope, and Tears of Joy too, as well as Tears of Repentance; That this
Sin and Blasphemy is not chargeable upon Thee.

For, do but Examine,

Have thou Blasphemed the Holy Ghost in Saying ever, That the Miracles which
thy Savior did by the Power of the Holy Ghost, were done by the Devil? Did
thou ever make Use of This as an Argument against the Believing Jesus, and his
Gospel? Did thou ever Resist and Deny him, and his Holy Laws and Doctrines;
and make Use of This as an Argument to Resist and Deny him? No, This you cannot
charge upon your Self.

And if so; Then, as I said, you cannot choose, but with Tears of Hopes and
Joys, and Grief and Love, Return to him quickly by Repentance; and Persevere
and Hold on in a New and a Better Obedience; Seeing there is, upon These Terms,
Hopes for Thee, even Thee too.

To Examine a little further;

Have thou been guilty of an Utter Willful, and Spiteful rejecting of the
Gospel of Salvation, by the Holy Jesus?

Have thou been guilty of This, notwithstanding that in thy Conscience thou
were convinced, that Jesus is the Christ, and that Faith and Holiness, is the
Way to be Saved?

Have thou been guilty of an advised and absolute falling away from the
Profession of the Faith of Christ, so far, that against former Knowledge and
Conscience thou do maliciously Oppose and Blaspheme the Holy Spirit of God in
the Word, and in the Ordinances of the Gospel?

Have thou so far rejected, resisted, and utterly quenched all the Persuasions
and Motions of the Spirit of God, working formerly upon your Heart and
Affections, as, out of hatred to Christ, to Oppose and Deny and Disown him and
his Doctrines? Or so far, as thus to Crucify to your self afresh the Son of
God; and by disowning him, to put him to open Shame. (Heb. 6.6.) Treading under
foot the Son of God, and counting the Blood of the Covenant wherewith you were
sanctified, an unholy Thing; or Thus done despite to the Spirit of Grace?

Then indeed (had thou also totally and finally continued in this State, and
lived and died in it) had thou been Guilty of this Unpardonable Sin.

Which Sin (by the way) is also called the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and
becomes Unpardonable, because it is against the Office of the Holy Ghost; and
against the Gracious Operations of the Holy Spirit; whose Business and Office
it is to persuade us to receive Christ crucified, and the Faith and Doctrine of
the Gospel.

Well; Though thou have then been a Sinner, and unkindly Grieved the Holy
Spirit of Love; yet thou have been no Apostate: That is, Thou have yet been
Guilty of no Willing, Malicious, Total Falling off from Christ, and the Faith
and Doctrine of the Gospel, tendered to thee by the Holy Ghost, and against the
Light and Convictions of That Sacred Spirit; thou have not yet denied him, and
by a willful Blindness opposed him too.

If things are thus with Thee, (Sinner) as I verily believe they are; Come, be
so far Comforted, as cheerfully, but yet Quickly and Sincerely, to return to
thy offended God and Savior; and do not stay in the Confines of Desperation
any longer than you Dwell in your Sin.

Nay, for thy Consolation and Encouragement in thy Speedy Return to thy
offended Father, in the Faith and Name of Jesus, I have This further to add
concerning the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost;

That the Sin it self is only upon this Account Unpardonable, because it has a
finally Impenitent Temper joined with it: For otherwise were it possible that
such a Sinner, should Repent (by a Sincere and Persevering Repentance) there
would be no doubt of his Pardon.

Even the Blasphemer of the Holy Spirit himself, Repenting, Returning,
Believing, Laying hold on the Mercies of God in the Lord Jesus, and Coming in
to his Faith, and Love and Obedience, shall have Mercy.

Here stop a little (Dear Christian) and be persuaded to Consider the great
Cause you have to Resolve presently, and entirely to cast off the Sin that does
so easily beset you; and to choose Wiser and Better, and to Return to the Ways
of your Master, with Speed, and Care, and Consolation too: Do it Quickly, and
Sincerely, and I do assure you, your Case is not yet Desperate.

Oh that This Consideration might melt thee once more into Tears of Grief, and
Love and Joy too; Tears of Hope and Penitential Tears. And how can it choose
but do so; That there should be Balm in Gilead for thee, even Thee too: And
that for Thee, there should be a Physician there.

Let this make it an evil and a Bitter Thing to thee, as the Prophet speaks,
Jer. 2.19. That thou have forsaken the Lord.

Evil and Bitter let it appear to thee, That thou have held out in any Known
Sin, against so much Tenderness and Compassion, Love and Pity, Long-suffering
and Forbearance, which St. Paul says an Ingenuous Temper would have made
another use of, Romans 2.4.

Evil and Bitter let it appear to thee, That thou have held out in any Darling
Vice, so long, against so many Gracious Calls, and Invitations, and Wooings of
Thee to be Wise and Happy.

Evil and Bitter let it appear to thee, That thou have held out so long, and
taken little, or no Notice of the Dying Words of a crucified Master; but have
dis-regarded what he left thee in Charge when he went away.

Evil and Bitter, it must needs appear to thee, to have Held out so Long,
against the Calls and Invitations of Agonizing Love, Speaking to thee
meltingly, and Saying, If ye Love me, keep my Commandments.

Come (Dear Christian) after such a Thought as This, Try if thou can find it
in thy Heart to Return to Affront him again, as bad as ever, by any Known Sin.

Try if in this Thought, you can go on, and still find it in your Heart, to
Affront him as much as ever, by the voluntary Omission of any Known necessary
Duty.

And then presently in a Holy Meditation look up to him, with Reverential Love,
where he is now Preparing a Place for you, (if you will) and say to him, with
an affectionate Humility,

Blessed Jesu! Long have thou staid for me, and not given me up to a Reprobate
Spirit; but thou shall stay no longer: Thou have long looked for me, and not
given me up to a Spirit of Desperation; but thou shall look for me no longer.

I can hold out no longer, I will hold out no longer, against so much Love and
Mercy; So much Patience and Forbearance; So much Long-suffering and Goodness.

I will, I can hold out no longer: Let the Sin promise what it will, I will
Hold out no longer against thee.

Let the Duty cost what it will, I can hold out no longer against the endearing
Calls and Entreaties of Bleeding, Groaning, Agonizing, Dying Love. No, I cannot.

But seeing I have this Comfort, that I have not Blasphemed thy Spirit, or
denied Thee; and have so great Cause to Hope, That I have not Committed the
Unpardonable Sin; I am infinitely encouraged to come, and to come joyfully to
do Thy Will: And I will come Quickly, for I know the Night comes, when none can
work.

SECT. VI. The first Practical Inference, or Instance of Application; from the
Consideration of the Nature and Meaning of the Sin against the Holy Ghost: Viz.
That it is Matter of great Encouragement for the Faithful Penitent to go on very
Comfortably, but yet very Sincerely in his Repentances.
HAving thus finished my Three first Heads of Discourse, and shown plainly what
this Sin is, and How we may assuredly know whether we have committed it or not;
and shown withal the great Likelihood That no Christian Reader has: I now come
to a few Inferences, or Uses.

Inferences which I would leave not only upon the Understandings, but upon the
Memory; And not only upon the Memory, but upon the Heart and Affections, the
Life and Actions of Every Reader.

That the Great Sinner may not Despair of the Divine Mercy.

That the faithful Penitent may be encouraged to go on, and with Comfort
perfect his Repentances.

That no Man may Presume to continue in any Known Sin: And, That the Poor,
Humble, Doubting, but Devout Christian, may be encouraged to go on, with a Holy
Joy, in a Life of Faith and Devotion; Piety and Charity; Watchfulness and Care;
Probity and Sanctity; Self-denial and Purity; Love and Obedience; a little
longer, till his short Day be over, and all be well with him, and he finds
himself admitted ot the New Glories of a better World.

1. Practical Inference,

From the Consideration of what has been said of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost; Here first Results Matter of Encouragement for the Faithful Penitent to
go on very Comfortably, but yet very Sincerely too in his Repentances.

Thou have fallen, perhaps, from thy Baptismal Innocence, and Affronted and
Disobeyed a Tender Father; ungratefully and unkindly abused all the Endearments
of a Compassionate Redeemer, who was pleased to Die for you before you knew you
needed him; and have grieved the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were sealed to
the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30.

That you have done This, may be a sad and a dismal Truth.

But perhaps too, you are extremely Sensible that you have chosen amiss, and
Resolve to return and to choose Better and Wiser; and with the Prodigal, (St.
Luke 13.) to arise and go to your Father, and say, Father, I have sinned
against Heaven, and before Thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son,
make me as one of thy Servants.

It may be, you find it to be a great Truth, what the Wise King tells you, (
Prove. 3.17.) That the ways of Religious Wisdom, are ways of Pleasantness, and
all her Paths are Peace: And it may be too, you have sound what the Prophet
says, to be as great a Truth.

A Truth; Isai. 57. last. There is no Peace to the Wicked. And finding all this
to be true, by your own Experience; you have been often thinking, and are now
Resolved to return to the Ways of God, and a virtuous Course; and to be Wise
and Happy.

Why, if this be so Speedy and Sincere, and Persevering, as that you find your
self to be in Good earnest with God and your Soul; here is then Matter of
infinite Encouragement, for you to go on, with a holy Joy, and a very Great
Cheerfulness, That your Labor is not like to be in vain, in as much as the
Unpardonable Sin has yet been none of yours.

The Arms of your Savior, that were once stretched out upon the Cross, to the
very Posture of Embracing, are open to receive you too, even you: Only be sure
of This, That your Return and your Change be Present, Permanent and Universal.
And then the very Blasphemer himself is not excepted: He also, if he thus go,
may cause Joy in Heaven among the Beatified Spirits of the Upper World.

You, even you in particular, (Dear Christian) that but lately were afraid you
had committed the Unpardonable Sin, may Cause Joy too among the Blessed
Inhabitants of these Lovely Regions.

And if you may, oh how should This Thought encourage, melt, and endear, your
panting, sighing, languishing Heart, into entire Resolutions of Doing so!

And indeed tell me truly, Christian; Is it not infinitely better to Cause Joy
in Heaven, among the Beatified Spirits of the upper Lovely Regions, than Joy
only to the Accursed Spirits of Darkness?

Methinks, to a Wise Man, it should be infinitely more desirable and chusable
to have a good Report of him among the Beautiful Inhabitants of the Upper
World, than only among a few wicked, and mistaken People Here.

Methinks, it should be much more chusable to Cause Joy to him you have
Grieved; (even the Holy Spirit of God,) than to Cause Joy to him, who only
Rejoices, in Hopes of your being made a Partner with him, in the Sorrows of
Eternity.

And if you will presently resolve to be so Wise and Happy, (for if you will,
you may; and these Blessed Spirits desire it, and look for it) as to Cause Joy
among these Blessed and sweet, and lovely, and glorious Inhabitants, the Joy
will be your own: The Peace and Joy will be your own, first and last too: Yours
here, and yours Hereafter.

You Will find a present Joy and Peace in the Change, far beyond whatever you
found in the Ways of Wickedness, and in the Paths of Unrighteousness.

You Will find, upon the Change, a far Greater Pleasantness, and Ease and
Satisfaction in a Religious Course, than ever you could find in a Debauched, an
Irregular and a Profane Life: Infinitely more Substantial, and lasting
Tranquillity and Sedateness, and Serenity of Mind, more lightsomness and
cheerfulness of Heart in the one, than ever you did in the other: And besides
your own Joys and Peace on Earth, you will cause Joy among those Kind and Good
and Blessed Spirits, to whom you Hope to be admitted; and with whom you Hope to
pass away a Rapturous, and a pleasurable Eternity.

And if you may cause these Joys to your self and them, tell me (Dear
Christian) why will you not? why should not you, be earnest to do so;
Considering the very Comfortable Hopes you have, that the Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, has been none of your Sin?

And methinks, Christian, if you would but rationally compare and weigh things,
and see them as they truly are; all the little uneasy Joys, and vain Delights
of a Sinful Course of any sort, should appear very inconsiderable, compared
with the Joys, Present and Future, which you would bring to your self, (as well
as to the upper Lovely Spirits) by your Reformation.

For, if there be no Peace to the wicked, no true Joy; and if there be Joy in
Heaven at the Conversion of a Sinner, and Joy to himself too, on Earth; Joys
above, and Joys below; some Joys in Hand, and some in Reversion; some Present,
and some Future; can there be a greater Madness, than to deny your Self these
True Joys, for any Iniquity whatever; in which there can be neither Peace, nor
Joy; no long Peace, or lasting Joy?

Why will you any longer permit your Self to be thus cheated and abused by the
World, or the Devil, or your own corrupt Affections, that would lead you to a
Sin, and then fain persuade you there is more Peace and Joy in it, than in a
Life of Purity and Virtue, Probity and Sanctity, when all this is False?

And we are assured it is False, both from the Voice of Scripture, and the
Information of Experience. There is no Peace to the Wicked; but the Ways of
Virtue are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace: So says the
Language of the Scripture.

And the Voice of Experience, that says the same. No Peace; Nothing but Stings
and Gnawings; Shame and Dishonor; Lashings and Rendings; Inward Frettings and
Uneasiness; Discomposures and Disorders; Heart-akings and Heaviness of Soul;
Fearfulness and Dissatisfactions of Mind; Unquiet Days, and Restless Nights,
attend a Sinful Course.

And, for the Truth of all This, I dare venture to appeal to the Sinner's own
Experience.

And is This That which you like better than your own Inward Peace? Is This
That which you like better, than you do to Cause Joy in Heaven (by your
Conversion from Sin to God) and to Recover your own Peace and Joy again here;
and to make way for the extatick Joys of Futurity?

Come now (Christian) upon a View of both, take which of the two you please.
Either the Stings and Gnawings; The Shame and the Dishonor; The Lashings and
the Rendings; The Inward Frettings and Uneasiness; The Discomposures and
Disorders; The Heart-Akings, and Heaviness of Soul; The Fearfulness and
Dissatisfactions of Mind; The Unquiet Days, and Restless Nights, of an
Irreligious, a Careless and a Profane Course: Or, do This: Cause Joy in
Heaven, as well as Joy and Peace to your Self, by a Speedy Conversion from such
an Uneasy Course, to the Love and Obedience of your Savior, and the Ways of
Holiness.

And blessed be God, That the Choice is yet put to you; and That you have not
yet drawn upon your self the Guilt of the Unpardonable Blasphemy.

It Is true, indeed, you may if you please (Christian) Call the Stings and
Gnawings; the Shame and the Dishonours; The Fearfulness and Dissatisfactions of
Mind; The Fretting and Uneasiness of a Sinful Course; you may Call them Joys:
But yet, oh that the Inconsiderate Sinner would but try the Difference.

The Difference (I mean) between the No-Peace of a Wicked and a Profane
Course; and the unknown Peace and Delicacies of a Virtuous one.

All the Wisest, and all the Best, and all the Discreetest Men of the World,
that could see furthest into These Things, have done so: and they have quickly
been convinced of the Truth of them.

And why will not you be That Happy Person (Christian)? What should hinder you
from being Wise for your Self, and Wise for your Eternity? Wise for your
Truest, and your Best Interest?

Or, If you will not have me ask you the Question, yet do This: Ask your self
the Question, in your next Retirements, when you are alone, and withdrawn from
the World.

Why, my Soul, (say) Why shall not I be That Happy Person, That shall Cause Joy
in Heaven, and Joy to my Self; Joy Above, and Joy Below; Joys Present, and
Future Joys, by my speedy Conversion from Sin to God, from my bosom, darling
Sin? (My Sin --) Especially considering the Hopes we have, of being yet
Successful, if we are Speedy, Sincere, and Persevering.

The Unpardonable Blasphemy has been none of our Sin; Oh come, then let us
presently Arise and go to our Father; and return Quickly with the Prodigal.

And then for the little Time that we have yet left for Eternity, we'll Labor
Cheerfully to continue in our Father's House, and Favor, by the few Rules of
Probity and Sanctity, which our Ascended Savior was pleased to leave with us,
when he went away.

Till our short Day be ended, and the Curtain be drawn, and we give way to the
next Age, and we be securely put away to Rest; and then our Work is over.

SECT. VII. The Second Practical Inference, or Instance of Application, from
the Consideration of the Nature and the Meaning of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, is This: It brings Matter of Reproof and Terror to the Careless and the
Profane Person that goes on in any known Sin; and takes no Care to Come in,
and Return to God By Repentance; and to Labor for the Contrary Virtue, and
Live in it.
FRom what has been said of the Sin against the Holy Ghost; it appears very
likely (Christian) that thou have not been Guilty of that Unpardonable
Blasphemy.

Thou have not with the Pharisees Blasphemed him, in affirming, That the
Miracles which thy Savior wrought by the Power of the Holy Ghost, were done by
the Devil; Nor have thou made use of this as an Argument to deny him to be the
Christ.

Thou have not yet been Guilty of a Known, Malicious, and Total Falling off
from, and Denying the Faith of Christ, and the Doctrine of the Gospel.

Thou have not yet been Guilty of an Utter, Willful, Spiteful rejecting of the
Faith and Doctrine of Christianity; notwithstanding that thou were convinced,
that Jesus is the Christ.

Thou can not Charge these Things upon thy Self; and therefore there is
Reason to believe thou have not committed the Unpardonable Sin.

So far, indeed, thy Case is Hopeful.

But alas! Perhaps all this while, thou live in some known, willful Sin: Thou
continuest impenitently in some one such Guilt; take no Care to get out of
it, to Return to thy God by Repentance, and Reformation, and to obtain the
Contrary Virtue, and Live in it.

If this be thy Case, last mentioned, what does it signify, That thou have not
been Guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost? For our Savior tells us, Except
ye Repent, ye shall all likewise Perish.

Thou have not been Guilty, (very probably) of the Unpardonable Blasphemy: But
alas! that other known, willful Sin continued in, is (so long as it is continued
in) the Unpardonable Sin.

And let This be Matter of Terror and Reproof, and just Cause of Trembling to
the Careless, and the Impenitent, and the Habitual Sinner.

Suppose thou have not been Guilty of the Unpardonable Blasphemy: Ay, but what
if thy Lord come and find any other Known Iniquity; (thy darling Bosom Vice
especially) unreform'd, unrepented of, unmortify'd, continued in, by Thee?

Can thou expect then to be found in his Favor?

If thou art found out of the Covenant of Grace, that is, continuing in some
Known Disobedience to him impenitently; thou have then Reason, (so long as you
so continue) to expect as little Mercy as if thou had committed the
Unpardonable Sin. And how should this Consideration, drive thee to a Quick and
a Persevering Repentance of that Known Sin, be it what it will.

And if, as St. Paul says, the Forbearance and Goodness of God should lead thee
to Repentance; How should these Terrors of the Lord, as the same Apostle calls
them, persuade Thee and prevail upon Thee to run to it; and to choose wiser and
better; and to do it quickly; Lest thy Lord come, and find thee, (though not a
Blasphemer of the Holy Ghost, yet) out of his Way, and his Obedience; Going on
in some deliberate, habitual Sin.

Should he Thus come and find Thee; come either by Death or Judgment, and find
thee out of his Covenant of Grace, and Consign thee to the Sorrows of Eternity;
what shall it avail thee to say, thou have not been Guilty of the Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost?

For, could That have done any More, or done any worse than This? Than to
exclude thee from the Favor of thy God; the Lovely Mansions of the Upper
World; and Bind thee over to eternal Infelicities?

Let this therefore be a just Reproof and Terror to all that continue in any
one Known willful Sin: Though they have not been Guilty of the Unpardonable
Blasphemy.

For if they will make any other Falls, any other Sins, Unpardonable to
themselves by Impenitently continuing in them, and going on in them, with open
Eyes, and a full Consent of the Will, it can avail them but little, to say,
they have not committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

And let it prevail with you, (Christian) even you in particular, to Turn from
Sin to God; to cast off your former Evils, and instead thereof, constantly to
set about all those Christian Duties, which our Lord was pleased to leave you
in Charge when he went away. And more particularly, to Throw off that Iniquity
of yours to which you have most indulged, and by which you have most frequently
fallen; And to labor to obtain the Contrary Virtue, and Live in it.

For let me most seriously and affectionately ask you, as I would a rational
Expecter of a Blessed Resurrection; You say, you have not been Guilty of the
Sin and Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; and it is like you have not: Well; and
will you (Christian) make any other Known Sin or Fall Unpardonable to you, by
your impenitently going on and continuing in it? Is it not infinite Imprudence,
and infinite Pity you should delay your Return to God, one Day, when your
Condition might be so Hopeful? Or, that you should make your Sin, become the
Unpardoned Sin; by your Impenitent Living and Dying in it; By your being found
in it, at the Hour of Death, and the Resurrection?

For, do but Consider again: The Covenant of Grace is not only a Covenant of
Faith, but of Repentance and Obedience too. And that it is so, is not only the
plain Language of the Scripture; but even of Common Reason, that it should be
so.

For, what think you, (Christian) Can the Murderers of Fathers, and the
Murderers of Mothers, as the Apostle speaks; Can the Profane, and the
Impenitent, the Atheistical, and Debauched Person, expect to be put away to the
Society of the Humble, Holy, Mortified and Devout Souls of all Ages?

Can the Unjust Person (impenitently so continuing,) expect to be put away to
Just Zachaeus, and to the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect? Is it likely he
should be qualified to pass away with them a pleasurable Eternity?

Can the Profane Swearer, so Living and Dying, expect to have his Tongue tuned
in an Instant, to the different Notes of Hymns, and Hallelujahs, and Hosanna's,
to him that sits on the Throne, and the Lamb for ever and ever?

Can the Impure Adulterer (till the polluted Temple of the Holy Ghost be
cleansed by the bitter Waters of Repentance) expect to be put away to the Chaste
and Holy Virgin Mother, and to the Chaste Souls of all Ages? Or is it likely he
should otherwise be qualified, to pass away with them, a Lovely Immortality?

Can the Uncharitable, the Bitter, and the Implacable Person, so continuing,
expect to be put away to, and be qualified to spend a Rapturous Eternity, with
Charitable St. Stephen?

Can the Intemperate Person, The Drunkard and the Glutton, expect to be lodged
for ever with the Abstemious and the Temperate? and be like to be fitted, to
pass away an Immortality with them?

Can the Unmortified, the Contentious and the Unpeaceful, expect to be put away
to the Prince of Peace; to the Meek Moses and the Meeker Jesus?

Can the Wretched Non-Communicant expect the same Lot and Portion, with the
Frequent and the Devout Communicant; and be like to be qualified to pass away a
Rapturous Eternity with them?

Can they who will have such an easy Religion as shall Cost them Nothing,
expect to be put away to those Devout Worthies, who for the Divine Obedience
and Love, were content to be Destitute, Afflicted, Tormented; not accepting a
Deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection?

Can the Impenitent Person, that takes No Care to show the Truth of his
Repentance, by his Reformation, expect to be admitted to Penitent St. Peter;
and with him, to pass away a pleasurable Eternity?

Say, Christian, are these Things probable, or likely, even to Common Reason;
Though there were no such Thing, as Scripture, and Divine Revelation?

No, surely.

Come then, take this Second Inference home to thy Self; Enter into a close and
strict Meditation; Show it to thy Peculiar Sin, any Iniquity continued in; and
then See how it Appears to Thee.

I Will mention a Few: And among them, do you bring in your own; and see How that
appears to You.

You, my Horrid Oaths and Imprecations, Why shall I venture the Wrath of my
God, and the Loss of an Immortality for you? Why, the Sin against the Holy
Ghost could have done but This: Why then shall I continue in you; which if I
Impenitently do, you will do as much as That?

You, my Injustices; by which I make no Scruple to defraud my Brother; and when
I know that I have done so, Refuse to make Restitution: You my Lusts and
Impurities, by which I have defiled the Temple of the Holy Ghost: You, my
Uncharitablenesses, my Bitterness and Implacableness of Spirit: You, my any
other known Sin, whether of Omission or Commission; Why shall I venture the
Wrath of my God, and the loss of an Immortality for you? Why, the Sin against
the Holy Ghost could have done but This: Why then shall I continue in you;
which if I Impenitently do, you will do as much as That.

See now in this Meditation how thy Peculiar, thy darling Sin and Vice, appears
to thee. If it appear Amiable, and Lovely, and Safe, and Desirable, you may
then even return to it again, upon the next Temptation.

But if it appear evil and bitter, Infinitely Unsafe and Dangerous, get
Instantly out of it; and That whatever Self-denial, or Mortification, or Loss,
or Disadvantage, or Shame, or Reproach, or Care, or Diligence, or Watchfulness
it cost thee.

For what Good can it do Thee, if thou should be consigned to the Sorrows of
Eternity, to remember that thou did not Perish by the Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, but by some other Sin, from which Thou would not be persuaded to
be divorced.

Come then (Christian) Cast off the darling Sin as thou would a Coal of Fire
out of thy Bosom: Let not a Sting so Evil and Bitter, so Unsafe and Dangerous;
so Treacherous and Betraying, be imprudently entertained and cherished a Day
longer. And seeing the Night comes in which none can work, and comes apace,
comes quickly; Remember This: There can be no such Wisdom as to make a few
Minutes or Days more, minister to the Safeties of a Blessed Eternity; And there
can be no such Folly in the World as the venturing so much as Eternity, for so
little as the small Pleasures or Advantages of Sin for a Season.

SECT. VIII. The third Practical Inference from the Consideration of the Nature
and Meaning of the Sin against the Holy Ghost. It Brings Matter of Comfort to
all Sincerely Humble, Holy, Devout and Obedient Persons; to Encourage them to
Persevere and go on, a Little longer, with a holy Joy, and with a Religious
Peace.
DEar Christian, The Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, was a Sin which you have
sometime been afraid you had committed: You knew not what it was; and therefore
could not tell, but that you might sometime or other have been guilty of it.

And This (perhaps) has filled you full of Doubts, and Fears, and Tremblings;
and has checked and hindered you from going on cheerfully in your Christian
Course: or at least has made you go on heavily in it, without Comfort, and Holy
and Vigorous Resolutions.

But now let the Sincerely Obedient Person, and the devout Lover of Jesus, be
Comforted: For seeing there is so very great Likes, nay, so great a Certainty
that he has not been Guilty of this Sin; what infinite Encouragement has he to
go on Cheerfully in the Faith, and Love, and Obedience of his Master? And in
the sincere Performance of all Known Duties to God and Man: To be steadfast and
unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, for as much as he knows,
that his Labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 13.

Had your labor been like to have been in vain; (by your having committed This
Sin) you would have had but little encouragement, to have endeavored to lay up
any Treasure in Heaven.

Had it been like to have been in vain, you could have had no Encouragement to
take any Care of your Soul for the short Remaining part of your Life. With how
little Comfort could you have gone on, in any of your Holy Purposes of an
Early, Cheerful, Sincere, Universal and Constant Obedience to your Savior; in
bearing his Easy Yoke and Light Burden, till your Day were ended, and your
Race over?

Had it been like to have been in vain; with how little Consolation and
Encouragement could you have been Content to bear any Thing, Do any Thing,
Suffer any Thing, Lay up any Thing, for a joyful Resurrection; for your safe
Landing to a Lovely Eternity, and for the Divine Favor; which had been
unattainable?

For, who would take any Pains or Cares; Use any Diligence, or Watchfulness;
Deny himself any Thing; Bear any part of the Cross; Resist any Temptations;
Bear any Reproaches; Lose any Advantages; where all were like to be
unsuccessful, and to no Purpose?

Perhaps Christian, as I said, This has been your Case: You have had these
Doubts and Fears, because you were not sure but you might have committed this
Blasphemy: And though you have always Feared to offend your great Master; Desired
to please him; Kept close to him in the Faith and Love and Obedience of the
Gospel; (and where you have failed of Perfection, and have fallen a Little, have
quickly returned to him by Repentance and Reformation, and a new and better
Obedience;) yet all this while, perhaps, you have been afraid that all this has
been in vain; Fearing lest you might have been Guilty of the Unpardonable Sin.

But now consider (dear Christian) once more; can you choose but go on with
Comfort and Encouragement, in all that is Holy, Just and Good? Seeing your
Labor is so far from being like to be in vain; and this has been none of your
Sin. Can you now find it in your Heart to lay down any part of the easy Yoke
and Light Burden of your Dearest Lord; who said, If ye Love me, Bear it?

Is it not an infinite Encouragement, to your Alms and Devotions; your
Self-denial and Mortification; your frequent Communicatings, and Penitential
Offices; All that you can do, and all that you can suffer for the Faith and
Love and Obedience of the Holy Jesus; that you are satisfied, that if you go
on, and hold out but a Little longer, none of them will be in vain?

Oh! who would give out, and Fall back from any known Duty, or Shrink from the
Yoke of Jesus, whatever it cost him to bear it a Little longer, when he has
such an Assurance of his Freedom from the Guilt of this Unpardonable Sin; and
that if he do but persevere a little, all will be well with him to Eternity?

And, Say Christian; (whatever others intend to do) are not you he, that are
Infinite willing all Things should be well with you to Eternity?

Are not you he, (let others do what they please) that are infinitely willing
to fill one of the vacant Seats of the fallen Angels; And, when the Crowns and
Palms of Eternity come to be disposed of, to have one of them bestown upon you,
even you in Particular, for all Futurity.

Are not you he, That are infinitely Willing to be in a Little Time placed
above the Reach of Hopes and Fears; Sin and Misery; Enemies and Temptations;
Doubts and Scruples; Poverty and Want; Sickness and Death; and every Thing that
we call uneasy here? And in that State to pass away a Pleasurable Eternity, a
Rapturous Eternity, with the Beatify'd Spirits of an Upper, New, a Better, and
a Lovely World? Yes, you are; I Know you are.

Well then, Seeing it is so likely that your Short Labor will not be
unsuccessful and in vain; and that you have not derived upon your self the
Unpardonable Blasphemy; what should now hinder you from Persevering cheerfully,
and resolvedly a Little longer, till all be finished, and over, and ended, in a
Holy Life, and a Happy Death?

The Just Man will not find it to have been in vain, that he has been so, when
he finds himself admitted to Just Zachaeus, and to the Spirits of Just Men made
Perfect; and shall be consigned to pass away with them, a Lovely Immortality.

The Charitable and the Forgiving Person will not find it to have been in vain,
that he has been so, for one short Life, when he finds himself admitted to
charitable St. Stephen, and shall be sentenced to pass away with him a joyous
Perpetuity.

The Meek and Peaceful Person will not find it to have been in vain, that he
has been so, for one short Life, when he finds himself admitted to the Meek
Moses, and the Meeker Jesus, the Prince of Peace; and shall be secured to pass
away with them, a Pleasurable Eternity.

The Pure and the Chaste Soul, will not find it to have been in vain, that he
has been so, for the short Hour of this Life, when he finds himself admitted to
Chaste Joseph, to the Chaste and Holy Virgin Mother, and the Prince of all chaste
Souls, the holy Jesus; and shall be consigned to pass away with them, a
rapturous Immortality.

The Devout and Faithful Penitent will not find it to have been in vain that he
has been such, for one short Life here, when he finds himself Admitted to
Penitent St. Peter, and shall be Sentenced to be with him, for ever; And with
him to Sing Hallelujahs to him that Sits on the Throne, and the Lamb, for ever
and ever.

SECT. IX. The CLOSE. Two Things necessary to the Holding out in a Christian
Course; which you (Christian Reader) that are now assured you have not
committed the Unpardonable Sin, should by all Means Presently resolve upon:
which if you did, you would be very Safe and Happy.
AND now, why will not you, Christian, above all Things, labor to be one of
these Happy Persons? Especially seeing there is so great a Probability, that
your Labor will not be in vain.

Come then (Dear Christian) whenever a Sin, or a Strong Temptation shall
present it self to you, for the Future, (seeing you have not yet been guilty of
the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost:) Or whenever you shall find your self
tempted, and willing to omit a necessary Duty, Do these two Things.

1. Whenever a Sin shall present it self; Resolve never to venture so much for
so Little: Seeing your Condition is yet so Hopeful. 2. Whenever you are tempted
to omit a Duty, because 'twill cost you something; Resolve to venture something
here, that you may win something in the other World.
Blessed Jesu! Fix these two Things upon the Hearts, the Affections, and the
Resolutions, of every one that says he Loves Thee.

First, Whenever a Sin shall present it self, Resolve never to venture so much
for so Little.

Never to venture the Loss of the Favor of God; The sweet Illapses of his
Love; The Religious Joys, and the Unknown Peace of a Good Conscience; The
Sweets and Delicacies of a Devout Life; All your Future Hopes and Expectations
beyond the Grave; All these Things which so many Wise Men have lived and died
for; never to venture all This for the vain Delights, or the vain Advantages of
Sin, for a Season.

But beat off the Temptation by Considering that you venture all This, and more
than This, by a Compliance. And if you would be but content to hold out against
it, a little; it is not long till your Day would be over; and your Combat would
be ended, and you would be put away to the Joys of Peace and Victory.

That Is the First of the two Things, which I would leave upon the Affections of
him that says he Loves; till he expires into the Element of Love; and be
ordered there to Live and Love and Reign for ever.

Secondly, The other Thing, that would now incline and help you to hold out a
Little longer, in a Life of Faith, and Love, and Sanctity, is This: Whenever
you are Tempted to Omit a Duty, because 'twill cost you something; Then resolve
to venture something here, that you may win something in the other World.

Come (my Soul) say with a generous and a Christian Resolution, and with an
Heroic Bravery of Mind, Let others do what they Please, I am resolved to
venture some Pains, and Cares, and Difficulties and Self-denials; And some
Watchfulness and Diligence, some Labors and Mortifications, some Scorns and
Reproaches, some Losses and Disadvantages, (now, seeing my Condition is so
Hopeful) for these Hopes and Expectations of Futurity, which so many Wise, and
Good Men have lived, and died for.

Tell him whom thy Soul Loves, That you think it all Reason in the World, That
That which cost him an Agony, and a Bloody Sweat, Wounds and Stripes, and a
Crucifixion and Death it self; should cost you one short Life of Probity and
Sanctity; Purity and Devotion; Faith and Repentance; Zeal and Love; and a great
Obedience.

Look up to him, in a Holy Meditation, and tell him with a Humble Love, That
you think, the Rewards of Heaven are so Great and Glorious; and his Yoke so
Easy, His Burden so Light, and withal, will be so short too, that you think
it a great Shame, to expect so great Glories, at a lower and a cheaper Rate
than a holy Life.

Tell him Affectionately and Humbly too, That if a Life Eternal be not worth
this, it is worth Nothing.

SECT. X. Three Aspirations; Or Emotions of the Soul, that being joyfully
Apprehensive it has not committed this Sin, is desirous henceforward to Please
God in a Life of Faithful Obedience and Penitential Love.
ASPIRATION I.
O Thou, whom my Soul Loves!
WHat should I have done, if thy Mercies had not been Infinite? And what should
I do, if my Savior's Merits were not Infinite? What should I do, if thou did
not pity and Love poor Penitents; And if you were not Gracious and Merciful,
slow to Anger, and of Great Kindness.

O my Love, What should I do, if my Mediator, my Advocate, my Intercessor, were
not, (in a merciful Sense) thy Self and Me? Partaker, I mean, both of Thy
Nature, and my Nature; God and Man? What should I have done, had He not been
Low as I; Poor as I; Weak as I in all Things, (Sin excepted) and tempted as I;
and yet equal all this while to thee, in his Divinity and Majesty, and Power,
and Glory, and Holiness.

Dread (yet Dear) Father: Thou art God, and I am Man: For his sake who is God
and Man united in one Person, Let not me, a Man, be separated from Thee, my
God, by any Thing I have Thought, or Spoken, or Done; or by any Thing which I
shall ever Speak, or Think, or Do, in my whole Passage through the World.

I am grieved that I have ever done any Thing to unfit me for thy Love: I am
Grieved that I have ever done any Thing, to displease a Tender Father: Grieved
I am, that I have done any one Thing contrary to his Commands, who said, If ye
Love me Keep them: And I am grieved that I have grieved the Holy Spirit of God,
by whom I was sealed to the Day of Redemption: And as I am grieved that I have
ever Unkindly and Ungratefully affronted him whom my Soul Loves: So, I grieve,
because I Love.

I could Wish to Die before I ever Knowingly, and Willingly, and Deliberately,
with open Eyes and a full Consent of my Will, do so any More, till I come up to
thee. Particularly, Here you may mention any Sin to which you are Tempted.
as to what I am most afraid of [ The Sin of -- ] Let Nothing, (O my Love) Let
Nothing that is Past; Let Nothing that shall ever befall me in it, Divorce and
Separate me from his Favor, and his Love, whom my Soul Loves: and to whom, I
yet Hope to Sing Hymns and Hallelujahs, among them that Love, in the Regions of
Holiness, and Peace, and Love for all Ages. Dread Majesty and Dearest Lord; I
bow the Head, and beg I may be fitted to be called by thee,

Thy Affectionate Glorifier, Lover and Obeyer.

ASPIRATION II.
O Thou whom my Soul Loves!
I Desire Nothing in this World, with any great Passion, but to be Loved by him
whom my Soul Loves: But if my Sins and Disobediences have lessened, or abated
thy Love to me; O Give me above all Things, a Repentance, True enough, and
Acceptable enough to restore me entirely to thy Love; and a Reformation great
enough, sincere enough, and acceptable enough to keep me in that Love, till I
change Worlds.

O my Love, make me Holy enough, Just enough, Chaste enough, Temperate enough,
Charitable enough, Devout enough, Penitent enough, Universally Obedient enough,
to fit me to be Loved by thee.

Make me but to Love Thee enough, to fit me to be Loved by thee, and I ask no
more.

Should thou tender me an earthly Crown, most willingly would I refuse it,
in exchange for This favor, viz. That thou would but make me to Love Thee
enough to be fit to be Loved by Thee.

O Thou whom my Soul Loves; I would refuse Ten thousand Kingdoms and Ten
thousand Worlds, were they tendered to me, to take my Choice; whether to have
these, or to have the Favor to be made fit to be loved by Thee; To Love Thee
enough to be fitted to be Loved by Thee, eternally.

Lord, I Fear, and Tremble, and Sorrow; My Heart is broken enough even to wish
my Self entirely annihilated, when I think that some sad Recessions from my
Love and my Obedience, may have caused Great Diminutions of thy Love to me.

But because a Restitution to thy Favor is not Impossible; and I find some
Instances of the Continuance of thy Love, in great Measures, to me; O be
pleased to fit me to be restored to it, as entirely as ever: And not only so,
but (O my Love) fit me by Repentance, Love and Obedience, or by something or
other of doing or suffering for thee, to be loved by Thee, beyond what I have
ever yet been; And keep me, O Keep me in it, till I come up to thy Seraphick
Lovers.

O my Lord, some of them sinned against Thee, and fell sadly too; but they
Loved much, and they had much forgiven: And I also would Love much, because I
have much to be forgiven.

O my Love, thou know how much I Love, and how much I Grieve, because I Love
no more. Oh! let me but Grieve enough, or Love enough to be forgiven, and to be
placed entirely in thy Love, and I would part with as many Kingdoms, Lives, and
Worlds, as Arithmetic could Number.

Oh Grant me to be called in Heaven (Pardon this Ambition, dearest Lord) and to
be made by Thee fit to be called There,

Dread Majesty, Thy Faithful Lover, Glorifier and Obeyer.

ASPIRATION III.
O Thou whom my Soul Loves!
HOw easy is it for Thee, to Pity where the Temptation is very Violent and
Surprising, thy Servant weak, and yet sorrowful and grieved for having fallen.
And then, Lord, how easy is it for Thee to Love where thou Pardonest; and how
easy is it for Thee to give the full Measure of Grace where thou Love; and
How easy is it for Thee to Glorify, where thou give Grace.

Lord, I have fallen by a Violent Temptation, and am infinitely grieved for
having fallen: O pity, I beseech Thee, and Pardon; and give More Grace to thy
grieved Lover, N. N. Pity me, that am troubled, that I have done, or spoken, or
Thought any Thing Contrary to thy Love, and thy Obedience. If Omnipotence can
pity Loving Dust; If the God of Love can pity a Worm that Loves, and that
Grieves for not Loving more; Grieves for not having Obeyed more, and Grieves
for not Grieving more; then I am sure my Love can pity me.

O my Love, let the same Love pardon me, that pities me; And when I am
Pardoned, Oh! Let me have Grace and Strength to stand, most Acceptably: When I
have Grace to stand, I shall be Loved; and when I am Loved, I am sure I shall
be Glorified.

But, O Pardon every one of my Unfitnesses for thy Pity and thy Pardon; Every
one of my Unfitnesses for thy Grace, thy Love, thy Glory; [ Especially, Here
you may mention any Particular.
that of -- ] and then for Love's-Sake, let me be called in Heaven.

Dread Majesty of Heaven and Earth, Thy faithful, affectionate, devout,
Glorifier, Lover and Obeyer.
(...)



FINIS.
Books Printed for HENRY BONWICKE, at the Red-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE General History of the Reformation, of the Church: Written in Latin by
John Sleidan: Faithfully Englished. To which is added, a Continuation to the
End of the Council of Trent. By E. Bohun, Esquire in Folio.

Two Useful Cases Resolved: 1. Whether a State of Salvation be attainable. 2.
What is the Rule by which this certainty is to be attained. In 4o.

Pia Desideria: Or, Divine Addresses: In Three Books. 1. Sighs of the Penitent
Soul. 2. Desires of the Religious Soul. 3. Ecstacies of the Enamoured Soul.
Illustrated with Forty Seven Copper Plates. Written in Latin: Englished by Edm.
Arwaker. M. A. 8o.

A New Description of Paris: Containing a Particular Account of all the
Churches, Palaces, Monasteries, Colleges, Hospitals, Libraries, Cabinets of
Rarities, Academies of the Virtuosi, Paintings, Medals, Statues and other
Sculptures, Monuments, and Public Inscriptions; With all other Remarkable
Matters in that Great and Famous City. Translated out of French. To which is
added, a Map of Paris.

The Art of Catechizing; Or, The Complete Catechist; In four Parts. 1. The
Church-Catechism Resolved into Easy Questions. 2. An Exposition of it, in a
Continued, Full, and Plain Discourse. 3. The Church-Catechism Resolved into
Scripture Proofs. 4. The Whole Duty of Man, Reduced into Questions. Fitted for
the Meanest Capacities, The Weakest Memories, the Plainest Teachers, and the
most Un-instructed Learners.

A Discourse Proving from Scripture and Reason, That the Life of Man is not
limited, by any Absolute Decree of God. By the Author of the Duty of Man, etc.

Letters of Religion and Virtue, to several Gentlemen and Ladies. To excite
Piety and Devotion. With some Short Reflections on Diverse Subjects.

Country-Conversations: Being an Account of some Discourses that Happened in a
Visit to the Country, Last Summer, on diverse Subjects; Chiefly, of the Modern
Comedies, of Drinking, of Translated Verse, of Painting and Painters, of Poets
and Poetry.


