A DISCOURSE ON The Love of Christ.

BY WILLIAM SHEPPARD, A. M. and Minister of the Gospel at Oundle in
Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel, 1695.

EPHESIANS. iii. 19. -- And to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge.
THE Apostle Paul was here diving into the deeps of the Love of Christ; and
diving into it, fell into a Labyrinth, and an immense Ocean, which set him into
an Admiration. Indeed, after our greatest Searchings into, and Discoveries of
the Love of Christ, the most we can do, is admire, not comprehend: So it was
with the Apostle here; when he set to search, he found it unsearchable; his
Line was too short, his Measure too narrow to reach this height, and depth,
and length, and breadth: Therefore he draws this Conclusion, That it is a Love
beyond Knowledge. We may Express much, but we may Conceive more: This Love is
not only above all we can express, but also above all we can conceive; above
Knowledge.

To know the Love of Christ.] Not excluding, but including the Love of the
Father. It is called the Love of Christ, because the Love of the whole Trinity
is conveyed to us in and through Christ.

Which passes Knowledge.] Excels, exceeds Knowledge, (as the word in the
Original signifies; viz. wholly to comprehend. Every true Believer knows so
much of it, by the teaching of the Spirit of God, as is necessary to Salvation;
yet the more he knows, the more he knows it to be Incomprehensible, and
past Knowledge.

We may take Three general Notes from the words:

1st. That the Love of Christ to Believers is so rich and unsearchable, so vast
and boundless, so matchless and unparallel, so immense and infinite, that the
best of Saints cannot understand it fully, so as to be able to express the
infinite and unsearchable Riches of it: They have a true knowledge of it, but
they know it but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9.

2dly. Though this Love of Christ be unsearchable, yet every true Believer may
and does attain to a certain measure of the knowledge of it; so far as to know
it to be infinite and unsearchable: They may know it so far, as to stand and
wonder, stand and admire, not being able perfectly to comprehend it: and this
is the Work of S^ints.

(...) That the Unsearchableness of the Love of Christ should (...) far from
discouraging Believers, that it should so much the more encourage and engage
them to search after it: for he seems to add this, passes knowledge, to
provoke the more to seek after it.

The Doctrine we shall insist upon, as containing the sum and marrow of the
words, is this:

Doct. That the Love of Christ to Believers is a surpassing Love, an infinite,
unparallel Love: Therefore we read of the Unsearchable Riches of Christ, Ephesians.
3. 8. -- Here are Two things to be shown:

I. What this Love of Christ is. II. Why Christ loves Believers with such a
surpassing Love.
1. What this Love of Christ to Believers is? And here, what shall we say? Does
not the Text say, it is past knowledge? Have not we already said, it is such as
we cannot express? such as we cannot conceive? How shall we dare to attempt
such an Undertaking as this? May not the Lord say, Who is this that darkeneth
counsel by words without knowledge? Job 38. 2. May we not say here, as St. Paul
speaks of his Revelation? 2 Cor. 12. 4. He was caught up into Paradise, and
heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful (you may read, not possible)
for a man to utter: The Original is, (...), worldless words; such things as
words will not bear, cannot bear: The Tongue of Men nor Angels cannot declare
this Love in the unsearchable, infinite nature of it: Therefore the most we can
do, is to speak something of the Properties of it; which we shall endeavor to
give some hints of, according to Scripture Light

1. It is great Love. So great as surpasses Knowledge. The Love of Christ to
Believers is so great, and they are so dear to him, that he thought nothing too
much for them: (...), supereminens, sublimis, excel^a magnitudo: He thought
nothing too much to give; therefore, because he could give them no greater, he
gave them Himself: Nothing too much to do for them: as Jacob served twice
seven Years for Rachael, and they seemed to him but a few Days, because he
loved her, Genesis 29. 20. Nothing too much to suffer for them.

1. He suffered in his Body, Reviling, Spitting, Buffeting, Scourging: His
whole Life was but a Suffering; He suffered to his Heart's Blood, Phil. 2. 6,
7, 8.

2. He suffered in his Soul: which were the highest Sufferings.

1. He endured the Curses, yea, all the Curses of the Law, which his People
should have borne. Oh, the thousands of dreadful Indictments the Law had
against thee! The Thunder and Lightning it denounces! The fire and Brimstone it
spits at thee! All this did this loving Jesus bear for thee that art a true
Believer, and bear away, Gal. 3. 13.

2. He endured the Wrath of God, Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6. Oh, what Love was this!
Christ has borne Griefs, but they were our Griefs! He carried Sorrows, but
they were our Sorrows! He was wounded for Transgressions, but they were our
Transgressions! He was bruised, but it was for our Iniquities! He was
chastised, but it was that we might have Peace! He had Stripes, but it was that
we might be healed! O Believer, be astonished at this Love! Christ had the
Curse, that thou might have the Blessing! Christ had the Wrath, that thou
might have the Love! Christ had the Misery, that thou might have th Glory!

3. He endured Dereliction of God, at least in his own apprehension, for a
time. Believer, Think thou hear Christ crying out, My God! My God! Why have
thou forsaken me? As Man, he cries out, Why have thou forsaken me? as God, My
God! My God! and all this for thee! Nay, Christ was really forsaken of God for
a time, as to the sensible and comfortable Manifestations of God's Presence.

4. He endured the Torments of Hell. Not that Christ did descend into the Local
Hell, though I believe there is a Place* where the Damned suffer the Vengeance
of Eternal Fire; that was not consonant with the Dignity of his Person, nor
Office of a Mediator: But, Christ did endure such Torments as did tantamount
the Torments of Hell: Psalm. 18. 5. The sorrows of hell compassed me about: For
Christ endured all that Wrath that was due for all the Sins of all the Elect,
from the Beginning to the End of the World, which they must else have endured
to all Eternity; they must have suffered, but could never satisfy: Therefore
the Damned must suffer for ever, because they cannot satisfy for ever: Christ
suffered and satisfied. Oh, what Love was here to Believers! Christ emptied
himself of all his Glory for them: He came down from Heaven to Earth: He took
their Nature, their Sins, their Curse, their Wrath, their Hell: He fulfilled
the Law, he satisfied Divine justice; He prayed, he mourned, he lived, he died
for them: Lo, how he loved them!

2. Christ's Love to Believers is a Free Love.

1. Undeserved Love, Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8. They were polluted in their
Blood; and when they were in their Blood, Christ said to them, Live. And why?
Why, it was a time of Love, Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. They were also, sometimes,
as well as others, foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and
Pleasures, etc. It was the mere Kindness and Love of God appeared to them,
justifying them freely by his Grace, Romans 3. 24. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. We can
provoke him to Wrath, but not move God to Love: it arises from Himself; God's
Choosing, Calling, Justifying, Adopting, Saving Love, is all free, undeserved
Love.

2. Undesired Love, Isai. 65. 1. This is the Voice of the Lord, I am sought of
them that asked not for me; I am found of them (...) sought me not. Not so much
as a Prayer! What could be less tha^ a little Breath, to show there was nothing
done to procure th^^ Love? It is Free Love.

3. Christ's Love to Believers is a singular Love, a distinguishing Love. It is
not to all, but to some; not to many, but a (...) Amos 3. 2. You only have I
known: Jer. 3. 14. One of a city, two (...) family: two in a bed, the one
taken, and the other left; the (...) band taken, and the Wife left; the Wife
taken, and the Husban^ left; the Child taken, and the Parents left. Oh, this
makes it (...) nishing Love, Joh. 14. 22 Believer, Do not thou find this
(...) Love ravish thy Heart? Does not thy Heart burn within thee, whilst thou
read these Lines?

4. The Love of Christ to Believers is a Sincere Love; a True, Unfeigned,
Cordial Love: His Heart is in it: Cant. 4. 9. It is Christ's Voice to his
Spouse; his Heart was set upon her, even to Ravishment: so it is upon every
sincere Believer: And it will appear to be no counterfeit Love, if you consider
what he has done, what he has suffered for them: A greater Demonstration he
could not give, than his Dying for them, Joh 15. 3^

5. Christ's Love to Believers is a Superlative Love; a Love of the Highest
degree; a Love above a^^ above all his, above his Glory, for he left it for
them; above his Life, for he laid it down for them; a Love above all other; a
Love to the Believer above all other Persons; to pass by thousands, and love
thee: a Love above all other Love, to lay down his Life; and that, not for a
near, dear, choice Friend, but a vile, wicked, cruel Enemy. I never heard nor
read but of one in all my Life, that laid down his Life for another, and that
was a Child for his Father: A Citizen of Toledo being condemned to die, his Son
offered to die for him, and was accepted. This was a Child for his Father: not
an Enemy, nor an ordinary Friend; but the best of Friends, a Father. But Christ
died, not for a Father, a Friend, but an Enemy, a Wretch, a Rebel, Romans 5. 8,
10.

6. Christ's Love to Believers is an Insuperable Love; a Love that nothing can
pose: No Difficulty that Christ met with could pose it: When Christ had
undertook, and God stood upon the fulfilling all Righteousness, and satisfying
Justice to the full; that after he had, by his active Obedience, done all that
could be required, there must be passive Obedience too: yet Christ did not
shrink at this neither; and after he had suffered much, many Indignities from
Men, and Severities from God, as in the Garden he sweat Drops of Blood; yet it
must come to his Life: He did not spare that neither: Joh. 15. 13. Was there
ever any love like unto this love? Certainly we may say here, as David of
Jonathan, Thy love passed the love of women.

7. Christ's Love to Believers is an inseparable Love. Here are Two things:

1. It is Constant Love. Men will love to day, and hate to morrow; but when
once God sets his Love upon a Soul, he never takes it off more: where he loves,
he always loves: whatsoever their Carriage is toward Him, when they deserve to
be hated; whatsoever His Carrriage seems to be toward them: When he chides, he
loves; when he hides, he loves.

1. When he chides, he loves, Rev. 3. 19. He chastens, yet he loves, Heb. 12.
6. He visits with the Rod, yet still loves, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33.

2. When he hides, he loves, Isa. 54. 7, 8, 10. For his iniquity I was wroth,
and smote him: I hid me, says God, Isa. 57. 16, 17, 18. It seems as if it was
God's Expectation that he should turn: But did he turn? No, he went on
frowardly in the way of his Heart. What might we expect that the Lord should
say now, but that I will take away my Love for ever! I will curse him. Plague
him, Damn him! But is it so? No, he loves still Oh, to be admired Love! See
what follows in ver. 18. I will heal him, yea, and restore comforts to him, and
to his mourners too.

2. It is permanent and abiding Love; lasting, yea, everlasting Love: It
reaches from Eternity to Eternity, from eternal Chusi^ to eternal Glorifying:
an unchangeable Love. Though Christ's Face change, sometime smile, sometimes
frown; though his Hand, his Actions change, sometimes Hand-mercies Comforts,
sometimes Hand-strokes: yet his Heart never changes: whom he loves, he loves to
the end, Joh. 13 1.

II. Why Christ loves Believers with such a surpassing Love.

1. Because these are they on whom the Riches of Grace shall be advanced for
ever. This is the great and glorious Design that was upon God's Heart from all
Eternity, to advance the Riches of his Grace in Christ upon poor Sinners. Now,
these are the Souls that this glorious Design shall be advanced on; and they
must needs be beloved Ones, that serve for the advancement of this glorious
Design. God may magnify his Justice upon Persons, and yet hate them; but he
never magnifies his Mercy and Grace on any, but he loves them. O Believers! all
the great things that ever God did, was for You! Creation was for you; Christ
for you; Redemption was for you: That Is the first Reason why Believers are so
beloved (...) because they are Persons set apart to advance the Riches of God^
Grace in Christ, Psalm. 4. 3. These are they the Lord set apart for himself, for
himself to enjoy, for himself to converse with, for himself to delight in to
all Eternity.

2. Because they are lovely in his sight: not as they are in themselves, but as
they are in him; by his Righteousness imputed, his Graces communicated, Cant.
4. 1. Behold, thou art fair, my Love, behold, thou art fair.

1. By his Righteousness imputed: Christ is made Righteousness to them, 1 Cor.
1. 30. And they are made Righteous, accounted Righteous in him: nay they are
made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Now Christ looks upon us in
this Righteousness, and so accounts us lovely. Hence he is said to see no
iniquity in Jacob: not that there was none, but he sees it not; looking on us
in his own Righteousness. Now they are pardoned, and as fully pardoned, as if
they had never sinned: Therefore we read, Jer. 50. 20. The iniquity of Israel
shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they
shall not be found: Why? for I will pardon them. Before they were in their
Blood, Filthiness, Pollution, and so ugly, loathsome; but now they are, by this
Righteousness, beautiful, lovely, and so loved. There is Christ's essential,
personal Righteousness as God; this cannot be communicated: but there is his
mediatory Righteousness, wrought as Mediator. This is imputed to them; and by
virtue of this they stand justified in God's sight, and therefore loved.

2. By his Graces imparted: They are clothed with Rubies, and Saphires, and
all the shining Graces of the Spirit. See how Christ adorns them, Ezekiel. 16. 9,
to 14. And how lovely they are in his sight, by reason of these Ornaments!
Christ is the common Stock of Grace, and they derive from him Grace for Grace,
viz. of every Grace according to their measure; Gratiam nova gratia comulatam.
The Father loves his Child, because he is like him. Believers are changed into
God's Image from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Now they are glorious in his
Eyes, and therefore loved.

3. Because they are his. Propriety is the ground of Love: We love our own, our
own Relations, our own Enjoyments, Houses, Lands, etc. A Believer is Christ's
own, and therefore loved, Cant. 7. ^0. I am my beloved's; and then it follows,
his desire is toward me. They are his Friends, his Favorites, his Members,
his Spouse, his Hephzibahs, his Beulahs, Isa. 62. 4. his Jewels, Mal. 3. 17.
his Treasure; and where the treasure is, there will the heart be also, Matthew.
6. 21.

1. They are his chosen Ones, John 15. 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you. Indeed there is nothing to cause him to choose, but his own Love.
Misericordia ejus praevenit secundum gratiam, non secundum debitum, Aug. God's
Love is Eternal, and therefore can have no cause but it self: for, Non est
gratia, si praecesserint merita, as Aug. 2 Timothy 1. 9. There purpose and grace
are put together. Christ loved them, therefore he has chosen them; now he has
chosen them, therefore loves them.

2. They are his purchased Ones: They are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
and that not a little one neither. They are purchased at a dear rate; they cost
no less than Blood: and that, not the the Blood of Bulls and Goats. Hebr. 10.
4. nor the Blood of mere Man, but the Blood of Christ: nothing but Blood could
do it, precious Blood, and that the precious Blood of the precious Christ, 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19. nay farther, the Blood of God, Acts 20. 28. for if the Divine
Nature had not been hypostatically united to the human, it would not have made
the Purchase. O what a Price is here! surely these must needs be precious
Souls, dearly beloved Souls, that cost such a price; and Christ must needs love
them highly, for they are all the Fruit of his precious Blood, all the Income
that he is ever like to have for this inestimable Price. Thus we see that there
is great Reason (though all from himself) why Christ loves Believers with such
a surpassing Love.

Object. It does not appear by God's Dealings with them in the World, as if he
loved them so; but rather, as if he loved others more, and hated them: Others
have the sweet, and they have the bitter; others have their Eyes stand out with
fatness, and have more than Heart can wish: when the Godly are chasten'd every
Morning, Psalm. 73. 4. to 7, 14.

Answ. It is true, God does often exercise his People with cross Providence,
contrary Dealings: They are in Trouble, when others are in Peace; they are in
Sorrow, when others are in Joy: but this is in infinite Wisdom and Love to
them. These, if rightly understood, speak Love; and God should not love them so
much, if he did not deal thus with them.

1. It is to correct them for their Miscarriages. If a Father should see his
Child run on in ways tending to his own Ruin, and not correct him, would you
not judge he rather hated then loved him? So when God sees his Child grow
undutiful, disobedient, fall into such ways as tend to his Perdition, Is it not
his great Love to use his Rod, rather than lose his Child? Whom I love, I
rebuke and chasten, Rev. 3. 19. I rebuke, but yet I love; yea, I rebuke,
because I love. The Reason is evident; it is to take away his Sin, which would
undo him, Isaiah 27. 9. By this shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and it
shall be the Fruit of it, to take away his Sin. As the Rod is better than
Death, than Hell; so it is greater Love to scourge him, then to spare his
Child. God had one Son without Sin, but never a Son without Sorrow, Heb. 12. 6,
10. Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives. But is this Love? Yea, for it is for our profit, that we may be made
partakers of his Holiness. I know, the Children of God are often crying out, If
I belonged to God, surely I should not be so afflicted: As David, My Foot had
almost slipped, Psalm. 73. 2, 3. But thou that art a Child of God, if thou
weighest these Things, may see how thou art beholding to God for
Afflictions, and cross Providence; and instead of questioning his Love, bless
his Name, that he will take so much pains, and be at so much trouble with thee.
Therefore let thine Apprehensions be rectified herein; and say as David, Psalm.
119. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me.

2. It is to exercise them; to exercise their Graces. This was God's End, as
far as appears by the Text in Job's great Afflictions and Trials, 1 Pet. 1. 6,
7. If need be, ye are in heaviness: There is the first Particular, to correct
them; and then it follows, for the Trial of their Faith. Tribulations are to
try the Saints Faith, Love, Patience, Humility, Self-denial, etc.

Trials have discovered many to be far otherways than they expected.

To try their Faith; Whether they can trust God under his chidings, and
hidings, as well as his shinings. It was in this School of Affliction, that Job
learned this great Lesson: Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job. 13.
15. But how often do Souls find the contrary? O, says a Soul, I never thought
there were so much Unbelief, Impatience, Pride, Stubborness in my Heart, as I
found under such a Trial.

To try their Love; Whether they can love God when he strips them. Oh this is a
sweet frame for a Soul to experience: Well, let God deal with me as he please,
I will love him still.

To try their Submission to the Divine Will and Pleasure: I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, Mich. 7. 9. Yea,
and I will bear it willingly, patiently, thankfully: It is a Sickbed, it might
have been a Bed of Flames: It is a sharp Providence, but it might have been
Fire and Brimstone: And I will wait patiently too the Lord's Wise and Gracious
Disposal. For he will bring me forth to the Light, and I shall behold his
Righteousness.

Here take this Note:

Note, If thou Child of God art enabled to put forth but one Act of Grace, in
an Affliction and Trouble, thou art partaker of an infinite Benefit and
Advantage, which thou have cause to bless God for ever for: For there is more
good in one Act of Grace, then there is evil in all the Afflictions and
Troubles of the World. And the Reason is evident; for that Evil is but
temporary, but this Good is eternal. Every Act of Grace shall have an eternal
Reward, an exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. O what great Mistakes, not
only the World, but the Children of God themselves lie under, by reason of
God's dealings with his here. The Wicked are ready to bless themselves in their
evil Ways, harden themselves against God's holy and blessed Ways, censure the
People of God; and the Children of God are ready to be discouraged and give up
all their hopes. But you see (precious Souls) that these things are not matter
of desponding to you, but rejoicing: Here you may learn what that of the
Apostle means, Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, I say,
Rejoice: And that, Romans 5. 3. We glory in tribulation.

3. It is to better them. To better their Hearts, their Duties, their Graces,
their Comforts, their Experiences, their Evidences, they are to humble them, to
wean them, to win them, Psalm. 37. 37. Let the way be never so uncomfortable,
the End shall be blessed.

There are Four Times, precious Believers have cause infinitely to admire and
adore their God and Father for.

1. A time of more than ordinary Enjoyment of Christ's special Presence. God
often makes Times of Trouble, Times of special Enjoyments, that some of his
People have been sometimes ready to wish for such a Trouble again. Indeed we
need not matter where we are, so we have God with us; nor what Condition we are
in, if we have Christ's Presence: Which made Luther say, He had rather be in
Hell with Christ, than in Heaven without him. Christ's Presence makes every
Place, and every Condition an Heaven; Sickness an Heaven, Poverty an Heaven, a
Prison an Heaven. And this is that Christ vouchsafes to his in all Conditions:
ordinarily, the greater their Trouble, the more of his presence, Isa. 43. 2. By
Fire, and Floods of Water, we are to understand great Troubles: And in these
they have God's presence, Isa. 63. 9. In all their afflictions he is afflicted,
and the angel of his presence saves them: in his love and pity he redeems, and
bears and carries them. Have not Saints cause to admire God in all this? Is not
this Love?

2. A Time of greater Conveyance of Divine Grace. God makes Times of Trouble,
Times of increasing the Saint's Graces, strengthening their Faith, inflaming
their love, raising their Joys, 1 Pet. 1. 8. He spoke before, ver. 6. of a Time
of Heaviness. I have known Souls experience this: They have been at such Times
so filled with Joy, that they have rejoiced with Joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 11. We are delivered unto Death, we are in deep Troubles, that
we may have more of Jesus: And how then are we beholding to Jesus?

3. A Time of clearer Revelation of Divine Love. This is a Time Believers are
to bless God for, and this God often makes Times of Trouble to be, 2 Hos. 14.
Therefore, behold, I will bring her into the wilderness, and there will I
allure her: I will speak comfortably to her. As if God had said, I will bring
such a Child of mine into a Wilderness-Condition, a Wilderness of Trouble; he
shall not know which way to go, what to do, etc. And what then? Then I will
speak comfortably to him; Loquar ad cor, as the Word signifies: I will speak a
Word to him, that shall do him good at Heart, revive him, cheer him rejoice his
Heart. And observe how this is ushered in: Behold; as if it were said, Behold,
ye Children of God, how ye are beholding to your God and Father for your
Troubles: Behold what cause ye have to bless him for them: Behold what cause
you have to admire him for them. God often makes them as the King's Chamber to
his People; wherein he makes them glad, and rejoice in him; to remember his
Love more than Wine, Cant. 1. 4 He makes them a Banqueting House to his
Children, and his Banner over them is Love: He stays them with Flagons: He
gives them not only sips, tastes, cups, but Flagons of Love, of the Wines of his
Consolations. Now are not Believers infinitely beholding to their God and
Father for such a time as this? Cant. 2. 4, 5.

4. A Time of fuller manifestation of his Glory: Acts 7. 54, 55, 56. when
Stephen had the Storm of Stones coming about his Ears, then he had the Vision
of the Glory of God, and Jesus at the Righthand of God. I knew a gracious
Woman, upon a sick Bed, in violent Bodily Pains, and also great Distress of
Soul, after a little time, the Lord was pleased to break in upon her with such
glorious Light (as she expressed it) as filled her with such Joy and
Consolation, that all her Bodily Pains were immediately gone, and she felt not
the least Bodily Grievance. Another, by reason of Bodily and Soul Distress
together, was become Bedridden, seemingly at the Gates of Death; and upon a
Minister's Praying with her, she cried out, He is come! He is come! He is come!
and she was filled with Joy unspeakable and Glorious. Lay all these together,
and it will fully appear, notwithstanding all Objections to the contrary, that
this Doctrine stands firm and invincible; that the Love of Christ to Believers
is a Surpassing Love.

Use 1. Then, Oh! the Misery of those that have no part in this Love of Christ!
that are not taken with Christ, notwithstanding this Love! that prefer, or
seek after any thing more than this Love of Christ! Oh, ye vile Drunkards, that
prefer a Lust, a Pot-Companion before this Christ! Oh, ye covetous Worldlings,
that prefer a good Bargain, Corn, and Wine, and Oil, before this Christ! Oh,
ye voluptuous Ones, that prefer vain empty Pleasures before this Christ, so
full of Love, and Grace, and Glory! how will ye answer it at the Great Day! how
will ye look this Christ in the Face at the Last Day! Oh, ye vain Temporizers,
that are for the Love and Favor of Men, more then the Love of Christ! Oh, ye
besotted, blind, secure Ones that are settled on your Lees! see not your need of
this Christ! What will become of you? Are there not many that see no Need of
him, no Beauty in him, that they should desire him? that say of him, as the
Daughters of Jerusalem to the Spouse, What is thy beloved more than another
beloved? They see no such Excellency and Glory in him, (as has been shown.) We
may say of them, as is said of the Children of Israel, Our fathers understood
not thy wonders in Egypt, etc. Psalm. 106. 7. Great and Wonderful Things the
Lord did for them; but they saw no Glory therein: Wonderful Things have been
spoken of the Love of Christ's but they see no Glory in it: Their Hearts are not
taken with it. Oh, how shall we be able to lament their Misery, that are not
taken with this Love of Christ! It was a Saying of one of the Fathers, If all
the World were turned into Tears, they were not sufficient to lament the Misery
of that Soul, that sees not Excellency in Jesus Christ. I may say here, If all
the World, from the Earth to the Empyrean Heaven, were full of Tears, yea,
Tears of Blood, they were not sufficient to lament the Misery of your Souls,
that have not an Interest in this lovely Jesus. We are not able to express your
Misery: Words will not bear it; the Tongue of Men and Angels cannot declare it.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maran-atha, 1
Cor. 16. 22. Let him be accursed with the greatest Curses. The dreadfullest
Curses that Law or Gospel can denounce, are the Portion of Unbelievers:
therefore, when our Savior would denounce the greatest Torments, he says, Let
them have their portion with the hypocrites and unbelievers. -- This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather
than light, etc. Joh. 3. 19. Christ has brought Light into the World, the
Light of Grace and Glory: but the generality of Men love Darkness, dark
Company, dark Practices, Ways; live in Darkness: and this is the Condemnation.
(The) Condemnation; What is that? Oh! we are not able to express that, how
great Condemnation it is, how dreadful Condemnation it is! Oh, that Sinners
might dread it before they feel it.

1. It is Dreadful, because Wilful: Sinners Wilfulness will add to the
Dreadfulness of it: Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life, Joh. 5.
40. Oh, how will this torment, I might have had Christ, but would not! Grace
and Glory, but would not! I would not Pray! I would not Mourn for my Sins! I
would not be Godly! I would have my Lusts! I would be Damned! Oh! my Wilfulness
has brought me to this Place of Torment!

2. Your Condemnation will be inexcusable, and therefore dreadful: Friend, how
came thou hither, without the wedding garment? And he was speechless, Mat.
22. 12. Sinners, Tremble to think of this! You will be speechless; you will
have no Excuse: You cannot say, Christ was not offered you. Now, we Ministers
come to deal with you; we offer you Christ; we beseech you to come to him: but
you have many Excuses, as Luk 14. 16, 17, 18. they were called to the Supper,
viz. Christ and his Benefits, but they made their Excuses to the Servant: But
when the Lord himself comes to deal with you, as Mat. 22. 11. Friend, how
came thou hither, without the wedding garment? How come thou to be without
a Christ? Was he not offered thee? Then he will call his Servants, his
Ministers, and ask the Question. Did not you offer Christ to this Man? Then
they will answer, Yes, Lord; I was earnest with him, I did beg of him, as on my
Knees, and labor with all my might to bring him in, but could not persuade
him. Oh, then you will be speechless; you will not have one word to say: How
will this torment!

3. Your condemnation will be intolerable, and therefore dreadful, Luke 13. 28.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, and your selves thrust out. There shall be
gnashing of teeth; it speaks, their intolerable Torment. Oh, how will this
torment, to see the Husband taken into Heaven, and the Wife shut out? the Wife
taken into Heaven, and the Husband shut out? the Child taken into Heaven, and
the Parent shut out? the Servant taken into Heaven, and the Master shut out?
your Neighbor taken into Heaven, and your selves shut out? This will cause
gnashing of Teeth; I had the same Means and Opportunities as they; I had Christ
offered me as well as they; I sat under the same Sermons; I had the same
Calls, but I would not come in. The Refusals of Christ will make Damnation
intolerable.

4. Your Damnation will be Eternal, therefore Dreadful: Mat. 25. 41. Depart
from me, ye cursed into everlasting fire. Oh, Dreadful! Fire, the Lake of Fire,
Rev. 20. 15. and that for ever, to be burning and ever burning; where the worm
dies not, and the fire is not quenched, Mark 9. 44. The Christless Sinner shall
burn and roar, and roar and burn, and that for ever; after you have been as
many thousands of millions, and millions of thousands of Years,; Ages, as as
there are Hairs on your Head, Piles of Grass on the Earth, Stars in the Sky,
Sands in the Sea, Drops in the Ocean, you will be no nearer coming out, than at
the beginning. O Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! This will cut to the Heart: Then
you shall seek Death, and shall not find it: O Death, whither art thou gone?
Oh, come and end this doleful Life! Oh, that these Pains would break my Heart,
and end my Being! Oh, that I might once die! Oh, that I had been a Dog or Toad!
Oh, that I had never had a Being! Oh, Sinner, lay (...) to heart! Remember,
Everlasting Torment is dreadful Torment (...) Time is almost gone; Eternity is
ready ^o swallow you up; (...) haste, Make haste to the City of Refuge, before
the Avenger (...) Blood overtake you.

Use 2. For Exhortation to come in to Christ: Sinners, Come, lay in for a share
in this Love. Oh, what infinite Pity it is, that any poor Soul should miss of
this Love!

1. God is earnest for your Coming; He would never have sent his Son else: Joh.
3. 16. God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. God so
loved; it was so great a Love, that we cannot express: Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live,
says the Lord God, I take no pleasure in the death of sinners, but that they
turn and live: Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye die? The God of Truth swears it;
doubles the Call, Turn ye, turn ye, expostulates the Case with you; Why will ye
die? If you come not, you die; I would not have you: that if you die, it is
because you will die. God is so earnest, that he entreats you to come and live.
God offers Reconciliation in his Son, and sends his Ambassadors to beseech you
to come and accept, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Oh, how earnest is he? You are Guilty,
Condemned Malefactors, and will ye not accept of a Pardon? You are under Wrath,
and will ye not accept of Free Love? How shall ye escape, if ye neglect so
great salvation?

2. Christ is willing: so willing, that he took our Nature, and died, Heb. 10.
5, 6, 7. compared with Psalm. 40. 6, 7, 8. It is spoken of Christ: Christ
delighted in Dying, and bearing the Wrath of God for poor Sinners; lo, I come,
and I delight in it; lo, I must take your Nature, and I delight in it; and if I
take your Nature, I must take your Sins too, and I delight in it: lo, I must
take your Curse and Wrath, and I delight in it: lo, I must endure your Death
and Hell, and I delight in it: I must have the Curse, that you may have the
Blessing: I must have the Wrath, that you may have the Love: I must die, that
you may live: I must have the Hell, that you may have Heaven, and I delight in
it. Oh, how willing is Christ to save poor Sinners! Ah, Sinners! do you not
find your Hearts taken with this Love? When Christ was in the World, did he
cast away any one that came to him for Bodily Healing? He came to save Souls;
will he then refuse Souls that come to him? He sat among Sinners; he wept over
Sinners. When he was near the Cross, he says, I have a baptism to be baptized
with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished? Luke 12. 50. He means his
Passion: as if Christ had said, I must endure a bitter Agony in the Garden,
sweat Drops of Blood, and how do I long? I am to die a shameful, painful,
cursed Death upon the Cross at Jerusalem, and how do I long till it be
accomplished? When he was upon the Cross, he prayed for his Murdere^s: when he
was risen, he sends his Apostles to preach the Gospel, and offer the Benefits
of his Death, first at Jerusalem, Act. 3. 14, 15, 16. O Love indeed! They who
shed his Blood, must have the first Offer of his Blood. And when he was
ascended, he appears to John at Patmos, and gave him Commission to write to the
Churches, Rev. 1. 11. And what does he write? Even a Call to Sinners to come
and partake of the Salvation he has wrought out, Rev. 22. 17. The Spirit and
the Bride say, Come: And let him that hears, say, Come: And let him that is
a-thirst, come: And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. How
earnest Christ is! Come, Sinners; Come, Come, Come, take me and my Benefits
freely: Christ is willing, and art not thou willing? Sinner, consider how this
will aggravate thy Damnation. Oh, that every Soul that hears or reads these
lines may come!

1. Labor tosee your Need of Him: You have infinite Need of him, whether you
see it or no; and your Misery is the greater, that do not see it. Christ is
offered to you, and to the greatest of Sinners; but you must see your Need,
before you will come. Let a Physician come to two Men, the one well, and the
other sick: the Well-Man does not regard him; the Whole need not a Physician;
but the Sick-Man is glad of him, to have his Directions, and follow his
Prescriptions.

2. Take heed of putting off this work of Believing any longer. Delays are
dangerous: Come in to Christ speedily: Make haste, the Judge stands behind
the Door; the Avenger of Blood is at your Heels: If you will have a Christ,
take him now; to Morrow may be too late: This Night thy Soul may be required of
thee. Art thou Young? Consider that Text, Prove. 27. 1. that is the Young Man's
Text, Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may
bring forth. Heb. 3. 7, 8. To day, if you will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. If you do not take him, and take him to day, it is the Hardness of your
Heart. Art thou an Old Man? Consider that Text, Hos. 7. 9. 10. that is the Old
Man's Text; it is said of Ephraim, Strangers have devoured his strength, and he
knows it not; yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, and he knows
not. Yet they do not return to the Lord, nor seek him, for all this. Oh, this
is a sad case? What, an Old Man, and a Christless Man! an Old Man, and a
Prayerless Man! an Old Man, and not turn to the Lord, nor seek him, for all
this? Many will be for putting off the Work till Sickness, or Death: Take heed
of it; then God may justly seal you up to Destruction. Now, Satan will say,
Repent at Death, but then he will say, It is too late. There was a Man that in
Sickness cried out, When I was well I would not go to God, but now I have no
God to go to. then the Devil bid me repent at death; but now he tells me, It is
too late. Take heed that this be not your Case.

3. Consider the danger of neglecting this gracious Offer of a Christ. If you
go away, and wallow in your Sins, then Condemnation will come upon you to the
uttermost, Mat. 11. 22, to 24. Christ is there upbraiding the Cities where he
had made the Offers of his Grace, and they refused: And see how dreadful he
declares their Case to be, how many Woes he pronounces against them; he tells
them, It shall be worse with them, then with Sodom, at the Day of Judgment.
Worse than with Sodom! certainly this must needs be a dreadful Condition
indeed; for Sodom must needs be a very wicked People. We read Genesis 19. 24.
That the Lord rained Brimstone and Fire from Heaven upon them: Yet you that
refuse Christ, shall have a hotter Hell than they; more dreadful Torments then
Sodom and Gomorrah. O tremble, Sinners, to think of missing of Christ. Souls,
why should you be worse for Christ? Christ, that is the greatest Mercy that
ever came into the World. It will be the greatest Mercy that ever was to you,
if you get into him; but if you miss of him, you will be infinitely and
eternally the worse for him. In some Countries, where they burn their
Malefactors, they pour Oil into the Flames to make them more grievous. O fear
and tremble to miss of Christ; for this will be as Oil to the Flames: Every
Offer of Christ will be Oil to the Flames in Hell; every Sermon will be as Oil
to the Flames; every Sabbath, and Soul-opportunity, will be as Oil to the
Flames in Hell. What say thou Sinner? Do thou find these things affect
thee? Do thou find thy Heart coming? O away to Christ, go and cry for a
Christ, and wrestle for a Christ, and be restless for Christ Day and Night; or
I tell thee from the Lord, thou will certainly lament it when it is too late,
and that to Eternity: for it is not I, but the Mouth of the Lord has spoken
it. O remember, I beseech you, and forget not, that this very Call will be as
Oil to the Flames in Hell. O how will this torment! yonder is my Father in
Heaven, my Brother in Heaven, my Neighbor in Heaven; and I was offered Christ
as well as they: I might had Christ but would not; I must be for ever burning,
and tormented in these Flames.

May we not imagine and expect, that Souls, upon these Considerations, should
fly to Christ, as Doves to the Windows? And do they not? What is the Reason? Oh
they are under delusion about it; they think they are in Christ already; they
hope to be saved by Christ. And is not this thy case that read these Lines?
But are not thou deceived? Look well to it, look again and again to it, that
thou and others may be undeceived. I shall come to a use of Trial: And the Lord
help thee to apply every Mark to thy own Heart, diligently, faithfully.

Use 3. For Examination. The Love of Christ to Believers is a surpassing Love:
But have we an Interest in this Love? as one said, when he looked on the
Rainbow, and therein read God's Covenant never to drown the World more, Ah!
but what is that to me, if I be be drowned? So here Christ has infinite Love
for his. But what if I have no part in it? as he said, Christ is to me a Grief
and a Torment, because I have refused him, rejected him, have no part in him.
Ah Souls! look and search narrowly into it, that you be not mistaken: How many
Souls are undone merely by Mistakes! Therefore Paul presses so hard this Work
of Examination, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine, prove know your own States; see what
Grounds you build upon, that you may not think your selves loved of God, when
you are Reprobates, such as God will never own.

1. Where the Love of Christ is, there is the Image of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If
any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; he is transformed into the same
Image, 2 Cor. 3. 18. He has a Participation of God: He is holy, as God is
holy. Christ's Beloveds are Holy Ones.

2. Where the Love of Christ is, there is the Spirit of Christ: If any man has
not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. 9. And they that have the
Spirit of Christ, are led by the Spirit, ver. 14. Gal. 5. 16, 25. Christ's
beloved Ones are spiritual Walkers. Here is a Touchstone for Professors.

3. Where the Love of Christ is upon a Soul, that Soul is a true Lover of Jesus
Christ, Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am hi^. Love is the Loadstone,
the attractive of Love. We love him, because he first loved us, 1 John 4. 19.

Object. Many will reply here, If this be a Mark of the Love of Christ, then we
hope all is well: We do not question but we love Christ as well as any other;
and it is pity they should live that do not love Christ.

Answ. It is true indeed: But how many deceive themselves with this? Who
questions his Love to Christ? except it be a few weak doubting Souls: It is
hard to persuade them that they do love Christ. The generality of the World,
though ignorant, carnal, profane, will pretend to love Christ, though they love
the World better, a Lust better: But this is a Love Christ will never own.
Therefore I shall give you some Characters of true and saving Love to Christ;
such Love as Christ will own.

1. A true Lover of Christ loves nothing in comparison of Christ, nothing in
competition with Christ.

1. He loves nothing in comparison of Christ: To one that is a stranger to
Christ, the World is lovely, Sins, Lusts lovely; there is a great deal of
Beauty and Glory in worldly Riches and Honors: But when a Soul has a right
view of Christ, then transit gloria mundi, then all worldly Glory is eclipsed,
Phil. 3. 7, 8. Now all Paul's former Gains are loss, dross, dung; not only his
worldly, but Pharisaical Gains too. Before, a Man has a Righteousness of his
own, which he highly values, but now all is as filthy Rags.

2. He loves nothing in competition with Christ. If Houses, Lands Friends, yea
Life it self, stand in competition with Christ; that he must forsake these or
Christ: True love of Christ bears down all before it. Now he is enabled to say
after Christ, Mat. 16. 24, 25, 26. and follow the Example of that noble
Marquis: Farewell Crown, Kingdom, Wife, Children, and All, that I may go to
Christ.

Now what say thou Soul? Judge righteous Judgment: Thou love Christ, thou
say; but do thou not love something else better? Thou can not part with
a Lust, or petty Vanity for him. This then is a Love which Christ will never
own.

But, poor doubting Believer! thou may be here gathering Evidences: Thou art
afraid thou do not love Christ savingly. But do thou love any thing else
better? If thou find it really in thine own Heart, there is nothing whatsoever
that thou-lovest better than Christ; thou may conclude thou do truly love
Christ: For there is never an Unbeliever in the World, but there is something
or other which he loves better than Christ.

2. A true Lover of Christ loves all Christ; and all Christ above all things.

1. He loves all Christ. 1. The Person of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 2. He sees Beauty
and Glory in Christ: John 1. 14. We beheld his glory, said the Disciples. You
see desireableness in his Benefits, but not in his Person; then your Love is
not right. 2. The People of Christ: Psalm. 16. 3. My delight is in the Saints,
says a true Lover of Christ; these are the excellent in the earth. 3. The
Ordinances of Christ. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! my Soul
longs for them, says a Lover of Christ, Psalm. 84. 1, 2. There I was wont to
meet with my Beloved; there I have had glorious views of him, sweet tastes,
precious Solacements, delightful Communions; there I have sat under his shadow
with great delight, and his fruit was sweet unto my taste: He has brought me
into his banqueting house, and his banner over me was love, Cant. 2. 3, 4.
There I have eaten of his Bread, and drank of the Wine which he has mingled;
there I have been ravished with his Loves. 4. The Ways of Christ: A Beloved of
Christ loves his holy Laws and Government; he can experience David's Language,
Psalm. 119. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as mine heritage for ever: for
they are the rejoicing of my heart. A Lover of Christ accounts his ways, not
his bondage, but his heritage; not his slavery, but his liberty; and that not
for a fit, as a Carnalist, Formalist may seem to do, but for ever.

Now Soul, thou that art deluded about thy Love to Christ, lay these things
together, and apply them faithfully, and thou may find it. Thou say thou
love Christ; that is, his Benefits: but as to his Person, thou say, as
Isa. 53. 2. There is no form, nor comeliness, no beauty that we should desire
him. You say, you love Christ, but his Ordinances are of no value to you. You
love Christ, but you hate his People, scoff at, revile them: 1 John 5. 1. That
Text tells you, That he that loves God, loves him also that is begotten of him.
You say, you love Christ, but hate Holiness; you cannot endure the power of
Godliness: Holy Duties, Religious Exercises are not your heritage, but your
bondage; not your liberty, but your slavery. Soul, do not let Satan gull thee;
that love of thine is but a counterfeit Love, which thou may go to Hell with.

2. He loves all Christ above all things: 1. Above all things on Earth 2. Above
all things in Heaven. Cant. 5. 10. Christ is the chief among ten thousand to
him; yea, as verse last, altogether lovely. All desires: (1.) Above all things
on Earth, Mat. 10. 37. If any man love father or mother more then me, he is not
worthy of me. Father and Mother are instanced as the chief of all worldly
Objects; Son, and Daughter, and Life: Yet if Christ be not preferred above all
these, our Love is such as Christ will not own. (2.) Above all things in
Heaven, Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee; and there is none in
earth I desire in comparison of thee. Soul, apply this to your self: Do you
love Christ above all things? Then it is a Love which Christ will own. 3. A
True Lover of Christ, his Heart is taken up with Christ; his Life is taken up
with Christ.

1. His Heart is taken up with Christ: Christ is much in his Thoughts, Desires,
Meditations, Cant. 1. 13. A bundle of myrrh is my beloved unto me, he shall lie
all night betwixt my breasts. Can you say you love Christ, and he is little in
your thoughts? Lovers cannot but have their thoughts run upon one another. The
World is much in your thoughts: vain Company, Pleasures, the Profits of the
World much in your thoughts, and Christ but little in your thoughts: These
things show you have but little Love to Christ. It is the Character of a
Beloved of Christ; Christ shall be as a bundle of myrrh to me: Myrrh was of
fragrant smell, and delightful: Christ shall be sweet unto my Thoughts; Christ
shall delight my Heart, says a gracious Soul.

2. His Life is taken up with Christ.

1. He speaks Christ much, Psalm. 37. 30, 31. The mouth of the righteous is as
choice silver, and his tongue talks of judgment. Lovers are much talking of
one another. Is Christ little in your Mouth? It is a sign he is little and low
in your Heart.

2. He lives Christ, Gal. 2. 20. The life that I live, I live by the faith of
the son of God: His Care and Endeavor is to live a Christlike Life, a
Gospel-life. Do you love Christ, and live in sin and wickedness in open
rebellion against Christ? You have not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4. 20. to 24.
If you love Christ, and have learned Christ, you will put off the old Man with
his corrupt Deeds, and put on the new Man of Righteousness and True Holiness,
or else your Love to Christ is but a Fancy.

Object. If this be a Character of a Beloved of Christ, I am afraid I have not
a dram of True Love to Christ: O how little do I live Christ! How contrary do I
live to Christ? This may be the Objection of a weak Believer.

Answ. You must not judge of your self by the measure of Grace, but by the
truth of Grace. Christ will not bring a pair of Balances to weigh your Graces,
but a Touchstone to try the Truth of them. The best of Saints are far short of
the Life they ought to i^e; far short of the Pattern Christ has set them. You
must not expect to attain it legally, but evangelically; not perfectly, but
sin^erely. But is it your chief Care and Business? Thus it is with every
Beloved of Christ. Can you in truth and sincerity say with David, Psalm. 119. 5,
6, 7, 112. The best of Saints are more in desires and endeavors then
seize. Here is the Mercy, we have to deal with God in a Covenant of
Grace: And this is the Glory of it, That it accepts of sincerity for
perfection. According to the tenor of it, a Christian is what he sincerely
desires and endeavors to be, 2 Cor. 8. 12. If there be first a willing mind,
it is accepted, according to what a man has, and not according to that a man
has not.

Doubting Soul, Are these the real Workings of thy Heart? ^ that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes! O that there were such an Heart in me! O that I
could wholly live to God! O that I might never sin more! O that I could come up
to the whole Will of God; that I could attain to the top of Holiness! This,
according to the Covenant of Grace, is living Christ: And here thou have an
Evidence of true Love to Christ.

4. A true Lover of Christ earnestly longs for a nearer conjunction to Christ,
fuller communion with Christ in Grace, in Glory.

1. In Grace: Isa. 26. 8, 9. The desire of the Soul is to his Presence; it
cannot live without the Presence of Christ: When it goes to a Duty, it is the
Presence of Christ it breaths after. O (...) will thou come unto me? Psalm. 101.
2. O that I may have communion with thee! Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves,
where th^^ feedest, where thou meetest with thy flocks: O let me not be of th^^
that turn aside, Cant. 1. 7. My soul breaks with longing, etc. Psalm. 119. 20.

Doubting Soul, Can thou read these in thy Heart? thou (...) an Evidence of
true Love to Christ. But thou (Soul) that (...) live without the Presence of
Christ; can go all the Day, all (...) Week without his presence, and be
quiet; company of (...) worldly Enjoyments can content thee: Thou have cause to
(...) nay thou may conclude, thou have not a dram of Saving-love (...)
Christ in thy Soul.

2. In Glory, Psalm. 42. 1, 2. O when shall I come and appear (...) thee? When
shall I have the full Enjoyment of Thee? These (...) the workings of a gracious
Soul. I have had some glympses (...) times; Oh, how glorious are they! Oh, when
shall I see his (...) Rev. 22. 4. We have some little Enjoyment of his Presence
(...) times; some times solace our selves with Love: and blessed be the Lord
for them. But how soon are they lost again? Oh, when will the time come, when
we shall enjoy him fully, without cessation, without intermission, for ever,
and ever, and ever! when we shall be for ever with the Lord: 1 These. 4. 17. I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ -- Moriar Domine, ut te videam;
nolo vivere, volo mori, August. Let me die, Lord, that I may see thee; I will
not live, I will die. -- Make haste, my Beloved, and be like to a roe or heart
on the mountains of spices, Cant. 8. ult. Come, Lord Jesus; Come quickly.

Note, Because I would not discourage the weakest Believer, You may take
notice, That Love may be considered in the spark, or in the flame; and that
this last Particular speaks Love rather in the flame.

5. A true Lover of Christ thinks nothing too much to do, nothing too much to
suffer for Christ.

1. Nothing too much to do for Christ. Lovers think they can never do too
much for one another: Genesis 29. 20. Jacob served seven Years for Rachel, and
they seemed but as a few Days, for the Love he had to her. A Beloved of Christ
thinks he can never Pray too much, Hear too much, Do too much in the Work of
Christ. Is it not otherwise with thee? Thou think thou can never do too
much for the World. Is not this thy Character, we read of, Eccles. 4. 8? There
is no end of all his labors for the World, Plowing, Sowing, Riding, Running,
Carking, Caring for the World; early and late, thou never think this too
much; but thou take little Pains for Christ. If one hour will not serve for
the World, thou will rise sooner: But I appeal to thy own Heart, when did
thou an hour the earlier for Prayer, to cry to God for a Christ? Thou art soon
weary of these, and think it more ado than needs. This speaks little Love
to Christ.

2. Nothing too much to suffer for Christ.

1. He thinks not too much to suffer Reproaches for Christ, Heb. 11. 26. He
accounts them his Riches, Glory, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

He thinks not too much to suffer Losses for Christ, loss of Goods, of Good
Name, Heb. 10. ^4. He believes he shall be no Loser by it, Mat. 19. 29. He has
this Principle rooted in his Heart, That he may lose much for Christ, but shall
never lose by Christ.

3. He thinks it not too much to suffer Death for Christ, Rev. 12. 11. They
loved not their Lives unto the death, Act. 21. 13.

6. A true Lover of Christ is exceedingly cast-down at the withdrawings of
Christ, and solaced with the returns of Christ.

1. He is exceedingly cast-down at the withdrawings of Christ. All his Peace
and Comfort is gone, when Christ is gone. The Spouse lost Christ; He withdrew
himself: And how was it with her? Her Soul failed; she was as swooning, dying.
As Jacob's life was bound up in the Lad's life, so is a Believer's life, and
all the comforts of it, in Christ. He says, as Absolon, when shut out from his
Father's Presence, Let me die, if I may not see his face; so says the Beloved
of Christ. And I have heard some Souls crying out most hideously, under Divine
Withdrawings, Oh, I cannot bear these Withdrawings! I cannot live without God's
Presence! I had rather die a thousand Deaths, than be in this Condition! Woe!
Woe! Woe is me! I sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar!

Thou Soul, that know not what these things mean, can read these in thine
Heart, whatever thy Doubtings and Mis-givings of Heart may be, about thy love
to Christ, thou may look upon them as Evidences of it: let not Satan rob
thee of thy peace and comfort: be not faithless, but believing; and believing,
rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. But if thou that read these
lines, art one that can endure distance from God, you cannot bear distance from
Friends, and those you love, but it is a great disquiet to you; but you can be
without God, and it never troubles you: let not Satan gull thee, nor thy Heart
deceive thee; for I tell thee from the Lord, That thou have not the least spark
of Saving Love to Christ.

2. He is exceedingly revived, rejoiced at the returns of Christ. He says, as
Mephibosheth, Let him take all, since my Lord is come back. Let Worldlings take
the World, so I may have Christ: Let Profane Ones take their Lusts, so I may
love Christ: let Voluptuous Ones take their Pleasures, so I may have Christ:
let Ambitious Ones take their Honors, so I may have Christ. I have enough: The
lines are fallen to me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage, Psalm.
16. 5, 6. Return to thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee, Psalm. 116. 6, 7.

Use 4. What Encouragement is here for poor awakened Soul^^ that are distressed
for a Christ? Oh, here is a Jesus full of love matchless love! away to him: He
is all love to coming Souls; he is all wrath to Unbelievers, to Sinners that
stand it out against him: he says, Those mine Enemies that will not come,
bring hither and (...) before me. But he is all love to coming souls; he stands
with open Arms ready to receive them: his Heart is full of love, Hands full of
love; Come, poor Sinners, here is my Blood, my Love, my Purchases, my Benefits,
all for thee; away with all your doubts and fears; do not dispute your selves
out of Christ.

Obj. Oh, but I am vile! so vile, I dare not come!

Ans. What if thou art never so vile, if Christ has love enough to swallow up
all thy vileness, then this need not hinder thy coming to Christ; his love is
infinite, boundless, bottomless: thy sin is but the sin of a finite Creature,
his love is the love of an Infinite God: Jer. 3. 12, 13, 14. Go and proclaim
these words, and say, Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I
will not cause mine anger to fall upon thee; for I am merciful, says the Lord.
God gives Commission to his Ministers to go and proclaim, That if Sinners will
come to him, they shall have Mercy: Soul, this I have commission from the Lord
to tell thee, That if thou will come in to the Lord, thou shall have Mercy: the
Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Obj. Oh, but I am a great Sinner! If I were not so great a Sinner, I could
hope!

Ans. What if thy sins are never so great, if the love of Christ be greater?
Isa. 1. 18. Come, says the Lord; and though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool. As if he had said, Let your Sins be never so great, of never such a
Crimson dye; yet if you will but come, you shall have Mercy: Though thy sins
have weakened the Law, and made that unable to save thee; yet it has not
weakened Christ, Romans 8. 3. Christ came to do that, which the Law could not
do: Heb. ^. 25. 26 That Text tells you, That he is able, to the uttermost, to
save those that come: Christ is able, to the uttermost of your sins, to the
uttermost of your doubts and fears, neither quantity nor quality of your sins
can pose Christ. There is not so much evil in all thy sins as there is fullness
in Christ, Mark 9. 23. Let thy sins be what they will, pardon and salvation are
possible, if thou do believe. The Blood of Christ is sufficient to drown
Mountains as well as Mole-hills. If thou see still more and more sins, though
legions of Lusts and Devils, yet all shall not hinder thy salvation, if they do
not hinder thy coming to Christ

Obj. Oh, but my Sins are so many, immumerable Evils compass me about, that I
am not able to dare to look up.

Ans. What if thy sins are never so many, if the love of Christ be much more?
Why should this hinder thy coming? And this he has declared, Romans 5. 20. Where
sin abounded, grace did much more abound. If thy Sins be never so abundant, if
the Grace of Christ shall abound much more, why should they hinder coming? Isa.
55. 7. Oh, come, Soul, throw away all thy Doubts, and come, and the Lord will
multiply to Pardon: He will make his Pardons more th^^ thy Sins. Oh, away to
Christ!

Obj. Oh, but I am afraid it is too late! If I had gone sooner, I might have
had mercy; but now I fear it is too late.

Ans. It is never too late, whilst Christ calls: And Christ calls thee, after
all this: Jer. 3. 6, 7. Judah there had multiplied her Abominations; yet says
the Lord, I said, after she had done all these things, Turn unto me. This is
the Voice of the Lord Jesus to thee. Ah, Sinner, thou halt multiplied thy
Transgressions; yet I say unto thee, after all these, Come unto me. Ah, poor
Soul! thou art going headlong to Destruction; I pity thee; my Bowels yearn
toward thee: come to me; here is my Blood, my Love, my Grace, my Glory, my
All: come, and I am thine, and all mine are thine. Do thou not yet believe?
Oh, dreadful! Then thou make God a Liar, 1 John 5. 10. What? make Christ a
Liar! It is a plain case, Christ says, Come, and I will pardon, love, save
thee. Thou fay'st, He will not; you dare not believe him; you dare not come.

But to plead a little further with thee: O that thou would come! come and
^ee! come and try! come and venture!

1. Come! The Designation of Christ is for thee, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. It is spoken
of Christ: He is anointed for this very end, appointed of the Lord to bind up
broken Hearts, comfort mourning Souls, to deliver poor Sinners from their
captivity to Sin, the Devil, and Hell, Mat. 9. 13. If thou were not a Sinner,
thou were not such a one as Christ came to save; for he came to save Sinners.

2. Come! The Invitation of Christ is to thee. Art not thou distressed for a
Christ? Then be of good comfort; Rise, he calls thee, Mat. 11. 28. Art not
thou a-thirst? Do thou not long for Christ? Then be of good comfort; Come, he
calls thee, Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 17. It is every one that is burdened, it is
every one that is a-thirst; therefore thou.

3. Come! And the Promise is to thee, Joh. 6. 37. Him that comes, I will in no
wise cast out. It is, whosoever comes; therefore it is thou, if thou come:
thou shall certainly be received; by no means in the world rejected: Joh. 3.
16. Whosoever believes in him, shall have everlasting life: Whosoever does it;
therefore, if you come, the Promise is yours: It is not said, If you be not a
great Sinner; If you have not abundance of sins; If you have not continued long
in sin: No, No; it is, Whosoever comes; be he a great Sinner, an old Sinner,
if he comes, he shall have Eternal Life: Come then, and the Promise is to thee:
Christ is thine; the Promise thine; Eternal Life thine.

4. Come! The Heart of Christ is toward thee: Hos. 2. 14. I will allure her,
and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her. -- Postquam
perduxero eam, (as Tremellius has it.) God humbled the Fathers in the
Wilderness, and then brought them to Canaan. Has God humbled thee? broke thy
Heart for thy Sins? Come to him, and he will speak a word to thee, that shall
do thee good at heart: He will tell thee, His Christ is thine; His Love is
thine, etc. ver. 19. I will betroth thee to me in righteousness and judgment,
and in loving kindness and mercy. The Scripture makes mention of Espousals, and
of Marriage, to express the great Mystery of the Grace of God to Souls. It is
observable, That this gracious Promise comes in after the mention of their
great Wickedness, ver. 3. What does all this speak to thee, but as if God
should say, Thou have been a vile Wretch, and I might justly cast thee off for
ever; but I am merciful, I am gracious; come to me; and if thou do come, as
surely as thou come to me, I will marry thee? As I am a Righteou; God, as I
am a God of Faithfulness, yea, I will marry thee in loving kindness: my Bowels
are in it; I will, I will, I will; I will betroth thee to me in Faithfulness,
and thou shall be mine. Soul, Do yet Believe? Will thou venture upon Jesus
Christ?

5. It is for his Interest to receive thee: As Christ's Heart is upon the Work,
so his Interest is in it: He will lose his Blood else, as to you, Isa. 53. 11.
His Soul is in travail for thee: He will not be satisfied till thou come.
Will not this Argument prevail with thee? Oh, go and satisfy Christ's Travail!

6. Come, for it is Christ's Office to receive those Souls that come, and he is
faithful, Hebr. 2. 17. He is an Highpriest: It is his Office to make
Reconciliation for Sins; and he is faithful. Christ would not be faithful if he
should refuse one Sinner that comes to him. O what Encouragement is here for
poor Sin-sick Souls that are distressed for a Christ! Lay all these Things
together: Christ is appointed for thee; Christ calls thee to come to him; he
promises to receive thee if thou come; his Heart is upon it; it is for his
Interest to receive thee; he should not be faithful if he refuse thee. O away,
away to Christ: Cast away all thy Doubts and Fears; venture again upon Christ:
Cast thy self upon him in the Promise, and he is thine. Beno more faithless,
but believing.

Will you not yet believe? Will you not yet come? If you do not

1. You lessen the Grace of Christ: You make the Grace of Christ to be less
than your Sins: You want only a view of the Greatness, Riches, Infiniteness of
the Grace of God in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 6, 7, 8. Here is Grace, Riches of Grace,
exceeding Riches of Grace in Christ: 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15. Lo the Gradations;
Grace, Riches of Grace, exceeding Riches of Grace, exceeding abundant Grace
Here is Grace abundantly exceeding all your Sins. O let this Grace constrain
you to believe: Come to Jesus.

2. You limit the Grace of Christ: As if it were enough for others, such a
Sinner, and such a Sinner, but not for you. It was ^ Brand upon the Israelites
that they limited the Holy One of (...) They spoke against God. What did they
say? Can God furnish a (...) in the wilderness? He clave the rock, and the
waters came: Can ^e (...) bread also? Psalm. 78. 19, 20, 41. O the
unreasonableness of Unbel^^^^ Certainly he that could turn the Rock into Water,
could (if he plea^^ turn it into Bread. Is not this your Case? As if you should
(...) He can pardon others, but can he pardon me? Can he over (...) all my
Sins? This is to limit the Grace of Christ.

3. You dishonor the Grace of God His Wisdom: As if the might a better way
been found out. His Love: As if htere (...) not enough for you. His Power: As
if he was not able to pass (...) so many Offenses. His Truth: And so make him a
Liar. (...) to deny him to be a God: For if he be God, he is Truth, yea (...)
it self. Abraham honored him herein, Romans 4. 20. He (...) not at the promise
of God, through unbelief; but was strong in faith, (...) ving glory to God. O
it is a clear case, it is your unbelief: be (...) of it.

4. You displease God by your unbelief. Luther lay under (...) for a time: but
when he was lead to this, that nothing was (...) pleasing to God, then to
believe in his Son; the Work was easy to (...)

Ah Soul! thou do not think how pleasing it is: Thou can (...) please God
better, then by believing in Jesus.

5. You grieve Christ, and his Spirit, Psalm. 95. 10, 11. (...) years was I
grieved with this generation, and swear they should not (...) into my rest. Who
were they that he was so grieved with? (...) may see, if you compare it with
Hebr. 3. 17, 18, 19. They (...) those that believed not.

6. You provoke God. A Man is provoked, when we will (...) believe him, Psalm.
95. 8. Harden not your hearts as in the (...) What was the Provocation? Psalm.
78. 22. Because they (...) in God, and trusted not in his salvation. Therefore
the Lord was (...) a fire was kindl^d against Jacob; and anger came up against
Israel. (...) sweet Soul! dread this unbelief.

7. You lose all the sweet Sights and Tastes of Christ, and Grace. I shall say
to thee, (as Christ to Martha) John 11. 40. If thou would believe, thou
should see the glory of God. O the glorious Grace, and Love you should see!
You should see Christ glorious in pardoning Love, comforting Love, saving Love.

Doubting Soul, here is an open Door, And will thou not enter? O venture,
venture upon Christ: As Esther 4. 16. If I perish, I perish: As the Lepers at
the Gate of Samaria, 2 Kings 7. 3, 4. If they went into the City they died; if
they stayed there they died. The Syrians were their Enemies, they might expect
death from them; but being in this dilemma, they ventured, and had good
Success. Soul, this is just thy case: If thou stay in thy Sins thou dyest; thou
may look upon Christ as thine Enemy: He may justly curse thee, damn thee;
but thou must be damned if thou go not to him Thou can but perish;
therefore venture on him: Go, and believe, and thou shall certainly have good
Success. Never any perished in this way.

Believe, and you exalt the Grace of Christ. Christ is exalted; Acts 5. 31.
Grace is exalted; Isa. 30. 18. Are your Sins as great as the Mountains? Are
there Mountains of vileness, and unworthiness in the way? Grace is exalted
above them all. What is the great Mountain before Zerubbabel! It shall be made
a Plain, and thou shall at last cry, Grace, Grace, Zech. 4. 7.

Use 5. [1. Consolat.] To all Believers, both weak and strong. O blessed are ye
of the Lord; ye are partakers of this matchless, unparallel Love. Christ loves
you with a surpassing Love: A Love that cannot be expressed; a Love that cannot
be comprehended: We cannot express the Love that ye are loved with, neither can
ye conceive it. Ye are loved, even as Christ is, John 17. 23. with a great,
with an infinite, with an everlasting Love. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
nor heart conceived, the things which God has prepared for you, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

For Direction, hearken to these Counsels.

1. Admire this Love, as Paul here does: Indeed you cannot sufficiently admire,
but be admiring. Cry out as the Apostle; Oh the depth of the riches of the
wisdom and goodness of God! How unsearchable are his ways, and past finding
out! Romans 11. 33. O the height, and depth, and length, and breadth, of this
Love of Christ! Ephesians. 3. 18. Call in the Help of all the Beloved of Christ:
Help me, all my Fellow-Disciples; help me, all ye Friends of the Bridegroom:
Join in this Choir, all ye Angels and Archangels. O magnify the Lord with me,
and let us exalt his Nametogether.

2. Labor to return Love for Love. Does Christ love you? O d^ you love him?
Are you dear to Christ? O let Christ be dear to you^ Say as the Spouse, Cant.
5. 16. This is my beloved, this is my friend.

Love him with a Love of desire: Love him with a Love of (...) light: Love him
with a Love of admiration: Love him with (...) Love of Satisfaction: Love him
with the Love of Adhaesion. (...) you cannot say you are sick of Love; be sick,
that you can (...) him no more.

3. Take heed, O take heed of abusing this Love. What a (...) thing will it be
to abuse this Love? Is this thy Kindness to (...) Friend? may Christ say.

Quest. When do we abuse this Love?

Answ. 1. When we indulge our selves in Sin. Every Beloved (...) Christ should
say, as Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. How shall I do this great wi^^edness, and sin
against Christ?

2. When we grow remiss in Duty. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. O (...) Love of Christ
should constrain to be more humble, holy, activ^ diligent; careful to please,
fearful to offend, live at a higher (...) for Heaven.

3. When we doubt and question his Love: Give way to (...) giving Thoughts, the
Unbelievings of our own Hearts. Christ (...) needs take this very ill at our
Hands, when he has given (...) demonstrations of his Love, that greater cannot
be given, John (...) 13. Romans 5. 8. Herein God commended his Love, as if a
great (...) Testimony could not be given.

Walk answerably to this Love. Oh, how should a People so (...) loved walk! How
earnestly does the Apostle press this? Ephesians. 4. (...) He beseeches them to
walk worthy. So Colos. 1. 10. That ye may (...) worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing. (Believers) Be ye Humble, (...) Heavenly, Spiritual, Zealous of Good
Works, Tit. 2. 14. Be Zeal (...) for Christ's Honor, Zealous for his Glory.
Lovers can never (...) they do enough for one another; are tender of one
another. (...) tender of Christ's Name and Interest; study his Love; endeav^^^
to exalt his Name, his Love, his Honor and Glory. Oh, (...) manner of Persons
ought ye to be, in all holy Conversation and ^^^liness? 2 Pet. 3. 11. Make this
the Care and Business of your (...) love Christ, live Christ, glorify Christ:
And when Christ, who (...) your Life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in Glo^^

FINIS.

