A LETTER FROM Mr Alexander Sh^ilds, Minister to the Regim^^^ Whereof the late
Noble Earl of ANGU^^^ was Colonel, now in Flanders: Direc^^^ to the General
Assembly of (...) Church (...) SCOTLAND, which was to have m^^^ at Edinburgh in
December 1693.
Reverend and Dear Brethren
THO^ it has seemed good to Holy Providence (...) time, to Burden our ^ot with
many gravami^^^ (...) Circumstances, while engaged in a Bloody (...) exposed to
many Hazards and Hardships, Trou^^ (...) and Temptations in a strange Land, A
Land of (...) ^^^ven Images, A Thearte of many deplorable Cal^^^ ^^^^ties and
Devastations, imbittered with the Sorto^^^ (...) being o^ such a^^stance from
the benefit of your Counsel and the con^^^ (...) of your Communion, Yet it is
no small allay to all our several griev^ (...) (...) perswa^^^, that we have a
share of Your Simpathy and (...) The assurance of your being willing and ready
to assist and en^^^ge us every way, to the outmost of your Power, and the
Confidence (...) our favorable acceptance of our addresses for it. Were it not
for ^^^s, though the Cause be very important, the Necessity very cogent, my ^^^vn
Inclination and Ambition very earnest, and the desires of others ^^^ar more to
be valued) very urgent* I should not have presumed (and yet ^^^n not without
Blushing) to trouble you with such an Application and ^^e^tour from so mean
Hand upon such a material Head. But (...) the neces^^ty of the case, and the
import^^nity of our best Friends here sensible of i^. ^^^pells me; So the
Confi^ence of your Affection and Zeal or a common ^^^d Interest, Imboldens me
humbly to lay before you, that which is requir^^d by our King, expected by all
our Country Men here desired by all that ^^^e our Reformation, And requested by
that particular Regiment, which ^^^ttend upon. That it is vacant numbers may be
filled up with Recruits of people, of the Presbyterian p^^swation, and of a
good Conversation Answering that Character. And ^^at you may be moved to
contribute your help and assistance there^^* I humbly propose these
considerations.

I. Though War in it self be no desirable thing. Yet in the present con^^^tion of
the World, the management and pro^^cution of it for a good ^^^se, is a good and
lawful ^^cation suitable to Christians, and consistent ^^^th Piety; and not to
be excluded from The Whatsoever th^^^s are ^^ue, Whatsoever things are Honest,
Whatsoever things are just, that Christians are called to think on, and
Ministers may e^courage them to (...) is true indeed the present constitution
of our Armies, wherein (through ^^e remissness, and backwardness of the Godly
to ^ill them up) s^^^^ (...) Wicked Pros^iga^s so abound, to the grief and
vex^^^on of the h^nd^ul of (...) that fear God among them to be ^ssoc^a^ with
them in ^^^as, may be ^^oght neither pure, free of polluting Snares, not Lovely
to them that ^^^e their Example, not of so good Report as to adduce others to a
Concur^^^e. But as this joining in Arms with them for a common Righteous
^^^rest (not professedly upon the account of Religion) does not Infa^^ ^^^itive
Confederacy with persons of a different Religion, in any way (...) Imports a
neare^ accession to theirs, or a Recession from any point of ours, for the
advantage of theirs, of to the prejudice of (...) having ^^ill absolute
freedom, to avouch the Remotest distinction (...) their principles, and
abstraction from their practices and examples; So (...) this station* as well
as any other, many have and any of the Godly (...) Exercise themselves in
keeping a good Conscience, void of offense (...) ward God and Man, and walk and
shine (...) the blameless Sons of G^^^ (...) w^^^ Rebuke in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation. For (...) none have more ^^^tisarious, or more
^ffectual motives and inducement (...) to be Exercised unto Godl^ness, than
they who are exposed to so man (...) Dangers and Deaths ^very day; So none do
despise these Calls, but such (...) break all Bonds of Divine and h^mane Laws,
and would do so in every Lo^^ It is the multitude of such presumptuous
Deboshees that brings an evil Re^^port upon the profession of Arms which deters
the Godly from it, and the (...) aversness upon that account makes way for
bringing in more profane p^^^ (...) so^s. who^e increase in Numbe^^ emboldening
them (...) insolence, prov^^^ more and more discouraging to all that would
concur, in using endeavour^^ either to ^ight against the Enemies and repress
their Pride, Or to conten^^ against Commi^^ants and suppress their Profanity.
But if those that lov^^^ Ke^igion, would be stirred up to a suitable Zeal and
Ambition to outvie (...) Wicked in all appearan^^s of forwardness for
prosecuting the War, (...) such a good Interest. It would open a door of hope*
both of sooner su^^ ^^ing our Enemies, and repr^^^ing their Pride, And of more
easily re^^^^^ning our Ar^^^s (...) supp^^ssing their Profanity S^re none can
pr^^^ ^^ndi^ much obligation to the duty, (...) and right to the privilege
(...) being employed in a War so necessary for securing the Interest of
Religion as those that by Confession have suffered for it, and by profession
and practice (...) the Honor of it* But if all such shall be deterred from our
Armies* because of their Profanity* and wasted out of it without being
Recruited, then they must all be Profane and Wicked: And if so, wh^^ hope of
succes^. and what confidence in praying for it? Divine So^^^ ^aignity indeed
can give success to a Wicked Army, and more freque^ly (...) ^^^^ed than a good
Cause; (...) how can one Pray for this (...) Faith, (...) others is no promise
for it? And though we should Pray in Fa^^^ what do (...). My (...), though a Man
say (...) has Faith (...) (...) Works, can Faith save him? If a Brother or
Sister be Naked and de^^^^te of daily Food, and one say to him, Depart in
peace. Be ye warmed (...) filled, notwithstanding you give them not these
things which are ^^edful to the Body, What does it profit? Even so Fai^^ ^f it
has no Works, is Dead: Even so perhaps it may be no impertinent allusion to
al^^dge Praying in Faith for a Wicked Army, without working something to make
it better, will not save it* And if an Army or Regiment be wasted and destitute
of honest Soldiers to Fight for an honest Cause, and you ^^^y to the rest only
Depart in peace, go on, Fight and prosper. Notwithstanding you give them not
Recruits, which are needful to the filling up of their Body, what does it
prosite? In this I plead for nothing but what is lawful and also possible, to
incite some honest Men to concur, (...) Fighting for a Cause which all honest
Men pray for. I hope in Scotland, notwithstanding of the Hundreds that have
been destroyed by the fury of the Enemies* there is not such paucity of
Presbyterians, but that every Synod (that is planted) could make a Regiment
consisting of such if there were occasion. And therefore when but One is
desired out of all and but a few Recruits to make up that one, it will not be
difficult to fulfill the desire. It is a thing unessayable indeed to make an
Army of Sa^^^, but I humbly conceive, it is not so unsensible to get a Regiment
of Presbyteri^ns, if their Ministers encourage them to ^t.

II. It is not only lawful and Righteou^, but expedient and necessary for (...)
that have Zeal for the Glory of God, the good of the Church and Country thereof
they are Members, the security of the Government and Laws un^^^ which they live
a peaceable and quiet Life in all Godliness and honesty, ^ot only to wish well,
and Pray earnestly for these dearest and (...) In^^rests; But also to Act,
Content, and lay themselves out to the outmost of ^^eir power, to help foreward
the vigorous prosecution of this War. ^^at is so necessary for their
preservation, and ^^^o clearly and declaredly ^ated, not for the petty
Intrigues and Emulations of particular ^^inces, But for the necessary defense
of these greatest concerns so emi^^ntly exposed to hazard, and lying at Stake,
(...) in Britain and Ireland ^^ly, but all Europe over, in opposition to the
grass^^^ and gr^^ing usur^^tion of the declared Enemies of God and Mankind. The
quarrel I grant is not formally declared for Religion (in that case associati^^
(...) Papists would not be so clear, in a War wherein a Religion contra^^^^
(...) theirs must be both our motive, measure and end) but consequentially
(...) has such a near connection with and concern in this great and Righteou^
Cause, that if the Enemy be suffered to prevail, all the legal establishmen^
(...) of it in (...) and all the Re^^^med Churches will be utterly subverted
(...) and reduced to the desolate condition of the Church in France: which
(...) human deliberation nothing can avert, if there be not a more effectua^
check given to the insolency, and a more universal running to Arms, to resist
and extinguish the ^ury of these two Smoking Firebrarnds, that threa^on the
conflagration of Europe, and of Britain with the first. And in such a necessary
Cause none should reckon themselves more concerned than P^^^byterians, who know
best the worth of th^se Gracious Interests by their long groaning for the want
of them, under the late Government; And therefore should demonstrat greatest
Resolution, to maintain them when so far recovered and who had the greatest
hand in Exa^ctorating the ^ate King, and Establishing this Kings Authority in
Scotland, And therefore should reckons themselves most obliged to oppose the
one, and defend the other, and whose Zeal for Religion and Liberty has been so
Eminent and ^^^ou^, and even to strangers, That they expect upon this occasion
to find in Flanders whole Brigads of Religious Soldiers, And are stumbled,
when they observe so much Profanity in Officers and Soldiers and Chaplains too
of so many Scots Regiments, thinking them to be all Presbyterians, because
coming from a Country where Presbytry is the established order. It will be
therefore very necessary and expedient upon many accounts, that at least you
give your help to the completing of one Regiment, that may Answer the
Character, and maintain the Honor of that name.

III. Nor ought it to be misregarded, or forgotten how much all of us are
obliged in point of gratitude, as well as necessity, to help forward this War
in this Country, for the more immediate defense of the seven united Provin^^^*;
which are Reformed Sister Churches, and upon that account to be carefully
preserved, which ly next to our own, And upon that consideration, as an
advanced Post to our own Camp, ought to be with (...) ^reatest concern and
Caution defended; which have after affoorded a Sanctuary of protection to us
and others under ou^ persecutions, and therefore it is both the least and the
best signification of our grateful Respect to their Kindnesses, as well as of
^egard to our own interests to s^nd over some Soldiers to Fight in the
Fronteers, and keep off the Enemy from our own; and which to all their former
favors have added (...) very signally and strongly enforci^^ ^he ^^^^ion, in
f^rnishing us with a King, who has been the Honors instr^ment in the hand of
God, of rescuing us from Popery and Slavery, relieving us from Oppression and
Persecution, restoring to us Presbyterian Government, delivering us from the
grievous yoke of Prelacy, and of the putting and keeping us in the peaceable
possession of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; And therefore both in
Conscience, Honor, Loyalty and gratitude, the Subjects of such a King
especially those that are the most sensible (...) of such ^avours, should be
am^^^io^s to ^^^^ce all others in a (...) and zealous serving him in these
Wars, that are so necessary for the p^^^^^vation of these privileges. Shall
the Prelatick party, th^^ cannon be so sensible of the good effects of the
change of the Government* but rather reckon themselves Injured by the Favors
bestowed upon us be ^o thank^^lly forward in his service, for the kindnesses
extended to them, (...) they can Muster so many brave Regiments ready and (...)
for the War^ and will not the Presby^^^ians f^r more obliged, for all the
Kindnesses the King has sh^w^ them do so much as make one Regiment good to
serve him abroad, when he requires and expects it? Were not his Constancy,
Justice and Reg^^^^ our better Right* greater than the encouragements he gets
by any pr^^fs of our thankfulness, he might be tempted to weary of bellowing
favors upon them that will do him so little service, and extend them rather in
those that profess more forwardness. I shall not mention any services that this
particular Regiment has do^^ for your Interest and advantage, either at Home
o^ Abro^^, to merit your Kindness, not the esteem, that the King upon the
account thereof, has expressed for (...) of such a Character and his desire to
have it consist of such: But I humbly presume the consideration of Gratitude is
many ways strongly urgent, that you should lend your hand to make this a good
Regiment.

IV. Nor is it unworthy of consideration, that your own (...) advantage, in a
prudent respect to probable Events, seems to plead for (...) ^ame: For not only
more remotely may it be thought a promising mean ^ith the Blessing of God,
contributing to the accelerating the overthrow of the publ^^k Enemy, and
securing the common great interest; But in a nea^^r prospect this proof of your
Zeal for the King's Service, may be none of the most despicable or desperate
means, and as little inconvenient as any you can use* to ingratiat your selves
in his favor, and promote your interest at Court* The seeing of this your
concernedness to strengthen his Armies, will open his Ears and Heart to your
just Requests, will con^^^^ Friends, and give them confidence to appear in your
Cause, And stop the Mouth of your undermineing Traducers, when they shall have
to more occasion to Reproach that you will do the King no Service. And in case
of after Revolutions (which all things in time are subject to) or occurring
exigences that necessarly require Warlike expeditions, if this Regiment be
supplied with honest Recruits, it may be a standing Nursery, for breeding brave
Faithful and Zealous Officers and Soldiers, for s^rving their (...): and there
will not be afterward that necessity, or Excuse for ^^eking or admitting
profane Malignant and disaffected Men to these public Charges and Trusts, to
which for want of others they have been too commonly advanced, to the great
detriment and hinderance of a good Work. It may be therefore expected of your
prudence, that you will have some regard to such advantageous Interests, and
nor always veri^y that Proverb to be only wise behind the hand.

V. It will not be impertinent farther to Refl^ct upon the Honor and Cred^^
that may be in doing of such a pie^e o^ Service: which is a Topic that should
not only have force with Soldiers, but with Ministers and Christians also,
^^^^soever things are Lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report, if there be
any (...), and if their be any Praise, think on these things I beseech you
therefore, Reverend and Honored in the Lord be pleased to th^nk on this a
little, what a virtue and praise it may be, that the Professors o^ the ^^ue
Religion, shall excel the Professors of Profanity, in a forwardness to promote
a War that is so Righteous, and necessary for the Interest of it, as much as
they do exceed them in zeal to maintain the practice of it; And how unseemly
and absurd it is, that Strangers and Enemies to the practice of Religion,
should yet be more ambitious to Fight for the outward Interest of it, than ^^ey
that profess they cannot live without it. What a Praise and Glory were (...)
th^^ poor p^^^^^ed Presbyterians, who not long ago suffered so much, and so
long, (...) adhering to their Reformation and Christian Liberties, an^ dur^^
not (...) seen on the Street for fear of Imprisonment and Ba^ishi^^^ Hea^^ing
and Hanging, should now appear (...) the Fields ready and resolute to Fight,
for preserving what they suffered for before, and not ashamed nor a^^^d to
speak with their Enemies ^n the gate: And after having go them in ^ome ^^sure
P^^pressed at Home, should not confine their zeal to the narrow ^^ounds of
their own Country, b^t pu^^^e them Abroad, and extend it against all the
Enemies of all the Churches, and then and there make it appear, that the change
of their Lot, has not changed their Life, but that in the midst of a perverse
and profane Army, They can be us Blameless, Harm^^^s, and unrebukable in their
practice, and Strict, T^^der and T^nacious in their Principles and Profession,
when they are in a Fighting ^^fe, as before when they were in a suffering Life
and make it evident to the Conviction of the World. That Suffering, and Praying
and (...) very Compatible? And on the other hand, what a shame and Scandal is
it, for Eminent ^^^erers, either to turn so filly, unconcerned, or Faint
heatred. as to keep altogether aloof, from Jeoparding their Lives in the high
places of the Fields, and coming out to the help of the Lord against the
mighty, or so narrow, private, and p^^ching in their Zeal, as to re^^^ it to
endeavors for their own security only, and against their nearest and most
immediate Enemies within their own Land: And that of all the Presbyterians in
Scotland, whose Zeal and Sufferings, and A^tings for Reformation, has been so
renowned amongst the Notions, now when the^^ is opportunity (...) them to (...)
and shi^e and make it better known to the World; (...) Regiment can be made
abroad in^irely consisting of such, but that our Troops from S^^tland, (...)
gene^^^ly (...) pro^anest ^ossians in the Army; an offer^e and s^nn^^^ng ^^th
(...) ^^^pi^^s and Protestants, and that particular Regiment that (...)
signally heats that Character amongst them (and ^f Rec^^^ted might (...) in the
Credit of it,) must either turn to nothing, or degenerate like the rest to the
reproach of all What a Glory and Honor were it, for those wh^^ (for their
adhering to their Religion and Liberties, and wrestling against Tyrants ^^legal
impositions upon their Consciences) have been unjustly reproache^ with
Rebelliousnesse and Disaffection to Monarchy, as such that could live under no
Government should now as soon as they had got a Government that they might live
under, Confute and Confound all such lying C^l^mi^ies, by making it appear in
their present resolutenesse, (...) promo^e and prosecute this War, that they
could not indeed bear Ty^^^y, and therefore n^w are resolved to spend the last
drop of their Blood, to withstand its Reintroduction, and that they always
longed for, a Righteous Government, and therefore will contribute their utmost
to its defense, and will sooner part with their lives, than be robbed of it
again; and by demonstrating that they as far exceed others in a resolute
resisting these Tyrants (against whom the present War is stated) as formerly
they (...) of their ^^^^ity more than others, and that they as far excel all
others is, a ze^^dou^ forwardness for the defense of this Government, as they
(...) more obliged man others, to the benefits of it, and did appear before
others to ^^ense the qua^^el of it? And on the other hand what a dishonor and
disgrace will it be, (...) ^oly under these C^^^^met and by your remis^^^ to
imb^^den your Adversaries, with open (...), more and more to (...), that the
Presbyterians in Scotland, are either despe^^ally weak that they cannot give
the King a Regiment (...) serve him in the Wars abroad, and that (...) he ought
to despise them, as a People that can do him no services Or so perve^^ly
wicked, that they can rise in Rebellions, and fight against Kings, b^t for
none; Or so disorderly wilful, that they can be Sould^^^s at Home, where when
they weary they can have access mutinously to desert, but not abroad in a well
disciplined Army? And finally what an Honor and Credit as well as Interest
were it, to have a number of honest (...) brav^ Officers and So^ldiers trained
o^ to the Art of War, entirely devot^^^ the interest of God; that might upon
all occasions, when need re^^^^^, do their Country eminent and Faithful
Service? And on the other hand, what an unaccountable discred^^ ^ir, (...) well
as ^^^ful, when ever there is need of Soldiers to be forced to make recourse
told Principled and Scandalous men who are both a shame to the Cause, and may
be tempted to betray it? I know and will acknowledge. Much Respected Brethren,
that your Humility, together with your present humbling difficulties, will not
allow you to (...) great things of this Nature, and that (do your best) it is
impossible to avoid all reproaches of ^^ing Mouths, but I am so Ambitious as to
presume the Rec^^ting of this Regiment with Presbyterians, will neither
^^^flect upon you^ (...) Honour^ but effectually re^^te several Reproa^he.

VI, Unto this I subjoine the many encouragements that may invi^^ and allure
Honest Men, which are such (...) are not always, nor every where common, and
without which I (...) no^ (...) the Confidence to (...) them to a Lot and
Con^^^^ship, commonly so ob^^xious t^ Sins. (...) and Sorrows Here they may be
Encouraged, not only to be good Soldiers by the Kings presence and example,
but to be good (...) if they will respect either the Law^ of God or the Kings
orders* (...) encourage the Religious has used many ende^vours to Reform the
Vicious, by d^spersing Books among them for that (...), and by many repeated
Proclamations of Edicts for punishing them. And in this Regiment (though now much
(...) and worsted) (...) may expect yet a serious and pious Remnant, with whom
they may have (...) in Religious Duties; to which they may also be encouraged
by the Kings expressed desire and expectation, that it should be Recr^^^^^
(...) and by his several ways signifying his respect to us upon (...) granting
^^^se Requests, and upon our application, keeping from us (...) ill Off^^^^,
that othe^ways would have been imposed upon us: He has now (...) Honorable
Colonel J^^^^son to be ^ur C^^^^^, who^^ (...) Honest Men to fill up the
Vacancies of his Regiment, promises upon his word of Honor, (...) by all
^^cur^^^es, that if they desire (...) shall give them their Discharge at the
end of three (...). I need (...) add how convenient (...) have so many together
(...) one (...) and way, whereby (...) need no^ (...) the insultings of any,
(...) may thereby find, to promote good things b^th among our (...) others,
that otherways we can have no Capacity nor op^^^tunity for, no^ how
inconvenient it will be, that the King should (...) disappointed, our Officers
affronted, our Maligners hands strengthened, and (...) Friends more and more
weakened

I shall therefore ^^^lude, Begging you will be pleased to conside^^^^ ^^^^^en,
(...) Communica^ these o^ other more engaging perswasive^^ (...) Honest Men to
come over with our Officers; Whereby you (...) the greatest a^t of Charity and
compassion toward your po^^^^ unworthy Brother here le^t alone, as if it were
in Meshech, and Tents (...) Which yet by this you shall convert into a little
Zion, and Enco^^^^ (...) Live and D^^ with these honest Isra^lites that you
shall commend (...) my Charge, And to endure with all Cheerfulness, all the
Fatiqu^^^ ^^ouble and Hazards of these weary Wars. Otherways if I may not on^^
(...) this desire. My next must be to Be^^ for the Lords sake, that you would
relieve me of this Banishment, and allow me to see the Lords Ar^ and Habitati^s
^gain in my Native Country^ in the mean time hoping you will pleas^^ (...) mo^e
the (...) that is said, than the unwor^^^ (...) of (...). And Begging pardon
for this presumption and ^^^xness ^^^bsci^^^ my self.

Reverend Brethren and Fathers. Your Son, Brother, Servant, and Supplicant*
Alexander Sheilds.


