The lamentable CASE OF THE SAILORS OF THE English Navy, MOST Humbly offered to
the Consideration of the Honorable House of Commons.

Some further REASONS Humbly offered by the SAILORS, TO THE Consideration of
the Honorable House of Commons, for taking off the Q 's and R 's set upon
their Names in the Navy Books.
WE know your Honors are not insensible of the great Advantage of the Fleet to
the security of the Realm, Nature having placed your Island in such a part of
the watery Globe, that the Land-men cannot be secure without the assistance of
the Sailors; nor can the Nation subsist under its own Laws and Fundamental
Rights, without a good understanding betwixt both. The Sea not only affords you
floating Castles, which are the Walls and Bullworks of your Nation, but it
supplies you with the greatest part of the Money raised for the Defense of the
Kingdom, for which Reason, the Abuses of the Sailors seem yet the more hard in
point of Pay; for thus they seem to have a Natural as well as Rightful Claim to
their Wages. Had the Money raised upon Land, been the only Sum appropriated for
the payment of the Army, and the Tonnage and Poundage upon Shiping, with all
Duties laid on Merchandise, outward and inward, appropriated for the Navy, the
Sailors would have had a very generous Allowance.

We do not complain of the Allowance made us by this Honorable House, it is
indeed generous enough; we are content with our Wages, had we any way to come
at our own; and we are persuaded that your Honors, when you gave us such
Allowances for Provision and Pay, did intend it should be equally distributed
according to the true Intent and Meaning of your Acts. We cannot find in any of
your Acts the Commissioners of the Admiraltry or Navy empowered to stop our
Wages, under pretense of Q's and R's. We yet believe our selves to be English
Men, entitled to our Franchises and free Birthrights, and must judge our
selves to be so, until such time as we are Bastardised by Act of Parliament.

The Soldiers have Judicatures appointed them, whether they may appeal, when
abused in point of Pay; But the Sailors, who are bold to assert, that they have
done the Nation as much Service, and earned their Money as hard as any, can
appeal no where but to such Persons as have done them the highest Injustice,
and are solely left to the Judgment of their Enemies.

We are here unwilling to recriminate and urge the Hardships we have met with
at Sea, by being put to short Allowance in the Channel, a thing unknown to
former Ages; we are willing to forget our bad Provisions, the Pease, Bread, and
stinking Beef and Pork we have eaten, when this Honorable House allowed us all
Species good in their kind. But the want of our Pay, after these Hardships, is
a Greivance intolerable, when after so tedious an absence from our Wives and
Families, we must have the unhappy entertainment to see them Starve at Home,
and be cursed by the Parishes to which they are now burdensome.

We hope this Honorable House is thoroughly sensible of our Hardship, in having
our Wages detained from us, under the pretense of Q's and R's, and the
deplorable Condition of our necessitous Families, occasioned by this Greivance,
is worth the Consideration of this Honorable House, as also of their
Compassion. A Sailor is able by his Employment to keep his Family from the
Parish, when his Wages are duly paid him; but when detained from him after this
manner, not only he, but those that have trusted him with their Stocks, in
expectation of just Payment, must be burdensome to their Neighbor.

We would therefore humbly urge our deplorable Circumstances as highly worthy
the Consideration of this Honorable House: We hope our good Service may plead
for us, and that the loss of our Blood and Limbs in the Service of our Country,
shall be no occasion of the loss of our Pay. The Story of la Hogue will be a
standing Monument of our Bravery to future Ages, and we had no share in the
Affair of Monsieur Pointy, or that of Tholoun, yet kept out of our Pay, when
such Commanders as run away with their Ships had no R put upon their Names in
the Navy-Books. We envy them not the Bounty allowed them; we are contented with
our Wages when we can get it. All we desire is the Payment of what we ventured
our Lives to get; and we in all Humility hope we shall not incure the
Displeasure of this Honorable House, when we complain of our loss of Pay, and
of our being whipped and pickled into the Bargain.

All which is humbly submitted to the Wisdom of this Honorable House.


