Some Select QUERIES Humbly Offered to the Consideration OF THE D -- of C -- t
-- b -- y.
SIR,
In your Preface before Bishop Wilkins's Sermons, you recommend Moderation to
the World for a great Virtue; wherefore the first Query is;

I. Whether the greatest Trimmer be the most virtuous Man. And if so?

II. Whether the D -- of C -- be not the most virtuous Man in the whole World?

III. Whether a Man born of Anabaptistical Parents, and who can be proved not
to have been Baptized at eight Years of Age, can be supposed to be qualified to
receive the Orders of the Church of England, and to be made D -- of one of the
most Eminent Sees thereof, who has nothing to recommend him but his spewing up
the Engagement?

IV. Whether supposing it can be proved that the said D -- did in the late
times Preach expressly against the Common Prayer in St. Mary's Church in
Cambridge, and that he has never since, either by Word or Deed, contradicted
that Sermon, he may not reasonably be suspected to be of the same Principle
still, as he was at that time?

V. Whether or no a Man of his Constitution, who has run through so many
Trials, and is yet (alive) with a safe Conscience, may not at last be hoped to
die a good Musselman?

VI. Whether or no the said D -- designed the Interest of the Church of
England, when he Preached a turn for Julian the Apostate to give him leave to
answer Dr. Hick's Jovian?

VII. Whether or no it belongs to the Authority and Office of a D -- of the
Church of England to vindicate every Traitor that appears guilty of High
Treason?

VIII. Whether or no the said D -- did well in defacing the Altar piece of his
own Cathedral, for fear of offending tender Consciences?

IX. What Opinion we ought to have of this D -- who at two solemn Funerals
Preached the same Sermon, first, for a known Loyal Church of England Man, and
afterward for a Fanatic Preacher?

X. Whether or no the said D -- whom his Father called Jahnny no otherwise than
he named Spaniel Tray at eight years of Age, and cannot prove that he ever
since had Water thrown upon his Face, or the Sign of the Cross made, may by
virtue of his Orders be judged a Christian?

XI. Whether or no the said D -- Would not make a good D -- of Bray?

XII. What Religion is to be understood by the Protestant Religion?

Printed for H. Jones.


