REASONS Humbly Offered to his GRACE, HIS MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER, AND THE
RIGHT HONORABLE, THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT, By His MAJESTY'S Advocat, for His
HIGHNESS Interest: And by Sir George Campbell of Cesnock. Sheriff of Air Shire,
why the Act and Petition, presented by the Earl of Cassils, as to the Bailiry
of Carrick, ought not to pass.
THe Shire of Air consists of Kings-kyle, called, The Regality of Kyle Steuart,
and of the Bailiries of Carrick and Cuninghame, both holding of the Prince, and
whereof the Earls of Cassils and Eglingtoun are Heretable Bailies, and over
these Three Jurisdictions, the Jurisdiction of the Sheriff is Cumulative, and
the Earl of Cassils Act and Petition cannot be granted.

1 mo. Because it pleased His Majesty to make a purchase from the Lord Loudon,
then heretable Sherriff of the said Sheriff-ship: And His Majesty having
recovered it into His own Hands, by payment of a considerable Sum, it were an
evident Diminution of His Majesty's Right and Interest to cut off the Bailiry
of Carrick, and make it an independent Jurisdiction, exclusive of the Sheriff.
2 do. By the same parity of Reason the Earl of Eglingtoun might desire the like
for the Bailiry of Cuninghame, which would reduce the Shire and Sheriff-ship
almost to nothing. 3 tio. The Earl of Cassils Act and Petition does contain
virtually, the Erecting of the Bailiry of Carrick into a Shire, which, no
doubt, His Majesty's Commissioner will be very tender to do without express
Warrant. 4 to. This Erection craved for Carrick quite breaks the Shire, both as
to the quota of it is Valuation, and as to the Set of it is Commissioners,
whereof many live within Carrick: As likeways it prejudges the Town of Air, the
head Burgh of the whole Shire, where all it is Meetings are kept. 5 to. The
whole Heretors, specially the King's Tennents in Carrick, are also concerned,
in being brought under the independent Jurisdiction of this new Erection, and
taken from the Jurisdiction of the Sheriff, who is not Heretable, but at the
King's Nomination: And this is also His Majesty's Interest. 6 to. It is a
visible prejudice to Cesnock, the present Sheriff, and he ought at least to be
Cited, before any such Erection can be made.
But upon the whole, It Is humbly conceived, That both His Majesty's High
Commissioner and the Parliament, will be tender in doing any thing in this
Matter, which can only properly be done by a Signature of Erection, under His
Majesty's Hand (...)


