Men and ^^^thren,
It Is sure the most p^^t of you come here to gaze and wonder, rather than to be
^dified; but I hope there are some here witnessing and ^^mp^t^^zing with me;
but while ye are strangers to God, and h^s Word, and what our Lord has
suffered for us, and that he has told, throughout tribulation and affliction
we must e^^er into the Kingdom of God: It Is no wonder that we count us fool^,
for I was so while (...) nature: I was as mad as any of you against the Lord
and (...), but blessed be his glorious and holy Name, while as I (...) ^^ind,
now I see, and therefore abhors my self in dust and (...), and the more to
magnify his free grace that he has do^^ to me It Is true, unpleasant to sense,
while he is calling for h^^ mite of testimony from my hand for his despised
truth, for it was by the hearing of the Gospel, from his faithful
suffering-Ministers, that I was brought to the love of God, and the knowledge
of his holy Son Jesus Christ, since which time he has engaged my heart to seek
him in the way I found him, and wherein he was most eminently holden forth, and
witnessed for my sins, and the sins of the ^^^d holden forth with my duty
described, for which I am condemned, and for my following of the Gospel
preached i^ ^he fields, and with that poor handful at Airs-Mos, where M^.
Cameron had been preaching, and was to preach; because when the bloody Soldiers
come on us, we offered to defend ourselves, and whatever causes they lay to our
charge: and that you (...) not mistaken of me, and of the Lords people, though
they allege us to be of bloody principles, as some of the indulged Ministers
give it out; the Lord knows: I desire to know his W^ll, and walk in it: I have
been studying that which all the Land are obliged to do, to hear and keep the
Gospel. Keep it, defend my own life and my brethren, who has been so long
hunted, and the Gospel so long born down; though they give out, that I and the
suffering-remnant would Kill the King, or any of the Council: It Is an untruth,
and forged Calumny to reproach the way of God, more like themselves and their
own practices, who have killed so many of Gods People on Fields and Scaffolds:
and all is to please that bloody Tyrant the DUKE, who has been thirsting for
the blood of the Three Lands; who if they were brought to a Law, would be found
to be the Plotters by a just Trial* either according to the Law of God, or Law
of the Land; most of them has done (as much as might take their Lives) against
the good of the Land, and Laws of it. When I was before them in the Justiciary,
in trial of my life, they would give no access to explain my self, but were as
men, catching advantage, and cheat me out of my life; yet they must know, that
they will answer to the great Judge what they do: And this being the testimony
of a dying man, the fearers of God will believe my Declaration, before their
Proclamation, which is clearly a Plot in them to blind the eyes of a secure
generation, and cause strangers to approve it as just their Actings, and laugh
at our calamity, till they accomplish their Popish designs against all those
who will not follow them in the Three Nations; and though they spare their
Flatterers and Favourities, till they destroy the remnant, they dare not but
witness against them, as they would be marked with mourners, and then a holy
God shall take vengeance upon all ranks, forsaking his Christ, and betraying
him, and setting up any in his place, which will be found to be the Idol of
jealousy, beside others drawing away the generation from the true love we owe
to God; and because not only, but all lovers and fearers of God, desiring to
follow this sweet Christ, are reproached and wounded with the scourge of
Tongues, as dangerous principle, I declare I have in some measure desired to
know and follow the Truth, but in obedience to his Commands, and fear, and hope
of glory, though with much weakness. I am Presbyterian in my judgment, however
looked upon by men, in declaring my thoughts, owning a Reformation-work, carried
on by our Fathers, the shorter and larger Catechisms, national and solemn
League and Covenant; I own all the Testimonies of our Worthy Sufferers, with
all other Declarations, Excommunications. As also I pray at the writing hereof,
that the Lord open their eyes, give them repentance that are within the
election of Grace; and that the Lord may ratify in Heaven, what his servants
has done on Earth, according to his Will, and giving testimony against the
cursed Prelates, as instruments driving on the Council, and bloody Soldiers to
all oppression, and bloodshed done against the woeful indulgence, who has
received, or shall strengthen their hands in pleading for it, being Favorities:
they have broken the divided people of God, more than former Persecution
against lukewarm unfaithful Ministers; and professors falling from their first
love, pulling down that which was first builded. As also the cesse, and
bounding with Gods enemies: As also Oppression, Tyrany, Robbing of Gods People,
especially Glencairne, Hallyards, whose Names should be recorded to generations
succeeding, as those who has ruined the Widow and Fatherless, and laid wait
against the Righteous, and put many to beggary, against those who have
forfeited their right, which they now claim to that Supremacy: setting up
adulterous wretches in Christ's room, who thinks to wrong our Lord, but will be
too heavy for them, though all the Lord-Prelates and Indulged join hand to hold
up, down shall they come who wears that Crown: And since by them I am
proclaimed a Rebel, I disown them Traiterous to my holy Lord and Christ. But
let me entreat any who desires mercy, to forsake those wicked ways, and fall in
love with God through Christ as the only peacemaker, for there is Judgments
coming on the Land, and all your peace with men will not keep you from the
dreadful wrath of God, slighting the Gospel, Covenant Breaking, Perjury,
Idolatry, Profanity, Apostasy, Treacherous abominations, that all ranks are
guilty of, in welcoming this bloody person with a draught of our blood, as
formerly with Five of our Brethren. I bless the Lord, I have satisfaction in
owning his despised way, for which I depone my life, in drawing my heart after
him, and made me happily willing. I entreat you all seekers of his face, to
labor for more tenderness and watchfulness over your ways, there be looking on
us for our halting in Gods way; O for help from him till the day break! O to
hide our selves, to shut our mouth and be silent! the Lord has rubbed shame on
all faces, because of upsitting in duty, public and private: I think God is
contending with us. O dear friends, all ye that desire to be kept carefully
throughout these tribulations, and also astonishing like dispensations; forsake
not your Christian society, wherein so much of the power and presence of God
has been seen among those who have met together; it is felt and found in the
midst of them, out of love and zeal to pour out their hearts for him, and
before him, conversing with one another. I think the upsetting of this duty, is
a sad token ^od is leaving the Land, as any that I see* and therefore I not
only exhort you to this duty, as a dying man, but charge you, as ye will be
answerable at the great day, with fear, love and zeal to God, his glory before
your eyes, and love to Christ (...) be the principal motive in all other duties
(...) stumble of Christ's way for what we are suffering, for all the st^ps of
(...) is made easy to me throughout ^plain (...) keep the word of his
patience, those he wi^^ keep (...) of temptation. Labor to keep up those
field-meeting^, wherein my soul has been refreshed: Let it be your work to keep
patience, whatev^r ye meet with from enemies, or reproaches from pretended
friends, who will be found secret heart-enemies to God. This I leave to ^^u my
last advice, and (...) God for wha^ (...) h^s done to my soul, and (...) his
way he has taken in (...) the Land of Praises. I shall sing the sweet^^^ Song
throughout all the ages of eternity, and never have an (...) for if ye knew
what I meet with of his love and presence, which (...) would be given a look to
time, and bid it be gone that I may Marry my b^st beloved. Now I take my
farewell of ^ll friends relations, e^^^^ly enjoyments, and all cr^^ted (...).
Welcome Lord Jesus, to thy hands I commit my Spirit.

(...) STEWART.

Printed for Alexander K^^^^^^, 1681.


