TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE My LORDS, of His Majesty's Commission ECCLESIASTICAL.
I Most humbly Entreat your Lordships Favorable Interpretation, of what I now
Write, That since your Lordships, are resolved to Proceed against those, who
have not complied with the Kings Command, in Reading His Declaration. It is
absolutely impossible, for me to Serve His Majesty any longer, in this
Commission: I beg leave to tell your Lordships, that tho I my Self, did submit
in that particular, yet I will never be any way Instrumental, in Punishing
those, my Brethren, that did not. For, as I call God to Witness, that what I
did, was merely in a Principal of Conscience: So I am fully satisfied, that
their forbearance, was upon the same Principle. I have no Reason to think
otherwise of the whole Body of our Clergy, who upon all Occasions, have
signalized their Loyalty to the Crown; and their Zealous Affections to His
Present Majesty's Person, in the worst of Times. Now my Lords, the safety of
the whole Church of England, seeming to be exceedingly concerned in this
Prosecution: I must declare, I cannot with a safe Conscience, Sit or Judge in
this Cause, upon so many Pious and Excellent Men, with whom (if it be God's
Will) it rather becomes me to Suffer, then to be in the least, Oc^^^^on to
their Sufferings. I therefore, earnestly request your Lordships, (...)
^^terceed with His Majesty, that I may be Graciously dismissed, from any
(...)her Attendance at your Board: And to assure him, that I am still rea^^ to
Sacrifice, what ever I have to His Service, but my Conscience and ^^ligion.

My Lords, I am Your Lordships, Most Faithful, and Obedient Servant, Rochester.


