A POSTSCRIPT.
To the Paper of HUMILIATION.
THAT Religion and Virtue do greatly conduce to the Weal and Happiness of
Kingdoms, States, and of all Societies of Men, as well as of single Persons;
and Irreligion, Profaneness, Vice and Debauchery, to their Dissolution and
Destruction, has been observed by Philosophers and Wise Men in all Ages: And
that they have both a Natural Tendancy thereunto, and are moreover often
directed by a special Providence of God in concurrence with other causes to
those Ends, I have both by domestict Examples and Reasons, as far as I thought
necessary in so plain a Case, showed in the Caveat before mentioned. In which
taking notice of the great Degeneracy and Corruption of the Manners of this
Nation, I also showed that our late Extraordinary, though undeserved,
Deliverance did in a more special manner oblige us to a speedy and effectual
Reformation thereof: And that we could not expect but that the Neglect thereof
under such special Obligations would be attended with some observable
Disappointments or Obstructions in our Councils and the Course of our Affairs,
as we have seen it hitherto fall out. To this our Solemn Thanksgiving added a
further special Obligation; and the not doing it thereupon does beyond all
question aggravate the Fault of our Neglect, whereupon I presumed to represent
the Case briefly in a particular Dedication of those Papers to the King. And
when we had another Solemn day appointed for Fasting and Praying for God's
Blessing upon our Forces in the War against the French King, which certainly
adds another Obligation, it was but a reasonable Prosecution of the same honest
Design to note briefly the Necessity of making a Public Reformation a
Concomitant of such a Public Humiliation. To all this I will now add these few
Considerations:

They, who have any real Love to their Country, be their Religion what it will,
if they will acquit themselves but like men of sense and reason, ought
certainly to endeavor the promotion of such a Public Reformation, by the
promoting of some good and Effectual Laws for that purpose, even upon Civil
Considerations, as a thing tending by a natural Efficacy to make the People
much better either for Peace or War, and for the Common Benefit and Advantage
of the whole Society. And for an Experiment of the truth of this we need not go
far from home, or from our own times. It will be sufficient but to reflect
back, and consider well the different Morals of the two Parties in our late
Civil Wars, and their different Success.

And if they have indeed any thing of true Loyalty in them (whereof many have
made so high Profession) this they ought to demonstrate both by abstaining
themselves from contemning and affronting the Laws and Government of their
Country in things so sacred with all well constituted States, as the Religion
Publicly professed by them; and by a real and active concern, as they have
occasion, that all others be effectually restrained. If they have no just
concern it is certain their Loyalty is but a Superficial thing, a mere pretense
for some design or advantage to themselves: Nor ever did or ever will such Men
prove steady to any Government, but basely betray all, and sacrifice them to
their own Interest; and therefore are by no means to be trusted by any wise
Governors, notwithstanding any Parts or Abilities, for which they ought the
more to be suspected.

And for those who are Men of Religion, and more particularly those of the
Church of England, besides the Obligations and Considerations before mentioned,
the Common Prayers of the Church which are daily used, and in each House of
Parliament, as they do afford to them who are there present a daily Admonition
of their Duty, so are they in my apprehension a special and great obligation
upon them to it. For to pray that God will be pleased to direct and prosper all
their Consultations to the Advancement of his Glory, etc. and never so much as
enterinto any Consultation for the effectual restraining the Abominable
Profanation of his most holy Name by all sorts of people throughout the whole
Nation, and most impudent and presumptuous violation of his Laws; to pray that
all things may be so ordered and settled by their Endeavors that Religion and
Piety may be Established, and never use any Endeauours for the suppressing of
so common and notorious Impieties in the Nation; What is it but to add Impiety
to Impiety, to turn Religion into mere Formality, and insted of procuring a
Blessing to help to fill up the Measure of our Sins and pull down the Judgments
we have reason to fear, the sooner upon us; And the like observations may be
made upon the occasional Prayers and Confessions purposely composed for the
late Solemnities.

And for those, who perhaps may think better of some separate Churches,
certainly they would take it amiss if we should question whether they do
constantly Pray for God's Direction and Blessing upon this Parliament, or less
then is expressed in the Common Prayers: And if they come not behind in their
Prayers, and yet are as backward in their Consultations and Endeavors, I see
not how they are one jot more excusable, but must neccessarily fall into the
same Condemnation, if not greater for having deserted the Church and yet be no
better.

And these few Questions I would propose to them all, who pretend to be
Christians: Whether they can hope for any good success in this Undertaking
without God's Blessing, unless it be such as God sometimes gives to wicked men,
whom he uses for the correction of others? Whether there be not such Cursed
Things, and National Sins, which may provoke him to withdraw his Presence, and
withhold his Blessings from Christians, as well as from others, until they be
removed? Whether there be not reason to believe that this Nation is Poluted and
defiled and entangled in some such National Sins and Cursed Things, which may
obstruct the Divine Blessing? whether their unaccountable flow, or Retrograde
Course of our Affairs (no less to be admired than the precedent easy
Revolution,) may not with reason be reduced and imputed to some such secret
cause? And whether a diligent search into that remoter but most prevalent
Cause, and speedy and effectual Reformation of what is amiss, be not the most
proper business to begin with, (if we do indeed depend more upon God's
Blessing, now under such inviting Circumstances, than upon our own shallow and
ineffectual Policies) to complete a happy Progress of our Affairs?

This, if it was done to purpose, as it easily may, and ought to be, would soon
produce a great Alteration by the Blessing of God in the Course of our Affairs
for the better. Magnanimity, and Courage is the part and duty of a Christian,
as much as of an upright Judge or a Soldier: and if we will ever show it, now
is the time. If we basely fear the loss of a few debauched Ministers, Gentlemen
or Soldiers, we shall really lose a far greater Number of much better men, and
be enslaved and betrayed, as we well deserve, by the Company we choose: whereas
by a generous doing our Duty we should better secure them bettered by
reformation to our Party.

POssibly, in the Perusal of this Paper, some who are most attentive to the
Importance of the Matter, may overlook other things, and think it very good
and honest; but these must be Men who have some relish of such things But
others, who are not much affected with that, will be apt the more to regard the
Form, and censure it for rude and insolent; and that I am well pleased they
should do, and as severely as they will: For I know no better way to convince
them of a Fault of their own, than to make them judge themselves in the Person
of another. For If I be rude by plain-dealing with my Fellow Creatures for
their Good, who are perhaps but a little above me in some petty, accidental,
transitory Advantage, what are they who are not only more rude toward the
State, but impious against their Creator, or can behold such Rudeness and
Impiety without any Censure, or Endeavor to restrain it? Must I be censured
for breaking the Laws of Man, or but of Civility, and out of a good Design? And
it is equal then that others shall be permitted in impudent Contempt of the
Religion of the State, and impious violation of the Laws of Almighty God?
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art that judge; for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self. And think thou, O
Man that judge, -- and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of
God? Or despisest thou, etc.

FINIS

