Strange and Wonderful News from ROME
Giving an Account of an old Man lately and strangely known to be in the City
of Rome, in Itaty, and (...) came Invisibly thither; together with his Eleven
Strange and Wonderful PROPHESIES, which particularly do mention wh(...)
hap(...): the wing also how he breaks strong Iron Chains in pieces, as if
they were Brown-thread, with many more strange W^^^^s, neve(...) like ever
heard of before, as ^^ming the Year when there shall be no Pope, and Rome shall
have no Head, and the Go^^^^ shall be p^^^ched throughout the WORLD.

Licensed acconting to Order.



It is not unknown to most who are pleased to take Cognizance of Wonders and
strange Miracles, which this present Age does frequently represent; that of
late Years we have been exceedingly astonished at several (to us strange and
seldom heard of) much to be admired Wonders: But now prepare your Ears to hear
the most amazing and most unparalled Miracle that ever England was made
sensible of, or I think the whole World was ever made acquainted with; nay, so
wonderfully strange, and seemingly impossible to be true, that though it be
attested with manifold Assertions, it cannot lodge in the breast of the
Incredulous, as an unquestionable Verity. But to proceed to the matter
intended, and not too much to derogate from my desined Business, let this
inform the most doubtful and unbelieving Reader, That there is lately an
account sent from Italy, of the strange manner of the coming of one Man into
the City of Rome, eminently known by many Travelers, to be one of the Cities
not least accounted of in Italy; this Person of such an Age (as he says he is)
no less to be admired for his great Age, then for his strange kind of
Prophesies, which he daily parts with; and his manner of coming into the City,
which we are informed was invisible; but to come to particulars: This Person
does affirm, That his Age is greater then e're was heard off, for he does say
he is above a thousand Years old; he does pretend to be an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, and says that he has the Spirit of Truth in him; with many other
Assertions, no less full of Wonder then that you have already heard of in the
preceding lines: His manner of Apparel is no less to be admired then his
manner of Discourse, for such Habit as we are informed he does wear, was never
seen by mortal eye; his Deportment is also very strange, for he walks up and
down the City, preaching and admonishing to serious Repentance, and giving
admirable Advice to the People to forsake their Iniquities, and to return from
their evil Ways, for, says he, The wrath of God is kindled against the Romans.
He also adds, That the City of Rome is a second Sodom; and that the
Transgressions of the People have ascended to the Heavens, and approached to
the Ears of the Almighty, and that nothing can preserve them from approaching.
Misery, but speedy, and unseigned Repentance; without which, he does assert,
that in three Years the City shall be utterly destroyed and consumed by Fire.
By our last Advice we are informed, that this Man had continued there for the
space of eight Days, preaching about the City: his custom is to go bare-headed
and barefooted, strange to behold. The Magistrates being offended at his
Doctrine, have forbidden him to preach; but he took no more notice thereof,
then to return this answer, That he was sent from God to move the People to
Repentance, and to abandon those Iniquities, which if not deserted, would
doubtlesly pull down Vengeance upon them in a short time. After this, order was
given for his, Confinement; which being performed, he was frequently visited by
several Jesuits, who discoursed with him in several Tongues, namely, the
Latin, Hebrew, and Chaldean, wherein he was exquisitely perfect. He also
acknowledges that he knows well such as live loose and wicked Lives. Ha is not
overcurious in his Diet, for his greatest Delicate, and general Food is nothing
but dry Bread; and his strongest Drink is Water only. He prophesies of many
strange things, and the time when ail the Wickedness in the World should have
an end, and every one shall serve the Lord; and wormp the God of Heaven than
Nation shall no more rise against Nation, nor Kingdom against Kingdom, all the
World shall be at peace. Being asked by some of the amazed People, whose
astonishments were as great as his answers strange, How long it would be before
this blessed Day would come? His reply was absolute, and about the Year 1699,
should certainly be the end of all Wickedness in the World: all Nations shall
live in the fear of the Lord; all the World shall be at peace. His strange and
unknown coming into that City was admired by all: at last he was examined by
the Magistrates from whence he came: He answered, That he came from a place
called Galadiam in Damas, a City of Gallilea, and is the Messenger of the
Almighty, sent to preach Repentance to the sinful World. But the Jesuits not at
all pleased with his Doctrine or Discourse, have prevalently persuaded their
Magistrates to condescend to what they so earnestly requested, which is, That
this Person, on whom we know not what Title justly to bestow, should by all
means be conveyed to the Pope, there to be examined by his Holiness: But he
makes tittle account of what is ordered, saying, That he is very well
acquainted with what shall be his Portion, and what shall become of him; and
that he looked upon it altogether Unnecessary to be so loaded with Chains; but
did acknowledge that he was very desirous to see the Pope; and so without any
difficulty, and with great ease, breaking the Chains all to pieces, he filled
the Spectators with astonishment, as the Report of these Wonders will certainly
fill with amazement, all those to whom this matter shall be communicated. But
besides all this, he prophecy what Transactions shall happen yearly, which I
shall particularize as follows: He prophesies, That

In 1693 great Changes you will hear of and see.

In 1694 shall be Wars over all the World.

In 1695 Rome shall begin to fall, and England shall begin to thrive.

In 1696 shall be no Pope, and Rome shall have no Head.

In 1697 the Turk shall turn Christian.

In School the Gospel shall be preached throughout the World.

In 1699 a great Man shall rise.

In 1700 all the World shall be at Peace.

In 1701 Jesus Christ shall be known to all Mankind.

In 1702 a great Earthquake shall happen.

In 1703 will be the time when the Jews will be called.

Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Gilt-spur-street.


