The more Excellent Way: Or, A PROPOSAL of a Complete Work of Charity.
For the Accommodation of some Devout Women, with such mean, but convenient
Habitation, Work, Wages, and Relief, that they may have Time and Strength for
the Worship of GOD, both in Public and Private, and Freedom of Mind for
Meditation, and Religious Exercises, while their Hands are Employed for
Maintenance of the Body; and that while they enjoy the Benefit of such
Accommodations for their own Souls, their Benefactors, and the Church and
Nation may be benefitted by their Constant Prayers.
THe greatest part of the Works of Charity amongst us, are but of little more
use than for mere Temporal Accommodations. The Reason is, Because there is
neither any Limitation in the choice of the Persons, that they be indeed of the
Household of Faith; that is, of known and approved Virtue, Piety, and Devotion;
nor such Provision made, that they be effectually Instructed, Tutored, and, by
sufficient Religious Exercises, trained up to be so, as far as Humane Means can
avail. This is easy to be observed, not only in our Hospitals, but even in our
Schools and Colleges, in our Universities, and in our Cathedrals. Not only in
the World, but even in those Places Originally set apart for the Servants of
God, it may be feared, the Devil, through the Carelessness and Inconsiderateness
of Men, has gotten too great a part. And this is not only a Shame to our
Church and Nation, but a matter of much greater Mischief than is ordinarily
observed, or can easily be imagined.

Certain it is, that this Life, which is but short, and to us Mortals
uncertain, is but a Preparation to another of longer Duration. And, therefore,
in our Foundations of this Nature, if we have not a Principal respect to that,
that the Promotion of that be well provided for and secured, we lose the
Principal and most Noble Part of our Charity. The rest, without it, is but a
Provision for Brutes or Animals, if not worse --;but this is for Saints and
young Angels.

Tho it was much to be Wished, that we had such Accommodations for The Author
has also considered how single Men might live together in a Religious Society,
with several Advantages of Religious Exercises, good Convenience for Humane
Life upon reasonable Terms, and yet follow their several Employments without
any Hinderance, or loss of Time: But he had rather see a complete Number of
Persons so disposed, to begin and give an Example of such a Society, than offer
any more Proposals till he sees the Success of this.
Men as well as for Women, who are well disposed; yet I think it most proper to
begin with a Provision for Women, for diverse Reasons. 1. Because of that Sex we
find most Devout People. 2. Their Employments (for the most part) may better
admit of Intermission for them to go out to Church twice a day. 3. They do most
need it; for whereas Men can ordinarily Earn 2 s. or 2 s. 6 d. per day, most
Women cannot Earn above 6 d. or 4 d. or not so much.


The Choice of Persons being well made, besides the Advantage of Leisure for
the Worship of God, both in Public, and in their ordinary Religious Exercises
together at Home, Care is to be taken that they be Instructed, and often
Admonished, how to go on to Perfection, (Heb. 6.1.) Perfecting holiness in the
Fear of God. (2 Cor. 7.1.) That they may stand perfect and complete in all the
Will of God, (Col. 4.12.) And in every good Work: (Heb. 13.21.) How to Walk
with God all the Day, continually, in all things: And how to Converse with
others to their Edification, and to the Improvement of themselves. And being
thus fitted and prepared, they may be employed upon Works of Charity to others,
in Visiting the Sick and Needy, and carrying Alms and Relief where there may be
occasion; and be made Blessed Instruments for spreading the Leven of the
Kingdom of Christ.

It may be farther improved to be a Seminary of Piety and Virtue, And for the
Education of Young Women in Religious Exercises of Devotion and Virtue.
for such single Persons as want no Accommodations of this World; and a most
excellent Accommodation for Retirement and Repose for such as desire it, and
want no other. And, therefore, though this be Proposed for such as Need, yet is
there no Reason to exclude from Co-habitation with them, such other Devout
Women as need not, provided they will be Conformable to the Orders of the
House, and endeavor to promote so good a Work, by a Holy and Heavenly Example,
(which may be of great Use) by their Purse and by their Pains, for the
Assistance of those that Need. However, it is such a piece of Charity as is yet
too rare amongst us.

To be a Minister of the Divine Providence, in Provision of such Accommodations
for such as Need, and would make so good use of them, is certainly an Excellent
Work of Charity. We are Exhorted and Admonished by the Apostle, Gal. 6.10.
While we have time, to do good unto all Men, and especially to them of the
Household of Faith; and these certainly are such, if any. These are some of the
choice Members of the Household of Faith; and this is the chiefest Good that we
can do unto them, so set them free from the Necessities of this Life, to Serve
the Lord. This is not to feed the Body, but to feed the Soul. This is indeed to
lay up Treasure in Heaven, and to make us Friends there; to make the Favorites
of Heaven upon Earth, and their Angels in Heaven our Friends; and the God of
Heaven himself, if we do not otherwise offend him. The Administration of this
Service, not only supplieth the Want of the Saints, but is abundant also by
many Thanksgivings unto God. 2 Cor. 9.12. An Odor of a sweet Smell, a Sacrifice
acceptable, well-pleasing unto God. Phil. 4.18. And, certainly, to be
constantly remembered among other Benefactors at the Altar of God upon Earth, in
the fervent Prayers of Devout Christians, is a hopeful way, if there be nothing
to interpose, to come in Remembrance for Good before the Throne of God in
Heaven, by the Mediation of our Great High Priest there, who is always mindful
of what is done to himself in his Saints and Servants here.

Socrates Christianus: Or, Several Tracts and Papers, Written by the Author of
this Proposal, (who in some of them used that Name) and Printed by his Order,
since the Revolution.
THE Author having begun a Religious Society of Single Women, according to the
Design of the said Proposal, upon Presumption that there is yet so much Piety
and Charity left in this City; and especially in this Sex, as not to suffer it
to fall for want of Supplies; and being willing himself to contribute what he
can thereunto, has, among other things, dedicated to that Pious Work what
Profit may be made either of such of his Writings which have been Printed, and
remain in his Hands yet unsold, or of such others as he does design for the
Press: and therefore, for that Purpose, and for the Satisfaction of diverse, who
have desired Notes of what he has Written since the Revolution, has here
added the Titles of them, in Order as they were Written and Published, as
follows:

THE true English Government and Mis-government of the Four last Reigns. 1. A
Preface to the KING. 2. A Specimen of a Declaration against Debauchery. 3.
Important Questions upon the late Revolution. 4. A Caveat against Flattery, and
Profanation of Sacred things to Secular Ends. 1689.
Of Humiliation, with a Postscript. An Admonition to the Magistrates, with an
Appendix. Reflections upon the Occurrences of the last Year. 1689. An Apology
for Mr. Stafford, with an Admonition, etc. Authority abused by the Vindication
of the last Years Transactions. 1690. Considerations for Competitors, and
Electors of Representatives in Parliament. A Relation of the late Action at
Sea, (1690.) with Reflections thereupon; and a Letter to a Malefactor; and a
Draught of an Act for Restraining notorious Sins, etc. Reasons for the Trial of
the Earl of Torrington by Impeachment in Parliament. The Spirit of the Church
Faction. 1691. An Admonition concerning a Public Fast. 1691. An Appeal to
Heaven and Earth, etc. with Questions Theological, and Theologico Political.
1691. The Beginning and Progress of a Needful and Hopeful Reformation. A
Petition to the House of Commons against their Speaker, etc. The Prudentials,
to the Authors of the Athenian Mercury, praying Advice, for Relief of their
Country, against that pernicious Disease. Questions Parliamentary concerning
the Rights of the Commons of England, and Duty of their Representatives. Old
English Loyalty and Policy agreeable to Primitive Christianity. A Collection of
Modern Relations concerning Witches and Witchcraft, with a Meditation of Sir M.
Hale's upon that Subject. 1693. Questions concerning Witches and Witchcraft.
Questions concerning the Proper and Peculiar Christian Worship. Liturgica, etc.
not Published. Mistaken Justice, etc. in Francis Newland. 1695. Phinehas: Or
the Common Duty of all Men, and the Special Duty of Magistrates, to be Zealous
and Active in the Execution of Laws against Scandalous Sins and Debauchery.
1695. A Letter to a Lady, concerning the due Improvement of her Advantages of
Cellbacie, Portion, and Maturity of Age and Judgment. The Liturgy of the
Ancients represented, etc. Quarto's. The Office of the Faithful Enlarged,
according to Ancient Forms. Sacred Hymns. Octavo's
FINIS.

