A Supplemental Word, necessary to be made known, and understood aright, and to
be done accordingly, in order to the Healing of these Nations.
WHen the French were moving upon the Waters in the Year 1692. It was given out
throughout all this Nation, To make the People more Unanimous in opposition of
them, That they came to spoil and make a Conquest over this Country. They did
not then come so near, as to send out their Declarations, and make their
Pretenses known. But if they had, and declared accordingly, That they came only
to restore the deprived King; And that they did covet and design no more than
barely to effect This; and they would be contented only with the Charge of the
Expedition paid, with some moderate Gratuities to the Soldiers and Seamen; and
henceforward these Nations should abide by one another in Unity, Peace and
Concord: If the usual Consultation, Treaty and Security was had hereupon, the
People of England might credit and fully rely on these their so far seeming
Reasonable and just Demands, all one as they did take the P. of O. his Word to
let him come in when he had before declared, That He did not intend to make a
Conquest over them. Indeed there is somewhat more to be considered in the
disparity of the Numbers and Power which the One has over what the Other had.
But the Word and Promise of the Princes and Potentates of the Earth is much
alike, that there is no sure Trust and Reliance to be given to any of them.
They were wont to speak in old Time, saying, Thou shall surely ask Counsel at
Abel, and so they ended the matter 2 Samuel 20.18. As we are allowed, yea, and
commanded to search the Scriptures, so any one at his leisure may read the four
following Verses, as they lie open in the Bible. I am one of them that are
peaceable and faithful in England. It seems hard and unequal to me, that a
whole Nation should be endangered to be ruined, and swallowed up by Strangers
and Foreigners for the Ambition and Contention of two Men. Whereas Right might
be done in a Peaceable and Prudent way (without their Aid, or violent
interposure and meddling) upon the terms of Universal Forgiveness, not one Man
excepted. But if one is so stiff as not to grant that; As I suppose He would be
glad with all his Heart, and consent to be Readmitted in upon those mild and
equitable Conditions, which will make him both Revered and Loved; for it is
neither Duty, nor yet Wisdom to speak or behave ones self Proudly in the day of
Distress. They are Adversaries to the King, 2 Samuel 19.22. and they hinder his
Restoration, who dictate otherwise notwithstanding their ignorant Zeal, and
vain Talk for him. And if the Offenders are afraid to trust to this, as
Wickedness and Guilt is very timorous and suspicious (it being but what is
natural and usual, That they who have transgressed without a Cause, should be
also fearful without a Cause, that is, without a true Cause.) Then let all
those that are indeed criminal stand by themselves; for there is no reason why
others, who as yet are not so, should make themselves criminal also in
defending them. And let him come singly to punish them, whilst all others stand
perfectly Neuter, and Disinterested as to that Cause, only in defense of their
Country, to stop the Incursion and Spoil of Strangers and Robbers. The right
understanding of, and acting according to this Truth, would go a great way
toward the bringing and settling Peace again in our Borders.


