THE Parfait Marshall Or Complete Farrier

EDINBURGH MDCXCVI.

Geo: Scougall delin:
I. Sturt sculp:
engraved title page

THE PARFAIT MARSHALL, Or Complete FARRIER.

WHICH TEACHES, I. To know the Shapes and Goodness, as well as Faults and
Imperfections of Horses. II. The Signs and Causes of their Diseases, the Means
to prevent them, their Cure, and the good or bad use of Purging and Bleeding.
III. The way to order and Preserve them, when upon Travel, to Feed, and to
Dress them. IV. The Art of Shoeing, according to a new design of Shoes, which
will recover bad Feet, and preserve the Good.


Together with a Treatise, how to raise and bring up a true and Beautiful Race
of Horses: As also Instructions, whereby to fit all kinds of Horses with Proper
Bits, whereof the chief Draughts are Represented in Copper Plates.

Written Originally in French by the Sieur de Solleysel Escuyer, sometime one
of the Overseers of the French Kings Royal Academy of Riding, near to the
Hostel de Conde in Paris.

AND Translated from the last Paris Impression, by Sir WILLIAM HOPE of
Kirkl^ston Knight. Lieutenant Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh. By whom is also
added as a Supplement to the first part, a most compendious and excellent
Collection of Horsemanship, taken from the best and most modern Writers upon
that Subject, such as Mr. De la Brow, Pluvinel, and the Great Duke of Newcastle.

PART I.

Quis autem nosse curas equorum erubestendum putet, cum optima Jumenta habere
Gloriosum sit? Quis vituperationi det, id posse curare, quod laudi ducitur
possidere? Quia noticia curationis non solum honestissimis sed etiam
disertissimis convenit.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by GEORGE MOSMAN, M.DC.XCVI.

TO THE KING.
MAy it please YOUR MAJESTY,
IT is generally a Token of the Worth and Excellency of a Book, when those
concerned in it, adventure to place in its Front the Name of a Prince; This
therefore has imbolden'd Me GREAT SIR, to praefix Your most August Name to
this Work, which, if I may be allowed to carry the Parallel so high, is amongst
Books of Marshalry and Horsemanship, what Your Royal Person is amongst Men.

It needs not then (I think) be thought very strange, if I have presumed upon
the Choice of so mighty a Patron; for to whom could I have so justly Dedicate
the best of Books in its kind, as to the most Clement, Heroic, and Best of
Kings, and (which is most agreeable to my Subject) the most Accomplished and
Graceful amongst Horsemen? Of the first whereof, Your Majesty's most happy
Subjects feel the good effects, and of the Latter Your greatest Enemies bear
witness, and therefore cannot but acknowledge it; for SIR, Your great Wisdom
and Conduct, as well as singular Courage, force them all to confess, that You
are among the Number of the most Glorious Monarchs that ever Reigned.

I am therefore Hopeful, that as Your Majesty's extraordinary Valor has
brought these Islands once again to the Practice of Arms, so this Translation,
assisted by Your Royal Approbation and Protection, will not only instruct them,
to raise a Breed of Warlick and Serviceable Horses (till of late almost quite
out of Fashion amongst us) but also teach them to train them up, for the
benefit of Your Majesty's public, and their own private Divertisement; That as
we are a People, who delight as much in Horses as any Nation in the World, so
we may be Inferior to none, in the true Knowledge of every thing relating to
them.

Big with these Expectations, and also hoping Your Majesty will pardon this
bold Attempt, I humbly lay it at Your Royal Feet, and shall Repute my self too
Happy, if you Vouchafe it but the least favorable Glance. Now that God may
Prosper Your Majesty, in all Your Great and Glorious Undertakings, and give You
a Long and Happy Reign, to the Joy and Comfort of all Your Loyal Subjects, is
both heartily Wished, and fervently Prayed for, By

GRACIOUS SIR. Your Majesty's Most Humble and Most Obedient Subject and
Servant WILL: HOPE.

THE PREFACE.
ALTHOUGH I am no great friend to Tedious and unnecessary Prefaceing, and that
I also believe the most part of Gentlemen, who have had any opportunity of
conversing with Horsemen abroad, know the great esteem they have for this Book,
so that I fancy, there are but very few Country Gentlemen of any Note in these
Islands, who have not heard somewhat of it; yet at present I find my self
obliged, both because of the respect I bear to the Authors Memory, as also for
the benefi^e of such, who perhaps because of their retired dwellings have had
but little or no notice of it, to give the Reader a short account of three
things: First of the Author, Secondly of his Book, and Thirdly of this
Translation.

As for the Author, he was a person delighted mightily in Horses, and during
his whole Life, made it his Business to improve all the parts of Horsemanship,
this Book of his being a sufficient Testimony of his great Knowledge in one
part of it, to wit, the Cureing of Diseases; and his excellent Illustrations,
upon the Duke of Newcastle's Book of Riding last published in English, and
which he took the pains to Translate into French) a clear demonstration of his
extraordinary Address and skill in the other; He was also to my certain
knowledge, very well known by many of the Nobility and Gentry of these
Kingdoms, who had the good fortune to be taught by him, when they rode in the
late Mr. Bernards Academy at Paris; and at that time, he had by this Book of
his so outstript all Authors upon the same subject, who had gone before him,
that he very deservedly acquired the esteem of all the considerable Escuyers in
France, and thereby an universal applause, which so long as Horsemanship is in
request, will make his Name and Writings famous.

Yea his Inclinations were so much bent this way, that he made it a part of his
business, to instruct many of the Nobility and Gentry in the Art of R^ding, for
notwithstanding of his being one of the Overseers, he did also officiat as an
Escuyer in the French Kings Royal Academy of Riding in Paris; and he was in
such Repute for his great Knowledge and Judgment, in what related to horses
and Horsemanship, that the Prince of Horsemen, the Unparalleled and Famous Duke
of Newcastle (whose Memory for his extraordinary skill in this Art, will be for
ever an Honor to his Nation) did not think it below him to communicate his
thoughts upon it to him, and willingly accept of his approbation and
assistance, of giving which he judged him no doubt very Capable, otherwise he
would never have kept that intimate correspondence with him, which it is very
well known he did.

He was also a person of a pleasant Conversation, and altogether free of
Ceremony, took delight when desired, to discourse of his Art, and to
communicate it to such Gentlemen, whom he thought inclined to like horses, and
also without any kind of reservedness answered them such Questions, as they
(out of an earnest desire to be instructed by so knowing and excellent a
Master) thought fit to propose to him: And I can say this with the more
certainty being my self many times an Eyewitness to it, because of my good
fortune in being for near two years his Scholar; so that for my own part, I do
ingenuously acknowledge, that the very little I understand of Horsemanship, I
owe either to his good Instructions when alive, or to his Writings now he is
gone, and I make no doubt, but they shall have the like good effects upon any
ingenious Reader, who with a sincere Intention and judicious reflection, shall
deliberatly and seriously peruse them.

It Is true his Writings are not many, but of all of them which to my knowledge
are extant, this Entitled The Parfait Marshall, which I have taken the pains
to Translate, is accounted the chief, and also looked upon by the most part of
understanding Horsemen, who have thoroughly perused it, to be indeed a Master
piece upon the Subject whereof it treats; and that I may in a few words give
you a general Idea of its Contents, such short and superficial accounts proving
frequently very acceptable, especially of a Book wherein there is somewhat more
than ordinary expected; I shall briefly run through the general heads of the
whole.

The Book then is divided into two parts, and in the First Part you have,
First, several discourses showing the true shapes of a horse, with most exact
directions to prevent being imposed upon, and Cheated when you come to buy one,
where also all the imperfections of a horse both Before and Behind, are
described so to the Life, that a Man must be very dull if he come not to
understand them: Secondly, You have a discourse of Shoeing, and excellent
directions to keep horses of all kinds, whether for Saddle or Coach, either at
home or upon Travel, with an exact description of what Furniture is most
convenient for Travel, and how to preserve your horses from being spoilt by it;
which is no small matter, as I believe all who have made either a Campaign, or
any great Journey, can testify: Thirdly, you have methods set down to be used
in the Spring, for preventing Diseases in horses, together with the Art of
Bleeding and Purging: Fourthly, You have an account of all the Plasters and
Ointments, that are most useful in the Cureing of Horses; and then Lastly, this
First Part is closed with two most useful Discourses, The First concerning the
raising a true Breed of Horses, and the Second of Bits and Branches, where you
have exact Instructions, for fitting all kinds of horses with proper and
convenient Bridles, let their Mouths be never so bad; of all which to relate
the particulars, would be too Tedious in this place, and therefore I forbear
it, but they are indeed the very best that ever I read upon these Subjects.

In the Second Part, You have a most exact and learnd Description, of all the
Diseases this most useful Creature is subject to, together with their Remedies,
and a most methodical way of applying them, either according to the different
Constitutions of the Horses you have to deal withal, or the mildness and
Malignity of the Disease: And indeed in this point he so far exceeds all other
Authors, that they may be very well said only superficially to recommend
Receipts, but he both to recommend and apply them to the bottom, and that for
the most part with such success, that they rarely fail to eradicate, the very
principles of that Ferment which occasioned the distemper; Thus much of our
excellent Author, and the general Heads of his Book.

It now remains that I give the Reader a short account, of that wherein I think
my self a little more particularly concerned, and that is, of this Translation
of it into English, which I also Judge so much the more necessary, because of
some considerable alterations I have made in it, which are not to be found in
the French Copy; for

First, Whereas in the French Impression the Treatise of Diseases is in the
First Part, I have in this Translation placed it in the Second, which was the
true form and order, it was first writ and published in at Paris by the Author
himself, he being necessitate (as you may see more at large in his own ensueing
Preface) to transpose the parts of this last Edition, that by so considerable
an alteration, his own True and Genuine Copies, might be distinguished from
some False ones, which were about that time Counterfeit at Lions; and even
although it had not come at first from our Authors Hands in this Order, yet
would I have inclined for several Reasons to make this Alteration; for to
instance but one; is it not a great deal more methodical, yea even more
natural, that a man should first know the true Shapes of a horse, and wherein
the Perfection and Imperfection of each particular Member consists, as also how
to Govern him at Home and upon Travel, then that he at very first engage
himself, in the study of Cureing all the Diseases, and Accidental Disasters, to
which this most sprightly and useful Creature is but too frequently subject? To
do otherwise, is methinks to Renverse the Order of things, and a man had as
good attempt to read before he can Spell, or run before he can walk, as
endeavor to know what belongs to the Cure of Horses, without first
understanding these very first Rudiments of Horsemanship I have named; Now this
is what the Second Part of this Book in the French Copy treats of, and
therefore I thought fit in this Translation to make it the First; so here you
have the Reason, and I think a very good one too, for the first considerable
Alteration in this Book, to wit the Transposition of its parts.

The Second is, the dividing the most part of the Chapters into Sections, which
to me seemed a much more distinct way, especially for the Second Part, then
that used by the Author, because in that Part, he makes almost always a
Chapter of each different Receipt, as well as of every particular Disease or
Distemper, which did so mightily increase the Number of Chapters, that they
amounted in that one Part to 180. and were in my Opinion very inconvenient, not
so much because of their great Number, as because no man could easily at first
view, know by the Title of the Remedy, to what Disease it was chiefly
appropriate; at present I have endeavored to rectify this, by making almost no
more Chapters in the 2d Part, than there are Diseases or Infirmities incident
to Horses (which however still amount to about 120) and reducing all the
Remedies for each particular Disease, to Distinct Sections only; So that a man
may now at first opening the Book, know certainly by the direction for the
Chapter at the head of each Page, that such a Disease is particularly treated
of in that Chapter, and consequently that all the Sections contained in it, are
only so many different Remedies, but chiefly appropriate to that Disease or
Infirmity, although they may be also good for some others, according as they
shall be particularly prescribed by the Author.

The Third Alteration, or rather Improvement I have made, and which is not to
be found in any of the French Impressions, is First, the Addition of a most
exact Collection of Horsemanship, which I have taken from the very best of
Writers upon that Subject, and which I thought fit to add to the First Part by
way of Supplement, there being little or nothing of the Art of Riding contained
in it: Secondly, An Alphabetical Catalogue, of all the Simples and Drugs
dispersed through the whole Book, together with their French and Latin
Appellations; as also for the benefit of such as do not understand them, a
short explication of the Weights and Measures, with the most useful French
Terms of Horsemanship, mentioned throughout the whole work, all which are
likewise set down in an Alphabetical order, immediately after the Catalogue of
Simples.

Now this little English, French and Latin Catalogue. I judged would be of
singular use, for although the Book be in the English Language, yet the
Catalogue makes it almost universally useful, all Europe over; For example,
suppose a Gentleman buy this Book, and for the benefit of his Horses take it
along with him to the Army in Flanders, Germany, etc. or to any other Kingdom
in Europe, I say understanding English, if he intend to cause compose any
Remedy, he needs but apply himself to some skilful Apothecary (who if he be
such, must be Master of Latin, or at least ought to understand the Latin Names
of all Simples) to whom reading over the Latin Names of the Druggs, together
with their Doses, which compose any Remedy, the Gentleman himself explaining,
in any Language, wherein he can be best understood by the Apothecary, the
method of Composition from this English Impression; the Apothecary, I say, if
he be not a mere ignorant or blockhead, cannot fail being thus directed, to
make up exactly the most composed Remedy in the whole Book, and the Ointment,
Charge, Drench, or whatever else, being once prepared, the Gentleman may give
Orders anent it himself, according to the Directions of the Book, with the same
dexterity and certainty, as if he had been at home in his native Country, or
the Receipt made up by a London or Edinburgh Apothecary; all which is certainly
no small Advantage to any of our Contrymen, who by their employments in time
of War, are obliged to a frequent attendance upon the Army in Flanders, or
elsewhere, as his Majesty's Service shall require.

So you see, you have in this one Book, all that any Gentleman needs know,
either as to Breeding, Backing, Bitting, Keeping, Cureing, or Shoeing any kind
of Horse, for whatever Service he be designed, and therefore I am confident, no
judicious Person, who is a lover of Horses, will dispute the usefulness of this
Translation.

The Book, as I told you before, is in French, Entitled, Le Parfait Marshall,
or Complete Farrier, and how much we stand in need of good ones, whereof there
is such a scarcity in these Islands, I leave to those, who having Horses of a
considerable Value, sometimes falling sick amongst their hands, and know not
possibly what methods to take for their Recovery, to judge; And indeed, to deal
ingenuously, it was chiefly this Consideration, together with the esteem I had
for the Author, and great delight I take my self in Horses, which first put me
upon the Fancy of Translating it, wherein, if I have gratifyed a good many
Curious Gentlemen, who earnestly wished for it, yet I am persuaded I have
disappointed not a few Criticizing. I should have rather said, Invidious and
Self conceited Sparks, who with all their hearts I know expected, and wished me
to fail in my undertaking, and who are so mean spirited, that they cannot
endure any public Work should be gone about, which they are not either capable
to perform themselves, or of the Theory whereof they are not at least so much
Masters, as to be in a capacity, without discovering their ignorance, to
pretend and allege the commission of some few faults or escapes, whereby they
may have a kind of pretext to backbite and condemn the Performer: But for the
exactness of the Translation, I leave it to answer for it self, being very
certain, that whatever Faults some Nice people may find in the Language, yet
they will find none in the Sense, which is what I chiefly aimed at in the
Version: and for their Critical Backbiting, and Censorious Humor, I am
resolved not to be in the least concerned at it, seeing in my opinion, the very
Vice it self, carries along with it its own punishment, besides, I am of St
Valerian's mind, that, Plena victoria est ad clamantem tacere, and non
respondere provocanti.

In fine, seeing this Book in French is acknowledged by all who ever perused
it, to be the best, and most methodical that ever was writ upon the Subject, I
cannot comprehend, how we in Britain have so far overseen our selves, as
altogether to neglect its Translation till now, especially, when so few Curious
Books are published in French upon any other Subject, but what are immediately
made English; but I judge the Reasons of it to be chiefly these four.

First, It was too great, nay I may rather say too difficult a task for any
common Farrier to undertake, both because of the French Language, which few of
that Profession are Masters of; as also, because there is in it, a great deal
more of what by Physicians is called Method, than in any Book as yet writ upon
the same Subject; No wonder then, the Englishing of it was not attempted by
such, whose knowledge in Physic is generally but very superficial, and
Practice not performed with near so much Order and Method as is to be found
here: It may also be supposed, that Farriers, whose Tread and Calling is their
Livelihood, may have willingly omitted it, (even although otherwise very
capable of performing it) lest its accuracy and plainness, for both which this
Book is so highly esteemed, might have prejudged their Employment.

Secondly, There are but few Gentlemen, who although very capable to undertake
such a Work, will yet be at the trouble and pains to engage in it, being
sensible what a vast difference there is, between Englishing a few Pages, and
translating a considerable Volume; and I know, that many have for this very
reason admited, how that I, whose Employment and Business lay not at all this
way, should have ever concerned my self with it: But to satisfy a little such
inquisitive Persons as to this. I say, that the Subject I have made choice of,
is not only very Gentlemany, and therefore worthy any man's allowing some spare
hours upon the study of it, but I must also let them know, that several things
which many other Gentlemen look upon as toils and troubles, are to me real
Recreations and Divertisements; and as it is my humor to abominate idleness, so
I always designed that my innocent Occupations, might not only be diverting and
useful to my self, but also beneficial, if possible, to others, whereof I have
already given several Proofs, in treating of a Subject no less useful and
Gentlemany than this; and as the divertisement and satisfaction I have had in
completing this Translation, has abundantly recompensed my labor (for I
assure you what ever may be the thoughts of some narrow and mean spirited
People, I never intended any prospect of gain should) so I make no doubt, but
the serious perusal of it will sufficiently answer my expectation, by giving
all imaginable satisfaction to the Reader.

The Third Reason proceeds from an Objection, which I have heard sometimes made
against the Book in General, viz. That many of its Receipts are not only
difficult to prepare, but also very chargeable; now although I know this will
have no weight with any who know the Book, yet seeing it has been, and still
may be a Stumbling Block to many, who know not its Worth and Excellency. I
shall endeavor to remove it. First then, as to the great difficulty there is
in prepareing some of the Receipts, I say that is easily remeded. by either
making use of such as are least composed, (and whereof there are a great many
in the Book, of the same nature and virtue, although not altogether so great,
with those that are most difficult to prepare) or otherwise, where there is an
absolute necessity to make use of any which are more composed; by employing
some discreet and skilful Apothecary, who may be commonly found in the next
adjacent Town or Village: And as to the Second, which is their chargeableness
and excessive Rate, besides, as I have already said, that there are many
Remedies of an easy composition, as well as more difficult, so there are also
others which may be had at a very easy Rate, and are therefore most proper for
Horses of a small value; not but that they are also good for the finest of
Horses, however I judge them more proper for the coursest and most common, such
as your ordinary Hackneys, plough and Cart-horses, etc. and where a man has
Horses which are very fine, and of a great value, I cannot imagine, that he
will grudge at the giving out twenty shillings, that so he may save himself
100, 200, or 300 Pounds, many Horses in Europe being known to be valued at
these Rates, and even in England there are some of 100, 150, and 200 Pounds
price, so that I say, to save Horses of so great a value, I cannot fancy that
any Nobleman, or Gentleman, who takes delight in them, will scruple the laying
out of 20 or 30 shillings, which is more than the price of the most composed
Remedy in the whole Book; and although the common Vehicle recommended by our
Author, be Claret or White Wine, both because the coursest kind of it, which is
good enough for Horses, is procured at a very easy Rate in France, as also
because they have not in that Country the convenience of getting good Ale, yet
it does not hinder, but that in many cases where he orders Claret or White
Wine, we in these Islands, (where Wines are sold at a pretty dear Rate, and
where good Ale may be easily had) may make use of Ale, if we find no
indispensible necessity lying upon us, to make only use of Wine, which in some
cases there is, as the nature of the Remedy, with a little Experience will
quickly discover to any: And thus I hope I have removed a common, but in my
Opinion, very weak and frivolous Objection, made by a kind of men, who value a
Crown or Noble, more than the finest Courser of Naples.

But the Fourth and last Reason, why this Translation has been omitted, and
which will, I believe, be found to be the strongest of all, is that we are
generally so much persuaded of the Ezcellency of our old Writers, such as
Blundevil, Markham, De la Gray, and some others, that we imagine none can
outstrip or exceed them, and yet the most part of those who have writ in the
English Language upon this Subject, were French Men; For the Duke of Newcastle,
by what I can learn, never writ any thing of Marshalry, what ever he might have
done, had he lived, for we find in his English Book of Horsemanship last
Published, that he designed such a Treatise, but that it was ever either
finished, or so much as begun to, is what I could never as yet be certainly
informed of; so that, generally speaking, I say we must still acknowledge, that
we are in a great measure beholden to the French, for our chiefest Knowledge
and Skill in this Science; and who ever shall take the pains to peruse these
Writers and this, as I have done the most part of them, will find such a
difference betwixt them, that I am confident, if he be any thing of a Horseman,
he will make no Comparison.

Let this long neglect then of ours, now we have this admirable Piece in our
own Language, make us the more foreward, thoroughly to peruse and practice its
Directions, that so we may with the greater success, improve in the knowledge
of a Science, which (as the Art Military) is looked upon not to be below the
study even of Princes, whereof several instances might be given; and that this
Translation may have so good and wished for effect, is the earnest desire of
him, who is not only a Well-wisher to Marshalry and Horsemanship, but also
according to his small power and capacity, an Encourager and Promoter of all
Heroic and Gentlemany Studies and Exercises whatsoever.

THE AUTHOR'S EPISTLE To the READER.
HERE is a new Edition of the Parfait Marshall, wherein I am to give you new
discoveries, which without doubt will make it preferable to the former; I
changed many things in the last, to distinguish it from those which were
Counterfeit by some Booksellers at Lions, accustomed to deceive the Public by
defective Editions, wherein they shamefully join Negligence with Dishonesty;
They altered in this my Work the Names of the Drugs, and thereby rendered them
unintelligible; they falsified in many remedies the Dose, and consequently made
the Cure worse than the Disease: To free the public of this inconveniency I
have in this new Edition changed the order of the preceding, by transposing
the two Parts which compose the Whole, and putting the Second in place of the
First, To the end so remarkable a change, which immediately strikes the Eyes,
might without Choquing either Reason or Symmetry, serve to distinguish the true
and genuine Copies from the false.

Since that time, Experience and Reflections have given me new Discoveries,
whereof I intend to make the Public a Sharer; thereby the better to Answer the
expectation of many Strangers, who having already Translated this Book into
several Languages, and preparing for new Editions, will be no doubt very well
satisfied, to find it more Exact and Correct than heretofore: In many parts I
have taken away whole Remedies, which appeared to me not so good as those I
have put in their places, and I have cleared the most part of the Pages, of
those trouble some Characters, such as Croche^s, Stars, and Little Hands, that
marked the Additions made from time to time, and which composed a Bizarre and
fantastical body of Work, more proper to distract and confound the Reader, than
render him attentive, and instruct him.

I had left in my former Editions, out of an indulgent Humor, and in behalf of
many Farriers, and some opiniative Humors, certain Remedies, or rather certain
Old Rotes and Practices, which a long custom had so Authorized, that I scarcely
believed I could wholly destroy them; at present I banish this Tolleration, and
although I put my self in hazard of exciteing against me this Crowd of People,
infatuated with their false Opinions, yet I declare that I am absolutely
against these Old and despicable Routines, and pretend after having first
rejected them, to substitute in their places wholesome Remedies; for example;
amongst the different Remedies which I had given for Foundering in the feet, I
had slipped in that bad Custom of Gartering, for Reasons I shall explain in the
Chapter Treating of that Infirmity; If I had omitted that Routine, People would
either have accused me of singularity, or that I had been ignorant of a
practice, which had been by time beyond the compass of Memory, rooted and
established among the Farriers; Now, I quit that Circumspection, and intend to
prove that the use of Garters is to be abolished, and that if they are not
altogether unprofitable, yet they generally do more prejudice than good. This I
shall make clearly appear to such, who are endued but with a moderate portion
of Reason and good sense.

It is the same with what they commonly practice upon a Horse that is strained
in the Shoulder or Haunch, for several Farriers prepossest with the old
Routine, cause the Horse if the strain be in the Shoulder ( Nager a Sec as the
French call it, which is nothing else but the tying up of the sound Leg, with a
piece of small Rope to his fore thigh, that so he may not set it to the ground,
and then they constrain him to walk upon his three Legs; You shall have the
Reason why they do this in its proper place) and if it be in the Haunch, then
they make him draw in the Harrows, which is nothing else but to redouble the
pain in a part already very much afflicted; and it is the same, as if a man who
has strained his Knee or Thigh, should go Cripple and walk upon it.

But in this occasion they don't rest there, for having forced the horse either
to walk thus upon three Legs, or to draw in the Harrows, they at the very same
time, blood him in the Plat Veins, or flat of the Thighs, which is a manifest
Counter-time, and very great imprudence, because the horse's whole Blood being
agitated by the violent motion of going upon three Legs. etc. there evacuats
none but that which is purest, and most filled with Animal Spirits; So that
nature remains weakened, and far less capable to Re establish the Shoulder or
Thigh which they intend to Cure; Besides that to take Blood in such an occasion
from the Plat-Vein, is but to draw down the Humor upon the part afflicted,
whereas by a more judicious practice, they might make a Revulsion and divert
it, by Blooding in the Neck.

Don't they fall again into another Mistake against Good Practice and Custom,
when they suspect a Horse of having the Glaunders, because he has Kernels, and
casts at the Nose? for then they begin by removing the Kernels as if they
were the Cause of the Glanders, whereas they are only its Effects, and a Horse
is no less Glander'd for having the Kernels taken away; also a Horse which
casts at the Nose, may be perhaps but Colded, although he appear to have the
Glanders: But their abuse goes yet further, because when they observe that a
Horse Casts after the Kernels are removed, they then give him some Cordials
after their own fashion, which neither Cure the Horse, nor so much as prevent
his Casting, so that for last refuge they Purge and Repurge him, which is a
great abuse, and the true and ready way to render the Disease incureable; it
being most certain, that Purging in such a case produces a bad effect, because
it disorders and confounds nature, by forceing her to take another way to
discharge her self, than that she would have chosen of her own accord: They
would prevent such accidents as these, if they were capable of a little
Speculation, but it is not for them this Axiom is made, Medicus est inspector
naturae; for in fine a man should always accomodate himself to Nature, and
cross and oppose her as little as possible.

I could play the Critic longer, and could recite a great many more examples,
but I refer the Reader to the First In this Translation the Second.
part of this work, which will instruct him in every thing relating to the
Knowledge of Horses, and assist him to make Judicious Reflections upon the
Cause and Signs of their Diseases; he will find them there Defined with so
great care and exactness, that he will scarcely receive more exact Ideas of
them any where else, and if he will but join to them a little Practice, and
apply himself to the Composition and Application of the Remedies, he will be in
no danger of being ensnared by the Mischievous and pitiful Routines of some of
our common Farriers, and of another Set of People who are no less to be feared.
I mean certain Half knowing Men; who having but Superficial Notions of what I
shall explain, fancy to amuse the World with a great Fracas of words, but
shamefully hold their peace when People require their Effects: I tell my
Opinion with a great deal of freedom, but yet with more Ingenuity and Candor,
and all know that my Words and Actions are free from any mean By end, and that
I have no other motive herein, but after a Generous way to oblige the Public,
and particularly those who delight in Horses. I conclude, by saying that a Man
may also receive some happy Impressions, relating to this Subject and some
others fit for frameing the Spirit of a Young Gentleman, by Reading a Book
entitled in French, Les Arts De l'homme d'epee, published by G. Guillet,
wherein is found amongst other things, the Facility of Dictionaries, for the
Terms and Definitions of each Subject, are there set down in an Alphabetical
order: Many people have found so much good by it already, that I fancy the
Public will be in some measure beholden to me for recommending it.

AN ALPHABETICAL CATALOGUE Of All the Simples, and Drugs, mentioned in this
Work, Together with their French and Latin Appellations, in the first Column is
contained the English, in the Second the French, and in the Third the Latin
Names.
Nota. The Explication of the Weights and Measures, together with the Terms of
Horsemanship, are to be found at the end of this Catalogue.

English French Latin A A A AConite or Wolfsbane Reagal Aconitum vel luparia
Acorns Glands de Chesne Glandes Quercinae Agarick Agaric Agaricum Agarick
Trochiscated Agaricen trochisques Agaricum Trochiscatum Agnus Castas or Chaste
t^ee Agnus Castus Agnus Castus Agrimony Agrimoine Agrimoni^s Alder Aune ou
Verne Alnus Alhandalor Coloquintida Trochiscated Dalhandal Troch^sci Alhandal
Alkanet or Orchanet Orcanette Anchusa Alkermes or Confect of the Berry Chermes
Alkermes Confellio Alkermes Alum common Alun Alumen factitium Alum of the
Rock or Roch Alum Alun de Glace Alumenrupeum Almonds bitter Amandes ameres
Amygdalae amarae Almonds sweet Amandes douces Amygdalae dulces Aloes common
Aloes Commun Aloe caballina Aloes bepatick or the middle kind Aloes hepatique
Aloe hepatica Aloes succotriue or finest Aloes succotrin Aloe succotrina, Amber
white Ambre Succinum, Amber yellow Carabe Carabe Anet or Dill Anet Anethum
Angelica Angelique Angelica Angelica of Bohemia Angelique de Boheme Angelica
Bohemioe Aniseeds Anis Anisum Antimony Crude Antimoin crud Antimonium crudum
Antimony Diaphoretick Antimoin Diaforetique Antimonium Diaphoreticum Antimony
glass Ver d' Antimoin Vitrum Autimonii Apple Pomme Pomum Apple called a Renet
or Pippen Pomme de Reynette Malum Petitium Aquafortis Eau fort Aquafortis
Aquafortis weakened by using Eau second Aquafortis usu attenuata Armenian stone
Pierre d' Armenie Lapis Armenus Aromatic Reed of the Shops Calamus Aromatique
Calamus Aromaticus Arsenick Arsenic Arsenicum Arsmart Culrage ou Persicaire
Persicaria vel Hydropiper Ash tree Fresne Fraxinus Ashes made of the branches
of a Vine Cendres de Sarment Cineres Sarmenti Ashes made of the burnt lees or
dregs of Win^ Cendres gravelee Cineres faecium vini Asparegus Asperge Asparagus
Assa faetida Ass faetid Assa faetida Avens or Herb Bennet Benoist
Caryophillata Azure or Lazule stone Pierre don't se fait l' Azur Lapis L'azuli B
B B BAcon Skin Couenne, ou Coin de lard Corium Lardi Balm Citronille ou
melisie Melissa Barberry tree Espine Vinette Berberis Bark of any Tree Ecorce
Cortex Barley Orge Hordeum Barley flower or Meal Farine d' Orge Farina hordei
Bastard black Hellebor or bears foot Ellebore bastard ou Helleboraster
Helleborastrum Bastard Dittany Fraxinelle Fraxinella Bastard Saffron Cartham
Carthamus Bay Berries Bays de Laurier Baccae lauri Bay or Laurel wood Bois de
Laurier Lignum laurinum Bdellium a Gum Bdellium Bdellium Beans Feves Fabae
Bears breech, or brank urfine Branque ursine Acanthus vel Brancaursina Bears
foot or bastard black Hellebor Ellebore bastard, ou Helleboraster
Helleborastrum Beer, a kind of drink Biere Cervisia lupulata Beet Bette ou
Poiree Beta Beetle Escarbot Scarabaeus Beetrave Bette rave Beta rubra Benedicta
laxativa, or the blessed Laxative Benedicte Laxative Benedicta laxativa
Benjamin Benjoin Benzoinum Betony Betoine Betonica Bezoar stone Bezouart Lapis
Bezoar Bindweed or sea Bindweed Soldanelle Soldanella Birthwort long or Male
Aristoloch longue Aristolochia longa Birthwort round or Female Aristoloch ronde
Aristolochia rotunda Bistort or snake-weed Bistorte Bistorta vel radix
serpentaria Blites or Blite Blettes Blitum Blossom or flower of the
Pomegranate-tree Ballaust Balaustium Bole Armoniack, fine Bole, or Oriental
Bolarmenie Bol fin d'Armenie, ou de Levant Bolus Armenus vel Orientalis Bole
common Bole commun Bolus Vulgaris Borage Bourache Borag^ Borace or Borax Borax
Borax vel Chrysocolla Borax of Venice Borax de Venice Borax Venetiae Box wood
Buys Buxus Bramble Ronce Rubus Sylvestris Bran of Wheat Son Furfur Brandy Eau
de vie Spiritus vini vel vinum adustum Brier wild or Eglantine Eglantier, ou
Rosier sauvage Cynosbatus vel Rosa sylvestris Brimstone or Sulfur Soulfre
Sulphur Brimstone live or natural Soulfre vif Sulphur vivum. Briony black
Brioine Noire Bryonia Nigra Briony white Brioine ou Couleuvree Bryonia vel
vitis alba Broom Geneste Genista Bugloss Buglose Buglossum Bulrush of the Sea
Jonc marin Juncus aquaticus Burdock the great Bardane ou glouterone autrement
aureil d'asne Bardan^ major Butter Beurre Butyrum Butter-burr Petasites.
Petasitis. C C C CAbbage Choux pommez Brassica capitatiae Calamint Calament
Calamintha Camomill Camomille Chamaemelum Camomill Roman Camomille Roman
Chamaemelum Romanum Camphire a Gum Camphre Camphora Cantharides Cantarides
Cantharides Caper Tree Root Capparis Racine, ou Racine de Capier Capparis radix
Carawdy Carvi Carum Cardamoms the lesser, the greater being commonly called
grains of Paradise Cardamome Cardamomum Carduus benedictus, or Blessed Thistle
Chardon Benit Carduus Benedictus Carline Thistle Carline Carlina vel Chamaeleon
album Carrot Carote Daucus Cassia Casse Cassia Cassia fistula cleansed Casse
mondee Cassia fistularis mundata Castoreum of the Indies Castoreum de Levant
Castoreum Indicum Catholtcon double, or the double universa purging Electuary
Catholicum double Catholicum duplex Celandine E'claire Cheledonium, vel herba
Hirundinaria Centory great Centauree grande Centaurium majus Centory lesser
Centauree petite ou fiel de Terre Centaurium minus, vel Fell Terrae Cerecloth of
Galen Cerat de Galien Ceratum Galeni Ceruse, or White-lead Ceruse Cerussa Chalk
Craye Creta Charcoal of wood Charbon de Bois Carbo ligneus, sive ex Ligno
adusto China Root Esquine China vel lignum Chinense Cinnamon Canelle Cinnamomum
Cinque foil or five leaved grass. Pentaphilon ou Quinte-feuille Pentaphyllum
Citron or Lemmon Citron ou Limon Limonium vel Malum citreum Claret Wine Clairet
Vinum rubrum Clay Terre glaise Lutum Clay of Potters Terre a Potier Argilla,
vel Terra figulina Clove Gilly-flower Girofflee Cariophillum Cloves Clous de
Giroffle Cariophillae aromatica Cloves of Garlic Gousses d'aile Aglidia, vel
allii Nuclei Colewort Choux Caulis Colewort red Choux rouge Caulis ruber
Colocynth, or Coloquintida Coloquinte Colocynthis Colts foot Pas d'asne
Tussilago Comsrey the great Consoude grand Symphitum, vel consolida major
Comfrey middle, otherways Lung-wort Consoude moyen Pulmonaria Contra yerva or
counter poison Root Contra jerva Contra yerva vel radix Drakena Copper as
German Couperose d' Alemagne Vitriolum Germanicum Copper as Green Couperose
Vert Vitriolum viride Copperas white Couperose Blanch Vitriolum album Copper
brunt Calcantum Calcanthum vel Aes ustum Coral Coral Corallium Coraline or
Sea-moss Coralline Corallina Coriander Coriandre Coriandrum Cornachinus's
powder Poudre de Cornachine Pulvis cornachini vulgaris Corn Poppy, or Corn-rose
Coquericot Papaver Rhaeas Costus bitter Costus amere Costus amarus Cowslip or
Primrose Prime-ver Primula veris vel Verbasculum Crab Cancre Cancer Crab's-eyes
Yeux de cancres Oculi Cancrorum Craw-fish or Crevice Ecrevisse Astacus
Fluviatilis Cream of Sweet-milk Cresme de lait Aphrogala, velcremor lactis
Cresses of the Garden Nasitort Nasturtium Cross wort Croisee Cruciata Craw foot
yellow or of the Meadow Jaunet ou Basinet Ranunculus pratensis, vel Pes Corvi
Crumbs or soft of Bread Mie de pain Medulla panis Cristal of Tartar Cristal de
Tartre Cristallum Tartari Cristal Mineral or sal prunella Cristal Mineral ou
sell prunelle Sal Prunella Cubebs Cubebes Cubebae Cucumber Concombre Cucumer vel
Cucumis Cuttle bone Os de Seche Os Sepiae Cypress Tree Cypre Cupressus Cypress
Nut Noix de Cypre Galbulus vel nux Cypria D D D DAisie wild Marguerite sauvage
Belis minor Sylvestris Dandelion, Lions tooth, or piss a bed Dent de Lion ou
pissenlit Dens Leonis Darnel. Yvraie Lolium Devils Bit Mors du Diable Morsus
Diabolt Digred or Diagridium Diagrede Diagridium Dill or Anet Anet Anethum
Dittany bastard Fraxinelle Fraxinella Dittany of Crete Dictame de Crete
Dictamnus Creticus Divine Plaster Emplastre Divine Emplastrum Divinum Dock
sharp-pointed Lapas aigu ou parelle Lapathum acutum Dog or Quitch grass Chien
dent ou Gramen Gramen Caninum. Dragons blood. Sang de Dragon Sanguis Draconis
Dragon-wort Serpentaire Dracontium Dregs, grounds, or lees of Wine. Baistier ou
Bessiere de Vin Floces, vel faeces vini Dwarf Alder Hyeble ou Hieble Ebulus
Dung of any beast. Flante Retrimentum. E E E EArth sealed Terre Sigillee Terra
sigillata Earth Worm Lumbrique Lumbricus Egg oeuf Ovum Eglantine, or wild Brier
Eglantier ou Rosier sauvage Cynosbatus vel Rosa sylvestris Elaterium, or
condensed juice of the wild Cucumber Suc de Concombre Sauvage Elaterium
Elecampane Enule Campane Enula Campana Electuary of Carthamus Seeds Elect: de
Cartham Diacarthamum Electuary of the juice of Roses Electuaire du suc de Roses
Electuarium e succo Rosarum Electuary of Prunes purging Diaprunis Solutif
Diaprunum solutivum Endive Endive Endivia Eringo root Racine de Erynge Eringij
radix Euphorbium a Gum Euforbe Euphorbium. Extract of Juniper Extrait de
Genevre Extractum Juniperi Eye Bright. Eufraise Euphrasia F F F FEnegreek
Fenouil Grec Foenum Graecum Fennel Fenouil Foeniculum Fig Figue Ficus Fig tree
Figuier Ficus vel Arbor ficulnea Figwort Scrofulaire Scrofularia major vulgaris
Fileings of Steel Limaille d'acier Limatura Chalybis Flax, Hurds or Tow Bourre
Stupa Flea wort, or Flea bane Herb aux puces Psyllion Flint Caillou Silex
Flower, or blossom in general Fleur Flos Flower of Brimstone or Sulphur Fleur
de Soulfre Flos Sulphuris Flower, or blossom of Pomgranates Ballaust Balaustium
Flowers of Violets Fleurs de Violettes Flores Violarum Fluellin, or speedwell
Veronique Veronica Frank-incense, or Olibanum Oliban Olibanum, vel Thus
Fumitory Fume Terre Fumaria. G G G Galens Cere-cloath Cerat de Galien Ceratum
Galeni Galingal Galangue Galanga Gall of any Beast Fiel Fell Galls, or Gall-nuts
Galls Gallae Garlic Ail Allium Gentian Gentiane Gentiana Germander Germandree
Chamaedrys Ginger Gingembre Gingiber Goats Rue Rue de Chevre Galega, vel Ruta
capraria Goos berry-bush-white Grozelier blanc Grossularia alba Gourd
Citrouille Citrullum Grains of Chermes, or Scarlet grains Grains de Kermes
Grana Chermis, vel Jlicis Bacciferae Grains of Paradise, or the greater
Cardamoms Grains de Paradis, ou Maniguette Grana Paradisi Grape Raisin Vva
Grease, or fat of any thing Graisse Adeps vel Pinguedo Groats, or course oat
meall Gruau d'Aveine ou Avoine gruee Farina avenacea vel Avenarum Chondri
Gromel common Gremil Lythospermum seu milium solis Ground Pine Chame pitis ou
petit pin Chamaepitys Groundsel Senecon Senecio vel Erigerum Guajacum, lignum
vitae, or Pock-wood Gayac Guajacum, vel lignum sanctum Gum Ammoniack Ammoniac
Ammoniacum Gum Bdellium Bdellium Bdellium Gum Cambugia, or Gum gutte Gomme
gutte Cambogia, vel gutta gamba Gum Camphir Camphire Camphora Gum Dragon, or
Dragagant Gomme a Dragon Tragacanthum Gum Elemi Gomme Elemi Elemi Gummi Gum
Euphorbium Euforbe Euphorbium Gum Mastick Mastic Mastiche vel lentisci resina
Gum Olibanum, or Frankincense Oliban Olibanum, vel Thus Gum Sagapen Gomme
sagapene Sagapenum Gum Sarcocol Sarcocolle Sarcocolla Gun Powder. Poudre a
Canon. Pulvis Bombardicus H H H Hearts horn Corn de Cerf Cornu Cervi Hearts
tongue Langue de cerf ou sco. lopandre Lingua Cervina, vel sc^lopendria
Hawkweed Chichoree amere ou jaulne Accipitrina vel Hieracium Hazel tree Couldre
Corylus Sylvestris Hellebore black Ellebore noir Helleborus niger Hellebore
white Ellebore blanc Helleborus albus Hemp seed Chamvre ou Chenevis Cannabis
semen Hermodacts Hermodactes Hermodactylus Honey Miel Mel Honey of the herb
Mercury Miel Mercuriel Mel Mercuriale Honey of Roses Miel Rozat Mel Rosatum
Honey of Violets Miel Violat Mel Violatium Honey suckle Chevre-feuille
Caprifolium Hore-hound Marhube ou Marrube Marrubium Horse tail Presle ou Prele
Cauda equina vel equisetum Housleek the great, or Common Joubarbe Sedum, vel
semper vivum majus Hundred headed Thistle, or field Eringus Chardon a cent
testes Eryngium Hurds, Tow, or Flax Bourre Stupa Hypericon, or St. John's wort
Mill pertuis Hypericum Hysop Hysope Hyssopus I I I JAcinth or confection of
Jacinth Confection de Jacinth, ou Hyacinth Confectio de Hyacintho Jallap
Jalappe Jalappa Indian leaf Feuille de Jude Malabathrum vel folium indicum St.
John's wort, or Hypericon Mill pertuis Hypericum Iris common Iris Commun Iris
vulgaris Iris of Florence Iris de Florence Iris Florentina Juice of Liquorice
common Suc de Regalise Succus Glycyrrhizae vulgaris Juice of black Liquorice
Suc de Regalise noire Succus Glycyrrhizae niger Juice of Pale Roses Suc de
Roses pales Succus Rosarum pallid. Juniper Berries Bays ou grains de Genevre
Baccae Juniperi Juniper Wood Bois de Genevre Lignum Juniperi Ivy common Lierre
commun ou rempant Haedera vulgaris Ivy of the ground Lierre terrestre Haedera
terrestris Ivory. Ivoire Ebur K K K KNot grass Renoue ou Trainasse Polygonum,
vel Centinodia. L L L LAdies Mantle, or Lyon's foot. Pied de Lion Pes Leonis,
seu Alchimilla Lard or fat of Bacon Lard Liquamen vel Lardum Lavender Lavande
Lavendula Laurel wood Bois de Laurier Lignum Laurinum Lazule, or Azure stone
Pierre don't se fait l'Azur Lapis Lazuli Lead Plombe Plumbum Leek Poireau Porrum
Lees or Dregs of Wine Baistier ou Bessier de vin Floces vel faeces Vini Lemmon
or Citron Limon ou Citron Limonium, velmalum Citreum Lemmon Peel or skin Ecorce
de Citron Cortex Limonum Lettuce Laitue Lactuca Lilly Lis Lilium Lilly
Comfancy, or Lilly Convally Grand Muguet Lilium Convallium Lilly Root Oignion
de Lis Lilij Radix Lillies of the water, white and yellow Lis d'Etang Nympheae
albae and lutae Ladies Bedstraw Petit Muguet Gallium Lime unslacked Chaux Vive
Calx viva Linseed Lin Lini Semen Linseed flower, or meal Farine de Lin Farina
Lini Lions foot, or Lions paw Pied de Lion Pes Leonis, vel Alchimilla Liquorice
Regalisse Glycyrrhiza Litharge of Gold Litarge d'Or Lithargyrum Auri Litharge
of Silver Litarge d'Argent Lithargyrum Argenti Liver of any thing Foy Jecur vel
Hepar Lung wort, or liverwort, otherwise middle Comfrey Consoude moyen
Pulmonaria M M M MAce Macis Macis Madder Garance Rubia Tinctorum Magistery of
Lead Magister du Saturn Magisterium Saturni Maidenhair Herb de Capillaire, ou
Polittic Adianthum vulgar vel Polytrichum Male Incense, or Frank-Incense
Oliban Olibanum Malmsey Wine Malvoise Vinum Arvisium, vel Malvaticum Mallow
common Mauve Malva vulgaris Manna Manne Manna Marjoram sweet Marjolaine
Marjorana hortensis Marrow of a Heart Mouelle de Cerf Medulla Cervi Marsh Mallow
Guimove Althaea Master wort Imperatoire Imperatoria Mastick a Gum Mastic
Mastiche vel lentisciresina Meadsweet Reine de Prez Regina prati, seu Vlmaria
Mechoacan Mechoacan Mechoacanna Medlar or Open arse Nefle ou Nesple Mespilum
Melilot Melilot Me^ilotus Melon Melon Melo Mercury the Herb, or French Mercury
Mercuriale Mercurialis Mercury red, or Red sublimate Mercure rouge Mercurius
dulcis subli: matus rubrus Milfoil, or Yarrow Mill Feuilles Mellefolium Milk
Lait Lac Millet Millet Milium Mint Menthe ou Mente Mentha vulgaris Mint broun
or red Menthe a cost rouge Mentha rubra Misseltoe of the Appletree Guis de
Pomier Viscum Malinum Misseltoe of the Oak Guis de Chesne Viscum Quercinum
Mouse ear Aureille de soury, ou Piloselle Auricula muris Mucilage plaster
Emplastre de Mucilages Diachylon simplex Mugwort Armoise Artemisia Mules fat,
or grease Axunge de Mulet Axungia-Muli Mullain white or Male Boullon blanc ou
Molene Verbascum, vel Tapsus Barbatus Mummy, or embalmed man's flesh Mumie
Mumia Muscle shells Coquilles de Moules Musculorum Conchae Musk Musc Moschus
Mustard seed Grain de Moutard Sinapi Mutton sewet Suif de Mouton Sevum Ovillum
Myrabolans of five kinas, viz. Citrinae, Chebulae, Indicae, Emblicae, and
Bellericae Myrabolans de cinq sorts, etc. Myrabolanae Citrinae, Chebulae, etc.
Myrrh Myrrh Myrrha Myrtle berries Mirtilles Myrti Baccae. N N N Nettle Ortie
Vrtica Night-shade-water Eau de Morelle Aqua Solani vel Morella Nitre or
saltpeter Nitre ou Sal-pestre Nitrum Nutmeg Muscade Nux Moschata, vel
Myristica. O O O OAts Avoine Avena Oat meal course, or rather Groats Avoine
gruee ou gruau d'Aveine Farina Avenacea, vel Avenarum chondri Onion Oignon Cape
Opium or the condensed juice of black poppyheads Opium Opium Opoponax, a Gum
Opoponax Opoponax Orange Orange Aurantium Orange peel Ecorce d'Orange
Aurantiorum Cortex Organy, or wild-Marjor am Origan Origanum Orpiment Orpiment
Auripigmentum Orpine Orpin Telephium Orrice common, or ordinary flower de luce
root Iris commun Jris Vulgaris Orrice root of Florence Iris de Florence Jris
Florentina Orvietan Orvietan Electuarium Orvietanum Oxycrat, or a composition
of water and vinegar Oxycrat Oxycratum Oxycrotium-plaster Emplastre Occicrocium
Emplastrum Oxycr^cium Oil Huile Oleum Oil of bitter Almonds Huile d'Amandes
ameres Oleum Amygdal. amar. Oil of sweet Almonds Huile d'Amandes douces Oleum
Amygdalarum dulcium Oil of Amber Huile d'Ambre Oleum Succini Oil of Bays or
Laurel Huile de Laurier Oleum Laurinum Oil of Castor or Castoreum Huile de
Castor Oleum de Castoreo Oil of Cloves Huile de Giroffles Oleum Caryophillorum
Oil of Earthworms Huile de Lumbris Oleum Lumbricorum Oil of Hemp seed, Huile
de Chenevis Oleum Cannabis Oil of Hypericon or St. John's wort Huile de
Hypericon ou mill pertuis Oleum Hyperici Oil of Lillies Huile de Lis Oleum
Liliorum Oil of Linseed Huile de Lin Oleum seminis Lini Oil of Myrtles Huile de
Mittles Oleum Mirtinum Oil of Olives Huile de Olives Oleum Olivarum Oil of
Petre, or Petrolium Huile de Petrole Oleum Petrae, vel Petrolaeum Oil of
Quinces Huile de Coins Oleum Cydoniorum Oil of Roses Huile Rosat Oleum Rosaceum
Oil of Turpentine Huile de Terebentine Oleum Terebinthinae Oil of Walnuts Huile
de noix Oleum Carynum Oil of Wax Huile de Cire Oleum Cerae Oil of Vitriol Huile
de Vitriol Oleum Vitrioli Ointment of Agrippa Onguent Agrippa Vnguentum
Agrippae Ointment of the Apostles Onguent des Apostres Vnguentum Apostolerum
Ointment of Marshmallows Onguent d'Althea Vnguentum Dialthaeae Ointment
Martiatum or of soldiers Onguent de Soldats Vnguentum Martiatum Ointment
Oppodeldoch Onguent Oppodeldoc Vnguentum Oppodeldoch Ointment of Pompholix, or
nothing Onguent Ponpholix Vnguentum Diapompholigos, vel nihil Ointment of
Poplar buds Onguent de Populeon Vnguentum Populneum Ointment Resumptive or
Restoring Onguent Resumptif Vnguentum resumptivum Ointment of Roses Onguent
Rosat Vnguentum Rosatum Oyster shells E^^illes des Huistres Ostrearum conchae.
P P P PArmacity Sperma Ceti Sperma Ceti Parsley Persil Petroselinum Parsnip
Pastenade Pastinaca Patience, or Monks rhubarb Patience Patientia vel
Hippolapathum Peach tree Peschiet Arbor Persica Pearls Perles Margaritae Pease
Feverolles Fabulae vel pisa Pellitory of Spain Peretre ou Pyrethre Pyrethrum
Pellitory of the Wall Parietaire Parietaria vel herba muralis Pennyroyal common
Pouliot Pulegium hortense seu Puleium Pennyroyal wild Pouliot sauvage Pulegium
Sylvestre Pepper Poivre Piper Pepper long Poivre long Piper longum Pepper white
Poivre Blanc Piper Album Periwinkle Pervenche Vinca pervinca Petrol, or oil of
petre Petrole Petrolium Phagaedenick water Eau phagedenique Aqua Phagaedenica
Pine Kernels of the Indies Pignons d'Inde Nuclea pini Indicae Pine Tree Pin
Pinus Pine-tree-bark Ecorce de pin Cortex pini Pine tree-Gum Gomme de pin Pint
Gummi Pitch black or common Poix noire Pix nigra seu sicca Pitch of Burgundy
Poix de Bourgogne Pix Burgundiae Plantain Plantin Plantago Plantain water Eau
de plantin Aqua Plantaginis Polypody Polipode Polypodium Pomgranet Grenade
Malum granatum Pomgranet blossoms, or flowers Ballaust Balaustium Pomgranet
skin Ecorce de Grenade Cortex Mali granati Poppy of the Corn, or Corn-Rose
Coquericot Papaver Rhaeas Poppy white Pavot blanc Papaver album Potters clay
Terre a potier Argilla, vel terra figulina Powder of Cornachinus Poudre de
Cornachini Pulvis Cornachinii vulgaris Praecipitate red Precipite rouge
Praecipitatus rubrus Praecipitate white Precipite blanc Praecipitatus albus
Pulp, or fleshy part of any Fruit Poulpe Pulpa Purslain Pourpier Portulaca Q Q
Q QVick silver Argent vif ou Mercure courant Argentum vivum Qu^^ces Coins Mala
Cydonia Quitch-grass, or Doggrass Ghien dent ou gramen Gramen Caninum. R R R
RAdish Raifort ou Rave Raphanus Rain water Fau de pluie Aqua pluvialis Rasins,
or dried Grapes Raisins sees Vvae passae Rape seed Navette Semen rapi oblongi
Reed Aromatic of the Shops Calamus Aromatique Calamus Aromaticus Regulus of
Antimony Regalle d'Antimoine Regulus antimonij Rennet Apple Pomme de Reynette
Petitium Malum Rest harrow Acutelle Anonis, vel Aresta Bovis Rhubarb Rhubarbe
Rhabarbarum Rosemary Romatin Ros marinum Rose Rose Rosa Rose Damask, or pale
Rose Rose de Damas Rosa Damascena, vel Pallida Rose red common Rose rouge Rosa
rubra Rose red double, or Province Rose de provins Rosa rubra Batava, vel
Provincialis Rose water Eau de Rose Aqua Rosarum Rosin common Poix resine
Resina nativa Rue Rhue, ou Rue Ruta Rue of the Wall Rhue domest ique Ruta
muraria Rue water Eau de Rhue Aqua rutae Rye Seigle ou segle Secale S S S SAck
or Spanish-wine Vin d'Espagne Vinum Hispanense Saffron Safran Crocus, vel spica
Cilissae Saffron Oriental Safran de levant Crocus Orientalis Sagapen a Gum
Sagapene Sagapenum Sage Sauge Salvia Salprunella, or Cristal Mineral Sell
Brunelle Sal prunella Salt Sell Sal Salt Ammoniac Sell Ammoniac Sal Armoniacum
Sal Gem, or Mineral Salt Sell Gemme Sal Gemmae Salt great Sell gros Sal
Hispanicum Salt of lead Sell du Saturn, ou Sell de Plombe Sal Saturni Salt Petre
or Nitre Sell Pestre ou Nitre Nitrum, vel sal Petrae Salt of Tartar Sell de
Tartre Sal Tartari Salt Treacle of Vipers Sell Theriacal de Viperes Sal
Theriacum Viperarum Sandiver or glass salt Sell de Verre Axungia Vitri Sanicle
Sanicle Sanicula Sarcocol, a Gum Sarcocolle Sarcocolla Sarsaparilla
Salsepareille Salsaparilla Sassafras Sassafras Sassafras Satyrion Satyrion
Satyrium Saunders Sandal Santalum Saunders the three kinds Trois Sandale
Triasantalum Savin Sabine Sabina Savory Sariette Satureia Scabious Scabieuse
Scabiosa Scammony Scamonee Scammonium Scorzonera or Vipers grass Scorzonere
Scorzonera Sea-bind-weed Soldanelle Soldanella Sea-rush-grass, or sea-Bull-rush
Jonc matin Juncus aquaticus Sea holly, or hundred headed Thistle Chardon a Cent
testes Eryngium Sealed Earth Terre sigillee Terra sigillata Self-heal Brunell
Brunella, vel consolida minima Seen Seen Senna Serpent, or Adders tongue Langue
de serpent Lingua Serpentis Services Cormes Sorba Sharp-pointed dock Lapas aigu
ou parelle Lapathum acutum Shepherds purse Bourse de pasture Bursa pastorit
Skirrets Chervi Cicer Sloe Prunelle de Buisson Prunum sylvestre Smallage Ache
Apium Snails red without shells Limaces rouges Limaces rubri Snake-weed, or
Bistort Bistorte Bistorta vel radix serpentaria Soap Savon Sapo Soap black
Savon noire Sapo niger Soap of Castile, or Spanish soap Savon d'Espagne Marbre
Sapo Hispanicus Solomons-seal Signet de Solomon Sigillum Solomonis Soot of wood
Suye de Bois Fuligo Ligni Sorrel of the Garden Ozeille Acetosa hortensis, sive
Franca Sorrel long-leaved Ozeille long Acetosa vulgaris folio longo Sow bread
Ciclamen ou pain de Pourceau Ciclamen, vel panis porcinus Spech-grease, or
peece-grease, being the fat or grease of boi^ed oiled Leather Surpoint Pinguedo
Corij concocti oleo delibuti Speed-well or Fluellin Veronique Veronica
Spicknard Spica nard Spica Indica, seu spica nardus Spinnage Espinars
Spinnachia Spirit of Nitre Esprit de Nitre Spiritus nitri Spirit of salt Esprit
de sell Spiritus salis Spirit of Turpentine Esprit de Therebentin Spiritus
Terebinthinae Spirit of Wine Esprit de Vin Spiritus Vini Spirit of Vitriol
Esprit de Vitriol Spiritus Vitrioli Spleen-wort Ceterac Asplenium vel Cetarach
Spodium, also Nothing Ponpholix Pompholix Spurge lesser or wild Epurge, une
Espece de Tithymale Esula, vel Tithymalus sylvaticus lunato flore Starch Amidon
Amylum Staves acre Stafis agree Staphis agria Steel Acier Chalybs Steel dust, or
fileings Limaille de Acier Limatura Chalybis Sublimate corrosive Sublime
corrosif Mercurius sublimatus corrosivus Sublimate sweet Sublime doux Mercurius
sublimatus dulcis Succory Chichoree Cichoreum Succory bitter or yellow or
rather hawkweed Chichoree amere ou jaulne Accipitrina, Hieracium, vel Cichoreum
amarum Succory water Eau de Chichoree Aqua Cichorei Sugar Sucre Saccharum
Sugar Candy brown Sucre Candy roux Saccharum candum rubrum Sugar Candy white
Sucre Candy blanc Saceharum candum album Sugar coarse, or Powder-sugar
Cassonade Saccharum pulveratum non purificatum Swine-seam Graisse de porc, ou
sain doux Axungia porcina Sulphur or Brimstone Soulfre Sulphur Sulphur golden
of Antimony Soulfre aure d'Antimoine Sulphur auratum Antimonij Sumach Sumach
Rhus Sumach berries Grain de sumach Eruthros T T T TAmarinds Tamarins Tamarindi
Tamariskae shrub Tamaris Tamariscus Tansie Tanaise, ou Tanacet Tanacetum Tar
Tarc ou Tarc Pix liquida Tartar Tartre Tartarum Tartar white or calcined Tartre
blane Tartarum Calcinatum Thee The Thee Thistle with a hundred heads, or sea
holly Chardon a cent testes Eryngium Thyme Thim Thymum Thyme wild, or mother of
Thyme Serpolet Serpillum Toad Crapaut Bufo Tobacco Tabacou herb a la Rein
Petum vel Nicotiana Tobacco of Barsil Tabac de Bresil Petum indicum Tormentil
Tormentille Tormentilla Tow, Hurds, or Flax Bourre Stupa Treacle of Andromach
Theriaque d'Androniaque Theriaca Andro nachi Treacle of Venice Theriaque de
Venice Theriaca Veneta Turbith, the herb Turbith Turpethum Turnip Rave Rapum
Turpentine common Terebentine commune Terebinthina laricia vel communis
Turpentine of the Isle of Chio Terebentine de l'isle de Chio Terebinthina e
Chio Turpentine of Venice Terebentine de Venice Terebinthina Veneta. U U U
UNicorn's horn Corn de Licorne Vnicornis vel Monocerotis Cornu W W W WAlnut
Noix Juglans Water in which hot Iron has been quenched. Eau ferte Aqua ferro
calido calofacta Water Germander Scordion, ou Germandree acatique Scordium Wax
Cire Cera Wax hard, or sealing Wax Cire d'Espagne Cera sigillaris Wax red Cire
rouge Cera miniata Wax white, or virgin Wax Cire blanch Cera Virginea Wax
Yellow Cire jaune Cera flava Wayfaring Tree, or wild Vine Viorne ou Vigne
Sauvage Viburnum Whay Petit lait Serum lastis Wheat Froment Triticum Wheat Bran
Son Furfur Wheat flower the finest Farine fine de froment Pollen Wheat meal, or
course wheat flower Farine de froment Far, vel farina Tritici Whelp sucking
Chien de lair Catulus lacteanus White of an Egg Claire d'un oeuf Albumen White
lead or Ceruse Ceruse Cerussa Willow or sallow Tree Saul Salix Wine Vin Vinum
Wine lees or dregs Baistier ou Bessiere de vin Floces vel faeces Vini. Wine red
or Claret Vin rouge ou Clairet Vinum rubrum Wine white Vin blanc Vinum album
Winter green Pirole Pyro^a Wolfs bane, or Aconite Reagal Aconitum vel luparia
Wood louse, Sow, or Cheeslip Cloport Tilus vel Porcellio Worm-seed Semance
contre les verse Semen contra Vermes Worm wood Absinte Absynthium V V V VAlerian
Valeriane Valeriana Veraegrease Vert de gris, ou verdet Aerugo Verjuice Verjus
Vinum Omphacium Vermilion, or Cinnabar natural Cinabre naturel Cinnabris nativa
Vermilion, or Cinnabar artificial Cinabre artificiel Cinnabris factiva Vervaine
Verveine Verbena Vine Tree, or shrub Vigne Vitis Vine wild, or way faring tree
Viorne ou vigne sauvage Viburnum Vinegar Vinaigre Acetum Vinegar of Roses
Vinaigre rosat Acetum rosaceum Violet Violette Viola Viper Vipre Vipera Vipers
grass, or Scorzonera Scorzonere Scorzonera Vitriol blew or Roman Vittiol blue
Vitriolum coerulenm, vel Romanum Vitriol white or common Vitriol Commun
Vitriolum album, vel commune Vometing Nut Noix vom^que Nux vomica Y Y Y YArrow
or Milfoil Mill feulles Mill folium Yolk of an Egg Jaune d'un oeuf Vitellus
vel ovi luteum Z Z Z ZEdoary Zedoaire Zedoaria

AN EXPLICATION OF Some French Terms of Horsemanship, mentioned in this Book.
A
AIDES. Are Assistances or Helps, which the Rider draws from the gentle and
delicate Effects of the Bridle, Cavez on, Spurs, Rod, Action of his Legs, and
pressure of his Thighs; As also from the found or Clack of his Tongue, to make
a Horse ride just, and as he ought: They are also made use of to prevent
Chastisements, which a man is sometimes obliged to make use of, while he is a
dressing Horses. See Suppl. p. 26 etc AIR. An Air, is a Cadence and Liberty of
movement, accommodate to the natural Disposition of a Horse, which makes him
Ride, and Raise himself, according to the Riders Inclination, and that both in
measure and Cadence: They are generally reckoned to be six. See Supplement. p.
36 AMBLE. See Suppl. p. 33. and 60 APPUY. An Appuy may be considered several
ways, as First, it may be taken for a Reciprocal Sentiment or Feeling, betwixt
the Rider's hand, and the Horse's mouth: 2ly. For a Horse's rest upon the Bit
mouth: And 3ly. For the Pressure of the Bit-mouth on the Bars APPUY a
Pleine-main. Is a firm Pressure of a Horse's Bars against the Bit-mouth, but
however, so as not to be heavy on the Rider's hand; and this is a Quality which
all Horses appointed for the Wars, ought to have; because they are thereby the
more sure for the Rider, who in time of Action, cannot be supposed to consider
attentively the Aides of his Bridle-hand. APPUY au de la de Pleine-main. Is a
very hard pressure of a Horse's Bars against the Bit-mouth, but however, so as
not to force the Rider's hand, and therefore may be turned, and Stopped with a
little strength: This kind of Appuy is thought convenient for such people, as
having weak Thighs, cannot keep themselves firm on Horseback with them, and
therefore hold fast, and cleave to the Bridle-reins. ARMER. See Part 1. p. 254
and Supplement p. 66
B
BALOTTADE. See Suppl. p. 36
C
CAPRIOLE. See Suppl. p. 36 CAVESSON. A Cavezon, is a kind of Musrole or
Nose-band, made either of Iron, Leather, or Rope, sometimes flat upon the
inside, and sometimes hollow, as also twisted, and which is placed by help of a
Head-stale upon a Horse's Nose, the better to constrain him, and assist the
Rider in the suppling of his Shoulders: Those of Iron, flat upon the inside,
and also quilted with soft Leather, are most proper for this, and those of Cord
or Leather fittest to be made use of betwixt the Pillars. CHEVALER. See
Passager. CORVET. See Suppl. p. 36 CROUPADE. See Suppl. p. 36
D
DEMY-VOLT. Is a half Circle, or Round, which a Horse performs upon one of
the Corners of the Square wherein he is Riding, or at the end of a Passade, and
which he marketh with either one or two Pists, as the Rider pleases, that so he
may change hands, and fall in again exactly to the same Line of the Square or
Passade from whence he turned; and when it happens that he falls not in exactly
upon the same Line, then People say, He has not closed exactly his Demyvolt.
Nota, That it is always better to form a Square in Riding, than a Circle; this
is agreed to by all good Horsemen. DES-UNY. Or Disunited, See Suppl. p. 35
E
ENTIER. See Suppl. p. 66
F
FERME a Ferme. Is when a Horse performs Corvets or Pesades in one place,
with out in the least either advanceing or retireing.
G
GALLOP. See Suppl. p. 34
H
HEAVY. On the Hand. See Part I p. 242
M
MANEGE, May be considered two ways, as 1. It may be taken for the place where
People ride. 2. For any particular Air that is taught a Horse MES-AIR, is an
Air or Manage betwixt the Terre a Terre and Corvet, and is commonly called the
Volts.
N
NOUER. l'eguillette, See Capriole.
P
PAS. See Walk. PASSADE. See Suppl. p. 48 PASSAGER. See Suppl. p. 1 etc.
PIROUETTE. See Suppl. p. 47 PISTE. Is the Print O Mark, made by a Horse's Feet
upon the ground as he is Rideing, so that he may either mark one or two, if he
be a ready Horse, as the Rider has a mind for it, For Example, if the Rider
make him go but at an ordinary Gallop in a Circle, or rather Square, then he
will mark but one Pist, but if he make him Gallop either with his Haunches in,
or go the Terre a Terre, then he will mark two Pists, and the same if the Rider
make him Passage, or go sidewise, either in a straight Line or upon a Circle.
Q
QUART EN QUART. Is when a Horse is wrought or Rid upon a Square, to ride him
three times together along the first of its four sides, and at the third time
to pass the first Angle, and ride him as many times along the second, and and
so successively to the rest, until the Rider has made him go over the whole
four sides of the Square, that so he may finish his Reprise upon that side of
it where he began.
R
REPRISE. Is the Reiteration, or Repetition of a Horse's Lesson.
S
SACCADE. Is a sudden twitch that the Rider gives a Horse with the Reins of
the Bridle, when he either with Opiniatrety, Arms himself, or rests too much on
the hand: it is a kind of Correction, but should be very rarely made use of,
because it is apt to spoil a horse's mouth. SERPEGER. Is to ride a horse in a
Serpentine or Undulate Line. SOUTENIER. Is to stay or keep up a horse's head
with the Bridle-hand.
T
TERRE a terre. See Suppl. p. 36 TIRER a la main. Is to resist and press
against the Rider's Bridle-hand. See Part I: p. 242 TRIED. Is the quick and
short motion of a horse's Legs, upon any natural or artificial Action. TROT.
See Suppl. p. 33
W
WALK. See Suppl. p. 32 VOLTE. May be considered two ways; As 1. Forby the
Circle or Round wherein a horse rides. 2. For a kind of Air betwixt the Terre
a Terre and Corvet, called also a Mes-air. VOLTE Renversee. Is when a horse
performs a Manage or Volt of two Pists, his fore-parts making the lesser
Circle, and his hind the larger, or his Head being next the Center, and his
Croupe out.
Of Weights and Measures, as well Dry as Liquid.
Nota That it is only the English Liquid Measure, and Goldsmith or Mark-weight,
that are made use of throughout this whole Work, whereof

Weights.
3 Scruples Make One Dram 8 Drachms Make One Ounce 8 Ounces Make One Mark, or
Pound 2 Mark or 16 Ounces Make One Pound
Liquid Measures.
English half Pint Equal. Make Half a Pound Scots half Mutchkin Equal. Make
Half a Pound Paris Mutchkin Equal. Make Half a Pound English Pint Equal Make
One Pound Scots Mutchkin Equal Make One Pound Paris Choppin Equal Make One
Pound English Quart Equal Make Two Pounds Scots Choppin Equal Make Two Pounds
Paris Pint Equal Make Two Pounds
Dry Measures. English Measures.
2 English Pints Equal Make One Quart 1 Scots Choppin Equal Make One Quart 2
English Quarts Equal Make One Pottle 1 Scots Pint Equal Make One Pottle 2
Pottles or 4 Engl. Q Equal Make One Gallon 1 Scots Quart Equal Make One Gallon
2 Galls. or 8 Engl Q Equal Make One Peck 2 Scots Quarts Equal Make One Peck 4
Pecks, or 32 En. Q. Equal Make One Bushel 8 Scots Quarts Equal Make One Bushel
Nota. The large French Bushel is somewhat less than 1 English Peck and an half
which is 12 English Quarts so that the French Peck or Picotin which is the sixth
part of the large French Bushel, is somewhat less than 2 English Quarts, or 2
Scots Choppins.

THE PARFAIT MARSHALL, Or Complete FARRIER Part I.
The Introduction.
AMongst all the Creatures, there is none which yields more profit and
pleasure to Man than the Horse; He is Stately in Triumphs, The Introduction.
adroit and bold in the most Dangerous Engagments, and strong and hardy to
endure any kind of Fatigue or Labor: A Horse is useful in all the great
Interprises of War: There is none more fit for Traffic and Husbandry, nor so
agreeable for divertisement: But all Horses which People make choice of both
for War and the Manage, do not always answer Expectation: and of those also
which are designed for draught, many are overcome by a Moderat Labor, and can
endure no extraordinary Fatigue; yea Travelers do not always meet with that
convenience and pleasure which they expect from their Journey Pads; All the
advantages which may justly be expected from Horses are not easy to be met
with, and that which is most troublesome of all to those who diligently seek
after them, is, that after they have met with a good and well shapt Horse, and
one that is adroit and vigorous, often times for want of skill to Govern him, or
through the remisness of a Groom who neglects to dress him, for not having
regulat his Diet, or for having watered him unseasonably, or by any other
accident, (which the want of skill in this Art may have made a Man fall into)
the Horse is brought to such a Condition as renders him altogether
unserviceable: these Malheurs are oft-times of great importance, and prove
always hurtful, yet they so frequently fall out, that without a little
experience and Skill, a particular application, and exact precaution for
preventing them, a Man cannot sometimes shun loseing Horses of considerable
value.

I am therefore persuaded, that those who delight in Horses will be very well
satisfied, that I have taken the pains to make this Book appear in public,
with all the perfection imaginable lay in my power: In the several impressions
which have been hitherto, I made the public a sharer of the skill, which I
acquired not only from new Remedies, but also from several Experiences and
observations for the application of the said Remedies; I therefore hope that
this last Edition will clear all the Doubts which have been proposed to me, and
that People will find in it wherewithal to satisfy themselves: I am in a
continual practice, and I see an infinite number of Diseased Horses, so that
daily I learn and discover things, which were either doubtful, or unknown to
me; It was always my aim to find out easy Remedies, and also sufficient to
recover Horses, and put them in a condition to serve, in which I succeeded
sometimes: And in this Edition if you will give your self the trouble to peruse
it, you will find that I have taken away some Remedies which were too difficult
to be practiced, and have put in their places others farmore easy and as good,
that I have also amended the faults which were in others, and finally that I
have put all things in such a condition, that I believe those who are curious
will confess, that I must needs have been at a great dale of pains, to bring
this Book to that exactness in which it is at prelent; I prescribe not in it
any new Recept, but what by experience has been found good, and for the
convenience of those who desired it, I have reduced it into two parts.

That I may therefore instruct you methodically, to prevent all the
abovementioned inconveniences, I shall first teach you to know all the parts
of a Horse, the same figures which are in the Discourse, being to be found upon
the following print in their respective places, see plate 1st.

CHAP I. The Names of all the Parts, which generally frame or compose the Body
of a Horse.
THE Head being the seat of the Animal faculty, CHAP. I. The Names of all the
parts, which generally frame or Compose a Horses Body.
the source of docility and Caprice, the Principle of motion and rest, is
without debate the most considerable part of a Horses Body; it consists of
diverse parts, which according as they are justly proportioned, give it it is
exact shape and comeliness; I shall name them briefly and in order, contenting
my self for the most part with the representation of them, as they are marked
with Figures in the following Plate which is the first.

The EARS are a part well known.

The FOREHEAD is marked 1.

The TEMPLES are marked 2.

The EYE-PITS, or Hollowes which are above the Eyebrows, and which when very
deep cause a horse look surly and ugly, by making him appear old, are marked 3

The EYEBROWS are above the eyes, and below those above mentioned Pits.

The EYES (by which as in a looking Glass may be perceived the mettle, Courage,
Malice, Health, and Indisposition of a Horse) should be considered with
attention; they consist of two parts, not to mention the Eyelids, which are
those Skins which cover the Eyes, when a Horse is either asleep or shutting
them.

The first part is the Glass or Cristal, which encloseth the whole substance of
the Eye, and gives it the form of a transparent Glob: I will not discourse
here of the Humors whereof the Eye is Composed, that discourse belonging
properly to Physicians.

The second part is the ground or bottom of the Eye, which is properly the
pupil or Apple of the Eye, and which is called by some the joy or Life of the
Eye; the consideration of this division of the eye is of Consequence, that
these two parts may be the better Distinguished and not confounded together,
for the Cristal is that part of the Eye people perceive at the very first
looking to it, and the bottom or apple of the Eye is not perceived, but by
looking attentively, and in through the cristal to it, and then will the ground
or inward part of the eye appear.

Behind the eyes and toward the Throat, is the GANACHE (as they called it in
French) or that part of the Nether Jaw Bone, which when a Horse has his head
exactly well placed, touches the neck next to that part of it, which is called
the Onset of the Head; it is moveable, and serves to give his under-jaws that
motion, by which with the help of the teeth, they chaw and grind his provender;
it is marked 4.

The NOSTRILS are those overtures, through which a Horse does breath.

The NOSE is at the end of the head, and below the Nostrils marked 5.

The word MOUTH is only appropriat to men, and by a particular privilege to
Horses; that part is divided into several others, whereof some are External,
and others Internal.

The External or outward parts of the Mouth, are first the LIPS, which are
these thick skin that cover the teeth and gums.

In this Plate is contained First the Portrait of a Horse, by which is known
the Names of all the particular Parts, which generally compose and frame a
Horses Body, each part being marked with a distinct Figure, all which are
explained in ye following Chapters: Secondly ye representation of ye most
necessary Movables belonging to a Stable; as Comb Brush, Shovel, Broom, andct

Plate. 1. Part, 1. Chap 1.
diagram

The BEARD is the second External part, it is the place where the curb rests
and presses the Horse, when the bridle is drawn a little firm to bring in his
head to it is right place; it is marked, 6.

The third part of the Mouth, is the TIP of the NOSE, which is as it were a
continuation of the upper lip, which covers the teeth, and preserves them
from cold and the injuries of the Air.

The fourth External part of the Mouth, is the CHIN, which is also a part of
the under-lip which covers the teeth; Marked 7.

In the Internal parts of the Mouth, people consider first the BARS, which are
a part of the Gumms, but without any teeth, so that Nature seems to have
appointed them as a place, for the mouth of the Bit to rest upon.

The BARS are propperly the very ridges or upper parts of the Gumms, betwixt
the under Tushes and Grinders, for the outward sides of them are always called
the Gumms.

The second part is the TONGUE.

The third is the CHANNEL which is the hollow betwixt the two Bars or nether
jaw-bones, in which the Tongue is lodged.

The fourth is the PALATE, which is the Roof of the mouth, and the place where
Horses are commonly bled with a sharp pointed horn, to refresh and give them
an Appetite.

The fifth and last is the TEETH which are of five kinds.

The first are the JAW-TEETH or Grinders, which are in Number Twenty four, viz,
Twelve in the upper jaw, and as many below, with which the Horse does bruise
and grind his provender by the Motion of the inferior jaw, the superior
remaining always immovable and fixed.

The second are those Small teeth which come forth before, when a Foal is about
three Months old, and which he begins to cast about two Years and a half
thereafter, in the same order as they did first grow; they are therefore upon
that account, called MILK or FOAL-TEETH.

The third are the TUSHES, which Mr. De La Brow calls Eschalions, those are
Teeth placed alone in the Bars, betwixt the Fore-teeth and Grinders, one upon
each side below, and as many above almost just opposite to them: Mares have
seldom any of these Tushes, and when they have them they are but small; it is
also thought an imperfection in those which have them.

The fourth kind are those which grow before in place of the Foal-teeth, and
with which Horses draw their Fodder, or cut their grass when they are a
grazing, they are called GATHERERS, and being six above and as many below, are
divided into three kinds, viz the NIPPERS, the MIDDLE TEETH or SEPARATERS, and
the OUTWARD or CORNER ones; The Nippers which are the two teeth in the middle
both above and below, are those which a Horse first changes, the middle Teeth
or Separaters, which are the two next the Nippers one upon each side of them
both above and below, (and called Separaters because they Separate the Nippers
from the Corner teeth) are those which change next, And the Outward and Corner
ones, which are those next the Tushes both above and below, and by which the
age of a Horse is known, are those which he casts last; the age is also known
by the Middle Teeth or Separaters; So the Number of the fore-teeth are twelve,
six above and six below, by which it is easy to conclude, that a Horse has in
all Forty teeth, and a Mare but Thirty Six.

Having named and made known to you the parts of a Horses Head, which are most
apparent to our sight, I shall not ingadge my self to describe the Internal and
most hidden parts thereof, which lie not so open and discovered to us, such as
those of the brain and nerves, because those Persons who have the curiosity to
be more particularly instructed in them, may receive that satisfaction from the
Anatomy of the Sieur Ruiny, or Mr Snap's Anatomy of a Horse in English, who
has treated very exactly of them,

The NECK is limited above by the CREST OR MANE, (which is that long hair which
goes from betwixt his Ears, all along the very Top or Ridge of the Crest,
down almost to the tip of his shoulders) and below by the Throat or windpipe:
It is Marked 8.8.

The WITHERS begin where the Mane ends, and are joined to, and end at the
very top of the shoulder blades, they are Marked 9.

The SHOULDERS are below the Withers on each side, and in a manner enclose the
Breast, which is called by some the Counter, and descend to the place of their
insertion, or joining to the shoulder bone: they are marked 10. 10. 10.

The BREAST or COUNTER is below the windpipe, and betwixt the two shoulders
before; Marked 11. 11.

The BACK or REINS, begins at the Withers, and takes up as much length as a
pad-salde of a reasonable bigness will cover; It is Marked 12.13.

The LOINS begin at that place where the hinder part of the Sadle rests, and
although they be called the Loins, yet properly they are nothing else but a
continuation of the Back or Reins.

The RIBBS begin at the Back, and environ the Chest or Belly: they are marked
14* 14.

The BELLY is well enough known, it is opposite to the Back, and that part
which People commonly strike when they make use of their Spurrs.

The FLANKS are at the extremity of the Belly where the Ribbs are wanting, and
below the Loins: marked 15. 15.

The HANCHES begin at those two Bones, which are at the upper part of the
Flanks near to the Crupper, although the whole hinder part upon each side, from
the Crupper to the Ham or Hough, goes commonly under that name.

The CROUPE or upper part of the Buttocks, begins betwixt those two
abovementioned Bones, and near the Loins, and reaches to the very Rump or
Dock, comprehending all that space which is of a round or circular form, and
where commonly the Crupper of the Sadle does rest.

The FORELEGS are composed of those following parts.

The SHOULDER, or rather SHOULDER BLADE which we mentioned before, marked 10.
10. 10. does somewhat resemble a Shoulder of Mutton, and is placed much after
the same fashion.

The SHOULDER BONE, it is Bone which reaches betwixt the Shoulder Blade, and
Elbow-joynt, and is placed opposite to that part of the Belly, where the girths
ly after a Horse is sadled, it is marked 16. When that Bone lies so close to
the body, that a Man finds difficulty in putting his hand betwixt the Horses
body and Elbow, it is a deformity which always discovers, that the Horse when
riding will carry his Legs outward: It is very fit to make this observation in
Colts, and albeit this be not the proper place to mention it, yet lest it might
have escaped my memory, for lack of an opportunity to discourse of it, I have
here set it down.

The ARM or FORE-THIGH, reaches from the Elbow Joint to the Knee, and
begins the Foreleg; it is marked 17. 18. At that part where the Arm or
Fore-thigh begins, upon the fore part of the Leg near to the Elbow joint,
and a little inclining toward the inside, there lies a vein, called the
Basilick Vein (in French L'ars and by common Farriers the Plat-veine) in which
Horses are bled upon several occasions: it is marked 17.

The KNEE is below the Arm or Fore Thigh, and just opposite to the ply or
bending of the forelegs; it is marked 19 in the left leg of the figure plate
1st.

The SHANK is that part of the Fore leg, which is betwixt the Knee and second
joint next to the foot, which is called the Fet-lock or Pastern joint, and is
marked 19. 19.

The FET-LOCK or PASTERN joint, is that joint I just now mentioned, it is
marked 20, and is the very next to the Foot.

The PASTERN, is the distance betwixt the foresaid joint and the Coronet of the
hoof: it is marked 21.

The CORONET is that part round the very top of the Foot, where the hair
grows and falls down upon the hoof; it is marked 22. These are the names of
all the parts belonging to the Forelegs.

The FOOT consists of the HOOF or COFFIN, which is all that Horn that appears
when the Horse has his foot set to the ground: it is marked 23, 24, 25.

The QUARTERS are the two sides of the foot from 24 to 23.

The HEEL is the hinder part of the foot, and has two sides where the Quarters
terminate; it is marked 23.

The TOE is the fore part of the foot, marked 25.

The foot must be taken up, that the parts following may be perceived.

The FRUSH or FROG, which is placed from the middle of the sole toward the Heel
upon both sides, is a part more soft and more elevate than the rest of the
sole, and terminates just at the Heel.

The SOLE is as it were a plate of horn, which environing the Frush covers
the whole bottom of the Foot, all people know it, because when a shoe is right
placed, it should not at all rest upon it, and but very seldom touch it.

The COFFIN BONE or LITTLE-FOOT, is that bone which is to the foot as a heart
or kernel, It is quite surrounded and covered by the hoof, frush, and sole, and
is not perceived when even the Horses sole is quite taken out, being covered
upon all sides by a coat of flesh, which hinders the bone to appear.

It now remains that I name the parts of the hind-legs, whereof the most
considerable are, the upper bone of the hanch near to the Croup and upper part
of the buttocks, called Os ilium, and marked 26.

The STIFFLE, otherwise called the great Muscle, is that part of the hind leg,
which advances toward the Horses belly as he is riding, it is marked 27, and
is a most dangerous part to receive a blow or stroke upon.

The THIGH or GASKOIN begineth at the Stiffle, and reaches to the ply or
bending of the ham, and is contained betwixt the figures 27, and 29.

The HAM or HOUGH, is the ply or bending of the hind-leg marked 29. 29. and
comprehends likewayes the point behind, and opposite to the ply, called the
Hock, it is marked 30.

The PLY or bending of the Ham where the Selender comes, is marked 29.

The part where the SPAVEN comes, which is a little beneath the ply and in the
inside, is marked 31, and where the Excrescence comes, which is called in
French Le jardon, and which is almost of the same nature with the Spaven, only
that it is upon the out side, is the number 32.

From the Ham to the Pastern joint, is that part of the leg which in the
forelegs is called the SHANK, but in the hind the INSTEP, marked 33; the rest
of the parts to the very sole, have the same denominations as in the fore legs,
viz, Fet-clock joint, Pastern, Coronet, Hoof or Coffin, with the rest of it is
parts.

CHAP. II. How the parts of a Horse should be framed, to appear comely and well
shaped.
HAving in the preceding Chapter, CHAP. II. How the parts of a Horse should be
framed, to appear comely, and well Sh^p^.
given you only the names of the parts which generally compose a Horses body,
it will be fit to represent to you in this, how they should be framed, to be
perfectly proportioned and well shaped.

The goodness and beauty of this creature are almost inseparable, so that being
capable to know a well shaped Horse, a man will come by degrees to know a good
one; for, omne pulchrum est etiam bonum; and because the definition which
Cicero gives of beauty is in my opinion pretty, and may very well answer my
subject, I shall here set it down: pulchritudo corporis apta compositione
membrorum, cum coloris quadam suavitate movet oculos, and delectat hoc ipso,
quod inter se omnes parts consentiunt; if this or any other passages of latin
in this book, appear strange to some, let them comfort themselves with this,
that the not understanding of them will not make them a whit the less skillful.

The Head of a Horse should be small, narrow, lean and dry; of the Head in
general.
every Horse which has a big and gross head, may come easily because of it is
weight, to rest and loll upon the bridle, and thereby in a journey incommode
the hand of the Rider; besides that he can never be very agreeable, and appear
stately with a big Head, unless he have a very long and well turned neck, and
place his Head well, in which case, he will not fail to make a pretty good
appearance; the head is an essential part for beauty, without the good shapes
of which a Horse can never look well, for although all the rest of his body be
well shaped, yet if his Head be square and gross, he will appear a great deal
worse, and be less esteemed, than if that imperfection lay in any other part of
his body; as for the legs, their shape is far more important for goodness and
service, than beauty.

Horses which have their Heads gross and charged with flesh, are subject to the
infirmities of the Eyes, but this is not to be understood of all big Heads, for
a Horse may have a Head big with bones, and but a very little flesh upon it, so
that he will not bemore subject in that case to such defluxions, than if his
Head were smaller; those Heads which are overcharged with Flesh, are those we
call fat or gross Heads, and not the other, which although big yet are very
lean and bony.

Now there being a particular shape required in every part of the Head, it will
be fit to treat of them in order.

The Ears should be little, narrow, straight and hardy, and the whole
consistance of them thin and delicat, that is to say, the Cartilage whereof
they are composed should be no ways thick, they should be well placed, and to
know how, there should be but a little distance betwixt them; that is, they
should be placed upon the very top of the Head, of the Ears.
and their points when styled or pricked, should be nearer to other than their
roots; when a Horse in galloping or traveling, carries his Ears pointed
forwards as much as possible, then he is said to have a bold, hardy, or brisk
Ear; also when a Horse travelleth he should keep them firm, for if he marketh
every step he makes by a motion of his Ears, then he will resemble a Hog;
when the Ears are low they are not right placed, and then they have them also
ordinarily long and lolling, which are called Leave-eares, such Horses are
commonly very durable, but however, upon this observation I would not buy a
Horse who has his Ears so placed, because although this imperfection does him
but little prejudice, yet he is nothing the better for it, and it is also very
unbecoming.

Pliny has made a pretty enough remark upon the Ears of a Horse, for he says
that by the motion of the Ears a man may judge of the intention and design, or
courage of a Horse, just as one does a Dogs inclination by the motion of his
Tail; the observation is good and holds for the most part, especially in ill
natured and vicious Horses, for it may be very well observed by the motion of
their Ears, if they design any desperate Action, when a man requires any thing
of them they are not capable to perform, or when he constrains them to do any
thing by violence, or the force of blows.

The Forehead or Brow, of the forehead.
should be somewhat broad, some will have it not altogether flat but a little
raised, because they think it makes a Horse look more bold and stately, this
shape resembles somewhat that of a Ram; my opinion is that a flat forehead is
the most beautiful; these Horses which are called Dish faced (in French Camus)
have the forepart of their head, from a little below their Eyes to the place
where the Nose-band of the bridle rests, a little low and hollow, such Horses
are commonly durable, but very often stubborn and ill natured.

All the forepart of the Head in general, should be narrow, contrary to that in
Men, for if it were too broad it would be an imperfection.

A Horse should have in his Fore head, that which we call a Feather, which is a
natural frizling, or rather a turning of the Hair which forms as it were a
Center, from whence the rest of the neighboring Hair does proceed; if he have
two of them one near to the other, or that even touch other, the mark is so
much the better.

Some people are so far mistaken, as to believe, that when the Feather is below
the Eyes it is a sign of a weak sight, and the contrary if it be above them;
but experience will discover to you the uncertainty of this observation.

If a Horse be neither White, Dapled, nor approaching these colors, he should
have a Star or Blaze in his Forehead, it is almost always a defect not only
for the beauty, but also for the goodness of a Horse when he is of any Dark
color, to be without one, as I shall show you in it is proper place. of the
Eyepits.


The Eye-pits or hollowes above the Eye brows, should no ways be too much
sunk, for if they are deep and hollow they are ugly, and the more they are
sunk, the more they make the Horse appear to be old; nevertheless such Horses
which come of an old Size or Stallion, have that deffect from their very youth,
some more and others less.

The Eyes which are bright, of the Eyes.
lively, full of fire, and pretty large and full, are most esteemed; those
which are very big are not the best, neither should they be too goggling, or
stareing out of the Head, but equal with it, and have a large and full pupil or
ground.

Moreover the Eye should be resolute, impudent, and brisk; a Horse to appear
well, should look to his object fixedly and with a kind of disdain, and not
look another way, for a brazen face and impudence do mightily become a Horse;
and in the Eye is also discovered his Inclination, Passion, Malice, Health, and
Indisposition; profecto in ocul^ animus habitat.

Littly hollow Eyes are ugly, and are called Pigs-eyes, it is true they prove
sometimes good, but they must be very narrowly considered.

When the Eyes are sunk, or that the Eyebrows are too elevate, and as they
were swelled, it is a sign of vitiousness and ill nature; such kind of horses
have ordinarily a melancholy aspect or countenance, but are commonly of great
fatigue.

The Eye is the most tender and delicate part of the whole Body, being the last
which is formed in the Womb, and the first that dies.

The Jaw-bones, from top to bottom should be narrow and lean, the distance
betwixt them at the throat should be pretty large and hollow, and so
proportionably tapring to the very chin, that he may with the more ease place
his Head when required; if the Jaw bone be too square, that is, if there be too
great distance betwixt the Eye, and that part of it which touches his neck, it
is not only ugly and unbecoming, but also hinders him to place his Head; also
if the Jaw bones be square or broad, and but a little distance betwixt them, of
the Jaw-bones.
so soon as the bridle is pulled to bring in his head to its most becoming
posture, the Bone meeting with his Neck will hinder him to place his Head,
especially if he have also with that imperfection a short and thick neck; but
because this is not the propper place to discourse of the inconveniences which
flow from a narrow jaw'd Horse, I shall at present forbear saying any more of
it.

From that part where the Nose-band of the bridle rests, of the Muzle.
which is somewhat below the middle of the Jaw Bone, and where it begineth to
straiten and become narrow, I say from that part to his very Muzle, he should
have nothing but skin and bone, so consequently the smaller the better; and to
make you the more easily comprehend how this part of a Horses head should be
shaped, people commonly say that he should drink out of a Bear-glass, by reason
of the smalness of his Muzle.

That which will mightily contribute to the right shaping of this part in
Colts, is to cause cut out the Nerves in that place, this does extremely dry up
and macerat the lower parts of the Head, and also as some people say,
preventeth the fat and thick growing of the neck.

Also that a Head may be the better shaped, it should not be too long; the
Heads which are too long are unbecoming, and are called Cymbal heads, (in
French Tesles de vielle) That which does most contribute to the good appearance
and air of a Head, is a fine onset, and exact situation when it is placed, for
without that a well shaped one will appear but ugly, and with it an ill shaped
will appear passible well and indifferent; a Horse has his head well placed,
when it is set high, and that he can bring it in to it is natural situation,
which is so, that all the forepart of the head from the very brow to the nose,
be perpendicular to the ground, and that if there were a line and plummet
applied to it, it would hang equally along it, and but just shave or raze it,

The Nostrils should be large and extended, that so one may perceive the
Vermilion, of the nostrils.
or red that is a little within them, especially when the horse sneereth; the
wideness of the Nostrils does not a little contribute, to that easiness which a
horse should have in breathing.

It is therefore upon this account, that the Spaniards and many others, cut up
their horses Nostrils, to facilitate their Breathing in violent courses, which
when such horses are brought to France, is the cause of their being thought
pursy or broken winded; but they are reputed such, only by those who have never
been farther then their own Country Village or home, even although they have
been born in or about Paris; but this cutting up of the Nostrils besides the
ease it gives in breathing, brings also another advantage along with it,
for it preventeth a horses neighing, which is very convenient for such persons
as go upon party, for then the neighing of their horses cannot discover them,
and I believe this is the chief reason why some horses nostrils are cut up,
because after it they neigh very rarely or not at all.

In Germany and the North, almost all the curtailed horses have their Nostrils
cut up, although their Wind be abundantly good, but in France quite the
contrary, for there they never cut up the Nostrils, but of such poor horses as
have their wind broke, and their Lungs quite spent and consumed with pursyness.

The Mouth should be indifferently well cloven, when it is too much, of the
Mouth.
there is a great difficulty so to bit a horse, as that he do not swallow it as
we say; And if he have a little Mouth and not enough cloven, then with
difficulty can the Mouth of the Bit be right lodged in it, without either
making him wrinkle his Lips, or the mouth of the Bit to rest upon his Tushes; a
reasonable big Mouth is more useful for the goodness, then beauty of a horse,
as are also all the internal parts which do not appear but when the Mouth is
opened, nevertheless seeing they are so essential to goodness, and are in place
of a Rudder whereby to govern him right or wrong, I shall without strictly
tying my self to set every thing in it is proper place, continue this matter, of
the Tong^e
which will be so much skill and knowledge already acquired, for the right
bitting of horses.

The Tongue should be small, otherwise it will be difficult to keep the bit
from pressing it, which making the tongue to extend over his bars and cover
them, will render his Appuy (as the French call it) or feeling of the pressure
of the bit dull, by hindering it is operation and effect upon the Bars; for no
liberty of any bit whatsoever is capable to contain these big Tongues, although
the Channel or hollow betwixt the horses Jaws, be abundantly deep and large:
such horses as have very big Tongues, have seldom or never a good and sensible
Mouth, because the bars are commonly flat and low.

A horse should have his Bars sharp ridged, and lean, for all the subjection
which a horse suffers by the Bridle proceeding from the Bars, of the Bars.
if they have not the abovementioned qualities, they will be very little or
not at all sensible, so that he can never have a good Mouth; for if they be
flat, Round, and unsensible, the Bit will not work it is effect, and to take
hold of such a horse by his Tail, or by the Bridle to govern him, will prove
much about one.

The Channel or hollow betwixt the under-jaws, of the Channel.
should be large enough to contain his Tongue, that it be not pressed with the
mouth of the Bit, which should always have a little liberty in the middle of it.

His Palate should be lean, for if it be fat, that is, if it be full and high,
so that it be equal almost with the extremities of his upper Teeth, of the
palate.
the least height in the liberty of a Bit will incommode him, and if that part
prove too sensible and ticklish, the horse to evite the trouble and pain he
receives from the liberty of the Bit, which hurts him in that place, will
either chack in the Bridle and be always throwing up of his head, or
otherwise carry it too low, which besides the deformity of it, will also very
much incommode the hand of the Rider. of the Lips.


Thin and little Lips contribute to a horses having a good Mouth, but the
contrary if they be large and thick.

The Beard should be neither flat, of the Beard.
nor too high raised or pointed; if it have any of these imperfections it is
ill shaped, and the Curb can never be made to rest in it is right place; it
should also have but little flesh upon it, and almost nothing but skin and
bone, without any kind of Chops, hardness, or swelling; all these conditions
make a good Mouth, whereas if the horse had any of them in too great a degree
or excess, his Mouth would prove bad by being too good: For example, if his
Bars were so sensible and sharp, that they could not suffer the pressure of
the Bit, and consequently that the horse could not endure the pulling of the
Bridle to keep him in subjection, this would be a great defect; it is true, the
other parts particularly the Beard, have seldom that degree of sensibility and
tenderness, although it is affirmed by the Duke of Newcastle, in his book of
riding, that the beard is the most sensible part of a horses mouth.

The general qualifications of a good Mouth, The general qualifications of a
good mouth.
are to have the feeling equal, firm, and gentle, the stop Easy and Firm, to
have neither Swelling, Hurt, nor Bruise, to have the inward parts of the Mouth
Fresh and full of froath; this Froath denotes the right constitution of a
horse, who having his Mouth always moist will not so easily overheat, and is a
token that he delights in the bit, because it makes his Mouth to froath, and
thereby gives him pleasure.

This is what is most considerable and necessary, for the knowledge of a
beautiful and well shaped head: I shall not stop to tell you the number of
bones whereof it is composed, nor their names, that being altogether of no use
to a Gentleman, and but of very little even to a Farrier.

As for the Neck, of the Neck.
it should be lean and have but little flesh upon it; and to be well shaped, it
should at it is outgoing from the Withers rise with a slop upwards, diminishing
by degrees toward the head, and framing very near such a compass or turn as
does the neck of a Swan; it should be long, raised, lean, and thin toward the
Mane, that is, it should have but a little flesh upon it near to the growing of
the Mane, and the whole Neck considered in it is bulk, should neither be too
slender nor too much turned, because either of these two extremes will give the
horse occasion to arm himself, or rest his chin upon his Counter.

The Barbs and Spanish horses, which have their Necks thick and somewhat
charged with flesh, are the better of it, for they have their heads more fixed,
their feeling of the bit better, and are not so subject to the throwing up of
their heads; for my own part, I esteem far more a Spanish horse with some what
of a thick Neck, than if he had it altogether small and slender; besides their
Necks do not increase in thickness as they become aged, but upon the contrary,
the Neck of a Spanish horse the older he grows, the more it diminishes.

In mares, it is a good quality to have their Necks a little gross and charged
with flesh, because they have them for the most part but too thin and delicat,
and to commend a mare that has some what of a thick Neck and raised Crest,
people say that she has a horses Neck, which is a perfection in her, because
as I said, they have almost all that defect of being too ^ne and slender necked.

The Necks which are called Renversed, or turned as it were up side down, are
those in with the Flesh that should be next the Mane, and give the Neck it is
just turn in that part, is placed quite below and next to the Throat, which
rendereth the Neck ugly and ill shaped, and is also the cause of the branches
of the Bit's more readily resting upon the Counter.

They are also called Deer-Necks, because of the resemblance to those of Deers;
or Cock thropled, in respect of their resemblance to those of Cocks:

There are also Necks which at the Crest incline to one side, which by some are
called Renversed Necks, but very impropperly; for although the top of the Neck
or Crest hang and incline to one side, yet it is not of these People mean, when
they discourse of a Renversed Neck, for these incline only to one side, by
reason of having too much Flesh next to the Mane, but the other to wit the
Renversed, for having it below upon the nether part of the Neck, and near to
the Throat.

To know if the neck be well shaped, you must with the bit bring in the Horses
head, and place it in it is most becoming posture, and to be right shaped, the
under part of it next to the Throat, should not rise perpendicularly, for those
which do so are called false Necks, and the other which have that part of the
Jaw Bone next to the Throat more backwards than the lower part of the said
Throat next to the Counter, are those Renversed or Cock-thropled Necks I just
now discoursed of; so that a Neck which is well shaped, should descend from the
upper part of the Jaw Bone or onset of the Head, all along slopwayes to the
very Counter, that is, that part of the Neck next to the upper part of the
Jaw Bone, should be more advanced than the lower part next to the breast or
Counter, this is what I understand by saying it should descend slopwayes, and
not altogether perpendicularly and straight. of the Mane.


The Hair of the Mane should be long, thin, and fine, if it be frizled so much
the better; large and thick Manes are a burden to the Neck, and make it often
times incline and ly to one side, besides that they are very unbecoming, and
without an extraordinary care a perfect nest for filth and dust; large and
thick Manes do also occasion the Itch, in Horses which are not carefully looked
after.

A well shaped neck, is yet more requisite for the beatuy of a Horse, than is a
small and slender head, for if a Horse have his Neck very long, well raised,
and turned, no doubt but he will appear comely, even although his head be a
little square and gross and that he but place it right, especially if with such
a Neck he have a well turned Buttock, and withal a good Horseman upon his
Back.

John Taquet who has writ a discourse of breeding Horses, and how to know
their shapes, which is pretty good for the time in which he lived, will have a
Horses neck to be thick and round, from the upper part of the Jaw-Bones to his
very shoulders, to the end says he, that he may not have the fault which the
Turkish Horses have, who but too easily ply their Necks, and who although he
have it stiff and no ways flexible, yet because of that shape of the Neck will
turn with the more ease as he says; this reasoning of his might have been
good about two hundred years ago when this Horseman lived, but now a days we
look upon it as a considerable imperfection in a Horse, to have a very stiff
neck, and which will not ply but with difficulty: I therefore recommend the
said John Taquet to the Duke of New Castle, who will discover to him, that one
of the greatest imperfections a Horse can have, is to be too Straight, Round,
and Stiff necked.

Horses which have a well shaped Neck, although their Jaw-bones be somewhat
broad, yet if they bring in their head well, and that the fore part of it be
narrow, they will make a very good figure; but although a Horse have a very
fine head, if he have not also with it a fine turned and well-shap't Neck, he
will never appear handsome and comely.

A well shaped Neck, besides the agreeableness and beauty it gives to a Horse,
contributes also very much to the other good qualities he should have, in so
far as it makes him either light or heavy on the hand, according as it is fine
or course; of the withers,
but it is not the shape of the Neck alone, which makes a Horse light or heavy
on the hand, but good or bad legs and feet, and strong or weak Reins; however
the Neck has a great share in it.

At the Lower part of the Neck upon the upper side, and at the end of the Mane,
is the Withers, which should be some what elevate and pretty long, because it
is a sign of strength and goodness; Moreover when the Withers are well raised,
they keep the sadle in its just place, and hinder it from coming forward upon
his shoulders and Neck, which does immediately spoil and gall a Horse; and if to
keep it back you make use of a Crupper, it will not fail also to hurt him,
because of the great weight of the Sadle inclining, and consequently of the
Rider pressing always forwards.

The Withers although raised, should not be too fleshy, for then they will be
much more subject to galling, and when hurt very difficult to cure; but if he
have them lean, and but little more than skin and bone upon them, then they
will be just so as a good and fine Horse should have them. Of the Breast or
Counter.


A large and full Breast or Counter, is always esteemed in light or small
sized Horses, but in Dutch and Frizland Horses they are commonly too large,
which makes them heavy; this is not to say but for Horses designed for
draught, large and broad Counters do very well, for they make them draw with
the more ease, and the Harness galleth them less, but to balance that
advantage, such Breasts or Counters make them much more heavy, having by that
means the perfect quality of a Cart-horse, who the more he is tied to the
ground and the bigger, the better he is, and if with all this he have also a
good wind, then he is most excellent, all horses which have their mouths naught
may draw in a Cart, but not in a Coach, where they must be light, and have a
pretty good and sensible Mouth.

The Shoulders should be of a middle size, Of the Shoulders,
flat, and but little flesh upon them, the joint next to the breast and the
rest of the whole shoulder very glib and moveable, a horse which is charged
with shoulders can never be agreeable to the Rider, for he will not only weary
sooner, but trip and stumble every minute; if a horses shoulders be not very
moveable, but stiff and unwieldy (which People call fixed or pegged shoulders,)
then he will never have any nimbleness or agreeableness; but above all if with
such large shoulders he have a thick and big Neck, then his legs will be the
sooner spoylt and ruined, because the weight of both the one and the other will
very soon undo the legs, which must support that great burden, as well in the
Stable as upon Journey.

The shoulders are one of the parts of a horse chiefly to be considered,
because in buying a horse they should be exactly looked to, and you should not
take it for a commendation of a horse, that people say he is broad and large
over all; it is a commendation indeed for the but tock, but if his shoulders
are too large it is a great imperfection.

Besides the directions I shall give you, to know when a horse has too large
shoulders, you may observe this; a horse which has too great a distance
betwixt his fore thighs, just at the top next to his shoulders, if he be a
horse of an ordinary size, and that that distance exceed half a foot, it is too
much, and I can assure you such a horse is charged with shoulders, or has them
too big and large; he may have also too little a distance between them, and
then he will be narrow breasted or strainted in the shoulders, which is a
considerable fault, therefore a horse of a middle size should have about half a
foot, or five inches distance between his fore-thighs, and when he is standing
straight upon his limbs, there should be a less distance between his feet, than
betwixt his fore thighs near to the shoulders.

Those who seek after horses which are most open before, (which is to have a
great distance between the fore-thighs near to the shoulders) mightily deceive
themselves, for such horses have almost always but too large shoulders; it is
not that I would advise you to choose them too narrow, because such horses as
have them are apt to stumble, and easily fall either in galloping or upon an
ordinary pace, besides that such shoulders are unpleasant to look to, and make
a horse appear ugly, narrow shouldered horses do also commonly cross their legs
and cut themselves in traveling; I shall speak a great deal more of the
knowledge of shoulders, when I discourse of what is to be observed in buying a
horse.

A horse should have double Reins, Of the Reins of Back.
which is when he has them a little more elevate upon each side of the back
bone than upon it, and that passing you hand along it, you find it large, well
furnished, and double, by the hollow that goes all along the backbone; the
back should be firm, and not at all hollow or bending from the the Withers to
the Croupe, but straight, and fashioned after the Reins of certain Mules.

Those horses which are hollow backed, are commonly light and have their Necks
raised and high, but it is an imperfection; they are called Sadle-backed; and
besides that such horses have not ordinarily much strength, it is also difficult
so to fit a sadle for them that it do not gall them, they have also commonly
excessive big bellies, called swallowed or gulped bellies, in French Ventres
avalles, which render them very uncomely.

The Ribbs should be circular and full, taking their tour or compass from the
very back bone, to the end that those parts which they contain, which are the
Lungs and others, may be the more easily lodged, and that the Horse may have
also the better belly and fuller flank.

The Belly should be but of an ordinary bigness in middle sized Horses, but in
Coach Horses the larger the better, provyding they be not altogether gulped or
swallowed, such as those of Cowes or of a Mare with foal, but that it be round
and well enclosed within the Ribbs, and rather extending upon the sides than
dounwards.

The Flanks should be full, at the top of which upon each side, Of the Flanks.
there should be a kind of frizour of the hair, or feather as we call it, the
nearer those feathers approach one another upon the top near to the loins, so
much the better, but if they be as it were within view of other, then the mark
is excellent.

The distance between the last Rib and Haunch bone, which is propperly the
Flank, should be but short; which we term well coupled. The Horses which are
shortest in that place, are longest of having their flanks ruined or spoilt by
excessive labor, but the contrary is observed in those who have it long.

The Croupe should be large and round, and so turned, Of the croupe.
that the tops of the two haunch bones be not within view of other; the greater
distance there is between those two bones, the better is the mark, and the
Croupe so much the finer and larger, but it is an imperfection if those two
bones appear too high, and then a Horse is called horn-hipped by such as have
but ordinary skill; for my own part I never met with a horn-hipped Horse,
because I make all those lusty and plump which People call so, and when they
are thus in good case, those high bones do not more appear, it is true I have
had more difficulty in making some fat and plump than others, because they had
those two bones extremely elevate, and even in view of other, but at last I
made them abundantly lusty, and then they were no more that which People call
horn-hipped.

The Croupe should not be straight nor swallowed up next to the tail, but take
it is tour and compass from the haunch bones, to the very dock or onset of the
tail, and should be divided in two by a hollow or channel, going from between
the two haunch bones al along to the very dock.

The Tail should be firm, strong, immovable, and well furnished with hair; of
the Tail.
the Dock should be big, stiff, and placed pretty high, those who have it too
low set have seldom good Reins, and never a beautyfull Croupe; some Horses have
it too high set, which makes their buttocks appear poynted, and of the shape
of a plum, which is very unbecomeing; those Horses which have but very little
hair upon their tails are called Rat-tail'd, and pass commonly for good ones,
but this one mark is not sufficient to make a Horse be esteemed, because to be
a good one their are a great many more required; having gone through all the
parts of a Horses body, we must now come to his for-legs.

The Forelegs have several parts, and each of them their particular beauty
and shape; of the fore-thighs.
the arm or fore-thigh should be large and Nervous, and if the muscle marked 17
below the Basilick vein, in French L' ars, be big, nervous, and fleshy, so
much the better, for although the shank from the knee to the pastern joint be
small, yet if his fore thigh be strong, and that the above mentioned Muscle be
large, it will in some measure supply the defect of the shank.

Another observation relateing to the fore-thigh, is that it should be pretty
long, which wll make the Horse the longer a wearying upon travel, because the
greatest strength of the leg lying in the fore-thigh, and the least in the
shank and other parts, it is to be presumed that the part which is most weak
being shortest, it will be in a better condition to endure fatigue, but then
the leg will not have so graceful a motion, that is to say, so fine and
delicat a ply and movement in stepping and galloping; this great motion, is
that which makes Horses designed for hunting and Coursing, or even for
Iourneying, to become sooner wearied, but then it is very gracfull and much
esteemed for the manage.

For in Managed Horses it is quite contrary, because the shorter the
fore-thighs or arms are, so much the better, and one of the most becomeing
things in a managed Horse, is to have a stately and graceful motion with his
forelegs, now the shorter the fore-thighs are, the greater motion the legs
make, which is very much to be taken notice to in buying of Colts, or Barbs
newly come over which people design for the Manage, because no Horse which
wants this comely movement, can be agreeable and charming, to those who behold
him in his manage.

For such Horses there is required a great deal of art, with an extraordinary
patience, the most part of them having no natural disposition to it; for Horses
wanting a graceful motion of their legs, although well managed, yet are very
difficult to be kept just and in order, that is, to be made to go well.

The larger and broader the Shank is, or that part of the fore-leg from the
knee to the pastern joint, so much the better; you will know when it is so, by
the back-sinew being at a distance from the bone, or pretty well separate from
it, and having no kind of swelling or humor betwixt it and the bone, which may
cause the leg to appear round; of the shank.
Horses which have a small back-sinew, have it almost always close upon the
bone, and are subject to become round legged, people call such legs, Ox legs,
because of their resemblance to those of Oxen.

The Knee should be flat and large, of the Knee.
without any swelling or roundness upon the top of it, and the shank as I said,
broad, flat, and short, the back-sinew well detatched from it; and near to the
pastern joint should be perceived the two little bones which lie upon each side
of the shank bone, but these little bones do but seldom appear except in small
sized Horses, such as Barbs and Spanish Horses; the back-sinews should be also
firm and large without any hardness.

The Back-sinews are the most considerable parts of a Horses legs, those which
are big and without any swelling are the best, because such legs as have them
small will be soon spoylt, the Horse will easily halt, and upon the least
travel or fatigue, the leg will become round and gourded, which as it is an
imperfection in the shape, so far more in the goodness of a leg.

The pasterne joint should be proportionably large to the size of the Horse, of
the pastern joint and pastern
broad, and without any swelling or sorrance, having a little tuft of hair
behind called the fet-lock, in french Le Fanon.

The Pasterne should be short, especially in middle sized Horses; the pasterns
which are too long, are weak and cannot endure travel, Horses which have them
are called long joynted; Large and big Horses which have too short pasterns
become soon Bo^^ as the French call it (which is when the pastern at the joint
bends forwards, and is as it were dislocat) especially if with short pasterns
they have also high heels; the Horses in Normandy are very subject to have
their pasterns bending forward at the joints, because they are commonly all
short pastern'd.

Upon the the contrary there are Barbs, and Horses whose Sires and Dams are of
different countries, called in french Chevaux Echappez that are extremely long
pastern'd, so that in traveling their pastern joints do almost touch the
ground, which is a sign of great weakness, at least in that part, if it be not
also universal.

This imperfection of being long joynted, is of more consequence against the
goodness than beauty of a Horse, and proceeds commonly form an old stallion,
therefore a man should never make choice of a middle sized Horse for a
stallion, which is long joynted. of the coronet and hoof.


The Coronet should be no more elevat than the hoof, nor make as it were a ridg
or hight round it; if it do, it is a sign that either the foot is dried up, or
that there are a great many humors in the Coronet, which do occasion the
Croun-scab, in french Les Peignes, and several other Sorrances which come in
that part.

The horn of the hoof should be of a dark color, some what shineing, high,
and smooth, the white is commonly brittle; to be excellent it should be of the
color of a Deers hoof, and the whole foot of a round figure, but a little
larger below then above; we shall continue to descrive all the parts of the
foot one after the other.

The heel should be high and large, of the hee^ and frush.
and one of it is sides should not be higher than the other, that is, it should
not rise higher upon the pastern than the other.

The Fresh although little, should yet be well nourished; in Horses which are
hoof-bound it is too little, for it is almost quite dried up, and as it is a
fault to have it little, so it is one to have it too large and fat as it were,
especially in Horses which have low heels or are flat footed.

The Soles should be thick and strong, of the Sole.
and the whole lower part of the foot where the shoe is placed, hollow.

A Horse should also stand firm upon his legs, which will contribute somewhat
to his comeliness, and when he stands still in one place, their should be a
greater distance between the upper parts of his two fore-thighs, than between
his feet, that is, the distance betwixt the forelegs, should enlarge by
degrees from the feet to the breast or Counter, and by this means a Horse will
be more firm upon his Limbs, and also appear more beautyfull.

Having considered the forelegs, let us go to those behind; I have already
spoken of the shape the Croupe, it therefore remains, that we examine the other
parts of the hind quarter.

The Thighs should be long and fleshy, and the Muscles which are upon the
outsides of them, called the Gas^oines, should be large, fleshy, and well
spread, it is an essential defect in the beauty of a horse, when the Thighs
are not well furnished and fleshy, and although the Croupe be Excellently well
turned, yet if the thighs be slender and lean, a horse will appear narrow
behind, which is called Cat-thighed; people know it when they percieve that the
Croupe is broad and large, and the thighs do not answer it proportionably, but
are small and not well furnished with flesh, which makes the whole hind hand
to appear misshap't; it is almost always a sign of a weak hindquarter, and
horses which have a draught in their hinder legs as they ride, are very subject
to have this imperfection of a thin and weak hind quarter, which appears to me
considerable.

The Houghs or Hams should be large, full, and not much bended, dry, discharged
of flesh, nervous and supple, all which qualities are as necessary for the
goodness, as right shape and beauty of the hams.

The Bone of the hind leg, from the ham to the pastern joint, called the
Inslep, of the Instep.
should be big and flat, and in a perpendicular line to the ground, when the
horse is in his natural posture of standing; when the insteps stand not
perpendiculary, it is a certain sign of weakness either in the Reins or hinder
quarters; the other parts of the hind legs should be considered just as those
of the fore; the shorter the hair is in either of them so much the better,
except in horses of a middle size, to whom also a little tuft of hair upon the
back part of the hind Pastern joint, called as I have already said the
fet-lock, in french Le Fanon, is very becoming.

A horse who has good feet before, has seldom bad ones behind, except by
accident; therefore people look to the hind feet but slightly, and (as the
French say) En passant.

Commonly the hind-feet are good, when the fore feet are weak and tender, the
Seimes as the french call them, which are rents or clifts in the quarters of
the feet from the Coronet to the shoe, are almost the only Sorrances which the
hind-feet are subject to, except sometimes the Crown-Scab upon the coronet, the
figg in the sole, and the hornfrush and brittle.

There remains as yet one very visible imperfection to be considered, which is
when Horses are set too high upon their legs, that is, when their legs are
longer than the proportion of their bodies requires, whereby not only their
beauty but goodness is diminished.

The Ancients have determined a measure for them, although in my opinion there
is no other required than that which is given by ones eye, seeing any person who
is a little accustomed to look to Horses, will easily know if a Horses body be
too high set, or have trop de jour as the french term it: but to satisfy the
Curious in this point, they may take a thread and measure from the Withers to
his elbow, and what ever length that is, he should have the same distance
betwixt the Elbow and lower part of his heel, for if he have more, his legs
will be too long; many people measure their Colts when a year old, and take the
distance from the lower part of the heel to their elbow, and say that their
body will always grow, until there be the same distance between their Elbow
and Withers, as there was betwixt the elbow and lower part of the heel; because
say they, at a year old a Colt has his legs as long as ever, which I have
indeed observed in some, but not in all: The Duke of New Castle in his book of
Horse-manship, condemns mightily this observation, and in my opinion not
without good ground.

CHAP. III. Some curious Remarks upon Horses Represented either in Relievo,
Imbossed Work, or flat Painting.
BEfore I begin another Chapter, CHAP. III. Curious remarks upon Horses,
represented either in Relievo or flat painting.
wherein I intend to treat of the knowledge of Horses, and of the methods to be
observed by every one, who intends to become that which we call knowing or
skillful, I shall give some advices, which may perhaps satilfie such of my
readers as delight in Horses, for by them they will be more capable to judge of
the workmanship and shapes of a Horse, painted, carved, or cast in Imbossed
metal, than it could be possible for them to do, if they had not the insight
which I shall give them.

Those who comprehend not my design, and have not the true taste and relish of
such kind of curiosities, may pass over this third Chapter and go to the fourth.

First, it is certain that all the famous Painters and excellent Carvers,
design and aim at nothing so much as to imitate antiquity, and all of them are
persuaded there can be no part of their work found fault with, if they can but
show you in any old original, that the famous ancient Painters and Sculptors
have delineat those parts (whose shapes you condemn) after the same manner,
and with the very same features which they have done; for example the Horse of
Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, and others which are in Rome and other places.

I do with them acknowledge, that those who imitate not the Ancients have not
that justness and skill, especially in what relates to the delineation and
exact shaping of humane bodies, but as to the matter of Horses, although
Ancients have observed the just delineation of many parts, yet they have failed
in some, and to give you a few instunces of it, I shall discourse of the
Attitude or situation, which is properly the postures in which they put the
Horses they represent, and I say that the most part of the postures they have
given to Horses, should not be imitate in this age wherein we live.

The Horses of the Ancients were no ways managed, and but under little
subjection, yea they were more oddly bridled, than the Cravats and Turkish
Horses are in these countries, and all the actions they represented them
performing under a man, appeared desperate and furious, because the Riders
themselves did not know what to require of them, and the Horses being full of
metal and Choler, performed such actions as did rather discover their being
transported, and in a kind of fury, than show their obedience and subjection to
the will of the Rider.

Their Bits which were badly chosen, and capable to render a Horse desperate,
might contribute much to it, especially the Riders being not at all Horsemen;
and the horses having also no sadles, but only a kind of cloth or house upon
them, did so incommode their Riders, that they could scarce keep their backs,
and then Clinging to them which their heels and spurrs, they caused their
horses, some of which were extraordinary well shapt and vigorous, to perform
such actions as would appear to us now a days so strange and extravagant, that
we could scarce endure to look to them being so disorderly and contrary to all
the Rules of art.

Now the modern Painters and Sculptors, endeavor to imitate those ugly,
frightfull, and vicious actions, because the Ancients have represented them;
it is true, in them it was pardonable, for they knew none better, in which to
cause their horses appear either more lively or vigorous, but now that the art
of rideing is brought to such a perfection, and that people have fallen upon
methods to reduce horses, and bring them under a perfect subjection and
obedience, and to have no other will save that of their Riders, it is known
more and more, that the actions of obedience wherewith a Horse is accustomed,
cause him perform Airs a great dale more fine, and infinitely more agreeable
to the soectators; and in those actions or Airs, there appears such a harmony
and beauty, that what ever they do contrary to them is displeasing, and cannot
be endured.

Moreover, since the art of bitting Horses is arrived at it is greatest
perfection, the bits which are made use of now a days, besides that they place
a Horses head right, give also his neck the most beautiful turn and situation
it is capable of, without forceing him to open his mouth as the bits of the
Ancients did, which cut and spoylt the Bars, and were of no other use but to
torment a Horse, and make him show a pair of wide frightfull Jaws, for in the
very instant that a Horse opens his mouth, the action and figure it makes
are so displeasing, that people say he opens his jaws out of derision and
contempt; Nevertheless all the Horses represented by the Ancients, either in
Imbossed metal or flat painting, do open their mouths after such an
Extraordinary manner, that it is one of the most horrible and chocking sights,
in fine the most unpleasant and unbecoming action, that a Horse can possibly
perform under a man.

All this being considered, I ask any man of sense if we should imitate the
Ancients in those things, wherein they were wrong and erred; if they have only
represented Horses in postures of rage and despair, they could not do
otherwise, because they knew no better; but now a days to represent under a
King, great Prince, or General of an army, a Horse in such actions of fury and
transport, would be enough to make the Spectators believe, that either the
Rider knows not to Govern him, or that the Horse is altogether disobedient,
which would be thought ridiculous for any to imagine, in this age wherein we
live; because persons of that condition and quality, mount no Horses but such
as are very well adjusted, and under a perfect subjection, having their heads
and necks exactly well placed, and performing some fine Pesade or becomeing
Passage, which make them appear brisk and stately, and without seeming in the
least to deny, that perfect obedience which they should give to their Riders.

Perhaps people may answer to this, that a Horse represented in such an
obedient posture, will appear no ways graceful, and that unless he be
represented performing some extraordinary action, which may discover his mettle
and be a token of his Courage, he will appear altogether dull and without life;
but there is a great difference in representations, that is, to put a Horse in
such a posture as may make him appear full of Courage, extraordinary Nervous,
and with a kind of fixedness and stayedness in his motions, and to paint him in
Despair and rage as the Ancients have done; and I believe I am not much
deceived, that if a Horse be represented with a stately carriage, and well upon
his Haunches, performing a beautiful Pesade or Corvet, with a good motion of
his arms or forethighs, which will discover that he has a graceful movement,
and if withal, his muscles, nerves and Veins, be marked in their due places, I
say such a Horse will certainly appear a thousand times more lively and
beautiful, and also more graceful and agreeable in such a posture, than those
of the Ancients in their extravagant actions, having their mouths open, their
necks Renversed, and endeavoring to force the hand of the Rider.

The Ancients have placed the head wrong, in most part of the designs they have
left us of Horses, either in paint or sculpture; for the forepart of the head
should stand always perpendicular or plum, whatever posture the body of the
Horse be in which is beneath the Rider, therefore to have the Nose extended in
galloping or other ways, as they have represented them, is a considerable
error; the neck in the upper part of it next to the mane, should make a Tour
very near like that of a Swans neck, it should be thinnest toward the mane,
and the under part should slop toward the breast or Counter, that is, that
part of the throat next to his nether jaws, should be four inches more advanced
than that part of it next his Counter, for if the Throat stand perpendicular it
is false, and if it be further back at the onset of the head, then it is at his
Counter, then it is that we call Deer-necked or Cock-thropled, which is an
imperfection the Ancients have very wrongously given to all their Horses,
represented either in painting, carved work, or imbossed metal; as also to make
the Crest, which is the part out of which the mane grows, too thick and
gross, especially betwixt the ears, where it makes that part too broad, is a
fault; for the neck should be almost flat upon each side of the mane, and but a
little flesh upon it.

For the Ears, it is indeed becoming to have their points placed nearer other
than their roots, to make them appear more hardy and brisk, but if they are too
much closed at the points as many painters represent them, then they are wrong,
which I could easily make appear, would it not prove too tedious to consume
time upon so small a matter; the Ears should be placed on the very upper part
of the head, and pretty near to one another.

For the shoulders there is a great debate anent them; the sculptors say that
the biggest and largest are the most beautiful; it is true they are the best
for draught Horses, but if sadle Horles had their shoulders large, fleshy, and
broad, as the painters affect to represent them, they would be fit only for a
Cart, for they would be heavy and fixed to the ground, which is properly what
they call in french Vne grande Carogne, or great Carrion; but for this they say,
that to make a Horse seem active his Muscles must appear, and if he be not very
full in the shoulders, and have also the joint at the insertion of the shoulder
bone with the blade, much advanced, they cannot be decerned, and so he will
never appear with any kind of life or vigor; I again mantain the quite
contrary, that in a full and large shoulder charged with flesh, the Muscles
will appear but little or not at all; do they appear in a very gross or
corpulent man? they will appear just as little in such large and fleshy
shoulders, and I assure you, that in a flat shoulder with little flesh, and
which has in a manner nothing upon it but skin and bone, which is as the
shoulder of a fine and will shapt Horse should be, the Muscles, and Nerves will
all appear as if they were natural; whereas if the Nerves and Muscles be
represented in a large and round shoulder, they will be contrary to Nature and
perhaps wrong placed, because they cannot be well perceived in any Horse who
has his shoulders so full and fleshy.

Moreover, representing those big shoulders with the joint which touches the
poitrall of the sadle, much advanced, there is such a distance and breadth in
the Counter of the Horse, that he is as full and broad in the shoulders as in
the Croupe, and that is also another fault accompanying the Errors of the
Painters and Sculptors, for although a Horse to be well shapt, should be open
and a little full before, yet if he be too much it is an imperfection, and
quality only fit for a Cart Horse; for the fore parts of a Horses shoulders,
that is, the distance which is between the one and the other, should be only a
little more than half the breadth of his hinder quarter, or hauuches, so that
when people speak of a well shapt Horse, they say he is full and broad in the
Croupe but not in the Shoulders, that is to say, the distance between them
should be but small, and therefore the Shoulders of an exact shapt Horse, are
compared to those of a Hare; judge then if Painters have reason to make such
monstrous Shoulders, when they design to represent a brave and beautiful horse.

That Muscle which is upon the inside of the fore thigh and below the Soulder,
cannot be represented too full and fleshy, for such a shape becomes it
extremely; the rest of the fore-thigh should be large, the Nerves and Muscles
well placed, and the knees big and pretty flat; some paintets place Muscles
upon them: I have seen in horses represented in Relievo or cast Metal, to the
number of three placed upon the flat of the knee, which is contrary to Nature,
for horses have never any in that part: as for the pastern joints of the
forelegs, they make them commonly too big; people to look to them would take
them to be swelled or gourded, their pasterns too long, and to complete all a
very big foot which is disproportionable to the leg, and consequently a gross
imperfection; for the thighs they make them too lean; you will see in some of
their horses a large Croupe, and fleshy haunches, Which is very right, but then
they give them lean and slender thighs, which is wrong; the Muscles which are
upon the outsides of them should be large and fleshy, and the whole thighs well
furnished: one needs not go far to discover this fault in a horse represented
in imbossed Metal, which is much esteemed and with reason, for it is done by an
excellent Workman; these faults of the thigh and knee which I have remarked,
are there all Visible.

When a horse is upon his haunches, making a Corvet or pesade, the whole
weight of his body rests upon his Hams, so that truly in that case all the
Nerves, Muscles and Veins, should appear; but as a horse does not continue long
in that action, that so he may be exactly designed, the Painters in stead of
placeing those heights and hollows where they should be according to nature,
make too many of them, and represent a Ham full of Courbs, Jardons, or Spavens,
and also make large plyes or folds in that part of the Ham where the Sellender
comes, to the number of two or three, which is absolutely contrary to the order
of Nature, for such large folds are called wreaths or rouls, in french des
Bourlets which are visible marks of a horse which has been much used; and if a
Horse have such Swellings in the bending of his Hams, he would not be sound
enough to be represented in imbossed work; yea although he should be beautiful
enough for that purpose, yet at least his faults should not be imitated, which
are these wreaths or Bourlets which he has in his Hams: The Ham or hough
should be large, broad, lean, and very hollow, so that if people make Swellings
where there should be none, in place of representing a beautiful Horse, they
will discover one Cripple and Maimed.

As for the pastern joints of the hind legs, of these Horses which the Painters
represent upon their haunches, they make them and the Insteps all of one piece
as it were, and the pastern the same, as if the horse had no ply in his pastern
joint, which can no ways be; for every Horse that performs any motion upon
his baunches, for example a Corvet; as the pastern joints of the hind legs are
thereby much stressed, and that all the weight of his body rests upon them,
they must of necessity ply and bend, and that so very much, that the back parts
of the pastern joints touch almost the ground, which is what may be daily seen
in the Academies of riding; yet the Sculptors never fail to represent the
Insiep of the hind leg, pastern joint and pastern, all in a straight line as if
they were of one piece, like to the leg of a dog, which is ridiculous; almost
all the Horses which I have seen either painted or carved in my time, had this
fault.

The painters may have this to retort upon me, that in the representation of a
natural humane body, they assist nature as one may say, because the most
perfectly shapt bodies that they make choice of for a model, have some parts so
formed, that if they were represented according to nature, they would be found
no ways agreeable, and people would judge them defective; I grant this is
true, but then they do it because men which are exactly well shaped, have all
the parts of their body so framed as they represent them; upon the contrary
Horses are seldom found perfectly well shapt, neither are the most beautiful
so in all their particular members; and therefore nature should only be
imitated in that wherein she is right and beautiful, but not wherein she is
deformed, which is what the Painters and Sculptors do: for to enlarge a Horses
shoulders, and to give him Muscles where he should have none, is to make him
frightfull and monstrous, and of a beautiful and well shapt Horse, to make
one fit only for a Cart.

If those Gentlemen, I mean the Painters and Sculptors, read what I have been
saying, I believe they will confess that antiquity should only be imitated in
that wherein it is right, and not where it is defective; for it is being Ancient
makes it no less an imperfection and error: Many people very dextrous in
their art, to whom I have related these reasons, have agreed with me in what I
said. I know very well that what the Greeks have left us of raised and carved
work in monuments, are most exactmodels for Sculpture and Painting, but it is
not the same in respect to the postures wherein they put their Horses; and that
which Monsieur Mignar has painted under the King the year he took Arastrick,
and which is in one of the Galleries of Versatles, is the most beautiful, the
best designed, and the most exactly shapt that has ever yet appeared, for it
is placed according to the rules of Horsemanship, and is in truth just as it
ought to be; for it is conform to beautiful nature, and every part of it so
exactly and delicately designed, that it may for ever serve as a model for all
the Painters, by which they may study and learn how a beautiful Horse should
be shapt; for let any man examine it critically and to the outmost rigor, but
without prejudice or humor, and he must acknowledge, that there has never as
yet appeared one more perfect.

This digression is a little too long for an impatient reader, who very little
concerns himself, whether Horses be well or ill designed and painted, for
providing he have good ones himself he is satisfied; perhaps he is in the
right on it, and it is probable the thread of my discourse has insensibly drawn
me on; but I entreat him to consider my intention and design, and if that will
not satisfy him, I must be so plain as to tell him, that I have had a great
dale more trouble in writing, than he in reading of it, especially not being
obliged to it, as I advertised him in the beginning of this Chapter, and so we
are quits.

I am now going to discourse of the goodness of a Horse, and of his faults and
imperfections, and I dare promise that every one who can understand what I am
going to write, may call himself skilful in this matter: experienc will teach
him, that a man may easily arrive at this knowledge, if he carefuly apply
himself to understand, what is contained in the following Chapters; it is not
enough to read them over once or twice, he must understand them; yea after he
has read them go visit and consider Horses, and observe all the particulars
which have been taken notice of; it is true there is required somewhat of pains
and application to do this, and it is a kind of trouble to those who do not
delight in it, which persons may assure themselves, that without having a
liking for Horses, they shall but with difficulty become knowing and skilful.

CHAP. IV. The perfect knowledge of the faults and imperfections in Horses, or
that which should be observed to prevent being deceived, when a man is a buying
one.
BEing to treat of the goodness of Horses, CHAP. IV The perfect knowledge of
the faults and imperfections in Horses.
one of the chief things a man should tie himself to, consists in the right
examining if the Horse which he designs for his service, has any fault, or if
he will be fit for that employment or work for which he designs him; for there
are other qualities required in a Pad or journey Nagg, than in a Horse which is
designed for hunting; the qualities of a Horse for the Manage, differ also
from those of a Traveling Horse; there is therefore a great dale of judgment
required (besides the knowing of his particular faults) to judge if he will be
fit for that use for which you design him: It is very difficult to give in
writing such precepts, as may be sufficient to make a man know any other thing,
acquire.
save that which is called Soundness; for to require a perfect knowledge of the
nature and constitution, of the Vigor, and a certain connection and
agreeableness in the motions, of the agility, of the Mouth, of the force, and
of the gentleness and delicateness of a Horse, as whether he will be fit for a
master, or only proper for a servant, is a delicateness which few people are
Masters of, and is that which makes an understanding and skilful person be
easily distinguished, from one but of an ordinary experience.

For both may judge of the soundness of a Horse; that is, that the least
lameness or imperfection shall not escape any of them, but then the one will
judge of the agreeableness and easiness, of the united and equal strength which
is found in his Actions, or of a rude knit and uneasy force; in fine, the one
will descern that the Horse is fit for a person of quality, and the other will
only know, that he is a good sound Horse and without fault, but will not be
able to penetrat farther, and this is what cannot but with great difficulty be
taught by writ; there is required for it a long practice and a nice fancy; I
shall discover all I know of it which is but little, yea it is also difficult
to arrive at that delicateness of Knowledge, without being a Horseman, having a
great experience, and having also Rid a great many Horses.

Nevertheless to proceed in it Methodically, when you have cast your eye upon
some Horse you like, and whose size and stature answers your design and fancy,
for some would have their Horses large, others would have them of a small size,
some again would have them long, and others short and well knit; some would
have them heavy, others would have them light, so that that fancy which people
have for different sizes in Horses, should be conform and agreeable to the
service for which they design them; for example, a Horse to go upon the Street
should be large and broad toward the ground, which they call in French E'
cache, now a Horse of that shape would not at all be fit for hunting, for he
would have certainly too much shoulders, too short a wind to gallop long, and
but very little swiftness; you must therefore begin by degrees, and orderly
consider every particular part, which will give a certain knowledge of the
Horses goodness you intend to make choice of, and whether he will be proper for
that service for which you design him, which is the quintescence of the
knowledge of Horses, because it is the most necessary and useful.

CHAP, V. How to know a Horses Age, while he has Mark.
TO begin then you must first examine his age, to do which, CHAP. V. How to
know a Horses age, while he has Mark.
take hold with your left hand of one of the Branches of the Bridle, to prevent
his hurting you with his fore-feet, which Branch you shall raise up, and with
your other hand taking him by the Chin, open his mouth that so you may perceive
his Age, which may be easily enough known as follows.

A Horse has four kinds of Teeth, his age is known by some of them, and others
serve to grind the provender where with he subsisteth; the first which grow are
the Feal-Teeth, which come forth a few months after he is foaled, these are
little and very White, not at all hollow, and are easily distinguished from the
rest; the second are the Tushes, and the third are these Teeth, which grow in
place of the Foal-teeth after they are cast, of which the outward ones, or
those next the corners show the age; these Corner teeth are placed next to the
Tushes, and upon the out sides of the fore-teeth both above and below: some
people in considering a Horses Age look to the upper teeth, but then it is only
when the Horse is pretty Aged, and that there can be nothing known by these
below.

A little before a Horse has attained to the Age of thirty Months, which is
two years and a half, he has twelve Foal-teeth in the fore part of his mouth,
six above and six below, (I do not hear speak of his Chop-teeth or Grinders) at
thirty Months or a little after, four of these Foal-teeth fall, two above and
two below in the very middle; in some Horses they do not fall till they have
three years, the observation not being so exact and just as to Answer always
thirty Months: there grows then in the place of these four Foal-teeth which
fell, four others which are called Nippers or Gatherers, they are those in the
middle, and with which a Horse cutteth his grass when he is a grazing; you must
remark that the Teeth which come in place of the Foal-teeth are a great deal
bigger, stronger, and larger than them, also they are these which a Horse
keeps all his lifetime, seeing he never changes them more.

When a Horse has changed but two Teeth above and two below, which Teeth are
as I said called Gatherers, then it is certain that he is at most but three
years old, and commonly but thirty Months which is only two years and a half.

At three years and a half, but rarely at four, there falls other four
Foal-teeth, two above and two below, whereof one upon each side of the
Gatherers both above and below, and in their places come four others, very near
as big, large, and strong, as the Gatherers, which are called Separaters,
because they separate the Gatherers from the outward or Corner Teeth; when a
Horse has changed four Teeth above and as many below, then he may be said to
have three years and a half, and very often four.

There remains after this to a horse, only four Foal-teeth in the Corners,
which he changes most commonly at four years and a half; you now see after
what order a horse changes his Teeth, to wit four teeth at two years and a
half, which is thirty Months, and are called Gatherers; four at three years and
a half, which are those between the Gatherers and Corner-teeth, called
Separaters; and at four years and a half the outward or Cornerteeth: to begin
therefore to know the age of a horse exactly by the Teeth, it will be necessary
to keep in your memory, two years and a half, three years and a half, and four
years and a half; that is to say, when a horse has cast but two Teeth above
and as many below, that then he has but two years and a half, if he have
changed four above and as many below, that he has three years and a half, and
that if he have cast all six both above and below, which is to have them all
changed, that then he has four years and a half.

It is to be observed that the Corner-teeth in the upper Gums, are cast before
these in the nether, and that upon the contrary the Tushes grow out in the
under Gums, before these in the upper, and oftimes Horses are very sick when
the Tushes of the Upper-Gums cut, but are never so when these below come forth;
there are also some Horses which have no Foal-teeth, they being already all
changed, and whose Tushes nevertheless have not as yet cut the Upper-gums,
although they have changed their Cornerteeth, which are these of the Fore-teeth
by which the age of a Horse is best known.

It remains now to discourse of the Tushes, which are not as the other Teeth,
for they are preceeded by no Foal-teeth in the places where they come, but grow
up when a Horse is about three years and a half old; the observations which are
taken from the Tushes, are the absolutely most certain for the knowing of a
Horses age, and shall be discoursed of in their proper place.

So soon as the Gatherers and Separaters have peirced or cut the Gums, they
make all their growth in fifteen days, but the Corner teeth do not grow so
suddenly, yet that does not hinder but that at their very first appearing and
coming out, they are as thick and broad as the other, but they are no higher
than the thickness of a Crown piece, and very sharp and hollow; it may
sometimes fall out that the Corner-teeth, will appear almost at the same very
time with the Tushes, sometimes before them, but most frequently after, for it
is most ordinary for the Tushes to grow up before the Corner-teeth are cast.

I observed in Germany (the fatigue of the War having killed a great many
Horses) that the Horse Coursers did pull out their Horses Foal-teeth at three
years old, to force nature to produce sooner Teeth of a bigger size; and
because a Horse of three years is not fit for the Wars, and only begins to be
serviceable at four or five, they, that they might the better sell or put them
off, made use of this trick and cunning to make them appear of the age of four
or five, which is an age in which the German Horses are as good and capable to
serve, as if they were full eight; but it is not the same in France, for the
Horses there of four years old are but very unfit for the Wars.

It is very rare to find a Mare who has Tushes, and when they have them they
are a great dale smaller than those in Horses, and are no ways useful for the
knowing of their Age; there are also some People who less esteem such Mares as
have them, and I am also of their Opinion.

Horses which have been accustomed to eat Oats or Straw when very young, that
is at two years or two years and an half old, appear by the Teeth to be elder
then really they are, for besides that it makes them sooner to change their
Foal-teeth, it also very much uses and wears those which come in their
Places, by which means the mark is sooner worn out, as I shall show you
hereafter.

When a Horse has no more Foal-teeth, and that his Outward or Corner-teeth
begin only to appear, he is then in his fifth year, that is, he has about four
years and an half, and is feeding, or as we say going in his fifth; for it is a
common way of expressing ones self and understood by all, that until the inner
side of a Horses Cornerteeth be as high as the outward, he is still but five
years old, as I shall afterward explain.

So soon as the Corner-teeth come forth, they appear to be only of equal height
with the Gums, after which they grow by degrees, and at full five they are
above the Gums as I shall explain; now the difference between those teeth and
the others which are next to them, is that they are sharp upon the out side and
the inward part as yet full of flesh, and then proportionably as they grow the
flesh within disappeareth, and there remains in the place of it a hollow over
all the inward part of the Teeth, which as yet are not flat in the top, that
is, they are not so high upon the inside as upon the out, which they will come
to be, about a year after they have cut and appeared.

I shall repeat it again that I may be the better understood; so soon then as a
Horse puts forth his Corner-teeth, they are only of equal height with the Gums
upon the outside, and the inside of them is filled with flesh until he be near
five; so when a Horse has put forth his Corner-teeth, and that they are as yet
filled with Flesh, you may confidently affirm that he is not as yet five,
because at five years old, the flesh which filled the insides of these Teeth
disappears; from five to five and an half, the Corner-teeth remain altogether
hollow in the inside, and that part which was filled with flesh is empty, and
will continue so till five and a half; from five and a half until six, that
hollow which is upon the inside fills up, the Teeth grow, and become flat and
equal on both sides on the top, and there remains but a little cavity in the
middle, both edges of the Teeth being as I said of an equal height; People
observe this Cavity or Mark in the very upper parts of these Teeth, which
somewhat resembles the Bud or Eye of a dry Bean, and then they say a Horse is
entering six; for so long as a Horses Corner teeth, are not so high upon the
inside as upon the out, he is still said to be but five, although he be five
and a half and sometimes six.

Now because this matter is of consequence, you would do well to remember, that
at two years and a half the Gatherers are put forth, at three years and a half
the middle Teeth or Separaters, and at four years and a half the Corner teeth,
which are filled upon the inside with flesh, and upon the out side are only
about the thickness of a Crownpiece above the Gums, and so they continue till
five; from five to five and a half, the flesh disappears and the Teeth remain
hollow, that is, the inner edge is not so high as the outward, which at that
time will be about the thickness of two Crown-pieces above the Gums; from five
years and a half to six, that hollow diminishes, and the Teeth at six are
level and equal upon the top, that is, have there insides as high as their
outward, and there remains only a little hollow or black speck in the middle,
which as I said resembles the Bud or Eye of a dry Bean, and then the Teeth are
above the Gums about the breadth of ones little finger; thus have you the age
of a Horse very distinctly explained until he be six years old, and perhaps a
little too tediously.

After a Horse has come to this age, people look only to the Corner-teeth, the
Separaters, and Tushes, to know if he have Mark; because the first Teeth which
grow up, after a Horse casts his Foale-teeth, are the Gatherers, and as they
are first put forth, so the mark does first wear out of them; after them do the
Separaters grow up, and they also by degrees loss their mark; and last of all
are the Corner-teeth put forth, and it is only upon them which people look, to
know if a Horse as yet marketh, for in the rest there is but very little to
look to, unless that the Horse were naturally hollow or sheltooth'd, which I
shall explain hereafter.

A Horse is said to have mark, when his Corner-teeth are a little hollow and
black in the middle; yet to be black is not enough, for they must also have a
little hollow in the middle, about the breadth of the thickness of a Farthing,
and the black speck must be in the bottom of it.

A Horse of six years old marketh after the manner I have shown you, and the
foresaid Corner-teeth are above the Gums about the thickness of ones little
finger, in some a little more but not much.

I say at full six, a Horse will have his Corner-teeth the breadth of ones
little finger above his Gums, and the black and hollow part of his Teeeth will
be diminished, but then his Tushes will be at their full length; at seven years
old his Corner-teeth will be yet longer, as about the thickness of the second,
or Ring-finger, and the hollow almost quite worn out and gone.

At eight years old the Horse will have Razed, that is, none of his Teeth will
have any hollow in them, but be flat quite over which we call Razed, and then
they will have of height about the thickness of the middle-finger above the
Gums; you must then after that a Horse has put forth his Corner-teeth,
consider well the height they have above his Gums, besides the little black
Cavity that should be always in the middle of them, that so you may the better
judge of his age, and you shall make your Observation after this manner
following.

From four years old and a half until five, the Corner-teeth will be above the
Gums about the thickness of a Crown-peice, from five to five and a half, about
the thickness of two Crown-pieces, and at six years old the breadth of ones
Little-finger, at seven years the breadth of ones Ring-finger, and at eight the
thickness of ones Middle-finger; those different heights are thus
distinguished, to be in place of a local memory to those who intend to be
instructed; when I say height or thickness, I mean the length of the Teeth, and
when I mention Fingers, I understand those of a man's hand who is of an ordinary
stature.

Now perhaps some pretender or half skilful person will say, that there is here
a great many Repetitions of one and the same thing, and that it had been enough
to have mentioned each particular but once; that to know the age is no such
difficult matter, as that it should be needful so frequently to repeat the
particulars of it: But I must answer this Doctor or Teacher, that it is not for
him I have writ, and that whoever reads this with a design to profit by it,
will be so far from finding fault with Repetitions, that upon the contrary they
will be rather a satisfaction to him, and that whereby he will be the better
instructed and cleared.

It is a common received opinion amongst most people, that Horses Raze, or
absolutely lose their mark at eight years old, but I have seen a great many
which had not Razed even at nine, who according to that ordinary observation,
would have pasled but for Horses of seven, but that is of small consequence
providing they be thought young; for the age or youth of Horses consists much
in fancy, although in France their being young makes a part of their value and
price, and yet when they are above eight they are in their full strength and
beauty, and fit for any service, but seldom before they arrive at that age,
especially the Horses of Bress, Auvergne, and Limosin, so that it is at that
age in which Horses begin to be serviceable and good, (providing they have not
been over-rid and spoilt in their youth,) that the French reject and will have
none of them.

As to Horses designed for the Manage or Wars, they do not so much consider
their age as to make it augment or diminish their prices, because it requires
a good dale of time to render a Horse adroit, supple, and easy, especially if
they do not resolve to spoill him in dressing, but to preserve his Gentleness;
for it is rare to find Horses of six years old brought such a length, and so
confirmed in their Lessons, as to be fit to give satisfaction in the Manage, or
be serviceable in the Wars: Therefore although Horses have eight, nine, yea ten
years of age, yet if they have all the qualities of good and ready Horses,
people do not stand or scruple at their having no mark, but pay very dear for
them, without making their value any ways consist in their being only six
years old, as is done in Runners and other Horses.

Besides, according to the Calculation of the French, who esteem none but those
of six, a Horse will be only good for the space of one or two years, consider
then if it be not ridiculous, to submit to an opinion supported by so bad a
foundation as that is, of only esteeming a Horse for the space of one or two
years; at that rate, good-buy to all the Horses of Bress, Auvergne, Limosin,
and others which are not at their very best till full eight, for should we only
esteem these Horses at six years old, we should never find a good one, and can
people be guilty of a greater folly, than never to desire Horses but when they
are worth nothing, and to put them off when they are beginning to prove good
and serviceable.

It is therefore a very great oversight so to tie up ones self, as never to buy
any but young Horses for present service, for besides that their being young
adds to their price, and although that they may be so shaped, as one may justly
expect they will be long serviceable without being spoilt, yet we see many of
them whose Legs are quite ruined and gone with one years fatigue, whose Hams
become so weak that they can endure no Travel, and who at last grow even Blind
although they have had very good eyes when first bought; so that a man when he
comes to part with them, either absolutely loses them, or at least a
considerable part of the price they stood him; but when a man buyeth Horses of
nine or ten years of age that are not spoilt, and which have good Limbs, with
their Flanks and other parts proportionable, then he is certain seeing those
parts have been so long right preserved, that they are sound and will last a
long time, especially being at their full goodness and vigor; and that which I
like best in such Horses, is that they are bought at a third, nay half the rate
of young Horses, and also oft-times last longer, so that the hazard is not so
great as in buying of young Horses, from whom you suffer all the inconveniences
and bad service, to which their younger years are subject, besides your being
very uncertain how they will at last prove and succeed: However seeing it is in
this snare and mistake that all such persons who have but little skill do
easily fall, I am satisfied that they buy first young Horses, and at a great
rate, that they keep them but a year, and then loss half if not their whole
price, because they like this method best their fancy leading them to it; for
after what I have said, I leave every man to follow his own humor and fancy.

I must likewayes tell you that it is quite contrary in Horses as it is with
men; young people labor, and endure fatigue incomparably better than old,
Horses again, toil better when they are old than young: Men when young, eat and
sleep better than when they are aged, but Horses upon the contrary eat a great
dale more when a little aged, and also rest better; finally people may lay
their account with this, that the greatest fatigues of War are always performed
by Horses of a middle age, and that but few die of old age in a Campaigne but
mostly by accidents which might also have befallen those that are young.

It is to be observed that the Teeth wear, and are used upon the upper parts
where the mark is, which is as I have said that black Cavity in the middle of
them; because it is that part of the Teeth, which is most made use of, for with
it the Horse cuts his Grass, and draws his provender or Hay and Straw from the
Rack, yet notwithstanding of that, they do not forbear to grow insensibly, and
as the Gums through time become lean, so they make the Teeth to appear long,
and it is certain that so much the longer a Horses Teeth are, he is still so
much the elder, they also about that age contract a great dale of Nastiness and
Rust upon them, and become yellow; there are however some old Horses which have
very white and short Teeth, people say of such that they have a good Mouth
considering their Age; it is also worth noticing, that some Horses will have a
black speck in their Teeth resembling the true Mark, a long time after they are
past Eight or Nine, but then it is not hollow, therefore People should not lay
any stress upon it, although the Horse Coursers may warrant it for a true Mark,
affirming that they have not counterfeited it, but that it is altogether
natural; however albeit it be not artificial, yet I say People should lay no
hold upon it, for although old Horses have sometimes that black speck without
any Cavity, and also that it be natural, yet it does no ways relate to their
Age, and they are never a whit the younger for it.

CHAP. VI. How to know the Age of a Horse, which is either past Mark, Shell, or
hollow Toothed, or even Counter-marked, that is, whose mark is artificially
counterfeit.
I Have sufficiently explained, CHAP. VI. How to know a Horses age, which is
either past Mark, Shel Toothed, or Countermarked.
how a Horses Age is to be known by the Teeth which mark, I must now consider
some other observations, which I shall explain as distinctly as possible, and
if I have been a little too prolixe upon this matter, perhaps it will not be
the worse for the Reader.

So soon as a Horse has Razed, which the Italians call Cavallo Serrado, a man
cannot judge of his age but by the length of his fore-teeth, or Tushes; and
first by the Tushes which are in his upper Jaw, which are almost opposite to
those below, you must feel them with your Finger, and if they be quite worn
and equal with the palate, the Horse is then at least Ten years old, however
this observation is not so certain, but that it sometimes fails, especially
if the Horse when young, has carried a bigger mouthed bit than was proper for
him, which with a little time may have used and consumed his Tushes; yet I have
found it fail but very seldom.

People also draw a very good observation from the under Tushes, for young
Horses have them always sharp and poynted, pretty long, some what edged upon
both sides, and without any kind of Rust, Scales, or Nastiness upon them; but
as they become aged their Tushes grow very big and Blunt, become round and
scaly, and in very old Horses they grow extremely thick and round, and at last
appear altogether used and yellow.

The upper Tushes do also discover a Horses youth, for if a Horse be but six,
the upper Tushes will be a little channel'd, or somewhat hollowed and grooved
upon the insides, and when he is above six, they fill up and become as it were
a little round in the insides, this Observation is so good, that it never or
but very rarely fails.

A man should therefore make it his business, to understand the Tushes, for
they are absolutely the most certain marks whereby to know a Horses age, and by
them with the assistance of the Corner-teeth, a man will hardly fail to judge
pretty near of a Horses Age.

The Fore-teeth and Tushes are the surest Marks whereby a Horses Age is known,
yet a man may know if a Horse be very old, by lifting up his Upper-lip, for if
the Upper-teeth be excessive long, it is a token of very great Age; it may be
also observed at the same time if they be used and worn in the middle, which if
they are, will be a sign that the Horse is subject to the Tack, which is an
imperfection, that cannot be exactly discovered without seeing him eat, see
Chap. 25. of this part, yet if a man perceive a Horses Gatherers to be used,
and the other Teeth upon each side of them somewhat longer then they, then he
may assuredly conclude that he is a Ticker and very old.

All other Marks are for the most part uncertain, as to have recourse to the
Joints of the Tail, to the folds of the Under-lip, and other different
observations in which I never found any great certainty; as for example, there
comes forth a knot or joint in the upper part of a Horses Rump when he is
between Ten and Twelve, a second when he is Fourteen; people perceive these
knots or joints by passing their hand along the Horses Rump, from the very
onset of it, or that part where the Crupper of the Saddle rests, to the lower
end of it; those who are satisfied with this mark may make use of it, for my
part I esteem it very little.

As for that knowledge which is acquired by the Under-lip, I saw once a
Gentleman hit luckily enough upon the age by it; he did it thus, he considered
how many plyes or folds the Horse had in his Under-lip when he thrust it back,
and as many folds as he observed in the Lip, so many years old he said the
Horse had, he who will study, and give faith to such a kind of knowledge as
this, shall have full liberty to do it.

For my own particular, I have always recourse to a Horses Legs after his mark
is gone, to know if they be neat and good, to his flank if it be well trussed
and not too full and swallowed up, but fresh and without any alteration; also
to his feet, to see if they are not spoilt, and if he walk after the manner
which I shall hereafter explain, and last of all to his Appetite; These are the
Tokens and Symptoms of Youth which I tie my self to; but as in Horse-craft more
than in any other affair, every man has his own humor and thoughts, I shall
here discourse of the most certain observations a man can make use of, whereby
to know the Age of a Horse that is past mark.

When the Pits above the Eyes are extremely hollow, it is almost always a
certain Token of old Age, although Horses which are of an old Stallions get,
have also those Pits very deep even at four or five years old, as also their
Ey-lids and Eyes, wrinkled and hollow.

When that part of the nether-Jaw-bone, which is about three or four finger
breadth above the Beard, and so upwards, is sharp and thin, that is, if in
passing the hand along it, it feel edged, it is a certain sign of Age, but
upon the contrary, if it be round it is a token of Youth; it is certain that in
young Horses, that part of the Nether-jaw-bone is always round, but in old
Horses sharp and edged, so that a man who is a little accustomed to it, will
before ever he open a Horses Mouth judge pretty near of his Age, by only
feeling this part of the Nether-jaw-bone; this is a very good Remark.

People also with their two fingers and Thumb, pull the Skin of the
Neither-jaw-bone or Shoulder, a little to them, and if the Skin continue a long
time without returning again to it is place, it is a sign say they that the
Horse is not young, and that the longer it is of returning the older he is; a
man should not much trust to this observation, because the Skin of a Lean Horse
although young, will be longer of returning to it is place, than the Skin of an
old Horse that is fat and plump; but this observation following is very good;
the points of the Gatherers in the Nether-jaw, when a Horse grows old stand
outward a little, and when he is extremely old point almost straight
forewards, but when he is young they stand almost straight up, and form as it
were a hollow beneath the Tongue, so that they are just equal with the outter
edges of these above; it sometimes falls out that they are the upper-teeth
which thus extend themselves forewards, but for the most part it is the under
that do it, and when a Horse has his Under-teeth thus situate, he is said to
be Sprung in the Beak, and it is a very good observation whereby to know Horses
which are extremely old.

Another certain Mark of old Age, is when a horse Seeleth, that is, when upon
his Eyebrows there grows about the breadth of a farthing of white hairs,
mixed with those of his natural color; a horse never Seeleth until he be
fourteen years old, and always before he be fifteen or sixteen at farthest;
The light or lyard sorel and black, do sooner Seel then any other colors; but
this may be relied upon, that a Horse never Seeleth, or becomes lyard above
the eyes, until he be fourteen or fifteen years old.

But because it is easy for a man, although he have but very little skill, to
perceive when a Horse seeleth or is lyard above the Eyes, the Horse Coursers do
therefore pull out all those white Hairs with pincers, being rather satisfied
that there Horses should appear bald then seeled; and when their Horses have
such a number of white hairs, that they cannot conveniently pull them all out
without making them look ugly, they then color over or bedaub all their
Eyebrows, that so that imperfection of old age may not appear.

A Man may also judge of a Horses Age, by looking to his Palate, because
proportionably as a Horse grows old, the roof of his Mouth becomes Leaner,
and dryer toward the middle, and those Ridges which in the Palats of young
Horses are pretty high and plump, do by degrees diminish as they increase in
Age; as for example, at six years old the Palate is more fleshy, and those
Ridges higher than at eight, and at Ten, Twelve, or Thirteen, they will be
still proportionably more low and lean than they were at eight or nine, so that
at last the roof of the Mouth, in very old Horses, has nothing else upon it
but skin and bone, this remark is extremely good, especially in Mares, who have
very seldom any Tushes whereby one may know their age

In Spain people are more certain of the Age of Horses, for all those who have
good breeds, and amongst them young Horses which they expect will one day prove
good, go to a public Nottar, and their in presence of Witnesses, receive an
attestation of the Age of their young Horses or Colts, at such a time as it can
be certainly known, which is so long as they have their Foal teeth, so that the
Nottars declare that such a horse, of such a color, and such a Mark, such a
shape, and such a Breed or Race, and marked after such a fashion, was at such a
time so many years old, and this he signeth together with the Witnesses, and
delivers it to the owner of the horse, who when he hatha design to sell him,
produces his Testificat to prove the horses age; if people observed this
method in France and England, there would not be so many horses Counter-marked,
and the Tricks and subtilties which are frequently performed by horse Coursers,
in the Place-Moubert and Smith-field, would be of no use.

Gray horses become White proportionably as they grow old, and when they are
very aged they are White all over, but this does not conclude that there are no
horses foaled White; although but very rarely: But people know those which have
been Foaled Gray, by remarking their extremities, as Knees and Hams, which
continue for the most part still of that color.

There are some horses whose Teeth continue always beautiful and White, and as
short as if they were but six, although they have oft-times more then Twelve
Years, if such Horses fall into the hands of any Rogues or Cheats, they never
faill to Countermark them, and sell or put them off as if they had but only six.

To prevent therefore being imposed upon after this manner, and also to
understand when a horse is Counter-marked, you must know first, that a horse is
said to be Counter-marked, or to have the mark in his Teeth counterfeit, when
his Corner-teeth are made hollow with an ingraving Iron, and made black within,
to imitate as much as possible the true and natural Mark; they make the cavity
or hollow black immediately after it is made, by putting a little double-ink
into it, and there letting it dry, which will remain so long as the Teeth
continue hollow; those who are more cunning and dexterous, with a red hot Iron
burn a grain of Rye in the hollows of the Teeth, which makes them perfectly
black, for there proceeds from the Rye a kind of Oil, which by the help of
the burning cleaves extremely closs and fast, to the hollows of the Teeth
which are newly cut: There are other methods of Counterfeitting a horses Mark,
but as it is below a man of honor to practice any of them, so is it enough
that I have said as much of them, as may prevent your being deceived, when you
shall meet with any which are so.

You will know when a horse is Counter-marked, by looking to the hollows of his
Teeth, which will never so very exactly resemble the natural Mark, but with a
little practice the Cheat may be discovered; besides the graver makes
sometimes little slips which scratch the other parts of the Teeth, because the
Horse does sometimes stir and move, and is not so very quiet as he ought: the
Teeth are also hard which makes the Operator's hand nustedy, and so is the
occasion of those irregular scratches; when a man perceives such scratches upon
the outsides of the hollows of the Teeth, then is the Horse Counter-marked:
Moreover the upper Tushes should be considered, which should be groov'd, that
is, that upon the insides of them from the very Palate to their points they
should be hollow, and that until the Horse be seven years old; besides when a
Horse is old the upper Teeth will be too long, over passing these below, and
yellow, the low part of the neither Jaw Bone sharp and edged, the under Tushes
used, big and scaly, Whereas if he had but six, The under Tushes would be
small, pointed, and pretty sharp upon both the edges.

If a Horse which appears marked, have also many other signs and Tokens of old
age, it is very probable that he is Countermarked, you will also know if he be
so, because the false Mark is never so exactly Counterfeit, but with a little
experience you will come to know it is very shape, Besides that the Teeth will
be oft-times longer than they should, and the artificial hollow a great dale
blacker than the natural; it requires indeed a little practice to discover
exactly when a horse is Counter-marked, and also a man must have observed well,
how a Horse is Marked with the true and natural Mark, and how he has his Teeth
placed and framed, after which he will very rarely be mistaken or deceived by
the false one.

To believe that people file or saw a Horses Teeth to make them short, is what
I could never as yet see succeed, although I have used all Diligence
imaginable, to inform my self if it was practicable; It is true some do it to
Men, but I never knew any who successfully tried it upon Horses; for it is
certain that people never Counter-mark any Horses, but such whose Teeth appear
beautiful and young, that is short and white, and all those who have attempted
to saw a Horses Teeth thereby to shorten them, meet but with a great dale of
trouble and vexation, neither do I believe that ever any man made twice trial
of it in his Lifetime; for if people should only file or saw the under teeth,
which are those at which people look to know the age, then those above will be
observed to be longer than those which have been shortened, and if the teeth
both above and below be shortened, it will so fall out, that the jaw-teeth or
Grinders being at their full length, will join, and so hinder the upper and
lower Teeth which were shortened, to close upon other, which will manifestly
discover the Cheat; for the Horses mouth being shut, the Fore-teeth will be at
as great a distance from other, as that length is which was taken from them;
Besides, those horses upon whom this operation is performed, are a long time
without being in a condition, to chaw their meat with any tolerable ease,
because of the stress they have received by the filing, neither can they draw
their hay or straw from the Rack, because of the distance which is between
their lower and upper teeth.

Horses whose Teeth have been shortened are easily known, not only by what I
have said, but also by their Tushes, which will not be so fashioned and shaped,
as I have discovered they should be in young Horses; therefore I advise no to
man try it, not only because it will prove prejudicial to the Horse, but also
because such kind of Tricks or whatever you call them, are in truth below a man
of any Ingenuity or Candor.

There are some Horses which have their Teeth very long, and yet have a black
speck in the middle of them; such Horses are said to be Shell-tooth'd, in
french Beguts, and they have that mark all their Life, at least a great part of
it; Geldings are more subject to this of being Shell-tooth'd then Stoned
Horses, but Mares more than either; Most part of the Hungarian, Polonian,
Cravat, and Transilvanian Horses which I have seen, were thus Shell-tooth'd.

It is easily known when a Horse is so, because he appears to mark in all the
other Fore-Teeth as well as in the Corner, that is, both in the Separaters and
Gatherers, and therefore to know his age, the same methods must be taken as to
know the age of a Horse which is Counter-marked, such as the length of his
Teeth, used Tushes, sharp and edged nether Jaw-bones, and several other which I
have before set down.

Horses put forth their Gatherers, when about thirty Months old, thereafter the
Marks which were in them begin to wear; when the Separaters come forth, the
Marks which were in the Gatherers are half worn out, and then at six years old
they quite disappear, so afterward a Horse has no more mark in them; those
again next to them called the Separaters, have about that time, or when the
horse is six, the Marks which are in them half worn out, but in horses which
are Shell-tooth'd the Mark never almost wears out or disappeareth, but
remains in them as it also does in the Gatherers and Corners, which is the
Reason that people, when they perceive a horse to have Mark in the Gatherers as
well as in the other Fore-teeth, do conclude that he is Shell-tooth'd and with
so much the more certainty, if he have also with it very long Teeth, and of a
greater growth than they should be at six, with other observations which I have
already given you.

It is certain that Shell-tooth'd horses, have been once in their Lifetime only
five or fix year old, and that at the said age of five or six they have had
their Mark true and good, although it appeared equally in all their Fore-teeth
at one and the same time, and therefore in that case it would be a great
oversight, to conclude them old, because they are Shell-tooth'd, especially
when other Tokens of youthare discovered in them, such as short Teeth, small
and sharp Tushes, etc. for it is to those that a man must chiefly take notice,
before he pronounce his Opinion.

Neither does this conclude but that there are some Shell-tooth'd horses, which
although they have Mark all their Lifetime, yet have it not in all their
Teeth, but in such horses the age is also known by the length of the Teeth,
Tushes, and other signs of old age which I have already mentioned.

I am apt to believe, that if a man apply himself to consider all I have said,
concerning the knowledge of a Horses age, and that he also put it in practice,
by taking care to look at a great many Horses Mouths, and observe the
differences amongst them; I say without doubt he shall never be deceived, but
above all he must make it his business, to know when the legs are good, the
feet sound, the flank right, for if he think that this knowledge can be
acquired by the simple reading over of this Book, it is what will deceive him,
because it is only custom and experience that can confirm him in it.

Several persons have thought it strange, that after the reading of this Book
over and over, they did not find themselves Skilful, especially as to the
knowledge of a Horses Age, so that if they had not frequently heard the Book
commended, they acknowledged they would have condemned it, for not being
distinct enough in its directions, because they succeeded so ill with them; I
do therefore with a great dale of ingenuity and sincerity declare to such
Gentlemen, that the knowledge of Horses is not acquired by simple reading; one
it is true must understand the theorie, but he must put in practice what he has
Read, go visit Horses, examine all the different Circumstances, and earnestly
apply himself to it until he first understand it, and then be Master of it;
the most common Sciences are not acquired by one single reading, they must be
studied and carefully considered; and far more this I am Treating of which is
more Practical than Speculative, for if you do not practice, and by your own
Judgment join the Speculative part to the Practical, you will but in vain
make use of this Book, and I say not only this Book, but the very best that can
possibly be compiled on this Subject; if therefore those Gentlemen, do not
become knowing and Skilful by mere reading without practice, let them only
blame themselves, seeing if they be interrogat upon any of the defects or
diseases which are specified in the Book, they can give no reasonable account
of any of them; for first of all the sense and meaning must be well understood,
and then fixed in the memory and made so very familiar, that so soon as any
Disease or Imperfection is named, a Man may be able to give immediately the
defenition of it, and tell in what part of the Body it comes, and afterward
put what relates to it in practice; so here are three things required in a Man
to be Skillful, to comperhend or understand, to learn or to have the chief
things relating to the Disease fixed in his memory, and to practice; for without
this practice, a common Stable boy will let you know, that he is more Skillful
than you.

Having explained every thing which relates to the age, we most now consider
the other faults and Imperfections to which Horses are Subject, I Suppose a Man
has made himself as much Master of the knowledge of a Horses age as possible;
let him therefore shut his mouth, and look after his other Imperfections,
holding this always for an infallible Maxim, that when once you find a fault,
you must apply your self with all possible Attention to discover it to the very
bottom, and having so discovered it, think no more on it, but go to another, and
proceed thus orderly from one Imperfection to another; I give not these
directions to such persons as are Skilful, and who in the twinkling of an eye
can discover every fault, and who so soon as they look to a Horse, if there be
any thing wrong about him, it is the very first thing that comes in their
View, so that it would seem their eyes could look to nothing else but that
fault; but it is not thus with these Novices for whom I write, for they must
have more time to examine one Horse, and go over him from head to foot, than a
knowing person will take to consider four, for it is enough for him only to
look to a Horse, and walk gently about him, and in that short time he will
preceive all that can be seen.

CHAP. VII. Of the knowledge of the Eyes.
AFter having known a Horses age, CHAP VII How to know if a Horses Eyes be good.
you must consider his Eyes, the perfect knowledge of which is difficult
enough, and requires a very long and assiduous practice without being
discouraged; at first when one looks to the Eyes, the good and bad appear
alike, but if you persist to look to and consider them attentively, you will
discover the third time what you did not perceive the first, and the twentieth
time, what you have not as yet been Sensible of, and finally by the custom and
practice of looking to them, a Man's Eyes as one would think are opened, so that
he perceives and sees distinctly, what at the beginning appeared to him
Darkness and obscurity; Therefore do not disquiet your self, but persist
continually to look to them, and I assure you you shall succeed: That Eyes may
be exactly well perceived, the Horse must be right Situate; the Eyes are
perceived with a great dale of more ease, when a Horse is taken from a Dark
place to another which is very light, for example, in coming out of the Stable,
and just as his head is without the door, you may then look to his Eyes and
consider them, not by looking as it were straight upon them, but a little a
squint, for looking thus slopwayes to them, you will perceive them to the very
ground or bottom.

But if you be in the open feilds upon a march, or in a public Mercate place
or Fair, it is very difficult to perceive Eyes in the Sunshine, therefore you
must always take the Horse to a shade, and also that you may the better
discern them, place your hand above his Eye to keep away the too great light,
for in the Sun all Eyes appear to be better than really they are.

Any Man who has an inclination to know, and judge truly of a Horse's Eyes,
let him first consider them at night in the Stable, by the light of a very
small wax Candle or Bugie, and there he will perceive the ground of the Eye to
the very least tash, but then the Horses Eye must be placed between you and the
Bugie or candle, and when once you come to know and understand them well by the
Bugie, you will discern and distinguish them with the more ease in the day
time; yet although a Man may fancy, that he perceives and knows the Eyes very
well with a candle or Bugie, I would not adventure to buy a Horse upon that
observation, because I might be deceived by it, therefore I do not show you
this Method, as one by which you may certainly know the Eyes of a Horse, but
only as a help for your more easily coming to understand them.

A Man may quickly know to place a Horse right, that so he may observe his
eyes, if he but reflect, that when he is upon his back and stooping a little
forewards with his Body, he will perceive them very well, but he will yet
perceive them better, being on foot and standing before him.

Having placed the Horse right that so you may conveniently perceive his Eyes,
we shall next consider it is parts, Qui been distinguit hene docet, and to evite
confusion, I say there are two parts to be chiefly considered in the Eyes, to
wit the Cristal and the bottom or ground of the Eye; The Cristal is that
roundness of the Eye which appears at first view, being the most transparent
part of it, and should for clearness resemble a piece of Rock-Cristal, so that
one may see clearly thorough it, neither should it be covered with any cloud,
obscurity, spot, or Whiteness, because if the Cristal appear obscure and
troubled, so that you cannot see through it, it is a sign that the Eye is not
good; the Eye should have also no white Circle about it, yet there are Horses
who have this Cricle and have also very good Eyes, but however it were rather
to be wished that they wanted it; now upon the exact consideration of the
Cristal does the knowledge of the Eyes depend, you are therefore to use your
utmost endeavors to know certainly if it be exactly transparent, and although
perhaps at first view you cannot come to know it, yet you are not to be
concerned at it, but still to continue looking until you have acquired the
perfect knowledge of it, for by degrees your eyes will be opened, and you will
perceive it distinctly; that which is the cause why many people arrive not at
the true knowledge of the Eyes, is because they are at the very first
discouraged, and say, I can perceive nothing in such and such Eyes, for the
good and bad appear to me alike; but I must tell you, that although you should
be ten or fifteen days without making any distinction, and that they should
all appear alike to you, yet do not give it over, but continue to consider them
with care and attention, and at last you will gain your point.

A Horse may have upon his Eye, that is upon the Cristal of it, a whiteness
which may have proceeded from, and be the remainder of some stroke, and which
yet will not make him blind, but there is required some experience to discern
it, yet not so much neither to discover it, for it is very easily perceived, as
to know exactly if that whiteness will prove prejudicial or not to his sight;
to Novices every thing causes fear, and ofttimes a small evil appears to
them a considerable fault, when a greater imperfection is passed over without
taking notice to it; such Novices in respect to their knowledge in Horses, are
called but Half-skill'd, who being too nice and critical in their observations
of Horses, render themselves incapable of buying any at all, for they would
have the whole shapes of a Horse at fifty Crowns, to be as exact and perfect as
if he were worth fifty Pistols, without ever reflecting that there are
Merchandises at all rates, and that without an essential fault, they should not
restrict themselves to such particularities, especially in Horses of a small
value.

A reddish Cristal is a bad Symptom, being a sign that the Eye is either
inflamed, or that it is influenced by the Moon.

A Cristal that is Feuille-mort, or of the color of a dead leaf upon the lower
part, and troubled upon the upper, is an infallible mark that the Horse is
Lunatic, but it continues no longer but while the humor does actually
possess the Eye, for the defluxion being once over, the Feuille-mort color
does also immediately disappear; Therefore in horses which are Lunatic, it is
in vain to look for this mark when the Humor and Defluxion is not upon the
Eye, now you shall know when the Defluxion is upon it, by the Eye being
swelled, and emitting a great dale of hot water or humor; this infirmity is of
such consequence, that the horse will become blind of that Eye which was
influenced by the Moon, and also of both, if the Moon do influence and govern
both; this mark of the Eyes being of a Feuille-mort color, and Reddish, as if
the Eye were full of bloody Water, is one of the most certain whereby to know
when a horse is Lunatic, but observe it is only so when the Defluxion has
fallen down, and then the horse sees none with that Eye upon which the
Defluxion is: But to know a Lunatic Eye when the Defluxion is not actually
upon it, consider, that if only one of the Eyes be subject to it, then it will
appear less than the other, the Cristal of it will be also troubled, and the
bottom or ground of the Eye, black and brownish; but the Moon in the Eyes is
better known by a troubled Cristal than any other mark whatsoever.

The second part of the Eye which is to be considered, is the ground or bottom,
which is properly the pupil or apple of the Eye, and should be large and full;
it must be clearly perceived without any difficulty, that so you may with the
more certainty know if there be any Dragon, which is a white spot in the bottom
of the Eye, which makes the Horse blind of that Eye, or at least will do it in
a very short time; in the beginning a Dragon is but very small, and appears
to be no bigger then a Grain of Millet seed, but it grows to such a bigness
that it will cover the whole apple of the Eye, and also be irrecoverable,
because there can be no remedy applied to the place, or made to penetrate the
substance of the Eye in which the Dragon is situat, you must not therefore give
credit to such Farriers as vaunt to have cured them, for they are incureable,
and no man after the first moment in which they were formed, has ever taken
any of them away.

If the whole bottom or apple of the Eye be white, or of a transparent greenish
white, it is a token that it is not natural, and that bottom or apple of the
Eye being a little transparent, is that which is called in French Un cul de
Verre or bottom of a Glass; the Horse perhaps is not altogether blind with it,
because he as yet sees a little, but I would not take him having that
Imperfection, but at a very ordinary rate; Accademie Horses which are only
appointed for Gentlemen to be taught upon, called Chevaux d' E'cole, are as
serviceable and ride as agreeable when they have this imperfection, as if they
had no such cul de Verre, and the advantage is that their price is small, and
the loss of them but inconsiderable if any accident befall them.

You are also to take notice, that if you look to a Horses Eyes when opposite to
a white wall, the reflection of it will make the Apples of them appear
whittish, and a little inclining to green, as if they had a cul de Verre,
although they be indeed good; when you perceive this, you must remove your
Horse to another place and look to them, and then observe if the Eyes have
still the same appearance, in these different situations.

Before you come to observe the other imperfections of the Eyes, you must take
notice if you can perceive distinctly above the bottom or apple of the Eye, as
it were two grains of Chimney soot fixed to it, for if you see them distinctly,
it is not only a mark that the Cristal is clear and transparent, but that you
also begin to know and understand the eyes, so that if you continue a little to
make it your business, you will in a short time come to understand them
perfectly; yet although you see exactly these grains as it were of Chimney soot
placed above the apple of the Eye, that is not a sufficient evidence that the
Eye is good, you must therefore over and above perceive exactly the bottom of
the eye, which must be altogether without any spot or Whiteness, and then the
eye will be good.

Those who to know well an Eye, observe if they see themselves exactly
represented in it, as in a Looking-glass, and who if their Face appear
distinctly in it, conclude that the Eye is good, these Gentlemen I say are
mightily mistaken, for that kind of knowledge and observation is worth nothing,
because a bad and troubled Eye, will more naturally represent to them the
shadow of their Face, than a good one.

You are also to consider, if an Eye which is troubled and very brown, be
smaller and less than the other, for if it be, it is lost without recovery
because it dries up, Nature being defective in that part, which makes it to
become daily smaller, and these kind of Eyes are at first commonly spoilt and
lost, by a great Defluxion of humors, or the Moon; it is also a great hazard
if through time, a Horse who has lost one of his Eyes with this distemper, do
not also loss the other; but you must carefully observe, that an eye may appear
to be really less than the other, by some accident, and yet that the Horse will
not loss his sight in it, neither will it be troubled or of a brownish color;
for example, the Eyelid may have been cut or rent by a bite or Stroke, and the
body of the Eye not at all damaged, so that the wound of the Eye lid coming to
be healed up, or join again, it may remain a little straiter than before, which
will cause the body of the Eye to seem smaller and less than the other,
although it be really not so, but only in outward appearance, which I have
known many times to fall out.

There a great many more general observations, which may be given for knowing
eyes; for example, the walk or step of a blind Horse is always uncertain and
unequal, not daring to set down his feet boldly when he is led in ones hand;
but again if the same Horse be mounted by a Vigorous Horseman, and that also
the Horse of himself be mettled, then the fear of the Spurrs will make him Ride
resolutely and freely, so that his blindness shall hardly be perceived.

Another Mark whereby a Horse which is absolutely blind may be known, is that
when he hears any enter into the Stable, he will prick up his Ears and move
them backwards and forewards, which is a certain sign he has altogether lost
his sight; the reason of it is, because a vigorous Horse who has this
Infirmity mistrusteth every thing, and is continually in alarm by the least
noise that he hears, which is easily discovered by this motion of his Ears;
a Man must be a hundred times less than half skilled, to stand in need of such
common observations, because Eyes that have lost the faculty of Seeing are so
very easy to be known, that they are immediately discovered without having great
experience.

The variety and diversity of colors, are also means whereby to know and judge
if the Eyes be good or bad; those colors which are most subject to have bad
Eyes, are the very dark gray, the flea bitten, the white spotted, and color of
a peach blossom, which are all but different kinds of Gray, and also the Roan
often times; I had almost forgot to tell you that weeping Eyes, and those which
are swelled in the under parts, either the one or other, is a mark that the
Horse is troubled with a Defluxion of humors; if it be actually upon the Eye,
you need but put your hand upon it, and you will find the part very hot and as
it were inflamed, although the same kind of heat may also proceed from a stroke
or bite, which give the very same symptoms as a Defluxion, but in case of such
an uncertainty, from whatever cause the swelling may proceed, I would not
advise you to take the Horse, unless the owner of him warrant, and pass his
word before Witnesses, that his Eyes are good.

When Horses have either the true or false strangle, or are putting forth their
Teeth, that is, when they either change their Foal-teeth, or are putting out
their upper Tushes, some of them have their sight at such times weak and
troubled, so that a man would judge them blind, and sometimes they do really
become so, but in others again, so soon as the strangle or Gourme is gone, or
the Teeth grown up, the sight recovers and becomes more clear; this weakness
of sight which proceeds from the changing of Teeth, falls out more
frequently in time of casting the Corner-teeth, than any of the rest.

I have often seen Horses, who for having cast their Gourme or strangle
imperfectly have become blind, but they were either Spanish Horses, Barbs, or
other Southern Country Horses.

There are some people who to know if a Horses Eyes be good or bad, pass their
hand or finger before them, and if the Horse move his Eyelids, or wink and
shut them, then they esteem them good, but if he keep them still open, then
they say he has lost his sight and is blind; others again make a motion with
their finger, as if they would thrust it into the Horses eye, and observe if
this motion of their Finger makes him shut it; when ever you perceive a person
make such Grimaces as these, you may assure your self he knows not what he
would be at, and that he understands nothing of what he pretends to.

This Remark did once occasion a reproach to me, from a person who told me,
that not being willing to pass his hand before a Horses eyes (least the
Spectators should think him unskilful) he had trocked or swapt for one which
was almost blind; I told him it was not this Remark of mine which was the cause
of it, but his little knowledge, and great vanity, to be esteemed and pass for
what he really was not, for although he had passed his hand before the Horses
eyes, he would have been never a whit the less deceived; I therefore advised
him to take better notice in time coming, and to blame himself, and not my book
as the cause of his being imposed upon, in so far as he was ignorant of the
knowledge of the Eyes, and yet would have made people believe that he
understood them; I also caused read this Paragraph since to the person himself,
who was the cause of my setting it down, he professed to me that it was very
pat to the purpose, and since that time has become pretty Skilful; there are
some people who are very indifferent whether they be really skilful or not, for
providing they can by their chat and prattling, make people believe that they
are so, they are satisfied; for my part I am of another sentiment, for I would
rather be really skilful, and appear ignorant, by which I will come far better
to my purpose, than if I were esteemed Skilful and indeed were not.

Those who have lately begun, and even made it their study for some time, to
know and understand the eyes of a Horse, having considered an eye most closly,
that is, as narrowly and exactly as they can, yet will they find out but very
little, so difficult is the true and exact knowledge of the eyes, but above all
they must take notice to, and beware of these little eyes which are sunk into
the head and very black, and examine exactly if the Cristal be clear and
transparent, so that they can see perfectly through it, afterward let them
consider the bottom of the eye, but especially if the pupil or apple be big
and large; in all eyes the small, narrow, and long pupills, run a greater risk
of lossing the sight than any other; if such little eyes have all those
qualities I have named, then are they good; In the second Chapter I mentioned a
few of the qualities required in a good eye, which I shall not repeat in this
place, it is where I show how the parts of a Horse should be framed, to be well
shaped.

CHAP VIII. A Continuation of the knowledge of the faults and Imperfections in
Horses, and what is to be observed when a buying them
TO follow that order and method which we have begun, CHAP. VIII A Continuation
of the knowledge of the faults and imperfections in Horses.
a Man should after his knowing the Eyes, next apply himself to understand the
jaw-bones, Shoulders, Legs, and Rake or walk of Horses, which is an essential
qualification for that service which is justly expected of them.

After having considered the Age and Eyes, you must put your hand between the
two jaw-bones near to the Horses Throat, to feel if there be a good enough
Distance between them, that so the Horse may with the more ease bring in and
place his head; for that distance between the jaw-bones being pretty large and
hollow, and tapering by degrees from the Throat to the Chin, will contribute
much to the goodness of the Mouth.

Next you are to observe, if there be any Swelling, hardness, or moving kernel,
between these two bones, which if the Horse be young will be a sign that he
has not as yet cast his Gourme or Strangle, or at least that he has cast it
but imperfectly; if he be more aged, providing those kernels be no bigger than
large pease, and although he have also a pretty number of them, yet they are of
no consequence, because exercise and sweating will discuss them in a short
time; however if the Horse be past six Years old, they are a little more to be
feared, although they should not hinder you to buy the Horse if he otherwise
please you; such moving kernels may proceed from either a Rheum or Cold, or
from a remander of the Gourme or Strangle, which may have left these swellings
in that part, by which Nature discharged her self of her impurities, and
through which these bad humors did evacuat themselves, through the negligence
and carelesnes of those persons, who having the charge of such Horses, did not
attempt to resolve and discuss these bardneses and Swellings.

If there be a fixed kernel, painful and fastened to the jaw-bones, it is almost
always a sign of the Glanders, especially the Horse being past seven Years of
age, but if he be not as yet six, then it may be only the Strangle, especially
if he have no Cough with it, for commonly a cough is only an effect of the
Strangle; however if there be the least appearance of the Glanders, I would not
advise you to meddle with him, because it is a Disease which is very rarely
cured, whatever great secrets, so many printed Books upon this Subject do
promise for it; A Rheum or Cold may be also the cause of a kernel fixed to the
jaw bone, after the same manner as those which proceed from the Glanders, but
then it yields to remedies, and is discussed by a due application, yet if it be
neglected, it almost always turns to a Glander; the method of resolving and
discusing such a kernel, will be found in the second part, which will almost
always succeed, if there be no principle of putrefaction in the lungs; or
malignity in the cause.

There are some Horses that have big and fixed hardnesses, which are fastened
commonly upon the inside of one of the jaw-bones, and are no token at all of
the Glanders; These are Excrescences or figgs which are of no consequence, and
are removed first with the incision knife, and then the roots of them are eaten
away with Powders, but the neatest method of taking them away, is by tying them
hard about the roots in the decress of the Moon, with a thread of Crimson silk,
and then anointing them every day with the juice of Purslain; these kind of
figgs are no ways dangerous, neither are they any sign at all of the Horses
having the Glanders.

Seeing I am so far engaged in this discourse of fixed kernels, I shall tell
what I see once befall a Horse, who having Razed and being past Nine Years old,
as he was making a journey there grew upon one of his jaw-bones, a large fixed
kernel; he cast at the Nose with it, and was judged by two Farriers in Amtens
to have the Glanders, who were each of them according to their testificat near
sixty Years of age; And although the Horse did not cast at the Nose in any
great quantity, yet I say they declared he had the Glanders; the Horse was left
there to rest for a little time, and in fifteen days he recovered almost of
his own accord, by the assistance only of three Glisters that were given him,
without any other kind of remedy; the kernel dissolved, he did cast no more at
the Nose, and from that time forward he had not the least Symptorn of the
Glanders; no doubt the Glisters not having strength enough of themselves, as it
is evident, to cure this distemper, it behooved to be the strength of Nature
alone which did effectuat this cure, and that which made me afterward know,
that this kernel did only proceed from a Rheum or Cold, was that the distemper
fell down upon his legs, and caused them to swell extremely.

When you perceive a Horse to have any kind of kernels between his jaw-bones,
whither fixed or loose, you must with your hand stop the Horses Nostrils, to
see if being a pretty while without breathing through them, he will force
himself to snear when you let them go, which if he do, you must observe if the
Nostrils run, and if he throw out of them a matter, somewhat resembling the
glair or whites of eggs, which if it be but in a small quantity is not to be
regarded, but if it be in a great abundance and of an impostumous consistance,
then is it to be feared, especially if the matter which he casts, be Viscuous
and cleave to the insides of the Nostrils, into which you are also to look, if
the sharpness of the humor has as yet occasioned any Ulcer, which is a
certain token of it is great malignity, because, besides that it is justly to be
suspected that it may be the Glanders, it is also dangerous for the infecting
other Horses; and especially if the Horse has attained to the age of eight
years, you are not to venture upon him, even although that gross and viscuous
humor should have only proceeded from a Rheum: As also if you perceive a
fixed Kernel, which the Horse cannot suffer you to handle, because of the great
pain he endures by it, and also that he casts only at one Nostril; or
likewayes if the Kernel should not be painful yet if it be very hard; and
although the Horse should not have six years, yet if he also do not Cough with
it, I think in all these cases you may conclude with a great dale of reason,
that it is the Glanders.

CHAP. IX. How to know when a Horses shoulders are well shaped.
AFter you have considered and passed over those parts I have been discoursing
of, CHAP. IX. How to know if the Shoulders are well shaped.
you must next come to the Shoulders; if they are large, charged with Flesh,
and round, it is a considerable imperfection in them, you will know if they are
so, by considering if that part between the two Shoulder blades, and at the
very top of them which is called the Withers, be very thick and broad, for then
the Horse must have a Sadle, wider, and of a larger turn in the bows then
ordinary; this discourse may perhaps seem ridiculous to many Persons, that to a
Horse who is very broad between the Shoulders there is required a larger Sadle
than to others, because all People know it without being told it; but I mention
it to the end you may know, that if your Horse stand in need of a Sadle,
considerably larger and wider turned in the bows than ordinary, that then
without doubt he is larger in the Shoulders than he ought, and consequently
charged with a great dale of more Flesh upon them than is necessary; you shall
also observe, if from the Withers to the lower part of the Shoulder, there be a
great dale of Flesh, if it be of a round form, if the joint at the end of the
Shoulder blade where the Tie or Breast plate rests, be very large and more
advanced than ordinary, which is easily known by considering the distance,
there is between the Withers and foresaid joint, now this joint being big and
advanced, makes a man immediately conclude that the Shoulder is misshap't; all
this which I have already said, denotes and is a certain sign of the Shoulders
being large and ugly, which is an imperfection, to which the Horses bred in
France are most commonly subject, because for Barbs and Spanish Horses, they
are not to be the less esteemed although there shoulders be a little large,
providing they have the other good qualifications required in them; also I have
seldom seen any Barbs or Spanish Horses which had large shoulders, but they
proved always very good, however as upon this observation, I would not buy
such of those Country Horses which had large Shoulders, neither would I upon
that account reject them.

In the second Chapter of this part, where I discoursed of the shapes and
beauty of all those parts which generally compose a Horse, I spoke some what of
the shoulders which is very fit to be known, and therefore to prevent
repetitions shall recomend you to it.

In Raking or Walking a Horse, you are to consider if his shoulders be very
glib or moving; because if they be large, charged with Flesh, and also slow and
as it were stiff in their motion, he shall never be agreeable; if he be a Pad
he will be apt to trip and stumble, if a Courser or Runner he will not keep
long at it, because of the too great trouble he finds in galloping, and if he
be a Horse designed for the manage, he shall never succeed in any beautiful
Air, for the Actions of his Legs will be always constrained, which is a very
considerable imperfection in a managed Horse; but if his shoulders be too
large, and yet very glib and moving, then the defect is not so great, although
it will be offensive and more disagreeable to such spectators as are skillful,
than any thing else; upon the contrary if the Horse have very small shoulders,
and that he cannot move them easily, because of the great stiffness and
unweildyness he has in them, then you are to reject him, unless he be of a
very moderate price.

A Horse which is very much charged with shoulders, is fit for nothing but
draught, that is, either for Coach or Cart, because he will be less subject to
galling and spoiling by the Collar and Traises of the Harnoise, then if he had
nothing upon his shoulders but Skin and Bone, but then he will not trot so
lightly upon Travel, and therefore will weary so much the sooner.

The reason why a Horse which is not free and easy, or has no movement in his
shoulders, cannot travel so agreeably but wearieth immediately how vigorous
soever he be, i^ because he makes all the motion with his Legs, which
occasions him a great dale of trouble by the frequent lifting of them, although
he raise them but a very little, and yet should he want that motion in his
Legs, not having it in his shoulders, he would be apt to strike with his feet,
upon every clod or stone that came in his way.

If a Horses shoulders be large, even although very moving and glib, and his
neck at the same time much charged with flesh, the extraordinary weight of
those two parts being always supported by his fore legs, whether in Travel or
at rest, will cause them to be sooner ruined and spoyl't, then if they were
altogether discharged of that burden; such kind of Horses are always very
heavy upon the hand in traveling, and when weary, ride ill favouredly and
without any kind of grace, being subject to trip and stumble in the beginning
of a Journey, and to fall or come over with the Rider toward the end.

In fine, I think it is a part not to be neglected, and that a man should make
it his business, to know when a Horses shoulders are well or ill shaped; for
what ever people may think of it, experience will teach, that upon the good
shapes of them and the Neck, does very much depend the Gentleness and
Delicatness of a Horse; it is not but a man may supple such shoulders as are
stiff and gourded, and to some kind of Horses make them become glib and easy,
by Art and methodical Lessons, yet seeing it is what a man does not find done
already to his hand by nature, a Horse should upon that account be the less
valued; I would therefore never choice a Pad with stiff and pegged shoulders,
that is which have no movement, because such Horses, besides that they never
ride agreeably, they are also very subject to stumble and fall.

There are some Horses, who although they have little or no movement in their
shoulders, yet raise their fore legs higher, than those whose shoulders are
more easy and glib, so that those who are ignorant look upon this Action of
the Legs, as a token of the shoulders being easy and very moveable, although
it is most certain that this motion of the Legs can be without that of the
shoulders; and upon the contrary, other Horses which have glib shoulders will
also raise and truss up their Legs to their very Bellies, so that you see one
Horse may raise and ply his forelegs extremely well, and have almost no
movement in his shoulders, and another shall have the same Graceful motion of
the Legs, and together with it free and easy shoulders, for the one does not
include the other: therefore there is a great dale of experience required, to
know when a Horses Shoulders are free, degadged, and moving; as for the motion
of the forelegs it is immediately apparent to all People, and is one of the
things in the world, that gives a Horse which is appointed for the manage the
greatest grace, although often times Horses which have the best and most
graceful movement, have not the greatest fund of strength.

Some Horses have too big and large shoulders, others again too small and
little ones, that is, whose Counter is so narrow that their fore-thighs touch
almost one another; such horses are commonly worth very little, because they
have a weak forehand, so that upon a walk or step, they cross so very much
their Legs, that they are apt to cut themselves, and in Galloping carry their
Legs so confusedly, that they are very subject to fall: I would therefore like
a horse better who had too much shoulders, than one that had this imperfection.

A fine horse should therefore have his shoulders flat, little, discharged of
flesh, and very glib and moving; but it is convenient that such as are
appointed for draught or the Coach, have their shoulders a little large, so
that they may both endure the draught the better, and also not be so subject to
galling.

CHAP. X. How to know when a Horses legs are good.
HAving observed exactly the shoulders, you are next to consider the legs,
CHAP. X. How to know if a Horses Legs are good.
which are the foundation and Pillars by which this edifice is supported; it is
easy enough to understand them if a man go orderly to work, and with care and
exactness apply himself to it.

The forelegs are subject to many infirmities and weaknesses, which make them
to be with reason rejected by those who know them to be such; they are the
parts of the body which suffer most, and are also commonly the smallest and
weakest, let us therefore consider all their parts in order.

The first mark I shall give you of bad legs, that is, which are used and
spoilt, is if they appear altogether straight, or as they were all of one
piece; a horse is said to be straight upon his Members, in French Droit sur ses
members, when the parts whereof his legs are composed, go all in a straight
line, that is, when from the knee to the forepart of the Coronet, the knee,
shank, and pastern, descend in a straight or plum line, and that the pastern
joint appears more or at least as much advanced as the rest of the Leg; such
legs may be very well compared to those of a Goat, and when a horse is thus
straight upon his members, he is subject to stumble and fall, and through time
the Pastern is thrust quite forwards out of its place, so that the horse
remains Lame, and then he is called in French Boulete, which is a peculiar and
distinct name they give to horses, whose Pastern joint is dislodged as it were,
and thrust forwards; but that you may the better understand, what this
imperfection of being straight upon the members is, it will be fit that I
discover to you what horses are most subject to it, and how you shall know them.

Horses then which are short legged or short joynted, are subject to be
Bouleted, or become straight upon their members, especially if in shoeing their
heels are left too high, care therefore must be taken to keep the heels of such
Horses very low, by frequent pairing of them; those Horses again which are long
joynted, do upon the contrary ply and bend their Pasterns so far back and near
to the ground, that they are not so subject to become come straight membred:
that a leg may be said to be right planted or situate, the pastern should be
placed about two fingers breadth more backwards than the Coronet, that is, that
if you stretch a thread or line between the top of the knee, and the fore part
of the Coronet of the hoof, the fore part of the Pastern should be distant from
that thread, about the breadth of two fingers, more or less according to the
size of the Horse, whereas in a Horse which is straight upon his Members, the
fore part of his Pastern will be equal with, or as far advanced as the thread
or line.

Horses which are straight upon the Members, are quite contrary to those that
are long joynted, that is, whose Pasterns are so long and very flexible, that
the Horse in walking touches the ground almost with them, which is a great
imperfection, and more to be feared than the former; for to them there may be
some remedy used, but for these last there can be none, upon the contrary it is
a token of little or no strength, and such Horses are no ways fit for any kind
of toil or fatigue.

The Barbs, and such Horses as are slender built, are more subject to this
imperfection of being long joynted than others, especially those who have only
a Barb for their S^^^ but a Mare of another Country for their Dame; but of
whatever race they may be, if they have this imperfection, of touching almost
the ground with their pastern joint as they are walking, they will be of so
much the less value, and not at all fit for Fatigue.

There are however some Horses, which although they be long joynted, yet do not
bend their Pasterns in walking, but keep them in such a posture and situation
as they ought to be, without plying; those kind of Horses may prove servicable,
because that carriage of the Pastern is a token that they are nervous, for it
is nothing but the strength and vigor of the nerves which support the Pastern,
and prevent it is too much bending; so that i^ this case the imperfection of
being long joynted, will be more unpleasant to the sight of the owner, than
prejudicial to the Horse.

Horses which have thick, stiff, and short joints, that is, no ways plying or
flexible are very unfit for the manage, because they have no kind of
gentleness in their motion; for glib and flexible joints; providing they be not
too long, are one of the chief qualities required in a fine and delicate Horse
of Manage.

But if the joints be too long and flexible, besides that the Horse will not be
fit for fatigue, he will be also very soon subject to wind-galls, in French Les
molettes; there are also some Horses, which although they are not long joynted,
yet have so small and flexible Pastern joints, that they will not have rid two
days Journey when they will be past traveling, because of the great swellings
in their Pastern joints, and then those swelling are followed by Wind-galls.

This is then one of the observations that is to be made, to consider narrowly
that the Pastern joint be neither too stiff nor too small, nor upon the
contrary too plying and slexible; for the knowledge of all I have said
concerning a Horse which is straight upon his Members, depends absolutely,
upon the exact observation of the Pasters Joints.

Those English Horses which have a great dale of Reins or strength, if they
have with it their Pastern Joints some what longer, than perhaps one who
understands Horse exactly well would wish, yet if they are not too flexible,
such a Horse will Gallop and run with a great dale of more ease for his Rider,
than if he were very short joynted and these are the only propper Horses for
Persons of quality who are become aged, and have wherewithal to seek after
their ease and agreeableness in a Horse; it is true such Horses will not hold
out so long at hunting, as if they had not that imperfection, but a Person of
quality who has many to change, should not if he consider his own case, reject
them for it; such Horses may be very well compared to Coaches with Springs,
which render them infinitely more easy than those without them.

This imperfection of bending too much the Pastern joint, should be as
carefully taken notice to in the hind legs as in the fore, and there are also
some Horses which bend too much only in the hind Pasterns, and not in those
before, which is a token that they have a very weak hind quarter, and is a
great imperfection, whatever kind of service they may be designed for; and if
they have wind-galls, they will prove more dangerous being in the hind Pastern
joints or Legs, than if they were in those before, because with a little travel
and fatigue, they will penetrate beneath the nerves, and so become those which
are called in French Molettes nerveuses; also if such Horses are designed for
the Coach, they will not endure pulling back, or staying the Coach upon any
descent, and therefore will not at all be propper for that use.

The third imperfection of the Legs is, when they are Arched, in French Jambes
Arquees, which is when the Horse being in his Natural situation has his knees
bent forwards, and his whole leg frames a kind of Arch or Bow, less or more
according as it is Arched; this imperfection proceeds commonly from excessive
labor, which has caused the nerves or back sinews to contract or shrink up,
so that the Legs remain Arched, and tremble beneath them, when they are made to
stop after they have been rid a little; such kind of Horses are not absolutely
useless, because they may work notwithstanding of it, but for my part I would
not meddle with them at any rate, unless they had extraordinary good Reins, and
then they may serve well for a while, but they shall never be fit for a Master;
and although there have been some of them known to have lasted a long time with
such Arched Legs, yet they are always unpleasant to the sight, and a man can
never expect to get rid of them, besides that there are but very few People
that have a fancy to buy them, how good and serviceable soever they may prove.

The Spanish Horses, are for the most part either less or more arched in their
Legs, as they are brought old from Spain, and that because they always shackle
or fetter them in the Stable, which obliging them to stand wrong upon their
Legs, makes them through time become arched, although otherwise their Legs be
good and sound; and the Spainiards are so much taken with this method of
shackling their Horses, that so they may stand peaceably and no ways hurt
themselves by stricking or other wise, that they fetter some Horses, especially
such as are very vicious and troublesome, as well behind as before, but after
another manner, for behind the shackles are separate, and not joined together
with a chain, as those made use of for the Forelegs are.

In Barbary at Tunis, Algeirs, and other places, their Horses are always tied
with shackles, which they put both upon their fore and hind pasterns, and which
are fastened to stakes that are placed in the ground near to their Legs, neither
are they almost ever tied by the head or neck as ours are, because for the most
part they make never use of a Halter, neither in the Stable, nor in the
Meadows, when the Horses are a Grazeing.

There are some Horses which are Foaled with arched Legs, and are not much the
worse of them for service; they are called in French, Brassicours, the only
difference between these and the former, is that these have their Legs
naturally arched, whereas the other are made so by great labor and fatigue,
and are consequently the worst of the two; I have seen several of them, which
notwithstanding of this natural imperfection were very good and vigorous, and
traveled well in the Country, having their Legs as sure and trusty, as if
they had been well shaped; but unless a man can have them at a very easy rate,
I would never advise him to buy Horses that are thus naturally arched in the
Legs, and if he do, he would be also sure that they are so naturally, and not
occasioned by labor or fatigue; I have also seen Coach-horses, which although
they had their Legs naturally arched, yet did serve very well and also for a
long time.

A person who understood very well what belonged to Horses, and knew how to
distinguish the strong from the weak and feeble, assured me, that those Foals
which have the veins of their Legs very big and large, are neither so good nor
fit for service as others, because those Veins become filled with a superflous
Blood, which by an agitation occasioned by labor degenerats into putrefaction,
or breed a kind of Corruption, very subject to prove prejudicial to the Legs
upon many accounts; I have never as yet made trial of this observation, however
since the time I received it from that person, I found it in the Works of
Xenophon, who writ very well of Horses considering the time wherein he lived.

Having exactly observed the three preceding imperfections, to wit, whether a
Horse be straight upon his Members, long jointed, or have arched Legs, all
which may be perceived in the twinkle of an eye; you must next pass your hand
all along the back sinew of the Fore-leg, from the very bending of the knee to
the pastern joint, and you shall observe if the Sinew be large, firm, and
detatched or well separate from the bone, if in passing your hand along it,
you find no hardness which stops your hand, if between the back Sinew and
Bone you meet with no moveable kind of jelly, which slips from beneath your
Fingers as you are passing them along; for whatever hinders, or is an
impediment to the motion of the Back-Sinews, is more or less prejudicial to the
Horse, according to the quantity there is of it, and the greater distance there
is between the Sinew and the bone, the broader will the Leg be, which is what
is looked for, because those Legs which are broadest and flattest, are
according to the opinion of the most skilful always the best; now to have a
broad and flat Leg, is to have the Back-sinew well separate, and at a pretty
good distance from the shank bone.

There are some Horses, which although they have the Back-sinews of their
Forelegs some what separate from the Bones, yet their Sinews are so small and
so little detatched, that with a very ordinary labor or fatigue, the Legs
become round, so that how little humor soever falls down upon them, yet if it
there settle and grow hard, the Legs immediately become round with it, which is
not so when the Sinews are very well separate from the Bones; for as there is a
considerable distance between them, so the humor is with the more ease
dissipat and disolved, the reason of this is too evident to need a further
explication, I shall therefore only say, that those Legswhose back Sinews are
only a very little separate from the bones although they be really detatched,
are called Veal or Ox Legs, because their back Sinews are always too small in
proportion to the bigness of the rest of the Leg, or Shank-bone; all this I
have immediately discoursed of deserves a serious Reflection.

You are next to observe, if the back Sinew does not quite fail as it were,
just beneath the ply or bending of the knee, which is known, in so far as the
great back Sinew which makes the whole motion of the leg, diminishes
considerably of its bigness just beneath the bending of the knee, for in the
most part of legs, although the back Sinew be large and otherwise firm, to wit
all along the back side of the fore thigh and shank bone, yet it always
falls a little smaller beneath the ply or bending of the knee, but in some
that smalness is too considerable; indeed the back Sinews should not be so big
near to the bending of the knee, as it is in the middle of the the shank, but
in some Horses it diminishes so extraordinarly, that in that place it is no
biger then ones Thumb, or otherwise it is so fixed to the bone, that it does
but very little appear; this is an imperfection to which few people take
Notice, and which also considerably impaireth the strength of the leg, and
those Horses which have their Back-sinews so very small near to the plye or
bending of their knee, are for the most part very Subject to stumble, or at
least to trip and strick with their Toes against the stones.

Upon the sides of the pastern joints both within and without, their comes a
soft swelling about half the bigness of a pigeons egg, less or more, and when a
Man touches it he will perceive that it is full of water; this kind of
swelling is called a windgall in French Vne molette; and is commonly lodged
between the Sinew and bone of the pastern-joynt.

Those wind-galls are easily perceived by the Eye without feeling them, they
are a token that the Horse has Labored and fatigued much, but are not very
prejudicial unless they be hard and painful, however it is enough that they
show us that the legs have been too much used, and that their strength is
diminished, because that concurse of waters which form the wind-gall, discovers
that there is a weakness in that part; if the wind galls be hardened they will
in a short time lame the Horse; there comes frequently wind-galls to Horses
upon a journey, which go away again with a little rest, these are but small
wind-galls; but whatever way they come they are no ways agreeable to the Eye,
and people say of such Horses that they are Wind-gali'd; they discover that the
legs are used, but all legs which are fatigued and used, are not wnd-gall'd,
they are therefore the small and long joynted legs which are more Subject to
them than any other; many people who pretend to Skill in Horses call wind galls
Waters, because they are a kind of water, shut up as it were in a bladder
between the Skin and flesh, but very impropperly, for the Waters in a Horses
legs, in French Les Eaux, is another kind of imperfection, of which I shall
discover hereafter.

Some people know only to take away wind-galls for a certain time, to the end
they may not hinder the Seal of their Horses, because a Man must be almost a
perfect ignorant not to discover them, and when ever a Man perceives them he
concludes that the Horses legs are used, and he is much in the right on it;
Therefore those whose Trade it is to sell Horses, make it their busieness to
dry them up only for a time; you most endeavor to find it out by the hair,
which is more smooth and slicked in that part than any other, and also by the
leg which otherwise you will find to be used and spoylt, although the
wind-galls themselves do not at all appear; there cannot be a better
observation than this, yet I have seen wind-galls so restricted and compressed,
for a certain time only, that the most nicely Skillful could scarcely discover
them.

Let is now make a short recapitulation, of what we have been saying concerning
the Back-sinews of the forelegs; they should then be big and large without
swelling, firm without being stiff, and very will detatched and separate from
the bone; those Horses whose Back-sinews are very small, are soon spoylt, and
with the least fatigue there legs appear used and round; a leg can never appear
broad and flat with a small Back-sinew; a Sinew which is right, is without
hardness or swelling, and when you press it with your hand, the Horse should
not feel the least pain.

I have seen your light kind of Horses have a sort of wind-galls, which made
them halt when they traveled among Snow, and in the time of great Frosts;
another kind of Wind-galls again which swelled and covered so the Back-sinews,
that their could never any remedy be got for them but fireing; Therefore Horses
which are troubled with Wind-galls are not much to be trusted to, because of
the many Accidents which befall them; now it is of the forelegs which are
Wind-galled that I am discoursing, for it is not so very ordinary for a Horse
to halt with them in his hind.

Turning your hand, you shall feel all a long the forepart the shank-bone,
from the knee, downward, to find if there be any Splints, Osselets or little
bones, Fuzies, or pegg'd Splints.

It is fit that I explain these four imperfections; and first a simple splint,
in french Sur-os, which is the most common, is a callous excrescence or kind of
Grisle adhering to the shank-bone, and comes commonly upon the inside of it;
but if there be one also on the outside of the shank bone opposite to that upon
the inside, then it is called a pegg'd or pinned splint, in french Sur-os
Chevillez, because the one being over against the other, they pierce as it
were, the shank-bone like to a pegg or pin, and are abundantly dangerous.

Those simple splints, which are only fastened to the bone at a pretty distance
from the knee, and without touching the Back-sinew, are not very dangerous, but
those that are so placed that they touch the Back-sinew, make the Horse in a
short time to halt; nevertheless any simple splints, will with long and violent
exercise mount to the very knee, and when they come that length, then they are
to be Suspected.

Some people maintain that a Splint does not mount upwards, but that it only
lengthens and extends it self to the very knee, so that it thereby interrupts
the motion of the Leg; but what way soever it comes thither, it is certain
that a splint joining to the knee, lameth always the horse.

Every Horse which has a splint, should be less valued than if he wanted it,
and so proportionably if he have two; for it is an imperfection to have them,
let people say what they will, or if they please make no account of them at
all; indeed in Coachhorses the imperfection is not so considerable, as in these
only designed for the Sadle.

Horses have in the same place where the Splints come, that which we call
Fuzies, in french Fusees, which are nothing else but two splints joined by the
ends the one above the other; these Fuzies are a great dale more dangerous than
a simple splint, and therefore I would never buy a horse which had them.

There are some Horses which have little bones or hard excrescences in the
Knees, called in French Des osselets, which is an imperfection not very common,
and is so much the more difficult to be discovered, because they appear to be
of the very same substance with the rest of the knee; that you may the better
come to understand them, you must know that an Osselet, is as it were a very
big or large splint just upon the Knee, and without having a little experience,
a man will be apt to take it for the substance it is self of the Knee-bone,
which descends lower upon one side of it than upon the other, about the breadth
of two fingers or thereby; you are therefore when you perceive this deformity
which Choques the sight, to conclude that is that excrescence upon the Knee
called an Osselet; for without it, it was never yet known that the substance of
the Knee, did descend more upon the one side of the Shank-bone, than upon the
other; these Osselets grow always upon the inside of the knee but never upon
the out, and there are some Horses which have two of them one upon each
Fore-leg: if the Seller of such a Horse would rebait to me the half of his just
value, I would not buy him with this fault; I once saw a Horse which had those
Osselets or Excrescences, and yet did not halt with them, but was good,
Vigorous, and very Serviceable, the hazard is however too great to be ventured
upon.

I have in the Treatise of Diseases, part second, Chap: 37, explained the
Origin, matter, and humor, from whence all splints do proceed, to which you
may have recourse, if you desire to be more fully instructed in this point.

Now here is the Method whereby you may come to know a Splint, and how many
kinds there are of them; the first is the simple Splint only adhering to the
Bone of the Leg, which does not at all touch the Back-sinew, and is also at a
pretty distance from the knee; the second is the pegg'd Splint, which is when
there are two Splints, the one upon the out, and the other upon the inside of
the Leg, just opposite to one another, as if they were pinned together through
the Leg, from which they have their denomination of Pegg'd; the third is the
splint which ascends to the very knee, and almost always makes a Horse to
halt; the fourth is the Fuzie, which is two splints joined at the ends, and one
above the other; and the last is the little bony Excrescence, or Osselet, which
is upon the Knee, and may be taken for the very substance of the Knee it is
self, if a man have not all the greater experience; now excepting the simple
splint, a horse which has any of the rest is worth little or nothing, seeing
they diminish the greatest part if not the whole value of the horse: but me
thinks I hear some Misanthrop, Grumble at the many Repetitions made in this
Discourse of Splints, and other imperfections incident to Horses; if this
trouble and vex him, I out of true friendship advise him to read no more of
this book, because he will meet with many such Repetitions, neither is this the
only fault in it, and that which is worst of all for him, is that in all
appearance I shall not help it, because still as a Man grows old he delights
the more in Recitals.

There comes in the bending of the Knee, a Crevice or Chop, which is called
the Mallender, it oft-times makes the leg benumbed and stiff at the first
coming out of the Stable, yea it is also sometimes so painful that it makes
the Horse halt, and i^ old Horses it keeps always their Legs stiff; the
Horse Coursers think they give a Horse a great commendation, when they say he
has the Mallenders, they have indeed reason for what they say upon one
account, because the sharp and bad humor which occasions them, is expelled
through that channel or conduit which would prove very prejudicial to the
Horse, did it take it is course along the Nerves or back Sinews; but otherwise
they are Ridiculous, in so far as it were much better that the Horse had not
that humor which occasioned the Mallender, and so he would be free of them;
every Horse of value which has a Mallender should be the less esteemed for it,
and as he becomes old has his Legs much more pained with it, and always halts
at his first coming out of the stable.

Although I have already spoke of the pastern joints in discoursing of arched
Legs, yet I think it will be fit to say one word more of them in this place;
The pastern joints then are very considerable parts of the Legs by which a man
may know if they be spoilt, for besides the Windgalls which come upon the sides
of them and are very conspicuous, a man should also observe if they be no ways
swelled, because if they appear bigger then usual, it is a certain sign that
the Legs are used and spoilt.

The pastern joint is also sometimes Crowned as we say, that is, that without
any ways being galled or hurt, there is a swelling goes round it beneath the
Skin in form of a Circle, and about half the breadth of ones finger; that
humor has gathered there through Travel, and has congealed in that part of
the pastern joint in form of a Circle or Ring, and beneath the Skin, which is
a sign that the Horses Legs are used.

There comes upon the side of the pastern joint, either upon the in or
outside, and sometimes also before, a swelling about the bigness of half a
Walnut, which is soft and yields to ones finger when pressed, neither does
it make the Horse halt; It is not called a Wind-gall, neither is it one, for it
is not lodged as they are, commonly between the Nerve and Bone, but only
beneath the skin; neither is it also filled with water as a Wind-gall, but full
of a viscuous matter; you are not therefore to mistake and confound the one
with the other, but you are to know that this is a sign that the Leg is used,
and that a part of that humor which occasioned the ruin of the leg, has
gathered together upon the pastern joint and formed that swelling; if you find
a Horse which has this swelling, do not buy him in hopes to discuss it, for
you will find I assure you a great difficulty to do it without fireing, which
will also mark and Scarrify the pastern joint; I have in the second part of
this Book, given resolving remedies for discussing this kind of swelling, but I
do not positively promise that they will absolutely dissipate it; now it is not
that this kind of swelling does very much prejudice, for I have known Horses
which have had it and yet have served two or three years, without being much
incommoded by it, or it is ever becoming bigger, but it is prejudicial to the
sale, and as every thing alarms half skilled persons, therefore they Suspect
it, although in it is self it be really nothing else, but a sign that the Leg is
used.

I shall likewayes add here, that you would also take care not to buy such
Horses as have very small pastern-joynts, for they are not capable to fatigue
much, because the pastern-joynts being weak, the Horse does immediately become
wearied, by reason of the little strength he has in that part.

Below the pastern joint and in the very pastern, you must feel if there be not
that which is called in French a Form, which is a swelling situate in the
substance of the pastern, and not upon the skin, therefore you must not be
deceived by it, because you will sometimes find swellings and hardnesses, which
are only fixed upon the skin, and are not at all what we call Forms, but are
either a button of the farcy, or some other kind of swelling not very material,
being not at all fixed to the substance of the pastern.

Now the Form is quite another thing, for it is a considerable imperfection,
which lameth the Horse unless it be taken care of in time, and besides that it
makes a Horse to halt, I think it is also so very dangerous an imperfection,
that it should make the Horse be rejected for good and all, how beautiful and
apparently good he may otherwise seem to be; the Forms come as well in the
Hind-legs as in the sore, and althouh it be an imperfection which is not very
common, yet it is of consequence, and there is no other remedy for it but
fireing, and taking out the Horses sole, and the Fire is also with very great
difficulty and danger applied to that place where it comes; to be perfectly
instructed how to know a Form, turn forewards to the 46 Chap. of the second
part, where the method of curing them is discoursed of.

There are also some other Marks, by which a man may know when a Horses Legs
are spoilt; first you must observe, if when standing still he cannot rest
equally upon his Legs, but sometimes advances the one and sometimes the other,
to give himself ease, also being in the Stable he will sometimes only advance
one Leg, and continue it so for a pretty time, which they call in French,
montrer le chemin de St Jacques.

It is not but that there are some Horses, which although they have very good
Legs, yet shift from one to the other; but if it be only occasioned by fretting
or restlesness, and not to give themselves ease by it, as those do which have
their Legs used, a man can conclude nothing from that posture; for there are
Horses as there are Men, which can never plant themselves right upon their
Legs, although they be neither weary nor spoilt; these kind of Horses point out
always the chemin de St jacques, or advance still one of their Legs when in
the Stable: You are therefore besides this observation, to take notice to those
I have before discovered to you, and not to rely upon this single one, whereby
to judge if a Horses Legs be oppressed and used; I have seen several Horses
plant themselves very badly upon their Legs when ever they were kept still,
that is, which gave themselves ease by advancing one of their forelegs more
than the other, and had nevertheless their Legs true and good, and never made a
false step, which is worthy of consideration; therefore when you see a Horse
perform this action, you must carefully observe every thing else about his
Legs, to know perfectly if they are oppressed, used, or spoilt, which are all
much about one.

Other Horses again rest themselves upon three Legs, without having any of them
in the least spoilt, and it is but to give ease to one of their hind Legs, by
leting only the Toe of that hind Leg touch the ground, which is nothing but a
sign of weariness; but if he should advance one of his Forelegs and only point
it to the ground, it would be a very bad sign, because it will signify that he
is pained in that Leg; but making the other posture upon three Legs, it is only
a token that the Horse is perhaps wearied, without being of any bad consequence
for his hind quarter.

CHAP XI. How to know when a Horse is right planted upon his Limbs, and if he
walks or treads well.
HAving considered all the above mentioned particulars, CHAP II. How to know,
if a Horse be right planted upon his legs and walks well.
which are most requisite to be with all care and diligence taken notice to,
you must next understand the Walk or Gate of a Horse, which is to be looked upon
as one of these things which is of greatest importance, and use in any Horse;
for people buy Horses only to Ride or Travel upon, that is the end for which
they will have them, any other design being only so many means, the better to
arrive at and obtain that end; but before you cause walk any Horse, you must
observe, if when he is standing still, he be right planted upon his Limbs,
because upon the right or wrong Camping of a Horse when he is standing still,
does depend notwholly, but in a great part his good or bad going and carriage:
Now the natural situation of the Legs should be larger or wider above than
below, that is to say, the distance which is betwixt the one foot and the
other, should be less than that between the one of the fore thighs and the
other, upon the inside, and at that part of them which is next to the
shoulders; the knees should not incline too much to other, or be too close one
upon the other, but the whole Leg should descend in a straight line to the very
Pastern joint; the feet being placed upon the ground, should be turned neither
out nor in, but the Toe pointing directly forewards; being situate or camped
after this manner, he will be very well plauted on his Legs, and all this may
be observed when he is at rest and standing in the Stable.

As for the Hind-hand, his jarrets or hams should not be too closs together,
and if they are, then he will be crooked or bowed, called in French, un Cheval
crochu, but according to the term the Horse Coursers give it, they say that
such a Horse is only a little too much closed behind; the hind-leg, or rather
that part called the instep, which is betwixt the Hock and Pastern joint,
should stand perpendicular to the ground; if it stand foreward or as it were
under his Belly, the situation of it is bad, but if it stand stopping a little
backwards from the perpendicular line, (and be so situate as when a Horse is
going to stale or piss,) it is no bad stance, but then commonly such Horses
have too long Haunches, which is a deffect for the manage, because it is with a
great dale of difficulty that they can assemble themselves and go upon their
Haunches, but they have for the most part always a good walk or Raik, although
the fore parts be the sooner spoilt and ruined by it; upon the contrary again,
those Horses whose Haunches, Hams, and In steps are altogether straight, that
is, whose hind legs toward the feet fall not far enough back when standing
still, I say such Horses can but with difficulty raik or walk well; moreover if
the hind Pastern joint be so placed either to one side or forewards, as if it
were dislocate, such situations are naught; he should likewise plant his hind
feet fla upon the ground, and not rest only upon his Toes, as those Horses
which are called in French Chevaux Ramptins; you must also observe if he turn
the toes of his hind fee^ much outward, which is a very considerable
imperfection, in respect that in great descents such Horses have almost no
strength in their Haunches, and if they be designed for the Coach, it will not
be possible for them to keep her back when upon any considerable descent; but
that you may be the more sure of this, cause the Horse which situates himself
after that manner, to go or be put back with ones hand, and if in going back he
keep the to^^ of his hind feet turned outward, then is it with difficulty that
he goes back, which is a sign that he will be for no great service, and the
more that he turns out his hind to^^ the more reason will you have to
conclude that he is a bad Horse, whatever other qualifications he may have.

This much of the situation in which a Horse should most commonly place himself
when standing still; let us now prosecute the rest, and observe his step or
walk; you must then cause step him forewards to know if he be not lame, for if
he be, it will be to no purpose to examine him further, few People buying
Horses which are nottarly known to be lame.

You must cause ride the Horse at a foot pace, that you may have the more time
not only to consider if he walk well, but also if his Legs perform the actions
which they ought; now for a Horse to walk well, his steps should be quick, that
is, he should not make in his walk slow and debile motions with his Legs, but
should move them quickly, and make two times with them in the space that many
Horses mark but one; thus he will walk more commodiously, fatigue himself less,
and his rider will be more eased and comforted by it: After having made this
general view, you are to observe that for a Horse to go well, he should have
the Raising or lifting up of his Leg, the Stay or keeping of it up, and the
Tread or setting of it down, all good; these are called in French, Le Lever ou
hausser, le Soutieu, et L'appuy; now because this is a kind of Language not
understood by every Person, I shall explain each term by it self as follows.

The Lever, raising, or lifting up of a Horses Legs when he is walking, will be
good, if he perform it hardily and with ease, not crossing his Legs the one
over the other, nor carrying his feet either too much out or in, and that he
also bend his knees as much as is needful; this is for the Lever or raising of
his Legs.

The Soutien, stay, or keeping of them up, is good, when after that his legs
are raised, he keeps them up so long as he ought, the rest of his body and
head remaining in a good posture; a man may know when a Horse has not the
stay, or keeping up of his leg good, when he perceives him set it down suddenly
to give ease to his other leg, in which he is perhaps either pained or has a
weakness; some Horses also appear as if their noses were always a going to the
ground, and of these it may be very justly said, that the stay or keeping up of
their Legs in the Air is naught, and that their legs are weak and pained; this
much of the Soutien, or stay of a Horses Legs in the Air, which is the Second
thing to be considered in a Horses going.

In the third and last place you are to consider the Appuy, or setting down of
the Legs or rather feet, upon the ground, commonly called the Tread, which to
be good should be firm, vigorous, and straight, and without resting upon one
side of the foot more than upon the other, or setting down the toe or heel the
one before the other, but that both be done at one and the same time, and when
the foot is placed upon the ground, that it be turned neither out nor in, but
perfectly straight; that the Pastern also be neither too much plied, nor too
stiff or straight, for besides that the first is a sign of weakness in that
part, the Horse also because of it becomes sooner wearied, and will be very
subject to have Wind-galls; again, if his Pastern be too stiff and straight
set, he will become soon Boulete (as the French call it) which is to have his
Pastern joints bending forwards as if they were dislocate; now if a Horse have
his tread as I have been descriving, he will have it according to the rules of
Horsemanship.

If a Horse perform these three Actions, his head continuing firm and elevate,
then is it a sign that his Legs are good, and that he walks well.

This discourse of the Lever, the Soutien and the Appuy, or raising, keeping
up, and setting down or tread of the foot, is a kind of Cant or Jargon not very
common, for I my self am the inventer and contriver of this kind of Language,
which expresses well enough the different times or actions, which should be
observed in a Horses walk; till now People only said, that a Horse walked right
and sound; but it is in my opinion much better explained, by the Raising,
Keeping up, and Setting down of the leg, and I am persuaded that such Persons
who intend to become Skillful, should make a particular distinction of these
three Actions, because upon the exact observation of them, does the true
knowledge of a Horses good or bad walk, and even of his vigor and strength
depend: Now in these three Actions, you are to observe if a Horse in raising,
and setting down again his Forelegs, cross the one over the other, which is
very dangerous, not only for knocking the one Leg against the other, and
cutting, but likewise for stumbling and even falling in his Gallop or Course;
also if the Horse set his heels to the ground a little before his Toes, then is
it a sign that he is foundered in the feet, but if he shall set his Toes first
to the ground, then will it be a token that he has been a draught Horse;
therefore that the setting down of the Leg or Tread may be good, the whole foot
should be set down equally, and at one and the same very instant of time.

There are some Horses, which although they have the raising, keeping up, and
Tread of the Foot very good, yet they have a bad walk; therefore it is not
altogether enough to consider in a walk these three Actions of the Leg above
specified, but you must also observe if the Horse walk Lightly, Surely,
Quickly, and Easily; here are four Adverbs, which express all that the most
Nice and Curious can wish for in a Horses walk, and I am going to explain them,
for the behoof of such as desire to be instructed, because those who are
abundantly knowing already, have no need of it.

To walk quickly, is to advance considerably upon the step; now every one is a
competent judge to know and determine whether a Horse steps quickly, or
advances but little and slowly upon his Walk, and therefore I shall at this
time say no more of it.

For a Horse to walk very lightly, he should be light on the hand, that is, he
should not press or rest too much upon the bit, but be always Champing upon
it, keep his head high, and move quickly his shoulders; a Horse which walks
thus cannot be said to be too much upon his shoulders, because it is impossible
but he must be upon his haunches if he walk as I have told you, and besides all
this, if a Horse be not nimble and glib in the shoulders, but stiff, and want
as it were the use of his Limbs, he shall never walk lightly nor easily, but be
heavy and unweildy, and although some vigorous and mettl'd Horses, which have
stiff and unmoving shoulders, lift their Legs commonly high enough, and also
ply and bend them very well, yet it is not such Horses which walk best, because
they do not continue at it; neither do they walk nimbly nor easily, because
they have all an uneasy and hard set in their walk, which proceeds from the
force and violence with which they raise and lift up their Legs, and they
likewise become very soon wearied, by reason of what I told you, when I
discoursed of stiff and unmoving shoulders; and also very much fatigue the
Rider.

In these four conditions or qualities which I wish for in a Horse, that so he
may go well; which are to walk lightly, surely, quickly, and easily, there is a
necessity that the motion of the step be nimble and quick, that so the Horse
may walk lightly and easily, for he shall never walk lightly and easily, if his
step be slow, long, and too stretched, therefore a Horse should remove his Legs
often, without making a clattering motion with his feet, or beating the dust as
we say, for to step short and swift, is very far different from trampling, or
making a clattering motion with the feet.

When I discoursed of the Raising and keeping up of the Leg, I forgot to tell
you that those Horses which raise their Legs highest, and also stay them
longest in the Air, are not the most propper for the Walk, nor those which go
best, for upon the contrary they ordinarily walk very badly, slowly, and
uneasily; such Horses are called vain and proud Horses, in Spain Pissadors,
which is indeed a very becoming action in a Horse under a King. Prince, or
General of an Army, who show themselves to the People or to their Soldiers,
upon a review, or day of Parade; for it would seem that the Horse, by that
keeping up or long stay of his Leg in the Air, is high spirited, and vain of
the honor he has to carry his Master, and that he on purpose retards his
Walk, that he may give the longer time to the spectators to view and consider
his Rider; such kind of Horse make also a very good figure in a manage, for
they are brisk and lively, their Gallo^ and other Aires are graceful, and they
are admirable for a public Entry or Carrouse but for the use of a private
Person, who requires nothing else of his Horse but to go^ well at a foot pace,
they are not at all propper; a Horse also which raises his Leg (...) very
high, sets down his foot again with so much the more violence upon a hard (...)
paved way, and so benummes and surbaits sooner his feet, and also ruins and
spoils the back sinews of his Legs, by which he is rendered very soon
unservicable; such Horses a^ likewayes subject to another inconveniency, which
is, that keeping their feet so long^^ the Air, with shoes upon them which are
of a pretty good weight, the back sinew (...) sensible of it, and the Leg
thereby becomes sooner oppressed.

A Horse will walk easily if he be united, that is, if his fore-hand and hind,
a^ as they were both one when he walks, and if they both make as it were but
(...) motion, if I may so speak; There are some Horses whose fore-quarters go
right, b^ their Croupe when walking swingeth from side to side, which is called
a Rockin^ Croupe; Now this impefection is very easily discovered when a Horse
is Trottin^ for the Trot of such Horses, is as it were at two motions, because
of the Rocking (...) their Croupe as I have explained to you, and it is a token
that the Horse is of no great strength, for at each step, one of the haunch
bones falls and the other rises, like (...) the beam of a Balance; such
Horses are commonly not very vigorous.

Likewise to go easily, a Horse should not cause the Rider make any false
moti^^ upon his back, people perceive when he does it not, when they see him go
along smoothly without any ways troubling the Rider, or making him shift his
seat a^ though he be no very good Horseman, and that he but make very little
use of h^^ Thighs to keep him steady in the Sadle.

It remains to know how a Horse should go to walk Surely, he must then lift h^^
Legs indifferently high; if he did not bend them enough, he would be cold in
(...) Walk, which would cause him to strike upon the stones and clods; this
cold way of wal^ ing or Riding, is for the most part a token that the Horse
has his legs spoilt, although^ there are also Colts which have a cold walk
before ever they be wrought; the Barbs a^ very subject to this, and it is one
of the greatest imperfections which a Horse of Man nage can have, for with it
he has no life or Air, it is likewise one of the most discouraging
undertakings that a Horseman can engage in, to endeavor to dress such Horses
as have neither movement nor Life; if a man be not skilful enough to form a^
Air to such a Horse, I assure you he will soon run himself a ground: Let us now
return to our subject, and say that there is no security in those cold kind of
Walks for Journey Horses; moreover to walk surely, a Horse should have his
Tread good and firm, and (...) he will not be subject to stumble, but ride
securely.

To have these four Qualities, of going, quickly, surely, easily and lightly, a
Horse must be some what long, for those which are too short, although they have
a better force and be good for other things, yet they have the motion of their
lower parts too hard and set, because the movements are almost just below the
Sadle, and being so very near to the Horseman, do therefore incommode him,
which is contrary in long Horses, which give convenience and room for the
Horseman so to place himself, as to be too near neither of the Quarters, that
is neither upon the fore-quarter nor hind, and so being betwixt the two, and at
a good enough distance from either, he will beless sensible of their motions.

Morover, a long Horse advances more in his gallop with one stroke, than a
short does with two, and also cuts the double of the way without augmenting his
Labor, seeing they make both their motions at the same time; nevertheless long
Horses have for the most part less strength, and become sooner low and out of
case than short: In fine, as they are more commodious and easy than the short,
so one may say that they are the most proper Horses for great people and
Princes.

The opinion of most part of people is to be admired, in that they will pretend
to know if a Horse goes well, by observing if when walking he overpasses the
Tread of his fore-foot very much with his hind, which is a most ridiculous
mistake, and should be joined with that of passing the hand before a Horses
Eyes, to know if he have a good sight.

Most part of Horses which thus overpass with their hind-foot the Tread of
their fore, if they do it considerably, swing their Groupe from one side to
the other, and Rock, which is contrary to those conditions we required in a good
Walk; Besides such Horses commonly Forge, that is, that with the shoes of their
hind feet they overtake those of their fore, and so pull them off upon the
road, neither have they any Reins or Mettle; this is the signification of
forgeing, and the qualities of such Horses as are guilty of it, so you see it
is but a bad enough mark, whereby to know if a Horse walks well.

I don't deny but a Horse which thus overpasses with his hind foot the tread of
his fore, may walk swiftly, but such a Horse will have rarely good Reins,
neither can he go easily, because he has not a quick, but long and stretched
step all upon his shoulders, which will make him so much the more subject to
stumbling, because he is not supported by his Reins.

This observation which is made of a Horses overpassing much with his hind foot
the tread of his fore, is so much a better remark to know if he ambles well, as
it is bad for knowing if he walk well; for it is certain that a Horse can never
amble upon his haunches nor go well, if he do not with his hind feet overpass
the treads of his fore, at least a foot, or a foot and a half, and the more he
overpasses the better will he amble, which is quite contrary to the walk, and
so is also the way of removing his legs in these two Actions quite different;
for in the amble he lifts both the legs of one side, and has them both in the
Air at one and the same time, but in the step or walk he lifts them Cross;
for example, in a walk he lifts the near fore-leg and far hind-leg together,
and has them in the Air at the same time, and when he sets them down, he lifts
the other two which were cross upon the ground, to wit his far fore-leg and
near hind-leg, and so alternatively each remove; this is the true motion of a
Horses Legs upon a walk, which is the same with that of the Trot, although the
paces are different: Our author is here us a little mistake anent the motion of
a Horses Legs in the Walk, to convince you of which, I referr you to the
Supplement of Horsemanship, Chap: 21.

A Horse in walking should not carry his Hams outward every step that he
makes, for it is a sign of weakness, and to which Horses that amble are more
subject than those that only walk, but is not a less imperfection in the one
than in the other; any Horse which is designed for galloping or the manage, if
he have this Imperfection of turning his Jarrets or Hams outward in running,
shall never succeed at it, for he cannot endure to be put upon his Haunches,
and if he be not upon his Haunches, he cannot choose but be very disagreeable.

Likewayes, a Horse should not in walking rub or strike his Hams one against
the other, as those which are bow-legged do, which is an action quite contrary
to the former; Bow-legged Horses are commonly reputed swift and good, but they
are not proper for Hilly Countries, and for the manage they are altogether
disagreeable.

These are all the conditions required in a Horse to walk well, which are not
the same with those of a Galloper, for in the walk a Horse should set down his
foot firmly without putting it down with force, which is quite contrary in a
Gallop, for in it he should scarcely touch the ground, that is, he should
Gallop so lightly as that it would seem he disdained to touch it, and without
doubt that is a token that he will Gallop long, because of his performing it
with such ease; such Horses as gallop heavily set their Feet very rudely to the
ground, so likewise do those which go upon their shoulders, but these which
Gallop upon their haunches does scarcely with their fore feet touch the ground;
but it is not the same with Horses which walk, for these which have the best
and most nervous Legs, are them which set their feet most firmly to the ground,
and with a kind of noise; however they must not put their feet so heavily and
Rudely to the ground as if they were designed for a Coach, which is a thing as
easy to be understood as it is difficult to be expressed: This is enough of
the Gate or Walk, we must now proceed to the other imperfections, which we
shall do in the following Chapter, where I shall endeavor to make you know if
a Horse have good feet; for if he have not that part good, he will be soon
spoilt, and his service of no long continuance.

There are some Horses which although they have too long Haunches, yet commonly
walk well, but their fore-quarters are quickly ruined, because the hind presses
upon it with so much violence, that the fore part cannot resist it, such Horses
are admirable for Hilly Countries, for they Climb like Oxen, but to balance
that, they are no wise sure upon a descent, for they cannot ply their hams; and
a certain sign of it is, that when they Gallop they can never perform it
slowly, but almost always at full speed, because they cannot so ply their
Haunches beneath them, as to put them in a capacity to Gallop slowly: The
Manage is the greatest stumbling block such horses have, for whatever good
Reins they have, People have great difficulty to put them well upon their
Haunches, and if ane Esquire be not all the more skillful I would not advise
him to undertake it; if he succeed it will be by chance, and perhaps once in
his life time, and will take two years to cause him perform that, which another
Horse will do in three Months.

You shall know when the haunches are too long, in that when the horse is
standing in the stable, he Camps with his hind Feet farther back than he ought,
and that the top or onset of his Tail does not answer in a perpendicular Line
with the tips of his hocks, as it does always in horses which have their
haunches of a just length.

CHAP XII. A further continuation, of the knowledge of the faults and
imperfections in Horses, and what is to be observed when a buying them.
IN this Chapter, CHAP XII. A further Continuation, of the knowledge of the
faults and imperfections in Horses.
I shall teach you to know the feet and what belongs to them, afterward the
good or bad Flank, and all which belongs to that knowledge; in the preceding
Chapters we have regularly considered some imperfections; my design in this
place is not to discourse of the Gallop, Amble, a good or bad mouth, and of the
means to know every thing else, which a man should consider in the going of a
horse, as swiftness, and other good Qualities; that which oblidges me to take
this method, is that I observe People always consider the faults and
Imperfections we are going to discourse of, before ever they cause either Run
or Gallop a horse; for it would be but lost labor to advance so far, if a man
perceived other faults which would hinder his buying him; and providing that I
make the Reader understand them all, it is no great matter in what part of the
Book I do it.

There are four Marks which all Horses have, and which few Authors make mention
of, they are situate in the fore legs above the knees, and upon the insides,
and almost upon the back parts of the Hind-legs a little below the Hams; the
part is without hair and resembles a little piece of hard and dry horn, it is
termed the Swimer, the Greeks call this part Licheues, and the French call it
the Chestnut, because of the resemblance it has to One; the smaller this part
is the mark is the better, because it is a Token that the leg is dry and
Nervous; in some Horses this part as they grow old becomes hard as their
Soles; people shave such from time to time, because if they pull them away, the
Blood will follow, and there would remain a wound; These Swimers proceed from
Humidity, and there are some Horses which have them so very small, that they
can Scarcely be discerned, and they are the better for it.

This part is of small consequence, but a Man should know every thing, because
Nature has made nothing in Vain; Horses have upon the back parts of their fore
and hind pastern joints, a kind of Round stub which resembles a piece of Lender
Horn, and about the bigness of a nut, they are always covered with the little
Tufts of hair, that are upon the back parts of the pastern-joynts called the
Petlocks; these stubs, or round little knobs, are of the same Nature which
those Swimers or Chestnuts I was discoursing of, but the Swimers are commonly
more dry, and so consequently harder.

Horses are Subject to the Peigues, or Crown Scab, which is a kinds of Itching
scurf that comes upon the Coronet of the hoof, and keers the Hair upon that
part which is already Swelled, always bristly and stareing; there are two
kinds of them, one is humid, and sends forth serosities through the pores,
which some times increase so abundantly, that they mount up to the very
pastern-joynt, causing a part of the hair to fall away where they come
especially if the humor be very sharp; but if the Horse Labor in dry grounds,
than they dry up some times in the Summer time, so that scarcely any of the
most humor can be perceived, but if the hair be fallen of, then the part will
remain bald and ugly; this last kind of Crown-Scab which causes the hair fall,
is only seen in old Coach-horses, but rarely in Young.

The other kind is dry, and never expels any moisture but only sends forth
this kind of itchy scurf, which makes the hair to stare and keeps the
Coronet Swelled; I would not take a Horse which had either of these
imperfections, although they do not much hinder him to labor, unless the
person who ought him diminished considerably his price, and if he be a Horse of
value, he must be absolutely rejected having them; people know this infirmity
chiefly by the Coronets being Swelled, and full of that humor which occasions
the Crown-Scab; the Swelling is easily perceived by the Coronets being bigger
and more Elevate than the rest of the hoof; a Coach horse with Crown-Scabs is
worth nothing in a City.

This infirmity is as troublesome as any a Horse can have, for first they
rarely recover of them, and besides many persons absolutely reject them, so
that you your self are the last Master of the Horse; when the Horse-Coursers
have any such, they will tell you that their Horses have been Laboring in
strong and clay ground, which has occasioned the hair upon their Coronets to
bristle; I am of the opinion that a man should not give above eight pieces for
such horses.

You are next to consider, if the horse you intend to buy have no Form, which
is a kind of Swelling upon the pasterns, this imperfection is not very common,
and people rarely see it in Journey horses, but only in those which are
appointed for the Coach and manage; as it is of great consequence a Man should
know it exactly; I have already discoursed of it a little, and believe what I
am to repeat will not be altogether unnecessar, seeing every horse which has
Forms, may be looked upon to run a very great hazard of becoming lame.

A Form is a Swelling, which comes as well in the pasterns of the hind as
fore legs, above the Quarters of the foot both within and without, hard as the
rest of the substance of the pastern, and even like a Grissle, and it is not
only upon the skin, but fixed to the Substance of the pastern; it makes a horse
to halt, and at last to become altogether Lame; in the beginning it does not
exceed half the bigness of a pigeons egg, but labor and exercise makes it to
become through time, about half the bigness of a hens egg, and the nearer it is
situate to the Coronet upon the Quarters, so much the more dangerous is it.

CHAP. XIII. How to know a Horses Feet.
THe Feet are to be considered as one of the essential parts of a Horse, CHAP
XIII How to know if a Horses feet are good.
without which he is useless and for no kind of service, and although a Man may
have Horses with very good Feet, yet he is often times necessitat to let them
rest, that so they may grow and be in a condition to receive a shoe, if they
have either Rid bare footed, and thereby used and worn their hoof, or that it
be naturally brittle; it is a part of the Body which suffers most, and a Horse
which has them not good for what can he be proper, especially in hilly
Countries or unequal and stony Highways? he is fit for nothing but the Plow,
or for such Countries which are free of stones, where he may work now and then,
and but indifferently neither, or to be confined to a common Riding school
where the ground is extremely soft; it is always at an easy rate, that people
buy such Horses as have tender and bad Feet, and notwithstanding of it they
make often times^ bad enough bargain, although to tell the Truth, there is to be
seen odd enough Variety in the matter of Feet, for some will appear to be
weak, when they are really good, and and the little horn that they have is
tough, solid, and capable to serve, others again appear good, which are pained
for being too fat and full of Flesh; the surest way then is to take them of a
good shape, and where there is nothing to be complained of, and with the right
method of shoeing, people recover those that are bad, and the good they
maintain in a condition.

A Man must be a good knower of Horses, to judge exactly of certain kinds of
feet especially those of Dutch Horses, which come from Holland about the age of
four or five years, for with difficulty can it be known if those feet, which to
many people appear good will not become in a little time very bad, as it
frequently falls out, either through the defect of the foot, or fault of the
Smith who shoeth them, or sometimes both; therefore the surest way is to choose
them as I am going to show you.

Let us begin with the hoof, which should be of a form very near round, and not
longish especially toward the heel, for long feet are worth nothing; the horn
should be Tough and Solid, High, Smooth, and of a dark color, and if possible
without any Circles; a Man may know those that are brittle, when the Horse by
lossing often his Shoes h^^ spoilt his feet, by having many pieces broke from
the horn around his foot, and several wants in it near to the Shoe, so that it
does not follow the exact shape of it; brittle hoo^ split in the places where
the nails are rivetted, which sometimes takes away the very piece: a Man may
also know a bad hoof by lifting up the foot, and considering if it have a shoe
forged expressly for it, and that it be pierced extraordinarly, and the holes of
it placed in such parts where it is not very usual, that so they might shoe the
horse more conveniently, seeing he had not horn enough to take hold by, in
those parts where commonly the Nails are driven; so people are constrained
sometimes to pierce the shoes near to the Heels, although they are for the
fore-feet, it not being in their power to do otherwise; people commonly drive
no Nails near to the Heels of the fore-feet, and when they do, it is because
the Toe is so much split and broke, that they can place none in it.

Circles in Horses hoofs, make a man know that they are altered, and if they
quite soround the feet and be higher then the rest of the hoof, they make them
halt, for they look as if one had put expressly a Circle of horn in that place,
to keep the hoof together; when a Man sees that the foot is circled, although
the Circle does not make the Horse halt or mean his foot upon the Street, yet
it is a sign that the hoof is either altered or that the nature of the horn is
naught; therefore it must be considered very exactly and all the other
circumstances taken notice to, as first if the horn be thick, seeing those
horses which have a thin horn are such which are said to have fat feet, and
cannot be known but by seeing the foot pared, for in that case the horn will
not only be thin, but the Sole also, by having but a very little thickness;
such thin hoof'd Horses halt and mean their feet a long time after they are
shoed, before they recover strength in them, so that a man is necessitat to let
them rest some days after they are shoed, before he can make use of them.

To know exactly when feet are Fat, is one of the most difficult things in the
knowledge of Horses, and I am of opinion few people can judge certainly of
them, seeing their shape is as beautiful as that of any other foot, and the horn
makes the best appearance and show in the World, only that the hoof is
somewhat bigger than ordinary, and larger than the size of the Horse will allow
of.

You are moreover to consider, if the Horse have not a kind of clift in his
foot, called a False-quarter, which is occasioned by the Horses casting his
quarter and getting a new one, for then the Horn beginning to grow is uneven
and ugly, and bigger and softer than the rest of the hoof; if the clift be
considerable and take up a quarter of the foot, it should keep a man from
buying the Horse.

There are Horses which have over-reaches or calkin treads upon the coronet,
which become hollow and groov'd in curing, but then the hollow of the Tread
descends proportionably as the hoof grows, and is visible upon it; it does
little or no prejudice to the Horse, if there remain no swelling upon the
Coronet.

There are some Clifts very dangerous, for when Farriers have sometimes fired
the Coronet, and that they have burnt down a little upon the top of the horn,
there is occasioned a clift or groove along the hoof, which renders it ugly and
hard so long as his foot remains, and is considerably prejudicial to him,
because it commonly straitens and dries up the foot in that part; however it
is not at all dangerous to apply Rays of Fire upon the hoof, providing that
people do not burn the Coronet, yea it is so far from being dangerous, that it
is very profitable upon many occasions to perform it; for example, when a heel
or quarter is so straightened that it presses the little foot or coffin bone, a
man in that case may in stead of grooving the hoof with a drawing Iron, with
success apply the Rays of Fire after the manner I have taught you in the second
part, Chap. 50. and 59. Therefore when people see a foot thus fired they should
not be much startled at it, but only conclude that it has been straightened, and
that those Rays of fire have been applied to enlarge it.

You must now lift up the foot, the heel of which should be pretty high, broad,
large and open, that is, without being hoof-bound, which is to have it too
narrow and strait as I am going to show you; you shall also at the same time
consider if the Frog, or Frush be of a largness proportionable to the foot, for
if it be too little and dry it is a fault, and it is also one if it be too
large and fat; Those which are little and too much dried up, fall to the share
of hoof-bound or narrow heel'd Horses, because the heels becoming strait hinder
the frush to be nourished as it ought, and so it remains small and starved;
when the frush is too large and fat, it is higher then the sole at the heels,
and is always a token of a very bad foot.

The most part of Horses which have low heels, have large and fat Frushes, so
that they cannot walk but they touch the ground, and many times cause them
halt, which should be considered very carefully, because the most part of
people who understand shoeing, cause take down their Horses heels to preserve
the back Sinews of their Legs, or for other Reasons which I shall discourse of
hereafter; the Ignorant seeing a heel cut and taken down after that fashion,
boldly pronounce that a Horse has none, but in that case you are to take
notice to the Frush, which being but of a middle size, the Horse can scarcely
be too low heel'd; The tour and circumference of the hoof makes one also know
if the heels are low, if he have but a very little experience.

You shall in the next place, keeping always the Horses foot up, consider if
the sole be strong, and the whole foot hollow, and at a pretty distance from
the shoe; it is an excellent sign in Coach-horses to have hollow feet, and
therefore you are to know that those who sell such Horses, that they may make
their feet appear good, cause them to be made hollow by the Smith as much as
possible, and so leave their sole very thin and weak, and indeed by this a man
may be deceived; but a foot should be hollow, without having the sole of it too
much weakened and thin; to commend a foot people say that it will hold an
English halt pynt of Wine, that so they may certainly know it is very hollow.

When the sole is higher than the hoof, and that the whole foot is quite filled
up upon the lower part, so that in stead of the foot being hollow the sole is
in a manner round and bilged, they are then called Crown'd-soles in French
Pieds Combles; these kind of Feet have always the upper parts of them framed
like an Oyster shell, that is, flat and ugly, and almost all feet fashioned
after this manner, have their heels although low, yet straightened and narrow
toward the shoe, and become in a little time absolutely useless, it not being
possible without a great dale of difficulty to adjust their shoes to them, nor
drive the Nails but at a great distance from the heels, that is, only at the
Toe; such Horses are fit for nothing but the Plow; It is not but by methodical
shoeing care, and time, such high and Crowned Soles may in some measure be
rectified, and also receive a pretty good shape, if the heels be only straightened
near to the shoe, as they are always for the most part, and if they have not
their Frushes over large and heels too low: for these last there is little or
no possibility to recover them, but for the first whose hoof at the heel does
only straiten near to the shoe, although their heels be low, yet the method of
shoeing will recover them; I shall show how it is to be done when I discourse
of shoeing, but because people do not buy Horses with faults which are to be
rectified, and that Horses are but subject to too many infirmities, I think a
man should endeavor to choose them with the best feet he can, because they are
the foundation of the Building; especially for your large Dutch, and Frizland
Horses when a man sees them have low heels and a high sole, that is, which
rests almost upon the shoe, or that they have large and fat Frushes, he
should never think of buying them, for I assure you they will create a great
dale of trouble to him when they begin to change or Mew, for it is most certain
that the Feet of such Horses change, and alter after they are brought to
France, so that those which are pretty good become bad, and those which are are
bad, do in Mewing become absolutely useless.

There are other kind of Feet which people call weak, because although their
heels be indifferent high, yet they are but thin, that is, that at the point of
the Frush, betwixt it and the upper part of the h^ of they have but a small
thickness, and although they have the inward part of the foot, that is, the
sole hollow, yet they have so little strength in their Feet that they easily
halt, and are also subject to heat their feet upon hard ways, which at last
becoming painful makes them lame; these kind of Horse are very often upon their
litter, that is people are obliged to let them stand soft and give them but
very moderate labor, a man should therefore take special notice to such
Horses, particularly if they be designed for the Coach.

The Foot being always kept up, you may also consider if he be strait heel'd
(...) hoof-bound, to which your small sized Horses, as Barbs and Spanish Horses
are more subject then others, especially such of them which have high heels,
and dried hoofs.

Hoof-binding is known, when the heels do not take a right Tour or Compass, but
straiten toward the Clift of the Frush, so that upon each side of the said
clift, there is not above a finger breadth of distance, and that the whole heel
is little more as two finger breadth; Whereas a Horse should have always about
four at the heel, but that is either a little more or less according to the
size and bigness of the Foot.

There are narrow heel'd Horses which have high heels, but so weak, that by
pressing the two sides of the heel one against the other they yield and move,
which is a token of tenderness in the foot, and although the Horse were not
hoof-bound, yet such yielding heels are always weak.

Some narrow heel'd Horses have not high heels, but upon the contrary
abundantly low, but then that part of the hoof next to the heel, and which
rests upon the shoe, is much more straightened than that which is next to the
Cornet, and it is that which hoof-bindeth a Horse; Now for these last the
Panton or Pautable shoes have a very good effect.

There are Horses which have the back parts of their pasterns next to the
heels, as if they were pointed, and by that means have their feet too long,
because they exceed the ordinary roundness at the heel, and extend too much
back-wards; Commonly such have very bad feet, and are almost always
hoof-bound; They have likewayes that part of the pasterns too fleshy and
Subject to the Forms, which is an imperfection sufficient to make a man reject
a Horse and not to meddle with him, you are therefore by this to regulate your
self as to the shape of the foot, that it should approach as near to a round
form as possible, and that those whose heels extend backwards, and have their
foot almost of an ovall shape, have a bad figure of a foot for service.

Besides this fault in small sized Horses of being hoof-bound, they are also
Subject to have one of the sides of their heels higher by an inch than the
other; This is a considerable fault, but not altogether so bad as hoof-binding,
because besides that hoof-binding does for the most part make a Horse to halt,
it is also a token of a great dryness in the foot; Also bad shoeing may
occasion this of the heels being higher upon one side than the other; neither
is this imperfection incureable, but it is somewhat expensive to perform it;
it proceeds partly from the aridity and dryness of the foot, and the method
to prevent it, is to cause shoe and pair such kind of feet each month, that so
you may keep them from taking that bad shape; small sized Horses which have
narrow heels and which never ride in humid and wet ground, that so they may
have occasion to moisten their feet, are most subject to this infirmity; I am
of opinion that no man should buy a Horse of Value that is subject to it.

Horses which are hoof-bound, are also subject to have Seymes or clifts in
their Quarters; These two imperfectiones proceed from one and the same
internal cause, which is the dryness of the foot; the external cause proceeds
from the Horses Riding upon hard ground, or in strong frost, or by setting
their feet with too much Violence to the ground, as those Horses do which trot
upon the streets having their legs ruined and spoilt, also by leaping upon a
very soft ground, and many times also by galloping too high, or making too
great a motion with their legs; it is easy to perceive this imperfection by
their walking, for they do not set down their feet firm upon the ground, and so
their Tread is not such as we have already described it should, because for the
most part they always halt with it; a foot which is of a right shape and well
nourished, will never be subject to Seymes or cloven Quarters, and very rarely
do people see hoofs which are round and solid have any of them.

Seymes or Cloven Quarters are known, by looking to the Quarters of the hoofs
upon the inside, which will be found cloven from the Coronet to the very shoe,
quite through the horn, and such Quarters are almost always straightened; some of
these Clifts do not ascend so high as the Coronet, and therefore are the less
dangerous, however although they may be recovered, it is a very considerable
imperfection and yet a greater in fat feet which have a thin horn, where
oftimes such Clifts occasion a javar Encorne as the french call it, or
scratches upon the onsett or Coronet of the hoof, because the matter which
forms in that part spoileth and corrupts the Tenaon or Cartilage, which is
the cause of a Coronet-scratch; the difference between those, and those other I
was discoursing of (which are the most common) is that in those which are the
most common there gathers no matter, but in these other there does; people
know when the matter has formed in a cloven Quarter, in that it appears upon
the Coronet near to the hair, at which part the matter which has its origin
and source in the Cartilage, issues forth and makes the Horse halt to the
ground, such cloven Quarters are as difficult to be cured as a crowned scratch,
for they must be treated alter the very same manner; Although Horses have only
the most common kind of Seymes, yet they cannot work but in very soft and
Carpet kind of ground, for upon a street or hard ground, they but criple upon
them, and as they are walking, the Blood frequently comes out of the Clefts;
Cloven Quarters are always a token of a dried foot and bad temperature; A
cloven Quarter is enough to make a Man reject a journey Horse who has it, but
yet more one which is appointed for the Coach, and I am of opinion that the
fault is abundantly sufficient to do it, unless the horse be designed for a
Rideing school, where he may be recovered, but then he should be also bought at
a more easy rate.

Sometimes the horn of the hind feet, cleaves just in the very middle of the
fore part of the hoof, from the Coronet to the Shoe; this imperfection is not
very common, but it is very troublesome, and makes the horse sometimes halt;
They are called Ox feet, in French Pieds de Boeuf, because of their being
cloven in the middle, after the same manner as the feet of Oxen are; Mules are
more subject to this imperfection than Horses, and it should hinder the buying
of them, especialy if the clift be large, because the sand and clay mix and
incorporate in it, and make them to halt by the pain it occasions.

There is another imperfection to which the hoof and Coronet are subject,
called in French Crapaudine, or Tread upon the Coronet, which is a kind of
ulcer that comes upon the Coronet, and from which there issues a filthy sort
of matter, which by its sharpness dries up the horn beneath the part where the
tread is made, in which there is made a kind of hollow or groove down to the
very shoe, and it would seem that the horn shrinketh in that part, by reason of
that humor, which instead of moistning as it ought, changes its nature by the
corruption it receives from the wound made by the tread, and is the cause of
this disorder.

Horses of manage which do not cross their legs enough in passaging, but knock
and bit frequently their Coronets in one and the same place with the nails of
their shoes, and may very readliy occasion such ulcers, of which they will halt
very ill, if they be not looked to and kept clean; however they are of no great
consequence, and come for the most part rather in the hind feet than in the
fore.

It is a great imperfection, to have upon the one hand feet which are too large
or fat, or upon the other to have them too little, such Horses as have them too
big and large, are for the most part very heavy and but rarely light; when
their feet are of that shape, they are likeways subject to lose their shoes,
and give no kind of agreeable service.

At Paris people sell horses for the Saddle, which they call Flandrins, from
Flanders the name of the Country they came from, and because they are well
shapt and make a good appearance, although generally those of them which are
good, are very raze, therefore they make such pass for Normandy Horses; and we
have not a more certain mark whereby to know these Flandrins, than by their big
and large feet, for when once they have been made a little use of, they are but
too well known for what they are, the most part of them giving always upon the
least toil, a belch as they are spurred; too small feet are very much to be
suspected, because they are frequently painful, and subject to cloven quarters
and other imperfections we have been discoursing of; again, very big and large
feet are also very incommode for Traveling in Tough and Clay highways, neither
do they endure Fatigue, and the most part of Horses which have them, stumble;
but if with such feet they have also weak Legs and too long pasterns, they
shall never have great strength.

There are other kinds of Feet, whose form and shape are somewhat extraordinary
because of their being foundered, so that the hoof toward the middle of the
foot is shrunk and fallen in, has many circles quite round the foot, and
appears altogether altered and dry, with the heels all circled; A Horse which
has such kind of feet, that become still worse, sets always his heels first to
the ground when he Trots, having the middle part of his hoof hollow, and the
sole high and round, after the form of Crownea-soles; There are also sometimes
extraordinary founderings which fall down upon the feet, and make them of such
an odd shape, that that form which they should have above upon the hoof, they
have beneath upon the Sole, so that the feet are in a manner renversed; now all
these bad kinds and shapes of feet should be rejected.

CHAP: XIV. How to know if a Horse be well body'd, or have a good Belly.
HAving narrowly examined the feet of any Horse you intend to buy, CHAP: XIV
How to know if a horse be well bellied
you must next consider if he have a good Body and be full in the Flank, or if
he want a Belly, all which signify but one and the same thing; but to speak
properly, a Man should only say that a Horse has not a good Body, or a full
Flank, for to say he has no Gutts, is an expression not much in use, although
a man may very well say that a Horse has no Belly; therefore that I may be the
better understood by all, I shall without prejudice make sometimes use of it.

This imperfection may proceed from several causes which it will be fit to
examine, that so you may with the more certainty judge of it, and prevent being
deceived by it; and first if the last of the short Ribs be at a considerable
distance from the Haunch-bone, which is known by the great space there is
between that bone, and the last or hindmost Rib; now although such Horses may
for the time have pretty good Bodies, yet when they come to any considerable
labor or exercise, they absolutely lose it, and these are properly the Horses
which have no flank.

A Horse has also no flank, when his Ribs are too straightened in their tour or
compass, which is easily perceived by comparing their height with that of the
Haunch bones, for they ought to be as high and elivate as them, or but a very
little less when the Horse is Lusty and in good case, because when he is lean
and no flesh upon his Ribs, they cannot in that case appear so high and well
raised as the Haunch bones.

The imperfection of being narrow chested, besides that it hinders a Horse to
have a good body, his wind and breathing is also never so very free, by reason
of the last or hindmost Ribs squeezing and compressing too much the inward
parts.

If such Horses as have their Ribs strait, be great Feeders, then their Bellys
will be gulped up, so that it not being possible for the Entrals to be
contained within the Ribs, they will press downwards and make the shape of a
Cows Belly which is very unbecoming; besides that those Horses that are strait
Rib'd, are very difficult to Saddle, for there must be Saddles made expressly
for them, they have no wind, and are subject to the Cough; But they have all of
them for the most part a good Chine or Back.

If a Horses not having a good Belly proceed from Leanness, or for having
fatigued too much, it is not so much to be apprehended, especially if his Ribs
have a good turn or compass; for rest and ease, with the assistance of cooling
and moist nourishment, may come to recover him; Such Horses as are naturally
light Bellied although otherwise fat and plump enough, cannot endure any great
Fatigue; the precaution which people observe, in buying such Horses, is to take
notice if they eat heartily their Hay and Oats, and drink lustily, for then
there is little to be feared; if you intend to make choice of a Horse for
Coursing or Galloping, he will be Lighter and Cleverer with such a Belly, than
if it were a great dale bigger.

However it does not follow of consequence, that all lean Horses are light
Bellied; it is true there are some to who^ Leanness occasions this disorder, but
there also a great many which become Lean, and yet have as full a Flank and
good Belly as can be desired.

The true method to know a Horse, which can but with difficulty be made to have
a good Belly, is when you perceive him to be Lusty, and have a good dale of
flesh upon his Ribs, but little or no Flank; of such a Man may say that they
have naturally no Flank, and with difficulty can be made to have a good Belly,
because they have taken on fat and flesh abundantly without either increasing
their Flanks, or augmenting their Belly.

If a Horse be straightened in the Flanks, for not having his Ribs well enough
turned, but so narrow compassed, that they furnish no^ room sufficient to lodge
his Entrals easily within them, it is a considerable imperfection, and is known
by the narrowness of the Flanks and straitness of the Ribs which are next to
them; yet if those Horses which are so, eat heartily their Hay and Oats, and
drink well, they will prove as good as any for the Saddle, if they are not too
fiery, but I would not meddle with them for a Coach; the most part of Horses
which have strait turned Ribs, have good Chines or Backs, for a Man needs but
consider the Mules which have the strongest and best shaped backs can be, and
they have all of them their short Ribs, or those next to their Flanks strait
turned, and so all horses which have their Reins very much elevate, have their
Ribs likeways strait turned it is true their croups are not beautiful, because
they are for the most part pointed, but then to supply that their Reins are
excellent; such Horses are commonly called Sow-B^ck's.

Again, although a Horse be naturally light body'd, yet if his Ribs be well
turned, and that he also eat as I have been telling, he will no doubt prove
serviceable; especially if his hind hand be large and well turned, and that he
be not fiery: It is an infallible maxim, that a Man should never buy a Horse
which is both light body'd and fiery, because such Horses destroy themselves in
an instant.

If a Horse which has no Flank have his Ribs too short, then although you
bring him to a good Belly, he will lose it upon the cast Travel or Fatigue;
Ribs which are too short are easily known by their not extending so much
downwards as commonly they ought.

You are also carefully to consider, if a Horse which has no Belly be fretful
or fiery; for if he be, although he may have a good Appetite, yet he shall
never become well Bally'd; I purposely repeat this because it is of consequence.

Now many people do ignorantly confound fireyness with vigor or high Mettle:
Fireyness is an earnest and immoderate desire to go forwards, so that Horses
which are subject to it, Fret, Trample, Dance, and put themselves all in a
sweet through the desire they have to Gallop, neither can they suffer any Horse
to go before them with patience, but fret and Torment themselves until they
have got before them again, in fine they are good for nothing but to fatigue
the Rider, and weary themselves to no purpose; young giddy headed people who
have no experience, value their Horses the more for being firey, and they say
design^dly to commend them, that they are very hearty and have a great dale of
fire, which is just to say they are worth nothing, and to prasse them for that,
for which they should be rejected; true vigor and mettle does not consist in
having this Fieryness and troublesome motion, but in being very sensible and
fearing the spur, in being a little cold in his Actions, and not to have more
of this forwardness than what his Rider intends he should: In a word, a
vigorous and true mettled Horse, is one which is somewhat cold in his Actions,
and very obedient to the Spurrs, that is, whose sides are very sensible; yet
this is not to say but Firey Horses are many times very high Mettl'd, but their
fault is in being so, with this fretful and firey disposition.

Horses which have any great pain or weakness in their hind quarters, are
commonly light Bellied, and experience discovers to us daily, that Horses for
only having in their hind-legs painful scratches will loss their Bellies
extremely, and far rather than if they be any ways pained in their Hams by
Spavins, Jardons, or Capelets, which are situate upon Nervous and sensible
parts, and where by consequence such infirmities must cause an excessive pain;
therefore when you are shown a Horse which is light Bellied, look immediately to
his Hams, and in all probability you will there find one of these three
imperfections I just now mentioned, or at least some other thing which paineth
his hind quarters, that is, in some one or other of its parts; neither is this
to say, that there are not sometimes light body'd Horses which have none of
these infirmities in their Hams, but there is none which have any one of these
above specified imperfections, but what are light Bellied; such Horses cannot
endure Fatigue, so are not fit for the Saddle, and far less for the Coach: If
the pain and weakness which is in the hind-quarter, and which is the occasion
of the Horses being light Bellied, proceed from a cause which may be in a short
time removed, it should not stop your buying of the Horse; for example, painful
scratches in the hind-legs will sometimes take away a Horses Belly, but then
there is no great hazard, because they may be easily cured; and so of several
other Infirmities.

If the scratches are Nervous, that is, if they be situate upon the back sinew
of the Leg, a pretty way above the pastern joint, in that case although people
may endeavor to make you believe they are nothing, yet it is one of the most
troublesome external maladies to cure that a Horse can have; I have known
Horses to have them six, eight, and ten Months, others to have become lame by
them, and some at last to have dyed of them.

The reason besides what I have given, why horses which have such infirmites in
their Hams, become for the most part very light Bellied, is, that the Hams or
Jarrets are composed of Nerves, Ligaments, and Tendons, so that the least
strange body which insinuats it self amongst those parts, will produce such
strong effects, as will cause the Horse not only to lose his Belly and Flank,
but also his Appetite; now seeing the question is here concerning the buying of
Horses, I say that every horse which is light Bellied, by reason of incurable
infirmities in his Hams, should be rejected as altogether useless, and by no
means be bought let his rate be never so inconsiderable, and that not because
he is only light Bellied, but because that gauntness of his Belly is a token
that he is much pained in his hams; there are however some horses which have
infirmities in their hams, and yet do not become light Body'd, as I have a
hundred times seen one or two large Bone-spavins, in French Esparvins de Bauf,
not to cause the Horses which had them to diminish in the least in their
Flanks, or become light Bellied, but this was a sign that either the horses
were not sensible, or that those Spavins were not very painful; however I would
take no horses with such spavins, which I shall discourse of more at large in
their proper place; I must also tell you, that there are some horses which are
less sensible of the effects of pain than others.

There is another imperfection, to which Horses which are brought up in those
Provinces where they feed them with a great dale of Hay, and a very few Oats,
are subject; which is, that this method of feeding causes their Bellies to
become very big and take the Form and shape of a Cows Belly with Calf, which is
a thing not only very unbecoming, but such Horses are likeways never so light
and clever, nor well winded as they ought; Also when a Man would make a horse
Fat and Lusty which is very low, and that he let him eat abundance of Hay,
without which he will have difficulty to make him very plump, in this case I
say, the Horse belly will be at first Swallowed up, or fall too low, and at
last pass to the Croup and insensibly diminish, for the most part of horses
never begin to take on flesh, until they become big and well bellied; to
prevent and remedy these bellys which incline to be thus swallowed up or fall
too low, the English take a very good method, which is to make a good broad
su^cingle of a foot and a half broad, taking care to adjust two little cushions
to it, which may answer to the top of the Ribs upon each side of the Backbone,
and so preserve the Back from being galled with the surcingle; with this
surcingle they girt pretty hard the Horse Belly which inclines to fall too low,
and thus continue it for a while, straitning it a hole now and then by degrees,
and by this means the big or low Belly is made to pass sooner toward the
Croup, and so insensibly diminish; There are also some horses which have very
big bellys, but pointed and narrow hind quarters, to such the use of these
Surcingles do very well; before I see the proof of this I had enough a do to
believe it, but I am now convinced of it by my own experience, and therefore
was willing to set it down in this place for the behoof of the Curious: Let us
now return and discourse of the flanks.

CHAP. XV. How to know when a Horses flanks are altered and out of order.
IF a Horse have a full enough Flank, CHAP: XV How to know if a horse be pursy,
or have his Flanks alt^red
you are to consider if he have it not too large, because if it be too much
swallowed up, that is, if over against that part of the thigh which is called
the stiffle, marked 27. in the figure of the first plate, the Flank fall too
low, it is a great advance to pursyness, especially if the horse be not very
young.

If he make a string or cord in breathing, which is, when in the Act of
respiration he attracts to him theskin of his Belly where the Ribs fail, so
that he makes as it were a channel or groove all along them, then it is a
token that his Flank begins to alter, or at least a certain sign that the
horses Body is overheated, that he has been sick, or will in a short time
become so: This Cord or rather Hollow along the Ribs does many times appear in
Vigorous Horses, which have been too undiscreetly pushed on or over Rid, it
will also appear in Horses which have made any extraordinary journeys, and then
it will be a sign not of actual pursyness, but only that in a short time they
may become so; But at least, it is a token of a great inward heat occasioned by
the preceding fatigue, and which will prove very difficult to extinguish,
especially if the Horses are old.

Pursyness is a considerable enough imperfection in a Horse to keep him from
being bought; for if he be quit spent with it, it is easily known, yet at first
a man may readily be deceived with it; therefore the cautions which a man
should make use of to prevent being imposed upon by it, are these which follow:
You are first then to observe the Horses age, because young Horses are very
rarely pursy; next to consider if his Flank be not swallowed up, or fallen too
low, that is, if it descend too much over against that part of the thigh which
is called the stiffle joint, you are then to defye or mistrust that Flank. This
is the language of the Horse-coursers, or those who trade in Horses; They say
also there is a trouble in such a Flank, to express that the Flank is not
fresh, but begins to become pursy; But to render your self more certain, you
must press his throple or windpipe near to the upper part of the nether jaw
bones, or onset of the head, that so you may make him cough, which is very
easily done, and then take notice to the sound of it; if it be dry it is
naught, and if it be dry and often reiterate, it is yet worse, if it be moist
there is not so much hazard, but if he fart as he coughs, then it is almost
always a sign of pursyness; Yet to judge certainly if there be any appearance
of pursyness, the surest way is to consider him in the Stable when he is
performing no violent exercise, and if possible immediately after he has drunk,
or when he is eating his Oats.

I am now giving directions to such people as have no great experience, for
when a Man is once become Skillful, let the Horse be either over heated, or
only warm with Riding, and he will know if he be pursy, as well if he were cold
and standing still and quiet, but for such as have not that experience, the
surest way is to observe him when cold, for when a Horse has been galloping or
traveling, or that he has not drunk for a pretty while, a Man cannot judge so
certainly of him; neither also when he is a^ soil or grass, which although it
may have been thought to recover some while they were at it, yet is quite
contrary, and a great enemy to the cure of pursyness; For (...) soon as ever
they are taken up, and put to their Hay and Oats again, they will be work than
ever, because they will be ready to burst, so greatly will they be oppressed
for lack of Breath: This is however the common mistake of the Country People,
who so soo^ as ever their Horses become pursy, put them to grass and yet find
them still the worse (...) it. I do not pretend to reform all abuses of this
nature, only I tell this by way of a^ vice to such as have pursy horses, that
grass is absolutely an enemy to them, because i^ cools and refreshes them too
much, and thickens and makes tough those phlegms which stop the Veins and
passages that terminate in the Lungs, so that it both augments the horses
difficulty in breathing, and their Cough; and it is in this which many people
a^ deceived, who when they have pursy horses think of nothing else but of
cooling and refreshing them, by which their pursyness becomes still worse: Now
although the should not have been the place where I ought to have discoursed of
this, yet I thought (...) self obliged to set it down, let them be dissatisfied
or pleased at it who will.

The whole knowledge of pursyness consists, in observing exactly if the horses
Flank redouble as he is breathing, which is, when having breathed and drawn up
^is Flank t^ him, he lets it down all of a sudden, and makes at the very
same time, and with the same breath, a redoubled motion as if he breathed a
second time with one and the fa^^ breath: You are also to observe if when the
horse takes in his wind, the motion of h^ Flanks appears at the upper part
of his short ribs, which is a sign that his Flanks a^ altered, but yet a great
dale more if they beat aad make their motion at the very to and just by his
back bone, for that will be a certain token of pursyness, as it is a^ when they
kept too low and over against the flat-parts of his thighs; seeing it is some
what difficult at first looking to observe the redoubling of a horses Flank,
you are the^ fore to take notice to and remember these little remarks.

The redoubling of the Flank cannot be observed but by a great attention, and
when (...) horse is standing still in one place; you have been told the
preceding Symptoms when by you may know that his Flank is out of order, such
as having a very big and swallowe up Belly, or which falls too low,
especially if the horse be any thing old, and if (...) Cough from time to time,
these are the chiefest tokens; but above all, you are to super such horses as
are great feeders and cough frequently, and you are never to meddl^ with these
last if of any considerable age, although their Flank appear to be pretty fre^
and good.

If the horse be spent with pursyness, then he will not only cough, but redou^
it frequently, and then he is incureable, for although people may promise you
remed^ for it, I assure you you will find none, because if there were such, I
would have had the^ having neither wanted curiosity nor neglected pains to
enquire after them, and yet never knew a horse spent and decayed with
pursyness, nor which had it once well for^ed and settled in his Lungs, to
recover perfectly of it, so that you may join this disea^ with the worst kind
of Glanders, and look upon both as incurable, let people promile (...) you
never so confidently the contrary: I have been told a thousand Stories of
horses which have been cured of Pursyness and the Glanders, but they were all
Shamms, and if sud^ horses have been recovered, they have neither been far gone
in their pursyness no^ thoroughly Glandered; when I say thoroughly Glandered, I
mean such a Glander by whi^ the inward parts are consumed and ulcerate, and so
of purfyness, by which the Lung are dried up, and made to cleave to the Ribs.

Horses which have been spent and consumed a long time with pursyness, take or
draw in wind at their Fundament, and sometimes also people fix a short hollow
pipe in the part to facilitate their breathing; such Horses are rejected by all
the World.

There are some which are so very pursy and spent with it, that their flanks
be^ and move at the very upper part of their back or reins, and yet make a part
of the motion which is preformed by the flank below, such Horses are not worth
their maintenance although they may labor and work a little.

The most part of people which buy from horses-coursers, never consider if a
Horse flanks be good and sound, because they are obliged to warrant him, and by
the La^ forced to take him back again within Nine days; but if the horse be n^
notarly pursy, and only but beginning to be so, a Man cannot in that case
oblige the Seller or Merchant to take him again, and so the Buyer himself
becomes the Cully and Fool; or if you have had the horse by a Troque or
Exchange, or that the person from whom you had him did not warrant his Flank,
or any other imperfection, in these cases you will be but gulled and laughed at,
notwithstanding of the Law of Restitution, et quanto minoris, which obliges the
Seller to restore within the space of two Month the full rate of the horse when
he is returned to him, or at least to rebate a reasonable part of his price, if
the Buyer, notwithstanding of any imperfections he may have, consent to keep
him; but no doubt people are now a days, both more cunning and skilful, seeing
they do not so much rely upon this; and therefore the surest way is not to
trust so much to the Sellers warr^^dice, but that you otherways consider the
horse very narrowly and with all the circumspection imaginable, before you part
with your Money; for when once it is touched, there are many difficulties in
recovering it again, and the debate will at last end in a process or law suit
which is both troublesome and expensive, and in my opinion a very considerable
matter.

You are in the next place to consider if the horse be Chest-foundered, in
French Courbattu, which is known by the very same Symptoms almost as pursyness,
the only difference that can be made, is that young horses are subject to
Chest-foundering as well as old, whereas they are commonly horses of six years
old and above that are troubled with pursyness, at least it is a Disease which
rarely happens to very young horses, and when it does, they have their
pursyness naturally either from their Sire or Dame.

Chest-foundering may proceed from Crudities in the Stomach, or other
Infirmities which may have obstructed the Conduits and passages of the Lungs,
which make them so to alter that they may appear to be pursy when really they
are not; the difference between Chest-foundering and it, is that when a horse
is only Chest-foundered there is hopes of recovery, but not when he is spent in
^ursyness; Grass, and much refreshing and cooling cure Chest-foundering, but
augment and increase Pursyness.

When Horses are sick their Flanks will beat as if they were pursy and broken
winded, but people buy not commonly Sick horses, at least they should not;
therefore I shall not insist longer upon this point.

I have in the second part or treatise of diseases explained at large what
Pursyness and Chest-foundering are, there are there two whole Chapters
concerning them, which that you may be the better instructed it will be very
fit to read over; I have known some young people who had a great inclination to
become skilful, to whom having recommended the reading of those Chapters in the
treatise of Diseases which treated of the Infirmities they desired to
understand, have told me that they did not inquire after Remedies for these
imperfections or Diseases, but only directions to come to know and understand
them; Nevertheless having made them sensible of their mistake, and that the
only method to be perfectly instructed, was to read over the whole Chapter
where the cure of the Disease they looked for was discoursed, because the
Tokens and Symptoms of it were described there at full length, and a great dale
more particularly than in this first part, they at last followed my advice, and
declared to me that by reading attentively the second part or Treatise of
Diseases, they had acquired as great insight for the knowledge and exact
understanding of them, as they could do in this; Let us now return to our
subject.

After you are certain that the Horses Flank is right and sound, you are to
observe if he be not a Wheezer or Blower, which is quite different from
Pursyness, for he that is a Wheezer or short breather, when ever you either
gallop or trot him, will in a little puff and blow so excessively that he will
surprise you, but t^en stop him and consider his Flank and you will find it but
very little moved, and almost in the same condition as a horse should have it;
again Trot or Gallop him a little and you will perceive him to blow furiously,
and as if he were going to burst; immediately stop him and you will see his
flank beat or move naturally, so that one would not imagine it were the Flank
of that horse he but just now observed Wheezing and Blowing at such a rate;
however these Blowers or short Breathers, or as some call them Wheezers, do not
otherways want wind, because if this imperfection did proceed from lack of
wind, their Flanks would be agitated, and that most violently after exercise,
but it is not so, for they have their Flanks almost as good as any other Horses
which are sound, and hold out very near as well as if they had not that
imperfection; but then they wheeze and blow at such a rate and with such
violence, that they last not so long as other horses do, for one would think
they were going to Crevie and burst upon the very spot, and this excessive
blowing does also surprise, and even displease the generality of people, who
for the most part take them to be pursey.

Now this wheezing and blowing imperfection, does not proceed from any defect
in the Lungs, or those parts which depend upon them, but from the narrowness of
the conduits of Respiration which end at the upper part of the Nose: ^t is not
the skin or ouvertures of the Nostrils that are too strait, for then there
needed no more but to cut them up and enlarge them, but this would not at all
give more ease to the horse, because they are the small passages between the
bones and the Grisles of the nose, through which he attracts his Breath, that
are too closs and narrow, and these passages cannot be enlarged, which is the
cause of the horses wheezing and blowing, which is an imperfection that the
Horse-coursers are not obliged to warrant, because it depends absolutely upon
the buyer to discover it, by causing either Trot or Gallop the horse, so that
those who have condemned wheezing and blowing horses for pursey and broken
winded, have judged wrong, and I know a Gentleman who has the Character of
being a competent judge in such differences, seeing he will pretend to it, who
very unreasonably condemned a horse which only wheezed and blew, to be purly
and broket winded, which really he was not, and that more through ignorance than
malice.

There are other horses again which are thick-winded and blow as they are
working, but not so much as those which wheeze, but however they puff and blow
very much, and although their flanks do not redouble, as they do in a pursy
horse, to give them ease, yet they are not more moved nor disordered by it than
the abovementioned wheezers are, but neither the one nor other are agreeable,
or for any great service; in a word a thick winded horse is he, which has his
breathing a little more free than a puffer or blower, but yet blows a great
dale when he is exercised, so that neither of them should be boug ^t at a dear
rate; yet a man may be mistaken in it because when a horse has been kept a
long time in the Stable without exercise, he will at first riding be out of
wind, although he be neither a blower nor thick winded.

There are some wheezers or blowers, which rattle and make a noise through their
Nose, as if there were something which stopped the passages of Respiration, but
this impediment goes and comes, and proceeds only from abundance of
phlegmatic stuff, which is no Symptom at all of the Horses being Pursy; for
his Flanks will no ways redouble neither will be have a Cough with it, and
therefore cannot be Pursy, but only a Wheezer and Blower; people may see in the
Riding Schools or Academys some of these kind of Horses which serve, but then
their price should be moderate if a Man is to buy them.

I am of opinion that a man should meddle as little as possible with Hors^s
which are either Wheezers or thick winded, for although they may serve passibly
well, yet they are alwise disagreeable, and it is with a great dale of justice
and reason that many People suspect them; therefore when a man buyeth Horses it
is very fit he take notice to it; because if they blow excessively in running,
they will be no ways proper for hunting nor coursing, for it would seem that
they are going to burst at every stretch they make; and for journey pads, one
of the best properties they can have, is to have a good wind, that is, they
should travel without puffing or blowing much, because they will then perform
their work with the more pleasure both to themselves and Riders; a Horse which
has not a good Wind, can never go his manage agreeably; I have seen some
thick winded Horses of Manage, which wheezed and blew very much (they call
these Horses Wheezers which having difficulty in breathing make a kind of
rattling or noise thorrow the passages of their Noses) and yet had a great fund
of strength, and performed their manage both long and very well, and although
one would have thought that they would have burst at the end of their reprise,
yet they had not their Flanks much disordered; but it is rare to meet with such
as these, and this wheezing and blowing would make me always reject a Horse.

In buying Coach Horses, People are many times caught and deceived by it,
especially if they do not see them draw before they pay for them, for there
are some of them that during the time they are a showing, or making their
parade, will trot unitely, with their shoulders free and easy, and having a
good movement with their Legs will plant their feet right upon the ground, and
keep their heads high and firm, and yet the very same Horses being harnessed
and put to a Coach, will so soon as they have trotted a little puff or blow
like Oxen, that is they are Wheezers or Blowers; a man can not oblige the
Sellers of such Horses to take them again, because they are not pursy;
therefore before you pay for any Coach Horses, see them first draw, not only to
observe if they have this imperfection, but also to know if they draw truly and
well: Every Horse which is designed for a Coach, should in drawing stoop with
his hind parts and raise his fore, and then he will draw right, but if he raise
his hind parts and stoop with his fore, then he will draw ill.

CHAP. XVI. A yet further continuation, of the knowledge of the faults and
imperfections in Horses, especially those which come in the hind Quarters.
WHat remains to be examined, CHAP: XVI A yet further continuation, of the
knowledge of the faults and imperfections in Horses, especially in their Hind
quatters.
is of no less importance than that which has been already discoursed of, in
so far as inconsiderable faults, do by degrees increase and augment, either
through excessive labor or negligence; I shall therefore restrict my self to
trace them exactly in this Chapter, by discovering all the faults and
imperfections to which the Hind quarters are most subject, because, they are
chief and essential parts relating to the goodness of a Horse, and without the
exact shapes of which, he can not be very serviceable; especially seeing People
do many times observe good Horses fail first in those parts, particularly those
designed for hunting and the manage, and therefore I think it belongs to one
who is perfectly skilful, to know and understand them all to the very minutest
and most inconsiderable.

You are then first to cast your eye upon his Croup or Buttocks, which should
be large, round, and neither pointed nor too long shapt; having the Tail placed
or set pretty high, for those which have the onset of the tail very low, are
commonly of no great strength, and have their Croups pointed, and Buttocks too
low.

In the next place lift up his Dock or Rump, to know if it be stiff and firm,
for although this be not an infallible token of strength and vigor, yet for
the most part it is; Horses which are vigorous keep their Docks close and firm
when they are pulled up; there are others again which carry their tails
straight out from them, or cock them as we say; these are all good marks:
having lift up his tail, you must observe if his thighs be at a sufficient
distance from other, for it is ane imperfection and a token of weakness when
they are too closs upon other; People know it when they perceive but a little
distance betwixt them, and that they press or come extraordinary closs upon one
another.

If the thighs be discharged of Flesh and lean, it is a considerable
imperfection let the Horse be never so Plump and lusty otherwise; it is
unpleasant and chokes the sight, and People many times find a croup which is
large and well turned, which becomes narrow in ane instant toward the thighs
or Gascorns, for lack of Flesh in that part, which is a token of weakness in
the hind quarters; such Horses are said to be ill spread in the Gascoyns;
Horses which have a sudden twitch with any of their hind legs, that is, which
have the Dry-spavin, are very subject to this imperfection, for the Muscle of
the thigh which should be always very full and large in that part, has no
bigness, this muscle is situate upon the fore part of the thigh, and the back
part of the thigh over against it is somewhat thin and trenchant, whereas it
should be very large and full: Thighs which are full and well charged with
Flesh, and shoulders which are small and have little Flesh upon them, are
alwisethe best.

You are also to observe if the Horse be bowed in his hind legs or have them
arched inwards; for although such bow legged horses be many times good, yet it
is an inconvenient enough imperfection in Mountainous Countries, because that
in the great descents they strike and rub their hams against one another; and
besides, they have commonly a weak hind hand, for as a man with his knees
joined cannot raise from the ground such a great weigh^, as if he set his legs
a little asunder, so for the very same reason is it that a horse which has his
hind legs bowed or arched, has them also a little more weak then otherwise he
would.

There are some horses of manage which are a little narrow and strait in their
hams, and yet go very well, but they would yet go better if they had not that
imperfection.

The Horse Coursers to describe a horse which is bowed or Arched inwards in his
hind Legs, say that he is closed behind, imagining by the smoothness of the
expression to diminish the imperfection; Horses of manage which are thus very
much bowed, can perform no beautiful action upon their haunches, for their
whole manage is unpleasant not only to those who behold them, but also to
themselves by reason of the difficulty they find in performing it.

It is very easy to perceive and understand this imperfection, because the
hams are nearer to other than the feet, especially the points of the Hams
called the Hocks, and the distance enlarges still toward the Feet, as it does
in these men which are called Bakerleg'd, or which have them after the form of
a renversed Y.

You are afterward to consider the hams, and to look upon them as the most
important parts, in which no small and inconsiderable faults can be found, and
to which few people take great notice, because they can scarcely be convinced
that such imperfections are really to be found in them; for every one easily
flatters himself in his own interest and persuades himself that the
imperfection which People show him, does only consist in the imagination of him
who pretends to discover it; I had almost forgot to tell you in this place,
although I have hinted a little at it else where, that there is an imperfection
in the hind Legs which is just contrary to what I have been mentioning, because
in walking or riding the horse carries them outward, so that instead of being
bowe^ inwards, they are bowed outward, which proceeds from weakness, and
those kin^ of horses can never be put right upon their haunches, because they
cannot contin^ long upon them by reason of their weakness, which makes them in
plying and bend ing their hams to turn them outward, and so to have no
strength to support the haunches; I would like a horse better which had his
hams bowed inwards, than^ they were subject to turn always outward after this
fashion: Horses which amble a^ more subject to this imperfection than others,
and those which have it are alwise weak Now to observe an exact order in the
knowledge of the Hams, consider first their for^ and a te^ what manner they are
shap^t; they should then be large and full, for sma^ and little hams have no
strength, they should be also nervous and dry, those which a^ charged with
Flesh or gourded, are defective, and will be subject to those imperfection I am
about to explain.

To begin the deduction or narration of all the Imperfections to which the Hams
a^ subject, you are first to observe the tip or point of the hock, to see if
there be a Ca^let upon it, which is an imperfection known by the tip of the
Hock its being movea^ and more swelled than ordinary, when a Capelet is small
it does no great prejudice (...) the Horse, and sarcely hinders him to work, so
that were it not to be fear it might increase, it would be the most
inconsiderable imperfection to which the H^ is subject; but when it grows large
then it becomes painful, and by consequen^ causes the horse to loose his body,
which should keep a Man from buying him; I (...) almost neglected to tell you,
that although the Capelet, or swelling upon the tip of (...) Hock be small, yet
if it be painful, and that you perceive it make the horse loose (...) belly, it
is then as dangerous as a big one; many times Coach-horses newly arrived fr^^
Holland, have small Capelets, which are afterward discussed by rest, and are
only occ^sioned by the length of the Journey.

You are at the same time to consider if the horse have any Vessigon or kind of
Wi^gal, which is a swelling about the bigness of half ane Apple less or more,
composed a soft and spongeous flesh, growing between the flesh and skin, and
situate in (...) hollow next to the Hock and beneath the Big Sinew, a little
above the Capelet and bend^ of the Ham, and which appears but very little,
except when the horse is resting equ^ly upon both his Hind-legs, because when
he bends his Ham it does not appear at a^ neither does it often make a horse
halt, but through time it enlarges, and then hinderst Ham to move so easily as
it ought; it comes upon both sides of the Ham, but some times only upon one,
and is situate a little above the number 29 in the figure of the (...) plate:
The Vessigons which are situate lower than the former are not dangerous, (...)
I have observed when young Coach-horses have lately come from Holland, that the
have had them thus low situate, but then a moderate exercise did discuss them;
I have a^ seen Vessigons of such a prodigious bigness, that they rendered the
horse incapable both service and seal, but such are very rare.

There comes upon the backside of the Ham, below the Capelet, and a little
inclining toward the inside, a swelling which is called the Curb, and is more
to be feared than a Vessigon, for it makes the horse frequently to halt, and
keeps the whole Leg stiff, because the ply and bending of the Ham is troubled
with it, and consequently its motion interrupted, or at least performed with
difficulty and pain; this imperfection is incurable, and therefore the fire
must be applied to it in place of all other remedies, whoever desires to see
more at large what a Curb and Vessigon are, may have recourse to the 102. and
107 Chapters of the second part, where they will find the definitions and
causes of these infirmities described to the full: Those who are ignorant do
not the less esteem horses which have Curbs, and those who pretend without a
great experience to give account of all the imperfections belonging to the
Hams, do indifferently call them all Curbs; a Curb is very troublesome in so
far as the fire does not much resolve and restrict it, and therefore people
commonly say that Curbs scorn and mock at firing, as indeed it is true, for I
have always observed but a very small amendment in Curbs, notwithstanding of
the application of it; indeed they did not afterward grow any larger, but then
their diminution was also very inconsiderable.

Upon the inside of the Ham a little distant from the Curb, but about the same
height, there is a bone which stands somewhat high and elevate; all Hams have
it, but in some it is more elevate than in others, and it is natural in all
horses; that part of the Ham which is below that bone swells by a degorging
of the great vein, which is delated in that part, and forms a soft swelling
just as it does in Men, which is called a Varisse, this dilated vein or Varisse
does not make a horse halt, but only sometimes spoils his sale, by growing
excessively large; in some it diminishes, but the swelling is always soft; A
Man may be easily imposed upon by this Infirmity, for ease and rest (especially
if the part be daily bathed with good spirit of Wine will so restrict it, that
I give full liberty to the most nice and quick sighted to discover, if they
can, any thing like such a swelling for the time.

Below the Curb and Varisse, but more upon the inside, and upon the upper part
of the instep, beneath the bending of the Ham, do the Spavins come which are
marked 31 in in the figure of the first plate, and are very troublesome
Infirmities, which do commonly at last lame the Horse; they are of two kinds,
to wit the Dry, and Ox-Spavin; the Ox-Spavin is a callous and grissly swelling
hard as a bone and which is so painful that it makes the Horse loose his
Belly; it is known by its bigness upon the inside of the upper part of the
instep, and that bigness or swelling when once hardened is about the bigness of
ones Thumb, and frequently causes the horse halt, and as I have already, said
the great pain which this Spavin occasions, dries up the Horse and makes him
loose his Flanks; and although he may be recovered by rest, yet with one or two
days travel he will become so lank and thin that you may draw him through a
needle, having his Belly as light as a Greyhounds; it is certain that every
horse which has one or two Ox-Spavins, will be very little serviceable for any
employment he can be put to, and especially if the Spavin besides its bigness
be also so very painful, that it make him halt as he trots; there are some
horses which only halt with them at their first coming out of the Stable, when
they are but newly seized with them, and that the Spavins are but young: It is
called the Ox-Spavin, because old Oxen are commonly subject to it, and have it
extremely big, but whereas they do them no prejudice, they for the most part
always Criple and Lame a Horse; I have seen horses which have had both large
and small Ox-Spavins, and yet did not lose their Flanks with them, but trotted
very equally, which was a certain token that they gave them very little trouble
and pain, and these horses were sold at the same rates as if they had wanted
these Spavins, because no body observed them, for when they were handled they
felt as hard as the bone; however I would advise no man to venture upon such,
because soon or late they will certainly do their Masters a bad office; yet
many half skilled people are of another opinion, and say that such swellings
are not Spavins, but the real bones of the Legs which grow larger and biger in
some horses than in others, now every man has his own sentiment, and mine
after the great care and experience I have had of it, is that it is a most
considerable imperfection; when Ox-Spavins do first seize upon Horses, they are
the more difficult to be observed, in that they do not much rise above the
substance of the Legs, but yet at their first pearcing they commonly make
always a horse halt, and afterward the swelling growing bigger, the horse
halteth no more with it; but seeing they very rarely come equally in both the
Hams, the one Ham is easily perceived to be bigger then the other, which
immediately discovers the imperfection, and which the person who is considering
the horse, will far better observe being placed before the horse and a little
toward one of the Shoulders, than if he were just behind him, for a Spavin in
its infancy is bigg^ and larger toward the fore ply and bending of the Ham,
than behind it, and afterware that same Spavin will by degrees so increase and
augment, that it will at last quite la^e the Horse.

The second kind is the Dry-Spavin, which is perceived by the most unskilful,
for when a Horse in walking raises with a twitch or sudden motion one of his
hind-legs higher than the other, he is then said to have this kind of Spavin,
and will have it many times in both hind-legs: Horses which have this
imperfection, make this suden motion or twitch with their Legs but from timeto
time, and not alwise, but only when they come fir^ out of the Stable, and
before their Legs be a little suppled with walking; also when such horses are
made to stand still a little in the fields, they will give sudden twitches with
their leg for the first three or four steps they make, but if they were rid in
a manage, they would always halt or twitch with their Legs so long as they are
rid, because of their being kept upon their Haunches.

The reason of this sudden draught which Horses make by twitching up their leg,
proceeds from their not having the motion of their Hams free and easy, and
therefore are constrained to perform it with either their thigh or haunch,
which is the cause of the motion being so violent and precipitant.

This imperfection of the Dry-Spavin is not so much to be apprehended as the
other, but if the horse's hind quarters be narrow, in plain English, if his
Hams be bowed inwards and crooked, and that he be subject to dry spavins. I
would not take hi^ at any rate, if it were not to make and dress him for
Corvets, if he were capable to perform them, for then those Dry spavins would
make him reiterate or rebeat them so much the better, but neither in that case
should he be bowed in the Hams; Dry-spavins dilcover that a Horse is weak in
his Hams, and although some people do not look upon that as a great
imperfection, yet I take it to be a considerable one: There are many Escuyer^
whovery much esteem for the manage such Horses as have dry spavins, providing
that they have the other qualifications required, it is true that quick motion
of the legs does pretty well in Airs, because it makes the Horse to rebate
them with the more force and life, but to balance that they are very soon
spoilt, and can endure no^ great exercise, even in the most orderly and best
regulat mannages, and the weakness they have in those parts is the cause of
their coming so soon to an end; now if with such spavins they have also their
thighs lean and dry, which is what we call Catham'd, I would not meddle with
them for any thing in the world, because they will become very soon incapable
to serve, unless that with these Spavins they have excellent and well spread
thighs, and be in a condition to suffer being put upon their haunches; indeed
with such qualities they will be an ornament to a manage, because their
Corvets will almost appear like Balettades, especially if they have a good
grace and movement with their fore legs.

Dry-spavins are an impediment to swiftness, and for this one reason Horses
which have them are not much esteemed for the wars, because seeing they halt in
running, they lose that time they take in halting or twiching up their legs,
and so cannot employ it in running: Dry-spavins do frequently degenerat into
Ox-spavins, so that such Horses have two different infirmities of one name,
although varying in their natures, they are easily discovered and will infallibly
Lame the Horse, you are therefore not to delay, but to apply the fire to them
as soon as possible, becauseinfirmity thus upon infirmity, is a token of no
good habit or constitution of body, besides that firing does not always cure
them.

If upon the out side of the Ham below the Vessigon, there be a Swelling more
than ordinary, and hard as a Spavin, only that it is upon the inside and this
upon the out, and that this also mounteth almost as high as the part where the
Vessigon comes, whereas the Spavin upon the inside does notascend so high; it
is called a jardon or jarde, and is an imperfection as much if not more to be
feared then the Spavin; few people observe and consider it, although it be as
painful as the spavin, and also makes the Horse light Bellied, by keeping his
Ham stiff, and making him always halt, at least when he is any ways fatigued;
this is also an imperfection with which I would not buy a Horse; but as there
are few horses which have it, and that it is an imperfection not very common,
therefore few people know and understand it: It is hard as a bone and lameth
always the Horse, neither is their any remedy for it but firing, which does not
always succeed, especially when the Horse has had it any considerable time.

People know this imperfection, by only observing the extraordinary swelling we
have mentioned, particularly upon the number 32. Marked in the figure of the
first plate,

If upon the fore-sinew of the leg, between the spavin upon the inside and the
jardon without, there be as it were a circle which joineth them, and invironeth
the nerve of the instep, then is it a considerable imperfection to which few
horses are Subject, but when they have it they are incurable; I never see above
half a dozen have it, and they had all of them acquired it by being kept too
much upon their haunches, neither did I ever observe a horse to have this
circle, but he had always either a jardon or spavin accompanying it, but I have
many times seen spavins and jardons alone without it: Now a horse which has
this infirmity is spoilt and ruined past recovery.

You are also to observe if the ply or bending of the Ham be swelled, which
would be a considerable imperfection, especially in a Coach Horse; for it is a
source, which makes a continual discharge of humors upon the legs, that
cause putrefaction, and breed mattering warts, in French Petreaux, and other
infirmities in those parts, to which Coach Horses are but too subject, and
therefore such a swelling should alone hinder a Man to buy a Coach Horse which
has it, but if the whole Ham be swelled, then seeing it may proceed from some
accident, as Casting with the Halter, being entangled with the cross hanging
bar, or such like, which may all be cured, in this case there is not much to
be feared, and therefore the Seller should warrant the recovery of the Horse,
or otherways oblige himself to take him again, because I have more than once
seen such kind of swellings to stand in need of firing to discuss them,
although they were only light sized and saddle Horses which had them.

In the ply of the Ham where this swelling comes, there are some times Chops
and Crevices which resemble the Mallender in the forelegs, and are called the
Selender, it will be so much the better if they are there when the swelling is
also in that part, because they will serve as drains, through which the humor
occasioning the swelling will evacuate it self, but then it were yet better
that that humor were not at all there, because then their would be no need of
a Selender to drain it,

Besides the reasons I have already given, to convince you that there is no
part of a Horses body should be more narrowly considered than the Hams; you are
also to observe that they are those parts which carry and support the greatest
weight of the body, when a Horse is performing any beautiful air in the
manage, or galloping at hunting, so that if he have already any weakness in
them, it will but add more blemishes to his infirmity, if he be continued at
those exercises, and if people require any more of him than to go at a foot
place, feeling the trouble he has in his Hams, and not being able to move them
without pain, he will endeavor to ease himself, by resting as much as he can
upon his forelegs to spare them behind, so that these before will be very soon
spoilt, and the Horse become absolutely useless, having neither forelegs nor
Hams he can make use of; besides that going always thus upon his shoulders,
because of the pain he has in his Hams, he will become at last a perfect
Baggage horse, or at least very unpleasant and uneasy for the Saddle, which we
call a pitiful jade of attendance, of whom, the best is to make ones self Rid
with the first opportunity, seeing he is for no kind of service, and that the
longer he be keept he will still become the greater Carrion.

It is an infallible rule upon which a man may rely when he is a buying a
horse, that when one of the hands or quarterts of a horse is weaker than the
other, he will soon be spoilt and serve but a very short time, when I say hands
or quarters, I mean either his two hind legs or his two fore, and this weakness
comes more frequently in the forelegs than hind; a good token whereby to know
if the fore hand be weak, is when the horse has little or no movement in his
forelegs, and that when he is pushed on in a Carrier, he forms his halts or
stops well upon his haunches, which is a sign that his hind quarter is strong
and that he has good reins, but that his fore are weak; to know if that
weakness in the fore legs be natural or accidental, is what is very difficult
to determine, but for a half-skilled person, it is abundantly sufficient that
he knows the imperfection, without penetrating into its cause.

If the Horses weakness proceed from his hind quarters, then in all probability
he will be either bowed, or which is quite contrary to it, carry his Hams
outward as he is riding, or otherways will have some considerable infirmities
in them, as spavins, Curbs, jardons, etc. and if it be in his fore hand, then
his legs will be spoilt by being round and gourded, having the nerves hard and
a little contracted, with splints, windgalls, and other such like infirmities.

Morover if he have only one of his legs weak, then the other three by carrying
and supporting always the whole weight of his body, will soon come to be
spoilt; and if one of his Quarters be weak, for example his fore hand, then the
hind will but endure a short time, because it will support his whole weight,
and therefore in a little it will be as soon spoilt as that before, except he
be a horse of manage, which with a weak fore-hand, especially if his hind
quarter be excellent, may indeed endure and serve a considerable time,
providing also that the air which it is intended he shall always go, be
appropriate to the foibleness of the horse, or goodness and strength of his
hind hand, but his fore parts then will have no movement, because he will go
very low and closs by the ground, and although he may be very much upon his
haunches, yet he will appear to go upon his shoulders, because of his not
plying and bending enough his forelegs: If both the Horses quarters be equal
in suppleness, strength, and goodness, then is it a token that he will be long
serviceable and useful.

When Horses are appointed for the manage, it is very imprudently done to take
them with the least imperfection or infirmity in their Hams; for what good can
be expected from a horse which cannot be put exactly upon his haunches, for
fear of presently spoiling him, by augmenting the imperfection, which he ha^^
already but too much in that part? and which would prove such, as would give
him so great trouble as might dry him up and render him Hectic or Consumptive,
and so would mightily disappoint the expectation of his suceeding in any thing
which is graceful.

In fine, I would not advise such persons who either live in Mountainous
Countries, or whose affairs call them frequently thither, to meddle with horses
which have any infirmities in their Hams, for besides that they are not very
Lasting, the great ascents and descents do very soon spoil them.

There are some young Horses, which being labored undiscreetly and with excess
in the beginning, have their hams swelled with it, but a little care with much
rest will recover this disorder, as I have shown you in the second part, where
I discourse of the infirmities of the hams: I am persuaded that a great many
People who look upon themselves to be very Skilful, will say, or at least
think, that I have made a long discourse to set off and describe prettily two
or three imaginary imperfections, for it is after this fashion they talk of
things they understand not; but whether they repute then notional or real is
not my concern, I have said of them what I was in duty obliged to discover, and
I still persist in my sentiment, that the imperfections and infirmities of the
hams are the most considerable of any belonging to the hind quarters, and shall
alwise endeavor to persuade my friend, of the importance of them; yet I am
neither so unjust, nor so much in love with my own opinion, as to oblige any
person to believe or rely more upon it than he shall think fit.

Spavins and Jardons are hereditary imperfections, that is, that when the Sires
o^ Dames have had either of them these imperfections, their Foals will be
subject to the same, which may be called incurable, because they have their
principles too well fixe^ in them, to get them eradicat, and the most skilful
will but lose his Labor, if (...) attempt to know if the horse has these
imperfections by birth or by accident, for he shall never discover it: Spavins
and Jardons are more to be apprehended in young horses that old, because in
young, exercise or labor makes them increase, but in those which at past
seven or eight years, when the Spavin is not very large, and providing they do
not mean nor halt with it, and have also a good body and full Flank, in these I
say it as not so much to be feared as in young, because it does not increase so
suddenly; however in either, it at last spoils and ruins the Horse.

CHAP. XVII. Of the imperfections of the Hind-legs, from the Hams downwards;
where are explained all the infirmities, to which Coach-horses Legs are most
subject.
FRom the Hams we must go to the other parts of the Hind-legs which are below
them, CHAP. XVII Of the imperfections of the nindlegs, from the Hams downwards.
which should be dry and broad; when a horse is standing still and quiet, that
his Hind-legs may be right situate and planted, they should stand so that the
back sinews, from the tip of the Hock to the Fetlock, which is upon the back
part of the pastern joint, should be plum, that is, if you hang a line and
plumet at the Hock, it should shave all along the back side of the Leg, and
the Fetlock should stand neither within nor without it, but be placed exactly
touching the line.

There comes upon the Back-sinews Rats-tails, otherways called Arrestes, from
the resemblance they have to the Arrestes of Fishes; some people call them
Grapes, but very improperly; this infirmity is known, by the part in which it
comes (which is about the length of half a foot, that is, from two or three
fingers breadth below the Ham to the very pastern joint) it is being without
hair; they are sometimes dry and sometimes moist, but always accompanied with
Crusts and pretty hard Callosities, which are somewhat more elevate than the
rest of the Leg, sometimes to half the thickness of ones finger, and sometimes
less: When Arrestes or Rats-tails are moist, they send forth more or less of
sharp humors; there are some Horses which have them only in their Forelegs
and not at all behind, but this is very rare: they are also the large size of
Coach-horses, which have their Legs charged with flesh, hair, and full of bad
humors, that are most subject to this infirmity. At Paris the Coach-horses of
a moist temper and constitution, and loaded with humors, are very much subject
to it, because the sharp and picquant salt, of the Dirt and Mudof the streets,
does very much contribute to it, especially if the Coach men are careless in
keeping their Legs clean.

All people know that a Horse is called Rat-Tail'd, which has little hair upon
his Tail, and which can be looked upon but as a very inconsiderable deformity,
although a late Author would make it pass in his Book for an infirmity, but he
is mistaken, for a Rat-tail when it is an infirmity, comes in the Legs, and
such horses are not called Rat-Tail'd because of it, for these which are really
Rat-tail'd, are commonly very good, notwithstanding of that deformity
occasioned by the want of hair in their Tails, which remain without it: I have
seen some which had so very little hair upon their Tails when they were old,
that they were almost quite bald, so that their Tails being thus without hair
did very much resemble those of Rats, although but little with respect to their
bulk and size.

The Infirmities following belong only to large Coach Horses, such as come from
Holland, North Holland, Oldenburgh, and other low Marish Countries upon the
North of France, for they have their bodies full of humors occasioned by that
kind of moist feeding, which at last falls down upon their Legs; and which
does not happen to Horses of a middle size, nor to such large stoned Horses
which are bred upon the Mountains, although they have also very long hair upon
their Legs, nay nor even to your thick course and short legged Horses, in
French Chevaux goussaux on Ragots, providing they have their Legs dry, Nervous,
and flat. The mattering kind of warts or Leek-heads, in French Poireaux, come
about the Pasterns and pastern joints, and grow after the form of Leek-heads
from whence they have derived their French Name, but they have anearer
resemblance and affinity to large Warts: They are higher than the skin about
half the thickness of ones finger, and sometimes also about the thickness of
ones Thumb, throw out filthy stinking stuff, spoil the Leg insensibly, and
enlarge because of the great number there is of them; after a Leg is once
infested with them, they are very troublesome to cure, because they have roots
which are imperceptible, and which draw their nourishment from the Nerves, so
that after you have dried up, and even consumed all that appears, as well by
Causticks as firing, yet those roots which atract and feed upon that Nervous
juice make them to revive again: The Poireaux or mattering warts which come in
the pasterns, are hid beneath the long hair of the Fetlocks; there are some of
them so very malign, that they make the hair fall all around them, and they
themselves grow up like Walnuts; there are others again which are more flat,
and not so much raised above the skin, but they are more dangerous than those
which are bigest and most elevate; this infirmity is easily discovered when a
Man is a buying a Horse, for he will perceive a great many mattering kind of
Warts or Poireaux which touch one another, and are without hair; they are for
the most part humid and send forth matter, but yet may be dried up for a season.

There comes sometimes also in the soles mattering kind of warts, or rather
Figs, upon the frush, which are easy to be known, for they are in a manner
detatched from it, and send forth a stinking kind of matter, they also appear
distinctly upon the middle of the frush toward the heel, which is full of
corrupt stuff, they commonly exceed the ordinary height of the frush, and are
as I said rather figs than Poireaux or mattering warts, although they are for
the most part called Poireaux, because of their being mentained and nourished
by the same nervous juice as they.

Those Figs grow sometimes also upon the sides of the frush, and beneath the
sole of the foot, and when they are considerably raised above the frush, so
that they touch the ground as the Horse is riding, they then cause him halt to
the very ground.

The external form of Figs, is the the same with those Poireaux or mattering
warts which come in the pasterns, only that the figs do not in the beginning
send forth such stinking matter as the Poireaux or Leek heads do; those figs
are of such consequence that no man should buy a Horse which has them, because
their cure is long and troublesome, so that such persons who know the secret of
it, may safely say they can perform what very few people can, although some
within this short time have become pretty skilful in it.

A Man may know when a Horse has been cured of figs, especially if he has
suffered long under them, because that foot in which he had them will be larger
than the rest, and will still continue to be so, although the Horse be
otherways very well recovered, and render good service.

I know a fine Coach Horse whom there was a necessity to reject, because they
had neglected to look to the figs which he had in his hind soles, which were
become so corrupted, that the little foot or Coffin-bone was almost quite
discovered by it, so that one might have easily touched it with the prob,
through the corruption which the figs had made a top of it; the Horse being in
this condition did rid but with trouble, and his hind feet were almost twice as
big as his fore, so that at last there was a necessity to reject him.

There comes sometimes also through a Horses whole Body, a great number of figs
or rather Anburys, but which do no kind of prejudice, and as their roots are a
great dale less than their bodies, people tie a thread of double silk about
them, which they straiten by degrees, and which makes these Auburys to dry up
and fall away, especially if they are begun to be tied and restricted after the
full of the Moon, and when she is a decreasing, and that they be daily anointed
with the juice of the herb purslain, or with the milk which comes from green
figs when they are broke and squeezed; there are few of these kind of Figs or
Anburys which are not eradicat in the decrease of one Moon, but the silk thread
must be straightened once in three days: sometimes they go away of their own
accord, and so the horse is freed of them, unless it be a certain kind of large
ones, which are broad at the roots, and also almost asflat as a Crown piece,
such immediately appear upon the surface of the skin, the part is quick, and
sends forth a stinking juice or water, if these kind of Anburys be
neglected, they will increase to the bigness of half Oranges, and will be very
ugly, they may be dried up with the yellow water, by touching them with it once
or twice a day, and if you strew them over with the powder of dried Cuttle fish
bone, and continue it, you will so kill them that they will no more appear:
they come likeways upon that part of the neck where blood is taken, and which
is commonly caused by stricking with a rusty lance or fleam, also in the flat
and middle parts of hind Legs: The best remedy which I find for either, is the
yellow water, or vulnerary water, described in the 60. Chap. Sect. 8. and 61.
Chap. Sect. 3d. of the second part; you are to wash these figs or Anburys every
day with urine, then touch them with the vulnerary water, and afterward strew
them with the powder of dried cuttle fish-bone, and continuing this for a Month
the Anburys will dry up, and because they have no roots, will therefore never
return: It may so fall out that the Anburys may have caused a kind of Ulcer
which will be long a drying up and healing, but if you still continue to apply
what I have been directing, it will at last extirpate them. In fine, although
it is not in this place you should find remedies, I have however thought fit to
set down this because of its easiness, and that it is not worth the while to
make a Chapter expressly for it.

The Traverse Mules or Kib'd heels, are Chops and Clifts which surround the
back parts of the pastern joints where they ply and bend, and oft-times there
comes above that part many more; this infirmity is more painful than the
preceding, because these chincks as a horle is Riding, shut and open by reason
of the motion made by the pastern-joint, which makes them very painful; it is
with difficulty that they can be dried up, because of that movement that
keeps them still open, and which augmenteth the descent of the humor that
nourishes them; those who understand not this infirmity call it a Crevisse, it
is indeed a Crevisse, but which is more propperly called a Traverse Mule or
Kib'd Heel.

This infirmity should not hinder a man to buy a horse if the legs be not
gorged and swelled, although the most inconsiderable infirmities in
Coach-Horses legs, are truly very much to be feared because of their bad
consequences; oftentimes this infirmity makes a Horse always halt, until the
sharpness of the humor, heat, and swelling of the leg are removed.

Besides Rats-Tails, Poireaux or mattering warts, and Traverse mules, there
comes in the hind legs a kind of white, sharp, and corrupt humor or Waters,
called in French Manvaises Eaux, they come very rarely in the forelegs, but
rather almost always in the hind, these Waters are like to a stinking kind of
matter, which passing through the pores of the skin deaden it, and also render
it of a whitish color, they commonly do not ulcerate, but in the Crevisses
which are either in the pastern or upon the pastern-joint: This infirmity is
quickly known by causing lift the hind feet, and searching the pasterns, in
which you will presently find a humidity and moistness beneath the hair, which
is extremely stinking, and grows all round the pastern and pastern-joint, and
sometimes up almost to the very Ham; you are to observe that people dry up
these humors or Waters for a certain time, but then thy return again; It is
easy to know when they have been dried up, because you will find the filth and
neastiness in the pasterns, which is occasioned by the Drugs that were made use
of to dry and heal them up.

The Mauvaises Eaux or this white corrupt and sharp humor, is not of great
consequence in the beginning, because its course is easily put a stop to; they
many times cause the pasterns and pastern-joints to swell, keep the legs stiff,
make the Horse lean, and also separate the flesh from the Coronet near to the
heels; all the infirmities almost of the legs, have their rise and beginning
from these corrupt humors or waters, so that they are the cause of Poireaux or
mattering kind of warts, Rats Tails, Arrestes, Traversing mules or Kib'd heels,
and other such like infirmities which make the horse to perish by his legs:
After that the swelling of these has continued a long time upon the legs,
people are deceived when they imagine to discuss it, for these infirmities do
not easily yield to remedies, because the humor occasioning them is too much
hardened and congealed; Therefore in such an uncertainty, when a man knows not
whether the infirmity be newly come or not, I am of opinion that no man should
buy Coach horses, with gorged and swelled legs, unless they may be had at a
very reasonable rate.

However I would not scruple to buy a young horse, although he might have some
of these humors or Waters in his pasterns, providing that his Hams be dry,
together with the bending of them, as also that his legs be not gorged, that
is, swelled: The Horse Coursers are not so gross and foolish, as to put horses
to sale which have such Waters in their legs, for they dry them up from Evening
to Morning when the horses have no swelling with them, but if the legs are
gorged, whatever they may pretend for an excuse, you must not meddle with them,
for they are sufficiently hindered to restrict them by their not stirring out of
the Stable, and especially if the horses do not incline to ly down and rest.

The infirmities in the hind-legs are most dangerous for Coach horses,
especially such as have a great dale of hair upon their legs, because being
always wrought in Towns, where the dirt and mud is full of Nitre or a sharp
salt, unless they be carefully looked after and kept clean, the mud does so
poison these parts, that they are thereby rendered subject to infirmities,
which are very obstinate in yielding to remedies, (...) that a man can scarcely
recover them: Also if people let the dirt and filth remain^ such horses legs as
have a great great dale of hair upon them, that will be a mean to cauterize
them, and a wound being once made, a fluxion of humors falls dow^ upon it,
and entertaineth a passage for the whole impurity of the body, which at last
corn^^eth the horses legs, and occasions all these infirmities I have been
mentioning Therefore those who buy horses with very much hair upon their legs,
would do well to provide^ the same time, a Coachman or Groom who will take
care to keep them cle^^ and spare neither time nor Labor, to make all redound
to their own reputation, an Masters ^enefite and advantage; But notwithstanding
of all this if the legs be either charged with flesh, or have a full and fleshy
Ham, I assure you, you shall ne^^ find any satisfaction in them,

In buying a Coach-horse, the surest way to know if he will be little subject
to these (...) firmities of the legs, which are most dangerous and will soonest
ruin him, is to cho^^ him with as short hair upon them as possible, as well for
the ease of your Coach m^^ as your own satisfaction; not that it is long hair
alone which occasioneth those i^ firmities which I have been explaining, but
because it is a help to them, and as it we an assisting cause: above all, you
are to take care that their Hams be dry, that is pretty hollow, and without
much flesh, having no Vessigons, Varisses, or other co^siderable infirmities in
them; but the leg broad, nervous, disch^rged of flesh, a^ without swelling in
the pastern-joint, and thus, without it be by an accident, (...) will hardly be
subject to any infirmities in his legs: For my own part, I would li^^ a
Coach-horse better which had a great dale of hair upon his legs, than if he h^
but little, and very large and swelled Hams, for with this last imperfection he
will (...) a great dale more subject to the infirmities of the hind legs, than
with the former, p^^viding always that his legs be kept clean and neat, and
that the hard Hay-wisps be man to play exactly their part.

If you undertake the cure of these infirmities incident to the hind legs in
Winter a^ cold weather, they will give you a great dale of trouble, but in
Summer time as warm weather, the white Charge described in the 115 Chap. Sect.
3. of the second pa^ will produce such effects as you dare hardly wish for.

You are to observe besides what has been already said if his pastern joints
are (...) swelled, or have Crown Scabs as these before commonly have if he have
no Wind-gal^ and if when he is standing still, his pastern joint be not lodged
more to one side that the other, as if it were out of its place, and the joyn^
dislocate, or if it bend too mu^^ forwards, or if he carry it so low that it
mishapeth his leg; now some Horses have this weakness in their hind legs, when
they have it not in their fore.

Observe also if the Windgalls have any coherence with the nerves, for it is
one (...) the greatest infirmities a Horse can have, such windgalls as are
called nervous do always larne the Horse, and there is no remedy for them but
firing: one single nervo^ windgall should be enough to hinder a man from buying
the horse that has it.

You are next to consider if the horse tread only upon his toes, called in
French (...) Cheval rampin, which you will easily know by taking up his foot;
for they tread upon no part of it but the Toe, so that the shoe is all worn and
used in that part, the bac^ sinew of the leg shrinketh up, and the older the
horse grows it is still so much the worse; People may remedy this
imperfection, by methodical shooing when the horse is young and but lately
subject to it.

For what remains in the hind legs, you are to make the same observations which
I ordered you for the fore, that is, for treads upon the Coronet, scratches,
and other such like infirmities, to which the hind legs are as much subject as
they.

Having observed all I have been saying, you are as yet to consider if your
horse be Sound, that is, if he do not halt, you will know it best upon the
Step or Trot, for upon a Gallop a man can perceive but very little, without
having had a great and long experience, especially if the lameness lie in his
fore quarters; but still it will be less perceptible, if he be gallop't by a
good and skilful horseman.

The surest way then by far to know if a horse halt, is to make use of the very
same method people take for Coach horses, which is to cause trot them along the
streets i^ ones hand, it is there that a man cannot possibly disguise and
conceal a horses lameness, and is the true touch stone whereby a man cannot be
deceived in buying any kind of Horses, and not only for knowing if they halt,
but also for observing their strength and reins.

When a horse trotteth in ones hand, you are to observe if the lifting up,
keeping up, and setting down of his fore Legs, in French Le Lever, Le Soutien,
et L'Appuy, be such as they ought, and as I have already told you in the 11
Chapter; if he keep his Reins straight and equal, without rocking or swinging,
his head high, well placed and firm, for if he halt he will mark every time in
his trot with a motion of his head: When a horse rocketh, which I have
explained in discoursing of the Step or Walk, it is when one of his haunch
bones goes up and the other down, always the one after the other, every st^p he
marketh with his trot, for his Croup should not at all move thus after the
fashion of a balance beam, and if it do it is a token of no great strength.

The Horse-Marchants are obliged to warrant and secure the horses they sell,
from these infirmities following, to wit Pursyness, Glanders, that he shall
prove sound when either warm or cold, that is, that he shall no more halt after
he is warm, than he did at first going out of the stable when cold: If a horse
have any of these three infirmities, people both at Paris and almost over all
France, oblige the seller to take him again within nine days after the
delivery.

For the other infirmities, which I have been all along explaining in the
preceding Chapters, you are to have your eyes as sharp and clear sighted as
possible, that so you may discover them, because the^ Horse-marchants, who are
otherwise generally called Horse-coursers, are not obliged to warrant them,
nay nor even the Eyes, for it is to be supposed that you might have looked to
them and so have discovered whether they were good or not; but if you are a
buying a horse from a Gentleman or Burgess, who tells you expressly that he will
not warrant his soundness, you should in that case use all diligence imaginable
to discover the horses infirmities, if you suspect he have any, for when a
horses price is once paid, it is very difficult to make him be taken back
again.

When a Man buyeth a Horse at Paris, it is very fit to know the person from
whom he is bought, least he might have been stolen, because it is lawful for the
true owner of the Horse, to take him again where ever he can find him, so that
in this case the Buyer will be sent to seek after the Seller he knows not
where, and if he cannot find him, the price of the Horse is lost for good and
all; it is just so when a Man buyeth a Horse in the weekly Mercats, but if it
be in an open and public Fair there is no such hazard.

You are yet further to observe, if the Horse you intend to buy, be right
situat, and planted upon his legs and feet, as he is standing still and quiet,
and that he have the toes of his hind feet pointing straight forwards and
turned neither out nor in, or that he do not bring his hind legs too much
forwardbeneath his belly as he is standing, which is the very worst of all
stances: People say of such a horse, that his two ends, or head and Croup are
going to join when they perceive him standing in such a posture, and it is
either a token of a bad horse, or that he is much fatigued, when he thus
endeavors to give ease to his forelegs, by bringing forwards and as it were
beneath his belly those behind, that so he may make them support the most
considerable weight of his body.

Having thus examined your horse in every point as I have directed, you will,
when once you have had a little practice, in the twinkling of an eye find out
and discover the smallest imperfection, so that if a horse have any, it will be
the first thing will fall under your view and presently displease you; you are
in the next place to consider if he have a good Mouth.

CHAP. XVIII. How to know if a Horses Mouth be good and Loyal.
A Horse to have a good Mouth, CHAP. XVIII How to know if a Horses Mouth be
good and Loyal.
should have a well raised Neck, and if it be somewhat large and thick, it
should be at least well turned, his reins strong and well shapt, and his legs
and feet likewise; if he have all these right, no doubt but he will have
(unless it be by accident) a very good Mouth; Look to, or rather feel between
the upper parts of the jaw-bones, to know if they are sufficiently well
separate, that so the Horse may with the more ease bring in and place his head
exactly, for if these two bones be too closs upon other, and that he have also
a short and thick Neck charged with flesh, so that he cannot place his Head
right, his having a good mouth well be to little purpose, because you cannot
make use of it; and also this goodness of the Mouth is only agreeable, when the
Head is brought in to its best situation and posture; for we do not imitate the
Cravates, who make their horse carry their Noses in the Air, by which they are
very subject to falling; and also when any of them are in their countries, the
Clods or Stones in the highways make them frequently trip and stumble.

You have in the second Chapter of this First part, particular observations
whereby to know when a Horses Mouth is good, to which I referr you that I may
avoid repetitions: put your finger into the horse's Mouth, pressing his bar
pretty hard with it, and if you find that it paineth him, it is a token that
the bar is sensible, and consequently that his Mouth is good, but upon the
contrary, if the bar be not sensible his Mouth will be naught, for a horses
Mouth is no otherwise good, but it so far as it is less or more sensible;
however too great a degree of it will render it bad, as I shall show you.

Move your Finger also along his bars, to feel if they be high and ridged, and
not broke or hurt, which you will know either by the wound that is in them, or
at least the Cicatrice, and which kind of Bars are almost as much to be
apprehended as a bad mouth, for although the wound may come to heal up, yet the
cicatrice or scarr where the wound was, will never have that sense of feeling
which the Bar would have were it free of it, and it is also probable, that
that scar in the Bar may proceed from some cause which may denote the badness
of the Mouth, or it may be occasioned by the Riders having too rude a bridle
hand, or by a bad Bit; the greatest trouble which arises from such large wounds
in the Bars, is that they penetrate to very bone, and corrupting it, cause
small splinters of bone to fall from it, where the Bar remains always after
void and hollow, and which although it may be covered with the Cicatrice or
healing up of the wound, yet will neither be so sensible as it was before,
neither will the Mouth of the Bit rest so equally upon it.

Likewise if the place where the Curb rests be hurt, you may infer by it,
that the horse has either a bad mouth, rests too much upon the Bit in
traveling, or that the Rider has a hard hand, or otherwise that the Curb is
ill made, such as those are which are either too small in their Esses, or too
square and not very round; or lastly, that the place where the Curb rests is
very tender; but in buying a horse a man should always conclude the worst
against him, and believe that the place where the Curb rests has been hurt,
either by his having too hard a pressure upon the Curb, or by his mouths not
being so sensible as it ought.

In fine, to know with an entire certainty if a horses mouth be good, you must
les him part, or put him on pretty smartly, and then presently stop him; by his
parting you will know if he be not ticklish mouthed, that is, if he do not
chack the bridle or throw up his head, for when a horse has a too sensible or
ticklish mouth, he will rarely fail to beat upon the hand, or throw up his
head, especially at his first parting or breaking off; again by his stop you
will find if he stops easily, and by the least motion of your hand, with his
head firm and well placed.

You must make him thus part and stop very quickly two or three times, and if
he perform it exactly, it will be a token not only of a good mouth, but also of
much strength and Vigor; For if his parting be quick, and his stops just, with
a firm and steady head it is an extraordinary good sign, not only as to his
mouth, but also as to his Reins: Because after a violent action such as that of
running, in which a horse fully extends his body, if he stop as quickly and
short as a man would have him, it is a certain token of a good mouth, which by
its sensibility obliges the horse to Assemble in an instant all his forces and
strength, that were extended and stretched in his course, to put himself upon
his hinder parts or haunches; and if he repart again readily, and stop short, a
man may conclude from that, after he has made him perform it twice or thrice,
that the horse has a great dale of vigor, a good mouth, and excellent Reins:
It Is indeed true, that if he be rid by a good horseman, and that the Horse
himself be also managed, or has been but taught to form good and just stops
according to his capacity, that in that case his rider may so order it, that he
may with more ease perform what I have been saying; but if he part, and stop
firm and short twice or thrice, under an ordinary horseman, I think that a man
may very justly say that such a horse has both mettle, strength, and a good
mouth, because he parted quickly, formed very short and bard stops, by an easy
and gentle motion of the hand, without any kind of violence whatsoever.

Now you are to observe if you please, that the shortest stops are not the
best, but upon the contrary the very worst and most dangerous, so tha^ if you
do not make use of them both very moderatly and seldom, you will soon ruin
your Horses hams, and disorder his mouth; there needs no more to spoil a horse
but one bad and irregular stop, which may give him such a strain, as shall make
him of less value for it all his life time; but when People buy a horse they
do with him as they do with Fire Arms, to which they give a greater charge for
the first or proof shot, than they will ever give them thereafter, and so men
make use of this method of stopping horses short, for a trial, which is both of
very bad consequence, and false when made use of upon any other occasion:
Besides what I have already said of the mouth, it should be also full of
froath, which will be if the horse have what we call the action of the mouth,
that is, if he champ continually upon the mouth of his bit, and play as it were
with it, which is a token of a good horse, for few bad ones have this action; a
man needs not be very knowing in horses, to understand if the mouth be good, he
is only to observe, if the horse stop readily and easily after a quick and
swift carrier, but let this be only understood of such horses as are designed
for ordinary journey riding.

Horses which have not a fresh and foaming mouth, may readily not have a good
inward constitution of body, but have a hot and dry Liver, which consumes that
humidity, which by the agitation of the tongue is converted into froath.

You may also observe if this froath be thin and fluid, or of a pale, gray, or
yellowish color, all which denote a bad tempered Brain, but if it be white and
thick, and cleave to his lips and branches of the bridle, then you are to look
upon the mouth to be Fresh, and that the horse is of a good constitution and
sound in his body: This last observation of a froathing mouth, and its
different colors, will not please all people, and if they do not look upon it
as a bad remark, they will at least think it an unnecessary one, but as I have
undertaken to omit nothing which relates to horses, so I entreat the Reader to
receive the advices I give him, with the same sincerity of mind wherewith I
offer them.

You may in the last place take notice, if the bit which the horse has in his
mouth be not so rude, as by its violent effects to oblige and force him, to
form his stops thus quick and short, which is however not very easily
concealed; for with such a rude and harsh Bit a horse will always make
grimaces, beat on the hand, open his mouth, or endeavor to force the hand of
the rider; and if he do them not, he will have his mouth bloody, hurt, or very
much galled, which will be an infallible token of either a bad mouth, too rude
a Bit, or a very unskilful horseman, and perhaps of all three.

CHAP. XIX. How to judge of a Horses Vigor and Agility.
IT is very difficult to give certain directions, CHAP: XIX How to judge of a
Horses Vigor, and agility.
whereby to judge exactly of the vigou^ agreeableness, and strength of a horse:
However besides what I have already (...) the easiest way to know particularly
his mettle, is to pinch him with your spur in one place, without frighting him
with your legs, or giving him the least cause (...) apprehension any other way,
the manner of doing it, is when the horses is standing sh^^ to approach your
Spurrs just to the hair of his sides only, which by horsemen is term pinching;
now if when doing it you find that the horse is concerned or in a man^^
trembles, or is impatient under you, it is a token that he is sensible of the
Spurrs, (...) if you think he do not stir enough, I think it will not be amiss
to apply them (...) pretty smartly, keeping him fast with your bridle hand that
he move not out of (...) place, and if he assemble himself and endeavor to go
forwards, by signifying kind of impatience with the motion of his feet, and by
champing upon the bit without thrusting out his Nose, it is a sign of heart and
vigor; in a word a horse is said to^ mettled, when he is very sensible of the
spurrs: There are some horses which show great dale of mettle when they are
pinched, but then they immediately lose the app^^ hension of it, so that
although they have a very sensible feeling, which proceeds (...) from the
thinness of their skin, yet they are of a dull and craving nature and
disposition and are never agreeable, nor make use of their vigor, unless the
rider have always his spurrs in their sides: Now horses of this nature may be
rather said to be ticklish, the really sensible of the spurrs, and even
although they were really sensible, yet if the be lazy and have no regard to
the stroke of the spurrs after it is past, which many time falls out, in that
case a man may say that the horse is vigorous but lazy, and (...) thence
conclude that he can have no agreeableness neither in the Manage, if he be o^
pable of it, nor for journey riding.

You are also to remember that there is a very great difference between a
mett^^ Horse and a fiery one, a mettl'd and vigorous Horse should be esteemed
but a frettin^ and fiery Horse is good for nothing; a Horse which is truly
vigorous should be ca^^ and cool, ride patiently, and not discover his Mettle
but when required; whereas frettful and fiery Horse, although he may give the
same tokens of mettle when put^ it, as a vigorous, and have also really a great
dale of vigor, yet he will be always very uneasy, because he makes use of his
mettle only to incommode and trouble the Rid^^ and not to serve him with it
when he has most use for it: The excessive desire which he has to go
frettingly and unseasonably forwards, when the Rider would not ha^^ him, does
make him become so unquiet, that he is oftimes ready to force the bridl^^ hand,
and throw himself upon the Spurrs without giving the least obedience; few
peop^^ know to distinguish fieriness from true mettle, and the most part when
they would commend their Horses, say they have the greatest fire in the World,
which amongst Horse-m^^ is looked upon to be rather a dispraising than
commendation, and to express yet better th^^ fieriness, they say that he has
the greatest forwardness and eagerness can be, which is plainly to say he is
fit for none but giddy headed people who know not what they would have; I have
made this remark else where, for it is a method I always observe, to advertise
the Reader frequently of matters of consequence, to the end that if he did not
reflect upon them the first time, he may take notice to them the second; and I
look upon this to be a very good method, especially for young people and
Novices.

You are not to treat after this fashion Horses which have a great dale of
strength and chine, or such as are very delicate, because with the least action
that the Rider makes as if he grasp hard with the Brans of his Legs, they will
perform some vigorous action as pressing to go forwards, or leaping in one
place, and if they find but in the least the Spurrs, they will redouble their
Leaps either in one place, or by pressing forwards yerk out two or three times,
to advertise the Rider to close his Thighs and sit firm; but as these kind of
Horses are not every Man's Merchandice, as those who sell them do very well know
by the rate they put upon them, I shall discourse no more of them, it not being
very proper to prescribe directions for the knowing of Horses, to such persons
as daily dress and manage them, and who consequently should understand them to
the very bottom.

There are some jades which have no other defense when the spurrs are applied
to them, but to strike out continually; a good honest Burgess or Citizen who
were incommoded by such outstriking, would say that such a horse has a great
dale of strength, and that he would be very propper to make a Leaper for the
manage; but in place of a better observation, I maintain, that the most part of
horses which strike thus furiously out, do discover their doggedness and ill
nature, hoping thereby to free themselves from labor and exercise; for every
horse which does nothing but strike out, has more ill nature in him than
strength, and a horseman who suffers a horse thus to strike out beneath him,
may be a knowing Gentleman, which is what we call a learned Clerk, but upon my
word he is no good horseman, because it is always the Riders fault, if he
suffer a horse to strike out beneath him oftener then once or twice; those who
are skilful horsemen know if what I write ben't true.

There are other horses again, which when a man gives them the spurrs, will not
endure them nor go forwards, but as it were cleaving and fastening to them,
strike cut and go back, and cause themselves be beaten because they will not
advance, and if you press them hard, they will then fall a pissing and not stir
out of the place, these are called in French Chevaux Ramingues, or horses which
kick against the Spurrs; if he be a Gelding he will with difficulty quit this
humor, and out of mere hopes to recover him, I would not buy him; when
Geldings have once contracted a vice they very rarely quit with it again,
especially after they have had it a considerable time, and that it is become
habitual; but if he be a Stoned horse, he may then perhaps forget it for a
time, if he be under the conduct of a good horseman, but if once he has got
the mastery over any of his Riders, he will then be just to begin a new again,
such horses are called Ramingues or Kickers against the Spurrs which resist,
and as it were cleave to them, whereas a good horse should always fly the heels
or spurrs: This is not to say, but Geldings although guilty of any other vice
but this of Kicking against the spurrs, may be very easily reduced, especially
if they be not a long time accustomed to it and that they also be under the
conduct of a good Rider: But if they be mounted by some Booby or silly Fellow,
they will become soon worse than formerly; in a word every Gelding, Stoned
Horse, or Mare, which does not fly the spurrs, but obstinatly cleaves to and
kicks against them, should not be received, but looked upon as horses of a Cross
and Dogged Nature; and which are altogether incapable to serve agreeably.

When you mount a horse to try him, if he will not obey, but endeavors to go
where he himself has a mind for it, and also makes use of all possible means
to resist you, you are then to reject him, as a resty jade ought always to be,
for a man should buy horses which have no other Will save that of their Rider;
but then you must not confound kicking against the spurrs, with this vice of
Restiness; for a horse which kicketh against the spurrs in French Cheval
Ramingue, is he which cleaves to and resists them, and instead of flying them
or advancing, stands still, leaps, strikes out, or goes back, and does all
he can to disobey you; these kind of horses never quit altogether this vice:
Again a resty horse endeavors to go where he will and when he will, by
resisting his Rider with all the obstinacy he is capable of, that so he may
disobey him; such kind of Cattle are not at all to be meddled with.

In fine not to weaty the reader too much, I think the surest method is, to
choose, when a man can do it, such horses as are very apprehensive of strokes,
and are afraid of the least appearance of them, which at the only closing or
grasping with the legs or rather thighs, are afraid and allarum'd, and that
without fretting or fieriness, that is, that they discover no more of their
mettle and vigor, than what is required of them; it is with these
qualifications that I seek them, after I find they have a good mouth, and I
believe all people will be of my opinion; a horse which is free of any
considerable fault, which walks deliberatly and securely, without needing too
often the whip, and which without fretting goes from the walk to the gallop,
and from the gallop to the step again, without being disquieted, but always
champing upon his bit, which Trots with a glibness in his shoulders, and
gallops easily, snorting a little through his Nostrils, if he gallops easily, he
will certainly gallop a long time and with pleasure, because of his having a
good wind; if he be well upon his haunches, and gives a token of his being
strong and nervous, having a swift and just Carrier, a light and easy stop,
his head firm and well placed, and the Appuy or feeling of the Bit equal and
just, I say if a horse have these qualities, he may be bought without much
cause of complaint for his price, for there are Merchandices at all rates, and
people do not buy horses by the bulk or weight as they do Oxen; A true size,
Vigor, agreeableness, Suppleness, Lightness* and Strength, are things rare and
scarce, and for which people pay very dear.

Many people would have a horse with all good qualities and yet give but little
money for him, which is most unreasonable and what they cannot expect; because
if a man se^^ at a low rate any horse, which hathall the good qualities above
specified, it is a shre^^ token, that either he has no skill at all himself in
horses, or that the horse cost him no^ thing, being either gifted to him or
stolen.

However, I give this advice to my Friends, in relation to the buying of Horse^
that they never give too dear a rate for any which are not sensible of the
Spurrs, there is required no great skill to discover it, because by approaching
one of them, a Man will soon find if they answer it, neither should they give
too great a price for such a have not good Mouths, which any man who is in the
least skilful may easily judge of for having pushed on a horse in a carrier, it
is quickly known if he stop readily; now whatever other good qualities a Horse
may have, if he have not these two, of having a good Mouth, and being sensible
of and obedient to the Spurrs, which every Man is capable to judge of, I am of
opinion he should not be bought at a dear rate, and that at most his price
should not exceed thirty pieces, let his size be what it will.

In Spain, When a Man buys Colts or young Horses, from those which keep a breed
the price is regulate according to the age of the Colt, so that the people who
buy them knowing how these of two, three, and four years old are to be sold, a
Man has as more to do but choose his Colts of what age he would have them, and
then pay dow^ the price at which the Colts of that age are taxed, and thus he
is sure not to be i^^ posed upon by too exorbitant a rate; but after these
Colts have been once backed, and kept a little in the Stable, they then augment
extremely their prices, which thereafte^ is no ways regulat, but according to
the humor and fancy of the Seller, which is many times extrayagant and very
dear.

CHAP. XX. After what manner, a Man should mount and try a horse he intends to
Buy.
AFter you have seen the horse mounted and rid by another person, CHAP: XX How
a Man should mount and try a horse he intends to buy.
it will be fit to get up on him next your self, that so you may certainly know
if his going please you; A good Horseman will immedialy judge by a Horses
going, if he have strength, lightness, or be agreeable; but this can be taught
no man, but must be acquired by a long care, and application which he gives to
it: however I believe the best method whereby to know certainly the fund of the
vigor, Goodness, and agreeableness of a Horse, is this.

Take the Horse as he comes out of the Stable, and if possible before he has
Rid any that Day, and without animating, or in the least frighting him with
your Legs or rod, slack your Bridle hand about four fingers breadth, more than
it is necessary to feel him ou the hand, letting him go at a step according to
his own fancy and humor, with his head lolling if he will, and you no ways
troubling him; now if you can have but patience to let him walk thus
negligently for a quarter of an hour, if he incline to stumble he will trip
more than once, and perhaps salute the ground with his nose, if he be very
subject to it; if he be heavy on the hand he will rest wholly upon the Bit, and
be a burden to the Bridle-hand, if he be dull and Lazy, he will diminish
insensibly the train of his walk, and will at last stand still; to put him on
again, you must move gently your body and Legs, nay even your Arms, as commonly
the Grooms do when they take a Horse to the Water, and infallibly you will know
your Horse better thus in half an hour, than in half a day by any other method:
Again if after having made this proof, you cause him go at an attentive pace,
and that he be under the apprehension of your Spurrs, he will unite all his
strength and mettle to please you, whereas if you suffered him to walk on
negligently at his pleasure, he would not much help or advance his sale;
because it is commonly in the first hundred yards or so, that a Horse after he
has been switcht or spurred, gives the greatest token of his Mettle, by
reason that the fear and apprehension of the correction he received, is for so
long fresh enough in his memory: But if after he is once fred of that
apprehension, by your negligence in pressing him on, and slackness of your
thighs and legs, he notwithstanding go cheerfully forwards with a raised and
well placed head, and champing his bit, his step well raised and resolute,
without either stumbling or stricking upon the Clods or Stons in the way, I say
without doubt such a Horse cannot but be vigorous and mettled, and also go
well; these are the Horses which a man may venture to buy at a dear rate, for
there are but few of this make.

For Horses again which Amble, they should go roundly and equally, that is,
their hind quarters should accompany exactly their fore, and not go as if they
were in two pieces or halfs, but above all, you should observe if the persons
which are upon them, make but a little motion with their bodies, which will be
a certain token that such Horses go well, and that not only the Amble, but also
the Step.

Besides, a Horse in Ambling should go with an equal time or cadance, that is,
all his steps should be of an equal measure, and not three quick and perhaps
as many slow, but with his head and neck high and well raised, and his haunches
low; because those Hackneys with high and unbended Haunches, go uneasily, weary
themselves, and fatigue the Rider; there are some Amblers which raise up their
Croups every step they make, so that their hind-quarters move like the Waves of
the Sea, which are always rising and falling, this is a very bad way of
Ambling, which soon wearyeth Horses, and hinders them to Rid any great length,
because they do not Ride with their Haunches low and plied: For all Horses
which do not Amble with their Haunches thus low and plied, can never go
agreeably nor easily; but besides this, they should have also a sufficient
movement in their forelegs, which will add considerably to the Gracefulness of
their Amble.

The best observation for Amblers, and to know if they really go well, is to
take notice if they overlay much in Ambling, which is, if with their hind feet
they overpass a foot and a half, or two foot, the print of their fore, for the
more they overpass them with their hind feet, the better will they Amble, and
the worse if they do not, because it is impossible for them thus to overpass
with their hind-feet the treads of their fore, without plying considerably
their Haunches, which is the perfection of the Amble.

If people have not taken exact notice to the motions of a Horses legs upon the
Amble, they will scarcely believe how it is possible that an Ambler, which
lifts the fore and hind-legs of the same side and at one and the same time,
while the two legs of the other side are upon the ground, and so alternatively,
should yet set down these two legs which were in the Air the one before the
other and not at one and the same time; however it is a Matter of Fact, and if
you take notice to it, you will find that he sets his forefoot first to the
ground, and then afterward, but very quickly, his hind foot is set down, just
as the two feet of the other side, wherewith he did not lead, are beginning to
be raised, and when these two which did lead are upon the ground, then the two
of the other side are raised and make the same motion; and so successively the
one side after the other, which is pretty odd, and very well worth observation;
What our Author says here of a Horses setting down in an Amble, his forefoot
before the hind of the same side, notwithstanding of their being both raised
from the ground at the same time, may hold in some Horses, but does not in all,
as you may easily discover, by an exact observation of but half a score or a
dozen different Horses, as they are Ambling.

There are many traveling Horses, which have their Haunches so very stiff,
that they cannot at all ply them as they are Riding, which makes them so
uneasy, that they very much fatigue and trouble the Back and Reins of the
Rider, when they are but even going at a foot-pace, and they are those Horses
which are half ruined, and spoilt with carrying large Clock-bags and Mails, that
are most subject to this imperfection, so that when they have no Clock bag or
large Port-manteau upon their Croups, they go with their haunches very straight
and stiff, but if you load them with a pretty heavy Mail, they will then ride
agreeably enough, because of their being thereby constrained to ply and bend
their Haunches; the remedy is good, although somewhat too violent to be made
constantly use of: All Horses which have stiff hind quarters to uneasily,
neither are such Horses Haunches made stiff and uneasy with carrying Mails and
Port manteaus, for there are many of them which have never carried any, but
then this stiffness and uneasiness in them, may proceed from their being either
too severely fatigued, or for having too short Haunches: those Haunches are too
short, which descend in a straight line from the Haunch bone to the pastern
joint, and because it is with difficulty that such Horses bend their Hams in
Riding therefore is it that they have a hard and uneasy set with their
hind-quarters, without being in the least spoilt by excessive labor, for
although they be but Colts they will go after this manner, and give but a very
uneasy divertis^ment to their Rider.

In sine, whatever kind of pace a horse go, if he be upon his haunches he will
be so much the more agreeable and easy; there are some horses which as they
come first out of the stable, ply their haunches and go very low behind, but
they cannot continue long at it, because it is too constrained a motion; for
the horse perhaps unites al^ his strength to give ease to his forelegs which
are bad, and as no violent action is durable, therefore he cannot continue long
at this, so that after a short time taking himself to his old train, he will
go swinging and rouling his croup at each step, and ride very disagreeably all
the rest of the way.

There are however some horses which having very good and excellent Reins, ply
their haunches and go upon them at their very first coming out, but then this
is (...) mark of their strength and reins, in so far as being mounted by a good
horseman, he will make them continue their train, with their haunches thus
plied without intermission, which it were impossible for them to do, if they
had not besides good reins, (...) great dale of nimbleness and activity, with
an excellent and sensible mouth: Su^^ horses as these are both rare and very
dear.

It now remains that I discourse of those horses, which go shuffling and mixed
kind of paces, which generally speaking are worth nothing, for as such paces
are either a mixture of the amble and walk, called in French L'entre pas or
traquenard, or of the amble and Gallop, in French L'aubin, a horse cannot
continue at them, and commonly such horses are fretful and hery, which obliges
them at their first outsetting to take themselve to such kind of shuffling
paces: Sometimes also they proceed from a weakness either in their reins or
legs; but if it has never been a horses custom before, to go a shuffling pace
betwixt the walk and amble, and that you find he now inclines to it of his own
accord, it is almost always a token, that his legs are either spoilt or weak,
and that he erpects by this mixed kind of pace to give ease to them: The public
messengers Mail-horses which are these that carry the panniers or packs, take
up this kind of pace by carrying the large pack-sadles, and by degrees learn to
Amble as they spoil in their legs and become old.

Some ambles which are forced, that is, horses which have been constrained to
amble by help of the Tramel, without having any disposition to it, are many
times not very agreeable and easy; because they don't commonly keep at it
above half an hour, after which they take themselves to their accustomed pace,
and go either at a step or a pitiful short Trot: It Is true that the most part
of English horses have an amble, which i^ not at all natural to them, but which
they have been artificially taught, and indeed no horses in the world amble
better than they do, for they are taught it with a great dale of art; and many
Colts have at two years old the Tramel put to them, when they are at Grass, and
are left so in the fields with them every Summer, both night and day until
they be four years old, which is the age at which they commonly begin to back
them, so that by this long habit of running with the Tramel, they contract a
second Nature, and either Amble as they are pressed, or use their natural pace
when they are suffered to go slowly.

I have my self attempted to teach several Horses to Amble, both by the help of
Tramels, and without them only by the hand, but they never arrived to such a
perfection in it, as many Horses I have seen come from England, even although
the method of teaching it was discovered to me, by one of the most expert and
skilful in that employment; for he would have perfected and confirmed some
horses in the Amble in fifteen days time, and that only by the hand without
the Assistance of the Tramel; but that which happened to those I designed to
teach, was, that there Legs were all spoilt and galled with it, and by the
violence they suffered in going such a constrained motion, they became many
times lame; in short the most part of them came only such a length, that they
were more fit for deceiving People, than yiedling any good and profitable
service, so that if any person have a design to try his skill this way, I
advise him to follow no other method than that practiced by the English, which
he may find set down in the 33 Chapter of the Supplement of Horsemanship
annexed to this first part.

When a Horse has naturally a mixed pace, and that he goes sometimes the motion
of the Amble, and other times the Trot or Walk, it is very fit and reasonable
to apply the Tramel to him, that so it may assist nature to confirm him in a
pace, and which may prove also a very great help to give him such an Amble, as
may be both true and of long continuance, whereas if you did not make use of
the Tramel, there would happen this inconveniency that he would go the
Traquenard, which is a mixed and shuffling kind of motion, and but a very bad
pace.

When a Horse has an inclination to Amble, the English method of Tramling
succeeds very well: Now the motion of the Walk is different enough from that of
the Gallop, and the qualities which a horse should have to make him walk well,
are quite different from these he should have that so he may gallop well, nay
they are almost quite contrary: Because to walk well he should tread hard and
firm, whereas to gallop well he should scarcely suffer his feet to touch the
ground, which is the way people express themselves, when they would signify
that a horse should gallop lightly and easily; and it is upon this account that
horses which walk very well, do commonly never gallop in perfection, and that
those which gallop perfectly, do upon the contrary never walk exactly well;
however there are horses which have both a good walk and excellent gallop, but
they are rare and hard to be got: A horse that has a had walk, will run so
much the better, provided he have also mettle.

A Horse which is designed for hunting, should be Vigorous and full of mettle,
gallop upon his haunches, and but graze slightly upon the ground with his feet,
that is, should go smooth, and not raise his fore-feet too high, but list them
easily and without much trouble, his head and Neck high and well placed,
without resting too much upon the snaffle, and also giving a little snort with
his Nostrills each stroke he makes, which is a token of good wind; when a man
is taking a trial of a horse by galloping, he should observe if he perform it
equally while he continues him at it, and at last he should push him on a
little hard to know by his stop if the horse have as yet strength and vigor,
which is called a Source or Fund, and if he be also sensible of the Spurrs.

This is what I promised to discover to you, concerning the faults and
imperfections of horses; and if you have exactly understood what I have said,
and that with attention you go gradually from one part to another as I have
ordered, I am certainly persuaded you cannot be imposed upon or deceived when a
buying one: But if you think you are not as yet skilful enough to rely upon
your own choice, I advise you to consider well whom you employ to assist you,
and especially beware of those qutbus prater lucruns nihil est dulce. It is now
full time that I draw this part of the present treatise to a close, which
certainly for its usefulness cannot be too long, and if any person will take
the trouble to augment and enlarge it, he will do me a considerable piece of
kindness. I have as yet some useful circumstances to discover, which relate to
the buying of horses, such as the Color, White hair which comes upon the
legs, and Feathers, which are a kind of natural frilling, or rather turning of
the hair, upon several parts of the Body, and other such like things, which I
intend to discourse of in the following Chapters, because they are pretty
curiosities, and sought after and inquired into with a great dale of nicety and
care.

CHAP: XXI. That an orderly and well regulate Manage cannot be prejudicial to,
nor spoil Horses, as some people would pretend it does.
ALthough it be my profession to teach the Art of Riding to the Gentry of th^^
Nation, CHAP: XXI That an orderly and well regulate manage does Horses a great
dale of good.
and that a great many persons of good quality and reputation a^^ persuaded (at
least have made me to believe) that I have honorably acqutted my self of it
till now, yet I never undertook to writ any thing of my ow^ relating to the
manage; however I shall make bold to add a word or two in the place, to answer
such persons, who having no great knowledge in the Art, say that (...) manage
is prejudicial to, and spoileth a horse: They endeavor to persuade all people
who will give the least ear to them, of it, and think if they can but underval^
and destroy the good effects which may flow from a well regulate and judicious
m^nage that they will evite the shame and confusion they have of being
ignorant, when the would pass for knowing and skilful: And it is upon this
account, that contrary: their own proper sentiment and opinion, they condemn a
regular School of riding, a though they have known it to produce very good
effects, and that only because they themselves know not to make use of it.

For such as understand nothing at all of the Art, people should not be
surprise that they thus condemn the manage, because they talk of it as blind
men do of color without knowing for what; and without being prepossessed with
that bad maxi^ of finding fault with, and condemning every thing that ones self
understands not, a m^ cannot believe, that a regulate and well ordered manage
can possibly spoil any kind^ Horse: For let them show us horses of any kind of
service whatsoever, which ha^ served twenty or twenty five years, as there may
be seen a great many in the (...) cademies which have rid so long, and that
with a great dale of Courage and Vigo^^ and let them consider and examine the
legs, Flanks, and mouths of the one and the other, and they will find that
these belonging to the manage have them sound and ne^^ and the other either
Wind-gall'd, Arched, Round, or Straight set, with their Flan^ altered and
fallen low, and their mouths quite spoilt; now the reason of this is, beca^^
the chief design of the manage, is to supple a Horse and put him upon his
haunches which do both mightily preserve him.

Again a horse which is Supple and Adroit, will trouble and fatigue himself
(...) great dale less, than if he were Mal-adroit, Stiff, or Gourded and bound
up as it were in (...) shoulders and haunches, and if hedis-ease himself less,
he must in reason endurt longer and be less spoilt; besides, seeing it is known
that most part of horse end by their forelegs, if they be set well upon their
haunches, their reins and hind quarters will suffer the whole trouble, and so
preserve the weakest quarter and that which soonest spoils, which is the fore
hand, perfectly Sound and Entire.

Moreover, what is it that gives an easy Gentleness and Adress to Horses, and
oblige them to travel and gallop upon their haunches, but a well regulate
manage? Also for the walk, a man may try if a young Horse which have been
trotted for some time according to the rules of art, will not go the one half
better than he did formerly, that is, both more swiftly, lightly, and more
agreeably; but this is matter of fact which cannot be denied, having had
experience of it my self a hundred times, and I have also had some horses of
Ten years of age under my custody, which would never go at (...) right step
during the whole time they were made use of, and yet I made them wall
afterward very justly and well, they were it is true very sensible of the
Spurs, and had pretty good mouths; and this I did not to one but a good many:
Now can this, I pray, be performed without the assistance of the manage, and
Art? or is it to spoil a horse which has not a just step or walk to teach him
one? and yet what is it but the Manage and Art of Riding which does this? or
is it to spoil an English or French galloper, to teach him to run upon his
haunches, whereas formerly he gallop't upon his shoulders? or can it be done
without Art and being a good Horseman? no surely.

But perhaps some brisk and airy Sparks may say, that this can be done by
frequently coursing of him, which let it be so, yet after they have coursed him
never so long, do they imagine that he is ever a whit the more upon his
haunches for it? perhaps indeed he may be put upon them by it, when he is quite
spoilt, and has hardly any legs at all: As for the flancks, no body doubts but
a too great quantity of Hay contributes to make Horses pursy; for
Mannage-Horses, they get no more Hay than what is sufficient to cause them
drink lustily, but for journey Horses upon travel they give them what they can
eat of it, that by so strong a food they may continue or recover to them their
flesh and spirits, which they have lost by their great fatigue: Another certain
sign that the Manage does not trouble or spoil horses, is that they are there
maintained in good case and exceeding plump upon almost half the food that
people give commonly to journey or traveling horses.

I think I may now conclude this Chapter with a very true Maxim, which is, that
a well regulare Manage is to horses, what the Lapidaries Art is to an
unpolish't Diamond, seeing from a kind of rough Peeble, it becomes by the Art
of the workman an ornament fit for kings; and so the understanding and skilful
Horseman, does by his Art supple a horse and increase his gentleness,
facilitating to him the means whereby he may agreeably employ and make use of
his strength and vigor, and so be fit for the service of Kings, to carry them
off from the greatest dangers, and to make them be admired in Triumphs and
public Carousels; all which could never be without the assistance of the
Manage, as the Diamond would have continued but as a piece of rough Peeble
without the Lapidaries Art; there might be a great dale more writ upon this
matter, should I exceed the limits to which I have confined my self; but if
any person relish the little I have said, and that his curiofity excite him to
know more, Let him read the works of Mousieur La Broue, and these of the great
Duke of New Castle, which are later, or even the second Chapter of the
Supplement of Horsemanship at the end of this first part, and he will there
learn that there is as great a difference between a Horse which has been
mounted in his younger years by a good Horseman, and another which has not,
as there is between a dancing Master, and a common Porter or Country Clown, and
likewise, that the Horse which has been rid according to the rules of Art,
will be preserved and last near double the time he would have done, had he not
been thus suppled and put upon his haunches.

CHAP. XXII. The Names of the different Colors of horses, with the
instructions and observations that may be drawn from them.
BEcause the Colors of horses sufficiently discover their Natural temper and
constitution, CHAP: XXII The Names of the different colors of Horses,
it will be very fit I declare in this Chapter, what my experience has taught
me concerning them, especially seeing that without debate, upon the temperament
and constitution of a Horse, does in a great measure depend his goodness and
Value; we must therefore begin with the Names of these Colors, their
differences, and afterward relate which of them are good and which not

And although it is a common saying that there are good Horses of all Hewes or
Colors and good Greyhounds of all Marks, yet there is very much to be taken
notice to and considered; you are therefore first to know, that in France when
they would speak propperly, they don't ask de quelle couleur, but de quel poil
est un cheval, that is, they don't enquire what Color, but of what Hair a
Horse is, which although it go very well in the French Language, yet would make
but bad English, and therefore I shall only make use of the word Color, as
that which in the English Language is both most proper and best understood*

Now the most common of all Colors is the Bay, of which there are several
kinds; there is no man but knows that a Bay Horse is he which is of a Chestnut
Color, but more or less bright, and which by the common people is called Brown.

There are Light-Bays, and Guilded-Bays which are somewhat of a Yellowish
Color; the Chestnut-Bay is that which comes nearest to the color of a
Chestnut; some Bay^ are spotted, that is, they have spots upon their Croup of a
darker Color than the re^ of their Body, which in a manner dappleth it, and
are therefore called Dappled-Bays.

The Dark Bay is that which is almost Black, only has a little Brown hair upon
the Flanks and tip of the Nose, and is therefore sometimes called Brown-Bay.

All these kind of Bays, and even the Light-Bay, have all their Extremities,
that is their Mains and Tails Black; neither was there ever a Bay Horse which
had not his Extremities Black.

The Black is known by all people, it is of two kinds, the Moor or Coal Black
which is liveliest, and the Duskish or ill Dyed, which Color sufficiently
explaineth i^ self.

The Grays are of several kinds, and being composed of dark colored hairs, and
white, differ accordingly as they have more or less of either color, from
which the derive their Names; The Branded-Gray or Gray blackned as it were with
peices^^ Coals, is he which has spots wholly Black dispersed here and there
upon the Gray, and which are as large as the palm of ones hand, or thereby.

The Dappie-Gray is a very common Color; these horses have upon their Crou^^
spots of a darker Gray than the rest of their body, and which resemble little
round Wheels or Circles.

The Light or Silver-Gray, is a bright and lively Color, in which there is a
very small mixture of black hairs, and but only so much as may distinguish it
from the white.

The Sad or Powdered Gray is a Color with a very great mixture of Black hairs
in i^ and is a pretty enough color when the Main and Tail are white, the
Black-Gray is almd the same with a great dale of Black and but a little white;
the Brownish or Sandy colored Gray, is that wherein there is Bay colored
hairs mixed with the Black, and is (...) very good color.

Of Pye-Bald Horses there are several kinds, as Black, Bay, and Sorrel, and
they derive their Names from the resemblance they have to Mag-Pyes, they have
sometimes their Le^ all white to the very Knees or Hams, and others have the
White in other parts (...) their Bodies, but the less white they have, it is so
much better token of their goodness.

The Roan is as good a color; as any of the preceding, and there are several
kind of it; to wit.

The Roan of a Wine like color, or which approaches near to the color of a
pale Claret: and

The Roan with a Black or Moors head, and which has also his extremities, as
Mai^ and Tail black, called in French, Rouhan cavesse de More.

The Flea-Bitten or Starling color, is a color which somewhat resembles
either the Brownish or Black-gray, but only that it is more freckled than they,
having also a conside rabble dale of more white, which makes it so much the
Livelier, it is called the Starling color, by reason of its resemblance to the
Color of that Birds breast and back feathers.

Horses of the color of a Peach-Flower or blossom, are very rarely sensible,
and obedient to the spurrs, but their color is delicate and pleasing to the
Eye.

The Sorrel is a kind of Bay of a Brown or rather Ruddish color, and is in
horses what red hair'd is amongst men, but with this difference, that there are
but few Sorrel horses (...) what are good, especially if their extremities, to
wit their Mains, Tails, and legs be black.

There are several kind of Sorrels, and their difference chiefly consists in
the colou^^ of their Mains and Tails which dister from thatof their bodies. As,

The Red or Cow Colored Sorrel, with the Main and Tail white, or of the same
color with their bodies.

The Bright, or Light Colored Sorrel, has commonly the Main and Tail white,
and is not much worth.

The Common-Sorrel, which is neither Red nor Bright, but as it were a Medium
between both, is that which most commonly goes under the name of Sorrel,
without any other distinction whatsoever.

The Burnt-Sorrel, is a Sorrel of a very deep Brown and Redish color; and
should have always the Main and Tail white, but they are very rarely of another
color; and this is also both a beautiful and good color.

The most part of Sorrel Horses, except such as have their Flanks of a Pale
color, and their extremities White, have always a very sensible feeling of the
Spurs, that is, that they answer them readily; and are also frequently of a
Choleric constitution.

There are other mixed kinds of colors, such as the Rubican, which is, when a
Black, or Sorrel Horse, has White hairs scattered here and there upon his
body, but especially upon his Flanks.

The Mouse-colour or Dun sufficiently explains its self; there are Horses of
this color which have black lists along their Backs, called Eel-backt; others
have their Legs and Hams listed or rayed with black, after the fashion of some
Mules, with their Mains and Tails quite Black, and others are not so; some
again are of a bright Dun color, and other of a very Dark, but these last are
the most serviceable especially if their extremities be Black.

The Wolfe-colour is if two kinds, either Bright or somewhat Dark, if it be
very Bright it resembles much the Isabella color, such Horses have always, or
at least should have a Black list along their Backs, with their extremities, or
Main, Tail, and legs black; and are for the most part very good.

The Tiger-colour, is almost the same with the Branded or black spotted Gray
before mentioned, only that in the Tiger color, the spots are not by far so
big and large as in the Branded or Black spotted Gray.

There are some Horses which are called Purslain-coloured, because their bodies
which are white, are stained here and there with strange and odd kind of Spots,
somewhat like those that are to be seen upon Vessels made of Purslain; these
are rare colors of Horses, and therefore very proper for a King or General
Person to appear upon, in a day of public Joy and Triumph, especially if they
have also the other qualifications which are required in a fine and well shapt
horse, to cause them to be noticed.

From the mixture of different colors, are produced a great many others, which
have their denominations from that color which they most resemble.

Having described the several colors and told their names, we must next draw
observations from them, whereby we may judge of the temperature, and of the
humouz which predominats the which will discover to us, whether the horse be of
a fretful disposition, dull and heavy, or mettled and vigorous; so that by this
means knowing once the qualities of the color, a man may with the more
certainty buy a Horse, having always recourse and relying upon the preceding
observations; and not only this, but also order and regulate better the purging
and dispensing of Medicaments to Horses, if he be so unlucky as to have any
which are either indisposed or sick; notwithstanding that the Duke of
Newcastle, in his large book of Riding printed in French, treats en ridicule
all such as regard either color or marks, wherefrom to draw any knowledge of
their goodness and excellency; but I believe himself is the only person who is
of this opinion, although he be otherwise very knowing and skilful in both
Horses and Horsemanship; He also laughs at those who say that a Horse is
composed and nourished by the four Elements, for says he, both Men and Horses
receive their sustenance from Meat and Drink only, in which he is most
certainly in the right; but then he should have considered that meats and
drinks, and that of what kind soever, are all compounded of the four Elements.

Horses are composed, as Men, of Humors which have a certain affinity and
relation to the Elements; Physicians make four kinds of them, by which they
regulate and determine peoples constitutions, which they call Sanguinian,
Bilous or Choleric, Phlegmatic, and Melancholic; I shall discourse of these
at more length, when I treat of the method of Purging, which is near to the
close of this first part, and therefore it shall at present suffice, that I say
the Sanguine Complexion has an affinity to Air, the Bilous or Choleric to
Fire, the Phlegmatic to Water, and the Melancholic to Earth; so that to
proceed to the knowledge of what humor predomines, you shall not satisfy your
self with remarking only the Color, but you shall also join to this
observation, the consideration of the Horses principal actions, and if you find
that they correspond with the color, then you may with certainty conclude upon
the temper and disposition of the Horse.

This Assinity and correspondence between the Humors and Elements being
supposed, you must next know in which colors it is, that such and such an
humor predomines, which is what I am going to explain, without however
positively affirming it to you as a thing infallible, for seeing this
observation may come to fail in some circumstances, I don't pretend to make it
pass as an infallible demonstration, nor to establish thereby an assured
knowledge; I only discourse of it according to the experience I have had, which
has very rarely deceived me; but because there may be possibly some exceptions
in it, you are therefore to make use of it with the greater discretion.

Now the four principal colors, which have an Affinity and Relation to the
four humors in the Body, and which also correspond with the Elements, are
these following the Black is commonly Melancholic, that is the Melancholic
humor predomines most in a Horse which is of this color, and prevails over
the rest of the Humors; if the horse which is Black have a Star in his
forehead, or a white foot, it is a good mark, and such Horses are strong and
sprightly, but if he be all Coal Black and not a White spot upon him, then he
will be Melancholic, and consequently Terrestrail, Dull, and ofttimes double
Hearted, that is, he will have two Wills, one to obey, not being able to resist
because of his being Mastered by the rules of Art, and the other to refuse and
disobey: The Hungartans hold it for a certain truth, that a Man who is mounted
upon a Black Horse, even although he have no White at all upon him, is more
succesful in War, than if he were upon a Horse of any other color; I believe
the ground of this may be, because Black Horses are very rare and scarce in
these Countries, and also that they are not so well perceived at a distance by
an Enemy, as if they were of an other color.

The Spantards have so great an esteem for Horses which are Black all over,
called in French Chevaux Zaines, that they have a proverb which says,
Morsille sin senus muchos lo quieren, y pocos lo han, whereby they esteem those
happy who have a Coal Blad Horse, without the least White spot upon him.

Again in France, they look upon Jet Black Horses which have no White marks:
all upon them, as unluckie, and think also that all Horses, which have not a
White Stare Blaze in their foreheads, are defective, which is not without
reason.

The Sorrel color is Bilous or Choleric, and has assinity with Fire; A hoar
then of this color will be Cholerik, Frettfull and Light, and will have a
dispositi^^ to Leap.

The Bright and Dark Sorrels, are more or less Choleric, as their Colors at
Light or Dark, and if they have White marks upon them it is a good sign;
because White correspondeth with, and is a token of Phlegm, which by its
coldness qualifies the excessive heat of Bile or Choler, and so makes the
Horse of an excellent disposition.

But if he be a very Dark Sorrel, then he will have Melancholy mixed with his
Bile and it is so much the better; because by its weight it will fix his
Choler, and (...) make him more capable to conceive what a man would teach him,
and also cause his have a better memory, than he would have did he want it.

The White is Watery and Phlegmatic, and consequently dull and soft; Horses
(...) this Color have rarely a good disposition, and become commonly charged
with fle^ and very fat, however it is not fit because of this observation to
condemn all Whi^^ Horses, because there are but few fcal'd of this color; and
I have seen many Whi^^ Horses which were excellent Leapers, active and nimble,
but then they had been (...) and became only White as they grew aged, which is
what frequently happneth: W^^ Horses which are Flea-bitten or have small Dark
spots upon their Heads, Necks, and Shoulders, are commonly execellent, and if
they have them over all their body, the mark is so much the better, but if they
have them only upon their hind quarters and none upon their fore, then they are
rarely good; so that you see the White which ha^^ a mixture of Black, makes a
very good disposition as I have already said.

The Deer-Colour sufficiently explaineth it self by the resemblance it has to
that of a Deer; if such Horses have their extremities, as Main, Tail, and Legs,
Black, they will prove good, and if they have likewise a Black list along their
backs, they will be so much the better.

Horses of a Bay color are Sanguine, which is an execllent complexion, they
are also commonly brisk and hearty, feed with a good appetite, and ride
deliberatly.

If a Horse partake of all the Elements in a due and just proportion, he will
be perfectly good; now I shall tell you the chief of those which have this
equal mixture of humors.

The Chesnut-Bay of a lively color, with a Star in his Forehead, deriveth his
chief temper from the Sanguine humor, which is the most excellent; they have
always their extremities Black, which signifies that they partake also of
Melancholy; again this livelyness of their hair proceeds from Bile, and the
White Stars in their fore heads are a token of Phlegm: So when you observe in
a Horse the four humors thus proportionably assembled and united, he cannot
fail to be excellent, especially the Sanguine humor predominating as it does
here.

With a little experience, and solid judgment, it is easy to draw the like
consequences from the other mixtures of colors, which I might here set down,
would it not prove tedious, and perhaps of no great use; it will be therefore
in my opinion sufficient, to discover to you which are the best colors in
general.

The Dapple-Gray is excellent.

The Flea-Bitten, or color of a Starling, which has good eyes, cannot fail to
prove good.

The Roan with a Black or Moors head, in French Cavesse de More, or Cap de
Maure, is most Excellent, Vigorous, and Hardy.

The Burnt or Dark Sorrel, never fails.

This is an abrigment of the most excellent colors, and which are best
tempered and most esteemed: after these, those colors which come nearest to,
and resemble them most, are the best, although there are of all colors and
marks good.

This reasoning, will with a little experience make you come to understand,
that those Horses which have too much White, are commonly weak and foible, it
is a color which I have omitted to explain, because it abundantly discovers
it self.

Horses which are of the color of a Peach flower or blossom, or which
approach near to that color, are neither much sensible nor very courageous and
bold, although otherwise their color be very becoming and beautiful.

The reason why the Dapple-Gray is so excellent, is according to our former
reasoning, because his Phlegm is animated by his Adust Choler or Burnt Bile,
and thereby becomes the Lighter; now from this mixture of Bile and Phlegine,
does result an excellent temper and complexion, full of Life and Vigor, but
which for the most part is not very sensible of, or obedient to the Spurrs.

Here is abundance of matter, from the variety and diversity of colors and
their properties, to swell this Book to a large Volum; and a Man might here
show very well his ability and parts; but the Reader may draw abundance of
knowledge from what has been said, whereby to satisfy himself in this matter,
which I shall quit at present, that I may discourse of white footed Horses.

CHAP XXIII. Of Stars, Blazes, and the White marks which Horses have upon their
Feet or Legs, called in french Balzanes
THere are some knowing and skilful people, CHAP: XXIII Of Stars, Blazes, and
White footed Horses,
who rely much upon the observations they take from a Horses having such and
such White feet, and believe these Marks to be so infallible, that upon the
White Marks falling in a good foot, they will buy a Horse, without tying
themselves to consider any other Marks which are a great dale more essential:
The Spantards, although they do not esteem a horse which has a White far-hind
foot, yet do not much regard any kind of White marks whatsoever upon the Feet
or Legs, for they say by way of prover^ that goodness is more to be valued and
considered in a Horse than good marks, Bond^^ vincesennal.

The whole foundation, and certainty of observation which people draw from
White footed Horses, proceeds only from experience, which is our sole guide in
this matter, and this experience is also in some measure founded upon reason,
for these White marks do by their Phlegmatic coldness, temper and qualify the
heat of Choler and subtility of Blood and so of the rest; but as to what
concerns their situation, and what influence that may have upon them it is only
the observations which people have had, that Horses with such a Whi^^ mark and
in such a place, did prove very good, which are the ground of it, and long
experience and custom have confirmed it, so that the grounds of Law and Equity
with which many people are so mightily taken, and in a manner infatuate, have
not a more sure found^tion, than these observations drawn from a Horses having
such and such of his feet White some people denominat the feet, by saying the
right or left fore or hind foot, other again by saying the foot upon the lance
hand, or that upon the bridle hand; but I shall name them by the near and
far-side, as that which is most common and b^^ known, for all terms are good so
they be understood, and seeing I have no other aim but to make my self as
intelligible as I can to all, I have made choice of these which are most in
use; to express a horses fore-feet, some people call them his hand^ but I shall
not make use of this term, although it is not long ago, since it was very much
in fashion amongst many whose business lay this way.

The french word Balzan, is borrowed from the Italian, which signifies a White
foot: A horse which has his far-hind foot White, although he have other good
qualities, and may be esteemed good by some actions he may discover to us, yet
it is rarely a good mark, and such a horse is also looked upon to be unluckie in
a day (...) Battle; but if he have either a Star, Ratch or Blaze, which is a
kind of White face, they will diminish somewhat of his badness and being so
unfortunate; such Horses are called in French Chevaux Arzels, and the Spanish
proverb says Cavallo Arzel, guardaz^del; I have known very skilful people, who
would not have bought a Horse at a gre^rate which had this mark of a White far
hind foot, although he had been never so good but for my part, I would not slip
such a good opportunity, even although I should be obliged to make use of him
in the Wars; if a Man be so superstitious as to believe such a Horse
misfortunate in War, let him then in Gods name keep him for time (...) peace;
for if the Horse had otherways all the good qualities required in a fine Horse,
and that he were not of too extraordinary a rate, I would buy him without much
cons^sidering his being Arzel, or having a White far hind foot.

The word Chanfrain is an old French word, but very much used, to signify that
the Star in the forehead extends downwards almost to the nose, without however
being either so broad above as to touch the Eyebrows, or extending so much
downwards as to go to the very tip of the nose; such Horses are also called
White faced, and the mar^ is passably good; but if the White either touch the
Eyebrows, or descend to the tip of the Nose, then it will be bad; people
commonly say of such a Horse, that his Star is a drinking, or that he drinks
out of his White, which last is but a bad expression.

To have only the near hind foot White, is a good mark, and if the Horse have
also with it a Star in his Forehead, it is the best of all Marks, and is very
rarely known to fail, for me I never knew many bad Horses with this Mark: In
Germany they have such an esteem for it, that it will make them heighten
considerably a Horses price, and if with this mark he also raise his feet well,
that is, have a good movement with his Legs when Trotting, it will double his
price in a public Fair; but however I would not give one pistol more for him
upon that account, if he had not also all the other good qualities one would
wish for; when a Horse raises or trousses his Legs very well as he is Trotting,
people say he has a good movement, which is one of the most becoming and
beautiful actions for the Manage that a Man can desire or wish for, but it i^
of no great use for long service.

To have only the two Fore-feet White is a bad Mark, but not very common; I
have known but few Horses which had this Mark, neither were they very much
worth, and they are also looked upon to be unluckie: if the Horse had with this
Mark one of his hind-feet White, and had likewayes a Star in his Forehead,
this would in some measure diminish the badness of his Mark, but not wholly:
Such Horses as have too much White upon their Face, are said to have moist
Brains, and consequently to be subject to many infirmities, especially these
which proceed from a cold and moist cause.

It is a general Maxim for White footed Horses, that those which have more
White in their forelegs, than in their hind, will be badly marked, and
defective in this point.

A Horse which has two White hind feet, is well marked, should be ranked
amongst those which are good, and should be esteemed fortunate, especially if
he have also a Star in his forehead; or if he have a White face o^ Blaze, he
will be pretty good, but if with it he have also very small Stones, then he
will be excellent.

A Horse which has two White feet behind, and one before, without having a
Star in his forehead, will be badly marked, but if he have a Star, it may pass
for ane indifferent good one.

These horses which have three White feet, with a Star in their forehead, are
by the Italians called Kingly Horses, but for what reason I know not, for I
do'nt see that they are better then others: But perhaps they call them Kingly,
because horses which are kept in Kings Stables work little, and that a horse
which has three White feet, being proper but for a moderate Labor or
exercise, is therefore only fit for a King.

There are some White footed horses which are called Tramled or Traversed, in
french Travat, and others again Cross-Tramled or Cross-Traversed, in french
Trastravat; I shall explain both.

A Horse which has only two feet of a side White is called Tramled or
Traversed, because of the resemblance those White feet have to the hoses of a
half Tramel; it is a bad mark, and besides that such horses are subject to fall
and stumble, they are also looked upon not to be good.

Again a horse which is Cross-White-footed, that is, which has only his near
fore-foot and far hind-foot White, is called Cross-Tramled or Cross-Traversed,
because of the same resemblance of the hoses of a half Tramel being placed from
fore leg to hind Cross, and not upon one side as the former; this mark is worse
then Arzel, or having but only the far hind foot White, and although the horse
have a Star with it, yet he is not much the better for it.

A Horse which has his far fore foot and near hind foot White, is Cross
Tramled or Traversed as well as the preceding, because of his White feet not
being both upon one side, but Cross-ways, and it is a mark not much better then
the former, although many people look upon it to be a very good one, especially
if the horse have a Star with it; but I have observed the contrary in all
those, which were thus Cross-Tramled in their far fore and near hind feet; the
Star in the forehead diminishes indeed a little the badness of the mark, but
does not rectify it wholly.

A Horse which has four White feet, or is, as we say, White in all four, is
tractable and of a good Nature and disposition, but commonly not very strong,
and his fore-feet will incline to be brittle, because of the Whitness of their
hoofs or horn.

It is a received Maxim, that the higher the White of any Horses feet ascends
upon the legs, he is so much the worse, because he thereby resembles so much
more the Pye-balds, of which there are few found to be good, and people also
say of such horses, that their Stockins are pulled too high: ^he reason why
Pye-Balds, and horses which have the White of their feet rising too high upon
their legs, are reputed defective, proceeds from this, that the phlegm which
is betokened by the White hair, does too much predomine, and make them weaker
then otherwise they would be.

If the Whites which are upon a Horses legs end in small points, or as it were
indented, or that it be freckled with Black little spots, I say if the mark of
such White feet be good, this indenting or freckling will increase its
goodness, and if it be bad, the freckling will make it not quite so ill; now
the reason of this may be, because the phlegm does not govern alone, but is
corrected by some other humor, which assists the horse with more vigor;
however the reasons of the goodness and badness of all these marks are at best
but very obscure, so that the surest way is, either to refer them to the
experience of our ancestors, or to rely no more upon them then a Man has a mind
to, or judges convenient.

Ermined White feet, are those which are freckled with Black little spots all
around the Coronets; it is ane excellent mark, and if the mark of the White
feet be good, this augmenteth it, if bad, it qualifies and corrects it, and if
indiffrent, it makes it good; in fine, I can asure you that all the Ermin'd
White footed horses which I have seen, proved always good.

If there be any reason for a Horses having tramled or Cross tramled white see
which can with any probability convince us of its small worth, it must be
because the two feet of the same quarter are not of equal strength; but there
are some who goe^ greater length, and say that the two white feet of a side,
and from whence a Horse (...) called Tramled or Traversed, are joined together
while the Foal is in its Mothers Belly if you have the curiosity to know the
certainty of this, you must cause open (...) Mare which has dyed with a Foal
in her Belly; now these two fe^t of the F^^ being joined in the Mothers Belly,
do, say they, by a kind of Sympathy incline, wh^^ he is a Horse, to meet and
join again with other, which is the reason why such Horse so frequently stumble
and fall, when they are galloping any thing quick and swiftly If this reason be
sufficient to convince a Man of the badness of a horse, which has on^^ two
Legs of a side white, or which is, as we said, Iramlea; then it is of grea^^
force for such as are Cross-Tramled, or Cross white footed, because the white
(...) being Cross, will by this Sympathetick inclination to join and meet, make
a horse m^^ readily entangle his Legs as he is running, and consequently more
apt to stumble a fall: This reason is taken from some Italian Author, and there
are also some Ger^^ who have writ upon this same subject, and agree in this
very point, which (...) perhaps appear a little too nice and delicat to you, as
well as it does to me.

A Star alone in the forehead, is looked upon to be a very good mark.

One, Two, Three, or Three with a Cross, is a manner of speaking well eno^^
esteemed, and which people frequently make use of, to express in a few words
all (...) good Marks which a horse can have; One, signifies only a Star in the
Forehead which is a good Mark; Two, signifies both a Star in the Forehead,
and (...) near hind foot white, which is also an excellent Mark; Three
signifies a Star in (...) Forehead, and the two hind feet white, which is
likeways a good Mark; a three with a Cross, signifies a Star in the Forehead,
and two Cross-Tramled w^^ feet, to wit, the far fore-foot and near hind, which
is also pretty good: When (...) have once considered well this Paragraph, and
that you hear any person exp^^ a horses marks by One, Two, Three, or Three with
a Cross, (in French un, (...) trois, ou deuxen croix) you will perhaps
understand better what they mean, the^ who names them.

The same is said of horses which have white Faces or Blazes, but if the Blaze
be parate and divided in the middle Cross-ways, then will the horse be of an
odd a phantastique nature and Disposition.

Again if the Blaze be thus divided in the middle, but the horse have his near
his foot white with it, then it will be a good mark, and rectify in some
measure their perfection of the divided Blaze.

Horses which are freckled, or poudered with small white spots upon a black or
(...) color, are good, especially if they are so over their whole Body, but if
they be fre^^ed only in the Neck, Flanks, and Croupe, and no where else, it is
but a very i^^ferent mark, because this is a sign that it is not natural, but
may have been occasion by the Flies, from whose biting and stings, the Horses
when young could not dese^ themselves, especially in these parts of the Body
where the white specks appear, so (...) the flies have by their Stings peirced
and canckered a little the Skin, and occasi^^ the growing ^f these freckled and
small white spots.

This observation is only proper for such Horses as have been bred in hot
Count^^ as Spain, Barbary, Italy, Turkey, and other southern Countries, because
for these (...) in the South of France, the Flies there are not so vigorous as
to occasion it: (...) white freckled with black, which is a kind of
s^ea-bitten, is most excellent, very durab^ and lasts a long time; A horse
which is freckled with Sorrel or Bay is full as go^ as the former, and is
called Trout-coloured.

A Horse which is only freckled in the Jaw-bones and Nose, or other parts of
(...) head, will be high spirited and stately; and frequently Traitorous, as we
say.

Horses are called in French Zains, when they are all of one color without at
white spot upon them, I hear mean only such colors as are Dark, for a white
ho^ is not said by the French to be Zain, because he is all of one color, to
wit whi^^ and has no black upon him, but of all other colors except those
which are wh^ or gra^ish, these horses which are all over of one color, are
called in France, Zains.

The Darker color a Zain horse be of, he is so much the worse and of less val^
and people say of them all, that they are either Devils or Daws, that is,
either ver^ good or very bad.

Horses which are of a deep Sorrel or Ruddish color, which is a token of a
Bilo^ complexion, if they be Zains or have no white at all upon them, they are
then commonly extremely Choleric and fiery, because the nature of fire, to
which Bile corresponds, being light and volatile if it have no phlegm, which is
denoted by any white mark, to fix it, will alter his Blood; and the horse being
naturally of a hot and dry complexion, if the Bile come to superabound without
restriction, it will not only render the horse which is already fiery by
nature, feirce and ill natured, but may also make him, through a too earnest
desire and inclination he has to go forwards, perhaps to loose altogether, or
at least to spoil the feeling of his mouth, by rendering it unsensible.

The Dutch and Frizland horses, and others of these Countys which are designed
for drawght, when it happens that they are all black, or of any dark color
without the least white Mark; the Horse-coursers make them artificial Stars in
their Foreheads, that so they may the better suit and correspond with these
which naturally have them; but it is easy to discover that they have been made
by art, because there is always a place in the middle of the star without hair,
and the white hairs which frame the star are also a great dale longer then the
rest.

I might here set down the method to make them, but I Judge it more proper to
give it at the end of this first part; however to deal ingenuously, it has
failed oftener with me then ever it succeeded, and they are only the Dutch
people who have the knack on it.

Having discoursed of the Marks, which may be drawn from the different colors
and their variety of Mixtures, as also of Stars, Blazes, and the Marks in white
footed horses, which are good or bad, we shall next see what conjectures may be
drawn from these Frizures, or rather turnings of the hair in several parts of a
horses body, commonly called Feathers.

CHAP: XXIV. Of Feathers, both ordinary and extraordinary, which come in a
Horses Body.
A Feather upon a Horse, is nothing else but a turning of the hair, CHAP: XXIV
Of all ^inds of Feathers in horses.
which somewhat resembles ane Ear of Wheat or Barley in some, and a kind of
Oilet hole in others; there are some which are common to all Horses, and there
are others again which are extraordinary, and peculiar only to some, it is of
these last I intend to discourse of at present; now these turnings of the hair,
or Feathers, proceed from either a great dale of Cold, or an abundance of heat,
if from heat, then the hair in them turns upwards, and if through abundance of
cold, then it turns downwards.

All extraordinary Feathers, which are in such parts of a horses body as that
they cannot be seen by him, are excellent Marks, whereas if they are situate in
such parts, as by turning or bending his neck he can view them, for example
about his Heart or sides, then they are bad, but for what reason they are so,
that I know not.

If a Horse have in his Forehead two or three of these Oilets separate from
each other, or so joined that they form a kind of Feather, called in French une
Epee Roman, which I shall immediately discourse of, he will have an excellent
and fortunate Mark, which alone is able to rectify any other bad Marks he may
possibly have; but the last is the better of the two, and a Horse which has
it, will be obedient and true to his Master.

If the like mark be upon the ply of a Horses hind thigh, and upon the back
part of it near to where the end of his Dock or Rump reaches, it is an
excellent one, and as the preceding, will rectify any bad Marks he may
otherways have.

A true or Roman Feather, in French une Epee Roman, is the best of all Marks,
it is a turning of the hair, which reaches a good way along the upper part
of the nec^ near to the Main, and very much resembles the shape of a Feather,
if a horse have one upon each side of his neck, the mark is so much the better.

There are again some Turkish, Barbary, and Spanish horses, which have the
stroke or wound of the Lance, in French Coup de Lance; all people greatly
esteem this mark and the Horses which have it are mightily valued, it is
situate either upon the shoulder or neck, in some horses pretty high, and in
others more low, which is said to be the pa^ where that famous Stallion in
former times received his Wound; Now both for the satisfaction of the curious,
and better explication of this Mark, I shall relate the History of it, which is
reputed true, but whether it be really true or fabolous, as it is very probable
it may, yet here is the tenor of it.

A Turkish horse, one of the best and finest in these kingdoms, being mounted
by a general of ane Army; some say it was a Barb under the King of Tunis,
received a stroke or Wound in his shoulder with a Lance, and being much Lamed
by it was from his former employment turned to be a Stallion, as one which
would produc^ an excellent Race; so that all the Horses from Father to grand
Children, which are come of him, have the like mark or stroke of the Lance,
which mark has ever sinc^ passed for good and advantageous.

People know this mark upon the shoulder or neck, by a considerable hollow
without any kind of scar in the skin, although one would take it to have been a
deep wound because of the great cavity which is remaining; this mark is situate
sometimes upon the fore part of the shoulder, other times upon the lower part
of it, and sometime again upon the Neck; many affirm that the Lance went quite
through, and therefore that in some horses it appears upon both sides, this is
what I have learnt of the stroke or wound of the Lance, and have seen both
Barbs, Turkish, and Spani^ Horses have it, which were all most excellent and
serviceable.

Let this I have said be sufficient for understanding of Colors, White marks
and Feathers in horses; but perhaps it may seem that I have here made a long
digresion, I however look upon the knowledge of such things to be useful, or
at least currious for a man to understand, who is going to buy a horse, as also
for those who rely upon such observations, or love at least to discourse of
them.

CHAP. XXV. How to know if a horse which a man intends to buy, has a good
appetite, or be Subject to the Tick.
WHen according to all the directions and observations I have given you you
have considered a Horse both generally and by piece male, CHAP: XXV How to know
if a horse have a good Appetite, or be subject to to the Tick.
you are before you conclude the bargain, to observe if he Eat heartily, and
have a good appetite; because upon this does his serviceableness depend; no^
but that there are great Feeders which are no great Toilers, but there are very
few which can endure a great and long fatigue, but what have excellent
appetites.

A man may in some measure judge of it by seeing a horse fat and Lusty, with
(...) good Belly, and that he Eats heartily; but these observations are not
much to be relied upon, because they may easily deceive a Man, for a horse may
have been pampered up and fed very nicely for sometime, and that with a great
dale of care and trouble; he may have also become fat and well bellyed, by a
long resting in the stable without any kind of exercise, and yet may disgust
and loose his appetite by the least fatigue or xercise; but if you cause give
him a good measure of Oats, and that he eat them without intermission, and so
much as taking his Nose from amongst them until they be all eat up, this will
be a sign that he eats his Oats well, which is a great matter.

There are some Horses which as they eat their Oats, take their heads out of
the Manger to chaw them, and yet continue to eat them all up without
intermission; those Horses have a good Appetite, but by taking their heads thus
frequently out of the Manger, they loose a great dale of their Oats, and it is
also an unquiet and unbecoming kind of Action, especially if they have a trick
of looking behind them; but for a Horse to eat as he ought, that is, heartily
and with a good appetite, he should from the time that he puts his Nose amongst
his Oats, not remove it again until they are all eat up; and what sign soever
of greediness a Horse may discover at his first beginning to eat his Oats, yet
if he forsake them and fall to eating of his hay, (I suppose always that the
Oats are fresh and no ways musty) a man may then conclude that he has no good
appetire.

If the horse be Light-belly'd, a man should not buy him but upon condition of
having a Nights Custody of him, that so he may have time enough to know if he
eat his hay heartily, and he should give him about fifteen or twenty pound
weight of it, whereof if there be none nixt morning remaining, he will have a
good appetite; he is also to or serve if he drink well.

Horses which are Light-belly'd, although they may eat their Oats heartily upon
travel, yet for the most part do not eat much Hay, nor consequently drink
lustily, therefore it is fit to take notice to it when buying them, for they
have a great difficulty to subsist thus without Hay in Traveling, because with
Oats alone they are too much overheated, when a man is obliged to give a great
quantity of them, that so they may supply the want of Hay; if a Horse which is
light bellied be also fiery and fretful, he will never take to a belly,
although he may both eat and drink very heartily, and have his ribs also
abundantly deep and well turned; but if he be both light bellied and have short
turned ribs, then it will be so much the worse for him.

A man should also before concluding the bargain, observe if the horse be not a
Ticker, that is, subject to the infirmity, or rather bad custom called the
Tick, which is known by perceiving either his under or upper teeth all used and
worn, but yet a great dale better by seeing him eat; for he will press against
the edge of the Manger with his upper teeth, and give a kind of belch through
his throat, which action and noise is called the Tick, and with this infirmity
or bad habit I would not take a Horse for many reasons; first, a horse which
Ticketh thus, loses a part of his Oats as he is eating them, because as he
Ticketh he opens alwise his mouth, and so they fall from it, this is the
first inconveniency; the second is, that by continual ticking he so fills his
body with wind. that it will be apt to give him a Cholick which may make him
burst.

In the third place, a horse which is a Ticker having once become lean, can but
with great difficulty be fattened and made Insty again, and they are also
commonly but Light-body'd.

Lastly, this infirmity or bad custom communicats it self to other horses, not
by contagion or infection, but horses, especially those which are young, learn
i^ of one another; the Tick has been also many times taught Horses, by causing
them eat out of too high Mangers when very young.

Some horses Tiek with their upper teeth by pressing them against the Manger,
and some do the same with their under Teeth, both which they spoil and wear
with this trick.

Again others Tick with their Chins against the Manger, which obliges them to
keep their mouths shut, these do not loose their Oats, neither can a man know
that they have this bad custom, but by actually seeing them do it, for they
spoil not at all their teeth with it, as the others do.

There are others again which Tick upon the Halter or Collar, by taking it
betwixt there Teeth; now Ticking after this Fashion, a man can not know it more
by the Teeth then the former, but by actually seeing them do it, which must be
in the stable, But there are others which Tick in the open Air, without the
help or assistance of any rest, and others when they are bridled, by the
assistance of the Bit-mouth as some Coach Horses, do also upon the Pole-tree
when they are put to the Coach.

Of all Horses which Tick with their upper or under Teeth, some do it upon t^^
bottom of the Manger or Stall, and so loose none of their Oats, others again do
(...) upon the back part of the manger, and loose also but few, but the third
sort (which is worst) Tick upon the fore part of the manger, and it is here
that they both lo^^ their Oats, as I have said, and that the greatest number of
Horses Tick.

Some horses Tick more then others, and the more they do it so much the worse
for my part I would never buy a Ticker, for it is disagreeable and unpleasant,
to (...) a poor Creature always belching, when a man goes to visit him in the
stable: Ho^ ever I have known Horses put from this bad custom, by a little care
a^ pains.

After having enquired into the reasons, which might prompt and move a horse
(...) Tick, and what ease he could procure to himself by this kind of belching,
I imagine that it was a mere humor and fancy in horses, which gives them the
same kind (...) satisfaction, that men have in smoking Tobacco.

All these particulars being duly considered, a man should nixt discourse of
the price, unless the horse be subject to some of these considerable
Imperfections, as have before observed should make him be absolutely rejected:
but there are some, whi^^ not being of great consequence, should not be
apprehended, because horses will ser^ pretty well with them, and they are also
bought at a more easy rate, then if they ha^ nothing to be complained of; many
People do not scruple to buy such kind of horse and I think their policy good
where the price does not exceed twenty pieces; but if he be a horse of value,
there may infirmities enough come of their own accord, without buying him with
such as are known.

I am of Opinion, that one of the chief things a man should observe in buying
(...) horse, is to take care not to fall in love with him, because from the
Moment that th^^ passion has once seized a man, he is no longer in a condition
to judge of the horses i^ perfections; for although he may look to and discover
them, yet the great desire (...) has for the horse, is the cause that he
either persuades himself, that the faults he d^covers are but imaginary, or at
worst may be easily recovered: I give you this advi^^ as having my self
experimented it to my cost.

Before a man buy a Horse he should rather excite in himself a kind of hatred
again him, that so he may be a severe judge of all his imperfections, and when
the Horse once bought, then he should love him if he be worth his while; for
if a man love (...) his horses, jades and good horses will be all alike to him:
Those who seek after ho^^ to make drudges of them for all uses, without
considering whither they be good (...) bad, agreeable or uneasy, and don't
love nor cause take care of them, but leave the to the discretion of their
Foot-boyes; and who will neither take the pains to read what have already writ,
nor be taught it any other way, by conversing with those who u^ derstand it:
Jades and Carrions will I say be more propper for such Persons, the^ good
choice of horses, which would soon become sorry and pityful creatures in the^
Custody.

People are very often deceived when they come to trock or swap a horse, as I
(...) tell you, and therefore it is very fit they be advertised of it, that
they may guard again it: If you are wearied of a horse, and that he is not much
worth, or that you (...) not like him, have a care that the earnest desire you
have to quit with him, ma^^ you not take a worse in his place; because many
times the desire a man has to (...) himself of a bad horse, and the
satisfaction he conceives there is in taking advanta^ of, or gulling another is
the reason that a man is not capable to observe the faults, whi^^ are in the
horse he intends to swap for, so that a man many times exchanges a (...) having
only one eye, for another which is stark blind.

Again if a man have a horse which has any considerable fault, for example
Pur^^ or Broken-winded, he will shun as much as possible looking to the horses
Flank (...) which he is to tro^k, least it should make the other Person observe
his own horse and so a man gets commonly one jade for another: Those who
deal in horses, as have frequently occasion to swap and exchange them, know if
this be a good (...) useful advice or not.

After all has been said, it remains that you buy at as easy a rate as
possible, (...) take good care of your horse, and see he be well fed, that you
also cause look to (...) regular dressing, and that he be nowayes neglected,
either as to Shooing, Sadling, (...) Bridling, for all which I shall give you
directions hereafter.

Now all these observations I have been discoursing of, seem somewhat tedious
to be taken alwise exactly notice of; but every man who designs to become
knowing and skilful in horses, must either know and understand them, or
otherwise resolve to be first cheated, and then ridiculed.

CHAP. XXVI. The true method, to preserve horses sound and hearty upon Travel.
THe most part of People which travel upon good Horses, CHAP. XXVI How to
preserve horses sound and hearty upon Travel.
take great care to see them well fed and looked after, that so they may be
preserved sound and healthful, and yet they many times fail in it, either for
want of experience and reflection, upon what has already befallen them, or for
lack of the following advices and directions, which will prove most useful and
easy to practice; neither shall I affirm or say any thing but what I have
experienced, and have had the proof of its good success, in several journeys I
have been obliged to make, in which the horses by a few precautions, and small
charges, instead of being ruined and spoilt after two or three hundred Leagues
riding, were plump, Fresh, and their Legs as good and sound as when they first
set out.

People have also known large sized Horses, as well as Barbs, Spanish Horses,
and others of this size, which men make commonly most use of in any kind of
service or action, to have had there legs as sound after four or five
Campaigns, as they were the first, and that only by the care and directions
which I shall give you.

But before I discourse of what is to be observed in time of a journey, I shall
give some advices anent preparing for it, that so a Man may not be put to the
inconveniences and charges, to which these persons are who neglect them.

And I give this advice particularly to such, as have the commands or charge of
an Equipage, because for not having the horses commodiously fitted with Saddles
before parting, they will become severely galled and hurt, even almost to
death; those who have served in the Wars in Italy, Catalonia, and Flanders,
have at their own proper charges experimented this truth, and know that it is
one of the most necessary things for horses which are employed in the Wars, to
have them exactly well fitted with Saddles; and there is the same reason for
those which are to make a long journey; for it is an inconveniency, the
uneasyness whereof cannot be expressed, to be making use of horses which are
always galled and hurt beneath the Sadle; I shall therefore give you exact
directions, not only for this, but all other things belonging to a Journey.

You are then to cause shoe your horse that he may be at his ease, and that the
shoes be neither too strait nor press his feet, but be exactly shaped and
fitted according to the Rules which I shall hereafter give you for shoing, as
also that they be made of either old cast shoes, or a tough kind of Iron that
will not easily break.

If it be in the Summer time, and that your horse is very sensible of the Flies
it will be fit that his hind shoes have at their Toes, that which we call a
Beak which is nothing else but a little of the shoe at the Toe about the length
of ane inch, turned up, and fastened in upon the fore part of the hoof, there is
not a Smith who has had the least experience in his employment, but what knows
it, and at Paris they shoe all the Coatch Horses, which have begun but lately
to draw and trot upon the streets, with these kind of Beaks upon their shoes.

Now the reason why they make use of them, is because the Horses pulling always
up their hind-feet to their Bellys, to drive away the Flies and setting or
stricking them down again with force upon the ground, do by this violent kind
of motion, beat of their shoes every minute, and so break and spoil their hoofs.

This Beak upon the shoes of the hind feet, is also a sovereign remedy to
prevent such horses loosing of their shoes, which by reason of any itch, strike
violently while they are in the Stable, with their hind feet against the
ground; for it keeps their sho^^ fixed and steady in their places.

It is indeed true, that it is not so dangerous for horses to travel a little
wanting their hind shoes, as their fore, however if it be in a Stonny Country,
their feet would immediately spoil with so frequently loosing their shoes, and
fastening them on again; be^ sides that they will be so broken, that the Smith
will not find a place where he may safely drive a nail without hazard of
pricking, and then the Horse must remain for some time useless, because of his
not being in a condition to receive a shoe.

Your Horse being as I have told you shoed at his ease, you are next to see
that he be right bridled, for I suppose that you have already fi^ted him with a
propper B^^ according to the directions I shall hereafter give you, and
therefore you are to take notice if the mouth of the Bit rest upon his Bars,
about half a finger breadth above h^^ Tushes, and if it does not make him
frumple his lips; also if the Curb rest in its d^^ place, which is in the
hollow part of the Beard, a little above the Chin, and if it do no^ hurt him by
galling the part where it rests, for if it do, you must save and defend the
p^^ce with a piece of buft, or soft Leather.

I think it is also pretry material, to take care that all your horses, but
especially those for travel, be accommodated with Bits which are both proper
for them and also abundantly light, for these which have so very much Iron in
them, as those made in Germany, when ever a horse begins to weary, or that
he naturally incline to carry low, which but too frequently falls out, I say
that in that case a too heavy Bit^ will without doubt contribute very much to
make him heavy, or rest upon the hand, which is what we call to make use of
his fifth leg, and which is found to be (...) very incommode by all people,
that a Gentleman riding from Paris to Orleans, upon horse which was pretty
heavy on the hand, and rancountring with one of his friends who enquired at
him where he was going, very pleasantly and wittily replied, the he, was going
to carry his Horses head to Orleans.

The Head-stall and Reins should be of good Leather, but especialy these pieces
of leath^^ which support the Bit, called in french Poretemrds, should be looked
to that they b^ not fretted and burnt, some people for more security make them
of Hungarian leathe^ which is a kind of strong unlimed leather brought from
thence, and therefore (...) great dale tougher than your ordinary leather,
which is all limed; others again make them double, which is not a bad method.

In time of war, it is common for people to cause fasten a small Iron chain all
(...) long the insides of the Reins; now although this premonition concerning
the Head stall and reins, may seem to be of small consequence, yet I have known
horses to have been lost for want of a good head stall; for if you are
necessitate to make fast you horse in the open fields, only with their Bridles,
which is what you should preven and shun as much as possible, if but a Bird or
any other thing come to surpri^^ them unawarres, and without being expected,
they will not fail to pull back and break their Bridle reins or Head-stalls,
and so scamper through the feilds, which might be prevented were they provided
with good Head-stalls and Reins, but especially strong and fresh Port-mouths
which being frequently wet, and retaining long the moisture because of their
being next to the Iron, are therefore the more subject to break: there ar^ but
very few Head-stalls which are proof against, and can resist the pulling back
of (...) strong and high mettled horse, except it be those made of the the
above mentioned Hungarian Leather, and also pretty broad; therefore if you are
to make fast your horse, do it always either with his halter, or a piece of
good strong and fresh rope.

CHAP: XXVII. What is to be observed in Fitting a Horse with a convenient
Saddle, before a Man go to the wars, or begin a journey.
AFter observing your horses shoes and bridle, CHAP: XXVII How to fit a horse
with a convenient Saddle.
you are next to consider if he be well Saddled, and that it be so exactly
fitted to him that it cannot hurt him. It is not enough that the Saddle be
adjusted to the horse, it should be also commodious and easy for a horseman,
because if a man sit not at his ease upon a Saddle, he can never place or six
himself exactly in the middle of it, so that although the Saddle may be very
fit for the horse, yet the rider charging and pressing it more in one part then
another, it will at last spoil the horse, or at least weary him sooner, then
if the Rider were placed exactly in middle of it.

That a Saddle may not spoil and gall a horse, it should all of it rest equally
upon his back, that is, no part of it should more press his back than another,
neither should it any ways rest upon his Withers, Reins, or backbone, which is
termed upon the length of it.

To know if it rest equally over all, you must cause some person get up on it,
for it is only when a Saddle is filled, that this is best known, now if it
incline to pinch the horse in any part, you may easily perceive it, because
that part will be more pressed by it than any other, whereas it should rest
equally over all; For Example, if the Toes or points of the Saddle's fore-bow
press too much the horses sides, then the upper part of it will be void and
hollow, and not closs enough to the horses back, and so the Saddle will be too
narrow in its Toes or points, and may come to make the horse halt, but if the
points of the Saddle's fore-bow be too wide and open, then they will not touch
him at all in that part; but press him near to the upper part of the saddle,
and a little below the Withers, and so either hurt and pinch his shoulders, or
occasion Sit-fasts in those parts, which are very troublesome and difficult to
cure.

A Saddle will have also the like fault, if the hind-bow do not accompany
exactly the shape and circumference of the body, where it rests; for if it
press the horse at its points, then it will not come closs enough to his back
above, and if it rest too closs upon his back above, then it will be too easy
at the Toes or points, and so will quickly spoil the horse, where it presses
most.

There are some horses, to whom saddles are easily fitted before, and do not at
all sit right behind; but a saddle to be exactly well fitted, should rest
equally over all.

When a man has observed, that the two bows are exactly well turned, and fit
for the horse, in so far as they rest equally upon his back, both before and
behind, he must next see that there be enough of stuffing in the Pannels, to
preserve the saddle from resting either upon his Withers, Reins, or ridge of
his back.

But there should not be too much of it neither; which is the fault of your
common country Saddlers, who put as much stuffing in the pannels of a riding
saddle, as they do in those of a pack-saddle; for there should not be above the
thickness of two fingers of stuffing, and it should be either of Deers hair, or
the long hair of horses Manes and Tails, or even that of the Tails of Oxen,
which does not harden near so much with the sweat, as the common pannels
stuffed with the ordinary hair of Oxen and Cows: the cloth whereof the pannels
are made, should be pretty fine, for that which is course receives too much
sweat, and thereby becomes presently hard; Blue cotton Baize is very good for
the finer sort of saddles: In England they make sometimes the pannels of very
Rich Saddles of Velvet, which is both chargeable and of no extraordinary use,
there are also some who cause stuff their saddle pann is with Moss, which is
extremely well dried before it be made use of, and they say it is very propper
for this use, because it is not so apt to harden with sweat, as other kinds of
stuffing are.

The Saddle should be placed exactly upon the middle of the Back, neither too
much forwards nor too far back, because if it be too far back, and that the
Horse be light Bellied, his girths will immediately fall back to his sheath, and
were it too much forwards, the Horse would Ride but very uneasily, and
dissagreeably: Therefore that the Saddle may be exactly well placed, the
Fore-bow should be placed just at the want of the Shoulders, which is that part
that appears more hollow, especially in lean Horses, than any other part about
the tops of the Shoulders; some Sadlers call these hollows the Shoulder-pits.

You will also know when the Saddle is placed too much forwards, because the
Skin and Flesh of the shoulder, will be forced as it were forwards, and appear
high and raised at the points of the fore-Bow, especially when the horse is in
motion; the very same will also happen if the pannels be too much stuffed before,
or that the Toes of the fore-Bow be too narrow and strait.

In fine, you are to hold it for an infallible Maxim, that a Saddle will never
hurt^ horse, except in that part only where it presses him too much; you are
therefore to look carefully for that part, and when you discover it, prevent
its pressing him so any longer, by causing either alter the Bows, stuffing of
the Pannels, or by any other way you shall judge best.

The Polanders and Crawats make use of Saddles which have no Pannels, and ar^
all wood next to the horse's Back, but then they have woollen clothes, that
they fold i^ three or four plyes or doubles, which they lay next to the horses
Back, and adjust i^ exactly all beneath the Saddle, so that those coverings
supply the place of pannels, and when their horses come to be unsaddled, they
suffer them to remain upon the^ Backs for a little time, until they are cool
and then make use of them themselves, to keep them from the cold; these
coverings never become hard as Saddle panne^ do, and therefore the use of them
is excellent, for their horses are but very rarely galled or hurt with them,
only in the Summer time they heat a horse too much.

In Germany the whole Cavalry followed this method, not of Saddles made all of
wood, but to put such clothes beneath their Saddles, notwithstanding of their
having pannels as those in France, and the invention is good; for these
coverings di^ not only prevent the hardening of the pannels with sweat, but
were also a good moveable for themselves against the winter Cold.

Another invention for Horses which are Tender-skin'd, and subject to galling,
notwithstanding of all the care can be taken to prevent it: Is, to have a
Roe-b^ or Hinds skin according to the size of the horse, and which is well
garnished with hair, because otherways it would be too hard: you are to adjust
this beneath the panel of the Saddle, and to fix it neatly, that the hair of
the skin may be next to the horse's, now this does not harden with sweat, but
prevents extremely a horses spoiling and galling, and is likewise admirable
good for such horses, as have been lately cured of hurts or wounds on the back,
because they are very subject to gall a new again, and their skins being as yet
tender and without hair, are easily ruffled and spoilt; it is also a very good
method for horses which sweat much, and therefore are subject to galling; this
method of putting a Roe-buck or Hind's skin beneath the panel of the saddle, is
also very much used by the German Cavalry.

Having examined, if the Saddle be fit for your Horse, you need not much
concern your self any further, seeing there are at present so many skilful
Sadlers in Paris, and other Towns in the Country, who have so well imitate the
Saddles which come from England, that a Man may rely upon them for a Saddle,
which will be easy and convenient for the Rider; and they will serve you the
more carefully, when they see you are capable to discover their faults, which
you will certainly be, if you understand what you are immediately to read.

It remains then to be considered, that the Rider sit at his ease, which is
what the most part of people do not understand to make enquiry after, for
except in the great Citys, a Man will find very few easy and well made Saddles,
and the common Sadlers know very rarely so to make a Saddle, as that it may lie
low and near to the Horse, especially those in the Country, where however I
assure you, they understand better how to order a Saddle, so as it may not hurt
or gall a Horse, than in the Citys and great Towns, but to make them so as that
a Man may sit and ride at ease, is what they are not as yet come the length, or
Masters of.

That a Saddle may be commodious for the Rider, it should be low and not too
much elevate above the Horses back, that is, that betwixt the Horse's Body and
Riders Thighs, there should be but a very little distance; a Saddle to be easy,
should not be raised much higher before than behind, and for that effect, the
fore-bow of it should not be made with a kind of raised neck, but the
Saddle-Withers should be low, and if it be but two or three fingers breadth
above the Horse's Withers, it will be sufficient, that is, that the upper part
of the fore-bow of the Saddle, should be only two or three fingers breadth
higher than the Withers of the Horse, because if they were more, it would be
too high; for when a Man is upon a Saddle which is too much elevate before,
that is, whose upper part of the Fore-bow is excessively high, he cannot
possibly sit at his ease, but must be very much fatigued with it, and he will
also soon weary the Horse, because the motions of his Body come from a
distance, which make them the greater, and consequently the more uneasy for the
Horse.

The Rider being at a distance from the horses body, as he is when the saddle
is made very thick, and that the Withers of it are very much elevate, there is
a necessity that the motion of the Horseman be more incommode, as it is
greater; this incommodity will weary and fatigue the horse considerably, which
should be prevented as much as possible; and it is in this, that these people
who cause make the fore-bows or withers of their saddles, with half a foot or
four inches of a raised neck before, are mightily deceived; it is an error so
old and inveterate in the Provinces, that I don't pretend to rectify it, but
in the most refined Towns, People have absolutely quit it, and any considerate
Person will come to know the truth of what I affirm, and may easily make a
trial, that thereafter he may make use of it if he shall be convinced.

My design is not to recommend Saddles, whose fore-bows at the withers rest
upon the quick; upon the contrary they must always be distant from the horse's
Withers two or three finger-breadth, and when a man perceives that they lie too
near, he should immediately rectify it, by causing stuff and garnish the
pannels, at that part of them which is called their Breasts or Paps; but if the
Withers of the saddle be raised only two or three finger-breadth above the
Withers of the horse, then it will hurt him neither one way nor other; for the
first, which is a high Neck or Withers, will have its inconveniences which are
great, and the last which lies pretty low, and not too closs upon the horses
Withers, will have its advantages which are considerable.

That a saddle may be convenient and easy, both for the Rider and Horse, it
should be almost as low before as behind, that is, that the fore part of it
should be but a very little more elevate than the hind, unless the saddle be
made after the Scots fashion, which is a very good method, for the fore-parts
of them are fashioned like that of a great saddle, but the fore-bolsters are
not so high, they are flat upon that side next to the seat, and the fore part
of the seat goes almost in a level from them as in a great Saddle, so that
thus, the Withers of the Saddle is sufficiently well raised above the Withers
of the Horse, and the Rider is not at all incommoded, for the seat of the
Saddle is almost level without, being elevate before, and is joined to the
fore-bolster after the same manner as that of a great Saddle: The use of these
Saddles after the Scots fashion appears to me to be more convenient, then any I
ever made use of, and they are also very durable, because of their
Fore-bolsters, and the whole fore-parts of them being pretty well elevate, and
yet no more then they ought; They are also made long in the bands or seat, if a
Man please, and near to the Horse's back, which are the qualities of a good and
convenient Saddle.

The reason why people make Saddles which are easy, long in the seat, is, that
a Man may sit with the more ease betwixt the two Bolsters, and that his Thighs
may not rest too much upon that behind, as they do always when the Saddle is
too short, and which makes a Man sit hard and uneasily, because he is on the
wood; Moreover, a Saddle shouldly low upon a Horses back, and have a soft seat:
it will be somewhat difficult to persuade those, who never made use of any
other Saddles then what they had made in Country Villages, of the Truth of
this; but if a man will continue in his Error, I should certainly be a greater
fool than he, if I contradicted or opposed him; for it is permitted and free
for every man to incommode himself for his own pleasure, although with^^^ any
appearance of profit or advantage whatsoever.

That a Saddle may be low before, and yet not hurt a Horse's Withers depends
pa^ly upon the shape of the fore-bow, which, besides that it should not be
elevate more than two or three fingers above the Horses Withers, should also
have but about an inch of Neck, which is that distance that is betwixt the
Fore-bow and Pommel; but this (...) not enough, because if the Saddle be too
thick and high in the Pannels, or too much staff'd, it will incommode the Rider
very much, even although the Fore-bow of the Saddle be in it is shape, neither
too much elevate above the Horses Withers, nor have (...) high a neck.

If you design that a Saddle should lie low upon a Horse, you must order the
Sa^^^ when he is to fix the Bows upon the Bands, whether they be of Iron or
Wood, that (...) take care to place the Bands near to other, especially upon
the upper part of the inside of the Fore-bow, that is, that they be placed
pretty near to the Withers of it, (...) not too near; because if they be fixed
too low and at a distance from other, a Man shall never be near and closs to
the Horse, for when he would close his Thighs, the will meet with the Bands of
the Saddle, and so not only hurt him, but also keep then at (...) distance from
the Horses side, which is what we are afraid of and would preven^ Moreover,
before the Sadler stretch and fix the Girth-Web upon the Bows, if the Bands are
not already very smooth, he should take the Rasp and rasp them, if they (...)
wood, in that place where the Thigh rests, that so it may be flat and not
edged upon the upper part, as it many times happens; because, with the least
thickness of the Saddle in that part, the Rider will be incommoded; whereas if
the Bands be exactly ordered and well turned, there will be no need to rasp
them, because the Carpe^ter will have saved that labor: About Paris the
Sadlers are not at this trouble, because the Carpenters, or those who make the
Saddle-Bands, are very dexterous and skil^^ especially if well rewarded for
their pains.

It is a great abuse which has creept unto France, this of Carpenters for
Saddle-Bows for so these people are called which fashion Saddle-trees, because
never making Saddle themselves, how is it possible that they should know after
what fashion the Bows a^ Bands should be shaped, that so the Saddles may be
convenient and easy? the Sadles themselves should therefore cut out the Bows,
and give them the right turn, as I know a great many who already do it; the
Sadlers indeed may show the Carpenters the Faults of their Saddle-bows, but
then they must pay the more for them; and man Sadlers do not make it so much
their business, to enquire after such Carpenters as a^ most skilful in their
employment, as those which work cheapest and at the easiest rate.

The Saddle-tree-Carpenters, which know to give the Bows a right turn, among
which the English surpass all others in the World for Hunting-Saddles, give the
^and such a dress and shape, that the Arches can hardly press or gall a Horse's
Withers.

When English Saddles are put upon a Horse's Back, they immediately appear as
they rested closs upon the Withers, but when a Man is set upon them, the weight
being placed in the middle, makes them rise before, so that it is hardly
possible for them (...) rest upon the Withers or hurt the Horse, by reason of
the exact turn given to the Ban^ Our French Sadlers have attempted to make
theirs after the same fashion, but few^ yet have come that length; there are
however some at Parts, who are very dextero^ in making Hunting Saddles, which
are commodious and easy, and really the English themselves can hardly make them
better, for they lie low upon the Horse, and are very soft and easy, which is
all can be desired in a Hunting Saddle: But it is not to such who make only
Coaches, that a Man must adress himself to cause fit a Saddle exactly for ^
Horse; because if you bespeak a Saddle of them, they cause make it by some
other having neither the practice nor materials by them, which are propper for
it; that you may be therefore the better served, you are to employ those whose
only business it is to make Saddles, and can do it well.

Those however who are accustomed to Ride upon English Saddles, find difficulty
(...) make use of Ours, although very well made, and people may indeed say in
behalf of the good English Sadlers, that they make their Hunting Saddles lie
closser to the horse, Lighter, and more commodious and easy, than any
whatsoever; so that a Man who has made use of them for some time, cannot
accommodate himself with others, without a great deal of inconveniency; because
although the most part of them be hard and little, yet a Man sits firmer upon
them than any other, because he is nearer to the Horse, either when he is a
Hunting, or even Riding Post; those who are accustomed to such Saddles, never
gall or loose their Leather, as they will do if they posted upon French
Saddles, because the Seats of them being large, and stuffed with wool,
Feathers, or hair, do become warm, and afterward heat a Man's breech and
Thighs, and the skin being thus heated, does immediately gall; however, there
are few people of this opinion, although a very true one, unless they have been
long accustomed with English Saddles: It is indeed true, that, as they for the
present counterfeit them at Paris, the most nice and delicate have difficulty
to distinguish them, especially those Saddles whose Seats are well stuffed and
soft; but every man has his humor and fancy in this, as in all other things.

People at first using of them, find some of these English Saddles very hard,
especially those with skirts, and until a man be a little accustomed to them,
he finds them uneasy, and his Breech suffers by it; but, the habit once
acquired, and buttocks hardened, people never quit them, unless they be very
lean, or have their skin near to the bones; or that they are not much
accustomed with Riding.

Observe all the Horse-Coursers which are most firm and vigorous on Horseback,
and you will find, that they never make use of any other but English Saddles.

For such persons as cannot make use of these, I advise them, for Traveling,
to make use of the half English saddles, which being well stuffed and soft in
the Seat, almost as low before as behind, and exactly shapt, will although they
be set upon little Cushions neatly stuffed, be abundantly closs and low upon
the Horse's back, and have the same conveniences with the full English saddles,
without being anyways incommode or uneasy to those who have soft and Tender
Buttocks; people make such saddles wonderfully well at present.

Some people, for their convenience, will have Saddles which are very long in
the Bands, but I rather think, they should be proportioned to the Size of the
Horse and Rider, because a big bellied Horseman will require a longer Saddle,
than another whose Belly and Thighs are not so gross; yet this is not, but that
generally speaking long Saddles, or which have a pretty long Seat, are really
the most convenient for all kind of people; especially when they are to ride
Post, and that for the reasons I have already given.

Those large Saddles that are very high before, and which are called ala
Royale, or by what other name you please, with a broad and very high Seat, well
stuffed with Feathers, and which keep a Man's Thighs upon each side, at half a
foot distance from the Horse's sides, are very uneasy and worth nothing for
service, however they are much made use of in Provence; They are incommode, in
so far as being very high before, they throw a man back, and force him to sit
upon his Rump, which does not only weary him extremely, but is also troublesome
to his Reins, whereas in those Saddles, which are low before and closs to the
Horse, a Man sits upon his Twist and Thighs, his Reins are not at all troubled,
and he Rides at his ease, and although the Horse should kick or strike out,
yet he cannot much incommode the Rider.

When a Horse, with such Saddles as are extremely high before, does but move
his Tail, he immediately throws a Man upon his Nose, so that when he has made a
days Journey or two upon such a big and ill shapt Saddle, which may be called
more properly a Closs-Stool, finding himself very much incommoded and wearied,
he imagines for the most part that it proceeds from his not being accustomed to
Travel, or from the weakness of his Reins; whereas it is almost always from
the bad shape of the Saddle; nevertheless the mistake in this is so great, that
many people think they cannot have a good Saddle unless it be half a foot too
high before, very much raised above the Horse, the Seat extremely broad and
large, and the whole Saddle weighing fifty or sixty pound weight, which may be
rather called a Pack-Saddle than one fit for Travel, and which is only proper
to weary the Horse and fatigue the Rider; but whatever Saddle a Man make choice
of, provided it rest equally upon the horse's back, and press it not more in
one part then another (for that part where it presses most will spoil and
gall) it matters not I say whether it be English or Swedish, provided a Man be
pleased with it.

At present, people make Saddles that are called after the Holland fashion,
which have as it were a kind of quilted Roll fixed all around the back part of
the Seat; these Saddles are very good for those who would sit easily, because
with these Rolls they can never rest upon the hind-Bow, and the Seat being well
stuffed, makes a Man sit very soft; besides, they are convenient for tying a
Man's Cloak behind him after the German Custom, or for carrying a Port-mantle,
which may be made very fixed by the help of this Roll; and for such again as
are a little heavy in the Breech, or find difficulty to ge^ up on a Horse, they
take hold of the Roll to assist them, which is a great ease to them. The
English Saddles which in England are said to be made after the Scots fashion,
are the most convenient and easy of all Saddles, for it rarely happens that
they hurt a Horse and the Rider is very much at his ease upon them, the use of
them is come you much in fashion, and there is a great probability, that at
Court and about Paris the will come to make use of no other but these; for they
begin already to reject a other fashions.

CHAP: XXVIII. Of the Appurtenances or Furniture of Saddle; such as Poitral or
Breast Plate, Crupper, Girths, Sursengle, and Stirrops, etc.
THE Saddle being fit for the Horse, CHAP: XXVIII Of the Appurtenances or
furniture belonging to a Saddle
and convenient and easy for the Ri^e you must adjust the other furniture
belonging to it, for example, first^ Crupper, that it be neither too strait
drawn, nor too slack or loose; (...) be a Crupper with a single Buckle, care
must be taken that the Buckle do not (...) upon the Horses Reins, for if it do,
it will as he is Riding gall him in a very dang^ rous part; and if you perceive
it ruffle, or begin to cut any of the hair, you a then to adjust beneath it, a
piece of Veal or Roe-buck skin with the hair of it next (...) the Horse's, so
that the buckle may not hurt him.

The Cruppers for hunting, are those which have no buckles, and are fastened
only (...) the Saddle by two straps, they are preserable to those with buckles,
especially if (...) straps be not too big, and that they are well fastened, in
so far as they are not Subje^ to gall, but these hunting Cruppers are now no
more in use.

People at present make only use of Cruppers after the English fashion; the are
better than those for hunting, because the buckle is in the middle of the
Crupp^ and that by which it is fastened to the Saddle, has no tongue, whereby
they have the advantage, that a man may straiten or slack them at his pleasure
with a great deal (...) ease, and therefore they are the most convenient of
all, so that people have ban^ all other fashions, and make use of none but
these; and of ane hundred Saddles, wh^ are made at Paris, a man will not see
one of them with a hunting Crupper, for the are all made after this English
fashion.

Those Cruppers which have two buckles, distant seven or eight inches from
other after the old fashion, that is, each buckle about four inches distant
from the part of the saddle to which people commonly fix the Crupper, are very
good, a^ keep a Saddle much better in its right Seat than any other, especially
upon Mares whi^ are commonly low before; this fashion is at present little
used, and but very ugly although extraordinary convenient.

The Dock-peice of the Crupper should be rather large and full, as too small
because if the Saddle be high behind and low before, as it may very readily
fall o^ when either the fore-bow is too wide, or that the pannels are too much
stuff^ behind, the horse will then with out doubt gall beneath the Tail, but
the rather if the Dock-peice be very small.

And if the horse be low before, any fashion of Cruppers whatsoever will so^^
gall him, especially if he be traveling in hilly Countries, and that his rider
do not (...) care to prevent it, by dismounting and walking down the descents
on foot.

Mares are more subject to galling beneath their Tails than horses, because
they are commonly low before, but then they have an advantage by it for
climbing up the hills; to prevent therefore this disorder, which is very
inconvenient, especially in such beasts as are Ticklish, a man must have a
Saddle which is higher before then ordinary, to supply that height which is
wanting in the Mare, and should order to put but a very little stuffing in the
pannels behind, and should also make use of a Crupper with two Buckles, such as
I have been just now describing, for it will keep the Saddle a great deal
better fixed in its place then any other, and the Saddle being also thus shapt
will not press so much forwards, nor hurt so soon that part beneath the Dock,
where horses commonly gall; again for the same inconveniency, people make use
of a common invention, which is to sow a candle in the Dock-peice of the
Crupper, which by it is Sewet or grease that melts, softens the Leather and
helps to prevent the infirmity: I am of opinion, that it is fully as good to
grease every day the Dock piece, and to wash the sore, if there be any, with
good brandy, or Water and Salt, that so the galling which is beneath the Dock,
and from which a man receives so much inconveniency in a journey, may be the
sooner healed up.

But if your horse be so very severely galled beneath the Saddle, that he
cannot endure the Crupper, then you must have recourse to a low Crupper, which
is such as does only press upon the lower parts of the Buttocks behind, and
which certain Physicians make use of for their Mules, when they are Riding
about the City to visit their Patients.

When you are come to your journeys end, to cure the gall which is beneath your
horse's Tail, you must Wash all the Scabs and other parts of the sore, with
warm Claret Wine mixed with a fourth part of Olive Oil or Butter, and
afterward powder it all over with brayed Char-coal made of wood, and continue
this daily till healing; or Bath frequently the part with good Brandy, which is
the most sovereign remedy of any, provided the horse will suffer it.

The use of Cruppers after the English fashion, which may be shortened or
lengthned at pleasure, is at present common in all places, so that even in the
Academies of Riding, a man will rarely see any other, people know so well the
conveniences of them, and the disadvantages in useing any others.

The Poitral or Breast Plate is not of much less consequence, it should be of a
just length, and the stays or supporters of it should be neither too long nor
too short, for being too long, the Breast Plate or Tie will fall below the
motion of the shoulder, and so trouble the horse in riding, and if they were
too short, it would be too strait, and so frett and cut the hair in several
places.

It many times falls out, that the hair is cut and taken away in those parts
of the shoulders, where the Hulsters rest, because of their great Weight; to
prevent it, you must cause fix beneath them a piece of Roe-buck or Veal Skin
well furnished with hair, as I have told you should be done beneath the buckle
of the Crupper, or otherwise line that part with very soft leather stuffed with
Wool; this care should be particularly had for horses appointed for the Wars:
But since it is of late become the fashion in France, to make use of pretty
short Pistols, Horses are more freed of this Trouble, because heretofore they
had Piste^s almost as long as Carrabines, which frequently Galled horses in the
fore-parts of their shoulders where they rested.

It is also fit, that the Buckles by which the breast plate or Tie is fixed to
the saddle, should be so placed, as neither to cut the hair nor hurt the horse;
and if they be too far forward, there will be a necessity to cause remove them
a little more back, betwixt the saddle-bow and panel, or even upon the bow it
self, if a man can do no better, and he shall also place beneath them a piece
of Veal or Roe-buck skin, with the hairy side turned nixt to the Horse.

You are nixt to view the other furniture belonging to the Saddle, to wit the
Girths, and be sure that they be large and strong, and of good fresh Girth-web,
and if they have knots, (which Grooms commonly make upon them to shorten them
when they are too long) and which will spoil and gall the horse, you are to
untie them.

Also their Buckles should be, if possible, after the English fashion, for they
are the best of any, and never tear a man's Boots with their tongues.

The Saddle-straps should be of Hungarian Leather, or for want of it, good
white Oyled Leather, and see that there be two upon each side of the
Saddle-bow, with a good broad sursengle; those girths used for hunting are very
good, and girt well, they have two buckles above other, whereof one has only a
Tongue, and the use of them is very common in Equipages.

See that you be provided likewise with a pair of good long Stirrop-Leather,
those of Hungarian or white Oyled leather are also the best, and with
Surrop-(...) which are very strong, and either barred or grated where you place
your feet, and also pretty large, that you may the sooner quit them in case of
a fall.

Sometimes those who gallop at hunting, or move much their Legs as they ^^^vel,
do soon hurt with their Stirrop-leathers a horse's sides, especially if he be
lea^ and so gall them extremely below the saddle; to hinder it, you must fix or
stret^^ a Leather strap, or old false-scabbard of a sword, between the two
points of the for and hind bows of the saddle upon each side, and make the
Stirrop-leathers to pass ove^ them, which will certainly prevent this in
convenience.

Good Stirrop-irons should be large and strong, Tinned, and round all over, a^^
light and barred where you place your feet, for thus a man keeps his feet
firmer upon them; they should be fixed to the stirrop-leathers without swivles,
because they use and at length pass through the holes, unless they be made
after the English fashion^ but every one has his own fancy for stirrops; I
have said of them what seems to (...) most reasonable, but providing that a man
can put in and out his foot easily in a (...) rop-iron, although it should be
made even of a Sabot or wooden shoe, as some Spaniards use for their she Asses,
or of a simple piece of Timber as in Sweden, it is (...) no great import to me,
provided I am not obliged to make use of them.

The English Stirrop-irons are neat and well wrought, the lightest are most
prope^ for a Course, or taking the Air, some approve of them for all uses, and
I find they have reason, but as they make them at present, indifferently large,
round all over, and neatly Tinned, with greates where the feet are placed, I
look upon them to be the best fashion of any for all uses, and they are also
got at an easy rate.

CHAP. XXIX. How a man should order and take care of Horses, in the beginning
of a Journey.
I Have employed the preceding Chapter, CHAP: XXIX How a man should order
horses in the beginning of a journey.
in discoursing of things accidentally longing to a Horse, such as
Saddlot-Bridle, etc. It remains at present that (...) consider the
circumstances that are most necessary, and in a manner essential, be observed
by a man before he begin a Journey; which are, if the Horse be good, (...)
endure Fatigue, and be such as I have already descrived he should. If he be
very a and not at all in Wind, that is, if he have not been Traveled or
Exercised of a (...) time, you are to bring him to it after this manner.

You are the first day to cause your horse walk abroad a short league, or two
three Miles, the day following a league and a half, and then let him rest for a
day^ two; afterward you shall make him begin again his walk of one League,
(...) second day of two, and the nixt of three, and then you are to give him a
days (...) so the horse will after this manner, be brought in a condition to
begin his jou^^ when you please, and to travel very far, if you take care of
him as I shall direct y^^ And this should particularly, and in a more special
manner concern those, who have (...) charge of, and are to conduct Equipages,
which have remained whole Winters, wi^^ out any kind of exercise or Travel.

Because it is most dangerous, to make a horse begin a Journey before he be in
Wi^ and while he is not as yet accustomed to fatigue; for if it be in the
Summer time, (...) will after the very first day loose his Appetite, or take
the Vives, and sometimes will become foundered, or have his Grease molten, and
perhaps both; therefore it is of consequence to put him somewhat in Wind before
you part: If those who have Equipages to Conduct, do not observe these
premonitions or directions, they will, I assure them, have a great dale of
dissatisfaction in their first Journeys.

If the Horse which you are to Travel upon, be already fatigued, weary, and
lean, then it will be so much the worse, for Horses are not very expensive to
be made lean, but are both chargeable, and require a great dale of pains to be
recovered and made fat; therefore I would never begin a Journey, with a Horse
which were very much fatigued and low, until I had first tried to recover him,
and if I found I could not succeed in it, then I would buy another.

Having observed this precaution, you are to begin with short Marches or days
Journeys at first setting out, and afterward to increase them by degrees; As
for example, the first day a man may make six French Leagues, the second eight,
and afterward he may Ride Ten, or Twelve, and even Fourteen if there be need
for it: But if it be in a Country where the Leagues are longer than about
Paris, then four Leagues will be sufficient for the first day, six for the
second, and so you may increase them to nine or ten, but if you are not much
pressed, it will be very fit, especially to preserve a great Equipage, to rest
the third or fourth day of your Journey; for the Horses will recover Strength
and vigor by that days rest: and as people say that a Man must go back to take
his Race, whereby he may leap the further, so the Horses having with this
little rest recovered their heart and mettle, will perform their Journey the
more pleasantly; because if a Man do not thus give them a little intermission,
he will be necessitate to leave some Horses by the way, or otherwise render
them unserviceable; for any man may very well judge, that where there are a
great number of Horses, it will be very extraordinary if there be not some of
them, which will not prove to be in a condition to hold out with a March,
especially when not accustomed to it.

All the time of your Journey, you shall suffer your horse to drink of the
first good Water you meet with, after six or seven a Clock in the Morning, if
it be in the Summer time, and after eight or nine if in Winter; I call that
good Water, which is neither too quick and peircing, nor too muddy and
stinking, this I say your are to do unless you design to gallop him a long time
after drinking, for in this case you are to forbear it, and although it be very
much the custom in England, to Run and gallop their Horses after they have a
drunk, yet I think that method capable to render Horses pursy, as it is also,
when they are rid in the manage immediately after they are watered; the English
make use of this method of galloping their Horses immediately after drinking,
which they call Watering-Courses, to bring them as they say in Wind, which is
the most pernicious and hurtful practice for Horses that a man can imagine, and
they are so prepossessed and bewitched with the fancy of it, even although the
most part of their Horses become Pursy by it, that it is not possible for a man
to persuade them that it is naught, and absolutely spoileth them: The prejudice
I find by this practice of theirs, is, that having put their Horses in a fair
way to become pursy, they sell them to us in France for sound ones, and then
they become pursy among our hands, so that it is they who commit the folly, and
we pay for it.

You are, while your Horse is a watering, to interrupt his Drinking, or break
his Water as we say, by not letting him drink all at one draught, but you are
to draw up his head five or six times during the time he is a Watering, and
even although a Horse be warm and sweating very much, yet if he be not quite
out of breath, and that he have as yet a pretty way to Ride before he arrive at
the place you design to rest and refresh; for example a league or two, I assure
you he will be the better that you let him drink a little, than if you should
suffer him to take none at all; it is indeed true, that if the Horse be very
warm and that you give him drink, you should immediately at the coming out of
the water redouble your pace, or make him go at a gentle trot for some time,
that so you may warm the water in his Belly which he has drunk.

You are thus to let your horse Drink all the while you are Traveling, because
if he be hot or sweating when you come to Bait, you must let him stand a long
time before you can give him any Drink, without endangering his Life, and also
when you take the Bridle off him, his excessive Thirst will hinder him to eat,
so that an hour or two are elapsed before he offer to touch his Meat, which is
almost all the time a man can well allow, for a twelve a clock's Baiting, and
to depart again with the horse in this condition before he has either eat or
drunk, will make him but very unfit to Travel; therefore common sense and
reason will decide in my favors, that the surest method is to let a horse
drink on the Road, and a little while before you arrive at the Inn, as I have
already ordered.

In other Countries, where I know not but the Air, Water, or Climat, may
contribute to make Horses agree with it, I have seen the contrary practiced,
for in H^lland, the Waggoneers, who transport people from place to place in
their Waggo^^ which are drawn by very good Horses, carry a Pail along with
them, and cause the^ Horses drink where ever they meet with Water, for whether
they be warm or cold^ is all one to them, and even when they arrive at their
Inns, although their horses (...) all in a froth with sweat and quite out of
breath, they yet give them drink before the lead them to the stable: I believe
in France all our horses would die, should we (...) them after this manner.

People are obliged to make Coach-horses drink in the morning, before they g^
away, because when they are once harnoist and put to the Coach, it is with
great d^ ficulty that they can drink by the way, and therefore they make them
sometime drink by four a clock in the morning, for which they are not much the
better, but the^ is no help for it; if in the beginning of your journey, that
is the first four or five day you cause give your horse but a small quantity
of Oats, it will be so much the better (...) him; four or five measures a day,
about two sharp English Quarts e^ measure, are sufficient, because if you
should give him too much it would but disg^ and cloy him, but when he is once
in Wind, you may give him to seven or eight (...) these measures a day, without
doing him any prejudice, for upon the contrary he w^ be the better for it.

But if you perceive that your horse begin, after the first or second days
Riding, t^ Fumble and Toss his Oats, and to eat them only grain by grain, you
are then to ta^^ them quite from him, and give him either a little wet Bran, or
four or five pounds of (...) brown bread if you have it, or that the horse will
eat it, and at his next feeding (...) him again with the Oats.

You may for horses that loss their appetite and disgust at their Oats, give
them a Ounce of Venice Triacle dissolved in claret Wine, (or the same quantity
of Orvieta^ you can have it,) but if your horse be fiery and fretful, and that
you judge him begin^ to overheat, then give him a dose, which is two ounces, of
the imperial powder an English quart of Claret Wine; the imperial powder is the
liver of Antimo^ after the giving of which keep him an hour tied up with his
bridle to the Rack, a when you unbridle him he will have in some measure
recovered his appetite.

One of the most sensible troubles, that a horseman can meet with in either a
Jou^^ or Campaign, is, to see his horse standing in the stable without eating,
and that ^e^ fuses both Hay, Oats, and Bran, without having any other disease
but want of (...) petite, so that he remains with his Head amongst his Feet,
and without in the (...) offering to eat; I have enquired after, and tried all
methods to recover their appet^ and I have found a kind of Balls which I call
Gurmandizing Balls, which are desc^ive in the 8 Chap. of the 2, part, and are
very portable because they become extre^^ hard: To make use of them, you take
one and wrapping it in a linen cloth, tie it (...) the mouth of the Bit, then
you let your horse stand tied up to the Rack with (...) Bit for two hours, and
when you unbridle him I assure you he will eat; a man (...) also tie one of
them in the morning before parting to the mouth of his Bit, and w^^ he comes
to bait at twelve a clock, he will certainly have a good appetite, because
(...) Chawing upon it the whole way: A man may reiterate the use of them
several time for they cannot but do a great deal of good.

It is also good to ride very softly for a quarter or half an hour before you
(...) at the Inn, that so your horse may be neither too warm, nor out of breath
wh^ you put him in the stable, for during the time that you thus gently Raike
him, he (...) recover his wind as well, as if you had led him in your hand
expressly for that purp^ and by this means, your horse not at all beating in the
flank when you first urri^ you may immediately unbridle him, if he be not all
the warmer.

But if you are riding in the company of People, who are not inclined to have
this ^tlence, and who are more concerned to arrive quickly at the Inn to drink,
then (...) fireous to cool their horses by thus gently Raiking them, as it
frequently falls o^ or if other ways your business requires you to put a
little sharply on, you must the^ when you arrive, cause walk your horse in a
man's hand at a slow step, that so (...) may recover his wind and cool by
degrees; but if it be very cold, then you must ca^ cover him with some Clothes,
and also walk him up and down, but in some p^^^ which is calm and free from the
Wind, and if you have not the convenience (...) sheltered walk, then you must
cause put him in the Stable, because the violent cold would if he were very
warm destroy him, and all the motion he could make in walking although very
well covered, would not be sufficient to prevent his catching cold, or perhaps
foundering; therefore you are in such a case to stable him immediately, and to
cause dry the sweat off him with straw, or with a Scraping-knife, if you can
have one.

The reason why a man should not put horses too soon in a stable, which are
extremly warm and out of breath, is, that the humors coming to chill on a
sudden, and to congeal because of the rest which succeeds the preceding
violent motion, fall down upon the legs, or settle upon some other part of the
body, and so either founder the horse, cause him take the Vives, or take so
great a squimishness and disgust, that he is of a great deal less value for a
long time thereafter, which does not so frequently fall out, when by a gentle
leading in ones hand at a slow walk, a man allows him time to cool by degrees,
and to appease the beating of his flank, which the excessive heat and fatigue
have occasioned; but when a man can do no better, let him be sure to cause dry
his horse well and rub him exactly over the whole body; because of two evils
the least is still to be chosen.

There are some Coach horses, which being very fat and Thick-Winded, or even
Blowers, have in the great heats of Summer, their flanks so moved and agitated,
that one would think they were ready to brust after they are put in the stable,
although they have been led gently up and down for a pretty while in a man's
hand, and as they are extremely fat or afraid of the excessive heat, they put
themselves so out of breath, that they sometimes beat thus in the flank for an
hour together, before they can recover their Wind; now a man should not be
surprised at this, but immediately order to walk them gently up and down for
half an hour, and when they are unbridled, give them a little wet bran and a
good deal of litter to stand upon, and so soon as they have pissed, they will
be very much eased, and ready to take journey again with the rest; this
inconveniency happens also to some, through weakness, and for not being able to
resist or draw against the horses which are next to them, or rather always
through too much fierceness, or drawing with too great violence, or otherwise
for fear of the great heat, which is many times seen to befall horses which are
very fat, Thick, heavy, and charged with flesh, which although they may prove
very good for the Streets, yet are not at all light enough for traveling in the
Country.

When you arrive at your Inn, if your horse be not very warm, and that you have
only rid at his ordinary Train, you are to cause tie him up to the Ra^k, and
not to unbridle him until he has recovered his Wind, and be in some measure
dry, unless that the Horse be naturally inclined to sweat much, or be of a
washing constitution; and during that time you shall ungirt him, take off his
Crupper, slack the Tie or Breast Plate, and put some fresh straw betwixt the
Saddle and Horse's back to refresh and ease him: Then shake down a good deal of
fresh Litter beneath him, to oblige him to Stale or Piss, for the most part of
good Horses do always Piss when they are first put in the Stable, and find the
Litter beneath them.

I shall here by the way give you an advice, that will seem some what
extraordinary although very good, which is, that during your whole journey you
suffer your horse to piss as often as you find him inclined to it, and you
should also excite and invite him to it; the quite contrary of which is to be
practiced with Mares, which you are to hinder as much as possible to piss in
traveling betwixt meals, because their strength and vigor is thereby
diminished; those who have Mares may make a trial of this and will come to
acknowledge it for a truth, that horses should be allowed, and even excited to
piss as they are riding, but Mares not, because they will not be the worse, but
rather yield their Masters the more service by it; I don't allege and
recommend this practice without certainly knowing it is effect.

You are next to take away the old hay from the Rack, and clean the Stall
before him, from all filthiness of Earth, Sand, or Poultrey dung, taking also
care that the Manger be not full of holes, which is very common in most Inns,
that so the Oats which fall through may serve to feed their Fouls, and if it
should be very Dirty and Nastie, you are then to cause wash it with warm Water.

Another method for horses which are full of fire and Metal, and which are
worth the pains to be carefully looked after, is, that after you have rid them
hard and arrived at the Inn, or that your horse be very warm, you are
immediately at your alighting to cause unsaddle him, and scrape off the sweat
from his whole body with a Sweating, knife or Scraper, after which wipe his
head and ears well with a Hair-cloath, and rub his body all over with fresh
straw, put a covering or horse Cloth upon him, and then set on the Saddle
again, after which cause gently lead him up and down in a man's hand, for half
an hour before you put him in the Stable: This method is good to be practiced
by such as carry Grooms along with them, and whose only business it is to loo^
after, scrape off the sweat, and dry and rub down their horses, because as for
the Hostler Boys, they are very dextrous it is true in asking drink-money, but
understand little thing else belonging to horses, and therefore unless a man
have a Groom of his own, he had better make use of the former method: If a man
has carried along with him any of the stinking Pills descrived in the 85 Chap,
Sect, 3. of the second part, he man cause give his horse two of them with a
little Claret Wine, or for want of them give hi^ an English pint of Brandy, if
the horse has been rid very hard and that he fear (...) may be the worse of
it, for this will stop and prevent all accidents, and other inconveniences
which may happen; but I shall speak a little more of this hereafter.

If about a quarter or half a quarter of an hour before you arrive at the Inn,
yo^ meet with any water in which there is a good Foord or passage, it will be
very fit i^ cause your horse pass and repass it two or three times, without
either wetting his Belly, or suffering him to drink; when I say you should not
wet his Belly, I mean that you should not make him go so deep into it, as that
the water may come up to his Belly, for to prevent and hinder his Legs to make
the Water spurt, and fly up about his belly and wet it, is what cannot be
expected, neither is it of any consequence; now besides that the washing him
thus does cleanse his legs of the Mud, the water being cold does bind up the
humors, and prevent that those which were stirred up by the whole days
journey, fall not down upon his Legs as being the lowest parts of his body, and
the most capable to receive them, which will make them become stiff, by causing
obstructions in the Nerves, which at last will quite ruin and spoil them.

CHAP: XXX. How a man should order Horses at dinner and supper, while upon
Travel.
IF it be in the summer time, CHAP: XXX How a man should order horses at dinner
and supper, while upon travel.
when the Waters are warm, you are at your coming near to the Inn, if your
horse be not very warm and sweating, to wash hi^ in some Water or Pond, without
either going so deep as his belly or suffering him to drink, and it is also
very good for some horses whose Legs are already a little Gourded, or being
fleshy are subject to Humors, when a man has not the convenience of a Rivulet
or pond upon the Road, to alight about a quarter of an hour before he arrive at
his Inn, and lead his horse in his hand to cool him, and so soon as he is come
to the stable door, to cause wash and bath his Legs with Well water, just as it
is taken from the Well, which will prevent the descent of humors upon them;
this method is particularly excellent, for such horses as have received some
severe stroke upon their Legs or Hams, and which never fail to swell in those
parts, by them they have at Dinner time or in the Evening.

I knew an Italian Escuyer or Riding-Master, who after his Manage, whether his
horses were warm or not, made them swim over and again a River near by his
Manage, as broad as the Seine is before the Louvre in Paris, and afterward
caused dry them all over and cover them well in the stable, not suffering them
to eat for an hour after; this he practiced his whole lifetime, and none of
his horses had ever either Colic or Vives, but were always the cleanest and
nearest limbed could be; I believe this Example although very true, will not
persuade any man to do the like.

Your horse being tied up to the Rack, and partly dried of his sweat or
moisture which he had at first arriving, although he be as yet bridled, yet if
he begin to draw his hay, and beat no more in his Flanks, you are to cause
unbridle him, and to wash his Bit in a pail of water that it may be carefully
hung up, after it is well cleaned and wipt, and afterward you may suffer him
to eat his hay at pleasure.

Those who so soon as they arrive at the Inn, suffer their horses to be
unbridled by the Hostler boys, as is the common custom, are deceived, in so
far as their horses eat only for the first quarter of an hour, and then eat no
more thereafter, whereas if they were suffered to stand some time in the
bridle, it would be a great deal better for them, even although they should
receive no other advantage by it, but this, that they will eat with a great
deal better appetite.

But perhaps some may say, that horses have been long enough bridled the whole
day before, so that there is no need of letting them stand so long unnecessarly
in the stable without eating; To which I answer, that besides what I have
already said, there are many Horses to whom it is very fit to suffer the froth
and foam to come in their mouths, by the assistance of the Bit, which obliges
them to move their Tongues, and by this means they moysten their mouths, which
gives them a better relish of what they eat, whereas if their mouths were not
thus refreshed, they would eat but a very short while, so that a man thereby
rather gains as losses any time, contrary to the common Maxim of the
hostler-boyes: You are also to observe this by the way, that if your horse has
been very Warm, and that you could not have the conveniencie to cause him drink
upon the road, he will when unbridled eat but very little, although you have
exactly observed all the directions I have been giveing, and that because he is
much prested and troubled with thirst, therefore in that case you are to give
him such a quantity of Oats washed in Ale or Beer, as you shall judge
sufficient, however less, if you intend to feed him again after he has once
drunk.

Many are of opinion, that people spoil their horses by giving them Oats
before their water; because say they, the water makes the Oats to pass too
soon, and so undigested out of the stomach; I again think that it is good to
feed with Oats both before and after watering, although it be commonly the
custom not to do it till after; The Carriers and Coach-men upon their quick
dispatches give it always after watering, neither is it without some
appearance of Reason, that they thus feed with Oats only after watering,
because the water does not remain so long in the stomach but quickly passes, so
that the stomach is not at all weakened with it, and the Oats, which are of a
porous and spongious body, retain abundance and as much of the moisture of the
water, as is sufficient for the benefit of the horse; this is the only Reason,
why people feed with Oats only after watering, which however is not of force
enough to hinder a man to feed Horses before watering, which have been very
warm and hard Rid, for they will be a great deal the better of it, and not at
all in hazard of becoming sick.

When people Travel in Flying-Coaches, or with laid or fresh horses from stage
to stage, and that they have driven very hard, when the horses are taken all in
a sweat and out of breath from the Coach, they should, as I have already said,
cause first scrape off their sweat, rub them well down and cover them, and then
cause walk them half an hour in peoples hands that they may recover their wind,
during which time they shall prepare for each of them a French half Bushel of
wheat Bran, which is about six English quarts, and which must be well moistened
with water, then having put them in the stable and unbridl'd them, lay it
before them in the Manger, that so they may with it cool and refresh their
mouths which are dried with the dust and sand, and which many times reaches to
their very Throats; now this wet Bran detatches or separates the dust from
their mouths and Tongues, and even although horses be a little warm, they very
seldom receive prejudice by this method.

This dust and and sand, does sometimes so very much dry the tongues, palates,
and throats of horses, that they many times lose their appetite by it, because
their tongues become hard and dry, especially in horses which suffer them while
they are traveling in excessive hot weather, to hang out of their mouths; and
therefore people should never fail, either to give such horses alittle wet B^an
for the first thing they give them to eat, or otherwise to cause wash their
mouths and tongues well with a wet Sponge, to oblige them to eat.

People make use of the same method for hunters, and all other horses which
having Rid hard are out of breath; but especially if they be very fat, the use
of this we Bran does exremelywell with them, and gains them time, because
useing it they may be the sooner unbridled and in a condition to eat: In places
where wheat Bran can be ha^ this method is excellent, but except in France, it
is somewhat scarce and difficult to be got, other Countries not making much
use of it this way, and in Holland, (...) soon as their horses arrive whether
they be warm or not, they give them drink with out apprehending any prejudice
by it, as I have already observed was the custom amongst the Waggoneers, but
then their waters in those countries are not quick and sharp, for becoming in
a manner warm by standing, they cannot therefore (...) readily prejudge them;
but when people attempt this method with horses in France, they frequently dye
before they can be accustomed to this so dangerous a habit of liveing, which I
assure you shall never be put in practice by me.

People should take exact notice to the water which horses drink, especially
when traveling, for upon that, in a manner, depends their preservation or
destruction; that water which is least quick or penetrating is the best; if you
can have the convenience of a River it is preferable to a Spring, and a Spring
or Fountain to a Draw-well, but when a man is necessitate to let his horses
drink of such penetrating waters, he should cause bring it in a pretty time
before he use it, set it in the Sun, or cause warm somed it to correct the
sharpness of the rest; but it is sooner done to throw amongst it a little wheat
Bran or some soft of bread crumbled; for want of both which, the crudity of the
water may be a little corrected, by either stirring it some time about with
your hand, or throwing a little Hay amongst it; but if the water be extremely
quick and peirceing, neither the stirring of it with your hand nor Hay will
prevet the horses taking the Vives, and therefore in that case you are either
to mix with it a little warm water or wheat Bran, which will sufficiently
correct it.

It sometimes happneth, that horses are so hard and unmercifully rid, that they
are burst, and either dye or become foundered, if a man do not apply proper
remedies to prevent it; for example people are at the Stagg-hunting and cannot
have the convenience of their laid or fresh horses, because the Stagg takes
quite another way the^ where they are placed, or perhaps runns further than is
expected, so that people being warm and bent upon the chase, do not consider
their horses, but push the^ on to the outmost extremity, so that if they be not
well in wind, and accustomed to such long Courses, they are very quickly burst;
but notwithstanding of this, good and keen hunters will rather venture the
killing of their horses by excessive Riding then fail to be up with the dogs;
if therefore you have been obliged at hunting or otherwise to make great
dispatch, with hazard of bursting your horse, you shall when arrived, cause
order him as I have already told you, by causing scrape off the sweat, rubing
him all over and causeing lead him in ones hand until he cool then half an
hour after you shall cause give him in an English quart of Claret wi^e two of
the stinking pills discrib'd in the 85. Chapter of the second part Sect. 3. or
otherwise without the balls, give him an English pynt of good Brandy, or the
like quantity of good Claret with a couple of greated Nutmegs mixed with it,
then put him in the Stable, covering and littering him well, an hour after give
him a Glister, and half an hour after it has wrought, unbridle him and give
him some wet Bran; and I assure you unless he be quite spent and undone, you
will prevent all the accidents which would happen to him, by foundering, or
otherwise.

The very same method may be observed for Coach-Horses, which have been wrought
and pushed beyond their Wind and Strength; but then you must be careful not to
give the stinking pills, or for want of them the Wine and Nutmegs, until they
have fully recovered their breath, that is to say, half an hour or three
quarters at most after their arrival, to some more and to others less.

CHAP. XXXI. That Horses, at their first arrival, should not have their Legs
Rubbed down; although the practice of it be both very common and ordinary.
THE generality of people who travel, CHAP: XXXI That horses at their first
arrival should not have their legs rubbed down.
observe this method of causing rub down their Horse's Legs with Straw, so soon
as they are put in the Stable, and pretend thereby to unweary and supple their
legs, and so very much refresh them; but it is one of the greatest abuses can
be committed, because this action can produce no other effect, but to draw down
upon the legs those humors which are already stirred up by the fatigue of the
Journey, for by Rubbing, the Nerves are heated, and consequently their Pores
opened, which makes the Spirits exhale, and gives an opportunity to the
humors which have been already stirred up by the way, to discharge themselves,
and by their natural tendency to settle upon them, and possess those
imperceptible passages, which were taken up with these Spirits, and thereby to
occasion obstructions, which will deprive them of motion, and consequently
render the Horses legs absolutely stiff and unserviceable; for the legs being
those parts of the body which are lowest, are as it were it is sink or conduit,
especially when the humors are drawn down upon them, by this Rubbing which is
made with Straw, besides that those parts, being already fatigued, are the more
disposed to receive them: Now this humor, having once fallen down, does not
again ascend, and to resolve and discuss it, is difficult, because the parts
afflicted have not natural heat enough, and so the humor condenses and spoils
the horse; and I admire that people never reflected upon this, until I first
discovered it. But it may be objected against this, that the humor which
falls down is dissipate by insensible transpiration, and through the Pores
which are opened by this Rubbing of the Legs; to which I answer, that the
humor indeed does in some measure rarify, but that it cannot be all discussed
that way, having too gross a body for it, so that the remaining part of the
humor insinuates it self as a vapor amongst the Nerves, which is afterward
by the cold condensed into a water; and this water into a kind of viscuous or
glairous matter, which cannot be dispelled by any Rubbing, because, this
Rubbing being practiced in a time, when all the humors are in agitation, it
draws them down, and instead of giving ease, or being any ways beneficial to
the horse, is extremely prejudicial and hurtful.

This Rubbing of the Legs, which people practice at their first arrival, is the
reason that their Horse's Legs next day are stiff, and although they may not be
sensible of, nor perceive it so soon, yet they cannot but in a very short time
come to discover it, because it will occasion obstructions in the Nerves, which
stop the passages of the spirits that are the cause and fountain of motion, and
which obstructions will render the motion of the Horse's legs so difficult and
troublesome, that his whole strength will not be sufficient to make them
serviceable as they ought, and so he will come to trip, stumble, and many times
fall, so that by this method people take a great deal of pains to ruin and
spoil their Horses, by destroying their Legs: Those who will not yield to so
palpable and convincing reasons as these, let them make but a trial of it, and
then certainly they will be persuaded of it is truth, as severals have already
been, who no more order their horses Legs to be Rubbed down at their first
arrival, but only when they are altogether cooled and pretty well rested.

Now you shall prevent all these inconveniences, by practicing this I advise
you, which is to cause lead your horse to a pond or washing place instead of
rubbing him down, or for lack of this convenience, cause wash and bath his Legs
at the Stable door, with a pail of cold water, that thereby you may prevent the
descent of the moved humors, which is quite contrary to what is daily
practiced by the most part of people, who, it seems have never been at the
pains, to reflect upon what I have been saying.

It is not that I disapprove or discharge the Rubbing a horse's legs; upon the
contrary I very much approve of it, recommend it, and practice it my self, but
then it is only when they are pertectly cooled, and that the humors, which the
days traveling has stirred up, are settled, for example, if in the evening
before you go to bed, you cause rub your horses Legs for a full Hour, he will
be refreshed by it; or if in the Morning after your horse is Curried and dressed,
you make your Groom divert himself with a good hard Hay-Wisp so long as you
shall judge it convenient, it will open the Pores, and make way for those
subtle humors, which have lately fallen down upon the Nerves, to resolve, and
being rarifyed by rubbing to evaporate, so that the legs are thereby rendered
more supple, and you will produce by it a quite contrary effect to what it
would have had, should you have caused rub them at your first arrival.

But you may perhaps insist and say, that all people, yea even those who are
most Skilful in horses, do practice it; It is indeed true that many people do
it, but the most skilful do it not: and if the reasons I have given cannot
satisfy you, I refer it to experience which is the Mistress of Art; and
finally, as I am not so much taken with my own opinion, as to oblige all people
to yield to it, so I consent that you do not believe me, but that for your
fancy you spoil your horse rather then submit to reason.

CHAP: XXXII. A Charge or Bath to preserve horses Legs, and prevent their
spoiling, either upon Travel, or by hunting.
IF you have a horse, CHAP: XXXII A Bath to prevent horses legs spoiling upon
Travel.
which is worth your care and pains to preserve his (...) after Travel, so
soon as ever he is arrived in the evening, and put in the Sta^^ you shall cause
make some Cow or Ox dung very thin with Vinegar, so tha^ be but of the
consistence of thick Broth, and adding to it a good handful of si^ Salt, cause
Rub and charge his forelegs from the knees, and hind-legs from (...) Hams or
Gambrells, by chaffing them well with and against the hair, that so (...)
remedy may penetrate and adhere to them, and that they may be all covered (...)
with it, and thus leave him till next morning, neither wetting his legs, nor
remove^ him out of his place, but giveing him his water for that evening in a
Pail.

The next Morning you shall cause lead him to the River, if there be any, tha^
his Legs may be washed, or otherways you may cause make them clean with a wis^
wash them with well water, which is also very good; this remedy is both cheap
(...) excellent, is astringent and strengthens the parts oppressed, and being
continued (...) renewed every Evening, will preserve the Legs so neat and
sound, that a Horse at the end of a long Journey, will as to his Legs, appear
as if he had not stirred out of (...) Stable; it will be somewhat difficult to
persuade many people, that so small and ^^vial a thing, as this, can produce so
wonderful an effect; for the remedy is most (...) and all those to whom I have
recommended it, have found a great deal of good by because this charge does not
only refresh a Horse's legs, but restricts their swelling; so that it is a
great deal better than many of those Charges, which Farriers sell at a very
dear rate, for the same use: When the Salt is left out, it is not altogether so
good, although it never fails, even then, to produce a good effect; and many
times when I have had no Vinegar, I have made use of simple Water in it is
place, and the charge has notwithstanding had a very good operation.

This method, of chargeing and Bathing a horse's Legs, was found out by a mere
reasoning; and the first time I made use of it, it succeeded much better than I
could have imagined.

If you have therefore big and large Horses, to conduct and take care of during
a long Journey, and which are either to be led in the hand or otherways; you
are to make use of this remedy which is easy and cheap, and requires but a very
little pains to prepare and apply it, and you will, at the end of your Journey,
be sensible how good and profitable a thing it is.

You are also to grease or anoint the fore-feet of such Horses as have them
brittle and dry, and that at their first arrival at night, although it should
be with nothing else but fresh butter, Oil, or swine-seame, but if with the
Ointment of Roses so much the better; that so the Cow d^ng falling down upon
their hoofs may not dry them; for I assure you that Cow Dung, contrary to the
opinion of many people, spoileth a horses feet; it does indeed moisten the
Sole, but it dries up the hoof, which is of a different nature from it; if you
observe this method, you will find a great advantage by it: Those who, to
recover their horses feet, cause make a hole, which they fill with moistened
Cow Dung, and so keep their fore feet in it during the space of a Month or so,
do very badly; because although the continual moisture which is amongst the
Dung causes the hoof to grow, yet it drys and shrinks in so extremely being out
of that place, that is spleets and breaks like Glass, and the foot immediately
straitens; In fine, Cow Dung is good and profitable for the sole, but alters,
Burns, and spoils the hoof by drying it up too much: Therefore, to recover a
horses feet, you are rather in place of Cow Dung, to fill a hole full of wet
blew clay, and oblige the horse to keep his forefeet amongst it for a month.

I will not here omit another remedy, which unwearyeth and takes away the
swelling of the Legs, and also supples and renders them neat; it is abundantly
sufficient to practice it from time to time, but for the preceding charge,
although you should make use of it every evening, I assure you, you will
neither lose your time nor labor.

The Baths, which I have discoursed of in the second part, composed of the Lees
of Claret Wine, good Herbs, and Honey, do mightily refresh and supple horses
Legs; as also to cause rub them at your first arrival in the evening with
Vinegar and Salt, or Brandy, or even with warm Claret Wine, in which there is
dossolsed a little old Hogs Grease; all this unwearies, supples, and refreshes
horses legs: But if they are swelled or gorged, as it many times happens in the
hind-legs of such horses which are fatigued, then you are to cause wash and
bath them with cold water, and an hour after to cause anoint them with Honey,
and while the Honey is yet upon them, to cauffse chaff them with good Brandy
above it, and without taking any of the Honey away, and continuing this every
day, you will not only take away the swelling, but strengthen and fortify his
Legs upon his Travel.

You shall also unweary and refresh your horses Legs, if you charge and bath
them well, with the cold Lees of Claret Wine; the remedy is both good and
procured at an easy rate.

CHAP. XXXIII. How to take away the Swelling or Gourding from horses Legs, and
to unweary them with quenched Cinders.
YOu must cause boil some water in a Kettle, CHAP: XXXIII How to take away the
gourding from horses legs with quenched Cinders.
and then take from the fire the red Cinders which are made of the best wood
you can procure, such a^ Vine Branches, Walnut-tree, Oak, or Beech; for the
Cinders of white and soft Woods, are not proper for this use, no more than that
which has been long a^ floating upon Water; if nevertheless you can have no
better, you are to mix with this eight Ounces of the Ashes, made of the burnt
Lees or Dregs of Wine, (you may have them at the Grocers or from the common
Washers) throw any of the Cinders of these Woods, being red hot, amongst the
Boiling water, for the more of them y^^ throw amongst it so much the better,
then let the Water boil until their remain only a third, and then taking it
from the fire, scum off all the Char-coal.

You are only to make use of the Ashes of burnt lees, when you can procure
another wood but what is white and soft, or has long floated upon the water,
and it in any other case; for upon the contrary, it would but prove prejudicial.

You shall then, with this Water, being more than lukewarm, cause Bath and it
hard with ones hand, your horses fore and hind Legs and Hams; and then can
charge them well with the remaining Ashes, and let them continue upon his Legs^
next morning, without either leading him to the Water, or removing him out of
the Stable, and I assure you, the very first time you make use of this remedy,
you (...) perceive the good effects it has had, and your horse will next
Morning have his L^^ more supple and neat, then you have before seen them of a
long time, and he (...) be also more hearty then he was the day preceding the
application; you are to continue the use of this from time to time, that so you
may have full satisfaction and o^tentment from it.

Here is also another very good method for the same purpose. Take two Quarts
good strong Vinegar, put it over the fire in a pot or Skillet, and when ever it
beg^ to smoke, throw amongst it, four small shuvells full of red hot Cinders
which (...) made of Green-wood, let them boil half a quarter of an hour, and
then take the from the fire, and let them cool a little; when this stuff is
lukewarm, cause Bath as rub hard your Horse's forelegs with it, and if you do
this every fourth day, I ass^ you, you will preserve your Horse's Legs sound
and neat, during the greatest fat^^ of their Journey.

If you have but one Horse, one Quart of Vinegar will be sufficient; this
remedispels the humors by resolution, prevents their falling down upon the
Legs, a so preserves them sound and neat, and without gourding or swelling.

When you return from a long Journey or traveling, this remedy may be also
p^ctised with success, by only using it every third or fourth day for some
time; for the Bath will not only unweary and refresh the Horse, but also
recover his Legs.

When a Man has rid a Horse extremely hard, so that he fears foundering, (...)
best method he can take after he has put him in the Stable, and that he has
for caused lead him a little in ones hand, and otherways ordered him as I have
alre^^ directed, is, to take two Quarts of Vinegar, with two pound of Salt, and
mixing the well together cold, cause bath and rub hard the horse's four legs
with it for about (...) an hour, then cause pour into his feet some Oil of Bays
scalding hot, and upon the Oil hot Ashes, above which he is to put Hurds or
Course flax, with thin slic^^ wood, or pieces of whale bone fixed cross-ways
above it, to keep all fast, and (...) concentrate the heat; but if you can have
no Oil of Bays, then take either the Oil of Walnuts, Turnips, or that of
fishes, but the Oil of Bays is by far the best.

The same receipt is also good for horses which are very wearied, but these
immediately preceiding are better, because they are for your horses of Value,
such as Barbs, Turks, Spanish horses, Hunters that are esteemed, Journey-pads,
and fine English horses; for a man would have but little to do should he cause
take that care of jads or ordinary Naggs, and all the Cow Dung in Flanders
would not be sufficient for it, far less the Cinders especially in red
Char-coal; and yet they are those little Naggs and Gallowayes which endure the
greatest fatigues, and perform the longest journeys; Witness the Messengers,
and Posts, where they don't take this care nor observe these precautions, for
if they did, they would but last and endure too long; but again fine and large
horses are very soon spoilt^f they are not had a care of: therefore people
commonly say that great horses do not love great journeys, thereby signifying,
that if they travel too much they will be soon spoilt; for in effect, it is not
properly their employment, because they are as it were the Gentry among horses.

I knew a horse of Value, which being Rid extraordinary hard from Paris to
Foutaine-bleau, they at his arrival took all the care imaginable to lead him,
and dry and rub him for near two full hours, but they put no hot oil into his
feet, neither did they give him any of the stinking pills, Brandy Claret Wine
and Nutmegs, nor Glister; he was not sensible of any prejudice by this for the
time, and also he was three days after, Rid about a league, and at the end of
eight days he made two short journeyes only at a step, and he appeared also to
be very well and sound after his arrival, but the third day thereafter when
they took him to the forge to shoe, they found his fore-feet in some measure
round and Crowned, or elevate in the soles from the point of the frush to the
Toe, and his soles were so high in those parts I have mentioned, that they
could not fit him with any other but vaulted or hollow shoes, and although he
had very good feet before, yet he could not now almost support himself, but as
a horse in whom the foundering had fallen down upon his feet, and occasioned
Crescents in his Soles; they caused bar or stop his pastern Veins, as I shall
show you when I discourse of shoeing, and they shoed him with Panton or
Pantable shoes, which is a fashion of shoes I shall discrive to you hereafter;
the horse was by this method made fit in fix months time to serve, and although
his feet were not so good as formerly, yet they made use of him: Now if they
had observed the precautiones which I have given, which are to pour scalding
hot oil of Bays into the feet, and to administer some things inwardly to him,
they would have been fred of this trouble at a more easy rate, and the humor
which fell down upon his feet, would have been expelled another way.

CHAP: XXXIV. A Continuation of the directions, for preserving Horses sound
upon Travel.
Sect. 1. CHAP XXXIV A continuation of the directions for preserving horses
sound upon Travel,

YOUR horse being as I have ordered put in the stable and unbridled, I shall
continue to perscrive, what shall be next done, for to order him methodically;
If you travel in Summer, you are immediately after he is unbridled to cause take
off the saddle, and rub him very well all along the Back, where it stood with
hay or shraw, for it is a great deal better to unsaddle him, although it were
but in the time of dinner (and which is a thing that few people practice only
that they may save themselves the trouble of saddling again) than wholly t^
omit it; But if it be in Winter, you shall not unsaddle him so soon, but (...)
when he is fully dry, and that he has eat some, after which you shall also
cause (...) him well beneath the Saddle.

When you have taken off the saddle, you shall cause set it in the Sun, that so
(...) Pannels of it may dry, then you shall cause beat them with a Rod, that
they neither harden nor hurt the horse; those who make use of Saddle-Cloaths,
which the double and put beneath their Saddles, don't run this risk, and the
method is very good: (...) if it be in the winter, when you have not much
Sunshine proper for it, and that you horse has sweat a great deal, then the
Saddle being wet in the pannells, you sha^^ cause dry it by a fire, rather as
set it upon his Back next day all wet.

I had almost forgot to tell you, that when you take off the Saddle you are
(...) feel your horses Back where it stood, to discover if he be neither
pinched nor galle^ and if he be, you are both to cause rectify the Saddle, and
apply something to the part afflicted; the Saddle, by taking away some of it is
stuffing where it pressed him, or by chambering it, (he must be a very bad
Saddler who does not understand how this is to be done, for in all the
considerable Towns they know it) are to the sore, by treating it as I shall
hereafter show you.

When a horse has stood an hour or two unsaddled, a man will discover bette^
those parts in which he has been oppressed, than just immediately when the
Saddle is taken off, because when he is cool the part which was oppressed will
swell, whereas, instantly after he is unsaddled, it cannot be so well
perceived, because the heat hinders it from rising.

But if your horse be only swelled, without having his skin cut, and only (...)
being oppressed and pinched with the Saddle, then it is best to apply a remedy
to it a soon as possible, for if you should neglect it, there would grow a
hardness in the place, which is called a Sit-fast, and which through time will
fall away and lea^^ a great wound in it is place, all which may be prevented by
the following remedy, but not judgeing it needful to refer you for so small a
matter to the 2. p^^ which is the Treatise of Diseases, you shall make the
Restrictive following.

Sect. 2. A Restristive, to repel and take away any swelling upon a Horse's
back, occasioned by a bad Saddle.
TAke three, Sect: 2.
four, five or six whites of Eggs, according to the largeness (...) the
swelling, put them into a pretty large plate, and beat them with a^ big piece
of Alum, until you raise from them a strong and thick froth, which will be
done in about a quarter of an hour's time, if you continue still beating it;
Tale then of this strong froth, which will be pretty thick, and Rub and chaff
very well the swelling with it, and also lay as much of the froth upon it as
you can cause it imbibe, and so leave it till next morning, at which time the
swelling will infallibly be repelle^ and fallen; I have had the proof of this
remedy a thousand times; there are indeed many other ways to perform this, but
this is both the readiest and most easy of any if nevertheless you desire a
greater variety, you may have recourse to the Chapter of wounds in the second
part: you may carry always a piece of Alum along with you for this purpose,
because it will serve several times and the remedy is both cheap and good.

Sect: 3. Another for the same use.
RUB and chaff very hard the swelling with good Brandy, Sect: 3.
and if with spirit of wine so much the better; when you have Soked the place
well with it, set fire with a lighted paper to what remains upon it of the
Brandy or spirit of Wine, and when the fire of its own accord extinguishes,
then the swelling will also dissappear.

Or otherways, having chaffed extremely well the swelled part with good Brandy,
immediately rub it all over with black Soap to occasion a froth, which you are
to suffer to dry upon the swelling, and which I assure you will restrict it,
provided there be no matter in it; this last is perfectly good for
Coach-Horses, whom the harness has fretted; if you have not convenience of
getting the best black Soap, take that which is more common.

The most part of Horses become lean upon Travel, especially the larger size,
which are made use of in Equipages; because making the whole days Journey
commonly with one reach, they are bridled so long together, that they become
lean, and their Saddles which rested very equally upon them at their first
setting out, are found to be now too large by reason of it.

And a Horse will become sometimes so lean by it, that the Saddle will come to
rest either upon the Withers or Reins, which will prove very troublesome; you
are therefore, when you perceive that the points of the Saddle-bows do not rest
against his Body, and that the Saddle appears to be too wide, to cause stuff
the points and that part of the panel which goes all along the Back, and also
opposite to the shoulder pits, with Hart-hair or the hair of cut Manes and
Tails if need be; sometimes also it is very fit to cause quilt and ply the
points of the bows with Felt, especially if the horses leanness be
extraordinary, and that he has become very small in the body.

So soon as you give your horses Oats, it is good to leave them alone, that so
they may eat them with the less greed and disturbance; for a vigorous horse, so
long as there is any person behind him, while he is eating, will not fail to
look about to him now and then, and so loses many of his Oats, which at that
time fall from his Mouth; that you may therefore prevent this, you are to leave
him alone, provided you are in a place, where they have not a trick of stealing
horses Oats from them, which is very ordinary in many Inns, where, although the
Masters be both in a good condition and honest, yet their Servants rob one
another of the Oats committed to their Charge, and then make a piece of
Gallantry and Jest of it.

You are also, before you leave your horse, to see that he be so tied, as that
he may ly down with ease, and that his binding or halter be neither too long
nor too short.

If your horse has swett much all the day long, and that you find he is
perfectly dry after the eating his Oats, it will be very fit to cause Curry and
rub him over for a quarter of an hour; that so his hair, which the the sweat in
a manner has glewed together, may be detatched and separate, which would
otherwise render his body stiff, and hinder him to rest well all night;
besides, that it would also stop and bind up the Pores, whereby in the night
time the Vapors, and exhalations, which are called the Excrements of the third
concoction, and which should evacuate, are detained in the body, to the great
prejudice of his health; for horses produce a great many of these vapors,
which should transpire and insensibly evaporate through the Pores, especially
in the night time, which is most manifest by the quantity of dust, which is
found upon a horse's skin, and which people take daily away with the Curry
comb; now if you hinder this transpiration, which should be made in the night
time, you will prejudge him, especially if he has wrought hard and fatigued
much all the day long: I shall therefore conclude. That a horse, which has
swett much and is dry, will be much the better of being Curried a quarter or
half an hour in the Evening, and if he be (...) dry, to have his Body rubbed
all over very well for the like space, with good Straw.

I will here set down an observation for the Curious, and such as desire to be
instructed in the least particulars relating to Horses, it will be useful to
them when their ho^es are either sick or very low, and that they would recover
and make them up again it may prove also very beneficial to them when
Traveling, that so they may prever all the inconveniences, which may hinder
their horses to perform cheerfully their Journey.

You are then to look to your horses dung, thereby to judge of his inward
disposition, that so you may prevent the inconveniences which may befall him;
if (...) dung be too thin, it may be a sign that either the water which he
drunk was too (...) and peirceing, or that he has drunk too greedily of it; if
there be amongst his d^^ whole grains of Oats, perhaps the horse has either
not grinded or chaw'd the well, or that he has a weakenss in his Stomach; and
if his dung be black, d^ or come away in very small and hard pieces, then it is
a token that he is overh^^ed in his body: Sect: 3.
Now, according as you have judged, by these remarks, of his inw^^^
constitution, so you shall administer that to him which you shall think most
prope^ and which is taught you in many places of this book: the Ancients it
seems (...) this method, for I have read in a very old Author; viz: Galen:
Veneti, et Pras^^ fludiosi spectatores equorum, stercora, quo intelligant
quemadmodum alimenta coxerint od^^ tur; tanquam ex eo omnem eorum bonam
habitudinem cognituri. Where by the word odorantur. I think he can mean no
other thing, but that they looked attentively and carefully to the dung, and not
that they smelled it, for if it was smelled at, (...) was certainly only by the
commoner sort of people, who were notwithstanding (...) Curious,

When horses are arrived at the Inn, and tied up to the Rack, a man should,
bes^ they are unbridled, cause lift their feet, to see if they want any of
their shoes, o^ those which they have do not rest upon their soles, and cause
pick and clear the of the earth and gravel which may be got betwixt their shoes
and soles, and (...) also stop them with Cow Dung if the horses be worth that
pains, as I have al^^ ordered you, or that the Master be so careful as to cause
do it.

If you water them abroad, so soon as they return from the River, if you (...)
stop their feet with Cow Dung it will ease the pain in their feet, and take
away t^ heat and benumb'dness, which may have been occasioned by the hard earth
and (...) dung remain in their feet all night, which will keep them soft and in
a good ^^dition, by expelling the heat.

There are many Horses, which so soon as they are unbridled, do instead of ea^
lay them down to rest, because of the great pain which they have in their feet;
that a man is ready to judge them either sick or very much harassed: but if he
look their Eyes, he will see they are lively and good, and if he cause offer
meat to the as they are lying, they will eat it very willingly, yet if he
handle their feet he (...) find them extremly hot, which will discover to him,
that it is in that part they ^^fer; therefore you are to cause observe if their
shoes do not rest upon their for which is somewhat difficult to be certainly
known, without unshoeing them, but you cause take off their shoes, then look to
the insides of them, and you will ob^^^ that those parts of them which rest
upon the soles, are more smooth and shining the any other; you are therefore,
in that case to cause pare their feet in those parts (...) fix on the shoes
again, anointing their hoofs with ointment of Roses, or some o^ thing of that
nature, and causing also stop their soles with scalding hot black p^^ Tar, or
Ship-pitch which are all much about one, and let it cool in them before y^
suffer them to go to the ground; this Pitch or Tar will nourish the soles, take
a^ the painful heat, and perfectly strengthen them: at Paris people have the
conveni^ of geting Ship-Pitch, which is nothing else but that mixture wherewith
they pitch the Boats, and which strengthens sooner horses feet when applied
hot, then almost (...) other kind of application: it is composed of old oil or
grease, and black pitch, wh^ they cause melt and mix together and so keep it
for their use.

Horses which have tender feet, are commonly they which immediately lay then
selves down to rest so soon as they are unbridled, and that because of the
great p^^ which they have in their feet; By tender-footed horses, I here
understand such a have low heels, or whose feet have but a small body, that is
but a very little thickn^ betwixt the sole and hoof, in that part of the foot
which is about two finger breadth or less above the Toe or fore part of it;
also those which have too little feet, or which have cloven quarters, or are
hoof-bound, or have their hoofs Circled, and last of all those which have
Flat-feet.

When People Travel in very warm and dry Weather, their horses feet do many
times alter and become dry, and the hoof for lack of moisture spleets and
breaks, so that a man is in hazard of having his horse loss his shoes; you are
therefore, before you take such horses to the Water in the morning, to anoint
their fore-feet, just at the on-setting of the hoofs with the ointment of Roses
or any other hoof-salve whereof I have given you a description in the 2d part;
sometimes also when the feet are much altered, you should anoint them at twelve
a Clock; and it is particularly of such kind of horses you are to take the
greatest care, (because of having their hoofs so very brittle) when you are
either Traveling in hot Countries or that you have a great difficulty to cause
them keep their Shoes.

There are some horses of value, which having their backs swelled beneath the
saddle, People are necessitate to let them lie all night with their Sumpter
saddles upon them, Sect 3.
lest the cold in the night time should cause the bruised parts to swell so
excessively, that they could not conveniently saddle and load them next
morning; some times people also suffer the Sumpter saddles to remain all night
upon their backs, to keep, closs upon the swellings or Galls, the remedies they
have applied: Now it is a bad enough invention thus to cause a poor horse lie
all night beneath a saddle; it is therefore far better and more proper to cause
fill a bag with good warm dung, and tie it upon the swelling, which will not
only binder it to increase, but perhaps also quite discuss it.

The Egg-Carriers, which come from Normandy to Paris, never take off their
Horses pack-saddles in the night time, but then they have always their horses
Hung.

There are few horses, but what in a great journey interfere and cut themselves
less or more, but so soon as ever you perceive it, you may cause help it, as I
shall show you when I discourse of shoeing.

In the Morning, before you saddle your horse, you should always feel the
Saddle-Bows to know if they be unglew'd or broke, then observe if the band of
the saddlewithers be unnail'd or split, or the long bands any-wayes loose or
unfixed, if the Cloth of the Pannels be too stiff and hard, or that the
pannels themselves be separate from the Bows; when a man has had but never so
little practice in this, he will run over all these particulars in the twinkle
of an Eye, so that after he has done it he may cause cast the saddle upon his
horses back, which should be always done so soon as he is Curried and dressed,
and a pretty time before he take journey, because commonly when horses, which
are a little aged, are once saddled, they make a great deal of more haste and
dispatch in eating.

Likewise, before bridling, a man should look to those Leathers in the head
stall which support the Bitt, to see that they be neither broke nor rotten; as
also to the bridle reins where they are joined to the Branches: Horses should
always be fed with Oats before parting, for he which has an empty belly is
not in a very good condition to endure any great fatigue, because as horses are
of a hot and dry constitution, if their natural heat find not something
whereupon to work, it feeds upon its own proper substance, which very quickly
makes the horse become lean, or at least overheats him very much inwardly.

There are many People, who are more curious in providing good cheer for
themselves than for their horses, and who, if they have their own bellies full,
don't concern or trouble themselves much with any thing else; now such persons
particularly, and many others unworthy to mount or ride a horse, having read or
heard read all the preceding particulars, have said, That to observe them
exactly, a man needed noe other business, seeing it would take up the most part
of his time, and that for their own part they would rather venture the spoiling
of their horses, then be at so much care and trouble: I confess that it is not
always needful to observe them all, but only the most necessar, and if you be
once alittle accustomed to it, you will do all with a great deal of ease, and
even almost without thinking on it; however I with all my heart consent, that
those who will not observe them follow their own inclinations, because I write
only for such as are well intentioned, and desire to be instructed, and values
very little what others shall either act or say against this subject: This is
all that is to be observed before and in time of Travel; It now remains that I
say something of what is to be done after journeying, and when people are
arrived from it.

CHAP: XXXV. What is to be observed, after People are arrived from a Journey,
or Traveling.
Sect. I.
WHen you are arrived from a journey, CHAP: XXXV What is to be observed after
People are arrived from a journey.
you are immediately to cause d^^ the two heel nails of both the fore feet, and
if it be a large (...) then four; and two or three days after to cause blood
your horse in the Neck, and to feed him for ten or twelve days with wet Bran
only, without (...) him any Oats, also during this time keep him always soft
and cleanly litter'd; T^ reason, why after a long journey you are to draw the
heel Nails, is, because the (...) swell, and if they were not thus eased, the
shoes would press and straiten them (...) much; it is also good to stop their
feet with Cow Dung, but there are some (...) cause take their horses shoes
quite off, which is naught, and it is also a very bad cu^ to cause pare their
feet, Sect. 1.
because the humor is drawn down upon them by it.

After your horse is Bled, you are next day to apply upon his shoulders, legs,
and (...) the red Emmielure or Charge described in the 31 Chap, Sect 2d, of the
second (...) or otherwise make use of the Charge with Cow Dung and Vinegar, or
(...) made of quenched Ashes, or any other you please.

If you make use of the red Charge, you are twenty four hours after the first
an^ cation, to renew it again after the same manner, and so continue it every
four a twenty hours without taking away any of the old, until you have applied
it three four times, after which you shall prepare a bath with the lees of
Claret wine, as I (...) taught you in the 35 Chap. Sect. 3 of the 2d part, and
without removing any of (...) Emmielure or Charge, rub all the parts covered
with it, with this bath once (...) day, until you have bathed him with it
three or four times; if your horse, however^ tigued he be, is not recovered
with this, you are then only to give him rest, and he (...) recover of his own
accord, without needing the application of any more (...) medies.

Your horse being thus fully refreshed and unweari'd, you are to cause taken
his shoes, pare his feet, and shoe him anew again, then take him every day to
a (...) ning Water or Rivulet, and let him stand in it for half an hour, both
Morning and ^vening if it be in the Summer time, but if in Winter, then it is
sufficient to let (...) only remain in it, while he is a drinking.

If he be not much fatigued, as he will be but very little if you have
carefully lo^^ to him upon the Road, then it will be sufficient, having first
drawn the heel nails^ his fore feet, to cause blood him in the Neck, and
receiving his Blood in a Ve^^ keep it always stirring, lest it Clot and fix,
afterward among three pound Blood, which is the quantity should be taken, add
a pint of the best spirit of Wine, (...) all together, and without warming it
bath all his four legs and shoulders with it, (...) ting it remain upon them
for eight and forty hours, after which you shall make (...) Bath descrived in
the 65 Chap. of the 2d. part. with which you shall bath his l^ well, and
therewith also wash off the Blood, which was upon them and his should in place
of a Charge.

Sect: 2. Several other methods, whereby to unweary horses, when they come
first from Travel.
You will extremely unweary your horse, if you charge his Legs with this
composition following; take a pound of common salt, and putting it into a
frying pan, fry it until it be perfectly dry and leave crackling (for to have
spoke according to the terms of Art I should have said Decrepitat salt, Sect: 2.
) and when it has thus left crackling, throw it scalding hot into a large
Mortar, and beating it very fine add to it two pounds of honey, which you are
to mix very well with it by the help of the Pestle; with this, charge and rub
his Legs, and although they be swelled it will resolve and discuss it, and take
away the pain and benummedness of the finews, which the traveling may have
occasioned; this remedy is both easy and cheap.

The baths for the Legs, descrived in the 2d part, do wonderfully assuage their
pain and lay their swelling; as also if you cause rub and chaff them well, with
good brandy or spirit of Wine.

Or if you take two parts Brandy, and one part oil of Walnuts, and mixing them
well together chaff your horses Legs with it, it is an excellent remedy, but I
always suppose that the Bleeding has preceeded it.

To unweary your horses at an easy rate, you may, after having bled him, Cause
warm sorne Claret Wine lees, until it be thoroughly hot, then adding a pound or
two of Honey, thicken the composition by degrees with good wheat flower, not
forgetting to keep it always stirring, until it come to a pretty thick
consistence; then take it from the fire, and once in twenty four hours charge
the horses Legs with it, without removing any of what was put on before; this
is an excellent remedy and has always a very good effect.

The thickest of the dregs, or lees of the Claret Wine made use of quite cold,
is excellent; you are to charge and rub the Legs with it, and frequently to
renew its application; this remedy succeeds many times better then one more
composed: If you add a third of Vinegar to two thirds of thick Wine lees, it
will lay the swelling of a leg, and take away all the heat and fluxion, which
may have fallen down upon it, by the fatigue of the journey.

Another easy enough remedy to unweary a horse, without either much charges or
multiplicity of ingredients, is vinegar and quenched Charcoals of Wood, which
will dissolve and dissipate all the humors which are capable of resolution,
and which incommoded the leg by stifining its motion; I have already taught you
how it should be made.

But if your horse be so very fatigued, that none of the abovementioned
applications can recover him, then have recourse to the 33 Chap: of the 2d
part; where it is discoursed to the full of used and spoilt legs and of the
means to recover them; and if all the remedies, which you have caused apply,
produce noe good effect, my only advice then is, to give him rest; for Nature
many times of her own accord performs that, which all the remedies in the world
cannot: However take always care to cause rub his legs well, with a good Hay
Wisp, as also to Currie and dress the rest of his body well, and perhaps the
remedies which have not operate in the time of their application, will discover
their effects afterward, and that long rest will at last perfect the Work.

At least, you may cause once practice all the preceding Remedies, with an
assureance, that they cannot alter the Legs, even although they should receive
noe ease or benefit by them, which is a thing impossible.

There are some remedies, which soften and mollify so extremely the Sinews of
the Legs, by reason of their great humidity and moistening quality, that they
make a horse Cripple and halt for a long time after their application, and
although they have taken away the great pain, yet they make the Legs yield and
bend beneath the horse because of their having too much softened the Nerves; so
that there is almost as much time required to harden and strengthen the Nerves
again, as there was required (...) unweary and recover them of their fatigue,
if there had been applied proper and methodical remedies to them, such as I
have proposed.

CHAP: XXXVI. Of the Art of Shoeing, or the true and exact method of Shoeing
all sorts of feet, be they never so bad or deformed.
PEople should be persuaded that no Escuyer or Master of horse, CHAP: XXXVI Of
the Art of Shoeing.
Gentlem^ or other person who has good and handsome horses, should be ignor^
of the order and method, that ought to be observed, to have them (...) shoed;
to the end, that if he cannot conveniently find a skilful and expert Smith,
(...) may at least order after what manner they should be shoed, to have it
well done; I think therefore, that there should be a distinction made betwixt
two methods (...) shoeing: The first and most useful method is, to shoe for the
advantage of the foot, and according to it is nature and shape, so to fit shoes
to it, that may make (...) better than it is, and if it be good may preserve
and keep it from becoming bad; The second method is, that which disguiseth the
foot, and makes it appear good when really it is not, And this last is, that
which is most sought after by the Horse Coursers; for albeit that this last
method of shoing, through time, wholly ruins the foot, yet those, who have no
other design but to fell and put off their horses, do not much trouble
themselves about it, for provided that their horses feet but appear good, and
they get them sold, it is all they desire.

I shall show you the first method, which is to shoe a horse for the advantage
of his foot only, and although many run and seek earnestly after the second,
that is, to disguise the foot, and make it appear good, when really it is not;
for by that method of shoeing, they will at last wholly ruin their horses
feet, and that is what I do not undertake to teach you; therefore to prevent
your falling into this error, you mu^ not neglect, to learn the right method
of shoeing for the profit and advantage of the foot: People have known in this
our age, Kings who understood how to forge a horse's shoe, and there are but
few persons of quality who know not how to drive a Nail, thereby to serve
themselves upon a necessity; It is a Maxim, that people cannot teach that which
they know not themselves, and because of that, I endeavored to learn a little
how to forge a shoe, and give it the right shape it should have, so that many
times when the Smiths have not given the shoe the right turn, according to my
mind, I have taken the Hammer and Pincers, and has given it my self the true
turn or shape which I desired: There is not at present a Stable-boy, but what
will give orders for the shoeing of the horse whose foot he is holding; all the
Coach-men give lessons anent it to their Masters, and afterward to the
Smith-boy, and all these lessons are for the most part very prejudicial,
because they are the occasion of ruining, weakening, and spoiling horses feet:
Therefore, that you may not fall into these inconveniences, I have laid down
the most intelligible and useful Maxims that possibly I could, and which will
serve as so many guides to you, in the art of shoeing.

Now this part is absolutely necessar; and, for not understanding it, people of
times suffer horses of great value to become altogether useless, and so are
necessitate to rely upon the discretion of a Smith-boy, who will cause you
believe what he pleases, and persuade you that he is doing very right, when
perhaps he is absolutely ruining your horses feet.

Seeing Shoeing is a Trade, which seems merely to rely upon practice, or
rather a certain Rote which the Smith-boys learn from their Masters, It
follows, that they not knowing the true Maxims, which should be observed in
shoeing a foot well, therefore cannot teach it their Apprentices; and when such
Boys come among able Masters who would teach them to shoe for the profit of
the foot, they give for a reason, that they were bred up in such and such a
Shop, which was the best employed in Paris, and that there, they did not shoe
after that fashion, yea their Opiniatrety for their rote is so great, that of
times they render themselves incapable of being put in the right way: For me, I
have applied my self to find out the true way of shoeing, both because of the
need I had for it, to put and maintain bad feet in a condition to serve, as
also that I might not have the trouble and displeasure, of seeing fine and
vigorous horses remain useless, for having been in the beginning badly shoed;
so that a Man could not get them afterward conveniently shoed, without causing
them halt.

I shall discourse not only of Saddle, but also of Coach-horses which require a
greater care; because in place of good feet, at least such as were indifferent,
and in a condition to serve well when they came first from the low Countries,
if he be not a knowing Smith, they will in six Months or a year, have ( les
pieds Combles, as the French call them, or their Soles round and high) their
heels narrow, or so low and ill shaped, that they will have difficulty to
serve; because in the time that such horse's feet alter or change, if the
shoeing do not give them a good form and shape, I assure you they will soon be
out of condition to serve.

I daily also, by reason of this ignorance, see feet hoof-bound, altered, and
dry, and Legs which are arched (called in French Jambes arquee) also horses
which tread only upon the toes of their hind-feet, (called in French Chevaux
rampins) and a hundred other accidents, which befall horses by reason of their
being badly shoed, and for not knowing how they should be shoed, for the
benefit and advantage of their feet.

There are four Maxims or chief Rules which must of necessity be known, that a
man may shoe all sorts of feet well.

The first comprehends this general precept: Toe before, and Quarter behind, or
before behind, behind before, in French Pince devant, and talon derrtere.

Toe before, or Pince devant, that is to say, that although the Toes of the
forefeet be good and strong, and so capable to suffer a good grip by the Nails
you intend to drive in them, yet the quarters of the fore-feet has less
thickness of horn, and therefore people must take but a slender hold upon them,
for fear of touching the quick, and so pricking the horse; you must know then,
that by Toe before is understood, that you may drive hardily, and give the
Nails a good hold upon the Toes of the Fore feet, because there the horn is
very thick, which it is not in the quarters of the Fore-feet, for there the
horn is thin, and you would be in hazard of pricking your horse.

Quarter behind or Talon derriere, is that the horse has the quarters of his
hind-feet strong, that is to say the horn thick, and so capable of suffering a
good grip, because there is in that part much horn; but at the Toes of the
Hind-feet, you will immediately meet with the quick, because the horn is but
thin in that part, and therefore Smiths should put no Nails at all just at the
Toes of the Hind feet, but only in their quarters.

There are many Smiths in small Villages, who find difficulty in following this
Rule, and therefore unskilfully drive the Nails alike, in both the fore and
hind feet.

To drive a Nail (in french Brocher un clou) is so to fix it in a horse's foot,
that it may keep fast the shoe; the Hammer with which Smiths commonly knock in
the Nails, is called the Driver, (in French Brochoir) from whence the French
word (Brocher) is derived, is what I know not, neither is it of any
consequence, that it should.

You are then, for the first Maxim, to recollect your self and remember, That
the quarters of the fore-feet are weak, and have but little horn, and that the
Toes of the hind-feet are so likwayes, because the horn is thin, and you will
soon meet with the quick, so that by driving the Nails a little high in those
parts, you will easily close or press a vein which surrounds the foot, and so
cause the horse halt, which is called Pricking of him, and if people do not
very quickly find out the part hurt or pricked, matter will presently form in
it, and may be the occasion of many trouble, some accidents; it is just so when
people touch the quick; which is the flesh that is betwixt the sole and hoof,
and which surrounds a little bone in the middle of the Coffin, called the
Little-foot, in french Le petit pied.

People prick horses two ways, either when they drive into the quick, or when
they press this vein, and it commonly falls out in the quarters of the
fore-feet, or in the Toes of the hind; I have given cures for it at full length
in the 52 Chap. of the 2d part.

The second Maxim is, Never to open a horses heels; it is the greatest abuse of
all, and that which ruins the feet most: People call opening of the heels,
when the Smith in pareing the foot, cutteth the heel low, and closs almost to
the frush, and takes it down within a finger breadth of the Coronet or top of
the hoof, so that he separates the quarters at the heel, and by that means
weakneth and takes away the substance of the foot, and makes it to close, and
become narrow at the heels; now this which they call Opening, would be more
properly called Closing of the heels, for the roundness and circumference of
the foot being cut, by doing that which they call opening of the heels, which
is to cut them wholly away, they are no longer supported by any thing, so that
if there be any weakness in the foot it will of necessity cause it shrink and
straiten in the quarters, and if Smiths looked to their Reputation and did
their duty, they should make this Maxim one of their chief principles and Rules
in shoeing.

The Third Maxim is, To make use of as thin and small Nails as possible,
because they are the best; the Nails that are thick and gross make a large
hole, not only when they are a driving, but also when they are riveting; for
being stiff, they split the horn and take it away with them, so that a horse's
foot falling between two stones, or in any other place, where it behooveth him
to pull it out with force, the shoe will without doubt remain there with a part
of the horn, to wit all that is below the Nails, This falls out so much the
more easily, because the holes which the big Nails have made as well in driving
as riveting, have already weakened, and as it were (...) the hoof quite round in
the place where they are driven: Besides that people cannot easily shoe a
tender foot with such big Niss, without being in hazard of pricking it,
especially if there be but little horn to take hold of; but the smiths to
prevent this, pierce their shoes lean or too near the edge, which through time
is also the ruin of the foot.

The nails of Limoges and Argenton are preferable to others, those of Limoges
are soft and tough for no other reason, but because they forge them with
Char-coal made of the Chestnut tree, which has an oyliness in it that mollifies
the Iron, and makes it such as we approve of when we make use of those Nails;
for the Iron which they make use of at Limoges, is not better than in other
places, it is only the Char-coal that makes it good: And besides, these Nalls
are well forged and very thin, but because they are commonly long, if those who
drive them have not a sure and steady hand, or if the hoof be hard, they will
be apt to bend and knee them every moment; the ignorant smiths cry out
extremely against these sort of Nails, because they know not how to drive them,
but those who have a sure stroke and can place them right, will almost never
bend them, but drive them altogether as well, as those big and short clumsy
Nails which are worth nothing.

But large heavy shoes, such as Coach and Cart-horses have, could not be kept
fast with such small and limber Nails as I advise you to make use of, because
there is a proportion to be observed in every thing; therefore I grant, that to
large feet, you must make use of bigger Nails than to those which are of a less
size, but always the smallest and Limberest Nails, that can be made use of to
each kind are the best, neither does this exception at all destroy our Maxim,
which holds always true, but more particulary for small sized horses and
tender feet.

The fourth Maxim is, To make the lightest shoes you can, conform to the foot
and size of your horse; because, besides that heavy shoes spoil the back sinews
and weary the horse, in traveling he has almost always his feet in the Air,
for the time which they have to rest upon the ground is not considerable, so
that he must always support that useless weight, which being so heavy by
reason of the great thickness of the shoes, makes the Nails, with the least
knock against a stone, to slacken and yield; as also when a horse Over-reaches,
which is when with his hind feet he overtakes his fore, the shoes being heavy
are more easily pulled off, so that the horse remaining upon the Road unshoed,
is in hazard of being spoilt, before a man can have the occasion of a smith to
shoe him, and those who think they use frugality by shoeing with thick and
heavy shoes, and seldom, are deceived, for they loss more by it than they gain;
be cause by this method, horses spoil their sinews, and lose more frequently
their shoes than if they had been light; besides that any shoes which are not
brittle, last long enough in a plain Country where there are few stones.

CHAP. XXXVII, How to pare the feet well, fit the shoes, and drive the Nails.
I have told you what I think is necessary to be oserved for shoeing in
general, CHAP: XXXVII How to pare the feet well, fit the shoes, and drive the
Nails.
let us now consider what is to be observed by the Smith when he is to pare the
feet: he should then by no means, least he spoil them, hollow or empty their
quarters with the Butteris, or pare down the heels, which they call to open
them; the Butteris is the instrument with which they pare the feet, and is also
called the Pareing-Iron; if people should hollow the quarters and open them,
they would weaken the foot, for the roundness of the hoof being taken away, the
heels are not sustained or kept asunder with any thing, and by consequence will
close, being closed they will be extraordinarly weakened, and so the horse will
become very soon strait heeled or hoof-bound, especially if his heels be high
and in the least altered, that is dried; you must then keep the heels of the
fore-feet strong, and likewise all the rest of the foot; because if your horse
should chance to loss a shoe upon the road, he will spoil his foot by the way,
before you can perhaps have the opportunity to get him shoed again; also if you
should pare his feet thus almost to the quick, as some people do, who think
thereby to prevent the so frequent shoeing of their horses, because their hoofs
grow quickly, they would be all broken and spoilt; but if you know that your
horses hoofs are smooth and tough, you may by that judge that he will not so
easily loss his shoes, and therefore may, with the more confidence, pare his
soles reasonably near.

The foot being well pared, you must fit and adjust a shoe to it which must be
half after the English fashion, that is, which must be neither too broad nor
too narrow in the web, neither must it is spunges extend any further than the
heel, but must only follow the exact compass of the foot, just to the corners
of the frush, and they must not appear much upon the outsides of the hoofs at
the heels neither, as those smiths, who pretend to be very understanding, would
make us believe, by saying that it preserves and supporteth the heel; for this
pretended preservation of the heel is but a fancy very ill grounded, therefore
laying aside such whimsies, the middle of the sponge must, without any other
Philosophy, be placed just upon the middle of the end of the quarter which
touches the corner of the frush, and is called the Heel, and which, it is to be
supposed, you have not pared; for as I told you, the heels must never be pared,
because this paring of them, which by the common smiths is called the opening
of the heels, should as I said, be rather termed the closeing as opening of
them; Now the middle of the Spunges being placed upon the extremities of the
quarters, which form the heel and touches almost the frush, must not reach any
further, and then your horse will be shod, both for his own ease and the
benefit of his foot, for he will never become hoof-bound, neither will he
overreach, by reason of the Spunges of his fore-feet shoes being set equal
with his heels, and not suffered to exceed them; the best and strongest reason
I can give for this, is that a horse is never so much at his ease as when he is
standing without shoes upon his litter, therefore that he may have always that
ease, cause put shoes upon him which follow exactly the shap^ of his feet, and
that do not much exceed the outsides of his hoofs at the heels, to preserve
them as some smiths say; for that is not to follow nature, which is our guide
and wiser than we, but is rather to cross and constrain her; as for example.

Are not the Spantards more at ease in their shoes than we? because their shoes
follow the form and figure of their feet, and are made conform to the model
thereof, where as the French cause make shoes, whose shape their feet must take
and be accustome^ with, and whether they incommode them or not, they are not
much concerned at i^ provided they be but in the fashion; apply this comparison
to the shoeing of horse and you will find it answer pretty near.

Those who cause make the spunges of their horse's shoes too long, besides that
the fatigue and weary them, and also make them overreach, they likwayes ruin
a^^ spoil their feet, and are the occasion of their becoming hoof bound; those
again the are too short, make a horse go not so much at his ease, but your
horse's shoes (...) never be too short, if they follow the whole compass of his
feet to the ends or (...) of their frushes, and no further. The sponge is that
part of the shoe, which when it (...) fastened upon a horse's foot, is next to
the heel.

The shoe should not press upon the sole at all, but should rest equally and
exact^ round the whole foot upon the horn, which is about the thickness of a
small ^ing^ breadth, taking notice that if the shoe, upon the outer edge of
that side next the horst foot, have any rising or unevenness in it, and that
you cause not beat it down, (...) make it level with the rest before it be set
on, it will rest upon the horn, and certainly spoil his hoof, for that raised
edge being higher than the rest of the shoe, the^ will no other part of it rest
upon his hoof but it, which will certainly spoil it; the horn round the foot is
at most no thicker than a small fingers breadth, which is also generally the
thickness of the rest of the hoof.

If the shoe rested upon any other part of the foot but the horn, it work cause
the horse halt, and then ye would be necessitate immediately to take off his
sh^^ as it will often fall out when the shoe rests upon the sole, especially if
the sole be the and weak, but if the sole be thick and strong, although the
shoe rest upon some (...) of it, yet the horse will not halt, as you may remark
in shoeing with the (...) shoes hereafter described, which shoes rest almost
always upon the sole, or upon the Corners of the frush; and which being thick
and strong, is the reason that the horse but very seldom halteth with them.

Having thus fitted the shoe, you shall drive two nails in it, and then let his
foot* to the ground, to see if the shoe be right placed, then you shall drive
the rest of the na^ equally, and not the one higher than the other, which is
called to drive nails by M^ sick or Mufically, but you must drive them equally,
observing nevertheless that (...) nails of the heels of the fore feet be low
enough driven because you will there very (...) meet with the quick, which in
the hinder feet is just contrary, for in them the heels (...) strongest.

The nails being driven, and cut over with the Princers or Nippers, before the
you rivet them, you must take the Cutting-knife, which is a piece of steel
about (...) a foot long, having the one edge sharp, and the other about the
thickness of (...) Crowns, with which you must cut the horn that overpasses the
shoe when it is ^^^ned, by striking with the Hammer upon the back of the
cutting-knife, until y^^ have taken away all the horn you desire; the nails
being driven and cut over, before that you rivet them, take the Cutting-knife
again, and cut away the small pieces (...) horn which the nails have made rise
in driving, to the end that the rivets may (...) equal with the horn, for
besides that it makes the foot appear handsomer, the nails also fasten better,
so that the horse can never cut himself with the Rivets, which will oftentimes
fall out if you observe not this method, especially upon the inside (...) the
foot, and that the nails be big and thick; for the rivets being too high above
the horn, is the cause oftentimes of the horse's cutting himself, and therefore
the riveting of the nails well is of great consequence, for the reasons I have
been giving.

As the shoe wears, the nails by degrees sink into it, so that the rivets
loosen (...) and appear more above the hoof, and if people take not care to cut
them, they will (...) the horse; therefore people should take good notice, that
when a horse has (...) long shoed, he do not cut himself with these long
rivets.

There are some People, who observe always to shoe their horses at the change
(...) the Moon; which is good if the horn be smooth, tough, and good, and that
there (...) no other thing to be desired but the growing of the horn: For to
shoe after the (...) or fourth day of the new Moon, makes the feet to grow,
but it is also true that (...) the horn is not so strong and firm: Those horses
which have good and handsome feet, should always be should at the hight of the
Moon, for then the horn is closs' bright, and handsome, but the shoeing at that
time does not make them grow so much; for good feet I do not much observe the
age of the Moon, but cause shoe them when they stand in need of it, because the
necessity of having a horse sometimes shoed, is preferable to the observation
of the Moon, for if a horse want a shoe he must always have one put on again,
and if it be in a good time of the Moon, you may cause pare his foot, but not
otherwise.

For feet that are brittle and which split easily, you should always, as much
as possible, shoe them betwixt the full Moon and the change, yea even in the
last quarter of the Moon, and you will know, by the practice of it, the good
effects that it has, it being true that the feet shoed about the last quarter
grow very little, but then they become firmer and are not so apt to break; this
is what few people consider, for they think it enough if they cause shoe their
horses at the change; if your horses feet be brittle you must never pare them
at the change, but always after the full Moon, that is to say, in the Decress:
Whoever will observe this direction, I assure him he will make his horse's feet
become better, and although they be brittle, yet the horn will become tough,
for which purpose this following composition will be very useful.

Take common honey, white grease, and tar, of each a like quantity, mix them
cold, and use it for anointing brittle hoofs every other day, it will keep the
feet moist, and soften them; if nevertheless it has not that effect you
expected of it, have recourse to the hoof-salves set down in the 47 Chap. of
the 2d, part. Sect, 2d. etc.

But horses which have hard feet, in which People cannot drive a nail without
bending it by reason of their hardness, should be shoed at the Change, if the
horn with that hardness be not also brittle, which almost always happens,
but if it be both brittle and hard, he should be shoed after the full Moon, and
his sole should be moistened with good Remolades or softners, and his horn with
hoof-salves; or thrust forward his own dung, being wet with a little fresh
water, under his fore feet, and cause him stand upon it the whole day, and
continue it for a time, this will do more good to some kind of hoofs than the
remolades, but not to all.

Having now discoursed of shoeing in general, Without tying my self to any
particular imperfection in the feet, I shall next speak briefly of all kinds of
Feet in particular.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of low heels, tender feet, and other kinds of bad and imperfect
feet.
WHen you are paring a horse's feet which has low heels, CHAP: XXXVIII Of low
heels, tender feet, and other kinds of bad feet.
you must only pare the Toe without touching in the least the heel, and also it
is good not to touch the Frush, unless it be beginning to corrupt, and then you
must pare it flatt; you must also cut the toe with the Cutting-knife or Rasp
only, and not with the Butteris.

People make only use of the Butteris, for to give the shoe a seat after they
have cut the Toe with the Cutting-knife, for Examp: the breadth of ones finger
or thumb, if the foot be too long at the Toe; in which case you must also cause
pierce the shoe near the edge at the Toe, for fear of pricking, and so placeing
the shoe after that fashion, you will force the too great nourishment which
went to the Toe, to strengthen the heels, and in twice or thrice shoeing, the
foot will come to take a good shape and form, and also in the time that you
restrain the Toe by cutting it, the heel will strengthen. Now these kind of
feet growing only at the toe, all the nourishment of the foot goes there, and
so the heel becomes always narrower, and daily weaker; but if you observe
that which I tell you, to cut the toe with the Cutting-knife, having only as it
were Blanched or cleaned the sole with the Butteris, and that you put the shoe
at the Toe a finger breadth or ane inch back, according as the toe is too much
sprung, and that afterward you cut away the horn, I assure you the foot will
take quite another form or shape, which will be a great deal better, and the
heels will also strengthen.

But if your horse's heels be low and not narrow, and that the Frush be large
or fat, with great difficulty will you keep it from touching the ground, and
then your horse will be in danger of halting, especially when he is riding upon
hard ground.

To prevent it, I think there is no other remedy than to give him Calkins,
after the Fashion of the point of a Hares ear, (in French en Oreilles de
Lievre,) which is do^e by turning the insides of the spunges the whole breadth
of the shoe, and making then after the fashion of Calkins; now these kind of
Calkins will not do great harm (...) his feet, and he will also go the more
firmly with them upon the street, or (...) slippery ground; so by this means
you will hinder his Frush to touch the ground It is not that I approve of
Calkins after whatever fashion they are made, the great Calkins are the worst,
and those which spoil most a horse's feet, but these after the fashion of the
point of a Hares care are the least dangerous, and if people could also
dispense with the want of these, it would be still so much the better.

But if the horse which has low heels, have them also narrow near the shoe,
although that his frush be large, (which is not ordinary,) you must then give
him no Calkins, neither after the fashion of a Hares care nor any other, but
you must cause shoe him with Panton shoes, (in French fers a pantouffle) with a
narrow Sponge, and very thick in the inside, that is to say, that it must slope
very much from the inside of the shoe next his foot to the outer edge, and
place the sponge of the panton shoes upon the heels, so that the thick edge of
the sponge may enter within the Corners of the Fr^^ to press them out when they
grow; cut his Toe with the Pareing-knife, according as you shall find occasion
for it, and after that he is shoed, keep his feet in his D^^^ being a little
moistened with water, until he leave halting, for he will for a few day have
pain in his feet until he be accustomed to wear these kind of shoes, afterward
you may cause him work, for he will not have carried them long when he will I
accustomed with them; and after thrice shoeing, the heel and also the whole for
will have taken a good form or shape.

The Horse-coursers, to cover this imperfection of having low heels, cause make
the Spunges of the shoes great and thick, for to supply the want of the heels,
which is indeed a very good invention to spoil the heels for good and all, for
it is good for nothing but this, that it makes those who are ignorant buy such
horses, without taking notice to their having low heels; and the Horse-coursers
have no other design by it but this, when they cause shoe their horses after
that fashion; it does however we^ enough for such horses which have their heels
but a little low, to cause beat do^^ the ends of the spunges with the hammer,
to thicken and square them beneath for it will raise their heels, and make them
go better upon the streets while their shoes are new, but that will not give
their feet a good shape; In a word, low heels with a very large frush are those
kind of feet which people cannot help by shoeing, and I look upon them as the
worst of all feet, because they cannot at all, or but very rarely be recovered.

CHAP: XXXIX. Of flat feet, and such as have their soles round and high, called
in french pieds Combles.
THose Horses which have Flat-feet, if they be young, CHAP: XXXIX Of flat
footed and round soled horses.
their feet will always spread, and so be in danger of growing ill shaped,
therefore they should be Shoed after the manner following, to keep them
insensibly from spreading, especially if the horse be worth your pains; Above
all things, if your horse has Flat-feet you should bar the pastern Veins:
This operation is good, but however it is not absolutely necessary, unless your
horse has his soles round and high, yet this is not to say, but that the doing
of it contributes very much to the amendment of Flat-feet; for to do it, you
must know that in the pastern there are two Veins below the joint, the one upon
the inside, and the other upon the out; which Veins must be barred, that so you
may put a stop to the superfluous humor, which falls down upon the lower
part of the foot, and causes the sole grow round and high, and also the
Coffin-bone or little foot, which is the bone in the middle of the Coffin, to
push it self down, which through time, makes the foot become round at the
sole, in french Comble; the Veins of the forelegs being stopped in four
places, and the wounds beginning to heal up, which will be seven or eight days
after you have barred the Veins, you must do what follows.

But first, to bar the pastern Veins right, you must only tie them near the
joint with a fine thread, to the end that you retard not their cure; a little
silk is very good for that purpose; then cut the Vein beneath and let it blood;
if it blood too long, you may bind up the Orifice with a large band and a
Compresse.

If for Flat-feet you cause bar the Veins, you will come sooner to your
purpose than if you had omitted it; but that does not hinder this following
method to be very good, although you should not have barred him.

You must then cause forge, according to the following figure, A. C. D. F. See
plate third, fig. 9th; shoes very straight in the quarters, and which do not
turn in a circle, nor follow at all the shape of the quarters of the foot, but
whose branches from the toe A. D. to the spunges, C. F. must be very straight,
and you must cause pierce the holes G. H. I. L. very near the edge: You must
also place those shoes so, that you may have about the thickness of two Crowns
of horn to take away at the Toe A. D. with the cutting knife, and they having
their branches straight, there will without doubt be a good deal of horn to
take off at the sides A. B. C. and D. E. F. which are retrenched by the shape
of the shoe within the pointed line, as you may see in the figure.

Having then a shoe made after this fashion altogether flat, and the branches
near straight, cause pare his foot but very Gently and fit the shoe to it; for
although it rest a little upon the sole it matters not, because by no means you
must make your shoe vaulted or hollow, and fasten the shoe with very thin
nails, taking but a slender hold for fear of pressing the Vein, or meeting with
the quick; your horse being shod with this kind of shoe which I have been
ordering, put a restrictive in his foot made of chimney foot and turpentine,
boiled together upon a slow fire, always stirring it until it be pretty
thick, and apply it scalding hot, with hurds above it; and bec^^ when the shoes
are not vaulted, you will have difficulty to get in thin slices of w^^ to keep
fast the restrictive, because the shoe will almost touch the Sole, therefore
af^ you have put in the hurds, you must tie a cloth about his foot to hold all
fast, the Restrictive will help to put a stop to the growing so much of the
sole, and will also cetribute very much, with the stopping of the Pastern
Veins, to put a stop to all the superfluous nourishment which went to the sole
and Coffine bone; put also upon (...) Coronet by way of a plaster some hoof
salve spread upon hurds, applying it to (...) onsett of the hoof to cause his
foot grow, and renew the plaster every four day which does a great deal
better then only to anoint his feet every day, because (...) Ointment, being
tied on with hurds and always remaining upon the horn, has me^ time to
moisten it and cause it grow, than the simple anointing of it.

You must not work your horse for five or six days, that so he may be used to
(...) shoes, which will at the first press his foot, but if after that time he
mean it, you must then let him alone until he be wholly accustomed to them:
and if he halt^ extraordinarly, it is like that he may be then pricked, to which
you must take good no^e and cure it, as I have taught you in the 2d part: You
must continue to shoe him after the method, every new Moon, always by degrees
making the shoes straiter, not mu^^ at the the quarters, but considerably at
the Toe, A. D. which you must retrench and keep short by all means imaginable,
as you see it marked in the figure by the circular line A. D. which is marked
with points; after three or four shoeings your horse will have changed the
shape of his feet which was unpleasant, into a better: Now it is a certain
Rule, that you must always make use of this way of shoeing, three o^ four
days after the change of the Moon, to cause your Horse's hoof grow the better
which is what we desire.

If the feet which grow too much at the sole, have the heels straiter nearer
the shoe than above, then you must not retrench the sides of the foot, A. C. D.
F. as I desired y^^ before, but you must cause shoe them with panton shoes (in
French fers a pantouffle enlarge their heels; for besides, that these shoes
will open the heels, they will also hinder the sole to grow so much downwards,
and so the foot will take a better shape: When you shoe with a Panton Shoe, it
must follow the Circumference of the foot, and the Branches must not be
straight; you must also keep the sole strong, without taking an thing almost
from it, otherwise your horse will half, so then you are to take nothing from
the sole, heels, nor any other part when you shoe him, but only the crust,
(...) that which rises like a scurf, and you must always shorten the Toe by
cutting it wa^ the Cutting-knife proportionally as you shall find occasion;
make the Shoe altogether flat without vaulting it, for although it rest a
little upon the sole it matters not, because you are to force the foot to grow
less: His Fore-feet being shoed, cause him sha^ with them all day long, amongst
his own dung being a little moistened, and (...) him not work for eight or ten
days, until he be accustomed to those kind of shoe afterward you may step him
abroad upon easy ground, to strengthen his feet.

The reason, why the foot being restrained with this kind of shoeing, takes i^
right shape again, is because those Horse's which have flat feet, and round
soles, ha^ too much nourishment in their soles, and particularly at their Toes,
and too like at the upper part of their feet; now that the pastern veins
furnish this superfluous nourishment, is evident when people take out a Horse's
sole, because to stop the blood which in great abundance flows from the foot,
people are necessitate to tie the Pastern with a cord, that is, they press
those two Veins, which I have before ordered you to bar, and that tying
stops the Blood, which being stoped, as having no more passage to go to the
under part of the foot, which it did too much nourish and moisten, it follows
of necessity that the sole must dry and shrink in, (...) which the Panton Shoe
will contribute very much; because it opening the heel near the shoe, will also
constrain the superfluous nourishment, which went to the Sole and T^^ to remain
above, and nourish the heel which was dried, and by the means of the hoo^ salve
the foot will be moistened, and the nourishment kept there, which is what (...)
desired, and in the mean time the heel enlarges, and the Toe and sole shrink
in, are grow less; this method is also good for Flanders horse's, whose feet
change the horn, for in the time that their feet alter, it gives them a good
shape, but if their feet be already bad, you must take another course with them.

If the horse's sole be round and lower than his hoof, which happens more
(...) some than others, so that some will have their foot so ill shaped that it
will resemble an Oyster-shell, and is just renversed in a manner, so that it is
impossible to shoe then without hollowing or vaulting their shoes which will
make them go uneasily, and also through time cause their feet at the soles to
become round, like the segment of a Ball, which is what in french is called Des
pieds Combles.

The shortest and best remedy for such feet is, to bar the Pastern veins, and
seven or eight days after the operation, to cause make him Panton shoes with
strait spunges, and extraordinarly thick on the inner edge; they must also be
altogether flat and not vaulted, for it is to be remarked, that almost all the
round or high soled horse's have narrow heels near the shoe, and the Smiths
thinking to make them go easily, make them hollow shoes which rest only upon
the horn in the outside of the heel, and by that means, because the shoes by
degrees constrain the foot, they make it grow daily straiter at the heel; the
little bone also which is in the middle of the Coffin presses downwards toward
the sole, the Toe grows long, and so the feet become ill shaped and
unserviceable; now to help and rectify all these inconveniences, the Panton
shoe being forged and peirced near the edge of the Toe, as I told you, you
shall Cut more or less from the horse's Toe with the Cutting-knife, as you
shall think fit; then fit the shoe so, that the slopings or thick parts of its
spunges may enter within the corners of the Frush, and being flat at the Toe
that it may rest upon the horn, but although it rest also a little upon the
sole it matters not, and fasten it with thin nails; also put into his foot a
restrictive made of Chimney Soot and Turpentine boiled together, and anoint his
hoof with hoof salve, then let his feet strengthen and be eased of the pain,
which that new manner of shoeing will occasion, and that for the space of
twelve days or more until he leave halting, afterward cause him work by
degrees, and after three or four shoeings, if the horse be not old, his foot
will have taken a good shape: This which I speak is not by speculation, but
founded upon a great many experiences.

It is a great abuse to vault shoes when People may forbear it (and it may for
the most part be omitted) because the foot being nailed and made fast to the
shoe, it grows and takes the shape or form of the shoe, and nature finding
that passage open, through the inclination which she has to furnish a
superfluous nomishment to the under part of the sole, presses always that
way, and is also helped by the hollow shoe, to give that round form to the
feet, which rendereth a horse unserviceable for the street or upon hardground;
so that people are necessitate to send them to draw the plough, which had they
wanted that fault, would have been good, and might have served for a Coach.

It happens also that when a horse travelleth upon vaulted shoes, he treads
only upon the middle of the shoe, for it cannot all equally touch the ground,
because of its roundness; so that it hinders the horse to go so firmly as
otherwise he would, and also makes him slip.

The surest way therefore, is to rectify such bad feet in the beginning, and
especially in the time when horses alter or change their horn, which is the
first six Months after they come from Flanders.

But supposing that your horse's feet be yet in a condition to be helped, you
must restrain their growth in the soles as I have shown you for the flat feet;
or if his heels be narrow, shoe him with a Panton shoe, and after the former
fashion without vaulting or hollowing it, you must also but pare little from
his feet, and leave his sole strong, shorten his foot at the Toe, and put these
panton shoes upon him; If his heels I say be narrow near to the shoe: Then put
the restrictive into his foot which I ordered before, or otherwise let him
stand with his feet being shoed after the fashion I have been showing you, in
his own dung being kept a little moist that it may not heat, and let him stand
so until he halt no more, always keeping the dung moist upon which he
stands; at the same time put about his foot a Charge or Softner reasonably
warm, or hoof salve as I have before ordered you: You must also renew two or
three times the application of the restrictive, and the Charge or hoof-salve,
keeping him always shoed after the former manner, but if his foot after
shoeing be very high and round soled, you must then let him stand eight or ten
days upon his Litter.

If the horse have his sole but a little raised, or that it be not as yet
absolutely round beneath, after twice or thrice shoeing it will be helped, but
the more it is out of shape the more time will it take to rectify it: It is to
be observed that flat feet, at least the most part of them, have their heels
narrow near the shoe, so that the smiths hollowing or vaulting very much their
shoes, make them rest upon the outsides of the heels, and by that means make
them become narrower; now quite contrary to this method, you must cause shoe
your horses with panton shoes, so that causing their heels to open you will
contribute to the shrinking in of the sole and under part of (...) foot, as I
have told you before and cannot tell you it too often.

But if your horses foot be extraordinary high or round in the sole, you must
without delay bar the pastern Veins, which will be the only means to give a
good shoe to those flat kind of feet, for without this operation any other will
have no great (...) fect; because the main design is to put a stop to that
superfluous nourishment which goes to the sole, and to force nature to furnish
that nourishment to the upper p^^ of the foot, which the shoeing with panton
shoes will do, even without retrenching and cutting his hoofs at the sides, if
you but only with the Cutting-knife cut as retrench his Toe, and that you keep
his sole strong without almost taking any this from it, so that being shoed
with shoes which are not vaulted, although they rest little upon the soles, yet
they will not cause him halt much even although they (...) Panton shoes:
Afterward fit the shoe, and providing it rest not altogether upon (...) sole
it is enough, seeing you left the sole expressly for that purpose strong enough,
(...) fasten the shoe with very thin Nails. When he is shoed, you shall fill
his feet with Ta^^ scalding hot, or with the restrictive before mentioned, or
otherwise keep the^ amongst his moistened dung.

It Is true, this is to keep the horse a long time without having any service of
hi^ but oftentimes for not taking that care of him, and giving that rest,
hebecometh altogether unservicable, as I have seen a great many, for not taking
notice to them (...) time; there are some which have such kind of feet that
will yet be somewha^ serviceable, but according as they need help, people take
more or less care of them.

The smiths, whom I ordered to shoe some horses after this method, did it at
first out of mere complysance, thinking that every man had liberty to spoil his
ow^ horse and ruin his feet, but afterward finding this method of shoeing
with pant^ shoes, and barring the pastern veins to succeed well, they protested
to me that it was only the experience they had of them, which convinced them of
their usefulness. (...) the best way is, to prevent the disease, and to hinder
your horses in the beginning: have round or high soles; because horses which
are brought up in moist and ma^^ Countries and especially those which come from
Holland, Frizland, Oldenburg, (...) the other adjacent Countries, are very
subject to have their Feet spoilt when they after or change the horn; For
besides the bad form and nature of such hoofs, (...) horse Merchants at Paris
and other places, dry up the whole hoof with a great deal Cow Dung: To prevent
then your horses feet to become Comble, or high and (...) in the soles, you
must use all the means imaginable, for it is not enough to buy the with good
Feet when they come to France or England, but you must also prefer and maintain
them in that condition.

The first shoeing of Coach-horses is of consequence: So that you are then but
make the horn level where the shoe rests, and not to take any thing from the
(...) but as it were to clean and whiten it, because it has been already made
too holles shoe him just, and pierce your shoe a pretty distance from the edge,
but you (...) drive your Nails low, for if you should pierce your shoe near the
edge, the Nails w^^ in driving split the horn, which has been already too much
weakened by the ho^ Merchant, who had no other design but to make his horses
feet appear hollow: (...) must then cause pierce your shoe at a pretty distance
from the edge, so that the Nails (...) not easily split the horn, but for fear
of pricking your horse you are to drive them (...) what lower than ordinary,
and drive a Nail just at the Toe, to the end that the (...) may stay longer on
without shifting it is place, and may remain straight upon (...) foot; You are
not at all to retrench his quarters nor open his heels, but let the (...)
follow the compass of the horses foot, and by this means you shall preserve his
(...) and they will be always good.

Those Smiths, who think to give ease to their horses by enlargeing their shoes
vaulting them a little, insensibly spoil their feet, because they follow the
form the shoe and so become mishap't; for the more that you enlarge your shoe
at (...) the more you must enlarge it the next shoeing, and that is the way
absolutely to (...) your horse; for it is far more difficult to rectify your
horses feet and give them age shape when once deformed, then in the beginning
when they have good feet and the horn altering, to preserve them, because they
are then capable of receiveing any for you intend to give them: Horses which
have big and large feet, although they not flat, yet are more subject to have
them easily spoilt then any other, if people t^ not care at every shoeing to
retrench them, until the nature of the horn be chang This is what I thought
good and necessar to be practiced for this kind of bad feet shall in the
following chapter, continue to speak of other sorts of bad feet than these I
have already discoursed of.

Those who need horses for the Plough, and who live in a soft country, that is
to say, where there are few hard or flinty stones, they should certainly buy
such horses as have so high and round soles that they can be no more
serviceable upon the streets in Parit, London, or any other great City,
especially if they be young, and that they judge they will do their business
after they are recovered, for I have known such horses given for twenty Crowns,
which, had they had good feet, would been worth fix times more; all they have
to do, is to bar the pastern-Veins and shoe them as I have told, leting them
rest only for a month to strengthen their feet, and have the wounds healed up,
which were made in barring their Veins; afterward keeping their hoofs
anointed, they will work and gain their expenses, and in six months or a year
their feet will be so recovered, that they will be in a condition for any kind
of service; and I also assure you that by this method, such horses will in a
years time have pretty good and well shaped feet, which before had them as flat
as an oyster shell, of which I could give several examples I my self have had
experience of in and about Paris. Let this suffice for horses which have flat
and bad shaped feet, and also high or round soles.

CHAP. XL. How horses which are hoof bound, or narrow heel'd, should be shoed.
I shall begin this Chapter with feet which are hoof-bound, CHAP. XL. How
horses which are hoof-bound should be Shoed.
to which the light sized horses are most subject, such as Barbs, Turks,
Spanish, Italian and English horses; there are are also German horses, and
horses of this Kingdom, which are sometimes hoof-bound, but very rarely.

I have already shown that a hoof-bound horse, is a horse whose heels so press
the bone within the hoof, or the Coffin boue, that they either make the horse
to halt, or at least hinder him to travel easily; To cure it, people take out
the horse's Sole and cleave his Frush, which shall be treated of in the 50.
Chap: of the 2. part, Sect. 2d. or otherwise people remede it by the help of
shoeing; but when a horse is ill hoofbound, people oftimes gain time by taking
out his Sole, provided that they cleave his Frush to facilitate it; but people,
who have not had the experience thereof, can but with difficulty at first be
persuaded to make trial of it.

The causes of this defect in the feet are different; horses which have either
ill shaped or too long feet, are subject to grow hoof-bound: they also become
hoof-bound when their hoofs are too dry, and want nourishment to maintain the
horn, or if they be not right shoed their heels will grow narrow, and so they
will become hoof-bound; after which they never go firmly, because their heels
paining them, they endeavor to ease themselves as much as they can, and
therefore go upon their Toes, which makes the Back-sinews to shrink, and their
legs at the knee or pastern-joynt to bend forwards when they stand in their
natural posture, which are called in French, Jambet arquees, ou Boutees, and
which if you help not at the beginning will cause them halt to the ground: It
is discoursed at large in the 50. Chap: of the 2d. part. concerning the cureing
of feet which are hoof-bound,

To prevent and put a stop to this infirmity, you must when you shoe such
horses take the heels very much down without hollowing the Quarters, and pare
the Frust flat, for all horses whose heels are very much taken down, will not
only never become hoof-bound, but also they will have no Bleymes (which is an
inflammation occasioned by bruised blood within the hoof, betwixt the Sole and
the little-foot near to the heel, where the matter gathers and causes the
disorders which are explained in the 54 Chap. of the 2d. part) and also the
Sinews of their legs will be preserved, especially if they be horses which work
in the Manage upon soft ground.

You must also, besides this precaution, never open the heels with the
Butteris, as the Smiths do, who weaken the Quarters, by pressing the Butteris
edge-wayes forwards; they cut also the end of the said quarter or heel, and
take it away even within an inch^^ the hair, and they call that to open the
heels, but they are so far from doing that, that upon the contrary they take
away the whole strength of the foot, which should have been left altogether
whole, and which is done if you open not the heels, nor w^^ the Butteris hollow
the Quarters, but that you leave the sole strong, and let the he keep it is full
roundness: I will have a great many people against me for maintaining this
proposition, because most part of persons, at least all the Smiths, say that
the hee^ are to be opened; but that which they call opening the heels, is down
right to take away the strength of the heel, to weaken it, and put it in a
condition to be soo^ hoof-bound; but I will inquire at those Gentlemen, if
their horses shoed after that fas^ on do not become hoof-bound, for I daily see
of these horses hoof-bound, whose heels have been kep't very open after their
fashion, and I maintain, that of all the horses whose heels I caused take down
reasonably, and afterward shoed, causing the shoe follow the roundness of the
foot just to the corner of the Fush, and keeping their Soles strong, not so
much as one of them became hoof-bound. The proof of it is easy, and if you
mislike it, take you to your old method again, but I am sure you will continue
this manner of shoeing, when once you have made trial of it: This which I
affirm (...) grounded upon reason, for the horn follows the form of the shoe,
because it is (...) solid than the horn, and forces it to follow it is shape
when it grows; But if there be appearance that the horse's heel will become
narrow, then the surest way is to cause shoe him with the half Panton shoe,
which is to turn the branch of the shoe in toward the horses foot, as it is
explained in the following Chap: for that shoe will keep his Quarters in a
condition to open and become wider; the horn growing, the heel opens and
therefore cannot straiten, and so the foot will continue well shaped, for the
she which you caused put upon it will open the heel, because either the hoof
must not gro^ or the heel will open, for the Sponge of the shoe must follow the
roundness of the heel, and go no farther than the end of the quarter; seeing
then that the shoe gives the shape to the foot, as without all doubt it does,
and the shoe taking no other shap^ than it has already it being inflexible,
and the horn by it is flexibility, being capable of receiving any form, It
follows necessarly, that the shoe being a Half-panton shoe must force the horn
outward, and so enlarge the heel, which I shall explain in the following
Chapter: But above all, you must take notice when you shoe after this method,
that is to say with Half-panton shoes, that you keep always the Sole strong.

Some people say that the Frush should not at all be pared, because when it is
enti^^ it keeps out the quarters, and preventeth their coming together;
Truly, people should not make the sole hollow betwixt the Frush and the
Quarters, but should (...) pare the top of the Frush with the Butteris, which
is called to pare the Frush flat: If people did not at all pare the frush,
there would happen this inconveniency, that it would corrupt and become
stinking, and so breed the Teignes, (which is when the Frush mouldereth away in
pieces, as if the Moths had eaten it, and that it goes the length of the
quick, for then the itching pain is so great, that it will often make a horse
to halt; The word Teignr signifies a Moth, because when a horse has that
anfirmity, it looks as if the Moths had gnawed his Frush,) besides that there
is no advantage in leaving it so high: We conclude then, that every time that
the foot is pared, the Heels and Frush should be made flat without hollowing
the quarters, and that for the least straitning of the heels, the Spunges
should be turned in toward the Sole, after the manner of the half Panton shoe,
as it is explained in the next Chap. See plate 2d. Figure 11th. and the heels
very far from straitning, will infallibly open and enlarge.

For those horses which are hoof-bound, after that you have caused pare their
feet, and left the Sole extraordinarly strong at the heels, you must have
Panton shoes, conform to the shape of the 10. Fig. in Plate 3d. which are (as I
believe) Monsieur de is Browe's invention, who was one of the most skilful
horsemen we had in France, when the Exercise of Riding was first there
established, as people may judge by the book he left us, of the manner how to
manage horses, and by the favorable character has been left of him to
posterity.

I have called this shoe the Panton or Pantable-shoe, to distinguish it from
these of any other fashion or shape.

Now to forge a Panton-shoe, you must make the inner edge of the sponge B, A,
E, C, D, F, a great deal thicker than the outer edge IE, LF, so that betwixt A
G, and D H, there may be two or three times the thickness that there is betwixt
I E and L F, as you may perceive by the thickness of the sponge A B, C D, so
that the shoe rises by degrees from G to A and sloppeth equally from A to E,
the whole length A G, E I; and so you will find that the inner edge of the
sponge is a great deal thicker than the outer, for the thickness within marked
A B, is three times thicker then E; it is the inside of the shoe, and that
which touches the sole which you see in the figure, but there must be great
care taken that the foresaid thickness A B, C D, of the sponge, diminish
always toward G H, as you may perceive in the Figure, and all the rest of the
shoe from I L, G H, round the Toe of the shoe, is quite flat as other shoes
are, to the end that the horse's foot may rest upon it at ease: That which is
represented to you by the Figure, is but the inside of the shoe next the
horse's foot, and the spunges should be strait, or pretty near other, that they
may rest upon the inside of the Corners of the frush, and all the outside of
the shoe, which is next the ground, must be quite flar like to another shoe,
and then you shall have a right Panton shoe for your horse; See plate 3d. Fig:
10.

It is necessary when you place the spunges of this shoe upon the end of the
heel, which is the extremity of the Quarter, that the said extremity of the
quarter rest upon the middle betwixt AE, DF, which is the sloping part of the
sponge; but for all that, the inner edge of the Quarter AG, must not rest
wholly upon the sole, although you kept it strong enough, which should be
always done when you make use of those kind of shoes, for although people
should prevent as much as possible any shoes resting too much upon the sole,
yet people are sometimes necessitate to suffer this fashion of shoes to rest a
little upon the heels, and even the inner edge of the Sponge almost always
touches the Frush; Therefore the sole should be always kept strong,
especially at the heels; afterward anoint your horses feet, which are shoed
after this fashion, with the hoof salve before mentioned, or those described in
the 47 Chap: of the 2d. part, and keep his fore-feet amongst his moistened dung:
If you continue this method, infallibly his heels will open and enlarge; the
horse at first if you have weakened his soles too much, may mean his feet with
these kind of shoes, but his fee^ will strengthen through a little time and
rest; these kind of shoes are not fitted without a little time and pains, and
the Smith must not be slothful to put the shoe in the fire again, either to
open or straiten the Spunges, according as there is need for it, for that
cannot be done at the very first, and there is no Smith that is able to fit and
fasten two of these shoes in less then an hour, for the shoe must follow
exactly the shape of the foot, as well at the heel as at the Toe; And although
the inner edge of the Sponge, enter but the thickness of two Crown pieces
within the heel, it Matters not; for, in a months time, the heel opening will
cover it all; when the Panton shoes are forged, fitted, and ready to be put on,
they appear, to those who are ignorant, very strait and narrow at the heels,
because they follow the shape of the foot, and therefore seem ridiculous to
those who know not the good of them.

The reason why the use of these kind of shoes opens the heels, and helps
hoof-binding, is that when the heel grows it is forced outward by the shoe,
because the Sponge, which is thicker a great deal in the inner edge then in the
outer, hinders the heel to close and tend that way, and upon the contrary
forces it outward, so that either the hoof must not grow, or of necessity the
heels must enlarge and open, if the shoes be right placed.

You must continue the shoeing of him after this fashion, until his heels be
well shaped and large, which will be infallibly after twice or thrice shoeing;
do it at the Change, or about the fourth or fifth day of the new Moon: the use
of these shoes is admirable, in that they never shift upon the feet, but remain
firm in one place, being kept fixed by the thickness of the inner edges of the
Spunges.

A horse shoed after this fashion, is many times unserviceable for a little
time, which must be allowed him to strengthen his feet, amongst his moistened
dung.

People must not think to travel with these kind of shoes, at the beginning
when a horse is shoed with them, and before he be accustomed to them, for seeing
they press the foot, they would cause him halt; but they may take the Air upon
a horse shoed after this fashion, make him ride in the Manage, or do any other
moderate exercise, providing it be upon soft ground, and after that the horse
has been a little accustomed with these shoes, he will not halt with them
although you travel him; for I my (...) have made long journeys with horses
which carried them; I have also made use of the method for Mules which had
narrow heels, who found a great advantage in it; for although they were
Planch-shoes (as people call those shoes made use of for Mules which are forged
closs at the heels without any open at all) yet I caused forge thems^^ that the
Planch-shoe slopt at the heels as the Panton shoe, and did therefore also open
the Mules heels after the same manner.

If you have a journey to make with a horse which is hoof-bound, but does not ^
yet halt with it, you must not at all take down his heels when you shoe him,
although I heretofore ordered you upon other occasions to do it, but upon the
contrary you must keep his heels as strong as possible, and drive the nails
only in the Toe, for the be^ being high and narrow, you will not easily get
them driven there, neither co^^^ your horse suffer it, and then your horse will
travel with you as you please; indee^ this will not be the way to help his
hoof-binding, for upon the contrary it will mak^ it worse, but it is only to
cause him perform his journey that you do it.

If your horse be so ill hoof-bound that he halteth to the ground with it, the
be^^ and readiest cure is to take out his soles, and put shoes upon him which
have len^ Spunges; the way of taking out the soles is shown in the 50, Chap: of
the 2. part Sect: 2. This is not, but that these kind of shoes which I have
been discoursing of help, and will through time open his heels, but that will
be in four or five month time, whereas if his soles had been taken out, he
would have been cured in thre^ weeks or a month, providing that you took care
to open his heels when his sole w^ out, by cleaving the frush, or by putting in
a plate of iron betwixt his heels, so that (...) may keep them about two inches
or thereby further asunder than they we before his sole was taken out, and that
by fixing that plate of iron, betwixt the (...) Quarters of the foot near the
heel, because the Frush which is softer than the (...) the foot will yield and
open, and so make the heels in a condition to become larght it is sooner done
to give a stroke with an Incision-knife, and so to cleave and (...) the middle
of the Frush down almost to the pastern, to the end that that ouvert^ may make
the putting in of some rolls of linen in the clift of the frush (which must
first dipped in the healing Charge) the more easy, to keep the incision very
open; these will grow again which will keep out the quarters, the shoe which
must be made la^ to answer to the foot which is already made large, will keep
it so, and the heels growing will not close or straiten if the horse be right
shoed: This which I show y^ is founded upon several experiences I have made,
which succeeded very well (...) me; for the sole beginning to grow will keep
out the heels, and if there be need it, you may afterward cause shoe your
horse with Half-panton shoes, as in (...) next Chapter.

There are some horses so very ill hoof-bound, that although people have taken
their soles, yet they can scarcely force out their heels, to get that plate of
iron (...) placed, which should keep them open and asunder; for those kind of
feet, you must at the sole is taken out, force asunder the hoof at the heels
with the Nippers or pin^ so that by forceing them you may oblige them to
separate, but there must be great (...) taken in forceing the Quarters this
way, that you do not separate the horn from heel, for then you would cause the
horse cast his Quarters; after you have thus for his heels open with the
Pincers, you must put in that plate of Iron, which resemble somewhat the blade
of an old knife, which will keep his heels firm and open, (...) the soles grow
again and so keep them out themselves: But the absolutely sho^ way, is to
cleave the frush down almost to the very pastern, immediately after you (...)
taken out his sole, and after that the shoe is fastened on, and the Charge or
App^ for cure put upon the Sole, you must fill that Clift very well with
bolsters or rolls Linning, first dipped in the healing charge, and which must be
put into it at the (...) part of the pastern, and afterward tie all up with a
Cloth to keep them fast, a^ keep always that clift very open until the Sole
be wholly filled up again; (...) which, if you cause shoe your horse with a
half-Panton shoe, it will make his (...) become very large and well shaped,
which is easier done, then to force the Quarters making use of the Plate of
Iron abovementioned, although that method be also ^e good.

CHAP. XLI. How horses which have Clifts in their Quarters, commonly called
False-quarters, (and in French Des Seymes,) are to be shoed.
FOR horses which have cloven or false Quarters, CHAP: XLI How horses which
have cloven or false Quarters are to be shoed.
you must cause make a shoes after the fashion which I call the Half-panton
shoe, the use of it being good, I therefore thought fit to propose it to you;
this method of shoeing may also serve for horses whose hoofs begin to close and
straiten at the heels, for it comes near to the figure of the panton shoe,
because the Branch is turned upwards, which makes the same sloap that the
Panton shoe does, but the side of the shoe next to the ground is not the same,
because there is but one edge of the Sponge, to wit the outmost edge, which
touches the ground, whereas the under side of the Panton shoe is quite flat:
these kind of Half-panton shoes do not force out the heels so suddenly as the
whole Panton shoes, and therefore are good to be made use of at first, to cause
the heel spread.

The shoe OF, GH, which is represented in the 11. Fig. of the 3 plate, is a
half Panton shoe, which is to be put upon a horse which has one or more false
quarters, and which consequently has narrow heels; you must cause then make,
especially the whole branches and also the Spunges FB, DH, stronger than
ordinary, afterward turn them up so, that AB, CD, may be higher than the outer
edge OF, GH, so you will find that betwixt AB, and OF, the shoe will sloap
outward, also the other branch CD, GH, will do the same; and the rest of the
shoe FEGH, will be altogether flat upon the ground as an ordinary shoe, for I
here represent to you the inner side of the shoe, because the under side of the
same shoe FEGH, must rest upon the ground the whole compass of the shoe FEGH;
Now in vaulted shoes the Spunges are turned quite contrary, for in them they
are turned outward toward the ground, whereas in these they are turned in to
the foot.

The shoes for hoof-binding before mentioned, have the inner edge of the
Spunges a good deal thicker than the outer, whereas these have both the edges
of equal thickness; but the dexterity is to turn the Spunges, for to give them
a right sloap, and make the shoe hollow or vaulted next the ground.

To set on and fit the half Panton shoe, you must, when you pare the foot, keep
the sole strong at the heels, and so fit the shoe, that the middle of the heel
which makes the extremity of the Quarters, may be set just upon the Spunges F
B, D H; always taking care that the inner edges of the said spunges rest not
wholly upon the soles, but although they rest a little upon them it matters
not; then drive your nails neatly, and see that they be very thin in the shank.

When the shoe is put on to remain, that is to say, when it is nailed and
rivetted, you must pour into his foot Tallow and Pitch molten together, with
hurds and splinters of wood above them to keep all fast, and if you have the
Oil of Bays, it will be very proper to put it alone scalding hot into his foot,
with hurds and Splinters above it to keep in it, for it is such as we should
have to penetrate, soften, and strengthen the Sole, which people have a mind to
force the enlarging of, by the forgoing method of shoeing, or pour Tar scalding
hot into his foot; or, without making use of any of those, keep his feet
amongst his moistened dung, and let him always stand thus upon his moistened
dung until he leave halting, which will be within four or five days less or
more, and during that time always anoint his hoofs at the Coronets with hoof
salve, and although he perhaps halted before, because of the pain which his
False-quarter, or narrow heels gave him, yet, this method of shoeing will, from
that time forwards, give him ease: The False-quarter, or Seyme will solder and
close up to the very hair, and the horse will recover; but if this method of
shoeing do not the business have recourse to the 49 Chap. of the 2d. part where
the cures of Seymes, or False-quarters, are particularly treated of.

There are some horses, especially your light kind of horses, which have
unequal heels, in so far as the one stands higher than the other, which is
easily perceived by looking to the heels, just at the Pastern; there is no
other help for them, but to make use of this way of shoeing with the half
panton-shoe, or to take out their soles and cleave the Frush to the very
bottom; that so, when it grows up again, you may keep the heels at an equal
height.

When horses, which are appointed to ride in a Manage their whole Lifetime,
or those which ride always upon soft ground, have False-quarters; according to
the old custom, people cut short and retrench the quarter of the shoe, to the
first nail hole from the sponge: but it is not possible, to cause a horse shoed
after that fashion travel in the Country, nor even along the streets, if but a
little from the Manage.

Also, for horses of manage which are hoof-bound, people cause shoe them with
Lunette shoes (as the french call them) which are as it were half shoes,
because their quarters are retrenched to the first nail hole from the spunges,
which is also an old custo^^ some use also to make such horses work without
shoes, all which do little mere the nothing, for horses which have no shoes,
have no grace or movement; it is therefore better to shoe them with half-panton
shoes, because when their feet grow they will take a better form and shape, and
if you pare them also right, with this (...) of shoeing, you may come to cure
them. For such persons, who pretend never (...) shoe their Horses of Manage, I
see so few of them who have that opinion, that scarcely think it can be
defended; It is therefore proper to shoe mannage-horses: well as others, and
such persons, who out of a little frugality have forborne it, h^^ found the bad
consequences of it: I am therefore of opinion, that a horse should ne^ be
unshoed for good and all, until he be dragged to the Dunghill, or Lay-stall,
knew a person of quality, who would have all his Hunting-horses kept without
sho^ assureing himself that, with a little custom, their soles would become as
strong and fir^^ and endure as well as those which were shoed; but some of them
I saw stand^^^ upon their litter, not being able to support themselves upon
their feet, because of the pain which they had in them, the rest of them had
their legs spoilt, and the was the result of this Gentleman's fancy: Indeed, in
Germany and in Country where there is not the least stone, the Country
peoples horses are not shoed, but do not believe they are the better, for it;
and certainly they would serve better (...) they regularly shoed, for they have
their feet all awry; because when they are (...) velling they set their feet to
the ground sometimes turned out, and sometimes in, acc^^ding as they rest upon
their feet, more upon the one side than the other, which ^^^eth their feet
through time, very misshapen and disfigured; but the contrymen (...) not
much troubled at it, for providing they jog out the way with them, they are
^^tisfied.

CHAP. XLII. Of shoeing horses, which are Droits sur leurs members (as the
French call them) or whose forelegs, from the knees to the Coronets, go in a
straight line, and appear as if they were all of one piece; as also of those,
whose pastern-joints bend so far forwards, that they appear to be dislocate.
THere are some horses, CHAP: XLII Of shoing horses, whose forelegs appear so
very straight, as if they were all of one piece: as also of those whose
pastern-joints bend so far forewa^ds, that they appear to be dislocate.
which when they are standing in their natural situation, have their legs from
the knees to the Coronets in a straight line, (called in French Chevaux dreits
sur leurs members) which must be recovered, either by shoeing, or as I shall
show you hereafter, and is done by taking the heels very much down almost to
the quick, without hollowing the Quarters; which will force the Sinew to
stretch, and the Pastern joint to retire into it is place; if, when you take
down the heels, the leg falls not far enough back, and that the horse
continues to carry his Pastern-joynt too far forewards; you must then make the
shoe go beyond or exceed the Toe half a finger breadth, and it must also be
made thicker in that part then any other; in the mean time that you give him
this kind of shoe, anoint the back-sinews of his legs with the ointment of
Roses, Ointment of March-mallow, Ointment of Populion, and honey, of each alike
quantity mixed cold (which is called the Ointment of Montpelier and described
in the 2d. part) to make the back-sinews stretch the more easily, and bring
them to that condition wherein they ought to be: Horses which have high heels,
are more subject to this infirmity than others.

A Horse is said to be Boutte, or Boulettez, when the Pastern-joint goes out
of it is place, by bending too far forwards; and to help it, you must take down
the horse's heel to the very quick, without opening it, and give him a shoe
which must appear all round his Toe, two fingers breadth without his foot, as
people ordinarily shoe the Mules, and anoint the back-sinew of his Leg with the
Ointment of Montpelier; for this way of shoeing stretches the sinew, which
violence, would wrong it and occasion some swelling, if it were not assisted by
such ane Ointment as this, which has the virtue to take away the pain and
soften it; and also at first, when he carries these kind of shoes, it is
proper to cause walk him up and down in ones hand, to assist the joint to fall
into it is right place again, and not at all to travel him in hilly ground, for
in going up hill the sinew would stretch so much, that I assure you, the horse
would halt for having had it so violently stretched in a sudden; you must
therefore at first let his finew stretch by degrees upon plain ground, and
partly also in the Stable; but if your horse be absolutely Boutte, and that the
joint be altogether advanced, with difficulty will he be cured of it, if it be
not by cutting the finew, as I shall show you hereafter, a little lower then
the Ars (as the French call it) which (...) a vein upon the inside of each
fore-thigh a little below the Elbow, called the Basilick-vein and by common
Farriers the Plat-vein.

People practice this invention of shoeing, not only for Mules, but also for
pack are carriage horses, especially in Hilly Countries; because being heavy
loaded, when they come down the hills, they would be very apt to advance their
pastern joy^ too far forwards, were it not for the help of this kind of shoe,
which exceeds the foot at the Toe, and keeps the Sinew stretched, and the
pastern in it is due place by forceing it to bend a great deal more backwards
then otherwise it would People make these shoes exceed, after this fashion, at
the Toe, to some Mules more and to others less.

There is another reason, why that in plain Countries as well as Hilly, people
make these kind of shoes exceed so far the Mules Toes, and that is, because
they have very high heels and but weak enough feet, so that people dare not
pare then down; because, in them consists the whole strength of their feet;
the heels therefore remaining very high, if they were not shoed after this
fashion, they would have their pasterns cast forwards in four days time, and
their high heels would make their ^^news shrink, and the bone of the
pastern-joynt to bend immediately forwards.

I must by the way tell you, that people shoe Mules which have good feet with
shoes ( a la fleurentin, or which have a swelling welte or border round them)
and those which have weaker feet, with Planch-shves.

If horses which have their legs from the knee to the Coronet in a straight
line, and also those which have their pasterns already cast forwards, do not
recover by the method of shoeing which I have shown, you must then have
recourse to a man^^ operation, which appears dangerous but is not: To perform
which well, you must observe; that horses which are extremly troubled with
those infirmities I have bee^ mentioning, have a sinew or rather Muscle, at the
Ars or Plat-Vein, and a little below the place where they blood horses in that
part, which is near to the insertion or joining of the fore-thigh with the
shoulder: that Sinew or Muscle is about the bigness of ones little singer, very
much stretched and stiff, and lies straight up and down a^^ along the leg; Now
it is that Muscle or sinew which makes the motion of the Pastern-joynt, and
being stretched after this fashion keeps the joint forwards, a^ hinders it
to be in it is ordinar sit^ation; a certain token that it does so, is the those
horses which have neither of these two forenamed infirmities, have not the
Muscle stretched, but quite covered and hollow, so that people with difficulty
(...) find it out, but in those who have them, this Muscle is found at the very
first feel^^^ and it appears clearly to be stretched and not as naturally it
should: Have found out his Muscle, which is easily done, you must with an
Incision-knife open^ skin dounwards, four finger breadth below the Ars or
fore-thigh Vein, then cut (...) Muscle or sinew quite through cross-wayes, not
all at one cut but by degrees, the turn your Incision-knife to the other side
of it and perfect the cutting of it by de^^^ and not all at once, although you
must at last cut it quite through; and after (...) done wash the wound with
Brandy, and put salt in it, and work the horse after he (...) no more swelling
where you cut him, and that the wound is healed up, and thus (...) Pastern will
fall in to it is natural place by degrees and if the operation has (...)
dexterously performed, the horse will blood but very little, and the wound will
(...) heal up of its own accord; there are some very sensible horses which will
be (...) or ten days without lying after this operation, but People must not
be surprised a^^ seeing there is not the least hazard in it: Sometimes people
in making this operation through carelessness cut the Ars or fore-thigh Vein,
when they have made the i^^ sion too near to the Vein, and then the horse will
bleed very much, (...) there is not the least danger in it; let the horse bleed
sufficiently, then stop^ blooding, by filling the Orifice with Rabbet or Hare
wool, and afterward sow (...) the Skin in two parts; there will there gather a
little matter, but by greasing (...) wound, in eight or ten days the horse
will be healed, and sometimes sooner; best that this operation be made, the
horse's heels should be very much taken down, (...) then shoed with
Planch-shoes as the Mules are, and let them carry those shoes the or four
days before the operation, and also walk abroad with them, that so the may be
accustomed to them, after which you shall perform the operation. And (...) the
more security, that you may not cut the fore-thigh or Plat-Vein, you must (...)
sure to make the operation four-finger breadth lower than the Veins; thus the
operation will have more effect upon the pastern, and also you will not cut the
vein, and in eight or ten days the horse will be recovered, the wound healed
up, and he will be in a better condition to travel than formerly.

People make the like operation upon horses which have their pasterns
altogether cast forwards, by cutting them four fingers breadth higher than the
knee, just upon the fore part of the fore-thigh; they first cut the skin above
the sinew which is very stiff and stretched upon the fore part of the leg, then
they raise the sinew with a Shamoys or wild goats horn, by putting it quite
beneath the sinew; afterward they cut the sinew with the Incision-knife, quite
throw to the Shamoy horn, they fill the wound with salt, and put hurds or
course flax, dipped into warm Turpentine above it, and they hinder the horse to
come at it with his Teeth; for to keep the apparel fast-they wrap the part
about with a cloth, which must be sewed for fear of pressing the horse's leg
too hard which would cause it swell, then they leave him in that manner and
dress him not for some days, but they blood him the very next and anoint his
whole leg with the Dukes ointment described in the 2d. part Chap: 34. Sect: 9.
and continue it every day for eight days; the horse, during that time, may be
walked up and down in ones hand, and the pastern will fall into it is place so
soon as ever the wound is healed up; this operation is more difficult than the
former, and succeeds well enough with horses which are altogether Boulettez,
that is to say, which have their Pastern cast very far forwards, and as it were
quite out of its place, which makes the Sinew so stretched, that it is quite
raised from the forethigh and very much advanced, yet it is done without
trouble and hazard; but if a horse be but in a straight line from his knee to
the Coronet, and that the sinew, we have been discoursing of, be not much
raised from the bone and excessively stretched, it might in that case do
prejudice, as I saw it do to a horse, which had one of his legs from the knee
to the Coronet, only in a straight line, and in the other the Pastern was cast
quite forwards; the leg in which the Pastern-joynt was quite cast forwards, the
operation succeeded admirably well with it, for the sinew was very much
detached and elevate, but for his leg which was only in a straight line from
the knee to the Coronet, the sinew was not altogether raised from the thigh,
and so the horse was two Months of recovering.

Now people run not that hazard in making the other operation, which is
performed four fingers breadth below the fore-thigh vein, for it can never do
any prejudice although the sinew be but very little raised and advanced;
therefore except a horse have his Pastern-joint quite Boulette or cast
forwards, I would not advise you to cut the sinew a little above the knee: This
is enough upon this Subject.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Arched legs, in French jambes Arquees.
WHen Horses have Arched Legs, CHAP: XLIII Of Arched legs.
or their Legs bending forwards at the knee, when they are standing in their
natural situation, (in french Jambes arquees) people may also cut the
abovementioned sinew to them, as they do to horses which have their legs from
the knee to the Coronet in a straight line, and if they begin with the shoeing
as I have before ordered, the operation will succeed well; for after all is
done you will see how neat the legs will appear in comparison of what they were
before; you are to begin with the shoeing, and you cannot inshoeing of them
pare their heels too low, that so you may force and compel the Sinews to
stretch: at first when you make use of this invention, the horse may ha^^ with
it, but you must anoint the back-sinews with some softning ointment, such as
the Ointment of Montpelier described in the 2d part, and anoint the Sinews
twice a week with it, having first warmed the Sinew by chaffing it with your
hand; this Ointment will soften the Sinews, take away the pain, and so
facilitate the extension of the Nerves.

If after having taken down the heel, as I have told you, the leg be not in
that condition you would wish it, being still very much arched at the knee, you
m^^^ then cause make for him a Planch-shoe as they shoe the Mules, which must
go beyond or exceed the foot at the Toe two or three fingers breadth, and rise
also a little toward the edge, fasten it upon the foot, and then anoint his
sinew with the foresaid Ointment, let him stand after that manner, only walking
him in your hand every day about an hour, and in a short time, you will see the
good effects of it.

If nevertheless, it produce not that effect which you might expect, then cause
(...) the Sinew a little below the Ars or fore-thigh vein, as I showed you
before, and (...) that make his legs swell, as it sometimes does, be not
surprised at it, but anoint him with an ointment made of Populion, honey, and
black soap, of each an equal quantity mixed very well cold, with a small Glass
full of brandy, and continue to walk him every day in your hand; but you must
observe never to cut that sinew, until you have first taken his heels very well
down, and then shoed him with shoes which exceed his foot at the Toes, as those
do which are made use of for Mules.

CHAP. XLIV. Of horses which tread only upon the Toes of their hind-feet (
called in French Chevaux Rampins) as also of those which Trip or Stumble.
THE Chevaux Rampins, CHAP: XLIV Of horses which tread only upon the Toes of
their hind feet, as also of those which trip or stumble.
are those horses which tread only upon the Toese their hind feet, without
resting upon their heels at all; young horses (...) not so subject to this
infirmity as old, and through time it becomes in^^able; you are therefore to
practice upon them a part of the cure for the horse which are bouttez, or have
their pasterns bending forwards, as if they were out (...) joint, but whereas
that of being bouttez or boulettez is in the forelegs, this other (...) in the
hind: People then ordinarily begin with the taking down their heels ver^ much,
and then they give them shoes which are a little longer than the foot at the
To^^ they anoint very well the sinew of the hind leg, and so the horse in a
short time will recover, but you must continue always to take down his heels
extraordinarly and keep his Toe very long; also if it be necessary you must
make the shoe exce^^ his Toe; but the surest way is, to cause it exceed his
foot at the Toe an in^^ or two.

It is also very fit, that the stable where you put such horses which tread
only upon their hinder Toes, be equal and not full of holes where their hind
legs stand, if their be a hole, the horse will be sure to have his hind feet in
it, and so you will have all to begin anew again; this is of greater
importance than people imagine, for young horses because of their standing in
such uneven stables, where their hind feet were constantly ill placed, have at
length rendered their hind Quarters so mishap^t, that they appeared maimed:
There are some people who when they see a horse that treads only upon his
hinder Toes, say that he is Roosted or Pearched, in French Juche.

To shoe a horse which stumbleth, you must shoe him quite contrary to those
which tread only upon the Toes of their hind-feet, for you must take down his
Toe very much, and also shorten it, to the end he may not meet so easily with
the clods and stones upon the Highways.

But if those horses which stumble have their sinews troubled, their legs
spoilt, or if their shoulders be weak, then you must have recourse to another
cure than Shoeing, which you will find in the 33 Chap. of the 2d part, and
others following, where you have receipts that are all very good.

If your horse Overreach, you must shoe him so, that the Sponge of the shoe
may follow the turn of his foot, as I ordered you before: It is commonly a sign
of Weakness, when a horse is subject to Overreach, which is, when with his
hind-feet as he is riding, he overtaketh the heels of his fore.

Other people, after the Spanish fashion, turn up their hind-feet shoes at the
Toe, as I told you they did the Pack or Sumpter horses Fore-feet shoes in Hilly
Countries, which method is not bad, for when horses overreach, they do not so
easily with these pull off their fore-feet shoes; it is certain that the rider
is oftentimes the occasion of a horse's overreaching, because through his
ignorance he knows not how with his Bridle-hand, and by the fear of his
Spurs, to keep his horse Together and firm under him; it is true that an action
which is constrained cannot endure long, and far less the whole time of a long
journey when wearyness seizes a horse; but a man should always now and then
Advertise his horse, and if that prevent not his overreaching, you may then
freely say, that he wants Reins and Strength, or that he is quite spoilt.

CHAP. XLV. How to shoe horses which have been Foundered in the feet.
THere are few Horses, that have been oftener foundered in the Body than once,
CHAP, XLV How to shoe horses which have been foundered in the feet.
which have not some of the humor which occasioned the foundering, fallen down
in their feet, some more and others less, therefore it is necessary to cause
shoe them after some certain regular method, which may help and recover their
feet as much as possible.

I shall discourse to the full of Foundering in the body, in the 86 Chap. of
the second part of this Work, where the cures for it shall be set down at
large, and therefore, shall in this place only offer to you one single remedy
for it, which is as good as it is easy, and all the virtue of this cure
consists in the hair and skin of an Ermin: which is a little four footed
Creature all white, except the tip of its tail which is black; just shaped like
a Weasel, only their colors differ: People take the skins of those (...)
Creatures, which they dry without Tanning or dressing them, and whenever a h^^
foundered, they take about the bigness of a farthing at most of the skin and
hair ^^ther, and cutting it in five or six pieces, make the norse swallow it in
Wine, (...) or other liquor; afterward they keep the horse bridled three or
four hours, often times the horse with one drench will be cured; also when
horses have been (...) Fatigued, and that People fear their foundering, they
must give them amongst (...) wet Bran or Oats, when they are unbridled, a dozen
of the hairs of a dried (...) skin, and that will preserve them, and prevent
the disease.

But it is to be observed, that the Ermins skins which are taken in France,
have much virtue; you must therefore get of those Ermins skins which come (...)
Muscovy undressed; they are easily known, because of their length, for (...)
are considerably longer than the French ones; these in Germany are also better
(...) the French, but not so good as those of Muscovie, and the further North
that t^ Ermins are taken, the more virtue have their skins to cure foundered
horses: O^^ times also, although people have good enough Receipts, yet if they
be not time (...) applied, before that the foundering has seized much upon a
horse's body, it seld^^ fails but that the humor, at least a part of it, by
a natural propensity falls down^ to the Feet, more or less, according to the
time that the horse has been foundered, (...) fore he was taken notice to;
sometimes also receipts, not methodically given, have (...) had a successful
effect, so that the whole Foundering has fallen down into t^^ Feet.

Now the Feet into which the Foundering humor is fallen, are commonly miss^^^
and diffigured, because the point, or that part of the Coffin-bone or little
Foot wh^^ is most advanced, falls down, and presses the sole, and the middle
of the (...) above the Toe shrinketh in and becomes flat, because of the
hollowness beneath it, ocasioned by the falling down of the end of the
Coffine-bone; and when the bone^ the Little-foot has fallen down after this
manner, and presses the sole out wards people then say that the horse has
Crescents, although that those Crescents be really the bone of the little-foot,
which has left its place, and fallen downwards and the under part of the Foot,
to wit the sole at the toe, appears round like t^^ segment of a Ball, and the
hoof above shrinks in; neither can it be otherwise, (...) it is empty and
hollow: therefore a part of the Coffine-bone or Little-foot has, (...) said,
fallen down, and left that space wherein it stayed empty, and being empty, hoof
at that place is not supported by any thing, and therefore must of neces^
shrink, or fall in.

The very same happens to horses, which have had a great Numness in the Co^^
(called in French Petonnement du sab^t,) which is, when the same Coffin-bone or
Li^^ foot I was just now discoursing of, becomes loose at the Toe, and quiteth
its ^^tural situation and place: The flesh, which surrounded it and joined it
to the Co^^ dries up, and there remains a void and Empty place; and seeing
the Little-foot loose and detatched, at the end next the Toe, it falls down
and forces the (...) which covered it, downwards, so that the fore part of the
hoof appears like a C^^^cent, and the sole as if there were another little
bone grown below the Little (...) which pressed it downwards, where there is no
such thing; for that Crescent (...) thing else, but the bone of the
Little-foot, which has quit its natural situation (...) the Toe, and having
fallen down, it goes beyond its natural bounds, and make the hoof at the Toe,
appear of the shape of a Crescent, more or less, according as (...) bone of the
Little-foot is more or less loosned or fallen down; Now the causes of the
disease are almost the same, as of foundering in the feet, at least these two
infirm (...) give the same Symptoms which are the Crescents, and the horses
tread only upon their heels, so that in traveling they set down their toe a
pretty while af^^^ their heel, and by their very walking you will perceive,
that their toe is altogether weakened and without nourishment, for they can rest
upon no part of their foot (...) their heel, and that also but Creasily: I
shall discourse at large of this infirmity (^^led l'etonnement du sabot) in the
2d. part of this Book. Cap. 120.

Now for all these infirmities of the Feet, where the foundering has fallen
dow^ them, or that there be a numness in the Coffin, especially if it be come a
great leng^^ the horses are a long time of recovering, so that a years time
will produce but li^^ amendment; therefore the best and surest way is, if you
cannot get such horses (...) to give them away: But I here write only for such
horses as have not been (...) foundered in the Feet, and therefore for them,
you shall observe the preceding directions.

People should never pare a horse much at the Toe that is foundered in the
feet, because the sole in that part should be always kept strong, to the end
that if there be any appearance of a Crescent, it may be prevented from coming
any greater length, and so may be taken away by nature, which will not I assure
you be done in a sudden; and also you must not take down his heels much, for
all the strength of these kind of feet lies in the heels, and so soon as the
horse is shoed, pour into his sole of the Oil of Bays without any mixture,
scalding hot, with hards or course flax above it, and splinters of wood to keep
all fast, and continue it for seven or eight times, once every other day, to
pour the foresaid Oil into his Feet.

Horses, which have great founderings fallen down in their feet, should never
be longer of having their soles taken out, than three Months at most after
their foundering; and when People have out their soles, the whole Crescent
should be fired, that is to say, burn the whole end of the bone of the
Little-foot which is loose, that so it may fall away; but I think it by far
more proper not to take out such horses soles at all, but to keep the Sole
always strong, and to pour into it the Oil of Laurel or Bays; be careful also
to buy the true Oil of Bays, for that which People sell commonly, in most shops
in Paris, is worth nothing.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Calkins.
THere are many Towns, both in France and England, CHAP. XLVI Of Calkins,
where the streets are so uneven, that none of the horses which draw in them
can keep their Feet from slipping, without being Calked; in Germany, all the
Horses are calked as well in the Country as in the Towns, without so much as
excepting the Manage horses: A German would not suffer a horse, in his stable,
without being Calked, whereas upon the contrary, a French man would not suffer
one in his that were so.

If you are necessitate, through the unevenness of the streets, or because of
some other motive, to calk your horses, as I showed you when I spoke of low
heel'd horses; you must, for to make the Calkin, turn down the inner corners of
the Sponge upon the corner of the Stithy or Anvill, and so fashion a Calkin
after the shape of the point of a hares ear, in French en Orielle de lievre,
the great square Calkins spoil a Foot strangely, and occasion Bleymes, as the
French call them (which is an inflammation occasioned by a corrupt or bruised
Blood within the Sole at the Quarters, whereof we shall treat in the 54 Chap,
of the 2d part) whereas these after the fashion of the point of a Hares ear, do
little prejudice, if people take but the pains to pare the horn a little low
at the heel: The use of these kind of Calkins is tolerable, when there is a
necessity for having any, because of two evils the least is still to be chosen.

This opinion, it is true, appears somewhat problematical, although really it
be not; for those who approve of Calkins say, that when a horse is traveling
upon a way which is but a little slippery, such as those highways which are
fat and full of Clay, or that it has been but a little rain, he fretteth and
fatigueth himself extremely, to prevent his slipping, when he is shoed smooth
or without Calkins; and that such horses employ all their vigor to that
purpose, and also that a horse which will not at all sweat in his ordinary
traveling, yet let people but step him as softly as possible upon a slippery
highway in the summer time, and he will sweat more in riding one hour if he be
smooth shoed, than he would do in three, were he traveling in a Country
whe^^ he i^ not in hazard of slipping, which is a certain sign that he wearieth
and fatigued himself.

Whereas if a horse were calked, he would as they say, perhaps sweat less,
beca^^^ he would not be so apprehensive of slipping, and therefore would not
fret so much which would be easier both for the horse and rider, and so both
would be the be^^ of it: Those, who approve of Calkins, look upon this reason
as unanswerable whereas I think it but of little force.

Indeed, there is not the least doubt, but People should Calk their Horses in
t^^^ of Frost, without considering, whether or not it will be prejudicial to
their Legs (...) Feet, for Necessity has no Law; and it is better that the
horse spoil his Legs, than the the Rider should be in a continual hazard of
breaking his.

Those who are of the right opinion, that is who disapprove of Calkins,
maintain the they trouble and spoil the feet, and in my opinion they are in the
right; for besides the they cause the back sinew to shrink, and make horses
have their Legs in a streigh^ line from the knee to the Coronet, their Pastern
bends forwards, as if they were out (...) joint, and make them tread only upon
the toes of their hind Feet, and Tri^^ they also say, (and it is most true)
that horses so Calked do not walk so at the ease, they also affirm that
Calkins benumme and ruin the Foot if it be weak, or the at least they are the
occasion of Bleymes, which is a bruised Blood within the Coffin (...) the heel,
that they also trouble and spoil the back sinews, and are altogether the rui^^
of a horse: This is also the opinion of the Steur Caesar Fiescht a Gentleman of
Ferrara, in his Treatise concerning horses, where he disapproveth of all kinds
of Calkins; My opinion is, that Calkins spoil the feet, trouble the heels, and
ruin the back sinews; nevertheless in Winter, and in the time of Frosts and
Snow, Calkins are good and convenient, especially for such horses, as have noe
defect in either their Le^ or Feet.

However, in neither good nor bad ways, unequal grounds or Mountainous
Co^treys, would I ever make use of them, except upon a necessity: Neither (...)
people mention Calkins for manage horses, or horses which daily ride in the
School^, unless they intend to render themselves Ridiculous; because horses of
Manage should not be shoed as ordinary traveling horses, and therefore people
commonly put upon them shoes half after the English fashion, which are better
than the French shoes, that are too broad in the Web and too weighty; now these
other are light^ for the horse's Legs, and the earth does not gather so easily
in them, which dry^^ the foot extremely; besides that shoes, made half after
the English fashion, are not apt to fit and press upon the sole, nor to
occasion Bleymes, as any other kind of sh^^ are.

For all horses, which work only in a Manage, when people shoe them, they
sho^^^ take down their Heels to the very quick, without hollowing the Quarters;
and if the foot be so altered that it is very dry, as it often falls out,
they must then soften^ with moistened horse Dung, or with a good Remolade or
softning Charge.

In Paris and other great Citys, or in Stonny Countries, people shoe their
horse with shoes which cover almost the whole sole, because of the great
employment a^ roil they have up and down Towns, for fear of the Street-nails
and little stones wh^^^ spoil their feet; And also in Parit and London, they
should make the shoes cover^^ whole soles of Coach and Cart horses feet, to
prevent the many accidents which happen by the Street-nails, were it not that
the sand and Gravel would get in bet wi^^ the shoe and sole, so that people
could not easily get the foot cleaned; besides t^^ the sole and Frush would
also rot and putrify, for lack of air, and being too cl^^^ covered.

Some people, to prevent their horses finding of Nails, or rather Stubs, neve
cause pare their soles, but let them grow as thick as possible, that so their
hard^^^ may resist the Street-Nails, but far rather the Stubs, which horses
find in new take in grounds when they are a Hunting; and that they may do it
the more effectually they never pare their horses soles nor take any thing from
them, so that the Smith has nothing ado, but to take a little from the horn to
cause the shoe sit right, a^^ to fasten it so, that it may not touch the sole.

But when they perceive the sole begin to crack or split, because there alway^
grows as it were a new sole above the old, as also a new Frush; then of
necessity they must pare their horses feet, to take that off which would
otherwise fall away of it is own accord, but they never do it upon any other
occasion; so that by the means they pretend to hinder any thing to pierce their
horses soles: Some Hunters make very much use of this method, which is not bad
for some kind of horses, but it may very readily occasion Bleymes, which people
find of times more difficult to cure than a prick caused by a stub; and when
people also suffer a horse's feet to grow too much and too long, they often
trouble him and make him trip easily; However if people have a mind for it,
they may make trial of this method.

People make not Planch-shoes for Coach-horses as they do for Mules, because
the Planch-shoe is a shoe altogether closs, which has but an open in the
middle of the sole, about the bigness of a Crown-peice; with Planch-shoes
people might prevent a great many pricks with Street-nails, by which so many
horses are daily lost; but the difference between them and Mules is
considerable, in so far as the greatest strength of Mules feet lies in their
heels, whereas in horses it is in their Toes (speaking of the fore-feet) so
that people cannot keep a horse's heels so high as they may do a Mule's;
besides that people leave a little open or passage for the Mules, betwixt the
shoe and the sole, at the Toe of their fore-feet, through which the water may
run (in French un Siflet) which cannot be done to horses, because the whole
strength of their foot would be taken away with it, seeing it lies only in the
Toe and not in the heel, which is just contrary to Mules; The chief reason why
people make not Coach-horses shoes quite closs, is because horses feet are more
moist than Mules are, so that if they had not air, they would in the Winter
time rot, because of too much moisture, and in the summer time become too dry
or hard, being quite covered and altogether without Air.

And besides, the Flanch-shoe indeed preserves the foot, but it spoileth and
ruineth the leg, and the shoes a la Florentine or welted shoes, preserve the
leg and spoil the foot* Let this be said by the bye, upon this occasion of
discoursing of Mules.

The English shoes are light, and excellent for horses which have weak feet,
but they easily break upon the Streets, and in stonny Countries the flinty
stones spoil a horse's Sole, and occasion Bruises; indeed the Adroit English
Smiths forge a light shoe to admiration, there can be nothing wrought better,
and more equally, and they make them extraordinary good, because their Iron is
better than ours; In their Country where the ground is soft and without
stones, those narrow webbed shoes are good, but in this Country they would not
do well at all. An expert English Smith holds the horse's foot himself,
pareth it, fitteth the shoe and drives the nails, without the help of any; he
holds the horse's foot betwixt his knees, and takes off his shoe and puts
it on again all alone: this is a thing, which none who have ever been in
England, can be ignorant of.

The Turks excel all Nations in the World for shoeing; they beat and forge
their shoes without any open, and almost cold as people do Silver; a horse's
four shoes will not weigh more than one of ours, and they will last almost as
long: But the Iron which they make use of, and their Country which is soft and
free of Stones, contribute much to this.

CHAP. XLVII. How to shoe horses which Cut or Interfere.
IT is a considerable Infirmity, when a horse cutteth himself or interfereth,
CHAP: XLVII How to shoe horses which cut or interfere.
that is to say, when he takes off the hide or skin from his pastern-joint;
The horse Merchants in Paris say, that a horse Cutteth his hose, or Spotleth
his Silk Stockins: it is therefore both necessary and convenient to know the
means to prevent it, but before I give you the (...) which may be practiced
upon horses which Cut, I have remarked that in buying horses, if they cross
their legs much when they walk, peo^^ may conclude that they will be subject,
in all appearance, to interfere; this is very p^^bable, but there is also
something else in it, that is more considerable, which is, (...) those kind of
Horses strike the one leg against the other in different parts of the legs,
(...) that people cannot well perceive if they cut themselves, when they strike
their legs (...) one against the other after this fashion; for if it be upon a
sore and tender part, they (...) halt the next step after the stroke, by reason
of the pain, and therefore people (...) sometimes think that horses legs are
spoilt, although they be very good, for the (...) which the stroke occasioneth,
makes him halt; And this way, of striking the (...) leg against the other, is
worse than if they Cut themselves, because for this there may^ a cure, but for
that there is none. To prevent being deceived by it, never buy (...) ses which
cross their legs after that manner upon a walk, although people may (...)
deavour to persuade you that they do not Cut themselves, for it is likely that
wh^ they are weary they will first strike or Cut themselves, then halt, and
perhaps af^^ wards (if they are put to a Gallop) go topsie-tursy.

Shoeing is the only means, whereby to help such horses as Cut, and it is easy
to (...) it in the beginning while they are as yet but young, and that their
not knowing h^ to ride, or rid their Limbs, as we say, is the cause of their
Cutting.

There are four things which occasion a horse's Cutting himself; the First is
wea^^ ness, the Second weakness in his Reins, the Third not knowing how to go,
or (...) his feet when Traveling, and Lastly his not being accustomed to
travel nor su^^ in his step; now people may remede such kind of horses, or
rather prevent their Cutting. I might also add to these, his being badly or too
old shoed, but I suppose that the horse be for the most part indifferently well
shoed; So you see he may for o^^ of these four preceding reasons cut himself,
but it falls out more frequently in the hind legs than in the fore.

If a horse then Cut himself through wearyness, I know no better remedy than to
(...) him rest, and to feed him well; the Barbs, which are led in ones hand,
easily (...) themselves with one leg against the other, and almost always Cut
themselves, because they walk very coldly and negligently, which is contrary to
other horses, (...) Cut themselves, because they lift or raise their legs too
high when they travel, which wearyeth and fatigueth them in a very short time,
so that at length they Cut and^^terfere.

When people see a horse which Cuts himself, they should not at first sight
conde^ him for it, until they have examined whether it may not have been some
rivet (...) nail which has occasioned it, or that the shoe exceeds too much
his Quarters, up the insides.

Every horse, which after a long journey has not Cut himself, gives a
favour^s token and proof of his goodness; for there are but few, which after a
long journ^ are not found to have Cut themselves, less or more.

This imperfection is easily known, for people at first view perceive the skin
u^ the insides of the Pastern-joints to be cut, and many times galled to the
very b^^ so that the horse frequently halteth with it, and has his
Pastern-joints also swelled.

If a horse Cut before, you are to cause take off his two fore shoes, and take
very (...) down the out quarter of each foot, and place the inner edge of the
shoe so, that (...) follow exactly the Compass of his foot, without any ways
exceeding it toward th^^^ in other shoe; then cut the spunges equal with the
heel, and rivet the nails so exa^^ into the horn, that they may not at all
appear above it; or that you may make (...) rivets the more closs and flat,
burn with the point of a hot Iron the horn a little (...) low the hole of each
nail, and then beat down and rivet them in these holes.

If the horse, after this method of shoeing, continue still to Cut himself, you
are the to cause thicken the inner Quarters and Spunges of his shoes, to double
the thickness these upon the outside, and pare always very much down his out
quarters, even al^^ to the quick; and without in the least touching those
within, but be sure alwa^ to rivet the nails very justly and closs.

If he Cut behind, you are also to cause unshoe him, and pare down his
Out-quart almost to the quick, give his shoes Calkins only upon the insides,
and such a Turn^ may make them follow exactly the compass and shape of his Foot
without exceed^ it, especially in the inner quarters, and above all rivet the
nails exactly, for one sirt^ rivet will occasion a great disorder.

The large Mules, which Cut themselves behind, are worth nothing, and people^
apt to believe them stressed in their Reins. and unfit for any great service;
unless that their Cutting and intersereing proceed, from their being very young.

Calkins, which are only used upon the insides of the hind-feet, are, generally
speaking, more advantageous, of greater use, and more Graceful, than those upon
the out, as most people use them, and without any kind of reason, except it be
for such horses as carry their Feet badly, and wear their shoes only upon the
outsides: A Calkin upon the inside, makes a horse to walk more open, more at
his ease, and gives his Leg also a more natural situation; unless, as I have
said, you observe that he naturally wears and uses them only upon the outsides;
for in that case, Calkins upon the insides are altogether needless, I mean
still for the hind Feet.

For horses of Manage, people give them no kind of Calkins at all, neither
before nor behind, because as people have frequently occasion to make them
passage upon Volts or Circles, if they were either fretful, or mounted by
persons which are not very skillful, they would in crossing their Legs
infallibly give themselves Treads upon their Coronets, which will be so much
the more severe, because of their being Calked, and may at last turn to Ulcers
or Quitter-bones.

If, notwithstanding of all these precautions, your horse continue still to
Cut, if for example he be a young Coach-horse, you are to cause do all to him
which I have ordered, that is, take very much down his Out quarters, give him
Calkins upon the insides, cause the shoes answer exactly the inner Quarters of
his Feet, and drive no nails at all upon the insides, but only make a Beak at
the toe to keep the shoe firm in its place, and continuing this method for some
time, the horse will learn to walk, rid his feet, and interfere no more,
although he be afterward shoed after the ordinary fashion; or otherwise,
Rest, if he be very much fatigued, will recover him; but if none of these will
do, then for last recourse, cause shoe him after the Turkish Fashion: If you
are upon a journey, after you have caused shoe your horse in that manner, you
must make use of an invention practiced by the Messengers of Normandy, who put
little Boots of Leather or Felt about the Pastern joints, and there fasten them
to preserve those parts; the pieces of Felt or old hat, whereof these little
boots are made, are cut narrower at the top than bottom, and therefore are only
made fast at Top; at first horses find difficulty to walk with them, but in a
short time they will be accustomed to it, although the invention, I confess, be
both very ugly, and causes also many times the pastern-joynts to swell, or at
least makes the horse to walk with a bad Air or Grace.

If you have led horses, which are thus subject to Cut and Interfere, you must
cause wrap a piece of Sheep or Lamb skin with the wooly side turned next the
horse, about his pastern joint, and when that is used and worn, apply a new one.

Horses, which have tender and delicate Feet, and that unluckily come to loose
their shoes upon the Road or Fields, where they are far from any Smith, run the
hazard of spoiling and loosing their Feet; you are therefore in that case, to
wrap a piece of an old hat about your horse's Foot, and to lead him in your
hand, until you find an opportunity again to shoe him.

There is an invention of shoes, that may be accomodate to all sizes of Feet,
and which are made fast without Nails, only by the assistance of a raised
border, which binds and environes the horn quite round the Foot, then it is
made fast with a Vice, which so screws it together, that the foot is enclosed
within it as in a Box; these shoes are of no use neither for the Country nor
Streets, and the Sieur Frederick Grison, has given the design of them in his
Book of Horsemanship, although very imperfectly, and where there are a great
many things, both to be rectified and added.

A Country Gentleman, observing that his horse had lost a shoe, pulled off one
of his Boots and put his horse's Leg in it, least he should have spoylt his
Foot, and thus made his Entry into a great Town. I saw once a horse, in one of
the best Academies in France, that rode in Leather shoes, because his hoofs
were not strong enough to carry those of Iron. The French have neglected to
treat of this subject, which is not however to be undervalued; the Italians
have writ very learn'dly of it, and if you are curious, you may enquire for a
Book entitled. Il Trattato, del Ferrares Cavalli con i ferri in dessegno di
Caesare Fiaschi nobile Ferrare se, but in my opinion he says both too much and
too little: I am therefore hopeful, that the little I have said upon this
subject, will be sufficient for your use, especially if you take the pains to
read it, and understand the different methods; for there are many People, who
would with all their heart know and understand things, but few who will give
themselves the trouble to learn them.

However, to prevent the trouble, which bad Feet occasion in shoeing the^
according to Order and Method, a man should always endeavor to b^ such Horses
as have them good, and so very good, that your Smith, altho^^^ extraordinary
ignorant, cannot possibly spoil them.

CHAP. XLVIII. How horses of value should be fed and ordered, when staying at
home.
THose who search after the secret to fatten horses, CHAP. XLVIII How horses
should be fed and ordered at home.
keep them well bellyed, and finely Coated, and also preserve and augment their
strength and vigor with a small quantity of provision, have a great deal of
reason for it, especially seeing it is a thing possible, provided they do not
labor much: for it is nothing but the regular method of feeding them at
certain hours, and orderly dressing, which makes them fat and lusty, and not
the great abundance of food, nor rest alone, which preserves them plump and
hearty; a man needs not therefore much trouble himself, to enquire after
certain Powders, which people fancy have a virtue of themselves (...) fatten
horses, without observing any other precaution but to cause horses eat of, and
be accustomed with them: for upon my word, there is no other secret or Powder
whereby to perform this so well, as to observe a me hodical way of feeding
(...) dressing, which if exactly followed, there is no need of looking for any
new ones; (...) as there are many persons who with satisfaction practice this,
so it would be al^^gether to no purpose I should in this place propose it, did
I not think the omiss^^ of it would be prejudicial to, and offend those who are
but young beginners; its then only upon their behalf, that I here set down the
method, how horses of Value such as horses of manage, journey-pads, or fine
hunting horses should be ordered while they reside at home, and for the exact
keeping of which, there is required more exactness, than for these which are
more common, about whom there nee^^ not be taken so much pains and care;
however a man may add or pare from this as he shall think fit and convenient.

You shall then observe, over and above the other directions I am to give you,
The horses which are lean stand in need of a greater allowance of food; then
those which have been a long time plump and in good case, but that when once
they are (...) and accustomed to hard meat they may be maintained with one
half, nay the third part of that meat, which you allowed them when making up,
provided alw^^ that they work but moderatly; for I assure you great and violent
labor ^^sumeth all.

The allowance of food for horses of manage, is less than for any other horses
whatsoever, because they have but a moderate labor, and which although viole^^
is not of long continuance; but the greater the labor is, the greater should
be their allowance of Hay and Oats, besides that the labor of managed horses,
if right ordered, cannot properly be called a work, but only an exercise, for
evacuating of their bad humors, and to excite their Appetite.

Before I come to particulars, I shall establish four Maxims, which it will be
(...) to know, for the better understanding of all the rest.

The first is, that Hay commonly spoileth those horses which eat too much of
i^^ especially if they be past Six years old, but if under that age, a horse
will be very little prejudged although he be suffered to eat hay moderatly; and
provided be be not too fat, nor incline to become too charged with flesh, a man
needs not fear th^^ Hay will either make him Pursy, or alter his flank.

There are some Gurmandizing or greedy-eating-horses, which all day long eat
their litter, which is the straw that is thrown beneath them to stand upon; a
man should absolut^ly hinder this, because when their litter has but served
two days, it both spoils their wind, and makes them sweat much, so that if a
man had any extraordinary labor to put them to, they would become Pursy; but
this eating of their litter is very easily prevented.

The second Maxim is, That for every horse which is fat and resting at home,
that is, which either works and travels not at all, or but very little, new
threshed wheat straw is better for him than hay, because his wind is better
preserved by it, it alters not his flank, and also the fat and flesh which it
produces is always more firm then that of hay, as likewise, as people say,
more dureable, conform to the French proverb; Cheval de paille, Cheval de
bataille, Which I English thus.

A horse that is fed with straw of Wheat,
Is firm in flesh, and fit for Feat.
In fine a horse fed only with Wheat^straw and Oats, may be kept at rest in the
stable a full year without spoiling, whereas if he had eat hay he would appear
old, and become very dull and heavy in the space of three months.

But some persons who have only one horse, will perhaps say that they shall
prevent his resting so much, and remaining so long in the stable without doing
any thing, but if he be hurt or become lame they will be necessitate to do it,
and those who have great stables of horses, know very well that when they have
been much traveled, especialy at the close of a Campaigne where they have been
extremely fatigued, there is a necessity to give them rest, and that for a
considerable time, that so they may recover.

Horses which are Light-bellyed, and have not their flanks altered, agree
better with the eating of Hay than straw, also they are excepted out of the
proceeding Rule, because the hay cause; them to drink lustily, and the
abundance of water tempers and qualifies that heat, which dried them up and
hindered them to take a Belly; yet Hay considered as Hay, would seem more fit
and proper to take away a horse's Belly than give him one, because by its
natural heat, it should do him more prejudice than straw which is not so
fiery, but as it obliges horses to drink much, by reason of it is being charged
with a nitrous Salt which provokes thirst, the quantity of drink extinguishes
it is fiery and heating quality, how great soever, and so the horse, which is no
more consumed by that fire which contracted his Belly, is put in a condition to
have it enlarged; therefore a man should make no difficulty to give hay to such
kind of horses, and every lean horse which eats heartily, and drinks
lustily, and proportionably to what he eats, will be very soon fat and full
flanked.

For horses which are very lean, a man will not very suddenly fatten them with
Straw, therefore Hay is much more proper for them, if their flanks be not
altered, for if they have the least inclination to Pursyness, hay is naught for
them, because of the reasons I shall hereafter give you in the second part,
when I discourse of horses which is broken-winded or Pursy; and although people
very justly say, that such a horse has his flank altered, because he has a
little feeling or touch of Pursyness, yet you must not imagine That that
alteration proceeds from heat, because heat is nothing but an accident of
Pursyness, and its essential cause flows from a cold principle which is heavy,
slow, and Viscuous phlegm, that not only obstructs and stops the conduits of
respiration, but also those passages through which the blood runs, for
refreshing and nourishing the Lungs, in the time of its perpetual circulation;
but the accidental heat proceeds from this that betwixt the Pulmonary artery
and Vein, there is in the Parenchyma, or bloody and fistolous substance of the
Lungs, Anastomoses or passages from the Veins to the Arteries, which being many
times obstructed, do occasion that accidental heat in the Lungs, by reason of
the heat which is communicated to them from the Heart.

Horses which are inclined to be charged with flesh in their necks, or to
become Thick-necked, should not eat too much wheat straw, because it will
increase their fleshyness, as experience will teach you, but, unless it be in
these few exceptions, our Maxim holds always good, Excepting also Spanish
horses, which as they grow old become smaller and thinner Necked, contrary to
all other horses, and I am also of opinion, that a Spanish horse which has a
thick and well turned neck, is better than if he had it more slender, because
his mouth is more certain and firm with it, neither will he be so subject to
Beat upon the hand, or Chack in the Bridle, and therefore will consequently
have a better Appuy, or feeling of the pressure of the Bit upon his Bars.

The Wheat-straw in Languidock is most excellent, because, being tread upon the
peoples feet who thresh it, it is beat and softened, and consequently more
appetiz^ it is not, but that without this Treading it might be cut abundantly
small, but (...) it could not without a great deal of trouble, be made so soft
and toothsome (...) other way, as it is this.

We are not however wholly to banish Hay, and therefore there should always a
small quantity of it be given to horses before Watering, to excite their
thirst; and peo^^ find difficulty to maintain some horses in a good case with
straw alone, with he help of some hay; therefore I think they should always
have six or eight po^^ weight given them every four and twenty hours, unless
there be some reasons, wh^^ oblige a man to give them none at all.

The third Maxim for the right feeding of horses, is, Never to suffer them to
drink (...) cold or sharp water, as I have already remarked when I discoursed
of what was be observed when horses are upon journey; because such kind of
water weak^^ their stomach, engenders crudities, and causes obstructions in the
Liver; it is from that also that Collicks and Grips in the belly do commonly
proceed; cold and sha^^ water prevents and retards a horses growing fat which
is lean, and if he be alr^^^ fat, will make him the sooner become lean, and in
a bad condition: In a word, it (...) most unwholesome for him.

The water of great Rivers is excellent for horses, although those indeed whi^^
are too rapid are not so very good; Spring or Fountain Water is better than
th^^ of Draw-wells, although people are necessitate in many places to make use
of this for lack of better: Water which has had time to settle, or has been
taken a pretty while from the Well or Fountain, is better than that which is
immediately drawn, exce^^ in time of an excessive cold, in which water which is
new drawn has a kind (...) warmness; and is therefore more wholesome for
horses to drink immediately, than th^^ which has been suffered to cool, by
being a considerable time drawn before it be made use of.

I assure you good water contributes to the keeping a horse fat and plump; the
Water of the River Seine is so very excellent for horses, that at Paris people
see ^ew of them that are very Lean, whereas in Hilly-countreys where the waters
are sharp and peircing, there are few found which are fat; it is not That the
Seine-water alone fatteneth them about Paris, as many people fancy, it only
has not a macerating qualty, which many other waters have; and besides, people
there cannot endure horse which are Lean, neither are any such brought thither
to be sold, because peop^^ know that no horses go off there, or are easily
sold, but such as are fat and in good condition: I knew a person, who paid ten
Crowns a Month for Seine water for his horse to drink.

The fourth Maxim is, To keep your horse fat, because being Lean, he can never
(...) so beautiful, neither can a man expect any thing in perfection from him,
whethe it be for the manage or any other service; It is true, there are some
lean horses whi^^ will fatigue more than fat ones, whereof there are also some
which are not mu^^ worth, and many times not at all fit for any great fatigue,
but if such lean horses we^^ fat, they would be yet better, and work with a
great deal of more vigor, and a^^^ if those which are fat and not much worth
were lean, it would still be so much the worse.

However, this Maxim has some exceptions; for there are certain Cravates which
fatigue better being lean, than when they are fat, but their number is small
and (...) considerable.

I don't pretend by this Maxim, that horses which are too fat are better than
others upon the contrary they are of less value, and inconvenient, especially
in the excess^^ heats, for then they immediately weary, disgust easily, are
subject to foundering in t^^ body and grease melting, and are theresore very
little fit for service; however they a^ always better than those which are
lean, for it costs a man nothing to macerate (...) extenuate them, but they are
not immediately made fat and plump, when aman ha^^ a mind for it.

A man may then receive these four Maxims for true ones, and that not only for
lar^ horses, but also for all other sizes, and most pityfull jads: You shall
also observe, th^^ a horse which is abundantly fat, has been accustomed a
considerable time with ha^ meat, and which persormes but a regular and moderate
labor, will be maintain^ with so small a quantity of food, that those, who
have not been Eyewitnesses to (...) will have difficulty to be persuaded of it.

I have seen the largest size of Coach horses, which did not each of them daily
eat above a bot^e or ten or twelve pounds of hay, a botte or bundle of straw,
which is betwixt eight and nine pounds and two thirds of a French Bushel of
Oats, which is about eight English Quarts, and yet were fat and full skinned;
and before I regulate this proportion of food to them, they were always sick,
for having ate too much, but afterward kept their health very well.

Now for a man to fancy, that large Coach-horses which fatigue much, or are not
both very fat and well accustomed with hard-meat, can be maintained at this
rate, is mightily to deceive himself, therefore a man should take very exact
measures, before he positively determine any thing in it.

CHAP. XLIX Of the necessity there is, for dressing and Currying horses.
HAving discoursed of the ordering of horses while at home, CHAP. XLIX Of the
necessity there is for Currying horses.
I must now show you the necessity there is to have them dressed and Curryed, as
also how it is to be done, for this part of ordering is almost as necessary for
their preservation and health as the preceding, which is what few people can
be persuaded of, that there is such a necessity and great advantage in Rubbing
and Combing horses, for they fancy, that provided they feed them well and
liberally, it is sufficient, without so regulary restricting themselves to
Curry and dress them every day; the reason for it is however abundantly
evident, and if people take the pains to examine it attentively, I am
persuaded they will be of my sentiment, which is, that a horse which is well
Curryed and carefully dressed, will be maintained more fat, beautiful, and more
agreeable, with a less proportion of food methodically distributed, than with a
greater quantity, were he not carefully Curryed and dressed.

Van Helmont, who rendered himself famous, by his methodical way of treating
diseases, recomends preferable to feeding, the careful rubbing and currying
those she-Asses, whose milk he appointed for such persons as had any trouble in
their breasts, or lungs, affirming that people might know by the taste of the
Milk, if the Ass had been Curryed or not that morning; if this be true, then
dressing and combing must of necessity make a considerable change and
alteration in the humors; here are is words: Asina pectenda est instar
equorum, quia ex lactis gustu dignosci potest, an Asina pexa fuerat isto mane,
an non.

To explain exactly the usefulness of Currying, and how necessar it is to rub
and dress horses carefully, I shall begin at a little distance, and I fancy
people will not be dissatisfied, to find here an abridgement of the natural
Oeconomie which passes in a horse's body. A horse, as all other living
Creatures, partakes of the nature of Fire, habet enim a^idum innatum, which
stands in need of a certain food for its nourishment, and for lack of that
nourishment it is dispersed and weakened by a continual draining, so that at
last it is quite extinguished and perishes; the nourishment of a horse consists
in his eating and drinking, for after having strongly grind and chawed his
solid food, and knedded or mixed it by the help of his saliva or spittle, which
is sent from two small passages, that arise betwixt the parotide glands below
the ears, and are insert betwixt the nether Jaws, and below the Crotaphite or
Temporal Muscle, by the motion of which the Saliva or spittle is sent by
degrees into the mouth, and mixing with the food are both by the assistance of
the Tongue swallowed down, whereby that which the horse takes in at his mouth
is sent down to the stomach, which is as the boiling or stew-pot of the body,
where, by the heat of the intrals, particularly that of the Liver, and by the
help of ane acid, penetrating, and dissolving humor, the first coction is made
which digests the aliments, and converts them into a whi^^ matter like to milk,
which by the physicians is called Chyle.

That this acid juice, is the principle cause of the concoction of the food, is
manife^; For we see that those persons in which it abounds most, have a quicker
digestion, an^ are greater eaters then others; this example is plain in men of
a Melancholic Te^per or constitution, in that they are generally observed to
be greater eaters than others, and even in some this acid juice or humor does
so abound, that it qui^^^ the stomach, and then it becomes prejudicial,
because it is out of its natural place, and so troubles the other digestions,
by hindering them to perform their functio^^, and so to fatten; the like is
also observed in Birds and Wild-fowl, in whom this ^cid juice is so
penetrating, and so quickly dissolves the grain which they swallow that it is
in a very short time digested, which would be a thing impossible for the^
natural heat to perform alone, and without the assistance of this Acid: This is
al^^ confirmed, in that we see that Wild-Foul, (by a natural instinct which the
Author (...) all things has imprinted in them,) do most frequently swallow
gravel and (...) little stones, when they do not find a sufficient quantity of
food wherewithal to (...) their stomachs, that so they may blunt and weaken the
sharpness of that humor by the^ hard substances, and thereby keep it from
quitting their stomachs, for lack of mat^^^ whereupon to work, and which would
impede the other digestions, and make the^^ become lean.

According to the quantity and quality of the Food, the disposition of the
stomach, and abundance or scarcity of this acid humor, the abovementioned
concoction is sooner or latter finished; when it is fully perfected, the lower
part of the stomach opens, and this white digested matter passes by degrees
all along the gutts, which are full of plyes and folds, that so they may give
time to certain small passages that are in a great number joined to them, and
which are called Milky Veins, to suck in th^^ part of it which is most subtle
and best prepared; these Veins because of their whi^^ness are called Lacteal,
and are dispersed through the whole Mesentery, carrying in them this white
liquor into two receptacles, which are about the bigness of a small Egg,
situate in the middle of the same Mesentery, betwixt the two productions of the
Diaphragm or Midriff, and couched upon the Vertebraes of the Loins; from these
Reservoirs or receptacles do proceed two small Canals or Conduits, which are
calied Thoracick because of their situation, and Chy^^ducts because of their
use; the one (...) upon the right side and the other upon the left, they are
about the bigness of^ large Swans quill, and are lodged upon the body of the
Vertebraes of the back, (...) along the Great Artery, and ascending to the
Subclavian-vein, do there let the Ch^^ mix with the Blood, which according to
the ordinary course of Circulation, is (...) ried into the right ventricle of
the heart, to be there converted into Blood: The white matter is, I say,
carried by passages which are called Lacteal Veins, until the meet with a
Channel called the Aorta, which is more large, and which extends it s^ from the
Reins all along the backbone, until it come to the upper part of the bre^^ and
there it discharges it self into several passages, or Branches of the great or
holl^ Vein, at which part this Vein forks and divides it self, to distribute
the Blood (...) the Neck and Shoulders.

These Conduits or passages were luckily discovered, near a hundred and twe^^
years ago, by one Bartholomew Eustache a Venetian, as he was Anatomizing a
ho^^^, it is not a small advantage to horses, that they should have first
contributed to the discovery of a part unknown to the Ancients, and which is so
necessary and useful for our understanding the true and just dispensation of
those humors, which pass in or Bodies: Amongst the moderns, Thomas Bartholin
was the first who discovered these Canals in men; Olaus Rudbek the first who
found them out in Dogs; and John Pequet the first who writ of them: But there
are none of these who ascribe the Glory of the discovery to its true inventor,
which nevertheless upon this consideration deserve very well, that these Ducts
be called Eustachien, although in men they are at prese^ called Thoracick or
Chyliducts, but in horses, I think they should carry the name of the Famous
Horse-Anatomist.

The Chyle, or this white liquor, ascending by these Eustachien Canals,
discharge it self into the veins, and by degrees mixes with the Blood, which
according to the o^ der of Circulation, discovered in this Age by Dr. Harvy ane
Englishman, desce^^ and is carried to the right Auricle of the heart, to be
there converted with the (...) into Blood, from whence it is again driven or
forced by the the Systole, or compresing motion of the heart, to go into the
Lungs by help of the Pulmonary Artery; from the Lungs it is carried back again
to the left Ventricle, by the Pulmonary Vein which has Anastomoses, that is,
Communications with the Pulmonary Artery, there it is rectified and perfected,
and from thence sent to the great Artery, from which it runs and is Communicate
to all the parts of the Body for their Nourishment, where it at last by
Anastomoses reenters the veins, which through diverse passages bring it again
to the heart, and by a continual and reiterated circulation performed by many
Towrs and Windings, it is at last made absolutely perfect with the rest of the
Blood; so you see that the Blood purifies it self from many useless and
Superfluous parts, which nature separates and rejects, and being thus purified
and subtilized, furnishes those Spirits, which are the first Administrators of
Life, and the chief and principal instruments of all our Actions.

There is no probability, that this white juice passes all of it through the
veins, and is wholly converted into Blood which is red; because horses are
composed of several white parts, which require the nutriment of a humor which
does somewhat resemble them; so that in that case, it would be but labor in
vain to turn white matter to red, that behoved afterward to become white; for
Nature is not accustomed to give her self such unnec^ssary difficulties; for
example, in the production of Milk in Mares, which proceeds directly and
immediately from Chyle, without having been first Blood, as the Ancients
believed, who thought it to be only Blood blanched by virtue of the breasts or
Teats, and which people have certainly found since, that it is not, but that
milk is immediately formed of Chyle: However whether this be so or not, the
change of it into Blood, and the the perfecting of this conversion, passes for
the Second concoction.

The Third concoction, which we are to consider, is performed in each
particular part of the Body, which converts the humor that is most conform to
it into its proper substance, that so it may repair what it loses every
moment, and this concoction or digestion is termed Assimilation, which is
properly what we call Nourishment.

Each of these Concoctions have their particular excrements, these of the first
are the Ordour or dung, those of the second is the Urine, which passes through
the Reins, and is carried and conveyed by the Ureters into the Bladder; to
these People sometimes add the Bile or Gall, which is separate from the rest in
the Liver, and degorges it self into the intestines: People doubt to what
concoction Pituite or phlegm (which sometimes floateth in the stomach, and
always in the Gutts) does belong; neither are they more certain of Melancholy,
which is said to be thrown back into the Spleen: In effect, people perceive, in
sound and wholesome Bodies, no sensible and considerable excretions or
voydings, of these three last humors.

The excrements of the third concoction, upon whose account I have made this
discourse, too prolix I am afraid for some, but too short for the Curious, are
of two sorts; the one subtle which exhale and evaporate by insensible
transpiration, and the other more gross or thick, which cleave to and remain
upon the horse's skin, and as they are naturally saltish, so they acquire a new
acrimony by the stay they make upon it, which makes horses of vigor unquiet
and dull, if People take not care to remove it daily, in the dust which they
take away with the Curry-comb, and wipe off with a Cloth from their skins;
this excrement of the third Concoction, although inperceptible, does abound
extremely in all Creatures, but particularly in horses.

And it was this that obliged the Ancients, who had not the use of Linen
Cloth, to make daily use of a Bath; and also to cleanse themselves, they made
use of a kind of scouring instrument, which the Romans called Strigil, from
whence the French word Etrille, which signifies a Currie-comb is derived:
Indeed, if we consider how many humors evacuate through the pores of the skin,
we shall find a prodigious quantity of them, whereof the computation is
abundantly easy, as follows.

Weight the Hay, Oats, and Water, in fine all that a horse swalloweth during
the space of twenty four hours, weight likewise his Excrements and Urine which
he voids in the sa^^e space, and you will find that there comes insensibly
from him more than twenty five pownd weight a day, of which one part is sent
forth by breathing, and another by transpiration through the skin: the
calculation is easy, and yet few People reflect upon it; also Nature has been
very provident, to make the skins of horses a great deal more open and porous,
than these of other four footed creatures, to the end it might facilitate the
transpiration of these exhalations, and so drive them out of the Body.

Those, who prepare or dress horses skins, find them so porous and tender, that
the are of no use at all, for making either Saddle-furniture, or
Coach-harnesses.

When the abovementioned dust remains too long upon the skin, it obstructs
(...) pores, and hinders the other sharp vapors to exhale, so that these
superfluities wh^^ remain amongst the Blood, do alter and corrupt it, and being
once corrupted, it i^ very unfit to nourish well a horse, which in such a case
will without doubt become le^^ or at least not fatte^, and there needs no other
reason be enquired into for it, but th^^ which inconveniency may be prevented,
by the care and pains which people sho^^ take to have them well Curryed and
dressed. If these reasons are not of force to perswa^ some People, of the
necessity and use of the Curry-comb, who think upon noth^^^ else but to Cram
and burst their horses, through the excessive quantity of hay, I with all (...)
heart consent, that they continue in their Error.

Without the practice of this, you cannot possibly have any pleasure or service
from horse. I have therefore resolved to explain here the least things,
belonging to the particular, so that those who understand it already, will not I
expect take it ill, that instruct those, who have not the least rincture or
knowledge of it.

I have already explained the coction of the Aliments, and their conversion i^^
Blood according to the Modern Opinion, which I assure you is the most probable,
a^ best confirmed and supported by reason and experience; but if any one be so
much ^^ed to the Ancients, that he rejects every thing that is new, I shall for
his satisfacti^^ propose the opinion of Galen, which till of late has passed
always for the most probable, because people had not in his time that
knowledge in Anatomy, which they have at present, and the ancient Anatomists
did regulate themselves according to the experiments which they made upon Apes
and Swine, as having their inward pa^^ very nearly just so disposed as in Men;
the Moderns again finding the path a little beaten, have penetrate and advanced
further, as may be seen by the daily exper^ments they make.

Galen upon Hippocrates has said, that the Ventricle or Stomach performs the
first concoction it self, by the assistance of the natural heat, and by that
(...) which it has to boil the aliments that are contained in it, that natural
heat being as it were in its proper place; for every where else where that
great heat is (...), it is the origin of diseases, because being out of the
Stomach, it is the principle (...) Corruption, and of strange and unnatural
heat: This concocting faculty, being a^^^^ed by the natural heat, boyls the
aliments and reduces them to Chyle, and after the it has satisfied the animal
appetite, the Pylorus or inferior orifice of the Stom^ opens, and throws it
into the intestines, by which it is sucked, and carried by t^^ Mesaraick veins
to the Liver, which converts it into blood, and after having nou^^^ ed its self
with it, sends the rest into the Vena cava or hollow vein, from whence it^
distribute to the other parts of the body for their nourishment: Now you may
rema^^ here three concoctions, the First in the ventricle or Stomach, the
excrements where^^ the Dung; the Second in the Liver, where the blood receives
its form and col^^ its excrements are Bile, which is received into the
receptacle of the Gall; and (...) Third concoction, is performed in each part
of the Body for it is own particular nour^ment, which has also it is excrements,
that are certain smokes or vapors, wh^ should exhale through the pores of the
skin by insensible transpiration, and as the are some of them more gross than
the rest, so these stop and cleave to the (...) obstruct the pores, and impede
the transpiration of the said vapors, which being (...) and saltish alter the
blood, and hinders it to nourish the parts, yea even destro^^ and over heats
them, so that if people do not by the use of the Curry-comb (...) open and
unstop the pores, it is not possible for a horse to fatten, let his food be
ne^^ so good, but upon the contrary, when a horse is well Curryed, and cleaned
from^ his dust, he will with a less quantity of food be more fat and plump,
because t^ blood being well separate from it is excrements, which are the above
mentione smokes and vapors, will be in a condition, although in less quantity,
better to nou^^ the particular parts.

Perhaps, those who are Curious will be also very glad to find here a new
opini^^ which, if not probable, yet at least seems to me very pretty, although
I do really b^ lieve, that it is more subtle then solid: We have heretofore
discoursed of the (...) munctories or Glands, which are situate in several
parts of a horse, and whi^^ serve in place of Spounges, to attract and suck up
the superfluous humidities of the adjacent parts.

A while ago one named Wharton an English man, says that these Glands are
composed of Veins, Nerves, Arteryes, and Lymphatick vessels, and that they have
also a particular correspondence with the Nerves, about whose service they are
particularly employed; he moreover adds, that people may easily judge by their
rare and spongious substance, that they serve to filtrate and refine some kind
of Matter, which their white color discovers, that that matter is not Blood,
furnished by the veins and Arterys, and seeing the Nerves join to them, it would
appear that their Nourishment comes from thence, and that this nourishment
proceeds immediately from the Chyle, which out of its most pure and subtle
parts, furnishes a refined and exquisite juice for the nourishment of the
Nerves, and that this juice is purified in these glands, by passing through
their spongious flesh as through a filter or strainer, where it leaves behind
it what is most impure and gross, and least proper for the nourishment of the
Nervous parts.

The same Author says, that this nervous juice is employed in the most
exquisite functiof the Body; this opinion which is at this day generally
received among the English, who were the inventors of it, is revolved all upon
this most true Principle, that as there are in human bodies, two sorts of parts
which are of different colors, so they must have also two kinds of
nourishment, to wit Blood for the red parts, and this Nervous juice for the
white.

I shall not trouble the Reader any longer with this matter; if he have the
curiofity to see at full length this opinion, let him enquire for a Book
iutituled, Andenographia, seuglandularum humani corporis descriptio, Authore
Thoma Warton^, Novtemagi.

CHAP. L. How Horses are to be Curry'd and Dressed.
LEt us return again to our subject, CHAP. L. How horses are to be Curry'd and
dressed.
and say that of necessity horses should be Curry'd, and that to do it well,
one Groom cannot take care of or dress above six; and if People desire that he
perform his work well, they should not charge him with any more, for I assure
you he would but very badly acquit himself; neither must he have any other
work to do in the Lodging, to the end he may be always about the stable.

A Groom should be Active, Adroit, Nimble, Vigorous, and Hardy, should love
horses, and have a defire to perform his work well; when a man finds one
with these qualities, he should not eafily part with him, for this Merchandice
although gross and clownish, is hard enough to be found in many places of the
Country.

He should then rise early in the morning, immediately make clean the Manger
before his horses, and give to each of them a good measure full of Oats, which
may contain very near as much as the Crown of a large hat, which will be near
two of these commonly made use of in the Inns.

He should also truss up their Litter with a wooden Fork, (one shod with Iron
being dangerous for pricking) separate the dry from the wet for the next
evening, and take that which is dirty and spoilt to the Dunghill; he shall
afterward make clean and sweep the whole stable, and all day long keep it neat
and in good order with the Broom and Shovel, for it is no-wise decent to see a
horse's dung lying beneath him in the day time.

It is however good during the great Forsts in Winter, to shake down again the
Litter beneath the horses, after it has been cleand, and to leave it so all
day long; the evening or Supping time being come, he should truss it up again,
make clean t^^ place where it lay, separate the dry from the wet, and shake it
down beneath the^ as in the Morning, for this Method keeps horses warmer the
whole day long, a^^ their Coat is also preserved more clear and beautiful,
during the severity of (...) Gold.

The horse having are his Oats, he shall put a small Watering-bit or Masticad^^
(whereof you may see the Figure in the 3d, plat. fig. 13.) in his head, and
shall eith^^ lead him out, if the place will allow it, or otherwise tie him
betwixt two pill^^ in the stable, to Curry and rub him; for being Curry'd
within the stable, his dust ^^fly upon the rest of the horses if they are not
covered; however when a man can (...) no better, he may dress him within doors.

Beginning then at his Near or left side, he shall take the Curry-comb into
(...) right hand, laying the left upon the horse's Back, and shall Curry him
all along his bo^ both with and against the hair, behind and before, taking
always care not (...) place himself behind him for fear of stricking, and this
he must continue until the Curry-comb bring away no more dust; neither must he
press it too hard or rude^ upon the horse's body, but let it go easily and
lightly, for it is not strength that taken away the filth and dust, but only
the Adress and dexterity wherewith the Cumcomb is moved, that produces
cleanness.

The dust being thus taken away from the skin, he shall next take the Hair
e^wipeing cloth, (which is about half a yard of course linen or woolen
cloth, but many times they are made of hair) and holding it by one corner,
shall whisk all his body over to remove the loose dust that was upon his skin,
afterward with the same cloth he shall clean his Ears within and without,
rub him beneath the jaw-bones betwixt his legs before and thighs behind, and in
all other parts of the body which the Curry-comb cannot reach; then he shall
take the Brush, and pushing the head stall of the Watering-bit or Masticadour,
as far back as he can upon his Neck, ((...) if he have nothing but a binding he
shall wholly unty it,) he shall with his left Handtake hold of the lower part
of his Chin, and brush his head pretty hard beginning at the Forehead; but he
shall take care not to neglect his Eyes and Eye brows, because the dust cleaves
strangely to those places, and thus he shall continue to go over all the head,
always smoothing down the hair at the last; next he shall brush all his body,
and even his legs if the length of the hair will permit, and shall contime this
work, (still now and then cleaning the brush with the Curry-comb,) (...) he
perceive no more Scales, dust, or other nastyness upon the horse's bo^

He is moreover to Brush the Mane, both above, below, and within it, by
sepating the hair, that so he may take away the dust that cleaves to it; Last
of all, he shall (...) a wisp that is made of either Straw or Hay, twisted very
hard, about the bigness^ ones Arm, and a foot in length, which should be
moistened in a little water, (the which are made of Hay are the best for horses
which have a thin and tender skin^ with this he shall pass and repass the
horses whole Body, particularly his legs; for it ^ upon them that he is to
continue this work for a quarter or half an hour, to dive himself by rubbing
the nerves of the legs, above and below, with and against the (...) within the
pasterns, and upon the joints, that so no dust or foulness may rema^ upon them,
and that their hair may remain as bright and shining as that of the Man he
shall also with another wisp, if the first be much worn with rubbing, Chafe
the wh^^ nerves of the legs, from Top to Bottom, and from Bottom to Top, to
render (...) Supple, disobstruct them, and facilitate the passage of the animal
spirits which give them their motion; so that a Groom cannot rub too much a
horse's legs in the ^^^ing, and a good Hard-hay-wisp is an excellent
Stable-moveable: the Hay of th^^ wisps which have served a long time, if it be
opened out, dried, and given to ho^^ to eat, will give those which are
disgusted a good appetite, because of the salt^ the dust which has adhered to
the Hay, and penetrated it; I make frequently use^ them, provided their hay
have neither a rotten nor musty smell: there are m^^ Grooms who will not make
use of a Hard-wisp, as in Germany where it is not practied, but that is to
dress well the body and badly the legs; and a Body without (...) is in my
opinion of no great use.

Some again after they have gone over them with a moist wisp, have a piece
green Freize that they moisten with water, and with which they pass and re^ the
whole Body, to render the skin more Smooth and Glossy; this is good, hour few
French people make use of it, it was the Germans that introduced this meth^
which is a very excellent one: The English have Whisks of hair (called
Hair-cl^^^ that are very good, they are woven of gross hair thread, as the
country peoples course cloth is made of that of wool; with this they wipe
theirhorses and take away all the dust, rub them very well betwix the legs,
thighs, and all other parts of the Body whereat the Curry-comb and Brush cannot
come, after which they wash them in a pail of water, and so hang them up to
dry: I admire that the use of them has not been brought into France, especially
seeing they are both good and cheap, for in England they are very common.

There are some horses so very sensible and ticklish, that they will not suffer
the Curry-comb, yea with difficulty can they endure the Brush; these require to
be dressed only with the palm of ones hand, which is kept a little moist with
water, and past flat along the horle's Body as if he were Brushed, when the
hand is sufficiently charged with dust, then it is to be washed and half dried
and they continue thus to pass it with and against the hair, until they can
take away no more dust, and then at last they smooth down the hair, to make it
appear the more Glossy.

This method of dressing a horse is Tedious, but good, because it renders the
skin very beautiful, and keeps the body always clean; there is not a better
for this purpose, and those who have horses of a very tender and delicate skin,
should never suffer them to be dressed otherwise.

For large horses which have a fine skin, a Groom should make it his business
to dress them more with the Brush, and palm of his hand, than with the
Curry-comb, because as they have a desicate Coat, so the Curry-comb scratches
and galls them, which makes them oppose their keeper, and fret and torment
themselves to no purpose; whereas with a little more time, the Brush and hand
as I have directed, would keep them more clean and neat, without giving them so
much trouble with the Curry-comb.

When a horse is well dressed after this manner, his sweat when he is warm will
come from him clear as Water; if he be exactly well dressed the first day with
the hand, the next morning there will be almost nothing to do, but the first
time he is dressed after this fashion, it will take near three houts to make him
very clean, but afterwads one hour a day will be sufficient.

After all this, the Groom should Comb and Gently disentangle the hairs of his
Mane, beginning always at the lower parts of them and not at the roots, then
he shall take his Tail in a full handful, about a foot from the lower end, and
shall likewise gently rid and disentangle it with the Comb, ascending always
by degrees until it be all very well separate; there are some people who will
never suffer their horses Tails to be Combed, for fear they be pulled out and
shortened by it.

The Comb, being charged with dust, is to be washed, and every Groom when he is
dressing a horse should have a pail of Water by him; after he has as I have
ordered, unreveled and separate the hairs of the Mane and Tail, he must then
take a piece of sponge dipped in water, into the left hand, and the Mane-comb in
his right, and shall comb down the Mane beginning at it is root, and wetting it
with the sponge after each stroke of the Comb; next he shall comb the Tail
beginning also at it is root, and always smoothing down the hair upon the upper
part of his dock with the wet sponge, after which he shall wipe down the Mane
and Tail with a dry Hair-cloath, to remove any superfluous moisture.

When the Tail is foul and dirty, which frequently happens to white horses,
then it should be dipped and soak't a little in a pail of Water, and afterward
well scoured and rubbed betwixt ones hands; there are some who make use of
black soap, or white in its place when it cannot be had; others again cause
wash their horses tails once every day, and then truss or tie them up neatly,
that they may be preserved clean when they either go to the City or Country,
and if it be in the summer time, they also cause wash their horses Legs very
exactly with a wet sponge.

They likewise cause make, for that purpose, Brushes which are about four
fingers broad, and somewhat more then half a foot long, that with these they
may wash and scour their horses Legs, and clean them of all the dust that
cleaves to them; these Brushes should be made of Wild-Boar bristles, and well
pitched and rozen'd upon the top, that so the Water may not rot the pack-threed
which fixes the bristles to the wood, and those who will not be at this
expense, although small, take the half of any old Brush, wherewith they serve
themselves as with the former, after this manner; they first wash very well the
horses Legs, then rub them with the wet Brush which must be every moment dipped
into Water, the water which first comes from the Leg through the Brush, will
be white as milk, but the washing and rubbing must be still continued, till the
Water come away clear, and then the leg will be ab^ dantly clean; this
invention is excellent in the summer time, but not in Winter, (...) cause cold
water founders Light-sized horses, which are of a more delicate constitu^e than
others, however those who have fine horses and take delight in them, may in^^
summer time make use of this method.

The horse being thus Curryed and Dressed, they then put on his Sheet and
Mane-cloa^^ if he have one, and girt it on with a broad Sursingle or
Housing-girth, which (...) two little Cushions about the bigness of ones two
fists, fastened to it about half a (...) distant from other, and which are
placed one upon each side of the backbone wh^ the girth is to be fastened;
those two little Cushions facilitate a horse's breathing, (...) preventing his
being pressed by the Sursingle; then you shall turn him to the Mange and give
him some Hay, which you shall have before shaken, that so it may be bo^^ well
separate, and fred from its dust, before you throw it before him.

If people do not shake out that earth or dust, which has adhered to the gra^^
while it was growing in the meadow when the water overflowed it, and that (...)
water passes over it when it is yet uncut, and that the horse eat of this grass
when it (...) made hay, without being well shook and tossed, it will make him
cough extreme^^ and be prejudicial to his Lungs; as also, if the water happen
to overflow the meadow when the hay is cut, this kind of hay which has been in
a great part covered with the Mud of these overflowing Waters, although it be
afterward well dried, and also exactly shaken, yet is most prejudicial to
horses, and worse than the former: You are to suffer your horses which are
first dressed, to eat from the time they are dressed until nine a clock, and those
that are last, till ten.

Some people, so soon as their horses have eaten their Corn in the morning, and
art dressed, tie them up to the Rack till nine a clock, and this is very proper
for (...) which are very fat; but for these which need fatning, a man may order
them as I have directed, which is to suffer them to eat all the morning, except
when they are a dressing.

At Ten a clock or a little after, you shall lead your horses to the River; but
in summer time you may take them to it after eight, if you live in a convenient
place for it, because this quickens a horse, and makes him brisk and lively to
be watered abroad.

But if you cannot do better, then you may let them drink within doors, and
(...) be in Winter, having drawn their Water you shall observe if it be warm,
and to^ more certain of it you shall dip your hand in it, and if it be not, you
shall then th^^ some wheat bran amongst it, which is a thing both very proper,
and most wh^ some, but if it be in the summer time, and that you are obliged to
let them d^^^ Well-water, you must cause draw it a considerable time before you
suffer them to dr^^ it, and also cause set it in the sun, in clean Hogsheads
which have their heads koo^^ out, that so the great crudity of the water, which
is most prejudicial to horses, n^^ be corrected by the heat of the Sun.

Generally speaking, River Water is not so good in Winter as Well, because
(...) too cold, and if the Well-water be good, it is somewhat warmish when it
is immdiatly drawn, and consequently better than River.

When People lead their Horses to the River to drink, they should go softly to
(...) at a step, and if they are Coach-horses, should return from it at a short
Trot, (...) even at a step if they have a mind for it.

The English at coming our of the water, gallop commonly their running or
h^^ing horses for a quarter of an hour without Intermission, and almost at full
speed, the method may he good for them, but galloping after watering cannot but
be hurt^^ and so very prejudicial, that the horses accustomed to it, do either
soon or late beco^^ pursy by this rare method, upon which the English will bear
no reason that is give against it.

People must not be surprised, that I give so many precautions concerning
Wateing, for if you observe it narrowly and attentively, you will find that a
great man of the diseases which happen to horses, proceed from bad Water, or
from being w^tered unseasonably; the reason is, that the heat of the intrals
attracteth with a gr^^avidity and quickness, the liquor which the horse
drinks, and if it chance that the water be charged with any sharp mineral,
such as Alum, Bitumen, or any the li^^ without doubt that drink or liquor,
will leave some intemperature in the inward par^^ with some impression of a
strange or unnatural heat.

If the Waters be sharp or too crude, they leave behind them obstructions or
^^crudities, that are capable to hinder the necessary functions, which are
required to boil and perfect the Blood, which by that means gives occasion to
several sorts of diseases.

When you return with your horses from the water, you shall lash a little water
upon each leg with your two hands, and afterward wipe them down with straw, to
cause the water run off.

Some people, so soon as they return from the water, give their horses Oats,
but I think it is not a good method; because seeing a Groom who has Six horses
to look to, cannot take them all to the water but at Three times, if they were
accustomed to get Oats immediately as they come from the water, they would be
impatient waiting for the rest, would Bite and Strike at other, and eat no Hay
during all that time.

The Horse-coursers, who are understanding in their profession, as it is their
chief design to cause horses look plump, round, and full Flanked, cause them
drink in the Summer time by seven a clock in the morning, and give them no
drink at all in the Evening, that so they may drink the more heartily next
Morning, having been so long without it; after which they no doubt feed better,
and so appear more plump, and better Bellyed in the morning; then giving them
drink again at two a clock in the afternoon, they feed them after it, which
makes them appear full and round all the afternoon, and seeing they do not
show them in the nightime, they care not whether they then look well or not,
but suffer them to endure Thrist, that so they may drink the more heartily in
the Morning; this method is good to be practiced by those, who have no other
disign in showing their horses but to sell them, but for those who keep and
feed them for their own service, I assure you the method I have before
prescrived is better.

After you have then brought them from the water, you shall give them fresh
Hay, and suffer them to eat of it till Eleven or Tuelve a clock, at which time
you are to make clean the Manger, and give each of them two measures, or two
French pecks of clean sifted Oats, which is somewhat less than two English
quarts, which you are to suffer them to eat at their own ease; others again
give them only two such measures heaped of wet Bran, which is a very good
method for horses of manage, because it refreshes and cools them after their
violent exercise, and your larger sized horses stand also in need of moistning,
being generally of a hot constitution and full of fire.

After they have eaten their Oats or Bran, you are to put them upon a snaffle
or a vering-bit, their Tails being turned to the Manger, and let them stand
thus till four a clock in the Afternoon: People do not only put horses upon
the Snaffle (or Slavering-bit which is more proper) to prevent their eating,
but also to discharge their brains, this method causing them void a
considerable quantity of watery Phlegm, which cannot but be prejudicial were it
not evacuate, and which is a thing very well worth observation; for
notwithstanding that there was of old so many knowing Anatomists, they never
discovered till of late, the Vessels by which the Saliva or Spittle is conveyed
into the mouth: The Spittle falls from two small conduits, which take their
rise betwixt the Parotide Glands, and are insert between the two neither
jawbones below the Crotaphite Muscle, from whence by the motion of this Muscle,
and the Tongue, the humor or Spittle falls by degrees into the mouth; not so
much as one Author has mentioned these Salival Ducts or passages, their
discovery being only made lately at Paris.

This time that horses are suffered to stand upon the Slavering-bit, produces
a very good effect, for it helps the aliments which are frequently in too
great abundance in the stomach (especially being swallowed down with
greedyness) to digest, and gives also an appetite to those horses which want
one.

If the Groom in turning the horses from the Manger upon the Snaffle, observe
that they have not eaten all their Oats, without any manifest cause, then it is
a token that they are either disgusted or sick, he is therefore to put these
upon the Masticadour or Slavering-bit, iustead of putting them upon a Snaffle;
this Slavering-bit is a kind of Snaffle, which has two large Asses treads, the
one a little shorter than the other, and which are put into the horses mouth to
cause him Slaver, and thereby discharge his Brain, I have given the shape of it
in plat. 3. Fig. 13.

If a horse which eats not his Oats be simply disgusted, without any
appearance of sickness, and that he have his head heavy, his Eyes swelled, or
his Mouth foaming, and that there falls from the Bit a great deal of driveling
Slaver, which ropes almost to the very ground, you are then to take half an
Ounce of Assa-faetida, and wrapp^^ it up in a piece of linen cloth, tie it to
the middle of the Slavering-bit, which (...) cause him throw out a great deal
of those watery phlegms, and give him a good (...) petite; about four a clock,
or between four and five, turn your horse again (...) the Manger, suffering him
to eat his Hay till about Six, at which time (...) must take him again to the
water as in the morning; at Seven a clock, you (...) give him two more of the
above mentioned measures, or three if you please, (...) according as you find
the horse to need it; these measures as I have said contain (...) very near two
English quarts; after he has eaten his Oats, give him what wheat-S^^^ he can
eat till next morning, observing always to give him his Oats and water ^ near
together as you can, for the observation of this Rule or method is extre^^^
porfitable.

At nine a clock at night put a good deal of Litter beneath him, shaking it
(...) well forwards toward his forelegs, because horses do commonly in the
nightime thrust it too far back and almost behind them with their feet.

People give Wheat-straw to horses rather in the night time than in the day, to
(...) end that when they have ate the empty heads or Ears of it, and that which
is be^^ the rest being pulled down among their Feet may serve them for Litter,
for if the got it in the day time, it would not be possible to keep their
stable neat, seeing the^ would be always some straw lying amongst their Feet,
besides that the cool^^ of the night obliges them to eat it better, and the hay
which is given them i^ the day time, causes them to drink the more heartily,
and therefore it is very proper to give them always a little quantity of it in
the day time, to keep them plump and fat, although the Spanish horses in their
own Country are not suffered to taste it; their straw there is sweeter and
more juicy, where also the Barley which they (...) supplies the want of a
little hay, which People are necessitate to give them in (...) as well as their
other horses, although it should be but six or eight pounds a day, to some
moreand others less.

I am here discoursing of Spanish horses, Barbs, Turks, and other horses of
Manage of a light size; and I cannot understand why many people give to their
horses (...) in the day time, and hay in the night; because, besides what I
have said, it were (...) tainly very much to be wished that horses slept in the
nightime, which they (...) not so readily do if people give them good hay,
upon which they are a great (...) more greedy and bent than upon straw, and
whereof if they eat too much, it will^ be the better for them; indeed, horses
which are journeying would be but badly (...) dered, having traveled the whole
day, if people at night gave them only straw in pl^^ of good hay, and it is not
for these kind of horses that I write this Chapter, but (...) for extraordinary
horses, such as fine Hunters, and delicate horses of Mannag^ which labor
little, and only for their Masters divertisment and pleasure.

For Coach-horses, which stand commonly all day upon the street, or before a
g^^ as they have no time allowed them to eat hay but in the night, being
bridled (...) greatest part of the day, it is most proper, to give them hay in
the night ti^ and straw in the day.

Tie your horses in the night time with two bindings, that so they may not
(...) with those which stand next them, and the Ropes or Longes are to be so
long, as (...) they may easily lie down with them; the Cross-barrs which are
between the ho^^ should be of a good height, that is a little higher then their
hams, with Ropes fastend to the ends of them, whereby they are to be made fast
to the Posts, and which may (...) easily slackt at pleasnre without cutting
them, when it shall happen that the horses have Embarred themselves, or put
their Legs over the Bars; if it be a stable of consequence, People should
leave a burning Lamp in it all night: This is enough for horses which are plump
and in a good condition, but for these which are harassed, lea^ and light
bellyed, there are some other particulars to be observed, which I am going^
propose.

CHAP. LI. How horses which are Fatigued, Lean, and Light-bellyed, are to be
ordered and fed.
IN the Treatise of diseases or Second part, you will find remedies for horses
which are Sick for having suffered too much; our business in this place, CHAP.
LI How horses which are fatigued, lean, and light-Bellyed are to be fed
being only concerning their feeding; when a man returns from a long journey,
or the Army, with a great stable of horses, or that he has bought horses which
are harassed, lean, or light-bellyed, he must cause Curry and dress them as I
have been ordering for others, but for their feeding, you must observe First,
that there are horses (and even those of the greatest vigor and Mettle, which
will be sometimes so lean, that their skin cleaves to their very Ribs; they may
indeed eat, but they do not at all recover; therefore to fatten them you are to
give them only wet Bran, and administer two Glysters to them every day, one in
the Morning and another at Night, as I have ordered in the 68. Chap. of the 2d.
part. and Chapters following; after which make Baths for them, according to the
directions in the 35. Chap. of the 2d. part. Sect 3. and that not only for
their legs, but for their whole Body, as Shoulders, Sides, Croupe, and
Haunches, washing them well with the said Bath being lukewarm, which in proper
and Physical terms, is to make them a fomentation; being well-bathed and
washed, they are to be covered with a linen sheet well moistened in the warm
Bath, and above that with a couple of Coverings, which may for a long time keep
in the heat: you are to leave them thus till next morning, that you must begin
it a new again and continue it for Six or Seven days, you are during this
procedure to feed your horse well, keeping him in a warm place if it be in the
winter time, and in a temperate if in Summer, after which he will begin to
mend; at the end of seven or eight days, you are to forbear the baths and
glysters, and continue to feed him with Wet Bran, good Hay, and fresh Straw,
take from him one of the two coverings which were at first put upon him, and
five or six days after remove the other, and in place of it put on another
which is more light, that so his skin which has been made tender by bathing,
may return to its natural strength and firmness, for did you not observe this
precaution, the horse would immediately Founder; so long as you make use of the
bath, you are not to Curry or Comb him, but only rub him well with a hay-wisp
moistened in the warm bath, for a full quarter of an hour before you begin to
foment and wash him with it; if you have a mind during the use of the bath, to
cause him eat every day, two ounces of the Foye or Liver of Antimony in fine
powder amongst his wet bran, I assure you it will profit him much, cheer up his
inward parts, and even open the pores of his skin, that so the virtue of the
bath may the more easily penetrate it; this is the method to detatch or
separate horses skins from their bones, for so long as they have them bound and
cleaving hard to them, they will never fatten and become plump.

If it be in the spring time, green barley is admirable good for young horses
which are over-rid, lean, and have as yet their flanks sound, although they are
become contemptible by their being too much Fatigued.

You are to observe, that there are two sorts of green Barley, that which is
sown before Winter, called Winter-Barley (in French Esturgeon,) which is ready
for eating against the end of April, and the Barley which they sow in the Month
of March, and is not fit for eating until the end of May, (new style) or a
little earlyer if the Season be advanced; people give neither of these green
Barleys to horses, until it be beginning to Spindle, that is to say well shot,
because the would both eat too much of it, and it would also pass too quickly
in their Body while it is so tender.

The green Barley which is sown in Winter, fattneth horses sooner than that
so^^ in the Spring, but then this last Purges better, and gives them, as we
say, a ne^ Body.

So soon as this Barley is in it is Case, or beginning to Spindle, and that it
is fit (...) cutting, bleed your horse, and give him as much of it as he will
eat, observing a ways to cut it when the dew is upon it; to wit, (...) before
Sunrising for (...) day time, and after Sunset for the night: You are to give
it them little by little, a^ as it were but in handfulls, for after horses have
once blown or breathed much upon it, they will not any more meddle with it; you
are also, if you observe that the dew^ all exhaled, and that the Barley
remains quite dry, to sprinkle it with a (...) water, every time you give it
them.

People commonly sow Barley at different times, that so they may have it as
tend at the end of the Month, as at the beginning, because when once it
comes fully (...) the Ear, it is not so profitable and wholesome; it is
therefore very fit that you ca^ divide your Field into four parts, and every
eight or tenth day cause sow a quart of it, for so that which is sown first
will be fit for eating, when the last is only a pearing above ground; or divide
your Enclosure only in three, if you intend but (...) feed your horses with it
for three weeks, which is sufficient for some, but then you are to cause sow it
extraordinary thick, and with three times as much as for o^^^^ry use, because
Barley which is designed to be eaten when green, cannot possibly (...) sown too
thick.

There are some People, who while their horses are eating green barley, will
(...) suffer them to be curryed, nor allow their Litter to be changed, but
suffer them (...) stand among their Urine and Dung for the space of eight
days; and this method (...) pretty good for such as have their skins cleaving
to their bones, or very hard and dry^ because these excrements do open the
pores of the skin, and then afterward the body transpires so much the better,
but after eight days they should be made clean, their Litter every day
renewed, and afterward always very well Curryed and dressed; for I have seen
several, whose skins have been fretted and cauterized, for having be^^ suffered
to stand too long amongst their Dung and Urine; also if People are in a
^^venient place to send them once a day to the River, to wash their Legs, it
will^ very well: There are few Grooms who will be of this Opinion, because they
(...) very glad to have so much spare time from dressing their horses, having
in a ma^^ during that space nothing else ado, but to throw their meat before
them.

CHAP. LII. How to Fatten horses with Grass, or green Barley.
WHen people would fatten young horses which are very low, CHAP. LII How to
fatten horses with grass, or green Barley,
with gr^^ Barley, they are in the first place to give them tuice a day dry
brank if they be reasonably plump, then there is no need of giving it the
twice, for once will be sufficient, and that about mid day; and seeing horses
w^^ eat green Barley have frequently their teeth set on edge by it, I have found
out a (...) thod which will make them eat it with ease, Cool them, purify
their Blood, and ^^vent that Corrnption which is engendered by worms, in the
bodies of such horses (...) are thus at soil: You are therefore once a day when
you give your horses Bran, to mix with it two ounces of the Liver of Antimony
in fine Powder, it is always supposed, that you have moistened the bran a
little before hand with water, that so the powder because of it is weight may
not fall to the ground, for in that case the horse would not eat it, and it is
likewise to be supposed, that the horse to whom you give it is young; continue
to cause your horse eat it after this method so long as he is eating either cut
grass or green barley, and he will recover more in one Month with it, then he
would do otherwise in Six.

The method of making the Liver of Antimony or Imperial Powder, is set down in
67 Chap: of the 2d. part, Sect. 14.

Don't apprehend this remedy at which so many people are afraid, for it is
nowise Purgative to horses, but cordial, and sometimes Diuretic, and for the
most part works all its Effects by insensible transpiration; I know the
success of it so very well, having given it after so many different fashions,
that I can assure you, you will receive a great deal of satisfaction from it: I
shall not enlarge here upon the good effects which Antimony has upon horses,
according to its different preparations, but shall discourse of it hereafter,
however I am the first who ever made use of it for horses, and discovered the
great advantage it brings them.

You are to bleed your horses which have ate green barley, so soon as you put
them again to their hard meat, that is, to Hay and Oats.

I shall here give an advice to those who cause their horses eat green winter
barley, That there are some years, in which there happens cold Brizes, which
proceed from the North winds during that time of year they are at soil, so that
if they do not take care to cover them well, and to keep the Stable very warm,
they will become foundered; now if there happen any to founder while they are
eating their green Barley or grass, immediately Blood them in the Neck and
afterward give them of the stinking pills described in the 85. Chap. of the
2d. part Sect. 3. and according to the directions there set down; neither are
you to forbear the giving them their green Barley, for I assure you they will
recover and be restored again to their health, which I have had proof of many a
time.

I have known some years, in whch there were more then fifty horses foundered
in one little Village near Paris, called La Vilette, where people commonly
graze their horses, and that by reason of a cold wind which happned while they
were a grazing.

If you are in a place where you have the convenience of turning your horses to
grass, they will be very much the better of it if they be young; there are some
also which agree very well with eating green Barley after they are done with
grazing.

About Parts, where the green winter Barley can be easily had, a man may give
it to his horses before they be turned to Grass, because that is a great deal
sooner ready than this, but where he can get no other Barley than that which is
sown in the Spring, then the grass is many times in a condition, and ready to
be given before the Barley, which is commonly later.

To give a young horse Methodically grass in the feilds, until he be seven or
eight years old, you are first to bleed him in the neck, and then to turn him
to grass two days thereafter, taking care that it be always so well grown,
that the horse may feed heartily upon it, and you shall there leave him both
night and day for a Mouth and more, without either Currying or dressing him,
and without giving him any other kind of food, but his grass.

Grass charged with dew purges a Horse, by evacuating all the bad humors
which he may have in his Body, and then it afterward fattens; the dew also
besides this, contribures to the recovery of spoilt legs, by drying up all the
superfluous humors which they may have in them, and if a horse have any kind
of itch or mange, the grass will recover him: In fine there are few diseases in
young horses, for which grass is not a sovereign remedy, except the Farcy,
Glanders, and Pursyness, to which it is a great Enemy, as Experience will
discover to you, contrary to the opinion of many: Grass is whole some and
profitable for young horses, but Coldeth those which are Aged.

When a horse is at grass, he should have water given him only at Twelve a
clock, and in the Evening.

In excessive hot weather the grass becomes hard and is no longer wholesome,
and in hot countries the flies do so mightily incommode them in the Meadows,
that they cannot with ease remain in them, however notwithstanding of both
these, People (...) not scruple to give their horses grass while in the Army,
but there they can do (...) better, besides that such grass with Oats is a
pretty good food.

The Reguain, as the French call it, or second growth of Grass, is worth
nothing (...) borses neither green nor in hay, those who give it to them do
wrong, and it may (...) be the occasion of several bad accidents: It is an old
Maxim, that the dew of M^^ fattneth the horse, but macerates the Ox, and that
upon the contrary, the dew of Ang^^ fattens the Ox, but macerates the horse.

Every horse which has either eaten cut green Barley, grass, or has been
turned (...) graze in the Fields, should eat hay and oats ten or twelve days
at least, before he (...) put to any violent exercise; immediately when horses
are taken from Grass they should be bled, and afterward brought to their wind
by degrees; after they come from the grass I would also judge it very proper,
to give them half an ounce of good swe^ Sublimate in powder, in a pound of
Fresh Butter, with two ounces of the Cord^^ powder, being all well wrought
together and made into Balls, which you are to cause him swallow with an
English quart of Claret Wine, and which will drive away and kill all the Worms,
which the green Barley or grass do many times breed and learn behind them; if
you cannot conveniently get sweet Sublimate, or that it be ve^ dear, then give
hi^ in a pound of Butter, four ownces of Cinnabar or Vermilion (...) fine
powder, with the foresaid two ounces of the Cordial powder, mixed all well
altogether and formed into Balls, which you are also to cause him swallow with
the abovementioned quantity of Wine, and this will give Chase to and destroy
all the Vermin which he can possibly have in his body.

CHAP. LIII. A continuation of the Method for recovering Horses, which are
harassed and lean after a long journey.
THE most part of Horses which are Fatigued or over-rid, CHAP: LIII A
continuation of the method for recovering horses which are harassed and lean.
and made le^ by it, have their Flanks altered without being Purly, particulary
Vigo^^^ horses which have wrought too violently, but above all the Cravates are
(...) Subject to it; there is no better method to recover them, than to give
them in the morning half a pound of honey very well mixed amongst some scalded
Bran, (...) when they shall eat well the half pound, give them the next time a
whole one, (...) then afterward two pounds every day, continuing it, until by
long eating of it y^^ find that your horses empty and purge well with it; when
you preceive that the no longer purge, then forbear to give them any more
honey, but not sooner; or you have not a mind to give them honey, then give
them amongst their scald^ Bran, the powder of Liquorish for a confiderable
time; you may also during this the give them Three or Four Glysters, to cool
their Blood, and evacuate the (...) humors which are contained in their
intestines, and which will also give t^^ane apetite.

If their Flanks don't recover, then give them to eat of a powder for Pursy
hor^s described in the 65. Chap. of the 2d. part, Sect. 8. all horses are not
to be put upon the Slavering-bit alike, therefore you are to Suffer those which
are lean to (...) longer than the rest, and when they forbear eating, then you
are to put th^^ upon the Snaffle or Slavering-bit, and let them continue so for
ane hour, after wh^^ you shall turn them again to the Manger,

When the Groom goes to bed at night, it is very proper that he give those
horses which are very lean, two measures or French pe^ks of wet Bran (which is
somewhat less then four English Quarts) over and above their ordinary
proportion of Oats.

It is very fit also for such horses as are extraordinary lean, to give them
among their Oats, some of the powder described in the 66 Chap. of the 2d. part,
Sect. 2. you are likewise to give to those horses which are very Light-bellyed,
a good handful of wheat in the Morning before watering, and continue it for
some days, suffering them to eat Hay as well in the night time as in the day,
and to give them but little or no wheat straw at all; Grass is excellent for
such kind of horses.

If it be a Mare which is very Light-bellyed, you must cause give her a Horse,
because if she has never had a Foal before, this will stretch and enlarge her
Belly.

In fine, you are to give to all horses which you intend to fatten, a greater
proportion of oats, then to those which are a ready plump and in a good
condition.

Some people say, that it is a very good receipt for fattening a horse, to
cause rub his Tail tuice a day, with the Oats which he has left uneaten before
him in the Manger, but betuixt too much and too little, as well in Food as in
Labor or exercise, there is a middle that is far better then the extremes,
which are always hurtful.

Sometimes by feeding a horse too strongly, a man does him more prejudice than
good, and People will observe them without any manifest cause to sweat in the
stable, especially when they sleep, and that although the Stable be neither
kept too warm, nor the horse too much Covered; if you perceive this happen to
your horses, it is a certain sign that they eat too much, for it is the same
with them as in men, according to Hippocrates in his Aphorisms: Sudor multus ex
somno citra manifestam causam ciens, corpus multo alimento uti significat. If
after the retrenching his allowance of Food, he still continue to sweat, he
does then in that case stand in need of purging, according to the same
Aphorism: si vero cibum non capienti hoc fiat, significat quod evacuatione
opus habet: You shall therefore purge and repurge him, after which, he will
recover more in the space of fifteen days, than he would have done in a Month,
had he not been thus thoroughly purged.

Although I allege great difficulties in purging horses without a necessity,
nevertheless when People know certainly that it is needful, they are to pass
over these confiderations, and purge them according to the precautions I shall
give hereafter, when I discourse of Purging.

You are to observe, that lean, fatigued, and over-rid horses, which People
would suddenly fatten, by feeding them excessively without any kind of order or
rule, are subject to take the Farcy; therefore to prevent this, you are not to
give them so great a quantity to eat at a time, and are also to take a little
Blood of them now and then.

It is likewise to be remarked, that every horse which drinks lustily will be
quickly restored, and mend sooner than he that drinks little, and when a
horse begins to drink heartily, it is a certain sign that he will in a short
time recover.

The best method for horses which eat too greedily, is to spread well their
Oats, and scatter them in the Manger, because having some difficulty in
gathering them up, they can neither eat them in such haste, nor swallow them
unchawed.

To feed with straw very small cut, is an invention much made use of in
Germany, which is a very good one; they have in that Country, people who have
no other employment but to cut straw, which they sell in their shops by the
bushel, as they do Oats.

Cut straw mixed with Oats, is excellent to prevent a hors's eating of them too
greedily; besides that it being of it self a very good food, is mighty
wholesome for them.

But to fatten a horse which has his Flanks a little altered, you are to throw
a good handful of Oats amongst a French Bushel of cut straw, which is somewhat
less than twelve English quarts, and moistning all with a little water, give it
thus to the horse, for this mixture of the Oats will cause him to eat his
straw, and so to become plumpand fat without stuffing his belly with hay: There
are several kinds of Inventions for cutting straw, therefore every man may
cause do it after his own method, but that which is smallest cut is the best.

CHAP LIVE. Of the Food and Entertainment of horse of Manage.
BEsides what I have already said, CHAP. LIVE. Of the Food and Entertamment of
horses of Manage.
of the ordering and entertainment (...) horses of value, which are properly
the horses of Maunage, there are (...) some other things to be observed, while
they are actually working, and (...) they daily ride in the manage.

The most part of Overseers or Masters of Academies, give their horses no (...)
the morning before their manage, and only give it them two times a day, at
twelve a clock and at night; this method they say is good, because it both
saves ch^^g^^ and a horse is more gentle, and goes better when his belly is not
too full; for (...) think the contrary, especially for those which are obliged
to work till twelve a (...) because during such a long Interval, their natural
heat so consumes them, that th^^ cannot be so plump and lusty as they ought, to
be excellent and good; therefore think it is very proper to give them some Oats
in the Morning: This method (...) theirs of giving their Oats at two times a
day only, is supportable for horses which either ride little in the Manage, or
which never go to a Campaign, but for these which are obliged to travel, or
follow the Army, they should be fed at three times because it is more
profitable for them, disgusting them less, and digesting a gre^^ deal better:
It Is true that at last there is this inconveniency, that having once got ^
habit to eat their Oats at three times, when they come again to ride in the
mann^^ and to have none given them in the morning, their whole thoughts and
attention upon their Oats, so that their imagination is otherwise taken up,
than with wh^ man is teaching them, besides that they are too empty for
performing so violent (...) exercise: Those who give their horses no Oats in
the Morning, make a very (...) husbandry, according to the Horse-coursers
Maxim, that by seeding well a (...) gains not much, but by feeding too
sparingly he loses all.

Therefore I think it most proper, to give to all kinds of horses their Oa^s
three times a day, but then the first must be by four a clock in the Morning,
if a (...) design to work them at six, and by three, if he have a mind to ride
them at five, (...) so during those two hours of interval, their Oats may be
half digested.

In fine, all sorts of horses would have a regular method of feeding; the (...)
those of greatest value as the most noble and delicate, require the greatest
(...) There is nothing which makes a horse become so soon lean, as to be long
without ^^^ing, for it diminishes his vigor, and as the natural heat is never
idle, so wh^^ (...) has no subject to work upon, it acts against the proper
parts of the body, (...) drying them up, destroying their just temperature, and
dissipating their (...) substance.

This is an inconveniency, to which these horses are subject, which (...) but
one continued March of a days journey, and which is commonly practi^^ by such
as conduct a great Stable of horses, or a considerable Equipage; but that wh^^
should be observed in this case, is to be but only six or seven hours upon your
jou^^^^ when you can so order it as to get it done.

After your horses of Manage have ate their Oats in the Morning, you are to
(...) dress them slightly, by only removing the coursest dust which is upon
their skin, (...) help of the brush and hair cloth; if nevertheless your Groom
have the time, it is (...) fit to cause dress them thoroughly, after which he is
to saddle them neatly, taking (...) that the points of the fore-bows be placed
straight above the horse's (...) which are placed near his belly opposite to
the places where the girths are fastened, (...) marked in the Fig: of the first
plate, with Numb: 16.

People should always place great Saddles, more forwards than hunting Saddles,
because if they are set too far back and as the Hunting Saddles commonly are,
their Bows, which are ordinarily large, and therefore troublesome to the horse,
will hinder the motion of his shoulders; the horse, being thus saddled, is to
have his Bridle put into his head, care being always taken not to pull out the
hair of his fore-top, as it is frequently the custom for Mal-adroit Grooms to
do; and after your horse has done riding, if he sweat much, you are immediately
to cause lead him to the stable if you are near it, and if it be at a distance,
then you are to take him into some sheltered place for a short time, until you
have caused scrape the sweat from him.

But if you are near to the stable, then immediately when you have brought him
to it, put him upon the Snaffle, or rather Masticadour, and having taken off
his saddle, take a Sweating-knife or Scraper, whereof you may see the figure in
the 1. plate, and holding it with both your hands, and also taking care not to
cut him with it, scrape off all the sweat which is upon his whole body, going
always with the hair, as you scrape and make use of the knife.

Having scrap't off exactly his sweat, rub and wipe his head very well both
above and below, with a good large hair-cloath, because being suffered to
remain moist, it is many times the cause of defluxions; wipe him also betwixt
his fore and hind Legs, and then with clean straw rub him carefully over all
the body, particularly beneath his belly, after which cover him very well, and
so leave him until he be perfectly dry: Those who delight extraordinarly in
their horses, cause rub them always with straw until they be thoroughly dry,
and the method is good.

A horse which has sweat much through excessive labor, being exactly wipt
down and covered, if the Alley or walk of your stable be long enough cause lead
him up and down in it for a quarter of an hour, and if it be in the summer
time, you may cause lead him in ones hand without doors, but if you have no
place which is temperate and warm, then suffer him to dry where he stands.

Horses of manage which have swet extremly, should never be suffered to drink
before they are thoroughly cooled, and have ate some Oats, for I have known
many, which for having drunk too soon, have either dyed by it, or become very
sick.

The most part of Grooms fancy that their horses have the same impatience, and
inclination to drink that they themselves have which is the reason that they
make always so great haste to give it them; but you are to keep to this Maxim,
that a horse will never be the worse to be kept half a day from drinking, and
may come to dye for having drunk but one hour too soon, which I have told you
many times aleady, and cannot repeat it too often.

CHAP. LV. Of the Food and Entertainment of Coach-horses.
PEople do not feed Coach horses, CHAP. LV. Of the food and entertainment of
Coach-horses.
as they do those of whom I have been immediately discoursing, because they are
but too long upon the Slavering-bit or snaffle, when they stand seven or eight
hours before a gate, and therefore it is somewhat difficult to regulate their
Food, which should not only be good, but also hay and oats in abundance, as I
shall show you hereafter.

There are horses both in Paris, and which belong to the Stage-Coaches, which
will not eat a hundred pownd weight of hay in a whole month but live almost
only upon Oats, which is a truth very easy for any man to be certainly
informed of; these kind of horses do not last long, because they become either
Pursy, Mangie, or dye of the Farcy. In many places of France such as Brie and
Beauce^ the Country peoples (...) bouring horses eat no hay, from the time
that their Corns are sown until the Spring but then they have for it Pease or
fitch-straw, and the small or refuse of wheat-(...) besides that they give them
always before their water a large double handful, grain, such as Rye, wheat,
or other such stuff, they don't much regard whi^^ and then their Oats after
water; and with this kind of feeding, their horses (...) well, are plump, and
well coated, but then they are subject to the Mange, and (...) to the Farcy, by
reason of this hot kind of feeding.

The most considerable precaution, that people should observe in ordering (...)
horses, is to keep their Legs always clean; to perform which methodically,
(...) are after they return from the City or Traveling, to wash their Legs
with wate^ until it come perfectly clean from them; It is not enough to take
them to the Ever to wash their Legs, and take the dirt from them which they
have gathered (...) whole day long, but you are also when they return to the
stable, to cause wash the a new again, to remove that which they have
contracted betwixt the River and yo^ Lodging, and then afterward to cause wipe
them well down with straw; for I (...) ways suppose that they have been well
dressed in the Morning with the Curry-co^^ Brush, and hard Hay-wisp especially,
for a pretty time, that their skins have been made clean both within and above
the hair, and that their Legs have been like^^ extremely well rubbed, to
dissipate the superfluous humors which gather in the^ parts, and that also so
soon as the least clift or crevis in their heels is discov^ that you cause
immediately take care of it, because many times great and consider^^ infirmities
in the Legs, begin by a little crevis, to which if there be put a (...) all the
rest will be prevented.

The reason why there must be such care taken about Coach-horses legs, is the
they almost all perish that way, because the Mud or Dirt of the Streets which
(...) amongst the Hair, as it is sharp and piquant (especially in Paris) so it
fires and cauterizes the Skin like to a Vesicatory or Blystering plaster, and
this corrupted (...) being in the lowest parts of the Body, to which all the
numours have a nature ^^dency, and Coach-Horses being for the most part of a
phlegmatic temper, being been bred up in moist and Marish Countries, and being
much charged with flesh do drain themselves upon these badly affected parts, so
that the infirmity (...) through negligence, does at last spoil, and wholly
ruin the horses Legs.

These humors which commonly fall down upon the Legs, and which are corr^^
stinking, and of a whitish color, called in French Des Eaux, are abundantly
(...) of themselves to occasion this, because they corrode the Skin or Hide,
however the^ Acrimony is augmented by that of the Dirt or Mud, which at last
produces such (...) effects, that the legs are putrified by it; and if it shall
happen that the horse (...) an impure body, that impurity finding a weakness in
these parts, and still a less (...) sistance from them, does at last take its
course and channel that way, with such ^^niatrety, that it is very difficult to
divert it, or make a revulsion, and it is this which produces these big and
ugly warts or excrescences upon the Legs, called in Friend des Poireaux, which
are almost always incurable, and all the other like infirmit^s particularly in
the hind-legs.

Horses which do not travel amongst durty and muddy ground, but in a dry
Country, yet if they have fat and fleshy Hams, are also subject to the
infirmities of it hind-legs, but if these labored or traveled in plashy
grounds, or highways, (...) Infirmities of their Legs would prove then a
great dale worse.

You shall find in the 114 Chap. Sect. 3, 4, 5, etc. of the 2d part, proper
remedies for the cure of these Infirmities; but to the end you may not stand in
need of them, you should observe the precautions which I have given, the chief
of which for Coach-horses, is to cause brush and rub well their legs with a
hard Hay-wisp, and so to keep them very neat and clean.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Quantity of Food, which should be given to all sizes of
Horses.
IT remains that we consider the ordinary proportion of food, CHAP. LVI. Of the
quantity of food which should be given to horses
which should be given to all kinds of horses during a natural day, which is
twenty four hours, regulating our selves upon the Botte or bundle of Hay, which
weighs betwixt Ten and Twelve Pounds, and upon the Bottles of Wheat-Straw which
are betwixt Eight and Nine, the French-Peck or Measure of Oats, which weighs
three pounds or thereby, and the Paris Setier, which contains about Sixscore
pecks, because there are in it Twenty large Bushels at six Pecks in the Bushel,
but Twenty four of these Bushels commonly sold by the Corn-Chanalers, or
Oat-Merchants.

Nota. A French peck is somewhat less than two English Quarts, and the pound
here mentioned, as well as through this whole work, contains sixteen English
Ounces. For the further knowledge of Weights and Measures, see the Table at the
beginning of this part.

A Horse of manage should have for his ordinary one Botte, or Eleven pound
weight of fresh and good Hay, such as that which grows in the Meadows of
Nogent, upon the River Seine, because a Botte of such Hay will nourish him
better than two of that which is very small, and which therefore passes too
quickly; those then who live at a great distance from the River of Seine,
should make it their business to seek after the strongest Hay for Horses,
provided it be neither Rushy nor Sprat^y, which make but bad Hay; that wherein
there is much Clover is absolutely the best: A Botte of Straw, and three
Measures of Oats, whereof there are six (as I said) in the Bushel, with two
heaped Measures of Bran at Twelve a Clock especially, and the Straw which he
leaves of the abovementioned proportion, will serve for his Litter.

A Hunter or Journey-Pad of a reasonable size, will eat more Hay although his
labor be not so violent, both because they are commonly longer of Body, and
also that when they go to the Feilds to hunt, they are a long time without
eating; therefore they must have more food to keep them always in good case, so
that people should give to them a Botte and a half of Hay, a Botte of Straw,
and four Measures of Oats.

A large Galloway or Summer-Pad, two Bottes of Hay in three days, and each day
a Botte of Straw with two Measures of Oats, besides one of Bran at twelve a
clock.

The lesser size of Galloways, or Summer little Nags, two Bottes of Hay in
three days, and the like quantity of Straw, but then two Measures of Oats given
at three times in the day, will be abundantly sufficient.

As Coach-Horses are larger than any of these abovementioned, so they require
a greater allowance of food, therefore if they are very large, five Bottes of
Hay, and three Bottes of Straw betwixt the two, and six measures of Oats to
each, that is the Setier should serve them both for ten days; but if they are
horses only of a middle size, then four Bottes of Hay and three of Straw
betwixt the two, and five Measures of Oats to each will serve; however some
people give only four of Oats, but it is too small an allowance, if they work
much.

In fine, I am of opinion that it is an excellent Maxim, to feed well such
horses as work, as also these which do not; for it is a true Proverb, that
there should be no such thing, as Oats resting or not made use of.

A Setier of Oats, will serve two of the largest size of Coach-horses ten days,
although they work very hard, and twelve if but moderatly; to the common or
ordinary size of Coach horses, the Setier will last twelve days between the
two, and to the smallest size it will serve fourteen; but a man is always
according to their violent, moderate, or very small exercise, to regulate
himself for the just distribution of their food.

When once horses are very plump, and well accustomed for a long time to
Hard-meat, they are nourished, and maintain themselves in that condition with a
very little food; for example, I have known in Paris extraordinary large
Coach-horses, (...) did not eat each of them in twenty four hours above an
Botte of Hay, and a (...) straw, the Setier of Oats lasted them both a
fortnight, and yet they were (...) very fat and in good case; It is true indeed
that their labor was but moderate, and quently interrupted, that is they had
many days of rest, and before they were reduc^ this small allowance, they were
continually sick, but thereafter kept their health (...) well: Now if any Man
should offer to regulate his horse's food according to this p^^tion, without
considering whether or not they be already in a good case, or have of a long
time accustomed to Hard-meat, would I assure you be deceived, for they only
those horses which are very fat, that can be maintained with so little food,
(...) must they also be suffered to work too excessively.

The Wheat Bran which is given to Coach-horses, should not be reckoned as (...)
of their food, except they be either extraordinary light-belly'd, very young,
or excess^ overheated in their bodies, which you may easily discover, by the
hardness; blackness of their Dung.

Cut-Straw is very good to be given them amongst their Oats, and in other (...)
they are to be ordered as the rest of your horses.

Every Man who has good horses, should cause take a special care of them,
(...) they are worth his pains, and for that effect if he can have his choice
of a Stable, shall have it well aired, and not at all moist; for Humidity is a
great enemy to (...) and brings many inconveniences along with it, therefore
except in a dry and (...) foundation, all stables beneath ground are moist, and
consequently worth (...) the Windows should be to the North if possible, and
the whole Stable kept very (...) however without Stiffling, and it is upon this
account that the Vaults which are too^^ are unwholesome, because they are almost
as hot as Ovens; the Manger should be (...) three or four foot high, a foot and
a half broad, and as much in depth, provide that the Stall be full four foot
high, which is the greatest height it should (...) the largest size of Horses,
but for the middle three foot and a half is sufficient, and for (...) least, or
Galloway Nags, three, because for this last size, this height of the Manger
(...) judged abundantly sufficient, for if it were heigher, it would oblige
them (...) stretch too much their necks before they could reach the bottom of
the manger, Heck or Rack perpendicularly fixed, because in those which slop
forwards, the (...) and short hay falls from them, and so durties the horse's
head and Mane: In (...) where there are a great number of horses, the best way
is to have no Rack at all, cause the Grooms which should be continually near
them, will give them their by degrees, and so it will be better freed from its
dust, as it is just untyed and (...) out of the Bottle, which is a thing not
very commonly practiced, for the (...) men and Grooms do generally throw the
Bottles of hay into the Rack, hard tied and without so much as the least
untying or dusting it, which is a bad custom, (...) cause if you cause dust it
well, and but give it them little by lttle, it will them a great deal more good
than if you should give it all at once, as those lazy (...) slothful Grooms do.

The measures and dimensions of a Stable within the walls, are eighteen or two
foot for one range of horses, to wit, ten foot for the length of the horse
where stands, and eight or ten foot for the Alley or Walk, and so
proportionably (...) Stable of two ranges; there must be allowed seven foot and
a half for the stan^^ two horses, which is about eight inches for the
Mid-pillar, and about three (...) inches for the place of each horse: For the
rest see Chap.: 50. at the end. A (...) not want good models both in France and
England, whereby he may be inst^^^ in the building a convenient Stable,
especially in France that of Merlow in (...) pleasure house of the Constables
of Mommorancy, the Kings Stables both the great and lesser, the Stables of
Cardinal Mazarin, those of Chilly belonging to Monsieur (...) those of Maison,
which are of a very odd and extraordinary fashion, and many (...) any of which
patterns a man may make Choice of according to his fancy; these (...) excellent
Models, and there are also very fine ones about London, but it is permitte^ few
private persons to imitate them, because of their vast charges and cost.

The movables of your Stable should be, a good English Curry-comb for (...)
Saddle-horses, which should be strong and light, a Brush of wild Boares
briffles Main-comb either of Box-wood or Horn, a large Sponge, a Brush for Wal^
and Scouring the legs, a large wipeing cloth of course linen or hair, and one
(...) of green freez, a Sweating-Knife or Scraper, a watering bit or large
Snaffle, a Ma^^ dour or Slavering-bit, a Caparasson, sheet, or covering, a
Mane-cloath, Surfingle^ Howsing-girth, a pail for water, two Forks, one of wood
for trussing up the litter, and the other shod with Iron for forking up the
straw or hay, either to the Loft, or to the Rack before the horses; a Shovel, a
Broom, a Measure for Oats, a small Seive to clean them from the Dust, a pair of
Lunets or leather spectacles for vicious horses, a pair of Sizars for trimming
his Mane, Tail, and fore-top, and lastly a Picking-iron for his Feet, of all
which, as well as of the principal instruments belonging to a Farrier, you may
see the figures in the 1. and 6 Plates. You are also to be well provided with
good Hay, good Oats and wheat Bran, good straw, and a good and careful Groom,
but above all with a diligent and observing Eye, without which all these
abovementioned movables, will be but of very little use.

CHAP. LVII. Some Reasons, why Horses should be always covered in the Stable.
BEfore I put a close to this discourse of ordering and dressing horses, CHAP
LVII. Why horses Should be always covered in the Stabie.
I shall give some Reasons that may convince people, of the benefit their
horses receive by being covered, all the twelve Months of the Year, but
especially in the Winter season; I believe no man doubts, but that it is first
to preserve them from dust, and to give them a good Coat, but horses are also
covered, that they may be defended from the Cold, which is as great an Enemy to
them as to men; besides that a horse being well covered, has more heat to
digest the food he eats, because the external heat assists his internal or
natural.

Cold condenses the skin, closes the pores, and hinders the transpiration of
those vapors, which are (as I have already explained) the excrements of the
third concoction.

Excessive Cold Chills the internal heat, and therefore makes the hair to
stare, which rendereth a horse ugly and deformed how agreeable soever he may be
any other way; whereas a good covering will keep his hair smooth, slickt, and
beautiful.

Some people, to preserve horses from the cold, close up all the windows and
other opens in the stable, which renders it unwholesome, because Cold and the
agitation of the Air, are very proper to purify it, and therefore in some
measure necessary; if there be then any Malignity in it, it will lurk there,
which would be prevented, if by covering the horses people give them so much
Air, as not to be in danger of being stiffled; and moreover if there be amongst
them any horse which has weak Eyes, such warm stables will complete the eutire
spoiling of them.

People cover horses of Value in the Summer time, with a single sheet only, and
which is made of a kind of thin linen, with a cross work upon it, called about
Paris limber Buckram or Trelis, and which is made use of in that Season,
chiefly to defend them from the dust, and importunity of the flies.

The English cover their horses of Value in the Winter time, with a linen
sheet and covering above it, and suffer them to lie with it all night; for my
part I think they are in the right in so doing, but as people should shut, and
make their stables more closs in the night time than in the day, so I am of
opinion, they should take off their upper covering or sheet in the night time,
when they are not sick, and put it on again in the day, because seeing the
stable is abundantly warm in the night time being made so very closs, and that
the horses also sleep, their bodies will transp^ sufficiently well with the
single sheet, especially not being hindered by any excessi^^ Cold; however that
method of the English is not prejudicial to this because would seem that the
upper covering which they put upon their horses, does contrib^^ to the better
transpiration of these fuliginous vapors, wherewith horses do so ^tremly
abound.

If there are many horses in a stable, they should be but slightly covered in
the day time, because the heat and breath of so great a number of horses, does
abundantion warm it, and therefore in that case the only use of covering is to
keep down (...) hair, and make it smooth: The Latin proverb says, Pili
frigore rigescunt, and (...) a proof of this, let a man dress a horse only very
moderatly in the Winter time, (...) cover him well, and he will have a good and
smooth skin, although dusty and (...) and again let him Curry and rub another
horse two hours every day, yet if the (...) be either cold, or that he stand
uncovered, he will have his hair stareing and sta^^ing almost upright, which is
called a planted-Coat; Geldings are more subject to the then stoned horses, and
in well ordered Riding schools, a man will never see horse which have their
hair long and stareing, even although there may be among the^ some Geldings,
but that too in a small number and as few as possible, yet they ha^^ always
their skins Glossy and smooth, because they are both well dressed an^ covered.

This is what I had to say to you, upon the method of ordering horses while
they are in health, and in a condition to serve; Those who have a desire to be
instructed, will find in it useful observations, and which are fit to be known
by all who have horses; people may observe and take notice of them if they
please, and if they ma^^ use of them, their practice cannot be prejudicial, but
if they neglect them, the^^ may happen a great many bad accidents; for these
rules and precepts I have been giving you, are I assure you founded upon the
experience which I my self have had many times of them

CHAP. LVIII. Of Purging in General.
IN all things wherein we may either act right or wrong, CHAP LVIII Of Purging
in general.
it is fit to have Rules (...) direct us; we are to know that which is Right,
that we may put it in praction and that which is wrong, that we may evite it,
for without precepts (...) act but blindly; and as the Errors in purging horses
are very considerable, (...) cannot be warry and careful enough to cause a
horse take a Potion seasonably, (...) there is required Address to cause a
horse swallow it easily, knowledge and skill to (...) if he stand in need of
it, and also what medicament is most fit for him, to regular its quantity, to
resolve after what method it should be administrate, to cause (...) take it at
a proper and seasonable time, and lastly to practice exactly all the circ^^
stances which should be observed.

First. It is certain that the seldomer a man purge a horse, it will be always
the ^^est side he chooses, for it should never be attempted without a great
necessity, (...) they are easily enflamed, and so much the more readily,
because they require great quantity of Drugs to purge them, which cannot
possibly be given without (...) printing a strange heat in their bodies, and
which finding a disposition in their part and humors, does many times either
degenerate into a Fever, or leave behind (...) great impression of its heat,
which is not soon extinguished.

The second reason why horses should not be purged, except in a great
necessity, that the medicaments are commonly twenty four hours in their bodies,
before they begin to operate, so that during that time they always overheat or
alter some of the parts, seeing they don't rest there without moving,
over-heating, or irritating nature: If people could act upon horses, conform to
the doctrine of those who disapprove purging, they would certainly prevent a
great many disorders, because whatever precautions people may observe in
preparing them for it, yet they so frequently remark such considerable
disorders after its operation, that we may confidently conclude nature suffers
a great deal by such an evacuation; If we could find out remedies, whereby we
might so fortify and redress nature, as that she could discharge her self of
her own accord through the common passages, of that which were prejudicial to
her, and that she could either overcome and destroy these bad humors, take
away their malignity, or fix them, then certainly People might be freed from
that trouble they have in purging them; but for my part, whatever care and
diligence I have taken, I have not as yet discovered these remedies, and if
there are some Medicaments which may perform a part of this effect, yet they do
it not wholly, but leave the remander of the humors more attached and fastened,
and more difficult to be evacuate, then the whole would have been, had the
remedy been altogether a Specific for them.

Necessity has no Law, and therefore people are many times obliged to purge
horses, but then it should be performed by observing the Climate, Season, the
different aspects of the Planets, the disease, the constitution, age, and if
possible the very nature and disposition of the horse, which being void of
reason and speech, cannot discover to us his distemper, and far less what is
fit for it.

The third reason, for which we should observe exact precautions in purging,
proceeds from the difficulty of knowing the condition of the disease, and the
disposition of the humors, which when concocted and digested by nature, are
easily evacuate, but being crude and unprepared are rebellious, and don't yield
to the Remedy; and because there are several kinds of these humors, it is very
fit to give here a slight description of them.

The division that Hippocrates makes of the parts of Man, is to be observed in
all Creatures; he establishes first the solid parts, as the bones and flesh,
next the liquid parts, as the Blood and humors, and lastly the spirituous
parts, which are the Source of life, the principal Organs of Action, and the
first Springs of all our motions.

The Liquid parts, are those humors which are of no fixed and stable
consistence, they are produced of the Food which people take, and after diverse
preparations, a part of them is converted into the proper substance of the
solid parts, which is called Nutrition; another portion of them repaires the
loss and dissipation of the Spirits, and the rest is rejected as useless; if
the food be proper, right chosen, and taken in time, and in a just quantity; if
the concoction and preparation of them be made it as ought, and that all the
parts which contribute to digestion, acquit themselves exactly well of their
functions, and if the unprofitable and superfluous part of them be thrown out,
and expelled in its due time, and in just quantity through the common passages,
then there is formed a perfect Health, which is rare in Men; because their
passions, and the disturbance of their Body and Spirits, produce a great deal
of disorder, from which horses are exeemed; and I do really believe, that the
passions, and irregular desires in Men, are a considerable part of the cause,
why they have not a health so thoroughly and firmly established, as otherwise it
would; yea we even see, that horses without having passions, are not in a
perfect state of Health, and that through labor which is either given them
immoderatly, or unseasonably, or otherways by reason of bad nourishment, as I
shall show you more at large in the 2d. part.

If it happen that the food be improper, altered and corrupted, and either
taken unseasonably, or in too great or small a quantity, if the Digestion be
out of order, or if the Excretions or voidings are disordered, then is the
whole Economy of the Body perverted, its forces diminish, and Diseases are
brought upon it, so that in this disorder it produces humors, which degenerate
from the excellency of the Blood; and to facilitate the understanding of these
according to their different Comparisons, people make several kinds of
divisions of them: some compare them to Milk, and say that the purest blood,
considered in the perfection of its mass, answers to the entire substance of
Milk, and that there are three parts which compose it, Bile answers to Butter,
Melancholy to Cheese, and Phlegm to Whey; those again who compare the Humors
to the Elements and Seasons of the Year, say that Blood corresponds to the
Spring and to Air, and give it the qualities of hot and moist, that the Bile
sembles Summer, to which they give the qualities of hot and dry, not formally
virtually, and that phlegm has an affinity to water, which is cold and moist,
therefore has a conformity to Winter and to the Moon; that Melancholy is cold
dry, and so comes near to the nature of Earth, because of the cold which is
esse^ to it.

The Chemists have attempted to find out a conformity, betwixt the humors;
their own principles, but seeing they have not as yet agreed about it amongst
the selves, it is difficult to establish any thing which may prove solid, upon
prince which are still controverted and debated; therefore we shall have no
regard to the but adhere to that which is most agreeable to the ends of Purging.

People should not think of purging blood, considered as Blood, because if it
about in too great a quantity, it requires evacuation by bleeding; and so
likewise if it be (...) heated, to give a freedom to, and facilitate the motion
of the Spirits, and then (...) wards it may be clarified and purified, by
rightly appropriate Remedies, where shall discourse at large, in treating of
the Diseases which have their rise and o^^ from the corruption of the blood;
because if it be altered in its quality, or com^ in its substance, it
degenerats into some other Humor, so that to consider and (...) more exactly
the Humors which should be purged, people have observed these (...) cuations
which nature procures to her self, for the easing and allaying Diseases, (...)
so they might in some measure be assistant to them, in the choice of proper
purg^^.

People observe four kinds of them, without considering that by blood; (...)
is, when there comes from the body, Bilious, Yellow, Green, sharp, bitter,
(...) and overheated humors; the second is when it sends forth Humors which
a phlegmatic, thick and viscuous, like to the glaire of Eggs, many times (...)
but sometimes sharp and saltish; the third is when there comes forth bla^
mours, which are bitter and harsh, and sometimes so very corroding, that they
(...) what resemble Aqua fortis; the fourth sort of Evacuation, and which has
a kind of a finity to the second, is when the body sends forth humors, that
are clear and liquid and which are called Serosities.

Experience has discovered, that there are remedies which purge those (...)
and that there are likewayes some which have this property, that they expel
(...) humors sooner than others, upon which account people have assigned them
(...) distinct Classes; there are then some purgatives which are appointed to
evacuate^ or choler, others to expel phlegm, so that according as people know
the preatnant humor they appoint remedies most proper for that which
occasiones the (...) It would be to no purpose to enquire after a reason why a
remedy purges, and (...) what manner that evacuation is made, for whether the
Medicament attracts to it self humor in the Body, as the Adamant or Lodestone
does Iron, or whether it (...) Nature by its Acrimony and malignity, so that
feeling something which is (...) and troublesome to her, she therefore
endeavors to expel it, for which the^ some probability, yet it is no great
matter which of the two it be, prove people know that by giving such a remedy,
there will follow that effect which (...) expect; This is abundantly sufficient
to those who seek only to cure their horses, (...) not the grounds of the
reasons of Medicine, which is but of small use to a (...) many people.

To order a purgative potion seasonably, and to proceed methodically, (...)
should know the Subject, and if the horse be either too young or too old, or
(...) has been too much fatigued, for in that case he would stand more in need
of (...) feeding than Purging; as also if he can with ease endure purgation.

A man should also understand the Nature of the Disease; for example, in the
(...) of a Fever and in the pains of a Colic, it would be very improper to
admini^ a purge, because in either the one or the other, a man will soon have
cured his horse it, of all diseases.

People should also endeavor to discover the humor offending, because if it
be a great abundance. it must have a more violent remedy, but if it be only in
its (...) then it will be more easily expelled; if it be too sharp it will need
to be sweetened too thick and viscuous it must be attenuate, and if the passages
are stopped, they (...) opened; In fine all the humors had need to be prepared,
that so they may the (...) easily yield to the Medicament: I shall discourse
sufficiently of the Nature of Dise^^ in the 2d. part of this work, in which I
shall also discover to you the occasions whe^^ it is expedient to purge, so
that the little I have said in this place concerning the Na^ of the humors,
will be sufficient to give you at this time a reasonable knowledge of them; it
is therefore now time that I discourse of Purgatives.

People call that a purgative Medicament, which being taken inwardly, has the
faculty to expel through the common passage of the Belly, those humors which
it meets with in the Body; there are some of these which purge only by
lenifying and sweetning, such as Oils, Greases, and Butter, and which by
moistning and Greasing the interior superfice of the intestines, facilitate the
descent and evacuation of the excrements, and other humors; there are others
of them again which by their abundance of moisture, dilute and soften so
extremely the humors, that they cause all of them that are contained in the
bowels, to glide along with them and be evacute, such as Whey, the decoction of
Beets, of Pellitory of the wall, of Coleworts, of Spinach, and others; and so
likewise Grass which is given to horses in the Month of May, purges them by
soaking and softning the humors, and causing them to pass easily through the
Bowels, by reason of their great humidity.

All sharp and piquant things, do likewise irritate and excite the expulsive
faculty, such as almost all Salts, the seed of Nettles, and many others; but
all these remedies, are rather laxative and detersive, than true purgatives.

Those remedys which have the faculty, to purge mostly conform to the humors
which they evacuate, are of four sorts; these are called Cholagogs which Purge
Bile and Choler.

These Phlegmagogs, which purge pituite or Phlegm.

Those Melanagogs, which purge Melancholy or adust Choler; and those Hydragogs
which purge Waters, and the superfluous serosities of the whole Body.

Now notwithstanding of this people must not fancy, that the remedys of one
class do only purge and expel one particular humor, for how simple soever the
Medicament may be, yet it will purge a part of all: Seen, for example, is so
universal a Drug, that there is no Medicament wherein it may not be used, nor
none of the humors which it does not expel; those who say that purgatives Act
conform to the Similitude of substance, have a great deal of difficulty to
discover the resemblance, which so simple a Drug has with humors so very
different; but that which people should chiefly consider in a purgative, is its
strength or weakness.

Neither must it be thought that in a Malignant diftemper, a gentle remedy will
perform a great effect, it would also be very unreasonable, for a small
indisposition to make use of a violent remedy, if people fail in any side, it
should rather be in giving too weak, than too strong remedys; and as all
purgatives have a kind of Malignity, it is therefore very fit they should be
corrected: People should also know that a remedy given in Substance, for
example in powder, should be made use of in a less quantity, then when it is
only infused in some Liquor, and the solid Substance thrown away.

Generaly speaking, no infusion of any Drug whatsoever will purge a horse, he
must therefore have the remedys given to him in their proper Substance, because
their infusion passes too quickly, and continues not long enough in a horses
Body, that so it may purge him, for he is a creature so difficult to be wrought
upon, that although a Drug be given him in Substance, yet it will be four and
twenty hours in his Body before it begin to purge, and an infusion which is
liquid, passes commonly in five or six, so that it has little or no effect:
Indeed people may make use of an infusion as they do of a decoction, to mix
these Drugs withal, wherewith they intend to purge the horse, and give him
them both together, to increase in some measure their virtue, but not otherwise.

CHAP. LIX. Of Medicaments which purge Bile Choler.
CAssia alone, will not have strength enough to purge a horse, although p^^
should give him three pound weight of it, it is therefore to be mixed (...)
other Drugs which are more strong; CHAP. LIX Of Medicaments which purgo Choler.
it tempers and moistens those parts wh^^ are overheated, and therefore may be
given in the distempers of the Reins and ^^der; people correct it with
Anniseeds or Fennel, because it is flatuous or windy.

Manna is likewise too gentle, people therefore never make use of it for (...)
except when they have a Cough, and then it is also to be mingled with other
(...) which are more violent.

The Juice of Pale-roses is also too weak, it purges Bilous Serosities; people
there^^ instead of it, make commonly use of an Electuary of the Juice of Roses,
which he more force, because of the Diagridium or prepared Scammony, which
enters into (...) Composition.

Tamarinds lenify or sweeten Bile, and make it glide through the Bowels;
however people never give them to horses, but when they stand in need of
cooling, and because Tamarinds are cold, therefore is it that they then make
use of them.

Rhubarb is a root which purges Bile by restricting it, it strengthens
extren^^ and is good for a looseness in the Belly; its dose is four or five
ounces, but be^ it is commonly very dear, therefore people never give it to
horses except in (...) great necessity, and then also it must be mixed with
other Medicaments, be alone it is too weak.

Aloes is one of the Medicaments most used for horses, it opens and disobstruc^
purges Choler and Phlegm, and cleanses the Stomach and intestines only; it is
(...) for the head, Eyes, and Liver, by reason of the correspondence these
parts (...) with the Stomach: It is good for killing Worms, also it is very
bitter, and beca^^ opens the Orifice of the Stomach, it is therefore to be
corrected with Nutmegs, (...) and Cinnamon; but the best preparation which can
be given it, that so it may be (...) corrected, is to imbibe it with the Juice
of Roses, afterward drying it, and rei^^ing this several times; the juice of
Bugloss, Borrage, Carduus Benedictus, etc. are (...) very proper to prepare and
correct it, as I shall show you at the end of the 16. (...) Sect. 7. of the 2d
part; the Dose of it is from two to three Ounces, and it is one (...) best
purgatives we have for horses, because it extremely resists corruption.

Myrobalans are of five kinds, viz. Citrinae, Chebulae, Indae, Emblicae, and
Be^^ They are weak, and don't over-heat, they purge by restriction, and are
given (...) in Oil or Butter, but they are rarely made use of for horses,
because there would (...) at least three or four pounds of them, therefore they
are only mixed with other (...) dicaments, for stopping the fluxes of the Belly.

Scammony is corrected with the vapor of Sulphur, which is absolutely the best
p^ration of it, as I shall show you in the 13 Chap. Sect. 10. of the 2d part;
it purges Bile^^ most remote parts, and people cry mightily out against, its
Malignity and Stre^^ but being well prepared and given in some fat and greasy
substance, which ma^nify its Acrimony, and prevent its adhering to the Imrals,
it is an excellent purg^ for horses, and has succeeded always very well with
me; it is to be given in stance from 5 Drams to 6 and a half, and you are to
choice that which is most bea^^ and transparent: People have so much overcome
the aversion they had once Scammony, that they order it every day for men,
prepared after this same manner, there is nothing so common now a days as the
powder of Cornachinus, whereof it is the foundation.

If you intend at any time to compose a purgative for Bile, you may do it after
this manner; take of Aloes two Ounces and a half, Flowers of Violets,
Pale-Roses, and St. John's Wort, of each a Dram, of the powders of Trisantalum
or the three Saunders's, Mastick and Cinnamon, of each a half scruple, Scammony
prepared by the smoke of Brimstone two Drams; beat all into powder, and pass it
through a fine search, after which make it up into Balls with half a pound of
Butter: A Remedy to purge Bile or Choler.
People find in the Apothecaries Shops, the Electuaries called Diaprunum
solutivum or electuary of pruns purging, and the Electuarium e succo Rosarum or
Electuary of the juice of Roses, whereof they may give from four to six Ounces,
and which purge will succeed very well for the evacuating of Bile.

Crude Antimony is not a purgative, neither prepared as I shall hereafter show
you in the 2d part, nor any other way; however it fails not to prove an
excellent Remedy, but cannot be reckoned amongst the Purgatives for horses,
seeing it only works by insensible Transpiration, and by its Astral Virtue,
which consumes the bad humors in horses bodies, resists Corruption, rectifies
and purifies the Blood, and gives them a very good appetite, by causing the
most disgusted to eat; it expells also the humors sometimes by Urine, but very
seldom; it dis-obstructs and refreshes the inward parts which are overheated,
and evacuates Serosities, which are the origin of all Diseases and operates
with so very good success, that it will recover a horse which is weak and
languishing, and restore to him again his health and vigor: I shall show you
in the second part of this Book diverse preparations of Antimony, where I will
also discover to you its use and good effects, and therefore referring you to
it, shall finish this Chapter by advertising the Curious, That Antimony after
whatever manner it be prepared, is no wise Cathartick, that is purgative for
horses; it does not discover suddenly its effects, but acts after such a way,
that it is one of the best and most extraordinary Remedies we have, and most
agreeable to the constitution of Horses.

CHAP. LX. Of Medicaments which purge Pituite or Phlegm.
Carthamus or Bastard Saffron, is a seed wherewith people feed Parrats; CHAP.
LX Of Medicaments which purge Phlegm.
people make use of its quintessence or finest substance, which purges Phlegm
and watery humors; it is good for the Lungs, and is corrected with Anniseeds,
Cinnamon, and Galingal, but alone it is weak; the composition of Diacarthamum
or Electuary of Carthamus seeds, is very good, and were it not for its dearth,
people might give six or seven Ounces of it to a horse at a time.

Agarick Attenuats, Opens, and purges gross Phlegm, and also Choler; it draws
them from the Brain, Nerves, and Muscles, and people might say that it would be
one of the best Medicaments we have for horses, were it but purgative enough;
it is sometimes Trochiscated or made into Troches, which corrects it, and it
may be given from four to five Ounces, which will however but purge very
gently; the only ill of this Remedy is, that if it be not prepared into Troches
it is too gentle.

Turbith purges, but weakly, gross viscuous and corrupt Phlegm, it draws it
from the Remote parts, and is corrected with Ginger; it may be given from two
to four Ounces at most.

Hermodacts are a kind of Bulbows Roots, they purge gently Phlegm, vis^^^^^
Humors, and draw them powerfully from the Joints; they are corrected (...)
Spicknard and Cinnamon, and may be given from three to four Ounces.

Mechoacan (which is a Root so called from the Country where it grows, (...)
has almost the same virtue as Jallap, only that it is white whereas the Jallap
is black Purges Phlegm and Watery Humors, is good for an old Cough, Colic,
(...) Farcy; it is corrected with Cinnamon, Anniseeds, and Mastick, and its
dose is (...) Ounces.

Colocy^th or Coloquintida, is a very light kind of fruit, which purges phlegm
(...) other gross and viscuous humors, from the most remote parts, as the
Brain, Ner^ Muscles, Joints, and Lungs; it is excellent for to carry away that
vitrified Phle^ which adheres to the Internal superfice of the Guts, which
causes violent Coli^^ and is a great Enemy to the Stomach and Intestines when
it cleaves to them; pe^^^^ correct it by making it into Troches called
Al^andal, or with Oil of Sweet A^^^^^ and Gum Tragacanth.

This is the common Purgative of the Farriers, because it costs but little, a^^
works strongly; I have proposed a good preparation for Colocynth, as you may
in the 23 Chap. Sect. 3. of the 2d. Part; its Dose is from four to six Drams at
(...) given either in Butter, Lard of Bacon, or fresh Swines Seam,

Opoponax, purges viscuous Phlegm from the remote Parts, as the Joints, how^^^^
it has but a gentle operation; it is corrected with Spicknard, Ginger,
Cinnamon, (...) the Roots of Elecampane: its Dose is four Ounces.

Gum-Sagapen, or Sagarenum, is somewhat of the nature of the preceding Gum
(...) more proper for preparing, and inciding or attenuating Humors, than for
purging.

Euphorbium, is the gummy juice of a Tree, which purges gross Phlegm, and ^ther
watery Humors, but with such violence, that I don't advise any man to give
(...) his Horses inwardly, by reason of its excessive Heat, unless it be mixed
with Cassia; (...) Example, to four Ounces of Cassia, add two Drams of prepared
Euphorbium.

To prepare it, you are to dissolve it either in distilled Vinegar, or in the
juice of Limons, in Baln^^ Mariae, or in a panful of warm Water over the fire;
then while it is warm, pass it through a double linen Cloth, and evaporate
its humidity (...) it be dry; its Dose is two or three Drams, when it is thus
prepared.

To compose a Remedy that will purge Phlegm, you may take of Diacarth^^^ ^
Ounce, A remedy to purge phlegm.
Agarick in Troches two Drams, Turbith and Hermodacts of each an Ou^^^
Spikenard, Cinnamon, and Ginger, of each a Dram, Coloquintida a Dram and (...)
make all into a Powder, and mixing it with an English Quart of White Wine,
(...) it to the Horse.

A man may also make use of the purging Pills, which he will find ready
prep^^^^ in the Apothecaries Shops, by giving from one to two Ounces of them:
the (...) which purge Phlegm are, Ptlulae co^ciae, foetidae majores Mesuae, de
agarico, de hiera cum (...) de sarcocolla* de Colosynthide. If your Horse be
lean, it will be more proper to give him (...) purging Electuaries, than Pills:
the Electuaries are the Diaphenicon, or Electuary (...) Dates, the
Diacarthamum, Benedicta laxativa Nicolai, hiera pi^ra Galeni, Elect^^^^ Jndum
majus Mesuae; the Dose of any of these is from four to six Ounces: No^ a man
may of any number of the foresaid Medicaments, which purge Phlegm, ^^pole a
purgative Remedy proper for it, by either mixing them with the above ^^^tioned
Pills or Electuaries, or other solid Medicaments, according to their true (...)
and his own Judgment.

CHAP. LXI. Of Medicaments which purge Melancholy.
SEve possesses the first place amongst purgative Simples, CHAP. LXI Of
Medicaments which purge Melancholy.
it is a little Panchamagog or universal Purger, the Physicians are so much
taken with it, that they make it enter into all their purgative Medicaments:
Fernel a Physician in Paris, and one of the most skilful since Galen's time,
discourses thus of it in the fifth book of his Method Chap. 10. Seen purges
very successfully the adust melancholic Humor, Bile, and gross Phlegm, not
immediately from the remote parts, but chiefly from the Spleen and other inward
Parts, from the Hypocondria and the Mesentery, which is the real drain or sink
of all the Excrements of the Body; for there is no other Remedy which draws so
powerfully the putrified and corrupt Humors from these parts, or, which
penetrating unto the very cavities of the Veins, does so well remove their old
obstructions: It is corrected with Spikenard, Ginger, and Cloves, etc. and its
Dose is to four Ounces at most.

Polypody is rather a preparative than purgative; people corrrect it with
Liquorice, and to assist its tardive Virtue, with Ginger, Anniseeds, and
Fennel; it is given from eight to ten Ounces, but never alone; because of it
self it has not strength enough to purge a Horse.

Black-Hellebor is a root which purges Melancholy, and other adust Humors which
are opiniater or obstinate, and is therefore excellent for Melancholic
Constitutions; it is corrected by first washing it well with Water, then
infusing it four hours in strong Vinegar, after which it is to be dried before
a gentle fire: the Dose is from six Drams to an Ounce, and people may add to it
Cinnamon, Anniseeds, and Fennel.

Lapis Armeni^s or the Armenian Stone, is a stone found in the Silver-Mines
both of Germany and Armenia, from which last it has derived its Name. The
Painters make use of it; it is first beaten into fine Powder, and then washed in
Rose, or Bugloss-waters, its Dose is from four to five Ounces.

Lapis Lazuli or the Azure Stone, is much of the nature of the former, and has
the same virtues. A remedy to purge Melancholy.


To compose a remedy which will purge Melancholy, Take of the leaves of Sem an
Ounce and a half, Black-hellebor washed in Vinegar two Drams, Crystal of Tartar
half an Ounce, Lapis Armenius washed, six Drams, Anniseeds, Fennel, and
Cinnamon, of each a Dram and a half, beat all coursly, and make a drench of it
in an English quart of a decoction made of Borrage, Bugloss, and Fumitory.

The Pills and Compositions which purge Melancholy, and are found ready made up
in the Apothecaries Shops, are Pilulae Indae, de lapide Lazuli, and lapide
Armenio; the Dose of any of these shall be from one to two Ounces: The
Electuaries Diasena, and the Confectio Hamech, the Dose whereof is from four to
five Ounces: now it is by far the easiest way for a man to make use of these
ready made up compositions, but then they are also by much the most chargeable.

Melancholy is a very obstinate humor, and does not easily yield to
purgatives, unless after a great irritation of nature; and I have lately found
by experience, that Diuretics, that is remedies which expel the humors by
Urine, do more agreeably evacuate melancholy in Horses, than any other; because
they receive less trouble in their whole natural economy, and are more eased
and relieved by them, than with any other of what kind soever.

CHAP. LXII. Of Medicaments which purge Serosities or Watery Humors.
ALder and Duarf-Alder are gentle Purgatives; People may take the (...) Alder
in the Spring, CHAP LXII. Of Medicaments which purge watery humors.
and making a Decoction of them, mix amongst ^ther Drugs.

The Seed of Duarf Alder purges extremly Hydropick Humors, being mixed^^ some
other solid Purgative, which may augment its slow and tardive Virtue ^^ple may
give to two Ounces of it, beat small, and mixed with White Wind; (...) it be
above a year old, it has no more virtue: half an Ounce of this infu^^
White Wind, and strained through a fine linen Cloth, will purge excellen^^
Man.

Soldanella or Sea-Bind-Weed, is a Maritim Plant, which powerfully attracts
watery Humors and Bile; it is corrected with Cinnamon, and Ginger, and its De
is from three to four Ounces.

The juice of Iris-Root draws strongly serosities, and is corrected with Ca^^^,
but it has not sufficient strength to purge, being given alone.

Elaterium, is the juice of the wild Cucumber condensed, and made up into
little ca^^ people correct it with Cinnamon after it has been soaked a pretty
time in Milk; (...) Dose is from two to three Drams, but people seldom make use
of this Remedy, be^^ it is too violent, however the root of the same Plant
being dried, is found to be^ry good; it is to be reduced to course Powder, and
an Ounce of it given in eit^ Decoction, or amongst White Wine, which will
sufficiently purge any Horse; (...) the remedy made of the roots thus dried,
losses its virtue as it grows old, and (...) not last above two years at most,
after which it has no more effect; but se^^^ may be easily had, and that there
is no other preparation required, but the drying its roots in the shade, the
loss is inconsiderable.

Jallap is a root which purges watery Humors; people correct it with Cinn^ and
its Dose is two Ounces.

Esula or the lesser or wild Spurge, being a kind of Tithymale, which purge^
(...) ties; people make use of the Extract of it, but I will advise no man to
use it, be^^ there is something mighty venomous in it, and a great enemy to the
nature of Ho^^

Gutta Gamba or Gum Cambugia, purges powerfully watery Humors; peoples rect it
with Vinegar, as I have told they do Euphorbium; its Dose is six Dram^^ is very
proper for Horses, because it may be given in a small quantity, which great
Advantage.

To make up a Remedy which will purge Serosities or watery Humors, Take (...)
Ounces of Jallap in powder, A remedy to purge Serosities or watery humors.
and two Drams of Gutta Gamba, which you shall put^ an English quart of the
Decoction made of Alder-Buds and Iris-Roots; this is one the most easy and
best Purgatives we have; the use of it will discover to you goodness, because
the Advantage your Horse will receive by it, will be great.

CHAP. LXIII. How, and at what time to administer a Purge to a Horse.
WHen a Horse requires it, and that there is an absolute necessity to purge
him, after having discovered the nature, qualities, quantity, CHAP. LXIII How,
and at what time to administer a purge to a horse.
and place of the Humor which offends, and remarked the nature of the disease,
and known the constitution of the Horse, as well by his Actions as by his Coat
or Skin, you are next to run through the list of your purgative Medicaments,
and make choice of such of them, as will best answer your design.

You are likewayes to take Notice to the time when you resolve to purge him,
for upon it in some measure depends the good or bad Success of its operation,
which is what few or none of those who undertake the Cure of horses observe,
although I have many times remarked, that the like purgation given to one and
the same horse at sundry times, does work effects so different the one from the
other, that one would take it to be not only a distinct remedy, but another
horse.

You are therefore as much as possible to purge horses in the decrease of the
Moon, because Nature, at that time, has not such aversion to quit with the
humors, and suffer their evacuation, as in the Increase; therefore they are
detached with less violence, for we see that most Creatures, have less Marrow
in their bones in the Decrease than Increase, which is just so with the
humors, which diminishing and Sympathising in a manner with the Moon, a Man
may therefore easily and Successfuly purge horses at that time, if the remedy
Act but never so little conjunctly with that Planet.

And you are not only to purge them in the decrease of the Moon, but you are
also to choose for that effect, such a day as she is in a watery Sign; to wit
in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces, which are cold and moist Signs: And this you are
to practice as much as possible, and if you please to be very exact in your
observations afterward, you will find that the purges given them in these
days, will occasion less weakness, less disgust, and will cause a better
evacuation, than if you did administer it to them in the increase of the Moon,
and in a fiery, hot, or dry Sign, such as Aries, Sagittarius, and Lee, in which
it would have the quite contrary effect.

Besides this, there are certain times in the year in which horses should not
be purged, to wit in the Aequinoxes and Solstices; the Aequinoxes are about the
11. of March, and the 11. September, the Solstices about the 11. of Junce and
the 1 l. of December, a day or two in or over; you are therefore neither to
purge nor let blood, but in cases of great necessity, two days before and two
days after any of the above mentioned times; because they are as Critical
days, in which Nature makes an effort, to drive out and expel that which was
prejudicial to her: So that if people should then by a purgative Medicament,
force her to perform a motion contrary to her own, they would hinder her to
effectuate that for which she was prepared, and that also not without being
hurtful and prejudicial, to the constitution and health of the Creature; you
are then to abstain from purging horses, not only upon these above mentioned
days themselves, but a few days both before and after, to wit, from the 7. of
March to the 15. and from the 7. of September to the 15. of the same, which are
the times of the two Aequinoxes; and betwixt the 7, of June and the 16. and the
7. of December and the 16. of the same, which are the two Solslices.

You may also if you have any knowledge in the Ephemerides, observe over and
above the preceding directions, not to purge your horses when the Moon is
either in Conjunction or Opposition to the Square of the Sun, as also of Mars
and (...) which are great Enemies to her; for so consequently the Moon, which
operates (...) horses by her influenceing quality, being weakened by these
planets, will not (...) make a great disorder and ravage in their Bodies, and
render their purga^^ more hurtful than profitable.

But if you intend that a purge should certainly have good success, then when
(...) are Master of your own time, administer it when the Moon is in
Conjunction with ^^ter or Venus, and that she is either in her Sextile or
Trine, because these two Pla^^ being freindly to her, will assist her to
fortify Nature by her influencive qua^^ and not by her Elementary, which has
no great power upon Bodies; and even alth^^ the Moon were in Opposition to
Jupiter or Venus, she would not faill to prove^ vorable: Those who can make use
of these observations, will find a great de^^ Satisfaction and advantage by
them, even for Men; but for those who don't under^^ this kind of Language, they
may practice according to what they understand; How^^ I am of opinion, that
people cannot be warry and cautious enough, in their pretions for purging
horses, and if I should say the same for Men, I would butspe truth.

This is what I have observed most remarkable, as to the times in which horses
(...) be purged, with least hazard and most advantage; those who shall put it
in pra^^ will know that it is from a knowledge of the Cause, that I have given
(...) advice.

People are many times obliged before they purge a horse, to prepare the ha^
they intend to evacuate, because being crude and mixed with other (...)
humors, which are to be preserved for the conservation of the Creature, it
(...) be almost impossible wanting this preparation, to bring it away, without
(...) great deal of trouble, and a considerable disorder and agitation to the
Body.

Therefore a Man should almost never purge a horse in the beginning of a
Disea^^ because the humor not yiedling to the Remedy, is thereby overheated
and brought to a Fermentation, which increases the Disease instead of
diminishing it; and as it horses we cannot observe any certain sign of Coction,
and separation of the bad humors which occasion the Disease, for their Urines
are almost always troubled, and not much unlike to one another, the Dejections
also or Excrements of the Belly, are almost the same; therefore people are
obliged upon that account, to delay it (...) the horse be recovered, but this
is to be only understood of Acute and violent ^^eases, for when the distemper
begins once to slacken, then the humor which ^casioned it is concocted,
seeing it causes no longer any Symptom; and in so far a ture many times neglects
to expel the humor she has overcome, therefore is it (...) it must be
evacuate by purging, lest it should spring up anew again and occasion relapse,
so that in Fevers and other violent Diseases, a Man should never purge horse,
neither in their beginning, nor even when they are at their height.

Having well considered all these things, you are next to make choice of y^^
Drugs, and proportion them to your intention, a man being many times obliged
make use of diverse kinds, because it is rarely one single humor which
occasions (...) Disease: In bilious or Choleric Diseases, phlegms and
Crudities are always eng^ dered, and in the most phlegmatic bodies there is
always a mixture of Salt (...) Sulphur; when you employ several Drugs, you are
to diminish the Dose according to (...) number of them you make use of; for
example, if you take three purgatives, your take but the third part of the Dose
of each, which I have set you down for (...) one of them in particular, and so
shall the three being mixed together make (...) true Dose; neither are you to
forget their proper Correctives, which is always a^^ the fourth part of the
weight of the whole.

You will find that the purgative Medicaments which I have ordered, are a^^ all
of them weak, because the constitutions of horses are different, so that I
tho^^ it was less daugerous to purge them at two times, than to evacuate too
much their because the first will serve as a preparation to the second, of
which you may aug^^ the Dose if you find need for it, and be sure to increase
the proportion of that D^ which is in least quantity, because it is most
commonly the strongest, and therese will push on, and assist the operation of
the other Medicaments, which are (...) slow.

For Example, at the end of the Medicaments which purge Bile, there is a re^^
set down to evacuate it, wherein there enters two Ounces and a half of Aloes,
and Drams of Scammony; now if you find that your horse purge not sufficiently
with (...) composition, you are the next time in stead of two, to give him
three Drams of Scammony.

Again, amongst those which purge Phlegm, there is a receipt wherein there is
an Ounce of Diacarthamus, Agarick Trochiseated or reduced to Troches, two
Drams, Turbith and Hermodacts of each an Ounce, and of Colocynth a Dram and a
half; if this Medicament do not operate enough, then you must augment that
whereof there is the least Dose, which is the Colocynth, and give of it either
two Drams, or two and a half; and so of the rest.

For people cannot commit small errors in giving too violent purgatives;
because when once they are in a horses body, they are no more Masters of them;
they work many times with such disorder, that if they don't kill the horse, yet
they leave at least so great a distemper in the inward parts, that a man cannot
of a long time recover and restore them; it is this which made me reduce these
purgative Doses to such a just proportion, as that they cannot occasion this
disorder: If your horse has not purged sufficiently, with the Medicament you
have administrate to him, there is nothing lost, because it has disposed the
humor, and by reiterating the purgation some days after, and making it a
little stronger, you will find it succeed very well.

Having provided your self of the quantity of Drugs you have use for, you are
to break and beat them coursly, and if it be for pills, then mix the
composition with two pounds of fresh Bacon lard, or for want of it, the like
quantity of fresh Butter, and having beat and mixed all well together in a
Mortar, make it up into pills about the bigness of small Tennis-Balls, which
you are to cause the horse swallow down.

If it be for a Drench, you are also to beat them coursly, and either mix them
with a Decoction, or amongst Wine, and letting it infuse about a quarter of an
hour, give it to the horse early in the Morning with a horn, he being first
tied up two hours to the Rack, before it be Administrate.

If you are only to make a simple infusion of them, and which has no great
effect upon horses, then the Drugs being infused all night, the liquor is to be
poured off next Morning, amongst which you are to dissolve some kind of
Electuary or powder, in a sufficient quantity, that so it may purge and operate
according as you have determined; the horse having taken it, you are to rinse
the horn with the remainder of the Decoction, or with Wine, and make him
swallow it, after which you shall also wash his Mouth with a little Wine, to
take away its bad relish.

If it be Pills you are to make use of, then the horse having swallowed them,
you are to give him in a horn some White Wind, to carry them well down to his
Stomach, to soak and soften them, and also to wash his Mouth, and take away its
bitterness.

A Horse that is to be purged, should be kept four, five, or six Hours without
eating before be take it, and as long after, and you shall also for the more
precaution, give him a Glyster the night before you Administer it, and which
shall be composed according to the nature of his Disease.

When the horse shall begin to purge, you are to cause walk him half an hour in
ones hand every two hours, and continue it for half a day, that so it may the
better assist him to empty.

You are also, as much as possible, to forbear purging in violent Colds and
excessive heats; if nevertheless you are necessitate to do it, and that it be
in Winter, you are then to keep the horse well covered, and put him in a warm
stable, from whence he must not stir during his purgation, because Cold
hinders the operation of the Medicament; but if it be in Summer, then you are
to keep him in a cool and temperate place.

When the horse has done purging, you may if you will give him a Glyster, to
perfect the Evacuation of that which the Medicament has not brought away, but
only in a manner detatched or loosed; after which, you may feed and order him,
as formerly.

It is very fit, that a horse from the time he has taken a purgation, until it
be quite done working, (which will be about 40 hours) eat no Hay but only
Wet-Bran, taking care always to take him from the Rack at the end of every four
hours, that so he may eat two Measures of Wet-Bran, which are each of them
somewhat less, than two English Quarts.

Having set down the receipts of a great many purgations in the 2d Part of this
Book, you may therefore have recourse to it; I have experimented the most part
of them, and those I have not, are composed methodically and according to the
Rules of Art, and therefore may be very safely Administrate, seeing they will
cause no superpurgation, being all of them for the most part weak, and that I
may facilitate your finding th^^ out, I shall here make a kind of Table of
them. You will then find in the second part, a purge for the Head-Ake in the
13. Chap. Sect. 9. Pills for Lunati^^ horses in the 16 Chap. Sect. 6. An
excellent purgative Oil in the 23 Chap. Sect. You will find in the 68, Chap,
Sect. a. the Polychrest, which prepares the Body for a purge, and in the same
Chap. Sect. 4. a method to relax or loosen a Horse's Belly, which is lean and
harrassed, with the purgation belonging to it; there is likways (...) the same
Chap. Sect. 8. a purgative and comforting Drench, for a Horse too much
fatigued: you will find in the 76. Chap. Sect. 5. an universal purgative for
Glyster^ which I call a Catholicon, and which is better than any of these made
use of for Men, a is also proper for all constitutions in Horses: In the 78
Chap. there are Drenches and purgative Pills for the Farcy, and which are also
very well appropriate to that kind of it, which resembles the Rump of a pullet,
in French Farcin a cul de poule; in the 79 Chap. Sect. 2. there are also very
good purgative Pills; And in the 89 Chap. Sect. 3. there are purgative Pills
for the Mange; as also you will find in the 91 Chap. Sect. 4. purgative Poills
for killing the Worms, that engender in a Horse's body: And lastly in each
Class of purgative Medicaments, which are in the immediately preceding
59.60.61. and 62. Chapters of this part, you will find a Remedy exactly
composed for the evacuation of that Humor, to which the purgative of that
class does chiefly belong.

CHAP. LXIV. To prepare the Humors, in Horses which people intend to purge.
Sect. 1.
PEople are necessitate in many Diseases to purge horses, CHAP: LXIV To prepare
the humors that are to be purged.
although nature has (...) performed any Coction of the Humors, as in the
Farcy, Mange, a^^ many others; if a Man for example, will purge by way of
prevention, ho^^ which have stood among other sick horses, or which have lately
come from the Ar^^, or have been in some infective places, it is very proper
before he attempt it, that (...) prepare the humors, to the end the Medicament
which he is to Administer, may (...) only alter the Body less, but also produce
a better effect.

It would not be very reasonable, to draw impostomous matter from a swe^^
before it were ripe and digested, and so to be approved of; It is the very same
(...) those humors, which occasion and entertain the diseases within the Body.

This preparation or coction, shall be then performed in the manner follow^,
and we shall term the Simples which have the faculty to prepare those hum^^
Digestives, because to prepare a humor is to digest it, and make it the more
capa^^ to be evacuate; I shall therefore begin with Bile.

Sect. 2. Digestives of Bile
Some people say, Sect. 2.
that Bile being Subtle, and obliging a Body to excretion or ^^^ing by its
Acrimony, does therefore evacuate it self sufficiently without any preparat^^
because it immediately yields to the least Medicament when applied; It is indeed
(...) that it has no need to be perpared, because of the trouble people have
to expel it, he only because of its fire, and lest it may inflame the Guts,
therefore it is good to refresh and moisten it; and also for fear of too great
an Evacuation, it is fit to incrassateor thicken it,

These reasons are unanswerable and the Physicians nomine tenus, who say that
Bile has no need of any preparation, have nothing to answer to them,
especially having regard to the constitution of horses, which is easily
inflamed.

The simples which condense and cool it, are Bugloss, Plantaue, Lettuces, the
common or great Hous-leek, the Cold seeds, and that of Plantane, Psillium or
Flea^wort, the flowrs of White and yellow water Lillies, of Violets, and of
Mallows, the Herbs Maidenhair, Endive, and the Succorys.

Of all these simples or a part of them, Sect. 2.
you shall make a decoction of about three English pints, which you shall give
every Morning to such horses as you intend to purge of Bile; that is to horses
which are fiery, Choleric, and of a bright Sorrel color, during which time
they are to eat no Oats, but only wet Bran: Your horse shall continue also two
hours tied up to the Rack before he take the decoction, and as long after, and
you shall cause him take it thus for eight days, after which, you shall purge
him according as you shall judge he stands in need of it; but if you will not
be at this trouble, or that your horse be not of great Value, then you may give
some of these above mentioned Simples, being very small shred, in a good
quantity mixed amongst his wet Bran.

The best Digestive that can be for Bile, is the Polychrest described in the
68. Chap. Sect: 2d. of the Second part, and whereof you are to give two Ounces
at a time, in an English quart of Wine, and that for seven or eight days
together without intermission, which will prepare the humor, temperate its
heat, and many times also purge and expel it, without the assistance of any
other purgative.

Sect. 3. Divestives of Pituite or Phlegm.
It is not to be doubted, but Phlegm requires a preparation, Sect. 3.
that so it may be the more easily evacuate, and because it is cold and moist,
it has therefore need to be prepared, with such simples as dry and heat
moderatly; and especially seeing it is Gross, slow, and Viscous, it is upon that
account to be attenuate, Subtilized, and Cut; and because this humor does not
easily yield to remedys, therefore must it be prepared by the assistance of
some of these following Simples.

The Aperient or opening roots, Pennyroyal, Calamint, Sweet Marjoram, Mint,
Hyssop, Savory, Anniseeds, Fennel, Skirrits, and Spicknard; the roots of
Aristolochia or Birthwort, Elecampane, China, Galingal, Iris, Sarsaparilla,
Valerian, and Zedoary; the leaves of Wormwood, Agrimony, Betony, Gremander,
Fennel, St John's Wort, Laurel, Balm, Origany or Wild Marjoram, Rose-mary, Rue,
Sage, wild Thyme or Mother of Thyme, and the Four hot seeds, both great and
lesser, with those of Carduus-benedictus, Coriander, Bay Berries, and Juniper.

If you have a horse which is heavy, slow, soft, and of a washing color, or
approaching to it, which are all tokens that he is Phlegmatic; and that you
therefore find there is a necessity to purge him, you are to prepare the humor,
by making a decoction of about an English pynt and a half of any of the above
mentioned simples, and cause him take it once every day for Ten days, having
kept him tied up to the Rack about an hour or an hour and a half before giving
it and as much after, then you shall administer to him his purge as I have
already ordered, which will succed very happily: If you judge that his phlegm
be saltish, it must then be prepared as Bile, only adding some Aperient, and
Inciding or cutting Medicament; or you may if you please only shred the Herbs
small, and mix them among his wet Oats, but then they will have less effect.

Sect. 4. Digestives of Melancholy or Atra-bile.
Melancholy has as much need of preparation, if not more, as Phlegm, because
it is very adhering, opiniater, and troublesome to evacuate.

If therefore you judge that your Horse is Melancholic, by his dark color,
actions, and other sad and not ordinary Observations, you shall make use of the
following Simples, to prepare him for his Purge.

Whatever resemblance people may make Melancholy have to Earth and the Auturn
yet you are not to fancy it is so cold, as to stand in need of great heat; for
if it be the a^es or refuse of the Humors, yet it is a kind of Ashes, in which
there is a great deal (...) salt, and that also many times very corrosive; if
it be the lees or dregs of the blood, is a very sharp lee, a strong Curd, and a
most sharp Acid, which sometimes is a less violent than Aquafortis: this humor
should therefore be carefully managed, (...) small and gentle Remedies don't
move it, and the most violent do but excite and stir^ up; hot remedies redouble
its violence, and cold remedies do but entertain and encourage its obstinacy;
therefore has it always been reputed the Plague, as well of Physicians as sick
people: however you can scarcely fail to prepare it, if you make use: Simples
which are moderatly hot, moistning, and attenuating; such as are the ro^ of
Polypody, Satyrion, Liquorice, the middle Bark of the Ash-tree, and of Alder,
and (...) small Centaury, the leaves of Borrage, Bugloss, Spleen-wort, Fumitory,
Balm, Harts-t^^g^ The four hot Seeds, The four Cordial Flowers.
those of Agnus Castus, and Carduus Benedictus, the four cordial Flowers, to
wit, of Borrage, Bugloss, Roses, and Violets, and others of that quality, where
there are a very great number.

You shall make of any of these, a Decoction of an English quart, which you
shall gi^^ every morning to your Horse for eight days together, he being always
tied up to the Rack two hours before, and as many after taking it, during which
time, before his purge, you shall give him only Bran to eat in stead of Oats.

You may likewise give the same simples, being very well shred amongst his
(...) after which you shall give him a proper Purge.

There are some people who don't grudge at any thing for their Horses, and
(...) don't value the Charges, providing they be put to no trouble by it
themselves; (...) persons may therefore take ready prepared from the
Apothecaries Shops, what follows.

To prepare Bile when it is to be thickened, Preparers of Bile.
take of the powder Diatragacoth cold, and of Diapenidon, or of Polychrest.

To prepare Phlegm, of Phlegm.
the powders of Aromaticum rosatum, and Diarrhodon Abb^^^.

To prepare Melancholy, of Melancholy
the powders of Latificans Galeni, of the Trochisci de Al^^ thio, of Dialacca,
and of Eupatorium; These are the powders which you shall give your Horse
generally amongst Bran, for eight or ten days before purging, to prepare i^
Humors, but if it be for Phlegm, then you may give him the powders proper (...)
amongst Oats in place of Bran; or otherwise you may give any of these
digessives (...) the decoctions of the above mentioned Simples, according as I
have ordered.

This is what I thought needful to show you, concerning the preparation of the
^^mors before purging, lest it might prove prejudicial to Horses, which have
(...) reluctance and aversion to it, and from which, if they be not well
prepared for it, the many times receive great damage.

I have here said a little concerning the Purgation of Horses, which before
(...) has never been treated of by any; to the end people might both receive
because by it, and that I might also by this small Swatch or Pattern, give an
opportunity (...) the Curious, to dive deeper into the Medicine and Physic of
Horses, than has (...) been done hitherto; and which is extremly neglected by
those that are cap^^^ because they absolutely rely upon the skill of such, who
can scarcely read their (...) and therefore do many times loss their Horses, by
their negligence and ignor^^^ and for lack of a little Reflection and Study.

CHAP. LXV. Of Glysters.
THe Word Glyster, is derived from the Greek (...). which signifies to wash,
CHAP. LXV: Of Glysters:
from whence it is sometimes called also a Wathing, because the Guts are
cleansed by the injection that is made into the intestines, it is proper for
provocking the excretion, or voiding of the Excrements, to soften their
hardness, or to correct some intemperature, or to abate some great pain, or
excessive beating of the flanks, to expel Wind, to stop the immoderate fluxes
of the Belly, and to kill the worms which are contained in the intestines.

Glysters also produce a great many other good effects, because there is almost
no part of the Body, which does not receive some relief by them, and that by
reason of the correspondence, that all its parts have with the lower belly or
Guts, which being fred of their impurities, give the more liberty to other
parts, to discharge themselves of those humors which are prejudicial to them.

People compose them different ways, and according as they intend to treat the
Horse, as I shall show you all along the second Part, when I discourse of the
several Diseases; but those which are most in use are the Emollient, An
Emollient Glyster.
which are called common Glysters: People make a decoction of Mallows,
March-Mallows, Violets, Herb Mercury, Pellitory of the Wall, and Bears-breach,
causing boil two or three handfulls of each, in three English quarts and a half
of water, with two ounces of bruised Anniseeds, if it be in winter; but if it
be in the summer, then there may be added for cooling, the seeds of Cucumbers,
Gourds, Pumpkins, Wild-gourds, Melons, and an ounce or two of Polychrest, they
afterward strain all through a cloth, and according to their intention add
some kind of Electuary to it, especially the Catholicum for Horses, which is
described in the 76 Chap. Sect. 5. of the Second Part, or otherwise they make
use of Honey, or the like.

Beer or Ale is a decoction ready made, in which a man may cause boil two
ounces of the Scorte or refuse of the Liver of Antimony, in fine powder, or
otherways if he intend to make use of Purgatives, then Colocynth, Seen, or any
other according to the intention he has to purge, and after having strained
the decoction from them, he shall then dissolve in it some proper Electuary, or
other Medicament, as he shall think fit.

However, for the convenience of those who are altogether ignorant of their
composition, I shall here set down the models of all kinds of Glysters, whereby
they may be instructed, to make any of what nature and operation soever.

People, to expel and drive the wind out of a Horses body, A Carminative
Glyster
make Carminative Glysters, of some of the emollient Herbs, to which they add
Organy or Wila Marjoram, Calamint, the flowers of Melilot and Camomil, of each
two handfulls, with an ounce and an half of Polychrest in powder; they make
about two English quarts and a half of a decoction, and after having strained
it, add four ounces of good Oil of Bays, or in place of it two ounces of the
Catholicum for Horses, or of the Electuary of Bay Berries an ounce and an half,
and of all this they compose a Glyster, which they administer to their Horse:
Or in the place of the Electuary of Bay Berries, a man may take two ounces of
the Oil of Dill, or otherways an English pynt of Emetick Wine, in place of
either.

There are many other ways of composing Carminative Glysters, of which I shall
give you a description, when I discourse of those diseases for which they are
proper, but particularly where I treat of Colicks occasioned by Wind.

Make an ordinary decoction of the Emollient Herbs and Polychrest, A purging
Glyster.
then dissolve in two English quarts of what is strained from them, (an English
pynt of Cows Urine being mixed with it) two ounces of the Catholicum for
Horses, and eight ounces of Mercurial Honey, and if you will increase its
purgative virtue, mix with it an English pynt of the infusion of the Liver of
Antimony, which I shall show you hereafter to make and which is Emetick.

Seeing this Honey is most proper to be given, as well in Glysters for the
better p^^ging of Horses, as in many other preparations, I shall therefore here
show you i^ Composition; Take three pounds of Herb Mercury, well picked and
cleansed, w^^^ four pounds of Honey, mix and boil them together, now and then
skimming the^^ until they come to the consistence of a Syrup; The Composition
of Merurial Honey.
this being put amongst Glysters, w^ cleanse and purge, and people put commonly
about eight ounces of it at a time i^ Glyster: or more if they judge it proper:
there are Books stuffed with the Virtues this Mercurial Honey; you may read, if
you please, Renould, Bauderon, La Fran^^ siere, etc.

You are to observe, That when you intend to purge a horse exactly with Glyster
you must put no kind of fat into them, because Oils and Greases adhere to the
V^ves or Partitions of the Intestines, and so hinder the effect of the
purgatives, therefore upon the contrary people rather add Common Salt, Salt
Gem, Polychrest, or wa^^ Urine, all which prick and irritate the expulsive
faculty; whence it is that the Country Farriers, make commonly their Glysters
of the Water in which Cod-fish: Herring have been steeped, which costs but
little, and because of its saltness causes; horse to empty well: To make a
Glyster somewhat purgative, a man may infuse (...) night in a proper decoction,
an ounce of Seen, or otherwise one or two Col^^y^^ Apples cut very small, and
next morning giving it all a little Boil, shall afterward strain it to make a
Glyster. A Glyster to appease a great beating in the Flanks.


You are to take of the ordinary herbs for decoctions, and to put among the^
(...) or two ounces of Polychrest in powder, and in two English quarts of this
decoction mix eight ounces of Violet-honey, and two, three, or four ounces of
the Catholico^^^ horses Glysters, described in the 76 Chap, Sect. 5. of the
second part, and let it be given lukewarm to your horse.

Take an English Quart and an half, An astringent orbinding Glyster.
of that Water wherein Smiths quench their hot Iron, boil in it two handfuls of
Plantaine, Knot Grass or Centinodia, and white Mullain; strain this decoction,
and mix amongst it an English quart and an half of Milk, in which you shall
have quenched small red hot White pebble stones, for six or seven times, then
add to it fine Bole and Starch, of each two ounces, with half a dozen Yolks of
Eggs; you may also, if you will, make use of the seeds of Garden S^^^^ White
Poppy, the Oil of Roses, the Oil of Quinces and many others, where with you may
make a Glyster either stronger or weaker, according to your intention.

Ane Anodyne Glyster, An Anodyne Glyster.
is that which asswageth pain, by the agreeable temper it (...) with the nature
of the parts: To compose which.

Take three English pints of Milk, and a quart of Water, mix amongst it a po^^
of Linseed meal, with the soft of a penny Loaf, which must be well dissolved in
it, then take of the Flowrs of Camomil, and Melilot, and causing all boil
together (...) or six Walmes, pass it through a double linen Cloth, squeezing
it very strongly; af^^^ which dissolve in it half a dozen Yolks of Eggs, four
ounces of the Oil of Roses, a Violets, and half a pownd of Butter, or if you
have the marrow of a Heart or Deer, the fat of a Fox, Goose, or Hen, they will
be better than the Butter, and therefore you (...) make use of any of them in
its place.

A man may also make an Anodyne Glyster of the broth of Tripes, only adding to
(...) the herbs, and dissolving therein the Anodyus before mentioned.

People call that Diuretic, A Diuretic Glyster The five opening Roots.
which expells the watery humors and serosities contained in the body, by
Urine; you shall then cause boil the five aperient or opening (...) Viz,
Smallage, Fennel, Asparagus, Parsley, and Radishes; with Barley, and the ^^ent
herbs, and having strained the Decoction, dissolve amongst it two ounces of ^^
prunella, otherwise called Crystal Mineral, or which is more proper, an ounce
as a half of Polychrest in powder, with half a pound of common Turpentine, in
which y^^ are to dissolve three Yolks of Eggs; then mixing with all some
propper Electua^ such as the Catholicum for horses, and Diaprunum solutivum or
Electuary of pruns p^^ing, about three or four ounces, together with an English
pint of Emetick Wine; whi^^ Clyster being given to your horse, will cause him
piss more then all the Gale^ Diuretics.

A man may compose many other kinds of Glysters, by the knowledge I have give
him of the Simples, and of the manner they are to be made use of; for example,
wh^ you would purge Bile, then you are to put in the Glysters, those
Electuaries wh^ purge it, and so of the rest which purge the other humors, as
well Simples as Electuaries, which are all ranked in their proper Classes.

You will find in the 22 Chap. Sect. 5. of the 2d part, a Carminative and
Purgagative Oil to be put in Glysters, which is excellent, as also in the 76
Chap. Sect 5. of the said part, a Catholicum for the same purpose, and which is
particularly composed for horses.

CHAP. LXVI. After what manner a Glyster is to be administered to a horse.
THe Common Farriers, CHAP: LXVI How to give a Horse a Glyster.
don't give to horses above an English quart or three pints of Decoction for a
Glyster, neither have they generally a great effect, for besides that the
liquor is given in too small a quantity, they also spare the Drugs, and
commonly mix nothing with the Decoctions, but salted water, honey, and Oil;
however it is not, but if People would pay them as they desire, they would
perhaps make them good: My opinion is, that there is required for a Glyster at
least two or three English quarts of Decoction, because being in a less
quantity then that, it but moistens and washes little; for as a horse drinks
ten times more then a man, and that People give also twenty times more then the
doze for a man to purge him, it follows that the same proportion should be
observed for his Glysters.

A Glyster being prepared after this manner, should not be given till the
horses great Gut be cleared of its dung, which by Farriers is called Raiking,
and is performed, by first anointing your hand well with a little Oil, or
Butter, and then thrusting it up into his Fundament, taking care not to scratch
the Gut with your Nails, and with it drawing forth all the dung you can
conveniently bring away; or otherwise thrust up into it, about the bigness of
a large Hens Egg of Castile Soap, anointed with Oil to make it enter with the
more ease, half an hour after which, the horse will empty, so that using this,
you need not thrust up your hand to Raik him, because the Soap will do it
sufficiently of it self; having thus Raik't or caused your horses to empty, you
are next to place him with his fore-parts a little lower than his Croupe, and
thrusting in to his Fundament, a horn made for that purpose open at the small
end, pour into it by degrees the Glyster, which must be but Milk-warm, and if
it should stop in the born without passing down, you are to make the horse move
his Tongue, and then strike him gently with the palm of your hand upon the
Reins, which will make it enter, after which you are to put your horse in the
stable again tied up to the Rack, without moving him afterward, contrary to
the common practice, for the Farriers ordinarily cause walk a horse, while the
Glyster is yet in his Guts.

It is also fit that your horse by tied up to the Rack two hours before he take
his Glyster, and that he also eat none until he has rendered it, or about an
hour after he has taken it.

People should also endeavor as much as possible, to give horses their Glyster
with a Seringe, as they do men, but then it must be made so large as to contain
the whole Glyster, and the hollow of its pipe which enters his Fundament should
be so big, as that a man may put his finger into it; this method is better than
that with a horn, for it is both quicklier done, and the horse receives it
better, without so much as needing to be taken out of the stable, and therefore
as he is less moved after receiving it, so he will have the less cause to
render it too soon; this method is at present much in fashion, and with a great
deal of reason, seeing it is the only one that is good; (...) may see the form
of such a Seringe, in the upper part of the 6 Plate.

Those who cause walk their horses after they have received a Glyster, oblige
the to render it too soon, which is quite contrary to the design of giving it,
which that he may retain it a reasonable time: It signifies but little to stop
a horses f^^ment with Hay, or to tie down his Dock to hinder him to render it,
for I assure (...) none of these foolish methods will prevent a horses voyding
his Glyster, if he (...) an inclination to it; however if he could be made to
keep it a full hour, it would so much the better.

The common Purgatives made use of in Glysters, are the Electuaries, Diapr^^
solutivum, de Psillo, Diaphenicon, and benedicta laxativa Nicolas.

People put commonly but two ounces, or four at most of any of these Electuarie
a Glyster, which will but purge very gently, therefore if you intend to purge
y^ Horse soundly, you must give him in a Glyster at least seven or eight ounces
of the which the Apothecaries will not give at too easy a rate, unless the
Drugs be spoilt not faithfully made up; therefore when you design that your
Horse should be (...) purged, it is always fit to add to the Glyster, an
English pint of Emetick Wine, w^^ will be both cheaper, and have more effect
than these preceding Electuarie or otherways in place of it Polychrest, or the
Scorie and refuse of the Liver of A^^ny, the Urine of a healthful Man, or that
of a Cow, if you have the convenience it, or lastly, as I have already
directed, mix an ounce of Seen with the decoction, or otherways one or two
Coloquint Gourds shred very small, together with an ounce and a half of the
abovementioned Polychrest, or Scorie of Antimony.

Besides these Glysters I have been describing, there are a number of others in
(...) 2d. part of this Book, that are appropriat to the different Diseases, and
therefore (...) may have recourse to them when needful; I shall not here set
down the places (...) they are to be found, because the composition of all
kinds of Glysters is so very (...) that it is scarcely worth a man's pains, to
turn over to the Chapters where they are (...) down.

Glysters are of so great use, for the preservation of Horses health, and the
cureing of their Diseases, that we have no remedy which equals them; for a
Glyster given a^ a certain time, will save a horse's life, but then there must
be, at least, two English Quarts of it; Fevers, and the excessive beating of
the Flanks, are rarely allayed both the use of good Glysters often reiterate;
at least people are sure, that if they make (...) sensible alteration to the
better yet at least they refresh, and give a great deal of (...) and never did
a Glyster, given orderly and according to method, prove preju^^ to any Horse
whatsoever.

CHAP. LXVII. Of blooding Horses, and the Benefit thereof.
NAture finding her self oppressed with a violent Distemper, CHAP. LXVII Of
Blooding Horses, and its use:
does many (...) by her own proper strength, without any other assistance
whatsoever, (...) charge her self of that burden wherewith she was oppressed,
sometime the Flux of the Belly, other times by the Flux of Urine, many times
again by (...) and at other times slowly by insensible transpiration; but it
sometimes also happ^^ that she delivers her self of her trouble by a great loss
of blood, which is that, has ^^^ed Physicians to trace Nature foot by foot, and
to procure sometimes one kind (...) vacuation, and sometimes another, according
to the quality of the Humor offend^^ and the place where it lurks; it is
certain there is no evacuation so ready, so easy, so agreeable, and so
beneficial as blood-letting, which is made by an incision of a Vein, which
gives a free passage for the blood to issue forth: By the word Blood, I don't
strictly understand that choice and perfectly prepared fourth Humor so called,
because as the Lance does not particularly make choice of it, we are therefore
to understand thereby, the whole Mass of the Blood, which is contained in the
Veins and Arteries; this Mass sometimes preserves it self in such an equal
condition, that it produces the Sanguine complexion, without degenerating unto
either Bile, Phlegm, or Melancholy, but however does not fail to exceed in
quantity, to be subject to Inflammation or Corruption, and to run either too
slowly, or to precipitate it self upon some part of the body, and overcharge
it; and it is from this, that all the Reasons and Indications for Blood-letting
are taken.

But before I give you the Reasons which oblidge to let Blood, I shall in a few
words explain how Blood is produced in the bodies of Animals, according to the
most probable and curious Opinion, although called New, by many of the old
Physicians; for I fancied I would satisfy the curiosity of many People, by
inserting here this Opinion, which is founded upon many Experiments, the most
convinceing in the World: To comprehend then how the Blood is made, you must
know that the substance of a Horses body, is subject to a continual
dissipation, by reason of the natural heat which incessantly acts against its
radical moisture, therefore Nature, to repair that diminution of its proper
Substance, has given to Creatures a natural Appetite, which excites the animal
appetite; for in time of hunger, the parts sucking and mutually drawing their
nourishment from one another, there is made a divulsion, and consequently a
sense of feeling, which gives them no rest until that appetite be satisfied:
Being in this condition, they take food, cut it, and grind it with their teeth,
then they kned or mix it with the help of their Spittle, and by the assistance
of their Tongue, throw it unto the Stomach, there to be boiled and converted
into a white liquor, called Chyle: The animal Appetite being satisfied and the
breaches repaired, which were made by fasting, the inferior orifice of the
Stomach opens, and suffers the Chyle to run into the small guts, from whence it
is sucked by an infinite number of white Veins, called by reason of their
whiteness, Lacteal, which are dispersed through the whole M^sentery, and carry
the Chyle into two reservoirs or receptacles, about the bigness of a Hens Egg,
situate in the middle of the same Mesentery, betwixt the two productions of the
Diaphragm, and couched all along the Vertebraes of the Loins; from these
reservoirs do arise two Ducts or Channels, called Thoracick, because of their
Situation, or Chyleducts, because of their use; the one is upon the right side,
and the other upon the left, and are about the bigness of a large writing
Quill, they lie all along the great Artery, which is couched upon the body of
the Vertebraes of the Back, and ascending to the Sub-clavian Veins, there
suffer the Chyle to mix with the blood which comes from the brain, to be,
according to the order of Circulation, thrown into the right Ventricle of the
heart, to be there changed into blood, from whence it is again driven into the
lungs, through the Pulmonary Artery, when the Heart compresses it self; from
the lungs it is carried to the left Ventricle, by the Pulmonary Vein, which
has Anastomoses or Communications with the Pulmonary Artery, where it is
perfected and made more pure; then it is sent into the great Artery, from
whence it runs into all the parts of the body for their nourishment: This is a
succinct deduction of the new Opinion concerning Sanguification, let us now
come to those Reasons which oblige us to take blood.

1. The First Reason that obliges us to blood a Horse, is Plenitude, Reasons
for Blood letting.
which is nothing else but an immoderate and excessive quantity of blood; there
are two kinds of it, one, when the Vessels are so very full of blood, that they
can scarce contain it without bursting; the other, when there is more blood
than is needful for the entertainment of the parts, so that Nature cannot
govern it, omne enim nimium naturae inimicum; for although there be no great
fear of the Rupture of a Vein, yet so great a quantity of blood, rarely fails
to oppress and over-heat the Body.

2. The Second Reason is the excessive heat of the blood, which causes it to
sparkle in the Veins; in this case blooding refreshes, and appeases the boiling
of it.

3. The Third Reason that obliges us to let blood, is that we may take away the
corrupt Humors contained in the Veins: which by their putrefaction can only
produce bad effects, therefore nature being eased by this evacuation, does the
more easily digest the rest.

4. The Fourth Reason is, that when the blood has not liberty enough to run,
and pass freely through its vessels; blooding gives it vent, and so
facilitates its motion.

5. The Fifth Reason is, to make a revulsion, by altering its course, when it
carries it self from one part to another with too great impetuosity, and in too
much; bundance; now in this case, people either endeavor to retard its course,
or to p^cure another for it, quite another way.

6. The sixth and last reason for Blood-letting, is to give ease and releif to
any (...) that is overcharged with Blood, and which is performed by Blooding
the (...) afflicted.

Now although the Mass of the Blood, which comprehends all that is contain in
the Veins, does degenerate into Bile, Phlegm, or Melancholy, yet nevertheless
people do not scruple to take Blood; for if it be Bilious, it stands in need of
refresh^^ and cooling, and then it must be taken often, and but a little at a
time.

If the Veins be full of Melancholic Blood, then there will be a necessity to
(...) but a little at a time, and also blood seldom, only to facilitate the
course of the to thick Blood.

If the Blood be Phlegematick, crude, slow, and Cold, then it must (...) taken
in a less quantity, than when it is in any other disposition.

Blood-letting has also its inconveniences, when it is practiced
unseasonably; (...) then it makes a revulsion of the Spirits, which are the
source of strength and of the Natural heat; it (...) also takes away the
aliment appointed for the nourishment (...) the parts, whence it is that a man
is to consult a horse's strength, to know if (...) endure blooding, and also to
consider if the horse be very extenuate, for then he would stand more in need
to be made up by good feeding, then to loss his Blood.

Blooding is most necessary by way of prevention, for all horses which people
(...) well, and cause Labor little; It should be done twice a year, to
preserve the^ from those Diseases, that proceed from that plenitude, which is a
burden to them.

The letting of Blood is very profitable for the cureing of Fevers, the Farcy,
Mange, Strokes of all kinds; for defluxious upon any part of the Body, the Eyes
excepted, for the foundering in the Body, Vertigo, Head-akes, and a great many
other Diseases.

However there are some Authors, who do not approve of Blooding by way of
prevention, saying that if people chance to neglect it, at that time in which
they we: accustomed to practice it, it would occasion some indisposition to the
horse, and the therefore a horse should never be bled by way of prevention, but
in the pale: Philippo Scacco in his treatise Di Mescalzia, is of this sentiment.

Seeing Blood-letting then cures several Diseases, it cannot be doubted but that
it is useful for the preservation of horses from the same Diseases; and if you
neglect it a any accustomed time, then you are in the wrong, especially if your
horse be either heavy, too strongly fed, or out of exercise, but if otherwise,
then you are (...) tied to it.

CHAP. LXVIII. At what times Horses should be let Blood.
NOne I believe call in question, CHAP. LXVIII At what times horses should be
bled.
but that there are some times in the ye^ wherein one humor predomines more
than another; For example, (...) agree that it is the Blood which predominats
in the Spring, in the S^mer Bile, in Autumn Melancholy, and in the Winter
phlegm: That which is preforme in the space of a year, is renewed every six
hours, which is the time wherein the whole Circulation of the Blood is
perfected, as an infinite number of experiments have discovered; and to
explain it briefly, people have remarked that the Heart beats about 4000 times
in an hour, this motion or beating of the heart is called Systolo and Diastole,
which is all one with Dilatation and Compression: By each Diastole the Heart
attracts to it self from the Veins, about half a dram of blood, and by each
Systole sends so much forth from it self into the Arterys, all which being
exactly calculate, a horse will have in his Body about 50. pounds of Blood,
which will all pass through the two Ventricles of the heart in about six hours
space, by running from the Veins to the Ventricles, and from the Ventricles
into the great Artery; and in each tour or Circulation that the Blood makes,
one of the abovementioned humors will be predominant, in the manner following.

From midnight to six a clock in the Morning, it is the Blood that
predominates; from six to twelve a clock in the day it is Phlegm, from twelve a
clock till six at night it is Bile, and from six to midnight it is Melancholy:
This which I affirm may seem to be a Vain discourse, without any kind of
ground or solid foundation, but you may satisfy your self by an easy
experiment, made after this manner.

Endeavor to know the temper of your horse, and let us suppose him to be
bilious, then draw Blood of him betwixt twelve a clock in the day, and six a
clock at night, that is to say about four, and you will find, that as you have
made the evacuation in that time wherein Bile did predomine, so you will have
evecuate a great deal of Bile, which will convince you of the truth of what I
affirm, because it will be almost all Bile; whereas if you should take blood
from the same horse about four a clock in the Morning, which is the time that
blood predominats, you will then find his blood good, and but a little mixture
of Bile amongst it, and so of the other humors.

This change in the Mass of the blood, is a certain token of its circulation,
and in effect if it had not this motion, it would corrupt after the same
manner, as those humors that are in the Body do, who either ly still, or are
stopped in some part of the Body, and which by reason of their putrefaction, are
the cause and origin of many diseases: And Blood, did it not circulate, would
so much the more easily purify, in that it contains in it the principles of
Corruption, to wit Heat and Moisture.

Now this being laid down as a Principle, is it not very advantageous to
evacuate the humor that offends, or causes any indisposition in the Horse? this
may no doubt be done by this Observation, which is to take blood of him in that
time, wherein the humor which a man intends to evacuate does most predomine in
the Veins; but upon the contrary, Blooding will be prejudicial to him, if
practiced at any other time, because there will then be evacuate an humor,
which neither offends in quantity nor quality; it is therefore of greatest
consequence, to observe exactly the time and hour, in which it is most proper
to Blood a horse.

It is also to be remarked, that the Complete Circulation of the blood, is not
always precisely performed each six hours, because of the temper of the horse,
therefore supposing it to be phlegmatic, in that case it will exceed the six
hours, but if it be Bilious, then it will be accomplished in less than six, and
so of the rest; To prevent therefore your being deceived by this, I have
ordered the time of Blooding, to be four hours after that the humor which
should prodominate in that time of circulation, has begun to change and
increase; for example, for such horses as are Bilious at four a clock at night,
that so you may not be mistaken, and perform a Bleeding that will be useless,
and unprofitable for your horse.

I lay down then for an infallible Rule, that the Sanguine horse should be bled
at four in the Morning, the pituitous or Phlegmatic at ten, the Bilious or
fiery at four a clock in the afternoon, and the Melancholic at ten at night;
and if till now, you have performed many Bloodings which have produced bad
effects, it is because you did not know, and make use of these Observations.

Blooding should be also practiced as much as possible, in the increase of the
Moon, and never when she is in the signs of Leo or Taurus when the Blood is to
be taken from the Neck; or if it be from any other part of the Body it is to be
taken, you are then to observe never to take Blood from that part which is
governed by any sign, while the Moon is in that sign; for example, in the
Fore-thighs or plat Veins when the Moon is in Gemiui.

The letting of Blood should be also performed in a calm and clear day, and
which is free from clouds and fogs; because the Veins being emptyed a little by
the Blooding, do immediately attract into their vacuities, the Air which is an
unive^ Spirit, and which if pure and clear will be in no hazard of altering the
bl^^^ but upon the contrary will fill them with pure Atoms, which will rectify
it, whereas if be moist, to open the Veins at such a time, is just to mix with
the blood noysce Serosities, with which the Veins do many times abound:
Moreover, you are to a serve not to let bood when the Moon is in Opposition to
the Sun, that is when it is (...) Moon, nor when they are in Conjunction, which
is new Moon, nor when they (...) in a Square, which is the Quarters, because in
all these times Blooding prejudicial.

Without designing to show my abilities and skill, I can assure you that before
made these observationes, I took sometimes blood from horses, which did alone
cost them their Lives, and that only for once Bleeding; and that since that
time have performed Bloodings, which have manifestly saved them, and that
chiefly, for being caused take it at a proper and seasonable time.

I am therefore hopeful, that having cleared this road and path, some who
(...) Curious will advance and penetrate further in it, and that being grounded
upon true opinion, which is for the Circulation of the Blood, it will discover
to the p^^lick such secrets, as have been hitherto unknown

I had almost forgot to tell you, that you are never to take blood from horses:
the Solstices nor Aequinoxes, for these are times in which Nature is a kind of
(...) ferer, and therefore waits for some Crisis, or other extraordinary
effect; You are then not to incommode her at these times, be cause it may
produce very considerable accidents, and this is to be observed not only upon
the very days themselves but also two days before and as many after: But if
you know certainly the con^^tution and temper of your horse, then if he be
Sanguine, observe to blood him wh^ the Moon is in any of the earthly signs,
which are Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn; if (...) be Choleric, blood him when
the Moon is in a watery sign, such as Cancer, Scop^ or Pisces; if Melancholic,
when the Moon is in an Airy sign, such as Gee^^ Libra, or Aquartus, and if
Phlegmatic, then when the Moon is in any of the fiery signs, which are Aries,
Leo, and Sagittarius: I have added these circumstances purposely for the
Curious, who I know will please it.

CHAP. LXIX. Of the parts of the Body, wherein Horses are commonly bled.
WHen people blood Horses by way of prevention, CHAP. LXIX. Of the parts of the
Body wherein horses are commonly bled.
they should, when (...) convenience will allow them, take it from young Horses
in the (...) or fifth day of the Moon; and from old, when it is three or four
d^^ past the full: young Horses, as well as old, are to be bled as rarely as
possible; (...) also the same of such Horses which pass their Aliments without
being concocted as digested, such as those who have much whole and undigested
Oats amongst th^^ dung, unless it be that the Horse swallow them without
chawing, which is frequently the custom of many Horses.

Neither are you to blood such Horses as are cold and phlegmatic, nor those
wh^^ work in an excessive cold Country, no more than those in other Climats,
in the g^^^ heats, and excessive colds; because during that time, their bodies
stand more in n^^ to be strengthened than weakened.

There are some who observe very exactly, what I hinted a little at in the
prece^^ing Chapter, (and they do very well in so doing, when they are Masters
of the time, and that it is only by way of precaution that they do it) which is
not to draw blood from any of the Members, governed by any of the Celestial
Signs, when the Moon enters into that Sign, whereby the Member is governed that
they intend to take blood from, because at that time, that particular part of
the body will abound with humidity, which might occasion some extraordinary
defluction of humors upon it; and to know exactly what Signs (which in the
Almanacks, and other Astronomical Books are commonly marked with the following
Characters) govern such and such Members, you are to remember that Aries
governs the Head; Taurus the Neck and Throat; Gemini the fore Thighs and Legs;
Cancer the Counter or Breast; Leo the Heart; Virgo the Belly and Guts; Libra
the Back and Reins; Scorpio the Privy-parts; Sagittarius the Thighs;
Capricornus the Knees and Hams; Aquarius the Bones of the Legs and Shanks; and
Pisces the Feet of both the hind and fore Parts; in Rhyme thus: Aries Head,
Taurus Neck, Gemini Arms require,
Cancer Breast, Leo Heart, Virgo Guts desire;
Libra Loins, Scorpio Secrets, Sagitarius Thighs,
Capricorn Knees, Aquarius Legs, and Pisces Feet supplies.


But without having regard to these Observations, whose Foundations may be
debated, People don't scruple when necessity requires, to act without
consulting the Constellations, although without an urgent necessity, they
should not.

Now Horses have a great many Veins through their whole body, which may be seen
in the Anatomy Del Segnior Carlo Ruini, printed at Venice; and in Mr. Snaps
Anatomy of a Horse, in English.

But People most commonly blood them in the Jugular Veins, which lie in each
side of the neck near to the throat, they blood them there for prevention, but
it should never be done when the Moon is in Taurus; this being observed as much
as possible, a Horse may be bled in that part, for several Diseases, as I have
already told you; to wit for the Farcy, Mange, Diseases of Repletion or too
great abundance of Blood, and many others.

People take blood from the Temples, for the infirmities in the Eyes occasioned
by accident, if the Moon be not in Aries; these Infirmities must proceed from
strokes, bites, or blows, and then the Veins in those parts are to be opened
with a small Lance.

Horses are bled beneath the Tongue for Head-akes, or for being disgusted and
overheated by excessive Labor, or for Colicks, and the Vives; people have a
little Lance, made purposly for opening the Veins in that part.

They also bleed Horses in the Gristle of the Nose, by strikeing it through
with an Awl or Botkin, without regarding whether they hit the Vein or not, and
that for Colicks, Vives, and for being very much overheated by excessive
rideing.

As also in the middle of the Palate above the fourth Bar, when a Horse is
disgusted; they bleed them in this part more conveniently with a Lance, than
with a Horn, although people commonly term it, the strikeing a Horse in the
Palate with a Horn; it is good for Horses which are dull, harassed and
overheated.

This bleeding in the Palate, is many times practiced with a great deal of
success, by persons who know not why they do it: They give to their Horses
every first Tuesday of the Month, a stroke in the Palate with a Lance, or sharp
Horn, (in French un Coup de Corn) and then cause receive the blood amongst a
measure of bran, which the Horse afterward eats, and these Horses which are
thus ordered, are observed to thrive extraordinarly; I know no reason for this,
only experience has discovered to me that the practice of it is pretty good,
although I am altogether ignorant of its cause.

If it happen that your Horse lose too much blood, by a stroke thus given him
in the Palate, you are to raise his head very high, by tying a cord about his
upper foreteeth, as if you were going to give him a drench, and then the
blooding will stop of its own accord.

I saw once a Horse who dyed of a stroke, thus given him in the Palate with a
sharp horn, and whereof they could not stop the blooding, neither with Vitriol,
nor with a button of fire, or any thing else they could apply, so that the
Horse lost all his blood and dyed: I have since fallen upon a Remedy that would
have saved him, and w^^ is but a triffle; Take the half of a Walnut-shell, and
applying the hollow i^ of it to the orifice of the Wound, press it a little
hard upon it, and so hold it for quarter of an hour, after which the shell will
stick of its own accord, and so (...) the blood, which perhaps no other remedy
could have done.

People also take blood from the Basilsck or fore-thigh vein, for strains in
the should or when the Mange is in those parts, but this is very rarely done,
and when it is, must be observed that the Moon be neither in the Sign of Gemins
II, nor Cancer (...) and when it is taken from these Veins, it is commonly with
Fleems, and not with Lance.

They take blood from the Pasterns, for strains, infirmities in the Hams and
K^^^ observing that the Moon be not in Aquarius (...); it is taken from those
parts (...) with a Fleem or Lance, as a man has a mind for it.

Horses are let blood of in the Toes, for beating in the Feet, infirmities of
the Le^ such as swellings, and oppression of the Nerves, etc. providing that
the Moon be (...) in Pisces; it is taken in this part with the Butteris or
drawing Iron.

They are bled in the Flanks, for Colicks and other pains in the Belly,
someti^^ also for the Farcy, still observing that the Moon be not in Virgo; the
Veins of (...) Flanks are opened with a small Lance made for that purpose.

In the flat of the Thighs, for blows and strains in the hanches, taking notice
(...) the Moon be not in Sagittarius; it is drawn there with Fleems.

In the Tail or Dock, for the Fever and Pursyness, but then it is to be noticed
(...) the Moon be not in Scorpio; people take it in this part with a long Lance.

When a man bleeds a Horse, he should always make a good large Orifice in the
Vein, that so the most thick and terrestrial Blood may be evacuated, because
when the Orifice is too small, it is only the most subtle of the blood that is
drawn, so that is this case the blooding does more hurt than good.

I have made these Observations of the Celestial Signs, which are good when the
Disease will allow you the time, to make choice of your own hour for
blood-letting; but if the Disease be pressing, then there is neither Sign nor
Constellation, which should delay or hinder it.

CHAP. LXX. Of the Precautions to be observed in Blood-letting.
WHen a man intends to blood a Horse, he should not only let him rest the day
before, but also the day following.

He should likewise choose for it, as I have already said, a day that fair and
calm, CHAP. LXX. Precautions to be observen in blood-letting.
and if he be a young Horse, that it be in the increase of the Moo^^^ if old,
then after the Full; and also take care that the Horse be tied up early in
(...) morning to the Rack, and that he neither get Water nor Combing, for fear
of too (...) moving and agitating his Spirits; then he is to draw with a pair
of Fleems, (...) should be of a reasonable breadth, for the Reason before
given, about three pounds blood, and then to leave him tied to the Rack for two
hours.

After which he shall give him some scalded Bran, or a Mash, and seeing our
Author has not in any part of his Book, given the least Directions to make
one, by Reason, I judge, that they are not much made use of in France Malt
being but very scarce there, because of the small quantity of Ale they drink;
yet since it is a mixture very good for Horses, and much used in these Islands,
I have thought fit to set down in this place, the true Method of making a good
Mash, as follows.

Take four English Quarts, or half a Peck, of good well ground Malt, How to
make a Mash.
and put it into a Pailor wooden Vessel by it self; then take a Gallon, or four
English Quarts of fair Water, and set it on the fire, and when it has boiled a
very little, put as much of it into the Malt as will moisten it, working and
stirring them with a piece of flat wood, after which, pour in the rest of the
Water, and mix all very well together, then cover up the Vessel closs with a
double covering, or some Clothes, and let it stand thus for two hours, or till
such time as you intend to give it to your Horse; the Mash being thus made, and
your Horse ready to take it, uncover the Vessel, and with your hand stir all
well together, crushing and squeezing the Mait as much as possible, and when
lukewarm, give it the Horse to drink: It must. I say, be little more as milk
warm, when he takes it, and if it should prove either too hot, or too thick,
when you are to give it, you may rectify both, by adding a little cold Water
to it, but be sure not so much, as to make it either too cold, which would turn
it raw, or too thin, which would abate a great deal of its pleasant taste and
strength: You may also, if you intend he should eat none of the Grain or Malt,
(a little whereof can never do him prejudice) squeeze the Liquor quite from it,
and so let him drink it, throwing away the Malt, or rather giving it to your
Hogs or Cows.

This is the best Method I know to make a good Mash, which in many cases is
found to agree well with Horses, especially such as are any-wise indisposed, or
sick, and which was therefore the cause of my setting it down in this place,
our Author not having, as I have said, made the least mention of it, to my
knowledge, in his whole Book.

The Germans cause gallop their Horses before blooding, to the end say they,
that the bad blood which is as the Lee, may be mixed with the good, and so both
drawn together; but they are deceived in this, because the blood is filled with
Spirits, which being agitate and stirred up with this kind of coursing, does
immediately evaporate in a great abundance, with the most subtle part of the
blood, when ever the Vein is opened, so that blooding after this manner, is
more prejudicial than profitable.

If those who thus cause their Horses gallop before blood-letting, were
persuaded of the Circulation of the Blood, they would not be in so gross an
Error, as to believe that the Blood is with the same tranquillity in the Veins,
as Wine is in a Hogs-head, whose Lee lies at bottom; but would be convinced,
that the whole Mass of the Blood circulates, as well the gross part, as that
which is more subtle; seeing then this is so, there is no need of any violent
agitation of it, such as galloping, to oblige it to come forth, but rather upon
the contrary, the Horse should be kept calm and quiet, for fear of evacuating
and lossing too many of his Spirits, as I have already explained.

Those who are very careful of their Horses, cause them eat only Bran in place
of Oats, both the day before Blooding, the day it self, and the day thereafter,
and for these three days they should also let them rest, or at least that day
wherein they are bled, and also give them only bran in it.

You are also in taking blood, to regulate the quantity according as your Horse
is a great feeder, and as his Veins are full and stretched, and accordingly as
it issues forth with violence, having still regard to the quality of the
Disease, his Strength, Age, and the Season.

It is a general Maxim, that a man, without very good and pressing Reasons, she
(...) never make great evacuations by blood-letting, because there is made by
it a too (...) dissipation of the Spirits, whereby the Horse is weakened, so
that his Members (...) so easily perform their functions; as also, there are
thereby formed crudities i^ Veins, which are the Source and Origin of several
Diseases.

CHAP. LXXI. How to judge of the Quantity, and Quality of Blood.
ALthough it is not the common Practice of Farriers, to receive a Horse's (...)
into a Vessel, when they open any of his Veins, it is however very ^^^^^sary,
CHAP LXXI How to judge of the Quantity and Quality of Blood.
that so a man may first judge of the Quantity he takes from (...) and
afterward of its Quality.

Therefore when a Man opens a Horse's Vein, he should instead of letting (...)
Blood fall to the ground, receive it into a convenient Vessel, the contents
whereof should have measured before hand, to know how many pounds of Water it
contain^ that so he^ may proportionably draw as many pounds of Blood in the
same Vessel; (...) example, a Man knows how much space two English Quarts of
Water take up in a Vessel, the same space will be filled with four pounds of
Blood, for an English Qua^^ of Water weighs about two pound, and Blood is near
of equal weight with Water having drawn the quantity of Blood he designs to
evacuate, he shall let it fix and ^^^geal, that he may the better judge of its
quality; now although Blood be somewh^^ lighter then Water, yet the difference
is so very inconsiderable, that it is not (...) noticeing.

You shall then, when you blood a Horse, observe if it run calmly and slowly,
(...) without any impetuosity, as also if it cleave to your fingers when you
touch it, (...) cause if it do, it is a sign that it is Viscuous, and will be
subject to occasion obstru^^^ons; therefore in that case, you are to Blood your
Horse frequently; for this kin^ (...) Blood is a sign of Repletion, or that the
horse has too great abundance of it.

Blood which froaths much, when received into a Vessel at a pretty distance,
^^tokeneth heat, and an Agitation of the Spirits, from whence people conclude
the horse is overheated, either by superfluous nourishment or too violent
labor, or othe^wise that he is of a vigorous constitution; such horses should
be let blood at (...) twice in the year, by way of prevention.

When Blood coagulates soon and easily after it is drawn, and has a great
ma^^^bers in it, it is a sign that its substance is thick and terrestrial; but
if it with di^^^ty congeal, then it is more fluid and subtle.

If the Blood be very Serous, that is, Watery, it betokens a weakness in the
(...) or an obstruction in the Veins, or at least that the Pores of the skin
are stopped (...) Dust, for not being well Curryed and dressed, and which hinders
the insensible tra^^^ration and exhalation of those Vapors, which are the
Excrements of the third and (...) Concoction, that is performed in the habit of
the Body.

Blood whose superfice is Yellow, but black beneath, betokens a great deal of
(...) and that Bile predomines.

Blood full of phlegm and water, is a sign that the horse is of a cold and
moist ^^^plexion, and that he should be very seldom let Blood, except upon a
necessity.

Blood of a plumbeous or earthly color, betokens that a horse is Melancho^^
and that he should be but seldom bled: The Blood of Asses is of this color.

In a word, if the Blood be very Red, it is a sign it is good; if yellow, that
it is Bilious; if Pale and whiteish, that is not well prepared, and that it is
charged with phlegm; but if it be livide and greenish, that then he is
Melancholic and terrestrial.

That you may judge of the Quality of Blood after it is received into a Vessel,
you are to set it in a place where the Sun may not dry it, and without also
exposing it to smoke, Wind, or Dust, or any thing else that may be prejudicial
to the exact discerning of it.

If Blood will not congeal and fix, it is a sign that the horse is full of bad
humors, and that he stands in need of reiterate Blooding in a small quantity,
and to be purged to take away the Cacochymy, that is, those corrupt Humors
which by their putrefaction over-heat the Blood in the Veins, and thereby are
the cause of all Diseases, this kind of blood is the worst of any; neither
should such horses be bled too abundantly at a time, but by degrees and little
at once, taking care to purify the blood, after it has been preceeded by
purgatives.

When the blood is Viscuous and thick, and that when you break it with your
Fingers, it immediately rejoins and continues firm having a good color, then it
denotes plenitude, and consequently that the horse should be frequently bled.

If you would judge of the quality of blood by its taste, that which is
sweetest is the best and most natural; if it be inspide it is pituitous and
phlegmatic; if bitter, it is Bilious and Choleric; if it be acid or stiptick,
it is terrestrial and Melancholic; but if saltish, then it betokens Brackish
phlegm.

It is also good to observe, that when horses stand equally in need of blooding
and purging, it is fittest to begin with bleeding, because it cools, and
thereby may hinder the purgation, which is of an over-heating quality, to
inflame the Humors; because for the most part, a purgative Medicament stirs
up Humors which it does not evacuate, so that if you should immediately take
blood while the excited humors are thus in agitation, the Veins would presently
attract to themselves, that stirred up humor which was not evacuate, and which
being once in the Veins, is capable to spoil the rest of the good blood.

In fine, blood-letting contributes much to the giving a Man the true knowledge
of a horse's constitution, because it discovers his Temperament, and the humor
which predomines, more certainly then any other evidence or mark, whether of
Color or any thing else; as also a man may thereby judge of his inward health
and vigor.

CHAP. LXXII. Amethod, whereby to maintain or preserve horses in health.
Sect. 1.
IT is not enough to cure horses which are diseased; CHAP. LXXII A Method to
preserve horses in health
It would be more Glorious and useful to prevent their falling Sick; which
Vigotius tells very plainly; melius est diligents studio cu^edire sanutatem,
quam aegritudinibus praesiare remedia; that is, that it is a great deal more
commendable to preserve horses in health, than to recover them when sick.

I have already discoursed of the Entertainment of horses upon Travel, Sect. 1.
or when they remain at home, and also given necessary precautions relating to
both; but of those Medicaments which should be made use of to prevent Diseases,
I have said (...) very little.

The same Author imploys the 57.58.59. and 40. Chapters, in appointing Drench^
to be given in the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, for the preservation
(...) horses all the Year long; but as that is very troublesome, I never either
made try^ of, or experimented his Remedies.

After having turned over many a book, and tried Remdies of diverse kinds, I
have found none better than this I am about to propose to you; It was
communicated (...) me by a German Lieutenant of Horse, which has obliged me to
give the Powder (...) Name, he was so well versed in the Cure of horses, that
he frequently bought (...) those which were past hopes of recovery, Sect. 1.
in which he succeeded beyond the expectatie of the most experienced: Since my
return from Germany, I have fallen upon the meth^ to make use of prepared
Antimony for horses, with which I have not only prevence Diseases, but have
also fatned them in a short time beyond all hopes, their skin cleaning to their
very bones; if you cause them eat every Morning, two Ounces of (...) Liver of
Antimony in fine Powder mixed amongst their wet Bran, and that for the space of
fifteen days, the Liver of Antimony being prepared as I shall show you in the
67 Chap. of the 2d part Sect. 14. you will, I assure you, not only prevent
Diseases, (...) also put your horses in a condition to undergo the greatest
fatigues, and that for the reasons I have all along given, in discoursing of
its composition.

I will not enlarge upon the advantages of this powder, but I can assure you i^
never failed me, and that it is the most efficacious remedy I have known made
use of, for the prevention of diseases in horses, and also for cureing a great
man These are the true means, whereby to preserve horses from the distempers in
the He^^ for such as have taken it have been happily preserved.

The Lieutenants Powder is difficult to be prepared, therefore it is fit you
addre^ your self to some skillfull and faithful Apothecary, who will spare
neither his pain^ nor diligence to compose it exactly; therefore if you design
to have it well made, either prepare it your self, or see it prepared, or at
least be sure that the person to whom you trust its composition, be honest and
faithful; The powder is as follows.

Sect. 2. The Lieutenants Powder, which is a Preventer as well as Curer of
Diseases.
THis powder should be prepared rather in Summer as in Winter; take the Leaves
of Sage, Sect. 2.
and Carduus benedictus dried in the shade, of each th^^^ Ounces, Roots of long
Birth-wort, and Leaves of Fluellin, in La^^ Veronica, of each two Ounces dried
also in the shade, beat all into course powder and putting them into a Glazed
earthen pot, imbibe or soak them well with g^^ Spirit of Wine, after which
cover the earthen Vessel with another; lute well the joining, and then expose
it to the Sun, if in Summer, or set it in a warm place, if Winter, such as the
heat of a stove, or of an oven when the Bread new drawn.

When the powder is perfectly dry, reimbibe it with new Spirit of (...) which
must be done for three times, keeping the Vessels exactly closs luted, and
^^ing it well after every time as I have told you; while you are a doing this,
prep^ the rest as follows.

Take of the juice of Liquorish, roots of Elecampane, and of the Missle-toe of
(...) or in place of it Zedoary, of each three Ounces, of Gentian four Ounces,
of (...) berries, Anniseeds and Cummin-seeds, of each two Ounces,
Angelica-roots of Bohemia two Ounces, of Cross-wort or Devils-bit, and if you
can get neither of these, take in their place, of China-root two Ounces: Beat
all into powder and mix them well, putting them also into a Glazed Vessel, to be
imbibed as the preceding ingredients, with the following decoction, taking
always care that the two vessels be exactly well luted.

Take of the missle-toe of Pear Tree, Apple Tree, or Oak, Sect. 2.
and of the roots of Mallows bruised; as much of the one as of the other; then
half as much of the Herb Lung-wort, or that of Coltsfoot, all gathered fresh
if possible, make of all a decoction with Old White Wind, causing the roots to
boil in it, about half a^ hour before you throw in the Leaves, then having
Squeized out the Liquor, imbibe with it the last mentioned mixture of powders,
until it be all thoroughly wet, then cover the Glaized earthen Vessel in which
you have put it, with another exactly adjusted to it, and luteing well their
joynings set it in the Heat of the Sun, or in the moderate heat of a stove,
until it be perfectly dry; after which reimbibe it a Second time with, the same
decoction, letting it dry again, the Vessels being still kept closs and well
luted: but the Third time you shall soak and moisten this powder with the
Spirit of wine, letting it also dry with a moderate heat in the Luted earthen
Vessels, as before; when it is dry, mix the First powder and this very well
together, all which being thoroughly dried shall be exactly well beat together
and mixed, and kept very closs pressed, in either a glass Vessel, or leather
bag, as a precious and excellent Powder.

Now when a Man would preserve a horse from any indispositions which might
befall him, he should every third month, or at least every sixth, give his horse
in two measures of Bran, two Spoonfulls or an Ounce and a half of this powder,
the Bran being first a little moistened with water, that so the powder may
cleave to it, after which he is to tie him up for two hours to the Rack,
without suffering him to eat; and this he is to continue for five or six days,
which will prevent and stop the course of many diseases.

If a horse be disgusted, give him a Dose of this powder in the manner
following: The use of the Lieuten^ powder.
Let him fast six hours, and then mixing two ordinary Spoonfuls, or an Ounce
and a half of this powder, with half an English pint of White Wind, and as much
of a healthful Child's Urine, give it to the horse, which should also be kept
after taking it, six hours without eating.

If a horse's Eye be dull, his Hair stareing, or that he be not according to
his usual custom hearty, then give him a dose of this powder.

It is excellent for all kinds of Colicks, for the Vives, and for the Grips and
pains in the Belly, by administering a dose, so soon as the indisposition is
discovered.

It is good for Colded horses, which cast and cough; For Rhumes, Strangle and
False-strangle.

For the diseases in the head it cures them infallibly, if it be given in the
beginning of the distemper, and so soon as a man perceives the horse to forsake
his meat or loss his Appetite.

For horses which have suffered much in the Army, or which cannot be made
easily up and fatned, it performs wonders upon them; In fine, for all diseases
which proceed from a cold cause, crudities or indigestions, it is excellent;
giving it either amongst moistened Oats, wet Bran, or more properly amongst
White Wind and Child's Urine, as I have already ordered.

This powder has many other Virtues, which its use will more fully discover to
you.

CHAP. LXXIII. The Names and Virtues of Ointments, Emplasters, Oils, and
distilled Waters, commonly made use of for Horses.
Sect. 1.
THe four hot Ointments are the Ointments of Aregon, Martiatum, A^^^ and
Agrippa. CHAP. LXXIII The Names and Virtues of Ointments Emplasters etc.
commonly made use of for horses.


The Vnguentum Aregon has derived its Name from its effects, see Aregon in
Arabic signifies helpful; Its virtues are to heat, Attenuate, and digest and
is therefore excellent in the cold distempers of the Nerves.

The Martiatum, takes its Name from the person who invented it; It is g^^ for
coldness in the brain, and particularly to mollify hard Swellings, as also
(...) the cold affections of the Nerves and joints.

The Althaa has its Name from its Basis or fundation, which is the (...)
Mallow; The four hot Ointments.
It Heats, Moistens, Lenifies, Digests, expells the intemperatness of C^^^ is
profitable for hardened Nerves, corrects what is too dry, and rectifies the
(...) humors which are contained in the Muscles.

The Agrippa derives its Name from one Agrippa King of Judea; it is p^^^ for
softning, as also it Attenuates, and incides or cuts powerfully, discusses
(...) or insensible Phlegmatic tumors, and is good for all inveterate pains^
the Nerves. The four cold Ointments.


The four cold Ointments are, the Album Rhasis, Mesu's Ointment of (...) the
Populneum, and the Vnguentum Refrigerans Galent.

The Album Rasis is good for heats, excoriations, and blistering of the (...)
for Galling, and Ulcers proceeding from heat, intemperatness, or too great
(...) in any part, and other imperfections of the skin.

The Ointment of Roses appeases inflammations, and the Erysiely or (...)
Authony's fire.

The Populueum continues no longer good than a year, because its coo^ Virtue is
through time quite lost, and the heat of the Grease which enters into (...)
composition, Surmounts the refrigerating quality of the other ingredient it
provokes sleep, is good for feverish persons, and for Head-akes proceeds from
heat, if the forehead and temples be Anointed with it; It is also very go to
be given for cooling in Glysters, useing betwixt two and four Ounces (...) it
at a time.

As for the refrigerating Ointment of Galen, it is mighty refreshing as cooling.

There are also other Emplasters and Ointments much in use for horses, to (...)
the Diachylum Magnum, which mollifies hardnesses, and either resolves Swelling
or brings them to maturity; The Nutritum, otherwise called Triphar^^^ which is
good for the imperfections of the skin, and to dry up Ulcers; The Unguentum De
Belo, which Cools, Binds, and Strengthens, it is good in the beginning of hot
defluxions, especially for Erysipelys; The Pompholix, for pricks and
Street-Nails, and besides, it also dryes up Ulcers; The Stiptick Ointment, for
horses whose fundaments fall out, by reason of the violence occasioned by some
effort or stress.

Sect. 2. Of other Ointments and Emplasters made use of for Horses.
THe Emplast: of Melilot, Mollifies all hardnesses and dispells wind. Sect. 2.


The Basilicon, Ripens by cleansing and drawing.

The Unguent. Rubrum, incarnates, Asswageth pain, and heals up wounds.

The Vng. Egyptiacum, cleanses Ulcers and Fistulaes, removes Corruption, and
eats away the Dead-flesh more powerfully then the Vng. Aposlolorum; as also it
dryes up wounds.

The Emplast: Divinum, is good for Malignant Ulcers, it consumes their putre^
faction, and advances the ripening of Tumors.

I shall here give you the Receipt of a Plaster, An approved receipt for Corns
in men's feet.
for easing the pains occasioned by Corns in Men's feet, which I have always
found succeed very well; Take three Drams of Emplast. Divinum, and putting it
into a little glazed earthen pot, melt it over a gentle heat, adding to it a
small spoonful of Olive Oil, to keep the plaster from burning as it melts;
being melted take it from the fire, continually stirring it about, and when it
begins to cool, add to it one Dram of good sweet Sublimate in fine Powder, and
continue still stirring it off the fire, until it be perfectly cold: Take a
little of this Plaster, and spreading it upon either a piece of fine Linen
cloth or Cambrick, apply it to the Corns, and let it continue at them for 24
hours, at the end of which time as you are going to bed, remove the Plaster,
and with your Nail scratch as much from your Corns, as you can conveniently
take away, after which apply the very same Plaster again, and I assure you,
within two days you will scarcely feel any pain; after four days apply a fresh
plaster, continueing still to scratch your Corns, at the end of every 24 hours
as you go to bed, and at last you will take them wholly away, but after the
second day you will have no more pain.

The Emplast: Oxycrotium, mollifies hardnesses, and removes pains proceeding
from a cold cause.

The Emplast: Aureum, is good for agglutinating, incarnating, and easing pain,
as also for making the hoofs grow.

The Emplast: De Betonica, is good for wounds and Ulcers in the head.

The Diapalma which the Apothecaries call Diacalcitios (a strange and hard word
only to amuse people) stops Defluxions, and heals Ulcers.

"The Ointment of Montpelier, for Swellings and to strengthen.
"The Dukes Ointment, for Tumors and hot Inflammations.
"The Vng: Oppodeldoch, for dried up, and torn or rent shoulders.
"The Hermits Ointment, is admirable for Horses Wounds.
" Monsieur Curty's Plaster, for pricks in the feet and Street-Nails
"The Ointment of Plantane, for Brittle-hoofs and to make the horn grow.
These six last Compositions, are those most made use of for horses, and are
described in the 2d Part of this Book, as may be seen by the Alphabetical
Table, which is at the end of the said part.

I shall here also set down Black-Soap, although it is properly neither ranked
amongst Ointments nor Plasters, but seeing it is a powerful resolver of Tumors
and Swellings, and also that it is excellent for drying up the white, corrupt,
and stinking Humors in Horses Legs, I thought it deserved to be set down in
this place.

There are many other Ointments and Plasters in the 2d Part, which are almost
all of my own invention; there are likewise a great many Descriptions of Oils,
Ointments, Plasters etc. In Bauderon, Du Renou, Scroderus, and in the Works of
la Franaboisiere, as also in the new Dispensatory of Zwelfer, and several
others, who all of them show their Compositions and Virtues.

Sect. 3. Of the Oils commonly made use of for horses.
THe Oil of, Sect. 3.
Violets takes away Inflammations, tempers the heat of Impostum^ and eases pain.

The Oil of Lillies, heats, resolves, and digests humors which occasion pain.

The Oil of Iris, removes aches proceeding from a cold Cause, and advances the
ripening of Tumors; it penetrates more powerfully, and is a greater Resolver
than the Oil of Lillies, but is less Anodyne.

The Common Oil of Roses is good for inflammations, it keeps back Defluxions,
a^^ is good for stopping the impetuous motion of humors.

The Oleum Rosarum Omphacinum, is more cooling than the former, and is
excellent for aches or pains proceeding from a hot Cause; it also fortifies the
Stomach and other intestines, and is astringent.

The Oil of Camomil or Melilot, heats and resolves indifferently; it also eases
pairs proceeding from a cold cause, and strengthens wonderfully the Nerves.

The Oilof Hypericum, which we call St John's Wort, is the true Balsam of the
Nervous parts, it cures Burnings, and pricks with Nails or Stubs, and is also
Anodyne and Diuretic.

The Oil of Laurel or Bays, I mean that which is true, and not that which is
commonly sold in Parts, in which there is not above the fourth part of the Oil
of L^^^ and the other three only of Swines Seam, to which they give the true
Color by a little Verdigrise in fine powder; it is not I say this kind of it
which I here mean, but the^e and unsophisticate Oil of Laurel, which resolves
powerfully, and gives ease (...) indispositions of all the parts proceeding
from a cold cause, but especially to those (...) the Nerves and Joints.

The Oil of Dwarf-Alder-Seeds, asswages all kind of Akeings in the joints, and
(...) sipates gross Phlegm.

The Oil of Earthworms, is good for the Nerves, all pains in the joints, and
is (...) Anodyne or softning.

The Oil of Rue, is a great Resolver, it heats and attenuats gross humors, exp^
wind, and is good for the Colic and Convulsion.

The Oil of Marjoram, is good for the Nerves, and the cold affection the Brain.

The Oil of Gabian, is an Oily juice or rather Bitumen, which comes forth (...)
the Water, in a spring near Besiers in Languedock; it is hot as are all the
Petrolaus (...) Bitumenous Oils proceeding from Rocks, whereof Dioscorides
discourses at large, and is good for pricks, Street-nails, etc. it also
fortifies, resolves, and attenuats or makes this Viscuous and thick humors, it
is also good for the Nerves, and all pains proceeding from a cold cause.

The Oil of Petrolaeum is more penetrating than the Gabian, and has the same
effect only it causes a greater Inflammation and Swelling; it is good for the
strains of (...) shoulders and Haunches, and other fleshy parts, where there is
a necessity for the M^^cament to soke through the Flesh, that so it may
dissipate the Humors the Gathered.

The Oleo Dysasso, is a kind of Petrolaeum clear as Essence; it is found in the
Tetories of the Duke of Modena, and is commonly also sold at Parma, as well as
in Moles it is a kind of Petrolaeum which is rare in France, and is as
penetrating as any, ^e^ composed of very subtle parts; it is admirable for all
cold pains, and resolves powe^fully, but it must be used with discretion,
because it is extremely hot.

The Essence or Oil of Turpentine, is excellent for the Nervous parts, and
strains in the joints; but then it must not be often applied to one part, for
it would burn the Skin, and make it fall away in pieces

There are several other kinds of Oils, but because it would be Tedious to set
down here all their Virtues, therefore if you desire to know them, and which is
more, to compose them, look to the Alphabetical Table at the end of the second
Part; or otherwise read the Authors I have already cited, as also Joubert,
Rondelet, and others.

Sect. 4 Of the distilled Waters commonly made use of for Horses.
FOr the Infirmities of the Eyes, people make use of the Waters of Celandin,
Sect. 4.
Eye bright, Fennel, Roses, and Honey-suckle.

For the Breast and Lungs, that of the Burr-dock, Camomil, Elecampane,
Coltsfoot, and Violets.

The Cordial-Waters, are those of Carduus benedictus, Borrage, Bugloss, Roses,
The cordial waters, and Flowers.
and Violets; these four last are the four Cordial Flowers.

As also the Waters of Spanish Scorzonera, Mead-sweet, Scabious, and others,
where of the use is admirable in Horses Fevers.

The Waters for the Liver, are those of Agrimony, and the Sharp poynted Dock.

The Waters which provoke Urine, are those of Parsley Roots, Radishes, Juniper
berries, Pellitory of the Wall, and Gromel.

Those which provoke Sweat, are the Waters of Carduus benedictus, Mead-sweet,
and Butter-burr.

The Vulnerary Water, and second Water, in French Eau Second, are good for
Wounds, which have false, proud, and spongeous Flesh growing about them,
because they take away its itching quality.

These are in short the Ointments, Plasters, Oils, and Waters which people
make most commonly use of for Horses, as also those which are expressly
appropriate to the temperature of Horses, as you may see more at large in the
2d. Part.

CHAP. LXXIV. How to die the Manes and Tails of Horses, of either a Scarlet or
Gold Color, which will continue fresh and lively for a long time; as also to
make a White Star in a Horses Forehead.
Sect. 1.
SInce the third Impression of this Book, CHAP. LXXIV How to Die the Manes an^
Tails of Horses, etc.
People have begun to Die their Horses Manes and Tails of a Scarlet Color, as
is practiced by the Hungarians, Polonians, and Cravats, which Color makes a
pretty enough show upon White Horses, I therefore fancyed it would not be
disagreeable to the Reader, that he here find an easy Method to perform it,
which I have many times experimented, and with very (...) Charges: It is to be
observed that they are only the white Manes and Tails (...) can receive this
Color, and of whatever Color the Horse be it matters not, I providing his
Mane and Tail be white, they will take on the dye, but the hairs (...) are
black will continue so, and receive no other Color but the natural; The Secret
(...) is this.

Take two Ounces of a Root which you will find in the Druggists, called M^dde;
Latin Rubia Tinctorum, beat it coursly, and put it into a glazed Pot, which
will^ dure the fire, with an English Pint and a half of Claret Wine, and a
small Glasfull^ Olive or Walnut Oil; put the hair of the Horses Tail or Mane
into the Pot, stop it all closs about with a course Cloth, or Wisps of Hay
or Straw, that none of it (...) evaporate; then hold beneath the pot, a
Chafin-dish full of burning Charcoal, Coal-cinders, blowing it with a pair of
Bellows, and keeping it so until the Li^ has boiled about a quarter of an
hour; Sect. 1.
and that the Horse may not feel the he^^ the Fire, you are to cause hold a
Board betwixt the Chafer and Horse, taking (...) care that there be only the
hair in the Pot, and nothing of the Horses Dock, be^^ he could not suffer it;
when it has boiled about a quarter of an hour, take (...) the Mane or Tail out
of the Pot, and wash it immediately in a Pail of clean Water, (...) which it
will be of a beautiful Scarlet Color: but if it should not prove to be (...)
deep enough Die, then close it up in the Pot a second time, and make it boil
(...) some fresh Liquor, for a quarter of an hour as before, after which wash
it again (...) Water; this color will remain so long as the hair continues,
although the (...) Mane should be washed once every day.

I believe the Root of Alkanet or Orchanet would perform the like effect;
howeve^ never made trial of it, but seeing it has the Quality to die Red, as
well as M^^^ there is a great probability that it would succeed; it is easy to
make trial of it.

Sect. 2. How to Die the Mane and Tail, of a Yellow or Gold-Colour.
THere is a Root, called Terra Merita, which being made use of as the fore will
in all probability tinge the Mane and Tail of a Yellow or Gold^ lour, Sect. 2.
however I will not be positive in it, having never experiment^ but the trial
of it will not cost much, if you use it after the same method (...) Wine and
Oil, as you did the Rubia Tinctorum.

Sect. 3. How to make a White Star in a Horses Forehead.
I Promised to give in this Book, Sect. 3.
a Method for making a Star or white Man Horses forehead, but I have observed
it to succed so ill, that I do not advi^^ to rely much upon it, nor to trouble
your self to enquire after other methods for it, because the Hollanders who
practice it daily, to make their Horses, which are ^^ly black, resemble those
who have naturally Stars in their Foreheads, do thereby ny times render them
more ugly than beautiful; therefore without warranting any thing relating to
it, if you have such a design, I shall tell you that they cause roast a large
Onion amongst hot Embers or Ashes, and being almost thoroughly roasted, they
divide it in two, and dip it into scalding hot Walnut Oil, after which, they
immediately apply the flat side of it, to that part of the forehead where they
intend to make the Star, and there keep it for half an hour, after which they
take it away, and anoint the scalded Place with the Ointment of Roses; in a
short time the Scarf-skin falls away, and there grows up in the new one, some
white hairs, but the Star in the middle remains always without hair, as may be
observed in all such Horses, which people have attempted to mark artificially
after this manner.

CHAP. LXXV. A Discourse of Breeding, and how to Raise or Bring up a Good and
Beautiful Race of Horses.
IT is a thing known the whole World over, that the goodness of Horses does
partly depend upon the trueness of the Race, CHAP. LXXV. A Discourse of
breeding Horses
and the good and wholesome Nourishment they receive in their youth; People may
raise a good Breed, if they provide themselves with good and beautiful
Stallions and Stud-Mares; Their good Nourishment depends upon the quality of
the grounds where they run, upon their manner of feeding when housed, and the
method of governing them while young.

The knowledge of these things is partly grounded upon Reason, but Experience
is the Great Master, which can alone support Reason, so that without this Fund
of Experience, any Knowledge is but unfruitful: neither can it be acquired, but
by those who keep a Breed, or who have had at least the oversight and
government o^ one; but neither the one nor other of these Persons, have taken
the pains to leave any thing relating to it to the Public; For my part, I know
so much of it, as the Curiosity I had to inform my self thereof, in such places
where there were good Breeds, has taught me: I have also drawn some
Observations from Colts which I have seen brought up, but that knowledge not
being sufficient enough to communicate to the Public, I have with care perused
those Authors, who have writ of it in the French Language, amongst whom there
is none who gives such exact instructions thereanent, as the Great Duke of
Newcastle, one of the most accomplished Noblemen in England, who had always a
most beautiful Stable of Horses, many of which have been frequently seen
perform the most difficult and graceful Aires in the Manage; he took also, of
a long time, all imaginable care to have from his Breed, excellent Horses, and
such as might be capable to succeed in the manage; and as he made it his chief
divertisement, so he did not neglect to observe all such precautions, as he
judged would best contribute to yield him that pleasure, which he did
effectuate so much the more easily, in that he spared neither Charges nor
Labor to succeed in it; he had by Experience acquired the knowledge of those
Means, which he knew would bring him to it: Also it is very well known that
there have been most beautiful and excellent Horses, taken out of his Race, not
only for furnishing his own Stables, but also for gratifying his Friends: It is
therefore to be supposed, that what he has given to the Public on this
matter, cannot fall to be Excellent; but because his Book is rare, and that
people can but with difficulty procure (...) as well because of the excessive
Rate it is sold at, as because of the small number (...) Coppies which were
printed, and also that for a short Discourse, which is only use to such as have
the Curiosity to keep a Breed, every one has not the (...) buying a large
Volume, which treats of many curious things, proper for an (...) Master of
Horses, but not so very useful for a private Gentleman, I fancied I would (...)
the Public a piece of useful Service, if I presented it with what he writ upon
(...) Subject, as a thing both excellent in its kind, and also founded upon an
Experience of many years.

John Tacquet has writ pretty well of the method of raising a good Breed,
where gives very good Remarks, taken from ancient Authors, such as Aristotle,
Pliny, Z^^phon, etc. But that old Method is much improven of late, as you will
see by wh^^ faithfully relate, from the Writings of the Duke of Newcastle upon
this matter, wh^^ I shall exactly discover to you the true method he takes to
instruct his Reader, ^^claring, that I don't in the least pretend to assume to
my self the glory of what he h^ writ upon this Subject, lest I fall into the
fault of a modern Author, who being ^ cused of giving to the Public, a
Treatise taken Verbatim from another, without (...) much as either mentioning
the Authors Name, or the Title of the Book from where he Coppied it, would to
excuse himself, have alleged, that I had done the very (...) with the Duke of
Newcastle's Treatise of raising a breed of Horses; but the Reader (...) I
think, easily discern the difference there is, betwixt a man's ingenuously
nameing (...) Author from whom he has collected any thing, and attributing to
him the (...) Honor of it, and his coppying a whole Treatise, word by word,
without me^^oning its Author, that so he may assume the honor of it to
himself, by making it (...) for his own; but to put a close to this digression.

The Duke of Newcastle begins with the choice of a good Stallion, as the
foundation of a good Race, and wherein many people fail, in so far as they
neither enquire after those that are good and beautiful, but only such as are
cheapest, without ever considering if they be either too old or too young; It
is but to deceive ones self, to buy some old Jade that can do no more, for
having waited four or five years in great expectation of the Colt which came of
him, you will come at last to know that he is not worth his meat, because it
stands a man as much to maintain a bad Horse as (...) good; it is the loss of
time, and maintenance of a Horse that are most considerable and by buying a bad
Stallion, a man loses both, whereas the Price of a good one ^ing once for all
laid out, a man in a short time brings in his money again with (...)
pleasure, and a great deal of profit, if not usury; and the truth of this has
been ^^ry well known of late, for our Invincible Monarch, whose care extends
over all, (...) caused distribute both good and beautiful Stallions, to all
such parts where there is ^^^veniency for raising a Breed, that so having by
this method plenished his (...) with good Horses, he might not be necessitate
to send to Foreign Kingdoms for Horses, which could be easily enough bred up
in France, provided they had but good S^^lions, of which he has made a
plentiful Provision.

For Example, there comes yearly out of Low Bretagne, betwixt eight and (...)
thousand pretty good Horses, but the best come from these three Bishoprics,
(...) Lion, and Cornoale, but of all Trigvier is the Chief Nursery, for people
affirm that the^^ are in that one Bishopric, upwards of 20000 Mares, you may
then judge by this, (...) if they had had good and beautiful Horses for
Stallions, they would in place of a (...) of such Horses as are only fit for
Carriage and the Wagon, have a Race of Horse pr^per for the Wars, Hunting, and
the Equipages of Princes, and from which private ^^^sons, as well as the
Public, would draw a considerable Advantage, and triple what (...) have had
till this present time.

But to come to the Choice of this Stallion, the Duke explains the different
Co^^^ and Marks of Horses, and exclaims extremely against all the Conjectures
that (...) commonly draw from them, making them all pass for a mere Foppery and
gross ^^dity; however he advises to make choice of a Stallion and Stud-Mare,
which are (...) good Color and well Marked, hereby approving, what he so much
else where ^^demns, by restricting the only knowledge a man can have of a good
Horse, to (...) riding of him frequently himself, and seeing him ride by
another: It Is true (...) man would mightily deceive himself, should he, in
buying a Stallion, merely rely (...) on the Conjectures drawn from his Color,
and other good Marks, without (...) either tried him, or knowing some other
Reasons for his making choice of him, but to make choice of a Horse for a
Stallion, whose vigor and mettle even pleases you, after you have rid and
tried him, although he be neither of a good color nor well Marked, is what he
does not at all advise; It is therefore to be observed, that after having (out
of a particular humor to appear singular, and more knowing than others)
declaimed against the observation of either Color or Marks, he is at last
necessitate to advise the making choice of a good and beautiful Stallion, which
is of a good Color and well Marked, that so he may give a good tincture or dye
to the Colts that are to come of him; now if the Color signify nothing, to
what purpose should he advise the seeking after this good and beautiful
Tincture?

You will see what he says of it in the following discourse, which although
translated into pretty bad French, from the English Copy, in which it was
Originally writ, and that too by a Wallcon, who has committed many faults
contrary to the French Dialect, yet I have only changed some Words, to render
it the more intelligible, and removed others where I judged them superfluous,
they being but useless repetitions; and this I have done in such a manner, that
I am persuaded, were the Duke himself to read it, he would acknowledge that I
had a great deal of reason for doing it, having no ways either altered the
sense and meaning of the Discourse, or the force and strength of Expression;
there are some parts in it, where I have added such Remarks as I thought would
be useful to the Reader, they are marked in the Margin thus, (^) that he might
with the greater ease distinguish betwixt what was realy my own, and what the
Author's: He begins thus.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of the Different Colors and Marks of Horses, and which are the
best and most proper for a Stallion.
THe most part of Horsemen who have writ upon this Subject, have blubbered and
spoilt more paper to discover their Natural Philosophy, CHAP. LXXVI. Of the
Colors and Marks which are most proper for a Stallion.
than to show their Art and Skill in Horse-manship, especially by what they
teach concerning the colors and marks of horses, (that so a man may come to
know by them their temperature and disposition) as being composed of the four
Elements; And therefore they would make us believe, that a horse which has
such a Color joined with such a mark, does participate more of the Earth,
Water, Air, or Fire, and the contrary, if he prove to be of another Color and
otherwise marked; But as according to the opinion of some Philosophers, who
deny the existence of an Elementary fire in this sublunary world, there would
remain but three Elements, so the fundation they have laid, upon the
correspondence they fancy is between the Color in horses and four Elements,
would prove very uncertain and Embarassing; Others say that the world is
nothing else but Matter put in motion, so that in this case it is Motion does
all; The ancient Philosophers again say, that our Life is preserved by a just
composition or mixture of the four Elements; For my part I am of opinion, that
our Lives are maintained by eating and drinking, But whither the Elements do
contribute any virtue to this Meat and Drink, is truly what I leave to be
debated by them; the Chemists upon the other hand say, that all things are
composed of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, but as my design in this place is only
to write of horses, I shall (...) meddlingany further with Natural Philosophy,
and the rather, because I have in (...) long experience found their rules to be
as false, as the predictions of the (...) Almanacks, which at the Years end are
frequently found to be as false as true, (...) I commonly take the very
contrary of all they say, and it so falls out, that I (...) many times as much
Truth upon my side, as they; Therefore all such observation are but mere
triffles and false conjectures, from whence I conclude, that a man sh^^ mount
and Ride the horse he intends to buy, several times, and I dare venture to
(...) he will give a truer judgment of him, then he who reasons
Philosophically, upon (...) observations taken from the Color and Elements,
which in plain English is but to play (...) Mountebank: If I may be allowed to
give my advice upon what the Duke (...) of Colors and Marks, I believe the
conjectures which may be drawn from th^^ joined to what he perscrives for the
certainly knowing a horse's goodness, will (...) doubtedly give a more entire
knowledge of him, then if a man should only tie (...) self to one of them; But
in making choice of a Stallion, a man should indispen^^ make use of both.

The marks of horses, whether Star, Feather, or what else you will, are nothing
(...) so many absurdities, as also what people say of white footed horses, that
there (...) four good marks belonging to them, and Seven bad; The First good
mark of (...) feet, is when a horse has only his far fore-foot White, the
Second when he has (...) his near hind-foot White, and the others are too
tedious to descrive, seeing it (...) look like a kind of Conjuration or
Witchcraft to rehearse them, although all (...) ridiculous and false; For if
any of these marks prove good by chance, it is n^^ (...) having such and such a
White foot that is the cause of it, but the great abundance: Mettle or spirits
that is in the horse. The Duke is certainly in the Right to say, that (...) not
the having such and such a White foot, that makes a horse Succeed and prove
(...) But however a Long experience has confirmed this Observation, that those
(...) which have their feet so and so marked with white, do most frequently
prove go^^ The surest way of all then for a man, is to mount and try them
several times himself, before he offer to give his judgment, because the best
Horseman in the world, if he be not perfectly experienced, may come to be
deceived by only observing another persons Riding and trial of a horse; Yea
which is more, he may be deceived although he even Ride him himself, especially
if the horse be young, in respect th^^ horse's Vigor and Spirits alter
extremely with his Age, just as a young Boy's (...) when he becomes a man; with
this difference only, that as a horse arrives (...) at his prefection then a
man, so does he also sooner decay and perish.

But now let us consider, which are the best, or at least the most beautiful
Co^ of horses, for a man should be very careful that his Stallion be of a good
and agre^ Color, that so he may give the better Tincture to his Race; Men's
opinions conce^^ the Colors of horses, vary as much as their fancys, however
there are some ge^^ Colors which please most part of people; as for example:
The light Bay, (...) Mane, Tail, extremities of the legs, and list along the
Back all black, and (...) besides, a Star in the forehead; the Chestnut Bay, or
as some call it the Scarle^ Cherry colored Bay, with both the hind feet White,
and a Star in the fore-(...) the Roan well marked, or which is yet better, the
Roan with a black or (...) the Dark dapled Gray, which does not so very soon
become White; the Black (...) Blaze or Star in the forehead; I once saw an
Isabella Color, with (...) Tail, extremeties of the legs, and list along the
Back all black, having (...) a Star in the forehead, which appeared to me very
pretty and genteel, (...) an Isabella, with Mane and Tail white, and well
marked, which were both of (...) most fine and excellent horses; The Sorrel is
not a bad Color provided it he (...) marked, and have the Mane, Tail, and
extremities of the legs, all black; The (...) or Burnt sorrel, is one of the
best of Colors; the Pyebalds don't please me, a true Py^^ should be white and
black: I have known some very good white horses, which (...) black all about
their Eyes and Nostrils; the Ash-coloured-Gray is not a bad (...) the Flea
bitten Gray is excellent, 'and so is also the Trout-colour'd or Freckled, (...)
there are few horses of these two last Colors, until they become a little
Aged, I (...) also seen some very good Iron-coloured Grays, although it be
generally no (...) color, the Sandy-gray is very good; the Deer-colour is not
bad, providing (...) well marked, and have also the Mane, Tail, and extremities
of the legs black; I (...) seen Bay horses that had a mixture of white hairs
amongst the Bay, called in (...) Rubicans, with their Manes likewise mixed
after the same Manner, as also with their Manes and Tails black, which are both
commonly very good: But after all, the judgment that is drawn from the Color
is according to Men's fancies, because there are good and bad horses of all
Colors, as well as of all marks, so that the only sure way to know them, is to
take a good trial of them, by either seeing them Rid, or Riding them ones self,

None of those in France who understand horses, have ever doubted, but that a
good Color prepossesseth people, with an opinion of a Horses goodness which
also holds very often, for experience discovers daily to us the truth of it;
but as a man may come to be deceived by it, so he should always join it with
other things, which necessarly oblige all people to judge of the goodness of a
horse, and then by both together, he will be better capable to give a more
positive and certain judgment, than if he should look upon all Colors as
equally good.

Some people say that there was never a good horse of a bad Color, meaning
thereby, that it matters not much of what Color a horse be, so he be good; But
it is very certain that a good horse may be of a bad color, for a Man may have
a Coat of a very Rich Velvet, which may be of an ugly and disagreeable Color:
In fine, I conclude that the Color is of no great import, however I would
rather desire you should choose a Stallion of one of the above mentioned
Colors, than of any other, To wit, the light Bay, with Mane, Tail, the
extremities of the legs, and list along the back, all black, having also a Star
in the forehead; The Scarlet or Cherry-bay, or Dapled Chasnut-bay, either with
the near hind-foot only, or both hind-feet white, and a Star in the forehead;
the Roan with a Black or Dark colored Head; the Black with a Blaze or Star in
the forehead; the very Dark dapled Gray, and the Sandy Gray, (which are to be
put to Gray or White Mares only) the Dark sorrel with a Star in the forehead;
the Isabella, with Mane, Tail, extremities of the legs, and list along the
Back, all Black, and a Star in the forehead, all which may pass for excellent
colors for a Stallion; Other Colors are good, but I esteem those best which I
have named, because of their agreeableness and beauty: You see I differ
extremely from the Duke's opinion, but I have always heard the above mentioned
Colors most esteemed for Stallions.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of the Shapes of Horses in general, and of horses of different
Kingdoms.
THe perfect shape of a horse, as many Authors have described it to us, CHAP.
LXXVII Of the shapes of horses in general, and of Horses of different Kingdoms.
is so very nice, that it cannot possibly be found, being but a mere Chimaera,
because they take the shape of each particular member, from horses of different
Kingdoms, and join them together to make up a perfectly well shaped horse, so
that they compose them as they please, and frame a horse only after their own
Fancy, and not at all according to Nature: The Barbs are of one kind of shape,
Spanish horses of another, and Turkish horses differ also in their shapes one
from another; The Neapolitan horses have likewise one shape, and the Frizland
and strong knit Dutch horses differ in shapes from them all; yet nevertheless
the horses of all these Countries are perfectly well shaped in their kinds, and
according to the different structures of their Bodies, and although there be
also different Sizes amongst all these various kinds, yet when I see a horse, I
can immediately discover whether he be a Barb, Spanish horse, Turk, Neapolitan,
or strong Dutch horse: Several People have asked me which was the best and most
beautiful horse in the World? To whom I replied, that until they told me (...)
what use they desired him, I could give them no positive answer, because the
mo^^ part of the horses of all these different Kingdoms, are good and beautiful
in their (...) and may be made use of according to their kinds, in that service
for which they are most proper; let us consider then a little particularly the
good and bad qualities which they have; I have seen but few Turkish horses, and
they are of different Races, in respect that the Territories of the Grand
Seignior, are very large and spacious: The Tur^ is high set upon his Legs,
being of an unequal stature, is very Beautiful, Swift, and well winded, but
has very rarely a sure and certain Mouth.

Although the Territories of the Grand Seignior differ very much, not only as
to their Climate, but also in respect of their Situation and vast extent, yet
the Turk^ horses which we commonly see in this Kingdom, differ little from the
Barbs; I have seen some in Germany and other parts, but almost of the same size
and stature with them, and those of them which were coursest, resembled the
Mountain Spanish horse, and all of them good and vigorous, but having, as the
Duke very well observes, their mouths Ticklish and uncertain, and many times
very difficult to be made sure and fixed, by reason of the Bitts called a la
geneste, which they are accustomed to carry in Turkey.

The Turkish horses live long, and it is no extraordinary thing in that
Country, (...) see horses which have 30 years of age, vigorous, active,
cliver, and sound in all their Members; The Governor of Buda called Althascha,
whom the Grand Seignior caused to be strangled, upon suspicion of his keeping
intelligence with our People, had two of the best horses in his Stable, whereof
the youngest was 36 years old, neither did he (...) any other in time of
Action, although he had a good many that were a great (...) younger.

People may chiefly observe three kinds of horses all very excellent, which go
under the name of Turks, and whereof few come so far North as to us, amongst
whom shall be ranked first those of Persia, the most part whereof come from
Midia, where i^ the Campus Nizeus, from whence Herodot says there comes
large, bold, and brood buttock'd horses, which are Strong, Vigorous, Swift, and
great Fatiguers, and which are not to be found but in the stables of the
Basha's, and Grandees of Turkey but never amongst the common Gentry, because of
their being sold at a very high Rate.

After these, are those of Armenia and Arabia, which are of the Persian Race,
their good Stallions being Persian horses, and of those whereof I have been
discoursing, they being no further distant from other than the breadth of the
Persian Gulf; these (...) are less, and are not of such a stately size, but are
broader Limbed, less Fiery and Ch^lerick; but then for their goodness it is
incomparable, and it is for that their (...) are so very excessive in Turkey;
these are also only horses for the great People (...) Turkey.

The third kind are the Morisques or Moorish horses, toward the south of
Africa, the are of a middle size, and very swift, enduring Fatigue admirably
well, and if they (...) the same stature and stateliness with the Persians,
they would be most perfect horse of these we see some in France, but they are
so very apprehensive of Cold, that (...) Winter destroys them, unless they be
had a very great care of.

This is what I have learned of that which is most certain concerning the
Turkish horses; for the two first kinds I acknowledge it is only by hearsay,
because I ne^r saw any of them, but for the third I have seen many of them
which were very good And, generally speaking, the Persian horses are the best
in the World, and they a^ much sought after in Turkey and Indostan, whereof also
some are found at (...) which come with the Caravans from Hispahan; but these
are for the most part (...) bling horses, which they call Alascia, which are
the horses in the World that make (...) quickest dispatch, continue longest
healthful and sound, and which least Fatigue (...) Rider; however it is not of
these I pretend to discourse, although in Europe we (...) none comparable to
them, nor which can endure such Fatigue as they: Let us now ^^^ceed to the rest.

I have heard great esteem made of the Neapolitans, and in effect they are
brave horse those of them which I have seen were of a large size, however had a
great deal of strenged and abundance of Spirits and Vigor.

There are different Races in the Kingdom of Naples, whereof some are in great
pute, and they are for all uses, for the War, for the high Manage, as
Capriols. C^^pads, etc. As also Pad-naggs for traveling, out of the breed at
Gravina and several other places.

At present the Races of that Kingdom are so degenerate, that they are no more
worth any thing; I have seen many horses which people caused bring from thence,
and which were picked out of the best Races in the Kingdom, whose qualifications
did no^ wise come near those which Authors attribute to them in their Writings,
for they had big Heads, were Fierce and ill natured, the most part of them
being more fit to break a Neck than a Lance.

I have seen many Spanish horses, and have also had some my self, they are
extremely beautiful, and the most proper of all to be drawn by a curious
Pencil, or to be mounted by a King, when he intends to show himself in his
Majestic Glory to the People; for they are neither so slender as the Barbs,
nor so large as the Neapolitans, but have the perfection of being betwixt the
two; the Genet has a bold and stately Step, a lofty Trot, an admirable Gallop,
and a most swift Carreer; they are for the most part neither very tall nor
excessively broad and if they be right chosen, there will hardly be found any
kind of horse more noble than they: I have heard remarkable stories of their
Courage, for people have seen their Intrals hanging from their Bellies, through
the number of wounds received therein, and thereby having lost their Blood, yet
notwithstanding of all, to have carried off the Rider safe and sound, with the
same Courage and Pride with which they brought him to the Field, after which
they dyed, having less life then courage; the best Races are at Andaluzia, but
particularly that of the King of Spain in Corduba is the best; that of Cardona
is very good, as is also that of Molina.

As for the Barbs I must confess they are my Favorites, which may be because I
have had more of them than of any other kind of horses; I never knew their
equals for the excellency of their size, of their pure and Nervous Force, of
their Gentle nature, and tractableness; People say that the Barbs dye but never
become old, because they retain always their strength and vigor; it is true
that they have neither the Step, Trot, nor Gallop, so stately as the Genet^ or
Spanish horses, but when once they are well Researched or put to it, I never
saw horses go so well as they all sorts of Aires, as well for the manage de
Guerre, Passades terra a terra, as in the leaps, and they are the only best
horses for Stallions, providing they be short joynted: An old Nobleman who was
a Soldier under Henry the fourth, told me in France, that he had seen Barbs
several times overthrow great Flanders horses in a Shock. Take the shank bone
of a Barb, which I have several times made trial of my self, and you will find
it almost all solid bone, and that it has no greater hollow in the middle,
than what will scarcely receive a straw, whereas the Shank bone of a Dutch
horse has a hole in it, wherein you may almost thrust your finger.

The Barbs are most Nervous, Strong, and Swift, and are also excellently well
winded; Some of them are dull, and Melancholic, yea even in the feilds until
they be awaked, or that there be some thing required of them; the Mountain Barb
is the best, he is very courageous, and many of them carry the marks of wounds
they have received from Lions: It is certain that the courage of Barbs is
remarkable, for in Action they always go on until they have their bones broke,
or so long as they have a drop of Blood in their Body; They also bring their
Master off from any Battle or dangerous Engadgment, where without doubt he
would have lost his life, had it not been for his horses Courage, so that they
cannot be bought at too dear a Rate to be made use of upon a day of Action,
although to do them justice in other things, except in that and the Manage, I
assure you, they done like much fatigue, and few of them are able to travel
under a Man.

I learnt of a Gentleman, who enquired in the two kingdoms of Tunis and
Algiers, after all those parts where they Bred up horses, and who saw all which
was any thing good in all those places, having run through all the most remote
Countries of these two kingdoms, where he bought about 30 horses, not having
bought so much as one in the weekly Market of Tunis^ he told me that all the
horses of these Countries are Fat, and go without shoes, their food being
Barley twice a day, and but a little Straw, and that they cause them also drink
only once a day, and but little: He had bought a little Nagg of four years Old,
with which he had made four or five days journeyes, at about thirty leagues at
least each day; without suffering him either to eat or drink upon the way, but
only before parting in the Morning, and at Night he gave him Barley and the
other half of his water, and yet at the end of his journey his horse was hearty
and Vigorous, without giving any sign of being fatigud, he brought the same
horse to France, who was not capable to Ride ten Leagues without being so very
fatigued, that he was not the next day in a condi^^ to Ride as many; It must
therefore certainly be the Climate and manner of feeding in Africa, which
occasions this extraordinary change and alteration; The back all their horses
at eighteen Months old, at latest at two years, and the first time they mount
them, they purposely gallop and fatigue them for Eight or Ten day^ together,
until they either Cold them, or cause them cast at the Nose and cou^^ so that
some of them dye thereof, but if they escape, then the more they have (...) and
cough'd, the more they esteem them, saying that after that, they have (...)
their trial for all.

They don't use the common method of tying their horses by the Heads, they are
only made fast by the four feet, and the Horses and Mares are placed pell-(...)
together in the Stable, without offering to trouble other; Yea one will see
(...) Moors coming to the Faires and Horse-mercats, who alighting in the
middle (...) the Streets, throw the Reins over their horses Necks, so leaving
them, in which place they will continue three hours without so much as stirring
from it, although other horses pass and repass both before and behind them.

They esteem Mares infinitely more than horses, as well because of their
Switness, as because they can be three days without drinking as they say,
wherea^ horse can be but one; when their horses are sick or indisposed, they
have no (...) remedy but Fireing, which they apply themselves; For example, if
they have the Colic, they fire them beneath the Belly; or have they the Vives?
Then they apply it behind the Jaw-bones; In fine, for all diseases they use
Fireing, so that for their very selves they make use of it; If they have a
head-ake, they fire their forehead, and so likewayes in all other diseases the
same, as for a Sciatick, the Haunch or Thi^^ etc. and they confidently affirm
that they are eased by it.

The people of quality keep their horses Housed, and feed them with either a
little Barley or Wheat Straw, and with Barley twice a day; the Commons take no
care about the horsing of their Mares, but leave them to take their fortune
with their horses in the Pastures, where they are kept almost the whole year,
for although they make no Hay in these Countries, yet they have in many places
good Pastures, They breed up also many Mules in Barbary, where they are very
dear and of great use, and they are the Moors who are driven from Andalaza
which raise up these Mules, and who dwell in a very good Country.

Each family is careful to have a good horse in the stable, as well because of
the intestine Wars they have among themselves, as because of the Courses they
are (...) customed to have at Marriages and other joyful Festivals; They never
shoe their horses, and this Gentleman told me, that since he came to France, he
sensibly observed that his Horse's feet did daily straiten, and become
Hoof-bound, not withstanding of any care he could take to prevent it, which is
so much the more surprising, in that the Air and Soil of that Country, are
hotter and dryer than i^ France.

The reason why there comes not so very fine horses to us from Africz, is
because those who bring them from Barbary, are Mariners or Masters of Ships,
who take indifferently what the Moors bring to them; for providing they get
them at an ease rate, it is enough; whereas if they were persons skilled in
horses, who went to search after them in those parts of the Kingdoms of Tunis
and Algiers, and other (...) where they bring up fine horses, then we should
have excellent ones transported, (...) as there is a necessity for a man to go
two or three days journey into the (...), and to lodge in the Tents of the
Arabians who Camp in the open Fields, exposed to the hazard of being knocked
down, or at least robbed, few skilful People will take that pains, and run
these Risks as this Gentleman did, who brought with him the (...) beautiful
horses, have come from thence to France these hundred years.

As for the Frizland and thick knit Dutch horses, I have seen very beautiful
ones i^ their kind, which went all sorts of Aires in the Manage as well as
any, and who (...) me thinks a greater disposition for Leaping, because they
bended their forelegs extre^ly in that Air, which is the most beautiful action
a horse can have in any kind of Manage, and which horses of a light size very
rarely have.

But they are contrary to the Barbs in one thing, which is, that they soon
become (...) and are a long time a dying, so that in that case, they are an
excessive charge to the Ouner, whereas the Barbs die, but never become old.

You shall find a thousand strong Dutch horses fit for draught, before you find
(...) proper for the Manage, so that you may observe by this, how ridiculous a
thing it (...) to represent the exact and perfect shape of a Horse, which is
just the same as if one should attempt to describe that of a Dog; for certainly
the perfect shape of a Grayhound, is neither the same with that of a Mastiff,
nor with that of a Spaniel, nor that of a Hound, although all of them be very
well shapt in their kinds; it is the same with a horse, for providing that he
have his Neck exactly proportioned and well placed, and the rest of his Shapes
according to the size, or product of the Country where he has been brought
up, it is sufficient: A man should chiefly take Notice that the feet be good,
in respect that they are the fundation, or otherwise the whole Edifice will
come to ruin; If the Pasterns are short and stiff, the horse will never be
nimble, and if they are long and feeble, be will be defective in that part,
neither will he be capable to endure fatigue: The Italians say that such horses
go upon eight feet, but the Pasterns to be right, should be short and flexible,
because commonly such horses will be strong and agile: And proper to make good
Stallions of, because a long joynted Barb would be worth nothing to Breed upon,
no more than one who has too large and Fat feet.

It would be an endless work to write of mixed kinds of horses, because there
are so very many of them, and some of them extraordinary good; These which are
short Rein'd and well Coupled, seem to be the most proper for the Manage, in
respect that we endeavor to shorten them by Art, for we Stop them, pull them
back, and put them Together, to set them upon their haunches, therefore a short
horse is sooner Assembled than a long; However I have had many long horses,
which were as good as any short, so that that signifies nothing to such
persons who are Masters of a little Art: Many people say, that a horse Charged
in his fore-quarters, that is to say, which has his Head, Neck, and Shoulders
big and large, is heavy on the hand, although he be of a light size, because he
will rest upon the Bridle hand, as upon a fifth leg, just as a Lame person
leans upon astaff or Crutch, but in that case it is the Farrier which must
assist him, for the Rider's Art will be to no purpose if he understand not
Marshalry; Others say that a horse charged in the fore-hand, although very
sound, should yet necessarly press on the hand, and that upon the contrary, a
horse discharged of flesh before, should be light on the hand, but this is no
certain Rule, for I have known horses almost as heavy in the fore-hand as
Bulls, which were lighter on the hand, than those which had their fore-quarters
extremely discharged; they are therefore the strong or weak Reins, which
generally make a good or bad Mouth.

The having of which then does not consist in having the fore Quarters large or
slender, but only in the strength and goodness of the Reins, because the chief
thing in our Art of Horsemanship, is to put a Horse upon his haunches, and he
who has good Reins can endure it, and by the same means will be light on the
hand, whereas if his Reins be weak, he suffers so much, and is so afraid of
being set upon his haunches, that he will without doubt press upon the
Bridle-hand to free himself of it, or otherwise his hinder legs and hams will
be ruined and spoilt; so that one may see that they are only the good or bad
Reins, which render a Horse heavy or light on the hand, and not his
fore-quarters being much or little charged with flesh.

Methinks I hear some ignorant, who maintains that the more strong and firm
Reins a Horse has, the more difficult he is to be put upon his Haunches; It is
indeed difficult to be performed by an ignorant Horseman, but most easy for him
who understands his business, in respect that Nature furnishes us in such
Horses whereupon to work, whereas in others we have nothing at all; and when a
man has matter whereupon to work, it is not the fault of the Horse, but the
pure ignorance and want of Art in the Horseman, if he succeed not.

It is most certain that strong Rein'd Horses, which have their Strength knit,
and bound up as it were, and which are stiff and in some measure want the use
of their Limbs, are most difficult to be Dressed, that is to say, to be Assembled
and put upon their haunches, because they defend themselves with their great
strength, neither can a man supple them, but in a long tract of Time; but when
they are once suppled, as I assure you he who has well comprehended the Dukes
Lessons, will at last effectuate by his Method, if he put it exactly in
practice, that person, I say, will make of such Horses somewhat to be admired,
because they have a Fund and Resource, and providing they be well winded, one
may say that they are good stuff and that there is no more required but to make
good use of it.

It Is true some Horses are so disposed, that they have always an inclination to
leap, in that case the Rider should follow their Disposition; but then if he do
not put them upon their haunches, they shall never go just as a Horse should,
neither will the Air be so beautiful, nor appear so high.

Some People believe, that a Horse which has a thick Mane and bushy Tail,
(...) commonly dull and heavy, however I have had Horses, whose Manes and Tails
(...) thick and long, and who were notwithstanding as vigorous, and full of
Spirits, (...) any I ever saw, so that their Rule in this point is as false, as
those Conjectures w^^^ they draw from the Color and Marks.

The Duke cannot approve of any Conjecture or Mark, which may make a (...) know
the Goodness, Agility, and Gentleness of a Horse, and saying that he had (...)
a Horse, who having a bad Mark was very good, he would have us absolutely (...)
swaded of the contrary, of what Experience discovers to us; and in like man^^e
because he had once a well marked Horse, which was worth nothing, he w^^^ not
have us rely upon any of the Conjectures and Observations, which have hithe to
passed amongst us for very good, and that because they are not infallible; I
gr^^ they both do and may fail, but that a man should not at all have regard to
the^ is what I do not acknowledge, because these Observations, together with
the^ there means he gives us, whereby to know exactly a Horse, makes us to have
a^ more clear and distinct knowledge.

CHAP. LXXVIII. What kind of Horse is fittest for a Stallion, and how he is to
be ordered: As also, What Mares are best to Breed upon, and how they are to
receive the Stallion.
PEople cannot possibly find a better Horse for a Stallion, CHAP. LXXVIII. What
kind of Horse is fittest for a Stallion; as also, how the Mares are to receive
him.
than a good and beautiful Barb, of a good color and well marked, and in place
of hi^: good and beautiful Spanish Horse, also of a good color, and well (...)
that so they may give a good tincture to your Breed; and being designed for
th^^ use, he can never be too bold and vigorous, for I assure you the Colts
which he (...) gets, will rather degenerate than improve; and besides the
having him of a (...) color, a man should take care that he have none of these
Infirmities, which (...) called Heredetary: that is, which the Colts may derive
from him, because the (...) will as soon resent and participate of the
Imperfections, as good Qualities of (...) Stallion: The Heredetary
Imperfections are the Infirmities of the Eyes, which are (...) fluxions, the
Moon, etc. as also the Infirmities of the Hams, to wit Spavins, Jar^^^
Vessigons, and Courbs, etc. To these two preceding I shall add the Infirmit^^
the Flank, as Pursyness, Chest foundering, as also bad Feet, which are n^^^
either tender, of a bad shape, or Hoof-bound, with this distinction only, (...)
such imperfections and infirmities as happen by accident, are not accounted He
detary. Moreover People should take care that the Stallion be well natured,
(...) tractable in all things, otherwise his Race will resemble him, which I
have (...) times had a proof of.

The Barhs then, and Spanish Horses, are absolutely the best Stallions, for
having Horses for all uses, as well for a man's own Service as Divertisement,
unless it be for the Cart whereof there are already too great a number. That
which I have to say against the Spanish Horses, is, that they beget Colts of a
less Size than themselves, neither do the Mares hold so easily to them as to
the Barb, for of ten Mares covered with a Spanish Horse, the one half will not
be with Foal, which is a considerable loss in a Breed, whereas they hold sooner
to the Barb, providing the Stallions be but six years old, for being younger
they deceive the Mares.

Some people would make us believe, that the Barbs and Spantish Genets beget
too small Colts, in respect that Nature daily dryes up and becomes elder; in
the first place, we in England need not fear to have too small Horses, because
the coldness and moistness of the Climate, joined to the great nourishing
Quality of the Grass, are the Causes why all our Races produce large Horses.

As to what people say, that Nature dryes daily up, I believe that the Sun is
as hot at present, as it was the first moment it was Created, and that the
Earth is also as fertile; because if nature had alwise dried up since the
Creation, we should be at present smaller than the Ants, and the poor Ants
would have been long ago reduced to nothing: Therefore I conclude in favors of
the Barbs and Spanish Horses, as absolutely the best for Stallions. However you
are to be warry, not to cause cover large Mares with a Stallion of a far less
size than themselves upon the abovementioned Opinion, that a Barb being put to
large Mares will beget big enough Horses; it is true that such Horses will be
high, but their tallness will only consist in the Legs, which will be too high
above the ground, and their Bodies but very small, which has been found true
by Experience; but above all, see that the Barb you intend to breed upon, be
short jointed, that is to say, have short pasterns, having also his feet well
shaped, and proportioned to his Size.

As for the Mares, I should be satisfied you would make choice of some
beautiful Spanish Mares to Breed upon, or some out of the Kingdom of Naples,
which are delicatly shaped; but if you cannot easily procure of these, choose
beautiful English Mares, which will be as good as any, providing they be of a
good Color, and well Marked, which is of as much consequence to give a good
Tincture to your Breed, as the good color of a Stallion.

As to what concerns the giving the Mares the Stallion, I nowise approve of the
letting them be Covered in ones haud, tying them, and making them fast with
ropes, as if people intended to force them; for this Action of Nature should be
performed with freedom and love, and not with reluctance and against their will.

Neither do I approve of the observation of the Planets, as the Moon and other
Celestial bodies; to wit if the Moon be in her Decrease or Increase, or if the
other Celestial Bodies be in such and such a Conjunction, as if Forsooth Colts
were to be begot by Astronomy, or according to the Almanac.

As also to observe from what Airth or Point the Wind Blows, for to have a Male
or Female, or to tie the left Stone of the Stallion to have a Male, and the
right to have a Female, or to place a sheet of such a Color before the Mare,
that so she may conceive a Foal of the same Color; all these are false, and
nothing but Foppish tricks to amuse credulous and simple People, by causeing
them believe that there lies some mystery in them, that so themselves may be
admired as great. Philosophers, whereas they are nothing else, but Trick
players at Pass-pass.

Nature is most wise in her own Works, amongst which the greatest is the Act of
Generation, by which she preserves each Species, thereby to continue it to the
end of the World; and we see that this wise nature is so circumspect in this
Action, that although she suffer two different kinds to mix by generation, yet
that which proceeds therefrom does not afterward Generate, nor in the least
produce any thing, because were it otherwise, each true kind or Species would
perish; let us therefore follow herein the Laws of Nature, who is the most wise
in the Act of Generation, seeing it is she that imposes it, and not Art.

When your Stallion is once well chosen, three Months at least before the time
he is to Cover, feed him with good Oats, or good Pease or Beans, or with course
bread and but a little Hay, but a good deal of wheat straw, Stepping him out
twice a day to the Water, and after he has Drunk, walk him up and down an hour
without making him sweat, that so you may bring him in Wind, and it should be
about two hours every day that he should be thus walked abroad, in some
pleasant Field wherein he takes delight; if a Stallion were not thus brought in
wind before he is made to Cover, he would either become pursey and
broken-Winded, or run a great Risk of being so, and were he not well fed, he
could not perform his Task, but (...) deceive your Mares, or at least the Colts
would be but pityful and very weak, (...) Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus,
and although you nourish him very well, yet (...) will always take him in
again abundantly lean; if you give him many Mares he (...) not serve you so
long, and his Mane and Tail will fall away through poverty, (...) you will find
difficulty enough to recover, and bring him to a good condition (...) Body for
the year following, you are therefore only to give him Mares according to (...)
strength, that is, twelve or fifteen, and at most twenty.

We should in England cause cover our Mares in the beginning of June, that
(...) they may Foal in May, in which Month there is plenty of Grass, and which
will (...) make the Mares have a greater abundance of Milk, for the better
nourishing of their Foals: Mares go with Foal eleven Months, and as many days
as they are ye old; for example, a Mare of nine years old will carry her Foal
Eleven Months a^^ nine days, and one of six, eleven Months and six days, so
that a man may here by regulate himself in the Causing cover his Mares, that so
their Foals may (...) brought forth at such a time of the year, as there will
be abundance of Grass in the Country where he intends to keep his Breed.

It sometimes happens that Mares kill their Foals through carelessness, or for
hareing been entangled in the stable with their Halters, or through the
difficulty they have in bringing them forth; To assist a Mare at her Delivery.
now seeing you may easily by what has been sai^ guess near at the time when
she should Foal, you should therefore cause always a Servant attend her, that
so he may assist in case of necessity, and who may observe, whether it be for
want of strength or courage, that the Mare cannot bring forth her Foal, in
which case, he is with his hand to close her Nostrils, which will make her
press to have breath, in making which effort she will be delivered; or
otherwise let him pour into her Nostrils a little Claret Wine, boyl^d with
Fennel and Sallad-Oil, which will also assist her to bring forth.

But if through misfortune it be dead in her belly, then you are to endeavor
to cause her bring forth the dead Foal, and also preserve her life by the
following remedy; take of Mare or Asses Milk, or for want of that Goats Milk,
four pound weight, which is about two English Quarts, three pounds of strong
Claret Wine-Lees, Olive Oil two pounds, juice of white Onions one pownd, mix
all together and make it Luke warm, after which give it the Mare at twice,
about a^e hour betwixt each Drench.

If this remedy have not effect enough, then some adroit Person shall anoint
his hand and arm with Olive Oil, and shall endeavor to pull it out either
whole or in pi^^^^, and if he cannot get a good hold of it, then he is to ty
about the Chin of the Foal, a large and strong Whip-cord, and so pull it forth,
with as much Gentleness as possible.

Sometimes Foals come forth with their Feet foremost; in that case you are to
thrust them in again, and with your hand endeavor to pull forth its head at
least its nose, thereby to facilitate the Mares delivery: I had these remedies
from an old Cavalies, who practiced them many times upon the Stud-Mares he had
a charge of; it depends upon your self to make use of them or not upon
necessity; he was an honest and itgenuous man, and he also assured me, that he
had by this method preserved Mares, from whom although having pulled the dead
Foals, they yet did not fail afterward, to bring forth very good and beautiful
ones.

You should about the end of May or beginning of June, at which time there is
commonly abundauce of Grass, put your Mares into an Inclusure well
Pallissado'd, or enclosed with hedges or a stone Wall, and which may be capable
to feed them the whole time the Stallion is to be with them, or that they are
in Season, in which Inclusure or Pasture all your Mares should be put together,
as well those which are Barren as others; Then lead forth your Stallion, having
first taken off his hind feet shoes, to prevent thereby his hurting the Mares
when he kicks or stricks out, b^^ his Foreshoes must be kept on for the
preservation of his Feet, then cause him before you turn him loose amongst the
Mares, to cover one twice in hand to render him the more calm and Gentle, after
which take off his Bridle and let him go freely to the rest, with whom he will
become so Familiar, and use them so kindly, that they will at last make love to
him, so that not one of them will be horsed but as they are in Season; after he
has served them all, he will try them again one by one, and will only cover
such as willingly receive him; he knows very well when they desire no more his
Company, and when he has performed his Work; so that then he begins to beat at
the Palissade that he may be gone, at which time he is to be removed, and your
Mares put into a fresh enclosure.

These are the wise means Nature makes use of, and I assure you that of twenty
Mares there will not three fail, whereas if you caused Cover them in hand, the
one half would not Hold: There should be built in that enclosure wherein the
Stallion runs with the Mares, a little Lodge, for to retire and preserve him
from the scorching heats, in which there should be also a Manger, wherein you
are to give him his Oats. Pease, split Beans, Bread, or what else he likes
best, and he must be always thus had a care of while he is with the Mares,
which will be about six or seven Weeks; and there should be (not only to take
care of that, but also to give you a particular account how your Mares are
Horsed) a servant appointed to remain night and day with them, for whom there
should be built a little Hutt in the same Enclosure for him to lie in; he is
also to take care that no other horses come to them, nor other Mares to your
Stallion, and to advertise you when any thing extraordinary happens, but
above all, to take care to lead the Stallion in time of excessive heats or
great sunshine, into the Lodge built for that purpose.

You are to take care, when you cause cover your Mares either in hand or
otherwise, that the Stallion and Mare feed alike, for example, if the Stallion
be at Hay and Oats, which is commonly called Hard-meat, the Mare should be also
at Hard-meat, otherwise she will not so readily Hold; In like manner if the
Stallion be at grass, the Mare is also to be put to it, and this will be an
easy method to make them retain with more ease: You are also to observe, that
Mares which are very Fat hold with great difficulty, they are therefore those
which are only indifferently Fat and plump, which conceive with the greatest
ease and facility.

Mares retain a great deal better when they are Hot or in Season, this heat
excites the horse, who upon his part performs that Action with the greater
Ardour and Vigor; when the Mare is to be covered in hand, that she may the
more certainly Hold, let the Stallion and her be so placed in the Stable as
they may see other, and so let them be kept for some time, which will animate
them both, and so the generation will hardly fail.

To bring a Mare in Season, and cause her retain, you are to give her to eat,
for the space of eight days before you bring her to the Horse, about two
English Quarts of Hemp Seed in the Morning, and as much at Night; If she refuse
to eat it, mix it with a little Bran or Oats, or else cause her fast for a
while, and then she will eat it of her own accord, and if the Stalsion eat also
of it, it will contribute much to the generation.

As for the Age of a Stallion, people should never oblige him to cover before
he be Six years Old, nor after he is Fifteen, but as to this last you may
regulate your self according to his Strength and Vigor: It is to be observed
that young Barbs generally deceive Mares, so that they hold not to them, there
is therefore a necessity that they be at least Six or Seven years Old, before
they are in a condition to be made use of for Stallions; As to the age of the
Mares, they should not be covered before they be three years old but the
goodness of the Mares and Foals which they shall bring forth, should regulate
you as to this: It is a Maxim that a Mare should never be horsed while she is a
bringing up her Foal, because the Foal to which she is giving Suck, as well as
that in her Belly, will receive prejudice by it, and the Mare her self will be
also sooner spent; Yet people fancy that by causing a Mare bring forth yearly
a Foal, they perform a piece of Husbandry, whereas things being rightly
considered, there is more lost than gained, which is a thing commonly practiced
in France; However if you will thus cause Cover your Mare, let it be seven or
eight days after she has Foaled, that so she may have time to cleanse, as
also if you can conveniently, don't give her the Stallion until she desire him,
and also increase by all means possible that Passion, as by strong feeding etc:
At least the Foal to which she gives suck will be bettered by this method, and
thereby receive the more strength to follow her at grass, as also the Mare will
the more easily Conceive, being brought thus in Season.

Those who desire to have Males, although the Duke cannot Assent to it, may
practice what follows, and which may be also experimented upon other Creatures,
such as Cows, Goats, Sheep, etc: You must then bring the Mare in Season, and
cause cover her very early in the Morning, any time from the fourth day of the
Moon until it it be Full, but never in the Decrease, and thus she shall not
fail to bring forth a Male or Colt, the truth whereof a little experience will
discover.

You may provide your self of young Breeding Mares, from your own Race, which
as they are good, and of a good Breed, will bring you forth more beau^^^^ Foals
then any other, in respect that they have been engendered by a good Stallion,
and that the same who Covers them did also beget them, for there is no such
thing as Incest among horses; Besides that they will be brought up according to
the Soil and Air of the Country, where your Race is bred: But you are not at
all to make use of your Colts for Stallions. because they will be much
degenerate from the goodness of true Barbs, and if you should so make use of
them from one Generation to another, they would become at last, like to the
Natural Race of the Country wherein they are, so that in that case, you need
not take much pains to have beautiful Colts, seeing there Source which is the
Stallion, is but of that same Country Breed. One may say as much of all the
other Creatures in the World, even of Man; For let a French Man remain in
Germany, and his Grandchild shall be a true German; (...) like manner let a
German live in France, and his Grandchild will be a Frenchman both in Spirit
and Agility, such influence has the Climate, Air, and Soil upon al^ Creatures;
Therefore I would never advise you to choose a Stallion from your own Breed, but
rather that you would change him for a good Barb, or for want of a Barb, (...)
a beautiful Spanish horse, and so you shall always have a good and beautiful
Race of horses, but still make choice of the most beautiful Mares of your own
Race, to Breed upon; And above all don't grudge at any Rate for the price of a
fire Stallion, for there is no Money returns sooner again to a man than this,
and although he should cost 150 Pistolls, yet if he be good and beautiful he
will be cheap; This is the first and only means whereby to have a good Race of
horses, for without it all other are to no purpose.

CHAP. LXXIX. When Foals are to be Weaned or Separate from their Dames, and how
they are to beordered.
YOu should have in the Inelosure into which you change your Mares, CHAP. LXXIX
At what time Toals are to be weaned, and how they are to be ordered.
as also in all these wherein they are to feed, a Lodge or House, large enough
(...) contain them all, that so upon occasion they may be defended from the
injuries of the weather, for there is no Creature to which cold is a greater
En^^^ than to horses, and with difficulty do they also suffer excessive heat;
you are also (...) make provision of good store of Hay, wherewith to feed them
in the Stables d^^ing the Winter: Many are of opinion that Foals should Suck
until they be a year or two Old, but this is a great mistake, in respect that
it makes them become du^^ and ill shapt, besides that it causes you loss the
most, part of that time for the fertility of your Mares.

You should wean your Foals at the beginning of Winter, when it begins (...)
grow Cold, that is about Martinmass, which is near to the middle of November,
and wean them three days before full Moon, and hang about each of their Necks
upon a piece of Rope, seven or eight inches of the end of a Cows horn, or of
the oldest Deer's horn you can procure, that thereby you may the more easily
catch hold of them upon occasion, after which bring them all, as well Male as
female, into a warm and clean Stable, well provided of Racks and Mangers,
pretty low Set: The Reason why the most part of Foals advance so slowly, and
are not capable for service until they be six or seven years Old, is because
they have not Suekt long enough, this it clearly observed in the Bishopric of
Tragvier in low Bretaigne, where they Wean their Foals at the time the Duke
appoints, and to their horses are never for service until they be eight years
old; Whereas if they had Sucked till the next grass, that is to say the whole
Winter over, then they would be as good at four or five years old, as they are
now at eight, you may therefore judge by this, if it be good Husbandry to Wean
so soon; but this which the Duke orders after they are weaned is good. You are
to take care that the Stable wherein the Foals are put, be kept alwise neat and
clean, and that they have good store of litter, letting them also stand all
loose together and untyed; they are to be handled as little as possible, while
they are so very young, for fear of hurting them, or retarding their growth;
they are to be fed with good Hay, and wheat Bran, which will cause them drink
lustily, and by that means give them a good Belly; let them have also sometimes
a few Oats, for it is but a folly to say that Oats make Foals become blind, or
their teeth crooked: I am of opinion, that Oats will wear their Teeth, and
cause them sooner Change, and also Raze, therefore if you intend to give them
Oats, the best way is to cause first break them in a Mill, because by making an
Effort with their Jaws to bruise and chaw them, they stretch and swell their
Eye and nether-Jaw-veins, which attract to them the blood and humors in such
abundance, that Nature cannot master them, and so they fall down upon the
Eyes, and many times are the occasion of their loseing them; so that it is not
the too great nourishing and heating quality of the Oats, which is the cause of
this, as people commonly believe, but only the difficulty they have in grinding
and chawing them

It is further to be observed, that Foals thus fed with grain, as I have been
ordering, do not grow so high upon their legs, but become broader and better
knit, than if they eated nothing else but Hay and Bran, as also they are more
fit for service, and to endure fatigue.

When the Weather is good, drive them forth into some Court or Enclosed Place,
where they may have the Sun and Air, and also room to play and sport
themselves; let them be put to grass about the end of May, or so soon as there
is enough in any of the Enclosures to feed them, wherein put all those of one
year old together, in which there is also to be a large Lodge, capable to
contain them all, and preserve them from the great heat, the door of which
should be made very large, that they may not hurt other in going in or coming
out.

There are some Foals beneath six Months old, which although their Dames have
abundance of Milk, yet decay daily, A remedy against all diseases in Foals
beneath six Months old.
and also take a cough by reason of some certain pellicles or skins, that breed
in their Stomachs, which obstruct their breathing, and at last totally destroy
them; the Remedy is, to take the bag wherein the Foal came forth of its Mothers
belly, and causing dry it, give it as much of this amongst milk, as you can
take up with three fingers, which will cure it, and render it Sound and hearty;
this Remedy is also good against all the Diseases that happen to them beneath
six Months old, but if you cannot get she abovementioned Bag, then cause dry
the Lungs of a young Fox, and make use of it in place of the foresaid Powder.

At the end of a year, in the same Season, which is about Martinmass, you are
to take in again the Foals, which will now be a year and an half old, and put
them again into the Stable, Clipping all the hair from their Tails, to make
them grow more bushy and beautiful, and if people would be at the pains to
cause Cut or Poll them thus two or three times, while they are young, their
Tails would become stronger and more beautiful, and endure better the Comb;
Order, tie, anddress them as the rest of your Horses, and make them as gentle
and familiar as possible; the next Summer when they are two years old, you may
again put them to grass, where they must have alwise a large Lodge to retire
into, during the heat of the day; or otherwise you may keep them still in the
Stable, that so you may the more easily fit them for Backing, but they are
never to be Backed, until they be full three at least.

And because about two years old, or two years and half, the Colts begin to
Chase and heat themselves after the Fillies, therefore it is fit about that
time to se^rate them, that so they may not spoil other; there are some Colts,
which having beet well fed until they be a year old, begin to attempt the
covering or the Fillies, (...) soon as this is perceived they are immediately to
be seprate, because they w^^^ spoil themselves, however this rarely happens at
one year old, but frequently at (...) and an half, and others at two, and two
and a half, according to their constitu^^^ and as they have been either well or
ill fed.

It is good to house every Winter your Foals, and all Summer to put them to
gr^^ till they be past three years old, because they will be thereby so much
the strong^ to endure fatigue; it matters not what kind of Fasture they feed
in, providing it be but dry, and have a watering Place in it, for if they can
fill their bellies once (...) twenty four hours it suffices; neither is it
needful that you seek after so many ra^^ties, and diversity of Pastures, which
many People require, such as Rocky, Mou^tainous, Meadowy or level, for
providing you (...) but have the convemency of sep^ rating these of one year
old, from those of two or three, and so of the rest, you (...) seed them as you
please; yea a man may bring up a very Fine Horse in his Cou^^ and what is the
Reason that the Barbs, Turks, Neapolitans, and panish Horses are (...) fine,
nervous, so discharged of superfluous flesh, and of so delicate a Size, and so
(...) proportioned, but only because they are brought up in a hot Climate, and
consequen^ly with a dry kind of Food? The Secret then of bringing Horses
rightly up in (...) Countries, consists in nothing else, but keeping them warm
in the Winter, and feeding them with a dry kind of Food, and in turning them
out in Summer to dry ^^stures.

Take two Colts alike well shapt, begot by the same Stallion upon two Mares
equally beautiful, and cause keep one of them warm in the Winter time, feeding
him also with dry kind of Food until he be three years old, and I assure you
he shall have a good Legs shall be as nervous, as discharged of Flesh, and
almost altogether as we^ shaped as his Sire, which I suppose to be either a
Barb or Spanish Horse; suffer again the other to run all Winter in the Fields,
until he be three years old, and he shall have his Head and Neck big and thick,
his shoulders charged with flesh, and shall for his Stature or Size, be a most
lubberly and perfect Cart-Horse, from whence you may observe the effects of dry
Food and warm Housing, and how much both the one and the other contribute to the
beauty of Horses.

The Duke has forgot to mention, that the temper of the Air, joined to all he
has remarked, contributes very much to this; because in France we could never
breed up such large Horses as come from Holland, not because we have not such
(...) fat, and great quantity of Grass, as they have in that Country, (seeing
there is in Normandy a great deal as good, and of the same Quality, where
nevert^eless the H^^es do not grow to that largeness) but because of the
moistness of the Air in (...) Country where they are brought up, and in fine,
because of the Climate.

Before I put a close to this Treatise of Breeding, I shall give you a Remedy
(...) strengthening the small and feeble Legs of a Colt, against any labor he
is a^^^ wards to undergo; it is to be put in practice before he be backed. Take
a Pound (...) Olive Oil, To strength en the small and feeble Legs of a Colt.
a quarter of a Pound of Axungia Vitr^, which is nothing else (...) that stuff
that remains in the bottom of the Glass-makers Pots where they put the na^ter
whereof they make the Glass, it is sold by the Druggists, under the Name of
Sandiver, or Glass-salt, and at a very easy rate; take also half an Ounce of
Dr^^^^ blood, four Ounces of very dry Castoreum, bray the Axung^a Vitri as well
as the rest, very well, and mix all together, to which add an English Quart of
Spirit of Wine, in which let it all infuse cold for a night, afterward add to
it an Engli^^ Quart of strong Vinegar, and as much of a healthful Man's Urine,
and if conve^ency will allow, who drinks only pure Claret; let all boil
together for an hour, a^ with this hot mixture, bath very well his small and
feeble Legs from top to botto^ or from his Shoulders to his very Hoofs before,
and from the Stiffle Joint to (...) Feet behind, and Chaff them well to and
again with your hands, twice a day for quarter of an hour each time, that so
you may make it penetrate, and continue the application of this Bath twice a
day, for eight or ten days together.

By the help of this remedy, his lower parts will recover strength enough (...)
endure Fatigue, especially if it be practiced twice a year before he be p^ to
any kind of exercise, that is to say in the Spring and Autumn; and by doing is
from two years old, until they be four, a man will have horses which shall
never fail by the Legs.

As for the young Mares which are called Fillies, you may suffer them to run
abroad in the Enclosures until they be three years old, because they are not
so subject to become too charged with Flesh (especially in their fore-parts) as
Horses are; however if you have the convenience of housing your Fillies in the
Winter time as well as your Colts, it will be still so much the better, but I
am afraid that the charge of it would be too great for any private Gentleman,
especially if he have a great number of Stud-Mares: I know certainly by my own
experience that this method of breeding horses is the best, for I have tried
all others, and that with the most part of Stallions and Mares, which could be
had from different Kingdoms: you are to cause back and walk abroad your young
Mares some time before you cause Cover them, otherwise they will be so wild,
that they will be in danger of not only spoiling themselves, but their Foals,
but being thus Gently backed, and rendered tractable and Familiar, you will
prevent that disorder.

The largest Size of Foals, and all kind of tall horses, that is, which are
very high set upon their Limbs, ruin and spoil their Legs extremely while they
graze in the Fields, or at least turn very much out their Toes, that so they
may come at the Grass, and feed upon it with the more ease, especially if their
Necks be short; people should therefore if they intend to graze such horses,
give them their Grass cut in the Stable, which will prevent this imperfection
of turning out their Toes.

Without pretending to contradict the Duke, I have found by experience, that
for having weaned Colts at the time which he appoints, and for having taken
them from their Dames at the beginning of Winter, at a time in which they are
to change their green food to dry, and tender to bard, (for at the same time
that they are taken from the grass and put in the stable, about the very same
time they are to be weaned from the Pap,) this great change and privation of
Milk has been so prejudicial to them, and made them so very lean, that they
had difficulty the whole next Summer to recover it; it seems therefore a great
deal more reasonable to me (especially seeing their Dames are not to be covered
till next Spring) to let them Suck the whole Winter, for which they will
certainly be the better, because their mouths being as yet tender, find
difficulty in chawing Hay, and therefore they eat but little of it; it is true
that to make up that want, the Duke orders to give them Wheat-Bran and Oats,
which he pretends is sufficientto supply the want of Milk; but seeing the Mare
will be useless all Winter (for I suppose she is neither to be made use of for
Carriage, nor any other service, but only for Breeding) is it not a great deal
more proper to let the Foal Suck, until it be accustomed with a dry and hard
kind of Food? I herein submit my self to the Readers Judgment, who is free to
choose which he shall think best, that so he may succeed in his design.

This is what I have taken from the Duke of Newcastles Book, which I wish may
prove useful to you, and that in France, where they may bring up as beautiful
and fine Horses as in any part of the World, People would with Emulation put
this in practice, that so they might reestablish those Races and good Breeds of
Horses, which have been ruined by troublesome times; and that without going to
seek for horses at excessive rates in foreign Countries, they would Breed them
up in this, seeing certainly the good French Hunters and Gallopers are, when
well chosen, preferable to any horses in the World, because they have more
Resource, more strength, and last longer than any Outlandish horses whatsoever.
Before the year 1600, People made no use of English horses in France, and the
Mode then was stoned Curtailes, so that Henry the Great made use of them in the
Wars, at Hunting, and for all other uses; until one called Quinteret an
English man, brought over with him some horses to Court (where they delight
more in Novelties then any where else in the World) after which the use of them
was brought so much in Fashion, that the People of quality thought not
themselves well mounted, if they were not upon English Horses, because they did
not find their own Country Horses beautiful and fine enough for their Service,
and that by reason of the destruction of the Races in France: In England they
take great care of their Breeds, and the French pay them sufficiently for this
trouble, by buying their Horses at a very dear rate, among which as well as
elsewhere there are a great many Jads, although to tell the real truth, there
are some English Horses, which are excellent and very agreeable, but they are
not all so; and thus much of raising a true Breed of Horses.

CHAP. LXXX. Instructions, for fitting all kinds of Horses, with proper Bits.
TO Bit exactly a Horse, CHAP LXXX. Instructions for bitting all kinds of
Horses.
is to give him such a Bridle as is most agreeable (...) him, and most proper
to gain his consent to those Actions which a (...) requires of him; without
this consent Horses perform nothing agreeable, be ause they will have always
an aversion to obey, so that if the fear of Chaffisence hinders them to defend
themselves, yet one may perceive by the constrained posture (...) their Bodies,
that they only obey with Reluctance; but if a man can once gain their consent
by the practice of Methodical Lessons, assisted by the help of a proper and
convenient Bit, he will soon arrive at his proposed End, which is to fix and
affist to^ senfible and Ticklish Mouths; to a wake, and render light upon the
hand the insensible and heavy, and bring in and subject those which are too
rude and hard.

To acquire this knowledge a man must know some certain Principles, and by them
determine to give a Horse one kind of Bit rather as another, and a Branch of
one Fashion, before one of another which is far different from it; these
principles are what we call Theorte, which joined to a little practice will so
clear the way, that a man will be capable of himself to fit his Horses with
proper Bits, without the advice and assistance of any, and so arrive at that
End which we immediately propesed: But to succeed the better in this, he is to
endeavor not only to understand the Mouth and Reins of a Horse, but also to
know his Legs, and whether his feet be good or bad, yea if possible his very
natural inclination and disposition.

The Bitting of Horses, or, as some call it, the Science where by to know how
to (...) Horses with proper Bits, shall be divided into three parts; to wit
first, in that which considers the piece of Iron which is put in a Horse's
mouth, and which is termed (...) Bit or Bit-mouth.

Secondly, in that which considers the Branches, which are these longest parts
of the Bridle that appear outwardly, and

Thirdly in that which respects the C^rb, which is a kind of Chain fastened to
the Branch, and which rests (in a place as it were appointed by nature for it)
a little above the Beard.

The Bit Mouth produces the Appuy, which is a Horse's Rest on the hand, and
from which is Derived any obedience can be drawn from him.

The Branch which works its effect upon the Mouth of the Bit, serves to bring
in and place a horses head and Neck.

The Curb is that Chain, without which the Branch would have no operation upon
the Mouth of the Bit.

So you see that these three parts have such a Dependence upon each other, that
the Mouth does not operate but by the help of the Branch, and the Branch has
no effect but by the assistance of the Curb.

The mouth of the Bit is proportioned to the inward parts of a horse's Moun^ it
is composed of it is Sides, Chaperons (which in Scatch-months, are those parts
of the sides a the Mouth next the Branches, and to which the Banquets of the
Branches are fastnedy Plate 2 Part, i. Chap. 8i.
Fig: 1
Un Filet. A Snaffle, or small watering Bitt.

depiction of bit

Fig: 2. Un Simple Canon, ou Canon a Couplet.
A plain round or Canon Mouth and only joynted in ye Middle, to make a kind of
Liberty for the Tongue.

depiction of bit

Fig: 3. Un Canon a Trompe.
A round or Canon-Mouth all of one piece, and only kneed in the middle, to make
a Liberty for the Tongue.

depiction of bit

Fig: 4. The Canon a ^orge de Pigeon.
A round or Canon Mouth with ye Liberty after the Form of a Pigeons Neck.

depiction of bit

Fig: 5. Un Canon Montant.
A round or Canon Mouth, with an Upset or Mounting Liberty

depiction of bit

Fig: 6. Une Escache Montante.
A plain or simple S^^tch Mouth with an Upset or Mounting Liberty.

depiction of bit

Fig: 7. Les Olives a Couplet.
A Mouth with two long turning Olives coupled in the Middle.

depiction of bit

Fig: 8. Une Escache a Col D'Oye* Avec une Bavette.
A S^^tch Mouth, with the Liberty after the Form of a Gooses Neck, and having
a Slabbering Bit, hanging down from the middle of its Liberty.

depiction of bit

Fig: 9.Canon a Compass
A round or Canon Mouth, having the joining of its Upset or Mounting Liberty,
after ye Form of ye joint of a pair of Compasses.

depiction of bit

Fig: 10. Un Canon a Col D'Oye, La Liberte Gagnee.
A round or Canon Mouth, the Liberty gained out of the thickness of the heels,
and after the Form of a Gooses neck.

depiction of bit

Fig: 11. Un Canon a Basculle.
A round or Canon mouth all of one piece, only the two sides of ye Mouth move
forewards and backwards upon the two ends of the Liberty, by the help of two
Pivots.

depiction of bit

Fig: 12. Un Escache a Pignatelle, ou a pas d'Asne La Libert^^
A Sc^tch Mouth with the Libery gained out of the thickness of the Heels, and
eitehr after Mons. Pignatell's Fashion or after ye form of an Ass's Tread.

depiction of bit

Fig: 13.Un Canon a pas d'Asne, La Liberte gagnee.
A round or Canon Mouth all of one piece, with the Liberty gained out of ye
thickness of the heels, and after ye Form of an Asses Tread.

depiction of bit

Fig: 14. Les Olives-Tambours a Pignatelle.
A Mouth with small turning: Drums rounded upon ye edges after ye form of an
Olive, and having also little moving Rings upon ye outsides of them, with ye
Liberty after Mons* Pignatell's Fashion.

depiction of bit

Fig: 15. Une Escache a Boulton, a Melon, ou a Balotes La Liberte a La (...)
A Sc^tch Mouth with little Buttons, Melons, (...) Balls near to ye Liberty,
and ye Liber^^ Mons. Pignatell's Fashion.

depiction of bit

Fig: 16. Un canon Co^que a pas d'Asne.
A round or Canon Mouth cut short with the Liberty after the Form of an Ass's
Tread.

depiction of bit

Fig: 17. Les Balotes a Col d'Oye.
A Mouth with small turning Balls near to the Liberty, and having little moving
Rings upon the outsides of them, with the Liberty after the Form of a Gooses
Neck.

depiction of bit

Fig: 18. Les Poires Secrettes.
A Mouth with secret immovable Pears, and having small turning Rings upon ye
out sides of them with ye Liberty after ye form of an Ass's Tread, but kneed a
little inwards in the middle to provent tickling too much a Horses's Pallat.

depiction of bit

depictions of bits Olives, Fonceaux, (which are the same parts in Round or
Canon Mouths, what Chaperons are in Scatch) and of the Liberty for the Tongue.

The Branch is proportioned to a Horse's Neck, and to the design a man has of
either Raising or bringing it in; it is composed of the Eye, Banquet, Shoulder,
Beard, Arch of the Banquet, Jarret or Ham, and the Lower part of the Branch or
Sevil. See plate 3. Fig. 4.

The Curb is also proportioned according to the design a man has of bringing
in, or Raising a Horse's head; it is composed of two long hooks, one whereof is
fastened to the eye of the Branch, of Rings or Mallions, and Links or large
Esses. See Plat. 3. Fig. 12. and 14.

As I have said that a Mouth had it is sides, so are they either Round or
Canon'd, Scatcht, and after the form of a Barge, or otherwise composed of
Olives, Little Drums, small Bells, Pears, little Balls, Melons, little Rings,
Pater-nosters and many others now out of Fashion; the forms of several whereof
you may see in Plate 2.

Betwixt the two sides of the Mouth toward the middle, there is almost always
a liberty for the Tongue, which is a kind of Arched space or Overture, made as
well for Lodging and making a Room for the Tongue, as for strengthening the
mouth of the Bit.

The liberty is commonly made by an Upset, Pigeons Neck, Port, Goose-Neck,
Cats-foot, Pignatelle, or after the form of an Arched Balance Beam, the form
of an ordinary Arch, an Asses tread, or Saddle Bow, and several others, from
which Bits for the most part receive their Denominations; See the whole 2. Plat.

The Branches are of different Fashions, and the forms of their low parts give
them their Denominations, those most in use are the French, half French, those
a la Conestable, and a la Gigotte with round ends, these after the form of a
Capons Thigh, as also after the form of a Pistol, and many others, which we
have again sent back to Italy and Germany, See the whole 3. plate.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of all the different Kinds of Bit-Mouths, which are of most Use.
Sect. 1.
IT is to be understood, that in discoursing of a Complete Bit, there is not
thereby only understood the Mouth, but the Branches, Curb, little Crols Chains,
CHAP. LXXXI Of Bit Mouth^
and every thing else which renders a Bit perfect, and in a condition to serve
a Horse.

I shall begin to Anatomize this Bit by the Mouth, and shall relate all its
Effects as briefly as possible; after which I shall proceed to the Branch, then
to the Curb, and every thing else appertaining to it.

Sect. 2. Of such Bit-Mouths as are most Gentle.
1. Un Simple Canon, ou Canon a Couplet, See Plat. 2. Fig. 2.

THe most Gentle and best of all Mouths, Sect. 2.
is a simple Canon, or Canon a Couplet, which is a plain round, or Canon Mouth,
and only jo^nted in the middle, to make a kind of Liberty for the Tongue; the
larger it be toward the Fauceaux, or ends fixed to the Branches, the more
gentle it will be, because it will thereby be so much the less capable to
constrain a Horse.

In the well regulate Riding Schools, people see seldom or never any other;
they preserve alwise a Horse's Mouth whole and sound, and although the Tongue
sustains the whole effort of it, yet that part is not so sensible as the Bars,
which have their Feeling so very fine, that they feel through the Tongue the
pressure of this Mouth, and thereby obey the least motions of the Riders Hand;
if then the Mouth rested wholly upon the Bars, it would be a ready means to
turn a Horses Mouth desperate: In fine, it should be always held as a certain
Maxim, that a man should always make use of this mouth to a Horse so long as he
can, that is, that if with a simple Canon Mouth, he can draw from a Horse all
the Obedience he is capable to give, it will be in vain for him to trouble
himself to give him another, because this is the very best of all: you may see
the Figure of it in Plate 2. Fig. 2. and may cause make it bigger, according to
the wideness of the Horses Mouth, for which you design it.

2. Un Canon a Trompe, See Plat. 2. Fig. 3.

THe Canon a Trompe, or Canon Mouth all of one piece, and only kneed in the
middle, to make a liberty for the Tongue, comes next, it is proper to make
sure those Mouths, which for being too sensible, ticklish, or weak, chack or
beat upon the Hand; these three kinds of Mouths, have difficulty to endure any
pressure of the Bit-mouth, and therefore such Horses commonly beat upon the
hand; this Bit will therefore fix such Horses mouths, in respect that it rests
always in one place, so that thereby deadning in a manner that part, it makes
the Horse to lose his apprehensiveness, who in a little time will relish this
Bit-mouth better than a simple Canon, which as it is jointed in the middle,
rests upon the Bars unequally, sometimes upon one side, and sometimes upon
the other, which is the reason that such ticklish Mouths, have not such assurance
in it, as in this a Trompe, the which is nevertheless more rude, because it is
not jointed in the middle, but all of one piece; the greatest dexterity in
forgeing a Canon-mouth a Trompe, is to project the middle of it a little
forwards, thereby to give the more play to the Horses Tongue, and cause it rest
rather upon the Gums or outsides of the Bars, than upon their very ridges.

3 Un Canon a Gorge de Pigeon* See Plat. 2. Fig. 4.

WHen the two preceding Canon Mouths are not capable to Subject a Horse
enough, who has notwithstanding his Bars very high and sensible, it commonly
proceeds from his having too large a tongue, which by its thickness so supports
the mouth of the Bit, that it cannot work its Effect upon the bars; in this
Case there may be given to him a Gorge de Pigeon, or Canon mouth with the
Liberty after the form of a Pigeons Neck; whose liberty will a little disengage
his Tongue, and thereby suffer the mouth of the Bit to meet with, and rest upon
his Gums, which will make him so much the more light upon the hand.

This kind of Bit-mouth is for a horse which has an excellent mouth, but who
for having his Tongue a little too large, has the Appuy or feeling somewhat
Dull; this Mouth is also good for those Persons, Sect. 2.
who make sometimes use of one Rein because they may pull it, and thereby bend
the Horse's Neck without being afr^^d of ^urting his Bars, which cannot be
done with mouths that have other kinds of Libertys, because their Heels would
break and take away a part of the Bars, so that this one quality and
convenience, should make a man seek after this Bit Mouth.

4 Un Canon Montant; See Plat. 2. Fig. 5.

AFter the mouth a Gorge de Pigeon; We shall place the Canon montant or Canon
mouth with an upset or mounting Liberty, which is for a horse that has a fine
Appuy, and consequently an excellent mouth, but his Tongue somewhat large, for
the liberty gives it a place to lodge in; it works its effect upon the lips
and gums, and because the Tongue is disengaged, this mouth is therefore cap^ble
to subject a Horse who has his bars high, and in some degree sensible; it is
of excellent use and if it be well made, it will never hurt a Horse's Mouth,

5 Un Canon a Piston.

BEcause the Canon a Piston, or Canon mouth with the Liberty after the form of
the Print of a small horse's Foot, differs nothing from the preceding mouth,
but only that it has small turning Rings at each fide of the Liberty,
therefore either of them are given indifferently to a Horse; and because you
may easily by the help of the preceding mouth conceive its form, I have not
given you the Figure of it; it is enough that you understand it, which you may
do by the knowledge of the Canon Montant, and then you will know its effects,
because they are almost of the same shape, only that they give this to Horses
which have dry mouths, because the little moving Rings, give a kind of play to
the Tongue, which diverts Horses and keeps their Mouths fresh.

This Bit then as well as the preceding, shall be for a Horse which has a
good Mouth, a fine rest on the hand, high Bars, and his Tongue somewhat large.

6 Un Canon a pied de Chat.

THe Canon a pied do Chat, or Canon Mouth with the liberty after the form of a
Cats foot, is that which has the Liberty square above; this mouth is but made
little use of for Saddle-horses, not that it is not of great use, because for a
Horse which has a fine Appuy, a good Mouth, and his Tongue pretty big, as its
liberty is large, he will have sufficient room to lodge his Tongue therein, and
so the mouth of the Bit by that means will rest upon the bars, which
willquicken his Feeling; his Bars will also be eased by his Lips when the
Mouth is Forged a great deal bigger toward the Fonceaux for those parts of it
next to the Branches) than at the heels; in a word, this mouth will at very
first Subject a Horse, and therefore a man is only to keep a stayed and easy
hand, or if it fall out otherwise, it is a sign those mouths to which it is
applied, are not altogether so fine and sensible, as those to be found amongst
brave Horses.

7 Un Canon a Col d'Oye.

THe Canon a Col d'Oye, Sect. 2.
or Canon Mouth with the liberty after the form of a Goos's Neck, comes next,
whose liberty frames a round after the form of a Goos's Neck; this liberty is
large and therefore mightily disengages the Tongue so that it will be supported
by nothing but the Bars; this Bit-mouth will be therefore proper for a Horse
which has a good Mouth, an indifferent Appuy, and which a man must a little
constrain; I shall not give you the design of it, because it is easy to faucy
what fashion of a Mouth it is, without charging this paper to no purpose.

8 Vne Escache Montante. See Plat. 2. Fig. 6.

AS my design is to describe in order, some of those Bitts which are at present
most in use, I therefore set them down in order, that is, according to their
Rudeness or Weakness; therefore after those Canon mouths which are moveable in
the middle joint, I proceed to those Scatch mouths which move, because a mouth
which moves in the middle, is gentler then that which moves not at all, so that
to give in this place a description of the Canon mouths after Mr. Pignatell's
fashion, would be improper, because they are immovable.

It is not but that Scatch mouths are more rude then Canon mouths because they
are not fully so round but more edged; yet this rudeness is not so
considerable, but that a Canon mouth a Pignatelle, is more rude then a simple
Scatch with an upset or mounting Liberty.

The Escache Montante or simple Scatch-mouth with an upset or mounting Liberty,
will be proper for a Horse which has a good mouth, his tongue a little big,
and a full Appuy upon the hand, (or as the French call it an Appuy a plein^
main) and which is that which People most desire in horses designed for the
Wars, because such a mouth is capable to endure a rude motion of the hand, and
yet will not, because of the liberty of this Bit-mouth, offer to force it.

A Scatch mouth is preferable to a Canon, in that those parts of a Canon mouth,
to which the Branches are fastened, are, when they are not well rivetted,
subject to slip, so that a man is then left to his Horses Discretion; but the
ends of a Scatch mouth can never fail, because of their being overlapped, as
any understanding Bit-maker will inform you, and therefore they are absolutely
the most secure, for vicious and ill natured horses.

9 Vne Escache a Piston.

THe Escache a Piston or Satch-mouth with the Liberty after the form, of the
print of a small Horse's Foot, differs but little in its shape and effects from
the preceding, only that this has little moving Rings upon each side of its
Liberty, and that has none; as I said before of the Canon Montant, and Canon a
Piston.

This Scatch, if the heels of its Liberty be well rounded, cannot spoil a
horse's Mouth; it rests sharply enough upon the Bars, to oblige a horse which
has a full Appuy, upon the hand to obey with ease, especially if he have that
inclination to it, which is expected from a good horse.

10 Les Olives a Couplet. See Plat 2 Fig. 7.

THe Olives a Couplet or Mouths with two long turning Olives coupled in the
middle, follow; they are but little in use, Sect 2.
and are joined just so in the middle as a Canon Simple; they are good for
horses whose Mouths are but little Cloven and yet have them good, which is rare
enough, and quite contrary to that in Women, for these who have the least have
them best shaped, but in horses such as have them little have them worst; And
because horses with little Mouths have commonly big Lips, which cover and Arm
their Bars from the Bit-mouth, thereby hindering its operation, therefore the
Bars are to be disarmed of them; This Mouth will then discharge them, lodge
conveniently enough the Tongue, and give some kind of pleasure to a horse which
has a full Appu^ upon the hand, so that although these Olives will keep him in
Subjection enough, yet their being moveable will divert him.

The only fault I find in these small Olives, is that they press too much the
Gums, Which may sometimes cause a horse make Grimaces, but because it is
difficu^t to find out Bit-mouths, which will not too much till a horse's Mouth
who has it but little Cloven, I have therefore passed over this inconveniency,
which is not so considerable, as the want of a small and gentle Bit, that can
with ease be lodged in such little Mouths, would be.

11 Une Escache a Col d'Oye, avec une Bavette. See Plat 2. Fig. 8.

THe Esche a Col. d' Oye avec une Bavet^, Or Seatch Mouth with the Liberty
after the form of a Goos's neck, and having a Slabbering-bib hanging down from
the middle of its Liberty, comes next; It will be proper for a horse which
has a good Mouth, a big Tongue and a full Appuy upon the hand; as this Scatch
Mouth diminishes much toward the Liberty, it will rest almost upon nothing
else but the Gums, although the Tongue be very much disengaged in this large
liberty; and because the horse's lips are likewise abundantly taken up in
making so great a compass about it near to the Banquet of the Branch, therefore
the horse's bars will thereby be disarmed, and yet the bit will not press too
much upon them, because of the reason I have given, which is, that the Scatch
is a great deal smaller next to the heels of its liberty, than at the Banquets
of the Branches; it will however make a horse light on the hand, which has a
very strong Appuy or rest upon it. And being considered with a Bavette, or a
Slabbering-bib, it will be convenient for a horse, which having a Serpentine
Tongue, thrusts it always over the mouth of the bit, which is unpleasant to
behold; the little wheel which is at the lower end of the a Slabbering bib,
tickles his Tongue, which is serpentine and always moving, and thereby pleases
him, so that finding a large Liberty wherein to place it commodiously, he there
lodges it by this means, rather as by many other more violent, and which often
times produce l^ss effects.

12 Un Canon a Compass Montant: See Plat, 2, Fig. 9.

THe Canon a Compass Montant, Sect. 2.
or Canon mouth having the Joining of its Vpset or Mounting liberty, after the
form of the Joint of a pair of Compasses, is but little in use, although very
good; it is called a Compass, because the upper parts of its liberty, are joined
like a pair of Compasses by a turning joint; the fault whereof is, that it is
more easily broke, than the common joining of other mouths, so that excepting
that, the Bit is very good.

However the advantages which flow from it, are more considerable than this
small imperfection, because it will be proper for a horse which has a good
Mouth, a big Tongue, and a full rest upon the hand; It will Subject him enough,
because it somewhat resembles a Mouth all of one piece, or which wants a joint
in the middle, and that which is also good in this Bit, is that the horse can
divert himself upon it, although it abundantly restrain him.

When the liberty of this Bit is so large, that it cannot be made use of, it
may be straightened by help of the Cross-chains that are fixed to the Branches,
and if it be too narrow, then by lengthning them it will be enlarged, which is
what cannot so easily be done with other Bit Mouths.

13 Un Canon a Arcade.

THis Canon a Arcade, or Canon Mouth all of one piece, with a low Arched
Liberty, is the first mouth all of a piece which I shall describe; Its liberty
differs from that of an Asse's tread, in that that is higher and larger then
this; This mouth therefore is good for such horses as have an apprehensive
mouth, that is, which either rest too much or too little upon the Bit, and
commonly beat on the hand when they are pressed to obey; such horses are
difficult to Bit with any other Bit-mouth save this, which will six them,
because having but a low Liberty it partakes somewhat of the Canon a Trompe; So
that it works all its Effects in the same place, and thereby dulling and
deadening it, causes the horse to lose the apprehension and fear which the Bit
occasioned; Moreover it Subjects him when he presses too much upon the Bit,
because its Liberty also partakes of that of an Asse's Tread, upon which
account it will be capable to Subject him; but notwithstanding of all these
advantages, this Bit-mouth without a good hand, and the judicious conduct of
the Rider will be but of little use; I do not give you the draught of it,
because it is one of the most common, and best known Bit-mouths in the World.

14 Un Canon a Pignatelle.

THe Canon a Pignatelle, or Canon-mouth with the Liberty after Mr. Pignatell's
Fashion, is known all the world over; It is for a horse which has a full Appuy
upon the hand, a large Tongue, and round Bars; as this Mouth partakes of those
all of a piece, the horse will thereby continue under subjection and which is
more, because it approaches near to the line of the Bars, therefore it will
have a quick and lively pressure upon them, so that although they are round,
yet they will thereby be awacken'd and made Sensible, seeing it is not at all
supported by the Tongue, but only a little by his Lips; a Man should take care
never to work a horse with one Rein so long as he is Carrying one of these Bit
mouths, because he would infallibly break and Spoil his Bars: This fashion of
Mouth is much in use at present, so that People give it indifferently to all
kinds of Horses, but very improperly, for consider I pray how many different
Mouths I have already deseribed, which are all of them more gentle than this,
because I began with those which were most easy and gentle, and proceeded
Gradually as they increased in strength and Rudeness: It would be therefore a
great abuse to begin with this Mouth, if a horse have either a gentle Appuy, or
his Bars sharp; Sect. 2.
for I assure you all those Mouths which are of one piece, of which this a
Pignatelle is one, are not at all ordained for sharp Ridged Bars, but only for
such, which although high, are yet round, so that each time that a man gives it
to such horses, as have high and sharp Ridged Bars, he will either spoil their
Mouths, or at least cause them beat on the hand.

I have several times made use of a high Canon a Pignatelle, that is, whose
liberty was Elevate about two or three Fingers high, and that for such horses
as inclined to let their Tongues hang out of their Mouths; For as a horse does
never Thrust out his Tongue with a Masticadour or Slavering-bit, that made me
fall upon the fancy of making Liberties so, as that they might somewhat
resemble such Ass-treads, and thereby take away that imperfection of Thrusting
out the Tongue; But in respect that they troubled their Mouths, therefore I
made use of this Fashion of Pignatelle Mouth with a high Liberty; If you
approve of it you may serve your self with it, for I can assure you it is of
very good use.

15 Un Canon a Mirouer, ou a Double Pas d'asne.

THe Canon a Mirouer, ou a Double Pas d'asne, or Canon mouth with an Asse's
double Tread a little raised in the middle, and as it were after the form of a
convexed Mirror or looking Glass, is the only invention Bit-makers make use
of, when they are to fit a Horse with a Bit who thrusts out his Tongue; but
this Bit is worth nothing, neither will a man ever find it succeed, because the
invention of it is naught. An approved method to prevent a Horses thrusting out
of his Tongue.


Therefore for a Horse which thrusts out his Tongue, if he be otherwise well
fitted with a Bit, you may, without altering it in the least, fix to its cross
chain within his mouth, an Asses Tread about half a Foot high made of big Wire,
such as that whereof they make the slavering Bits, and as you bridle the Horse,
put this Asse's tread up into his Mouth, which will I can assure you hinder him
so long as you make use of it, to thrust out his Tongue: And because all Horses
do not agree with a mouth a Pignatelle, and far less with one which has a high
liberty, such as this I have been describing, and that also many Horses which
have high and sharp Bars, have this imperfection of thrusting out their
Tongues, therefore this invention of the Wire has that advantage, that it can
be adjusted and made fast to all sorts of Bit-Mouths, let them be never so
Gentle.

I neither approve of, nor condemn the invention of those Horse-Coursers, who
cause cut the Tongues of all such Horses as let their Tongues hang out of their
Mouths; and the Duke of Newcastle, who has otherwise writ very exactly of the
Manage, laughs at all the Inventions can be made use of to prevent this
imperfection, and advises nothing else but to cut their Tongues.

16 Un Canon Secret a Arcon.

THe Canon secret a Arcon, Sect. 2.
Or Canon mouth after the form of a Saddle Bow which turns round upon it, is
reputed a Masterpiece amongst Bit-makers, because of this Arch which is made
to turn about the Canon Mouth, it being so adjusted to it, as a Saddle-Bow is
upon a Horses back, and made fast within, before the ends of the Mouth, which
are fastened to the Banquets of the branches, are rivetted, for which reason it
is called Secret; it is proper for a Horse which has a pretty good Mouth,
round Bars, his Tongue very big, and a Fat or Fleshy palate; and because there
is a necessity to disengage his large Tongue, yet if the Liberty were made very
high it would trouble his Palate, which would at least cause him either chack
in the Bridle, or carry his head low if he have the least inclination to it,
therefore there is a necessity to have recourse to this Canon mouth a Arcon,
which gives his Tongue a good deal of liberty, without mounting too high, and
thereby rests sensibly upon the Bars, without being troubled by his Tongue; it
will therefore be good for a Horse, who has more than a full Appuy or rest
upon the hand, and whom there is a necessity to restrain and subject very much.

17 Un Canon a Col d'oye, la Liberte gagnee. See Plat 2. Fig. 10.

THe Canon a Col d'oye, la liberte gagnee, Or Canon Mouth with the liberty
gained out of the thickness of its Heels, and after the form of a Goos's Neck,
has really a place for the Tongue, gained out of the Heels of the sides of the
Mouth; I invented it to supply the place of the abovementioned Secret Canon a
Arcon, which is a very dear Bit, and that this will produce the same effect,
besides that it will give pleasure to the Horse, who can divert himself with
this Mouth, because it is joynted in the middle: It is proper for a Horse which
has an indifferent good Mouth, more than a sufficient good rest upon the hand,
his Tongue excessively large, and who also inclines to carry Low, for as the
Liberty is gained out of the heels of the sides of the Mouth, therefore there
is a sufficient place provided for lodging of the Tongue, without being
necessitate to elevate too much the Liberty, which would tickle his Palate, and
so make him either carry low, or chack on the Bridle; besides that this mouth
will rest sensibly upon the Bars, so that it will be capable to restrain and
subject a Horse that has them round, or who has his feeling of the Bit-mouth,
somewhat dull and unsensible.

I don't presume to assume to my self any applause for the invention of this
Bitmouth, but I assure you it saves a great deal of charges, which the
preceding Bitmouth would cost in making, and gives also pleasure and diversion
to a Horse, although it in the mean time restrain and subject him.

18 Un Canon a Basculle; See Plat. 2. Fig. 11.

THe Canon a Basculle, Or Canon mouth with the Liberty all of one piece, only
the two sides of the mouth move forwards and backwards upon the two ends of the
Liberty, by the help of two Pivots, Is different from that with the liberty a
Pignatelle, because this moves both forwards and backwards, whereas that moves
only backwards, Sect. 2.
and but a very little; this mouth is for a Horse which has a very big Tongue,
an indifferent large mouth, and a more than full rest upon the hand.

This mouth a Basculle, is designed chiefly for horses which have Ticklish
Palates, because seeing the sides of its mouth move easily forwards, and
backwards, therefore they prevent their chacking upon the Bridle, or beating on
the hand.

This mouth is also pretty firm and rude, and because it absolutely disengages
the Tongue, therefore it will rest very sensibly upon the Bars, so that it is
only fit for such Horses as have round Bars, for although his Lips may support
it a little, yet that does not hinder, but that the horse is thereby very much
subjected.

19 Vne Escache a Pignatelle.

THe Escache a Pignatelle, Or Scatch-mouth with the Liberty after Mr
Pignatelle's fashion, is so common, that it would be a superfluous piece of
work to give you here the Figure of it; the Shops are so full of these kind of
Mouths, that the Bit-makers bridle indifferently all sorts of Horses with them,
but many times very unseasonably, as I have already explained, when I
discoursed of the Canon a Pignatelle; because there is far more reason, that
the Scatch a Pignatelle, which is ruder than it, should never be given, but to
such Horses as have round Bars, big Tongues, a more than full Appuy, and their
mouths indifferently good.

In the well regulate Riding Schools, they have quite banished the Scatch
mouths a Piguatelle, from such Horses as have round Bars, because with this
mouth they would in a very short time, quite ruin and spoil their Bars, and
therefore they have rather recourse to good Lessons, and Art, whereby they may
subject their Horses than to Bit-mouths, which are more rude than is needful.

20 Vne Escache a Basculle.

THe Escache a Basculle, Or Scatch mouth with the Liberty after the very same
Form, as the preceding Canon mouth a Basculle, has almost the same effect
with that a Pignatelle, it will be therefore proper for a Horse which has an
indifferent good Mouth, his Bars high and round a big Tongue, a fleshy Palate,
and lastly, which has a more than full Appuy or rest on the hand; Now as this
mouth a Basculle turns easily backwards; therefore a fat Palate will not be
troubled by it, and so it will give no occasion to the Horse to chack on the
hand, because of his being incommoded thereby, this mouth will also rest
strongly upon the Bars, and consequently keep the Horse in subjection.

21 Un Canon Montant d'une Piece.

THe Canon Montant d'une Piece, Or Canon mouth with an upset or mounting
Liberty, all of one piece, is made exactly after the fashion of an ordinary
Canon Montant, only that it is not jointed in the middle but all of one piece;
it has the same effect with the Canon a Arcade before described, that is, it
is for an apprehensive mouth, Sect. 2.
which either rests too much or too little on the hand; such a kind of Mouth
rests too much upon the hand, when the Horse is more constrained than he
desires, and it rests too little when you give him a little too much liberty;
there is a difference betwixt this Bit-mouth, and the Canon a Arcade, in that
this is a great deal more firm than that.

It will therefore fix and make sure such false and apprehensive Mouths, which
are difficult to bit, because it partakes of the Canon a Trompe, and that a Pas
d'asne immediately following, but a great deal more of this last than the other;
this Bit then will not fail to be fit for such mouths as are indifferently
good, which have a more than full rest upon the hand, a big tongue, and which
also stand in need of being subjected.

22 Un Canon a Pas d'asne.

THe Canon a Pas d'asne, Or Canon mouth with the Liberty after the Form of an
Asse's Tread, is very much in use, since people knew its effects, and I fancy I
have my self contributed a little to make it be esteemed, as well as the
Scatches a Pas d'asne; it is for a horse which has high and round Bars, a
very big Tongue, an indifferent good Mouth, and a more than full Appuy on the
Hand; this Mouth keeps a Horse subject, because it rests sensibly upon the
Bars, his Tongue being absolutely disengaged by the Liberty, so that without
spoiling a Horse's mouth, a man may keep him as much subjected as he pleases
with this Bit; the Liberty being made after the form of an Asse's tread, should
be kept pretty low, and thus it will never cause a Horse beat on the hand, by
hurting or incommoding his Palate.

If the heels of its Liberty are made very round, then it will produce
excellent Effects, for you will thereby know it is one of the best kind of
Bit-mouths, that can be made use of for Horses, whose mouths are indifferently
good.

23 Un Canon a Pas d'asne a l'antique.

THe Canon a Pas d'asne a Pantique, Or Canon Mouth with the liberty after the
form of au Asses tread, and after the old fashion, is that whose liberty at the
top is furnished with turning Rings, for giving pleasure to a Horse's mouth
which is dry, because as to the rest, it has the very same effects as the
preceding mouth; people make use of these kind of mouths to Horses which have
low Bars, and whereas formerly they made use of strange kind of mouths to
restrain and subject them, at present they rarely make use of any other, but
these with the Liberty after the form of an Asse's tread; the which although
they be not much beneath a straight line, that is, do not slope much upwards
toward the liberty, yet seek out the Bars, because being kept from them by
nothing but the lips, they yield and slip from beneath them, so that the
Bit-mouth thereby reaches the Bars, and produces as great effect as those
which are most rude, provided alwiseit be in the hands of a discreet and
skilful Horseman.

24 Vne Escache a Pas d'asne. Sect. 2.


THe Escaches a Pas d'asne, Or, Scatch mouths with the Liberty after the form
of an Asse's tread, are a little more rude than the Canon mouths after the same
fashion, and as I before told you, that Scatch mouths were more ovasly edged,
and not so round as Canon mouths, so the use of them is more sure and certain,
in that those parts of them by which they are fastened to the Banquets of the
Branches, do not so easily slip and give way, as those in Canon mouths.

This kind of Bit-mouth will be fit for a horse which has an indifferent good
Mouth, round Bars, a big Tongue, and a more then full rest upon the Hand; care
must be taken, that the Liberty which is after the form of an Asse's Tread, be
not made to rise too high, for fear of incommoding the horse's palate, and so
causing him Beat on the Hand, therefore provided there be a sufficient place
made for Lodging his Tongue, any more would be useless.

You may both in Canon and Scatch-mouths, but much more commodiously in these
last, disarme a horses Bars of his lips after this manner; Cause make these
parts of the sides of the mouth next the Banquets very large, and so make them
diminish according to the bigness of the horse's mouth, toward those parts
which rest upon the Bars; Now the Lips being constrained to environ or
surround those large Banquets, they cannot possibly Arm or cover a horses
Bars, for they cannot be in two places at once; so that this will disarm him
as it were by accident, because there are Bit-mouths made expressly for
disarming, as are the Canon-mouths which are cut, and with little Drums, and
several others, but as they are too rude, so they turn Mouths which are good,
desperate, therefore there is no better method to disarm their Bars of their
Lips, than this I have been proposing,

25 Vne Escache a Pignatelle la Liberte Gagnee See plat 2 Fig. 12.

THe Escache a Pignatelle la Liberte Gagne, Or Scatch mouth with the liberty
gained out of the thickness of the beels, and after Mr. Pignateli's Fashion,
appears some what extraordinary, which indeed it is; I believe I am the
inventer of it, as well as of the Canon a Col d' Oye before described, whose
liberty is also gained out of the thickness of the Heels, and seeing I found
out the one, there was no great difficulty in falling on the other; the only
trouble consists in the right Forging of them, but I shall discourse of that
Elsewhere.

People may object against it, that the Scatch-mouth being so small, and
wanting a sufficient Body of Iron, above that part of it where the pressure is
made upon the Bars, and which is over against the Pignatelle, it may therefore
very easily come to hurt a horse; But any person, who has the least knowledge
in Bitting a horse, will immediately judge, that although that part of the
Scatch-mouth which rests upon the upper side, of that part of the mouth which
presses upon the Bars, have but half an inch thickness or less, yet it is of
no great import provided that that part of the mouth beneath it, which restsand
presses upon the Bars, be formed after the same fashion as if it had the
thickness of a full inch, Sect. 2.
and that therefore it will be in no Danger of hurting the Horse.

That which is Chiefly to be observed in this Scatch-mouth a Pignatelie, or a
Pas d'asne la Liberte gagnee, for it may be made after either of these
fashions, is that there be care taken, that the lower part of the liberty
betwixt the two heels, be a great deal closser than in other Bit-mouths, that
so it may not so easily reach (...) upon the Bars, in case a man should only
make use of one Rein, which be may be sometimes necessitate to do by reason of
a horse's resistance; and besides the mouth of the Bit will be thereby made
more strong, and I assure you there will be a sufficient enough Liberty for
lodging the bigest Tongues, without having respect to the wideness or
narrowness of that open betwixt the two heels.

This Mouth is proper for a horse which has an indifferent good mouth, round
and fleshy bars, a very big Tongue, a Fleshy Palate, and a more than full
Appuy or rest on the hand; I can assure you it will Subject him, because his
Tongue being Totally disengadged, the Bit-mouth will work it is whole Effects
upon the bars, so that their whole Senfibility will be awakened.

It will be likewise good for a horse, who, besides the abovementioned
qualities, has also an inclination to carry low; for in that case a man dares
not highten the liberty for fear of Tickling his Palate, which will cause him
to carry yet lower; Now the liberty of this Mouth will both lodge his Tongue,
and also be abundantly low, which is an advantage could never be had till now
in any Bit-mouth, save the Canon a Arcon.

This Mouth has then all the advantages of the Canon a Arcon, and none of its
inconveniences, which was to be very dear, and which is yet worse, people had
difficulty in finding workmen capable to make it.

26 Une Escache a Pas d'asne, la liberte jettee sur les talons.

THis Escache a Pas d'asue la Liberte jettee sur les talons, Or Scatch-mouth
with the Liberty everoaching upon the heels, and after the form of an Asse's
Tread, has really its Liberty encrocahing upon the heels of the sides of the
mouth, that is, that the Liberty instead of rising high, is extended a little
upon each side of the Mouth, to preserve always a liberty of a reasonable
bigness for the Tongue, and yet not to have it too high raised; before I had
the experience of the preceding Scatch a Pignatelle, I made always use of
this as very good, but when I find the preceding has not force enough, then I
have recourse to a Scatch-mouth a Pas d'asne, whose Liberty is also gained out
of the thickness of the heels, as well as the preceding a Pignatelle.

This Bit Mouth is for a horse which has a Mouth somewhat Fickle, and that
begins to lose the Qualities of a good Mouth, which has round Bars, a very
big Tongue, and inclines to Arm himself against his Counter, or to Carry low;
As this Liberty, a Pas d'asne Encroaches much upon the heels of the sides of
the Mouth, it is therefore so low, that it will not very easily touch the
Palate, and so will not oblige the horse to carry low, and yet the Tongue will
have a Sufficient place to Lodge in, which were it not so disengaged, would
render the horse's Appuy or feeling of the pressure of the Bit, but very dull.

27 Une Campanalle a Col d' Oye. Sect. 2.


THe Campanelles a Col d' Oye, Or Bit-mouths after the fashion of little Bolls,
and the Liberty either after the form of a Goos's Neck, or otherwise, have
lost much of their repute, so that the Bit-makers scarcely know what a man
means when he names a Campanelle to them; Now perhaps some Ancient Horseman
who will not quit his Old method, will assert that this is a good kind of
Bit-mouth, but those who have once Experimented the modern Bit-mouths, will
soon quit those a Campanelle, it is true they work some good Effects, but many
bad ones, which is the reason why people have forsaken them.

The use of Mouths a Campanetle, was for Horses which had extraordinary thick
Lips, and which Armed themselves by their assistance; And certainly for Horses
which have high Bars, and thus Arm themselves with their Lips, a Bit-mouth a
Campanelle is most proper, and produces a very good Effect, but when once it
has served a while, it wears in that part where the Appuy of it is, near to
the heels, and so afterward cuts the Horse's Bars like a Rasour; It is
therefore chiefly upon this account that people have rejected them, and those
with Olives will at last be laid aside for that same reason.

28 Les Olives a Pignatelle.

THe Olives a Pignatelle, Or Bit-mouth with two long turning Olives, and the
Liberty after Mr. Pignacelle's Fashion, are good; they are for Horses which
have an indifferent Mouth, a large Tongue, their Bars pretty high, but not
very Sensible, a more then full rest upon the Hand, and which even press more
against it than is convenient, but they are chiefly given to such as Arm their
Bars with their Lips; Now because this Mouth turns round, therefore it is
pleasaut enough in a Horses mouth, but it bath the same fault with that a
Campanelle; It is also frequently given to Coach Horses.

I find it of good use for False-mouths, that is, which having high Bars, yet
have them not very sensible, for if people should give to such Horles,
Bit-mouths which are below the line of the Bars, they would turn them
desperate, so that they would draw no more obedience from the use of such
Bit-mouths, than from these Olives, which are pleasant to the Horse, only
because they are moveable; of old people were persuaded that Bit-mouths with
Olives, were (because of their turning) more gentle than Canon mouths, which
without giving the lie to Antiquity, they are not, because they discharge the
Bars of the lips, are beneath the line of the Bars, and also dis-engage the
Tongue, so that with all this, it is impossible they can be so gentle as round
or Canon mouths.

29 Un Canon a Pas d'asne la liberte gagnee. See Plat. 2. Fig. 13.

THe Canon a Pas d'asne la liberte gagnee, Sect. 2.
Or Canon mouth with the Liberty gained out of the thickness of the heels, and
after the form of an Asse's tread, is an Invention of the same Nature with the
two preceding, viz. that a Col d' Oye, and a Pignatelle, with the liberty
gained out of the thickness of their Heels, so you see that there may be made
Six different Mouths after this fashion, to wit, three Canons, and three
Scatches; the First Canon mouth which we proposed after this fashion, was that
a (...) d'Oye, or after the form of a Goos's neck, after which fashion there
may be also made a Scatch mouth; the Second was a Scatch a Pignatelle, after
which fashion there may be made a Canon mouth, and Lastly there is this Canon a
Pas d'asne, after which fashion there may be also made a Scatch.

The use of this Bit-mouth, is for such Horses as have not a very bad mouth,
but which however do not deserve the name of good, and which have very big
Tongues, so that notwithstanding of an ordinary liberty, they cover therewith
their Bars, and therefore the Bit resting only upon the Tongue, can produce
nothing but a very dull Appuy or feeling; people have difficulty to Bit exactly
such kind of Horses, and if they incline either to carry low, to Arm themselves
against their Counters, or that they have ticklish Palates, there is no other
invention for them but this; formerly there was a necessity to make use of
Scatch-mouths, whose Liberties although encroaching upon the heels, yet had not
so great effect as this, but had considerable inconveniences, because people
were so confined, that they could not heighten the Liberties to give place to
the Horses tongues, lest tickling thereby their Palates, they should cause them
carry low; a man must therefore have recourse to this Mouth, which will, I
assure you, keep a horse very much subjected, and more than many other kinds of
Bit-mouths that are more rude.

The greatest difficulty in this Mouth, is that it must be Forged of one entire
piece, without any Soldering; because if the Liberty a Pas d'asne be soldered,
it will be worth nothing; but there is a particular way of Forging it to those
who know it, and than which there is nothing more easy.

30 Vne Escache a Pas d'asne la liberte gagnee; See Plat. 2. Fig. 12.

THis Escache a Pas d'asne, la liberte gagnee, Or Scatch mouth with the Liberty
gained out of the thickness of the heels, and after the form of an Asse's
tread, is of the same contrivance with the preceding, it is also more easily
forged, and is for the very same use, but a great deal more strong, it will be
therefore for a Horse, which has no more that which is called a good mouth,
but which has it too firm, and an Appuy that resists the Rider's hand, or is
very heavy on it, because of his having round Bars, and a big Tongue; moreover
this Bit-mouth will discharge a Horse's Lips who arms his Bars with them, for
it is very capable to keep him under subjection; you may observe the preceding
Canon-mouth a Pas d'asne la liberte gagnee, because this has very near the
same effects with it.

Sect. 3. Of Bit-mouths that are more Rude than the preceding.
HItherto I have discoursed of all those Bit-mouths, which may be given to
Horses, who have such Mouths as are called good, Sect. 3.
although the three or four last, are rather for those which have them Bad;
however seeing there is a necessity to suffer something in Horses, and not to be
so exact, and critical in condemning them, let us pass all those Bit-mouths we
have already described, as proper only for Horses which have good mouths, and
now proceed to those which are for bad, and which give the greatest difficulty
of any; for I assure you, excepting such Mouths as are uncertain, or which beat
on the hand through too much sensibility, for being too ticklish, apprehensive,
or tender, all the rest are easy enough to bit, because a man may draw
obedience from such; but those Horses which shall be condemned to carry any of
the Mouths I am about to describe, are abundantly unsupportable, because
although such Horses may by the force of these Bits, yield some obedience in
the beginning, yet they become in a short time dull by them, so that they have
no more effect upon them than the most gentle; therefore is it that I never
almost advise the use of rude Bit-mouths, but am alwise for the most gentle can
be made use of; however because people meet with more bad Horses than good, and
consequently more bad Mouths than good, it is therefore convenient to know all
those Bit-mouths I am to discourse of, to the end a man may know both the good
and bad, in this Science of Bitting

In the time of Mr De la Brow, and Mr Pluvinel, people were not so circumspect
in not giving rude Bits to Horses, because there was seen in the Riding Schools
in those days, Bit-mouths with Pears, little Balls, Melons, and also a Genette;
these kind of people did not then want Art, whereby to keep their Horses under
obedience, by the assistance of good Lessons, but their Branches were so weak,
that they were necessitate to have such rude Mouths to keep their Horses in
subjection; at present people have altered this method, for they have forsaken
all these kind of weak Branches, as being too feeble for producing any good
effect, and have substitute in their places more strong and hardy ones, and
gentler Mouths, so that a weak Branch is not now to be seen, because all are
strong and hardy, in like manner there is no rude Bit-mouths to be seen as
formerly, because people seldom exceed the simple Canon and Scatch mouths for
good Horses; that which may be said, of their fortifying in these latter times
the Bridle, by means of the Branch, is, that the horse's Beard suffers much
thereby, because there is a necessity that the Curb work with more violence;
but then it is more just to preserve the inner parts of the mouth, which are a
great deal sooner hurt, and more subject to be cut than the Beard, which is
covered with a skin, more capable to resist than that of the Bars, befides
that people can Quilt or line their Curbs, and also in case of necessity make
use of a small string or Ribband.

I have said these few Words, before I begin to discourse of rude Bit-mouths,
that so people might not be surprised when they shall see the Books of Mr.
Pluvinel, and Mr. de la Brow, who have both writ very well of this Science, but
the last a great deal more fully, and at large: Let us now proceed to them.

1 Un Canon a Pas d'asne Roulant.

THe Canon a Pas d'asne Roulant, Or Canon mouth with a moving Liberty, and
after the Form of an Asse's tread, is little in use, but however good for
Horses which have a bad enough Mouth, because of their having round and fleshy
Bars, although high enough, and who besides that, have also a Serpentine
Tongue, Sect. 3.
that is, who thrust it over the mouth of the Bit, or to one side, all which
being joined together, give them an Appuy, which too much resists the hand; and
as such serpentine Tongues endeavor to pass above the Bit-mouth, the Liberty a
Pat d'asne does binder them, so that Horses finding such a large Liberty
wherein to lodge their Tongues, does there keep them contrary to their
inclination; and besides, this Bit-mouth will also subject a horse when he has
a hard (...) mouth, and the Liberty although large yet because it is moving,
will not offend the Palate, and consequently not cause him beat on the hand.

That which may be found fault with in these moving Liberties a Pas d'asne, is,
that the parts whereupon they turn, are placed exactly in those parts of the
Bit-mouth which rest upon the Bars, so that although they be made never so
exact and equal to the rest of the Canon, yet as those parts wear, the Horse's
Bars go into them, and so are cut by the least rude motion of the Riders hand;
therefore a man should rather make use of the following Canon mouth, in which
he will not find the ncommodities of this.

2 Un Canon a Pas d'asne Secret.

THe Canon a Pas d'asne Secret, Or Canon mouth with a moving Liberty, after the
Form of an Asse's tread, but made to move after a secret manner, is of the very
same use with the preceding, and has not that incommodity of cutting the
Bars which it has, but because its Liberty is made to move after a secret
manner, therefore it will I assure you cost dear; any who intend to be at the
charges of it will find, that it is proper for Horses which have bad enough
Mouths, to oblige them to resist and press hard on the hand, and who besides
have a serpentine Tongue, which they thrust out upon one side of the Bit-mouth;
you may read the effects of the preceding Bit-mouth, because what the one is
good for, the same is the other.

3 Vne Escache a Pas d'asne quarree.

THe Escache a Pas d'asne quarree, Or Scatch mouth with the Liberty after the
Form of an Asse's tread, but a great deal more square at the top, is sometimes
made use of, there is a kind of Balance or Trebuchet, fastened to the upper
part of this Liberty a Pas d'asne, which is the reason why it is made more
square; and the said Trebuchet or Balance, is made fast to the Liberty by a
joint, so that it turns inwards when it meets with the horse's Palate.

If People consider this Mouth without the Trebuchet, it will then be proper
for a horse which has a bad enough mouth, by reason of his having round,
fleshy, and insenfible Ba^rs, his Tongue very big, and besides, his mouth
extremely much cloven, all which joined together, will make him resist the
hand, or rest hard upon it in a long journey.

This Trebuchet or kind of Balance is for two uses, First, For those Horses
abo^^ mentioned, which thrust their Tongues over the Bit-mouth, because it
there stops them, and although they have them Serpentine, yet they cannot, by
reason of this Trebuchet, find a passage.

Secondly, For Horses whose necks are False and Renversed, and which are
narrowjaw'd, to whom if you should give a hardy Branch with a high Eye, Sect. 3.
thereby to bring in their Heads, you would turn them desperate by reason of
their great constraint, because Nature resists and opposes their yielding that
obedience which you require of them; you are therefore to have recourse to some
invention, which may tickle their ^alates without much troubling them; this
Trebuchet is designed for that end; it will only importune him with the little
round joint that is in its middle, and the Horse to free himself from this
trouble, will bring down his nose, and come to endure the Appuy or Pressure of
the Bit upon his Bars, which is what we desire; so that a man will hereby
obtain without violence, or in the least troubling the Horse, the End he
proposed, which was to place the horse's Head in its most becoming posture.

4 Les Tambours a Col d'Oye.

THe Tambours a Col d'Oye, Or Mouths with small turning Drums, and little
moving Rings upon the Outsides of them, with the Liberty after the Form of a
Goose's Neck; as also with any other kind of Drums, are those Mouths, which
amongst rude Bits seemed to me the most reasonable, and preferable to many
others, so far as the nature of a horse's mouth, which I had once to fit with a
Bit, could discover to me; the Mouths with Drums have these three good
Qualities, which are to be pretty large, moveable, and round, which three
things render them pleasant and agreeable in a horse's mouth.

But let us come to these in particular; these abovementioned then will be
proper for a horse which has a bad Mouth, although very much cloven, has a
big Tongue, arms his Bars with his Lips, and has them also round, fleshy, and
dull, all which will produce an Appuy that will either resist the hand, or
press upon, and burden it upon a Journey.

But as this Bit-mouth will rest very sensibly without any impediment, upon the
Ridge of the Bars, only that it many times falsifies this Pressure by reason
of its Liberty's bending in the middle, this will cause the Horse find some
ease in it, and also have a lightness on the hand, which he would not have with
any other Bit-mouth, especially if be have no imperfection and debility in his
Members; because if his Legs, Feet, or Reins, be very weak, used or fatigued,
any of which will hinder the Horse to answer the operation of the Bridle, it
must not in that case be expected, that this Bit can rectify all these.

5 Les Tambours a Pignatelle.

THe Tambours a Pignatelle, Or Mouths with small turning Drums, and little
moving Rings upon the outsides of them, with the Liberty after Mr Pignatell's
fashion, are at first view discovered to be more rude than the preceding,
therefore a Horse which cannot be conducted nor commanded by that, will be
light on the hand with this; also if a horse should in traveling rest too much
upon the hand, this Bit-mouth may for some time render him more light and
attentive; this Bit is proper for a horse which has a bad Mouth, although well
enough cloven, and who has also an Appuy, that resists or presses too much
(...) the hand.

6 Les Olives Tambours a Pignatelle. See Plat. 2. Fig. 14. Sect. 3.


PEople do not at present make so much use of Mouths with big turning Drums, as
they did formerly, but have taken themselves to the Olives Tambours a
Pignatelle, Or Mouths with small turning Drums, rounded upon the edges after
the form of an Olive, and having also little moving Rings upon the outsides of
them, with the Liberty after Mr. Pignatell's fashion; the use of them is good,
because the sharp corners of the other (to wit the ordinary turning Drums) may
come to touch the Bars, whereas these being rounded in the Corners, can but
with difficulty hurt them.

These Olives Tambours a Pignatelle, shall be for a Horse, which has a bad
enough mouth, round and fleshy Bars, a big Tongue, Lips wherewith he arms
himself, and his whole Mouth but very little sensible, all which will produce
an Appuy, that will much resist the Riders hand.

This Bit-mouth being smaller than the preceding, will be therefore more rude,
and so will the better awake the sensibility of the Horse's Mouth; it is true,
care must be taken that the Liberty be not made too large, nor that the Mouth
bend in the middle, because if it should, then the extremities or edges of the
Drums that are nixt to the Appuy, would fly the top of the Bars, and rest upon
the Gums, which would render the Bit more feeble, and there by diminish its
effect.

7 Les Poires droites a Pas d'asne, ou autrement.

THe Poires droites a Pas d'asne. Or Mouths after the fashion of long or
straight turning Pears, and the Liberty ^^ther after the Form of an Asse's
tread, or otherwise, are much abandoned because of the inconveniency common to
them with those a Campaenelle, for they are very near of the same shape, only
that they do not so exactly discharge a horse's Lips; this Bit is for a horse
which has a false Mouth, that is, who has high Bars, and which yet contrary
to all kind of order, are unsensible, which is called a False mouth; if a man
should give to such Horses, any Bit-mouth which is below the Line of the Bars,
the Eyes of the Branch would mount so high, that the Curb would not lodge in
its right place, besides that this would without doubt cause the Horse beat on
the hand; but these straight Pears reach the Appuy without offending it,
discharge the Bars of the Lips, lodge the Tongue, and that they may give some
pleasure to the mouth, they roll and turn, which in some measure diminishes
their rudeness; therefore they would be most proper and excellent for false
mouths, were it not for the inconveniency I explained, when discoursing of
these a Campavelle, Viz. that being a little worn, they gall and cut the Bars
like a Rasour.

8 Vne Escache a Bouton, a Melon, ou a Balotes, la Liberte a La Pignatelle; See
Plat. 2. Fig. 15.

THe Escaches a Bouton, ou a Melon etc. Sect. 3.
Or Scatch Mouths with little turning Buttons, Melons, or round Balls near to
the Liberty, and the Liberty after Mr. Pig natell's fashion, are all much about
one, the Buttons are least, the Melons next, and the Balls biggest of all; this
Bit-mouth is excellent for a Horse which has round, fleshy, and unsensible
Bars, his Lips however th^^; a big Tongue, an Appuy that resists, or is heavy
on the hand, and who has altogether a bad mouth.

If a horse have very thick Lips, this mouth will not be proper for him,
because his Lips will support a part of the weight of the Bit, so that the
Bars are thereby releived, and therefore will not yield that Obedience you
expected to find in his feeling, the which you thought to awake by the means of
the little Buttons, or Melons, which rest exactly upon the place of his Appuy:

This Bit will be also good for horses, which besides the abovementioned
imperfections in their Mouths, are also very heavy on the Hand upon Travel; and
if you judge that the Buttons, or Melons which are next the Liberty, be too
small, then you may cause make them bigger, that they may so much the sooner
reach such low and unsensible Bars.

But if this Scatch-mouth be too big near to the Banquets of the Branches, in
proportion to the Clift of the horse's Mouth you intend to Bit, so that the
Buttons or Melons cannot therefore so easily reach the Bars, then you must
cause make it smaller, and so consequently the Balls or Melons will press more
sensibly upon them, which will keep the horse under more Subjection; the
Bit-makers have no fancy at all for this Bit-mouth, because it is with great
difficulty adjusted, however it is of very good use when rightly appropriate.

That which many people esteem most in this Scatch a Bouton, or a Melon etc: Is
that many who pretend to a great deal of nicety and skill, and even some who
are really knowing, when they either intend to buy or swap a horse, looking but
slightly to the Bit that the horse carries, and only seeing it near to the
Banquets of the Branches, immediately look upon it to be a simple-Scatch, and
thereupon conclude that the horse has a good Mouth, whereas there is no such
thing, although he yield all the Obedience possibly he can with this Bit-mouth.

9 Un Canon Coupe a Pignatelle.

THe Canon Co^pe a Pignatelle, Or Canon Mouth cut short, with the Liberty after
Mr. Pignatelle's Fashion, is strong or Rude, and therefore is capable to keep
Horses under great Subjection; it is a Modern Invention and only used of late;
However it is a good Bit-mouth amongst such as are Rude, in respect that it
rarely hurts Horses, when it is well made.

It is proper for a horse which has an ill or bad Mouth, round and fleshy
Bars, and which Arms them with his Lips (for it is the peculiar property of
this Bit to discharge the Lips) who has also a big Tongue, and who
consequently has an Appuy that to day presses the Hand, but to morrow will
force it; the convenience that is found in this Bit-mouth, is, that commonly
people make the Liberty large enough to lodge the very biggest Tongues, by
extending the joints which frame the Pignatelle, a little upon each side of the
Bit-mouth; this Bit descends a great deal below the line of the Bars, and
therefore very much constrains a horse, by finding out a great part of that
Sensibility whereof his Mouth is capable, Sect. 3.
so that many times although a horse be heavy on the hand, yet by carrying of
this Bit he will be thought light.

I have several times mentioned Pressing or Resisting the hand, and being Heavy
on the hand, without explaining them and perhaps there are many people who do
not understand the difference of these Terms.

A horse Presses or Resists the hand, when either through Fieryness, or an
excessive desire to go forwards, he very much opposes the hand of the Rider who
would restrain him; this sometimes also happens for want of good Reins, when a
man would oblige him to continue upon his haunches, and that his Reins care not
to endure this constr^^^ed Posture, because the horse in this case fancying to
shun Subjection, goes forwards by pressing the hand of the ^ider.

To be Heavy on the Hand, is when a horse without being anywise Fiery, and but
only by his own proper weight, lolls or rests much on the Hand, and thereby
seeks (as People say) his fifth Leg; this also happens sometimes through the
Lack of good Legs and Feet, or for want of strength.

Horses are neither very Heavy on the Hand, nor Press it much when their Mouths
are fine and delicate, for in that case, they will be more apt to Chack or beat
on the Hand, than to rest on it.

There are few Cut-short Scatch-mouths to be seen, but they may be made after
the same fashion as Canon-mouths which are cut short: This Bit is for a horse
which has a very bad Mouth, low Bars, a big Tongue, who Arms himself with his
Lips, and which with all these has also his mouth enough cloven, all which
being joined together, produces an Appuy which will either force the Rider's
hand, when any thing extraordinary is required of the horse, or be heavy on it
when he is traveling.

Although this Bit-mouth be Ruder than the preceding, and that it reaches the
Bars, and excites their feeling almost as much as possible, yet I do not
promise that you will make a horse light on the Hand with it upon Travel, if he
have any other impediment which hinders him; for example, if he be much
fatigued you may for some time make him light on the Hand, but it must be only
rest, which will strengthen your Bit as to this; or if his Legs be spoilt, and
that he has a weakness in them, I assure you he will seek after a fifth leg,
which is the Bridle, to give ease to his weak parts which are his Legs; So that
there is little hopes of finding Bits, that will be capable to render horses
which have those imperfections, obedient and light on the Hand for any
considerable time.

10 La Berge a Pignatelle.

THe Berge a Pignatelle, Or Bit-mouth after the form of a Barge (which is a
kind of Boat) with the Liberty after Mr. Pignatelle's Fashion, is the Hunters
Bit; the Duke of New Castle approves of it, and in his Book of Riding advises a
Man to put as little Iron in a Horse's Mouth as possible; although he was an
excellent Horseman, yet he was somewhat Heretical as to his Opinion in Bits,
and relied so much upon his Art of dressing Horses, that he mightily
undervalues a man's taking a great deal of care, to adjust such a Bridle to a
horse as may be convenient for him: As for his method of Mannaging Horses I
agree with him, but for his way of Bitting never shall, unless I very much
change my Sentiment.

This Berge will be good for a horse whose Mouth is but little cloven, and
consequently very bad, who has a big Tongue, low Bars, and an Appuy which
when he is put to it, will force the Rider's hand, or load and weary his Arm
upon travel; I am very much persuaded, that these kind of Bit-mouths serve for
nothing else, but to spoil Horse's Mouths, but seeing they are small, therefore
Hunters like them, because they do not hinder a horse to breath by the Mouth,
when the length of their Courses obliges him to it, whereas a Bit which fills
much a horse's Mouth, does not give him that convenience.

For the very same reason it is, Sect. 3.
that the English seldom give their horses any other kind of Bridles, but small
Snaffles, which we call in French, filets a l'angloise, the Figure whereof may
be seen in Plat. 2. Fig. 1.

It is not, but that a Judicious Man may make use of this kind of Bit-mouth a
Berge, without spoiling a horse's Mouth with it, but if it fall in the hands of
a giddy headed Person, then Adieu to the poor Horse's Mouth, especially if it
be a Berge a Pas a' asne, whereof I shall discourse hereafter.

Sect. 4. Of Bit-mouths that are most Rude.
1 Les Poires Renversees.

THe Poires Renversees, Or Mouths with renversed and turning Pears, are
extraordinary rude; I advance alwise by degrees to those Bits that are rudest,
and those Horses to whom people are necessitate to give the following
Bit-mouths, are in truth only fit for Servants, because whatever other good
Qualities they may have, yet with such bad Mouths they can never be agreeable.

These Pears are moveable, which renders their operation the more gentle, Sect,
4.
they are also large, and therefore do not so easily cut the Horse's Bars,
however they are very rude, because they reach the B^rrs let them be never so
low, so that they will be proper for a Horse which has a very bad Mouth, low
Bars, a big Tongue, and who besides Arming his Bars with his Lips, has also
an Appuy that forces the hand.

Such low Bars have commonly so little feeling, that unless a man make use of
Bits, which reach and rest upon them very smartly, he will without doubt never
find much lightness and sensibility in them.

2 Un Canon Coupe a Pas d'asne; See Plat 2. Fig. 16.

THe Canon Coupe a Pas d'asne, Or Canon mouth cut short, with the Liberty after
the form of an Asse's Tread, is for a very bad and false Mouth, and which has
high enough Bars but not sensible, a big Tongue, and which Arms it self with
the Lips, having also a great inclination to carry low.

As the Liberty a Pas d'asne is not much elevate, therefore it will not oblige
the horse to carry low, and yet he will have abundance of Room wherein to
lodge his Tongue, as also for discharging his Lips: In fine, this mouth is
proper to keep a horse under somewhat extraordinary subjection, who inclines
much to Force the hand.

An Advertisement which I have to give those, who have an itch to give rude
Bits, to certain Horses whereof they are not Masters; For Example, if they
force their hand for having an excessive ardour or fieryness, is, that they
beware of giving them a rude Bit, for it will produce no other effect save the
ruin of the Horse's Mouth; therefore let them rather have recourse to good
Lessons, judiciously practiced, Sect. 4.
and to gentle Bits, in which Horses take pleasure, wherein they will find a
great deal more satisfaction.

Those who buy a Horse with a bad Mouth, in hopes to find a Bit wherewith to
recover it, are many times, and almost alwise deceived, for such a Bit is not
to be found, and the Horse which is bought will again force the hand of the
Rider, after he has carried such a Bit but eight days, let it be never so
strong or Rude.

3 Les Annelets.

THe Annelets, Or Bit-mouths made of small Rings, and after the fashion of a
Chain, are those which Ignorants make use of because so soon as they have a
horse with a bad Mouth, they never fail to give him this Bit; the only reason I
fancy that obliges them to this, is that because the Horse's Mouth is bad,
therefore they will give it also a bad Bit; I say with reason Bad, because
besides its bad effects, to consider it only in its Make or Fashion, within
three days all is stretched, the Bit has no longer any regular effects, and
its whole Operations are disorderly.

This Bit being given to a Horse which has a good Mouth, will very soon spoil
it, because it presses and pinches him over all; In fine, I scarcely know a
worse Bit, although it be very much in use amongst the common Horse-coursers.

When Cunning People who tread in Horses, have any which have bad Mouths, they
mount them commonly in the morning with such Chain-bits, pushing on and
stopping them so frequently, and causing them thereby feel so well the violent
effects of this Bit, that the Horse retains a suspicion of the mischief and
trouble they have caused him suffer, so that when he is Sold, and that people
push him on with an ordinary Bit, whether Canon, or Scatch-mouth, he appears
(so long as the apprehension of the Chain-bit remains,) to have some kind of
lightness, and that he will suffer himself to be conducted, but a little after,
it is the same thing whether a man take hold of him by his Head or by his Tail;
I discover to you this gross cheat, not that you may practice it, but to
prevent your being imposed upon by it.

4 La Berge a Pas d'asne.

THe Berge a Pas d'asne, Or small Bit-mouth after the fashion of a Barge,
(which is a kind of Boat) with the Liberty after the form of an Asse's Tread,
is I assure you the most proper Bit I know for spoiling a Horse's Mouth, and
let those Gentlemen the Hunters, be offended at this as much as they please,
and maintain that it is the only Bit for hunting Horses, yet I persist, and say
that it is the only Bridle will soonest ruin and spoil a horse's Mouth.

This Bit being small, cuts the Bars, and being also bigger toward their
Appuy it reaches them sharply; it disengages the Tongue and Lips, and is made
all of a piece without any joint, so that if with all this, the Rider's hand be
hard and rude, you may lay your account that the horse who carries it, will
very soon have his Bars galled and spoiled.

5 Les Balottes a Col d'Oye. Sect. 4.
See Plat. 2. Fig. 17.

THe Balottes a Col d'Oye, Or Bit-mouth with small turning Balls near the
Liberty, and having little turning Rings upon the outsides of them, with the
Liberty after the Form of a Goos's Neck, do among those Bits that are rude
please me pretty well; they rest slopwise upon the Gums, are moveable and
large, so that they are not so bad as people at first sight fancy them to be;
the Bit-makers call these little Balls Melons, but very improperly, the shape
of Melons being much different because they are grooved; these Balls are much
used for Coach-horses, as also for such as carry Mails, and with reason, for
they do not spoil a horse's mouth, and yet keep him very much under subjection,
giving him in the mean time some kind of pleasure because of their turning.

They are proper for Mouths which have low, fleshy, and unsensible Bars, big
Tongues, and thick Lips, with which they Arm their Bars, that is, for horses
who have very bad mouths, and an Appuy that forces the hand, or wearies the
Riders Arm upon a Journey, which are Qualities not very agreeable.

6 Les Tambours a Pas d'asne.

THe Tambours a Pas d'asne, Or Bit-mouths with small turning Drums near to the
Liberty, and having little moving Rings upon the outsides of them, with the
Liberty after the Form of an Asse's Tread, are strong and rude Bits, but they
have this much of Gentleness, that they are large, round, and moving; this Bit
will be good for a horse which has a very bad mouth, an extraordinary big
Tongue, extreme high Bars, excessive thick Lips, and an Appuy ready to force
the hand; and because these Bitmouths are a great deal beneath the line of the
Bars, therefore they search out their feeling, so that let them be never so
low, yet the Tongue will not hinder them, because it is absolutely disengaged
by reason of the large Liberty; now adays People make not those Drums so big
as formerly, because seeing the Eyes of the Branches are now made higher, if
people should make these Drums so very big with this height of the Eyes, it
would make these Eyes of the Branches mount yet higher, and so the Curb would
be misplaced.

7 Les Poires Renversees Roulantes a Pignatelle.

THe Poires Renversees roulantes a Pignatelle, Sect. 4.
Or Bit-mouth with renversed and turning Pears, and the Liberty after Mr
Pignatelle's fashion, are pretty good Bits among such as are very Rude, and are
gentler than those after the Form of a Basin bottom; they are good for low
Bars, because they awake and draw all the Feeling and Obedience from them that
is possible.

These Pears are given to Horses which have very bad Mouths, low and unsensible
Bars, big Tongues, and fleshy Palates, but especially thick Lips, with which
they Arm themselves, as also an Appuy ready to force the hand, or at least to
weary it extremly upon Travel.

Because these Pears move and turn, therefore they will hurt a Horse's Mouth
less than any other, but being very much below the line of the Bars, they will
work as great effects as any Bit possibly can.

8 Un Canon coupe, avec un Pas d'asne Excessivement haut.

THe Canon coupe avec un Pas d'asne Excessivement haut, Or Canon Mouth cut
short, with a very high Liberty, after the form of an Asses Tread, is for a
horse which having no feeling in his Bars, there is a necessity to seek for an
Appuy elsewhere, because the forsaid Bars do not furnish one sufficient
enough, for drawing any obedience from the horse; this new Appuy will be made
by the upper part of an excessive high Liberty a Pas d'asne, which meeting with
the Palate, will draw from it some sense of feeling, and thereby oblige the
horse in some measure to obey.

People see the use of such kinds of Bits in Mules, which having unsensible
Mouths, people therefore make use of very high Pas des asnes or Asses Treads,
for to restrain and command them, which by hurting their Palates oblige them to
bring down their Noses, and yield that obedience was required.

The inconveniency which sometimes flows from this kind of Bit, is that if the
Branches be not hardy, the Pas d'asne will not work the Effect we intended it
should have upon the Palate, and if they be too hardy, then the horse will open
his Mouth, in stead of yielding and bringing down his Nose, but in this last
case you may straiten the Nose-band of the Bridle, thereby to prevent the
opening of his Mouth.

It may also happen, that by reason of the Nose-bands being too much straightened,
the Branches may stand too much advanced, which would be a very unbecoming
posture for them; but there is also a remedy for this, which is to bend the Pas
d'asne a little backwards; It is true indeed it will not be then so firm, but
it will not occasion these disorders I have been mentioning: The Pas d'asne
cannot be bended backwards, but while it is a forging, because if you should
atempt to do it when cold, it would break.

9 Les poires Secrettes a Pas d'asne See Plat. 2. Fig. 18. Sect. 4.


THe Poires Secrettes a pas d'asne, Or Bit-mouth with Secret immovable pears,
and having small turning rings upon the outsides of them, with the Liberty
after the form of an Asse's Treaa, but knee'd a little inwards in the middle,
to prevent tickling too much a horse's palate, is one of the prettiest kind of
Rude Bits a man can see; It is admirable for bad Mouths, and for horses which
have a big Tongue and incline to carry low.

This, as you may see it Figured in the Second plate, will be good for a Bad,
Nay an extraordinary bad Mouth, which has an excessive big Tongue, hard and
thick Lips, low and unsensible Bars, an Appuy that forces the hand when put to
it, and withal, a great inclination to carry low.

These Pears are called Secret, because their Liberty is kneed inwards, that
is, that the Pas d'asne which joins them, in stead of riseing high against the
Palate to offend it, inclines inwards in its middle, which produces a very
good effect, because of it is not tickling the abovementioned Palate, which
would make the horse either beat on the Hand, or carry low, to free himself of
the trouble it occasions.

As for the rest, this Bit is Rude, and keeps a horse Subject; People find few
of these Bit-mouths ready made, but however they are good, and although they
cost dear, yet when they fit a horse exactly, they may be accounted Cheap.

10 Les poires a Cul de Bassin, a Pignatelle.

THe Poires a Cul de Bassin a Pignatelle, Or Bit-mouth with immovable pears,
whose big ends are somewhat flat after the fashion of the Bottom of a Basin,
with small turning rings upon the outsides of them, and the Liberty after Mr.
Pignatell's Fashion, are extraordinary Rude; but they have this considerable
convenience, that People make commonly a very large Liberty upon them for the
Tongue, by extending the joints of the Pignatelle to the very middle of the
Pears, which does not at all spoil the shape of the Bit, and yet enlarges
extremly the Liberty.

They are proper for horses which have abominable Mouths, fleshy Bars deprived
of all sensibility, a big Tongue, and who also Arm their Bars with their Lips,
together with an Appuy which we term Desperate, that is, which we are out of
hopes of rendering Light.

These Pears are much used for strong, thick, and will knit stoned Dutch
Horses, whose Mouths have these fine and excellent Qualities, I have just now
explained; as for their effect, it has been so often repeated, that the Reader
cannot but be fully informed of it, and therefore it would be almost as great a
trouble for him to Read, as for me to write it.

11 Les Balottes Secrettes a Pas d'asne.

THe Balottes Secrettes, Sect. 4.
Or Bit-mouth with Secret and small immovable Balls near to the Liberty, and
having small turning rings upon the outsides of them, with the Liberty after
the form of an Asse's Tread, but kneed inwards a little in the middle, to
prevent tickling too much a Horse's Palate; Is an invention which has almost
the same effects with the Secret Pears abovementioned, for both of them are
good, but very Rude.

These Balls are for a horse which has a bad Mouth, a fleshy Palate, low Bars
a big Tongue and thick Lips; But because the Liberty a Pas d'asne, might if it
were too high Tickle his Palate, especially if it were fleshy, and so cause him
to carry low, or beat on the Hand, therefore is it that people make use of
these Balls, with the Liberty fixed to them after the same manner as in the
Secret Pears, seeing both of them have the very same effects, but this is the
Ruder of the two.

12 Les poires a Pas d'asne.

THe Poires a Pas d'asne, Or Bit-mouth with immovable Pears and little turning
Rings upon the outsides of them, with the Liberty after the form of an Asse's
Tread, is the last Bit mouth with simple Pears, and also the most Rude,
especially if the big ends of them resemble the Bottom of a Basin, because
there may be Bit-mouths made with moveable Pears and the Liberty a Pas d'asne,
that will not be so Rude because of their turning which renders them more
Gentle: All these kind of Bits search sharply the Bars and are only proper for
such as are low, fleshy, and unsensible, because if people should give such
Pears to Horses which have high Bars although false, that is, unsensible, they
would certainly make the Eyes of the Branches mount too high, which would be a
means to displace the Curb, unless they took care to cause make the Eyes of the
Branches somewhat lower than ordinary.

It is certainly a kind of Martyrdom for brave Horses, when people Bit them
with Pears, because there are some who although their Horses have good Mouths,
yet if they have ardor or fieryness, or that they cannot be restrained or
stopped, (more perhaps through ignorance then want of a good mouth) they
immediately Bit them with Pears, which in a very short time turns their Mouths
desperate.

13 Les poires Vuidecs.

THere are a kind of Pears called in French Poires Vuidees, which are
immovable, and have a groove or hollowness quite round them in the middle;
they differ very much from the other, because as I said they are hollowed near
to their Belly, and their Situation would make a man judge, that they were not
made to rest upon the Bars, because they are more than two Inches distant from
other, which is contrary to all good method; because every thing that is to
rest upon the Bars, should not be further distant than an inch, or an inch and
a half at most.

This Bit has been invented for Horses which have no more feeling in their
Bars, either for having them ill shapt, or because of some Callosities or
hardnesses which have been occasioned by a former Bit, or for having some of
the bones broke; There is therefore a necessity to find out a new Appuy, at the
Bottom of the Gums, where the Li^s begin, because as that part, has never been
deadn'd or hardened by any former Appuy or pressure of a Bit, therefore
certainly this kind of Bit-mouth will there find some Sensibility, Sect. 4.
which before could never be found in such spoilt and desperate Bars.

It is easily discovered, that this Bit is not proper for a Horse which has a
good mouth, seeing it is ordained for such as have no more feeling in their
Bars, and which feeling must therefore be sought for at the bottom of the
Gums; the greatest difficulty is so to adjust it, as it may rest exactly upon
those parts of the Gums you design, observing alwise to make the Liberty wider
than I have ordered, if the distance between the Horse's bars be larger than
ordinary.

Mr. de la Brow has given us the Figure of it in his book of Horsemanship, and
he also tells, that he made use of one of a much odder shape, because instead
of Pears, he had Wheels, and made use of them for a horse which had no Appuy,
and could suffer nothing either upon his Bars or elsewhere: Horses now a-dayes
would find difficulty in relishing such a Bit, I mean such whose mouths are so
delicate and tender, that they cannot endure the least pressure of a Bit.

14 Les poires renversees Canelees.

THe Poires Renversees Canelees, or Bit-mouths with renversed immoveabie pears,
which are grooved or Channeled long-wayes from one end to the other, and having
also small turning Rings upon the outsides of them, are good for nothing but
spoiling and destroying a Horse's mouth; There are Melons also grooved after
the same fashion, so that all can be said of these kind of Bits, is that when
Horses cannot be Governed with any other, and that a man is necessitate to give
him one of these two, he will soon be rendered fit for nothing but a Cart, so
that while I live I shall never recommend the use of them, although it be left
for any man to use them according to his Fancy.

15 Les Poires a Arcon ou Arcelet.

THe Poiresa Arcon ou Arcelet, or Bit-mouth with moveable pears, and a long
moving Liberty almost the whole breadth of the mouth, after the form of a Sadle
Bow, is reputed a Masterpiece amongst Bit-makers, and yet People now a-dayes
make no use of it; Mr Pluvinel made use of it in his time, and has given the
design of it amongst those other Bits he has left us, which is the reason
makes me esteem it, and believe that it is a very proper Bit for horses which
have low Bars, big Tongues, Fleshly Palates, and an Appuy past all hopes of
recovery, which proceeds from their having very bad Mouths; because the
Liberty, or that part of it called the Arcelet, immediately turns backwards so
soon as it meets with the Palate, and so cannot trouble or hurt it, therefore
the Pears being supported by nothing, find out and reach the Bars, and excites
their feeling, let it be never so dull, and because they are moveable, their
effects are thereby rendered more Gentle; That which may be objected against
this Bit is its great price, and that there are few Bit-makers capable to make
it.

16 Vne Genette ou Mords a la Turque. Sect. 4.


IT remains that I discourse of the Genette or Bit a la Turque, which has been
of a long time much out of Fashion in France, but a while ago has again come
in Mode, so that several People at Court make use of them; People may sometimes
also see some Bustard Bits a Genette, whose branches are after our own Fashion,
however they are so very scarce, that few Bit-makers know to make them; People
made much use of them in Mr Pluvinel and Mr De la Brow's time, and I look upon
them to be good, but very difficult to be adjusted to a Horse; they have no
Curbs fastened to the eye of the Branch as ours have, but it is at the very top
of the Liberty to which it is fastened, being all of one piece, and which coming
over the lower part of the Horse's Mouth, rests it self upon the ordinary place
of the Curb.

This Bit keeps Horses very subject, and People make more use of them in Turkey
than in this Kingdom, because these People wanting Art, whereby to keep their
Horse's under obedience by the help of good Lessons, they have therefore
recourse to rude Bits, amongst which this a Genette, although bastardized, may
take place.

Here are in short the effects of all the Bit-mouths made use of at present,
but the last as being most rude are very little used, because People now
a-dayes give rarely ruder Bits to Horses, than Canon and Scatch Mouths; and I
assure you, that any Horseman who cannot dress a Horse with a Canon or Scatch
Mouth, will never dress him with any other kind of Bit Whatsoever.

It is to be remarked, that I have in these instructions placed all the Bits
according to their degrees of rudeness, having first set down and told the
effects of those Bits which are most Gentle, and afterward the rest according
to their Rank, so that hereby a man may judge of the strength or weakness of a
Bit, by considering where it is placed.

The Bit-mouths here described are abundantly sufficient, without enquiring
after a vast number of others made use of by the Germans and Italians, and
which serve for nothing else but to spoil Horses mouths; because Bits sought
after with so much Artifice and Workmanship about them, are a sufficient token
that the Rider has but little Art, whereby to render his Horse Obedient.

One of the greatest Secrets for keeping a Horse light on the hand, An
excellent direction for the Bridle-hand.
is to yield or slaken the Bit frequently to him, because when a man keeps a
Horse long at a time firm on the hand, the Bic-mouth rests so hard upon his
Bars, that it makes the Blood and Spirits which are the cause of their
Sensibility, to retire, so that if a man slacken sometimes his hand, the Bit
thereby not resting upon the Bars, his sense of Feeling will immediately
return, whereas if the Bit should be kept alwise firm, the place of Appuy in
the Bars would continue insensible, that let a man pull the Reins, as hard and
so long as he pleases, yet it will not oblige the Horse to obey.

But upon the contrary having slackned it, and the sensibility of the Bars
returning, so soon as ever he again pulls the Reins, it will oblige the Horse
to obey as much as he can, and so he will remain both lighter on the hand, and
have also his mouth more fresh, whereas if he should keep the Bit, as I said,
alwise firm, the very contrary would happen; a man should therefore yield or
slacken his hand as frequently as he can to all kinds of Horses, and by this
means he will draw some obedience from them; when such as cleave to the Bridle
Reins will draw from them none at all.

That which is chiefly to be observed, is to preserve as much as possible a
Horse's Bars, because they are composed of the nether Jaw bones, which are
edged, and of Part 1, Chap: 82.
Fig: 1. Une Branch Droit a Pistolet:
A Straight branch after ye form of a Pistol.

depiction of bridle

Fig: 2. Une Branch a La Conestable.
A Branch after the Duke of Mo^^erancy Constable of France his Fashion.

depiction of bridle

Fig: 3. Une Branche a La Gigotte.
A Branch after ye Form of a Gigol or Log and pretty well kneed, and also
bruised forewards at the Larr^t* or Ham.

depiction of bridle

Fig: 4.Une Branche a La (...)
A Branch very much (...) Larret or Ham of it after (...) a bent Knee.

depiction of bridle

Fig: 5. Une branche Francoise.
A Branch after ye French Fashion.

depiction of bridle

Fig: 6. Une autre Branche a La Conestable, Mais plus hardy que La precedente.
Another Branche after ye Duke of Mommorancy Constable of France his Fashion,
but more strong and hardy then the proceeding Branch

depiction of bridle

Fig: 7. Une autre Branche a La Gigotte, Mais qui ramens d'Advantage qui La
precedente.
Another Branch after the form of a Gigol or Leg, But which brings in a
Horses head better then the preceding Branch.

depiction of bridle

Fig: 8. Une autre Branche Francoise, Mais plus hardy que la Preceden^^
Another Branch after ye French Fas^^^^ but more strong and hardy then the
preceding Branch.

depiction of bridle

Fig: 9. Fer pour les pieds plats.
The true form of a Shoe for Flat Feet.

depiction of horseshoe

Fig: 10. Fer a Pantouffle.
A Panton or Pantable Shoe.

depiction of horseshoe

Fig: 11. Fer a Demi Pantouffle.
A half Panton Shoe

depiction of horseshoe

Fig: 12.
depiction of chain

Fig: 13.
A Masticadour or Slavering Bit.

depiction of bit

Fig: 14.
depiction of chain

depictions of bridles and horseshoes the Flesh which covers the said bones,
and which being pressed betwixt two hard bodies will be soon cut and broke,
because the Bit-mouth and Jaw bones press it extremely betwixt them, unless the
hand be kept very light; it is true indeed, that Horses which have round and
Fleshy Bars, are not subject to this, but Horses which have any thing of a
good Appuy, are, and therefore it is a direction very well worth the Noticeing.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of all the different kinds of Branches, most in Use.
THe Branch is the second part of that Division, CHAP. LXXXII Of Branches.
we made in the beginning of our instructions for Bitting, where we told its
effect was to place a Horse's head and neck, and that it was to be
proportioned, according to the design a man has of either bringing in, or
raising a Horse's head.

The Branch is not the first Cause that acts in the placing a Horse's head and
neck, for it is only a second, or help to the Bit-mouth; because as a Bit-mouth
has no effect but by means of the sensibility that is in a Horse's mouth, and
that that sentiment is awakned no other way but by the Bit-mouth, it follows
that to make use of that sensibility, there is a necessity that the Branch
Cooperate with the Bit-mouth, and but only as a second Cause, to produce those
effects which we know it does, by giving so beautiful a posture to Horses, and
obliging them to carry in the most becoming posture, whereof Nature has made
them capable.

The line of the Banquet, is that part of the branch whereby we judge of its
effects, and which discovers to us its strength or weakness; See plat. 3 Fig. 4.

A strong or hardy Branch, is that whose Sevill-hole at the lower end of it, is
placed upon the outside of the line of the Banquet, See Plat. 3 Fig 4.5. and 8.
and the Flaque or Gentle, which has it placed upon this side of the
abovementioned Line, See Plat, 3 Fig. 1.

A Rude and hardy Branch will bring in a Horse's head, proportionably as it is
more or less hardy, and the Flaque or Gentle cannot operate but by its
weakness, thereby diminishing the effect of the Bit-mouth, and so causing a
Horse more easily suffer the Appuy or Pressure of the Bit, who before had
difficulty to endure it.

The ordinary effect of a Branch, is to bring in a Horse's head, that is the
Action most natural to it, because the further it is from a Horse's Neck, the
greater strength will it have in pulling, and therefore that which is most
hardy, will bring best in, provided it be in the hands of a Person who
understands to make use of it.

A Branch may also raise a horse's head, but then it shall be never but betwixt
the Ham and Sevill-hole, that it will have this Operation, and that by reason
of the Bent or turn that is given to it in that part, for it is not the name of
a Branch that causes it either bring in or raise a Horse's head, but only the
Turn or shape that is given to its lower parts.

Short Branches are ruder then long, if they have both of them the same shape
and turn, because as the effects of a long Branch comes from a pretty
distance, therefore it does not constrain a horse so upon a sudden as a short,
which besides it is great constraint is also unpleasant. I shall give a
description of all the Branches, which are of most use for the right briding of
horses, and in explaining the effects of each Branch in particular, shall at
the same time discourse of all those parts which compose one, without speaking
separately of each, and thereby making a long discourse, which proves many
times as troublesome as useless.

It is difficult enough at first seeing of a horse to choose a proper Branch for
him, it being much harder than to appoint a Mouth, because a Bit-mouth may be
both seen and felt, and People have a certain measure for its bigness, but it
is not so with a Branch, because it must be proportioned to the length of a
horse's Neck; however one may sooner fail in ordering a too short, than too
long a Branch; I fancy that by considering exactly the Models I am to give a
man can scarcely fail, but that so soon as he sees a Branch, he will be capable
to tell that it is for a horse which has such a Neck, and that when he sees
how any horse carries his head, he will he also immediately able to discover,
that such a Branch is proper for him, because he carries so and so, and has
such a Neck.

1 Vne Branche droit a Pistolet, See Plat, 3 Fig: 1.

THis Branch being almost perfectly straight, is called in French a Pistolet,
or Branch after the form of a Pistol, as also a la Ca^abroise; it is the shape
of its lower end which gives it this Denomination; it is called straight
because it has no shoulder, and is made use of for young Horses, because it is
commonly the first which people give them, to form their mouths, and cause them
relish a Bit.

This fashion of straight Branch, restrains a horse a great deal less than one
having a shoulder, and it is alwise the Method should be observed in beginning
a young horse, to constrain him as little as possible, that so there may be no
occasion given him to resist, whereby he may shun that constraint, which is
displeasing to him; for of all the Chastisements and Remedies wherewith Art
furnishes us, there are none less natural than the effects of a Bridle, and
consequently very difficult to be comprehended by Horses.

People commonly for the very same reason make Branches pretty long, to the
end, first, that they may give no displeasure or trouble to the horse, and
next, because a long and gentle Branch, such as this, in a manner brings a
horse who has a mouth too tender and delicate, to endure a hard and firm hand,
and also assists and supports him, in the action of Stopping, without suffering
him to precipitate his force for that purpose, because this Branch comes easily
to his Counter; so that both his Mouth and Bars are thereby eased,

This Branch may serve to bring in or raise a horse's Head, according as the
Curb is either lengthned or shortened: these two effects it is true, will not be
performed with the same ease and advantage, wherewith they are by Branches,
whose shoulders and other shapes are particularly designed for that purpose;
but because this Branch is that which must gain a horse's consent with ease and
pleasure, therefore People commonly make use of no other, until this has
first somewhat habituate him to them.

This Branch is commonly joined to a simple Canon Mouth; for as that Mouth is
the most gentle of all Bit-mouths, therefore is it joined with this Branch,
which as I have said is also most Gentle; but if you horse, because of his
having a too sensible, tender or ticklish mouth, will not suffer the pressure
of a Canon simple, because of the inequality of its Appuy, which renders such
horses uncertain, then you are to join to this Branch a Mouth a Trompe, which
will bring the horse to a firm Appuy, especially being assisted by a good hand,
and the judicious conduct of a skilful Rider.

2 Vne Branche a la Conestable: See Plat. 3. Fig. 2.

THis Branch a la Conestable, Or after the Duke of Mommorancy Constable of
France his fashion, is round, as those will have it who understand not what
belongs to good Work; for there is no cut work upon round Branches, as people
make them now adays, so that a good Workman cannot thereupon show his skill;
it is left to every one to please their own fancy, but as to my own particular,
round Branches seem very ridiculous.

This Branch is upon the line of the Banquet, and so will be proper for a horse
which naturally carries his head well, and in as becomeing a posture as
possibly he can; for without much Philosophy, a horse that Carries exactly
well, should have alwise given to him a Branch upon the line of the Banquet,
because it is to no purpose to subject him by the means of a firm Branch, if he
immediately yield what is required of him, by one that is more gentle.

This Branch may be adjusted or joined to any Bit-mouth a man pleases, but as
its use is to preserve a horse in his naturally beautiful Posture, there is
appearance that his mouth is good, and therefore, for the most part you are not
to join any other Bitmouth to it, but a simple Canon or Scatch; however it is
not but when you are obliged for certain Reasons, to give your horse a rude
Mouth, you may join to it this Branch, only with a design to weaken or diminish
the strength of the Bit-mouth; for it is a Maxim, that a man may either
strengthen or weaken the effects of a Bitmouth, by means of the Branch.

From whence it follows, that a man can give to a horse either a rude or gentle
Branch, without any intention of either bringing in, or raising his head, but
only of fortifying or weakening the operation of the Bit-mouth.

What I have here said shall not be repeated, lest it should trouble the
Reader, and therefore he is to apply it to all Branches whatsoever.

3 Vne Branche a Gigotte. See Plat. 3, Fig. 3.

THe Branche a Gigotte, Or Branch after the form of a Gigot or Leg, and pretty
well kneed, and also bruised forwards at the Jarret or Ham, is upon the line of
the Banquet; but as it is hardy the matter of sixteen lines, or an inch and
four lines at the Ham, and that it is also bruised or set forwards by a false
Ham, therefore it will be proper for Horses which naturally carry well; and as
such horses many times either through the weakness of their Reins, or
weariness, may come to fall from such a beautiful Carriage, and even to carry
low, therefore I fancied this Branch would be proper for such, in respect,
First, that it is upon the Line of the Banquet, and therefore capable to
maintain them in their good Carriage; And Secondly, The hardiness or strength
of it at the Ham, together with the help of its false Ham, will raise their
heads, in case they have either of these imperfections I mentioned.

I also think that a man can commit no great fault, in giving a horse who has
his head naturally well placed, this Branch which we call a Gigotte, because he
may come of this Branch will oblige him to continue in his becoming posture;
this Branch may be joined to a gentle Bit-mouth, for the very same Reasons I
gave in discoursing of the preceding Branch; and People commonly join it to
Canon or Scatch-mouths.

It is not but that there are horses who have naturally their Heads and Necks
well enough placed, and yet have bad and hard Mouths, and who therefore require
a firm Bit to stop and conduct them; in this case you are not to hesitate, but
to give immediately a Bit conform to the inward parts of the Mouth, and
disposition of the Horse, who perhaps may afterward discover, that his mouth
is only bad through too great Ardour, or an excessive desire to go forwards; to
such a horse as this, a rude Bit would produce no other effect but the ruin of
his Mouth.

4 Vue Branche a Genouil; See Plat: 3. Fig. 4.

THis Branche a Genouil, Or Branch very much kneed at the Jarret. or Ham, after
the Form of a beut knee, is after the model of those Branches which raise a
Horse's head, and is proper for horses which Arm themselves against the
operation of the Bit, so that I cannot recommend to you a better for that
purpose; it appears at first view ridiculous, being of an extraordinary shape,
but it is it alone has discovered to us, that there was no other means to
raise a horse's head, but by the help of a hardy Branch, although it be only
between the Ham and Sevill-hole that it raises; the Touret or Sevill-hole
being placed upon the outside of the Line of the Banquet, it therefore follows
that the Branch is hardy, and yet notwithstauding of this, it also Raises.

This Branch is only hardy a few Lines at the lower end of the Branch, but at
the Ham it is full three Inches hardy, and that to give strength enough to the
lower part of the Branch to Raise, so that it will be proper for a horse which
arms himself after either of the manners I shall immediately explain; horses Arm
themselves most commonly for having their necks too slender and easy, which
they make use of to shun the subjection of the Bit, by bringing in so very much
their heads, that the lower parts of the Branches rest upon their Counters,
which renders any effect that the Bit can produce in their mouths altogether
useless, because there is no action of a Bridle, that can force a horse to
thrust out his nose directly as they can bring it in, for all Branches can do
this, but none that.

Till now there has never been sound any thing of better use for such horses
as Arm themselves, than the Branch a Genouil; I shall explain two ways how
horses Arm themselves, the First is as I have already told, by resting the
Branches against their Counters; the common remedy is to give to such shorter
Branches, which are so far from rectifying it, that upon the contrary it
constrains them more, and thereby obliges them to arm themselves more strongly
after this manner, than they did at first, and if there should be long Branches
given them, then they could not be restrained or kep't in; people are therefore
necessitate to have recourse to this Branch a Gonouil, which although pretty
long, yet is so turned that it cannot so soon reach their Counters, as an
ordinary Branch which is but six Inches long, (measuring from the lower part of
the Bit-mouth to the Touret or Sevill-hole) because instead of pulling down
their Noses, as other Branches generally do, this raises them, and yet it is
ten inches long, so that one would think, that for this reason it would reach
sooner their Counters, whereas it does no such thing, and that by reason of its
great bent at the Ham.

The Second way of horses Arming themselves, is that when a man would restrain
them, they turn in so very much their Heads, that they immediately touch their
Necks with their Chins, and thereby render the effects of the Branches useless;
there is no other remedy for such, but to place a ball of wood (covered with
Velvet, or any other thing to make it appear neat) betwixt their Jaw-bones,
upon the Chaul-band of the Bridle; this is an Invention left to us by Mr. de la
Brow, which is certainly the only Remedy can be made use of with best success
for this imperfection.

The bigness of this Ball should be proportioned according to the hollow
between the upper parts of the Jaws, because were it too little, it would
remain altogether useless and without effect, being wholly lodged between the
two Jaw bones, and if it were too big, besides that it would appear too much,
it would also shift from one side to the other, and so be frequently dislodged,
but being so adjusted, that the half of the Ball may enter between the two
Jaw-bones, and the other half remain without, and meet with his Throat, it will
then keep in its place, by reason that the hollow betwixt the two Jaw-bones
straitens as it descends so that the Ball cannot therefore be dislodged, but
must of necessity prevent the horse's Arming himself.

5 Vne Branche Francoise. See Plat. 3. Fig. 5.

ALL Horses do not Arm themselves, but many carry low, therefore the raising a
horse's head is one of the most difficult things we undertake, because a man
may bring in a hundred, when he will not raise so much as one; however the two
Branches I am to describe after other will perform this effect, the one more,
the other less.

The First is the Branche Francoise, or Branch after the French Fashion, which
is hardy about four Lines at the Touret or Sevill-hole, and kneed an Inch and
nine Lines at the Jarret or Ham, with the Eye of the Branch a little higher
than ordinary, to give the more force to the Branch, which is but a very little
hardy; it will therefore be proper for raising a horse which carries his head
low, because the Sevill at the lower end of the Branch, inclining backwards
toward the neck, has borrowed a sufficient strength from the Ham, which is
pretty much kneed in that part, to make it the more powerful for Raising.

This Philosophy will not be approved of by every one, because it has been but
little understood till of late, and people had difficulty to conceive how a
hardy Branch could raise a horse's head; but seeing it is a matter of Fact,
which is agreeable to reason (and although it were not, yet clear Matters of
Fact are not to be debated) I shall explain how this may come to pass; The
greatest and most sensible effect of a Branch is from the Shoulder to the Ham,
but from the Ham to the Sevill it is not so great; now in this Branch the
Shoulder has strength enough of it self, and which is more, it continues its
strength to the very Ham, again the lower part of the Branch or Sevill serves
it self advantagiously of this strength, for raising a horse's head, by
inclining backwards toward the neck, where however it is hardy, because it
remains about four Lines upon the outside of the Line of the Banquet, so that
our Proposition still holds good, that hardy Branches help to Raise a horse's
head.

6 Another Branch a la Conestable, but which is more hardy than the preceding.

See Plat: 3. Fig. 6.

HOrses carry their Heads differently, and so consequently their necks; I
immediately before proposed the Branche Francoise, or Branch after the French
fashion, whose effect is to raise, although but little, because it is only
hardy at the Sevill about the matter of four Lines, whereas this Branch a la
Conestable, (or after the Duke of Mommorancy Constable of France his fashion)
is somewhat more hardy, having eight Lines at the Sevill Hole, and about two
Inches at the Ham, therefore it will be proper to raise a horse's head which
carries it very low; the false Ham, or part of the Branch which is bruised or
advanced forwards, more than the other part of the Branch to which it is
Soldered, is a great help to it, because it augments the strength of the lower
part of the Branch, the Eye being of a good height, will also give strength to
the operation of the Branch, and the Shoulder which is so turned as not to
constrain too much, will likewise assist the Branch to Raise.

Now because it is most difficult to raise a horse's head which inclines to
carry low, I have therefore proposed three Branches for it; the First is that a
la Gigotte, marked 3d. which although it be only upon the Line of the Banquet,
and that it appears to be fit for nothing else, but to preserve a horse in a
good Carriage, yet as it is hardy at the Ham, it will therefore in some measure
Raise:

The Second is the Branch a la Francoise, marked 5th. which raises more than
the preceding, because it is its proper effect, but however with a great deal
of gentleness, because it is only hardy at the Sevill-hole, the matter of four
Lines, although the rest of its parts be very well proportioned for that
purpose.

Thirdly, There is this a la Conestable I have been describing, which will yet
raise more than the other two, because all its other proportions being exactly
observed, it is also hardy at the Sevll Hole, the matter of 8 Lines; it may be
made to raise yet a great deal more, by kneeing or advancing the Ham, the
double of the distance wherewith it is made hardy at the Sevill Hole; the very
same may be done with the preceding Branch.

7 Another Branche a la Gigotte, but which brings in a Horse's Head more than
the preceding.

See Plat. 3. Fig. 7.

BEcause Horses have different ways of carrying their Heads and Necks,
therefore to rectify these imperfections, there must be made use of Branches
whose Tours and Bents are also different; this a la Gigotte, is hardy the
matter of eight Lines at the Sevill Hole, and has a false Ham, that is, the
Branch at that part is bruised or set forwards, so that the most advanced part
of this Branch is about an Inch and nine Lines.

The principal effect of this Branch is to bring in, it being hardy to the very
lower part or Sevill-hole; the half Ham augments its strength, and the lower
part of the Branch which stands inclined toward the horse's Neck, makes it to
Raise a little, so that it will be good for a horse which Carries his Neck
straight out, and has therefore difficulty to bring in his head to such a
becoming posture as it ought.

This Branch brings in a great deal and raises but little, which is just what
we should make use of for such straight streached Necks, because by bringing
their Heads very much in, we oblige them to turn and bend their straight Necks
after the form of an Arch; but because it would be dangerous to bring them too
much in, and thereby bring their Heads betwixt their legs, therefore the lower
part of the Branch is made to incline Backwards toward the horse's Neck, which
raises and places their Heads in the most beautiful posture such Necks are
capable of; However it is not but that the same kind of Branch, may be made use
of for horses which only thrusts out their Noses, as I shall hereafter explain.

8 Another Branch a la Francoise, but which is more Hardy than the preceding;
See plat 3. Fig. 8.

WE have gone through a part of the different kinds of Necks, and Branches
which should be made use of, to prevent the Actions these Necks cause to be
performed by horses Heads, it now remains that we consider the effects of this
Branche Francoise, or Branch after the French fashion; It is hardy about an
Inch and two lines, which is 14. lines; its principal operation is to Bring in,
being almost equally hardy both at the Ham and sevill-hole, so that it will be
proper for horses which carry their Heads high enough, but yet Thrust out their
Noses, because as there is nothing required but to bring such Heads in, this
Branch will have therefore strength enough to perform it: If a man make good
use of his legs as he is pulling in hard a horse's Head, there are very few
horses but what he will oblige to bring down their Noses.

It is not, but that the preceding Branch a la Gigotte may be proper for
producing the same effect, for although the lower part of that Branch incline
backwards toward the horse's Neck, so that it cannot be called purely hardy,
because it also thereby Raises a little, yet that does not hinder its effect of
bringing in; Therefore all that can be said of it, is only that it is weaker,
and not so capable to restrain and bring in a horse's Head as this last.

Here are explained all the different ways which horses carry their Necks, so
that;

The First Branch is generally proper for the Necks of all Horses, which are
but beginning to be Rid; It may be also very good in particular, for such horses
as have slender Necks, or which have difficulty to endure the Pressure of the
Bit.

The Second is for horses which Naturally carry well.

The Third, for such as have a beautiful Carriage, but which incline, either
for lack of strength, or out of a bad custom, to carry low.

The Fourth, for horses which Arm themselves against their Counter.

The Fifth, for horses which carry low.

The Sixth, for such as carry yet lower than the preceding.

The Seventh, for Necks which stand Streached out straight forwards; and

The Eight, for Horses which carry their Necks high enough, but yet Thrust out
their Noses, like to the Cravats.

These are all the different ways, that horses commonly carry either their
Heads, or Necks, together with the Branches which are proper for them.

It remains that I discourse of such Necks as are too slender, and whose Mouths
will not endure the pressure of the Bit upon their Bars, nor consequently any
thing of a firm hand; I told you that the first Branch a Pistolet, was proper
for such horses; but as people have no fancy for giveing such Branches to
Journey-pads, they may therefore in that case take the sixth Branch a
Conestable, and render it more Flaque or gentle at the Sevill-hole by half an
inch, which will make it proper for such horses, because being made after this
fashion it will have no kind of hardyness or strength, which is what we desire;
as for the length, it must, as I have already said, be proportioned to the
length of the horse's Neck, and to the design you have of restraining much or
little: And for their turns or bents at the Ham, you are also to alter them
according to the intention you have of making them hardy or gentle. Note that
the further the Sevill-hole is without the line of the Banquet, the hardyer and
stronger the Branch is, and the more it approaches, or even comes on this
side the line of the Banquet, it is so much the more Flaque or gentle.

CHAP. LXXXIII. How to choose a proper Bit, for any Horse.
THe knowledge of the effects of the Bit-mouths and Branches I have described,
CHAP. LXXXIII How to fit a Horse with a proper Bit.
being supposed, it is easy enough to Choose, or appoint a proper Bit for any
horse whatsoever.

You are then to put a Bit into the horse's Mouth you are about to Bit, for
without doing this, it is impossible to judge which kind of Bit will be most
convenient for him, but however, you are to give him that at first which you
shall think most proper; If you have not many of a different kind by you, then
you are rather to give him a gentle one than a Rude, and you are also to take
care that it be right lodged in his Mouth, that is, that it be neither placed
too high, which would make him Frumple up his Lips, nor too low, which would
make it rest upon his Tushes.

This done, cause one Mount him, and after he has adjusted the Bridle Reins in
his hand, let him try to pull the horse two or three steps back; you will know
as he is going back, if his Head be firm, and if he performs it franckly, or
only obeyes with Reluctance, that so you may give him another Bit, which may
help to gain his consent, without either troubling or hurting his Mouth.

If in going back he bring in his Head to a right posture, that is, if having
formerly thrust out his Nose, he now bring it in so as that it stands
perpendicular to the ground, then it is certainly the fault of the Person that
formerly Rode him, that he has not already placed his Head in that posture,
for his once doing it, is a sign that he can, and therefore there is nothing
but to let him acquire a Habit of it.

Afterward cause him to go at a step or walk, and let the Rider feel him on
his Hand, that so he may oblige him to place his Head in the most beautiful
posture he is capable of with that Bit, and do you at the same time endeavor,
to know if he have either too large or too small a Bit in his Mouth; too large,
in that it makes him frumple his Lips, and that at the same time the hooks
which fasten the Curb do also pinch him; and too little, in that he swallows
his Bit-mouth as we Term it.

Consider next the length of the Branches, which may with a little experience
be easily understood; As whither too long or too short, which a little
reasoning will discover to you, because if the horse be such as you know there
is a necessity to restrain much, then they are to be shortened, but if but
gently and little, then they must be lengthed, and especially if he either beat
on the hand, or have a too slender Neck, for in those cases the Branches are to
be made very long, because their operation coming slowly and at a distance, it
will surprise the Horses Beard, as well as his Shoulders and Legs, a great deal
less, than if they were shorter, and that their Effects came from a short
distance, that is, which were nearer to the Hand of the Rider.

Again cause the horse to go at a step or Gallop, to Part and Stop suddenly,
and by seeing him perform these Actions, you may judge whether he have a good
or but an indifferent mouth; if you judge by his easy stopping, that he has a
very fine mouth, then give him only a Simple Canon-mouth, for when a Man can
make good use of a horse with a Canon-simple, he should never seek after
another.

After this open your Horse's Mouth, suffering the Bit mouth to remain in its
place, and by this you will know whether his tongue be so big, as that he will
need either a Bit with a like Liberty, or one that is larger than that he has
already, and which you may also come to know more easily, if you observed him
to have his Appuy or feeling of the Bit somewhat Dull. because in this Case,
there is a necessity to disengage his tongue, and the like, if he Arm his Bars
with his Lips; but if he should have a dull Appuy, because of his Arming
himself with his Lips against the pressure of the Bit, and yet have high and
sharp ridged Bars, then his Bars are only to be discharged of his Lips, and
that only by accident, as I have before told you.

If the Horse incline to carry low, you are not to give him a liberty for the
tongue which will rise too high, for that, by tickling his palate would bring
his head down between his Legs.

You shall next feel his Bars, to observe how they are shaped, for it is
partly they, that make a mouth either good or bad; if they are sharp ridged,
then you are to give your Horse a gentle Bit mouth, and you are not so much as
to mention a Pignatelle, which is only proper for round Bars.

If the Horse have them very fleshy and low, then you must have recourse to
such mouths as will reach them, but if his Bars be high and altogether
insensible, which is what we call a False mouth, then in that case, you may
give him a mouth with the Liberty after Mr Pignatell's fashion, or after the
form of an Asses tread; because for such Bit mouths as are beneath the line of
the Bars, they produce in False mouthed Horses but an ugly grimace, and a yet
worse effect.

Having observed all I have been telling you, you are yet to cause ride your
Horse, to cause him Part and Stop, go back, Part again, and then go at a Walk,
that so you may judge if he have strong Reins, sound Legs: and good Feet, or if
his hind quarters be stronger than his fore.

For your Horse may have contracted these imperfections, by reason of his
performing bad Stops through ignorance, a bad Habit, or by any impatient ardour
occasioned many times by his want of Reins, or for having painful and weak
Hams; therefore it is not a rude bridle will rectify such imperfections, but
good lessons well practiced, for a rude Bit will produce more disorder and
confusion than good effects, and that because the ground or lower parts of a
Horse's mouth are generally good, but rude Bits perfectly spoil them.

It may happen that the horse you intend to Bit, has been disorderly with the
Bit he carries, because it is too rude for him; it is in that case easy to
give him one more Gentle.

If your Horse beat on the hand, you are to endeavor to discover the motive
obliged him to it; the universal remedy for such horses is the Canon a Trompe,
provided the fault proceed not from the Horseman, who may have either too hard
a hand, or otherwise cleave too much to the Bridle.

When you are about to Bit a Horse you have only seen a little, and therefore
cannot know so exactly all his imperfections, you are to inform your self of
them; to wit if he be heavy on the hand, or if he Heat in the mouth, if he
retain his strength, for if he be hot and Fiery, to the end you may take your
measures accordingly.

If your Horse have a weak Fore hand, you are to give him a Bridle which will
subject him more than otherwise you would; and if his Hind-hand be weak by
reason of some infirmities, as Jardons, Spavins, etc. Then you must give him a
Bridle which restrains less, than one you would give him had he not these
infirmities.

Now by all that has been immediately said, and from the knowledge of the
effects of the Bit mouths heretofore described, you may easily form your
project for prescribing a Bit-mouth for any Horse whatsoever.

Let us next proceed to the Branch; I suppose you have also a sufficient
knowledge of its different effects as I have explained them; because according
to them, you are to consider after what manner a Horse carries his head, that
so you may fix upon the Branch you intend to give him.

You are to observe that the Bit-mouth, that is, that kind which you are to put
in the Horse's mouth, should regulate you in some measure as to his mouth,
because a Bit-mouth may be strengthened or weakened by the Branch; and therefore
you are to consider, whither you design to subject and restrain your Horse, by
means of the Bit-mouth, or Branch, because a hardy Branch may be given upon
such considerations as these, to a Horse who brings in his head abundantly
well, and so there may be also given a Branch which raises, to a Horse who
has no need of it, and that for either fortifying or weakening a Bit-mouth,
according to your intention and design.

The modern way of Bitting horses is very different from the ancient; For
heretofore, they only subjected their Horses with rude Bit mouths, whereas at
present People make only use of such as are Gentle, but then to supply that,
the Branches are now made more hardy, for heretofore they were almost all
Flaques or Gentle, but at present there are scarce any of these to be seen,
because People have fortified them not only at the Sevill-hole, but also at the
Eye and Ham; it is true the place where the Curb rests suffers a little by
it, but that is more easily rectified, than any of the internal parts of the
mouth, when they come to be hurt or spoilt.

If your horse Carry well, a Branch a Gigotte or half after the French fashion,
with the Sevill-hole upon the line of the Banquet, will keep him in that
posture.

If he Carry low give him a branch a la Conestable, made very hardy at the Ham,
and whose Sevill-hole remains about an inch upon the outside of the line of the
Banquet.

If he thrust out his Nose, give him only a Branch this is simply hardy.

If he Arm himself against his Counter, you must give him a Branch a Genouil.

And if he thrust or carry his Neck straight out, then give him a Branch a
Gigotte, which Brings in much, and but Raises little.

I fine, I believe I have explained so clearly the effects of the Branches
before described, that should I say any more of them, it would prove but an
useless repetition.

You are to take particular care, that the Bit-mouth you order to make be not
too large, for that gives Wings (as we say) to the Branches, or makes them
start forwards; as also that the Curb rest in its proper place, for without
this, the Bit mouth will not have that effect you might have expected from it.

The Liberty for the Tongue, should have only the length of an Inch between the
two heels of the Bit mouth, I do not as before, understand here an inch
consisting of twelve lines, but only an ordinary one containing about nine or
ten.

The Eye of the Branch should be no higher above the Bit mouth, then three
ordinary finger breadths, or twenty two lines.

The Banquet it self should stand plum or perpendicular; if it incline toward
the Horse's Neck, as it is the custom of ignorant Bit-makers to cause it, then
it will diminish the effect of the Branch, for if it should but incline that
way only one line, it would be a considerable distance when its line is
prolonged the length of the Sevill-hole.

The Shoulder should take its rise no higher, then from the middle of the Arch
of the Banquet, neither should it have any more for its greatest tour or
compass when it is most hardy, but only the height of the Eye.

Large Curbs, providing they be round, are always the most Gentle; the most
part of People who keep Horses, Fancy there is no better way to fit a Horse
exactly with a Bit, then always to change them until they fall upon that they
would have, this say they is the easiest and most certain way of any.

My Opinion is, That it is very convenient, especially for such as have no
great experience in Bitting Horses, to have a good many Bits by them, that so
they may make use of them as I am going to show.

When they would then Bit a Horse, let them put into his mouth, (having first
observed what I have been immediately directing) any Bit they shall judge most
proper for him, and from it they may easily take certain measures, as to the
Bit which will be most proper for him, for they will thereby know if there be
either too much or too little in his Mouth, as also what is to be rectified in
the Branch, whether it be too long or too short, if its Eye, Shoulder, or
Sevill-hole, have their just proportions, that so they may cause make a Bridle
conform, and which they judge will be most proper and convenient.

But to go without any kind of knowledge from a Rude Bit to a Gentle, and from
a Long Branch to a Short, and thus to skip from Bit-mouth to Bit-Mouth, and
from Branch to Branch, without either design or skill, is but just as if a man
should attempt to look for any thing with his Eyes shut, and will serve only to
falfifie a Horse's Mouth, and if it be tender and delicate, to render it
uncertain; So that People thereby, many times trouble and spoyla Horse's mouth,
instead of giving either ease to it, or making it better.

It is not, but that this way of choosing a Bit, may sometimes succeed with such
Horses as have excellent mouths, such as those which have a full Appuy or rest
upon the hand, and such Persons as can do no better, commit no great fault in
making use of it, but I look upon it to be the method only of such, as have not
the least Tincture of this Art, for which I assure you there is required a
great Application, as well as a little practice; however say they the thing
with a little study is not so very difficult, because People find in Paris a
great many who choose Bits wonderfully well, and yet know nothing belonging to
Horses, have no knowledge of their qualities, neither did they ever Ride any;
If then those Gentlemen have succeeded so well without ever Mounting, or so
much as knowing any thing belonging to a horse, surely those Cavalliers in
whose behalf I write these Lines, may with far greater reason hope to succeed
in it, seeing it would appear, that no man can with certainty direct a Bit for
a horse, according to the Rules of Art, if he do not first know his Legs, Feet,
Reins, Vigor, and Lightness; this is indeed a knowledge which all good
horsemen have, and which will therefore make them succeed sooner in Bitting a
Horse, than these Gentlemen, who know nothing of a Horse but his Jaws and
Bars, because of their having immediately felt them.

There is one Chapter more belonging to this part, wherein our Author gives
some directions, for dyeting or preparing a Horse for a Match or Course; I have
removed it hence to the 35 Chap: of the following Supplement of Horsemanship,
where you will find it insert in the 84 Page under this Title, A method to
prepare Running Horses, somewhat more ancient than the former, and set down by
Monsieur Solleysel, at the close of the second part, of the French impression
of the Parfa^^ Marshall, judging it a great deal more proper to set both
Methods together, (seeing I was notwithstanding of his, to give in that
Treatise particular directions concerning Running Horses) than to have them
placed at a distance from other so that they could not be so exactly and easily
compared; This I thought fit to advertise the Reader of lest he might Fancy I
had either forgot it, or wilfully shuffled it out of this Book: But this will
let him know that I have done neither, but only Transposed it, as well for the
advantage of the discourse, as his particular Convenience.

The End of the first Part
CORRECTIONS
In the First Part.
Page line. Read 4 25 is a Bone 9 7 in which the flesh 12 38 from an old
Stallion 18 21 acquire 25 57 unsteddy 26 33 noman to 30 34 there are a 38 46
discourse 39 8 Forepart of 47 9 kind 56 1 as well as if 60 41 scarcely 78 43
has been 111 2 For Turnips R. Rape seed 125 27 barred them Page. Lin. Read 134
2 Keep it in 142 16 their Pasterns bend 144 47 as in other shoes 147 42 which
are 160 9 Dele, for example 190 20 Dele, is 200 29 Erysipely 212 32 Andaluzia
212 42 Africa 238 11 a bard mouth 240 3 Dele, on 256 Dele, Sect 4. 257 2 false
Ham 259 14 Thrust out 260 34 That is

In the Supplement.
Page lin. Read 2 42 preceding 2 10 Of one 84 37 Wheat straw and Dele
unthreshed and with the Ears upon them. 84 50 Wheat straw 85 40 Wheat straw 85
49 Wheat straw

A SUPPLEMENT OF HORSEMANSHIP, To the First part of The PARFAIT MARSHALL.

OR A most Compendious and Excellent Treatise of RIDING.

Whereby all kinds of Horses may be wrought according to Nature, and Perfected
by the Subtility of Art.

Being a Collection, taken from the Best and most Modern Writers upon that
Subject.

The whole Collected and Methodized,

By Sir WILLIAM HOPE of Kirklistoun, Knight. Lieutenant Governor of the Castle of
Edinburgh.

Anima sapientis alitur tractatione rerum Honestarum, and Action bonorum
operum. Lactant. Printed at EDINBVRGH.

THE PREFACE.
OUR Famous Author, having in the two preceding Discourses which put a close
to the First Part of his Book; Given most Exact and Excellent Directions, for
Breeding and Bitting all Kinds of Horses, I judged it Proper, that I might
Render that First Part yet more Complete, (there being little or nothing of the
Art of Riding contained in it,) to Subjoyn to it this Exact Collection of
Horsemanship: For of what use is a Good Breed of Horses, or the Art to know,
and make Choice of a Proper Bitt, if a Man know not how to Mount and Rid the
One, and make Use of the Other?

It was therefore the Consideration of this, which first moved me to make this
Collection, which is taken from the very Best of Writers upon this Subject,
such as La' Brow, Pluvinel, and the Great Duke of Newcastle; But chiefly out of
this Last: All which I have taken pains to bring unto some kind of Order and
Method, and with as few Repetitions as possible, seeing I therein design all
imaginable Brevity and Perspicuity, both which I make no doubt, but after a
serious Perusal will be found observed to the full.

I am also to show, that my Design in this Treatise is not to instruct Novices,
or such who have never had any Tincture in the Art of Horsemanship; For the one
would be as Ridiculous as the other is Impossible, no Reading in the World
being capable to make a Man Master of any Practical Art, without having had
first some Experience in it: But as it is not intended for persons altogether
Ignorant of Riding; So I dare be bold to promise a great dale of Success to
such, who (having but a good Seat upon Horseback, and Judgment enough to put
in Execution what I direct,) shall seriously and with due Attention peruse it,
which I think is all can be really promised or justly Expected, from the best
Book that ever will be Writ upon any Practical Subject whatsoever.

Therefore not to detain the Reader with longer Prefacing, I only beg that he
would with as great Diligence and Assiduity endeavor to practice my
Directions, as I have with Exactness and Care Collected them, and then no doubt
both our Expectations shall be satisfied.

Upon a high Mettl'd, and well managed HORSE.
IN Feilds nor Pastures, Woods nor Forests wide,
Does any Beast so Noble as this reside.
His Nostrils raise a Tempest when he blows;
His Feet produce an Earthquake when he goes.
Runs he? the swiftest Winds behind retire,
Whilst from his Eyes flow Streams of flaming Fire.
This Creature taught by Art the Curb to feel,
Is most obed'ent both to Hand and Heel:
For he the GALLOP, STOP, and PIROYTE,
TERRA a TERRA, CAPRIOL, CORVET,
Performs with Ease and Pleasure; and what is more,
Has none but's Rider's Will, like a CENTO'R.
Would know yet more the Use and great Address,
Of this most Vigorous Creature, called a Horse?
The following PIECE peruse, and 'twill show
All, Art can Teach him, and all he can know.
A SUPPLEMENT OF HORSEMANSHIP To the First Part, of The PARFAIT MARSHALL, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Excellency of the Art, and of the most considerable Authors
who have writ of it.
THE Art of Riding is so Noble and Gentile an Exercise, CHAP: I.
that it would require a whole Book merely to deduce and express its
Excellency; For as to Pleasure and State, what Prince or Monarch looks more
great or more Enthroned, then upon a beautiful Horse, with rich Furniture, and
waving Plums, making his Entry through great Cities, to amaze the People with
pleasure and Delight.

Or what more Glorious and Manly, than at great Marriages of Princes, to run at
the Ring, Tilt, or Course in the Field? What can be more Comely and Pleasing,
then to see Horses go all their several Airs: And to see so Excellent a
Creature, with so much Spirit and Strength, to be so Obedient to his Rider, as
if having no will but his, they had but one Body, and one Mind, like to a
Centour? But above all, what setts off a King more, then to be upon a
Beautiful and Ready Horse, at the head of his Army.

But not to insist longer upon this, Let us ingenously acknowledge, that this
Noble Art was first begun and invented in Italy; So that it is the Italians
who have given the first Directions for putting in practice those Rules, which
they invented for dressing of Horses, and making them capable to serve
advantagiously in War; And also, to give all the Satisfaction and Pleasure
imaginable in the Carrier or Manage.

And as they themselves did much practice this Noble Art, so was it also upon
that account that all the French and other Nations went thither to be taught,
the Seat of Horsemanship being first at Naples, and afterward at Rome, whither
a great number of all Nations repaired, to make themselves Horsemen: But those
who designed to come to a greater perfection in this Art, went to Naples, where
they were kept two or three years; before the Masters so much as told them if
they were capable either to learn, or become Teachers of it, so well did those
Gentlemen, the Esquiers, know to esteem their Talent, of which they were more
frugal I assure you, then People now a days are.

The first who ever writ of it was one Frederick Grison a Neapolitan, And truly
he writ like a Horseman, and a great Master in the Art for these times, it
being then but in its Infancy; for we may see to what perfection it is brought
since that time, and seeing it is an easy matter to follow a beaten path; It
is therefore no great wonder if the French have since that time brought this
Art to some kind of perfection, seeing other persons gave them matter whereupon
to work: However it was nobly done in Grison to have been the first whoever
writ of this Subject; and for which he is much to be commended, seeing
(considering the time his Book was published) What he writ was so good; Henry
the Eight sent for two Italians that were his Scholars, to come to him into
England; And if one of them came all our Alexanders, for their Scholars
stocked the whole Kingdom with Horsemen.

The old Earl of Leicester sent for an Excellent Rider out of Italy, called
Signior Claudio Curtio, who writ a Book of Horsemanship, which is quoted by
several Italian Writers, but I think that very much of his Book is stolen out
of Grison: Laurentius Cussius is another Author, but none of the best, and with
horrible Bitts, which I believe were never made use of by any, but it seems
his design of writing of Bitts, was more out of vanity to show his pretended
skill and fancy, then any desire he had to gratify the Publict. Then there is
Caesar Fieske who writ a Book much out of Grison too, where he meddles with
Music, that so a man may regulate the Sound of his voice when he intends to
help a Horse, according to the different Airs which he intends to make him
go, and he builds much upon his knowledge of knowing how to help well with
the voice. There is another Book of Horsemanship called Gloria del Cavallo,
with long discourses and much out of Grison, especially as to what concerns the
dressing of Horses. There is also another Italian Book of Horsemanship, called
Cavallo Fraenato de Pietro Antonio a Neopolitan, much stolen out of Grison:
But his Book consists most of Bitts to little purpose, though they seem to be
great Curiosities: But the most famous Horseman that ever was in Italy was a
Neopolitan, who lived at Naples, called Signior Pignatel, but he never writ,
although he could certainly have done it very well, being one of the ablest
Masters ever was in Italy. Monsieur La Broue rid under him five years, Monsieur
de Pluvinel nine years, and Monsieur St. Anthione many years, The Liberty which
we account the best for Bitts at this day, is called a La pignatel.

These three last mentioned French men, who rid under Signior Pignatel filled
France with French Horsemen, which before was filled with Italians; Monsieur la
Broue was I believe the first that ever writ of Horsemanship in the French
Language, and the first Frenchman who writ well of that Art, although he be a
little too tedious, and has many words for little matter: As for Pluvinel no
doubt but he was a good Horseman, but his invention of the three pillars, which
his Book pretends to be an infallible method, is no more then an absolute
Routine, and has spoiled more horses then ever any thing else did, for Horses
are not made at all to the hand and heel by them, neither will they go except
in the usual place where they are ridden, and not well there neither.

After Pluvinel came our excellent Author Monsieur Solizel, The first part of
whose Book of Marschalrv you have had here immediately proceeding, so that the
perusing of it will speak more his Commendation, then any thing I can possibly
say; And therefore I refer you to it, he never writ any thing of Riding
(although he could certainly have done it very well, being a most knowing and
understanding Horseman) Save some Observations upon the Duke of Newcastles
second Book of Horsemanship, which are indeed most excellent, and sufficiently
discover the great Talent and Genious he had for understanding every thing
relating to Horses: The Italian Writers are commonly tedious, and writ more of
Marks, Colors, Temperatures, Elements, Moon, Stars, Winds and Bleedings, then
of the Art of Riding, and that only to make up a Book when they have not enough
of True Art to fill it up another way, and this much of the Italian and French
Writers.

As for our English, Mr Blundevil is one of the first, who was indeed a fine
Gentleman, and good Translator, but a better Scholar then Horseman, for he
tied himself too much to Old Authors, who knew as little as he in Horsemanship,
and so Authority abused him, having no knowledge himself in the Art, and
Totally wanting Experience in it: But for his Treaty of dyeting Horses, It is
truly as Learned as any Physician can write, but yet is nothing as it ought to
be, because of his want of Practice; his Cures of Diseases are likewayes most
admirable, and he is indeed the Father of all that business, and the best who
has Writ in the English Language upon that subjct: Markhom is but Blundevil in
another Dress, yet will not acknowledge it; He has many new Medicines, but not
much worth, such as his Oil of Oats, nor was he any thing of a Horseman, but
only took notes of Medicines and set them down Methodically.

After him came De la Grev, which is also but Blundevil, with some new Medicines
that are but indifferent: And as for his Method of raising a Breed, it is most
rediculous, being altogether contrary to the common course of Nature, and that
which I believe never any made trial of but himself.

But after all these came the Prince of Horsemen, the Great Duke of Newcastle,
who may be justly said to have given the very last and Master Strokes for the
perfecting of this Subject, for it was he who first descrived the Natural, and
Artificial motions which should be made by the Legs of all Horses, when they
are performing such and such an Air, which is the Foundation and very Ground
work of Horsemanship, for without that knowledge a Man but Groaps in the Dark,
And if he succeed in any thing, he is beholding more to a luckie chance than
solid Judgment; and if any before him did ever touch upon this matter, it was
but very superficially, whereas he goes to the very bottom and Foundation, and
thereby so firmly supports his new and extraordinary Method for dressing of
Horses, that a Man must needs either own and acknowledge it, to be by far the
best that ever yet was published, or otherwise deny and Renounce the solid
Arguments of Reason, and Experience: But that which renders his Writings yet
the more wonderful, is that they should be compiled by a person of so great a
Quality and plentiful Fortune; Such persons having commonly either no great
inclination, so much to streach their invention, as to be the first propogators
of any thing which is New, or otherwise the great Hurrie they are in about
business, not allowing them so much spare time as to reflect upon them.

Therefore our English Nation is so much the more beholden to this Noble
Author, who not only was at the trouble to convass the Ancient Writers, and
discover their errors, but also to make a New discovery of his own, and leave
it to them as a Monument, by which the Nation which was formerly beholding to
foreign Horsemen, is at present made capable, if the neglect be not their own,
not only of becoming Skilful Horsemen at home, and consequently to stand no
more in need of Strangers to instruct them, but also of contributing to the
improvement of their Neighboring Nations, who do all with one accord justly
acknowledge him to have been not only the greatest, but the most exact and
Skilful Horseman who ever Writ. The English Authors who have Writ since, being
for the most part rather Collectors and Copiers, then Original Authors, I shall
not Name them; And thus much of the Authors, whither Italian, French, or
English, who first put Pen to Paper upon this so Noble, Heroic, and Gentlemany
a Subject.

CHAP. II. That it is a very foolish thing, and a Token of great ignorance in
the Art, to think the Manage useless.
MAny People say that all things in the Manage are but Tricks, Dancing, CHAP:
II.
and Gamballs, and of no use, But by their leave, who ever says so, is very
much deceived: For a Horse that is well settled, and firm upon the Hand, and
obedient to the Heels, Gallops the Field, and changes just, and as often as you
please, and that either without or within the Circle, Serpiger, Terra a Terra,
the Pyroite, or what other Air you please: I say all that is so necessary and
useful, that a good Horseman upon such a Horse would have in all conscience,
but too great an advantage against any person who talks against it, either in a
single Combat, or in the Wars: For a ready Horse will run, stop, turn, go
back, and if he rise he knows how to come down again, and is also so well
upon the Hand, that you cannot pull him over with both your hands, and so
Obedient, that you may run him on Fire, Water, or Sword, and he shall answer
you; Now all this cannot be done but by the Art of Riding, and that in the
Manage, besides, It is to be observed, that all Horses which have been Riden
when Young, by understanding Horsemen, although they be no ways managed, yet
they will be the better for it all their lifetime, for they will be more
agreeable and Nimble, and go a great deal better, and with more ease, than if
they had not been Rid by such a Horseman I believe there are but very few who
will contradict this evident truth.

But what makes these men speak against it? The first reason is, because they
are Ignorant, and so speak as the Wisest men in the World must do, when they
discourse of any thing they understand not, and think that talk will carry it,
but the main reason is this, they find they cannot Ride well, nay indeed not at
all a managed Horse, and yet they would be esteemed the finest Men in the
World for all things, though they will take pains for nothing and because
forsooth they cannot Ride by inspiration, and without taking the least pains to
acquire it, therefore it is worth nothing, and of no use: But if every thing
else were naught that they cannot do, there would be very few good things in
the World.

The nixt thing is, that they think it a disgrace for a Gentleman to do any
thing well, what, be a Rider, why not? Many Kings and Princes have thought
themselves Graced by being good Horsemen: Yea our present and most Gracious
King is not only a very Graceful Horseman, but also takes great delight in
Riding, And I dar say thinks it no disgrace that he is reputed a good
Horseman; I would therefore desire such People to be more Merciful, and to
think it no disgrace for them to be Horsemen: But still the Old business does
stick with them, which is, they cannot do it, and therefore it is naught, A
very good and Gentlemany reason indeed! But I must tell them that he who will
take pains for nothing, shall never do any thing well; For Arts, Sciences, and
good Qualities, come not by instinct, but are got by great Labor, Study, and
Practice, but it seems such Gentlemen resolve to understand none of them, until
they be as easily learned, as Wenching and Drinking, Railing, and wearing Fine
Clothes and Feathers.

But let us now see how these Sparks are on Horseback, and what their Horses do
under them; first these Cavaliers sit as far back in the Sadle as they can,
their Legs streatched forewards before the Shoulders of the Horse, and their
Toes a great deal better turned out, than if they were walking a foot, that so
they may with the more ease Spurr their Horses in the Shoulders; they stoop in
the back, and lean very much forewards, which they call a comely Seat, neither
know they how to hold the Bridle, or guess at any helps at all, but appear on
Horseback as if they were three quarters foxt, so rediculous is that seat: And
having sent to a Sadler or Bit-maker to Bitt their Horses, all is well.

Being mounted thus as I tell you, let us now see the readiness of their
Horses, and their own Horsemanship and Address, when they would turn to the
Right hand, their Horses turn to the left, and when they would turn to the
left, their Horses turn to the Right, when they would stop, their Horses run
away, when they would go forewards, their Horses rest and run back, when they
would put them back, their Horses rise and come over upon them, and there my
good Horsemen ly until a Surgion or Bonesetter be sent for, and it is good if
they are not killed: Nay, their Horses will come near neither Drum, Trumpet, or
Colors, pistle, or Sword: But they fetch forty figaries to endanger their
Rider. Now these are the excellent Horsemen, and the ready Horses for service,
And how is it possible to be otherwise, when the Horses know not how to answer
either Heels or Hand, and their Riders are as ignorant, if not more then they,
whence it follows, that there is nothing so fit to make a sure and ready
Horse as the Manage.

Therefore every Horse that wears a Bitt, Gelding, or Nage, will be certainly
the better to be wrought in the Manage, both for readyness and safity: for
without settling upon the hand they are both very uneasy and dangerous. I must
likewayes tell you, that Corvets and other Airs, settle a Horse mightily upon
the hand, make him light before, and put him upon his Haunches, which are all
useful for a Souldiets horse, and make him stop upon his Haunches, which is
very useful, especially for a man in Armor, for did his Horse stop upon the
Shoulders, he would give his Rider (being Armed) such a Shock, as would make
his Bones ache were he never so sound; Nay, to make a Horse go in Leaps or
Capriols, firms him also upon the Hand, which is good for a Soldiers Horse.

But says a Galant, when I should have use for him in the Field, than he would
be playing tricks: But this is a great mistake, for the helps to make Horses go
in Airs, and to make them go upon the ground are vastly different, and good
Horsemen have much a do to make them go in Airs with their best helps: So that
if you let them alone, they will not trouble you, besides, two or three days
March will make them that they will not go in Airs if you would have them, and
yet they are much the readier to go on the ground; whereby you see that there
is no Horse whatsoever can be a good and useful horse in any kind with a Bitt,
but what is wrought in the Manage, and therefore (...) you for your (...) and
use, to Ride or cause Ride all your Horses in the Manage, and you will find
(...) without i^ absolutely safe an^ ^^^ful, neither can any (...) well and
gracefully in a snaffie without having been ^^ed to the Bitt, as he wi^^ (...)
had he been formerly Rid with, and accustom^ (...) it.

Thus I think it sufficiently proved, that there is nothing of more use for any
Horse then the Manage (...) thing of more State, Manliness or P^easure, then
Riding; And as it is the (...) the most healthful exercise in the World. In
H^^ting, Hauking, (...) ^^hooting, Cocking, Carts and (...) things, there is no
use a (...) merely Pleasure; But in a Horse of (...) both (...) Pleasure. It is
(...) at if there were nothing commendable but what is useful strickly
examined, we found then have nothing but hollow (...) houses, fig leaves for
our Cloa^ (...) for our M^nt, and Water for our (...) most things else are only
(...) curiosities, but not designing (...) the Philolopher, I shall (...)
practice of such abstin^^ces to (...) commend the (...) Horsemen.

CHAP. III. Of the great mistake which many people are in, who think it a great
disparagement to Horsemanship; if by chance a good Horseman be thrown from his
Horse.
MANY (...) are much deceived, when, if a Horse the w^^s Rider, CHAP: III
they not only (...) think they have good reason for it; Saying of the best
Horse^^^ in the World, To whom such a mischance shall happen; that he is a fine
(...), for they can swear that they knew a Horse threw him, but they (...) a
good Horseman may be sometimes thrown sooner than a bad one, (...) Horsemen
little think of sitting, and so may be six p^^^ed; Their thoughts (...) make
their Horses go well, and so never think of ^^^owing, whereas a (...) thinks
of nothing but s^^ing, for fear he should be thrown, and (...) to make his
Horse go well: For he know not how to do it, but holds by (...), his head
inclining toward the Horses, which is ready to beat out (...) holding fast by
the Horses Flances, which makes him look (...) an African Monster, and his
Horse is so disordered (...) him (...) in that manner, is the most nauseous
sight that can be, and the most (...) to the beholders: So that it were much
better for the Spectators to see him (...) his own reputation also, provided he
received no hurt by it.

Thus you see that any Groom or Tinket may si^, and yet be no Horseman, which
is a greater business than only sitting; For a Jackanapes in Paris Garden when
he is beated with must^d M^^ffs, the Gentleman sits very sure, but not very
comely, and in my Opinion (...) excellent Horseman, for sitting is but one
thing in Horsemanship, and there are Commands of things in the Art, so if a
good Horseman be thrown by chance, has (...) his Horsemanship because be was
once thrown, and is an Ignorant fellow (...) inspired with Horsemanship,
because be can ill favouredly Cling to the Horse and keep himself on; No,
sitting fast is one of the meanest things in Horsemanship, which comprehends
many more of greater consequence.

But I must tell you, that it is even very rate to see a good Horseman thrown,
although I have known (...) presumptuous ignotant fellows to get frequently
falls, but as a good Horseman wh^^ thrown by chance does not loss all his
Horsemanship by it, so an Ignorant Rider (...), is not presently inspited with
Horsemanship, for it is a mistake as rediculous as it is common, to take
sitting fast on Horseback for the whole Art of Horsemanship, (...) that were,
then the common Jockies and Horse-courses servants would be the best Horsemen
in the World, for some of them are extremly (...) and hardy, but as for one
Knoweldge of Horsemanship they know not (...) means.

CHAP. IV. That people are mightily disceived, who by mere Speculation without
practice, think to become good and Skilful Horsemen.
I Have known some People ask, CHAP: IV.
If the Reading a Book of Horsemanship would make them good Horsemen? To those
I answer, That good Books upon any practical Art which are plainly Writ, are
certainly very useful, but then you must have all in your memory, and perhaps
even then you do not understand them, but put the case you do: Yet wanting
practice it is imposible you can Ride well, and yet no fault at all in the
Books, but in you.

It is true, there are some people who think they can see nothing but what they
can immediately do, which must be certainly by inspiration, by which I never
knew any to Ride, though many pretend to Preach by it. Do you think that an
ignorant Schoolboy can be as Learned as a Doctor; Or let a skilful Musician
Write the Rarest Book in the World for Composing and Singing, can you imagine
that as soon as you have read his Book you can do what he teaches; No truly,
and yet not the Books fault, but yours, in being so partial to your self, as to
think you can do any thing at first sight without Practice or Study, which
would be a Miracle I never saw, nor I believe any body else ever shall.

In the same manner if a Lutenest should Write a Rate Book, can you expect that
as soon as you have read it, you can play upon the Lute, because it may be you
can jangle the strings: but you say you can Ride; truly just as you jangle the
Lute Strings, and no other ways; You have perhaps been taught a little in some
of the Accademies in Italy or France, that is something indeed: So many Crowns
a Month, and the Horse did not throw you, and that is all. Now GOD knows how
many Young Gentlemen are in this Condition when they come newly out of the
Accademies, who are famed for good Horsemen, and yet truly no piece of a
Horseman: For the most part of what they know, is only a Graceful seat, the
rest being only a mere Rott, beat unto them by the set form of Bauling, which
Masters commonly make use of so soon as ever their Horses begin a Reprise, of
the truth of which many young people when they come to a little more knowledge,
are by their woeful experience most sensible, especially when they come to break
and work any young, Rude, or Unmannaged Horse, which is not already made to
their hand; for than they find that it is not the routine of a few sniffling
Aids which they have got in an Accademy, and which they know not seasonably to
make use of, but a true knowledge of the Principles of the Art, and a solid
Judgment how to apply them, that must do the Business.

But says one, I can Ride a ready Horse, wherein he is deceived, for a ready
Horse is the hardest of all to Ride, because the least motion is an absolute
command to him, and an ignorant gives him such countertimes as puts him quite
out, another because he has Rid a Hundred Miles in a day, (which a Post Boy
can do) or because he can run a match with his Groom, Spring a Hedge, or leap a
Ditch at Hunting, and hold by the Main, thinks himself a Horseman, but his
Hunts-boy does as much; And my Lord Mayor when he goes to weigh Butter, sits a
Leg of either side the Horse very gravely, aknowing and excellent Horseman
indeed! and many Wenches have been known to Ride a Stride, Gallop, and run
their Horses, that could I think hardly Ride a Horse well in the Manage.

Are there not in all Trades bound Apprentices, seven ot nine Years, and many
bunglers of them too, and in higher professions, Twenty and Thirty years is not
too much before they are great Masters in any of them, and though Horsemanship
be almost as difficult as any, yet many a Gentleman would ride the first day as
well as the greatest Master, but he is deceived as well as those who think to
Buy with their Money any good quality: Therefore although it cannot be denied
but a man may reap a great deal of benefit by Reading a good Book upon any
practical subject, especially if he have had at the beginning a little practice
and instruction from a Master: yet it is not a Book alone, but long Study, and
diligent practice, a long habit and Custom, that must make any man knowing in
Horsemanship, and consequently a complete and skilful Horseman.

CHAP. V. Of a strange mistake in some Horsemen, who by double exercise, fancy
they will make a Horse sooner Ready, then by Moderate teaching.
THere are some Horsemen, but in my opinion none of the most judicious, CHAP: V.
who would Ride their Horses twice a day, saying, that if they can dress a
Horse in six Months by Riding once a Day, then certainly by ridding of him
twice a day, they will dress him in three, wherein they are very much deceived;
For a Horse being Flesh and Blood cannot endure perpetual Travel with little
rest, and no exercise is more violent for a Horse then the Manage: Nay, of
necessity Riding so much in one day, he will not recover it in two or three,
and if the Horse oppose his Rider, which all Horses will do at first,
especially if they are vicious, he must be corrected soundly, and then how can
you Ride him again in the afternoon? dull him you may, and take off his Spirit,
cause him hate the Manage, and make him liker to a vaulting Horse, than one
who has Life in him, nor can you ever give him his meat, Water, or rest in
order; the want of which must make him sick, and subject to many diseases,
which will make Death it self shortly to follow, and there is your twice a day
Riding of him, which in all probability will make him sooner fit for the
Hunts-man to dress for his Dogs, then be a means to improve him in the Manage.

Some say again that they will Ride no Horses twice a day, but such as are
vicious and of great strength: Many Horses its true are vicious, but it is as
true there are none of such strength as they talk of, for if a Horse be very
vicious, you must correct him smartly, and ride him so long until be obey you
in some small measure, and then I am sure you will have Rid him so violently,
and so long, that he will hardly be for Riding nixt Morning, far less to be Rid
any more that day; And if the Horse be so docil as to obey you in every thing,
then certainly the best way is to take but a little of him that Morning to
encourage him to do so again. So far should you be from thinking of Riding him
again that same very day, and thus he will be pleasent, lively, and vigorous,
take pleasure in you and the Manage, and after this manner learn more in a
Month, Riding him but once a day, then he shall do in three Riding him twice.

Have not all Scholars also Play days, and certain hours of rest in their
days of Study? all Tradsemen Holy days to rejoice in, States men
Divertisement from Business, and Good Preachers preach not every. Sunday, have
not Lawyers also their Terms and Vacations; Carriers horses rest also on
Christmas and other Holy days, and so Cart horses, Brewars horses, Coach
Horses, Hackney horses, and running horses; Shall then Horses of Manage be the
only Gallay slaves? there is not the least reason for it, No, not Dogs can hunt
every day, or Gray hound course every day, or Spaniels range every day, or
Hauks fly every day, there are hundred of examples of it, but these are
sufficient to let you see the great folly and ignorance of those, who will ride
their Horses of Manage twice a day:

Such persons I think may be very justly compared to the Polander, who being
sick, and his Physician giving him nine pills to be taken, three every night,
for three nights together, very wisely considered, that if three pills every
Night for three Nights together would recover him, then taking all the nine in
one Night would make him well presently, which accordingly he did, and had
almost purged himself out of this World, So any Horseman who will undertake to
make a Horse as well in three Months, with two lessons a day, as another will
in six Months; with once a day, may be assured he will sooner kill his Horse
than teach him; and thereby show himself rediculous in his Undertaking.

CHAP. VI. A short description of the different kinds of Outlandish Horses. And,
First, Of the Spanish Horses.
OF all Horses in the World, CHAP: VI.
The Spanish are the wisest, far the wilest, and strangely wise beyond any Man's
imagination, but I must tell you they are not the easier dressed for that,
because they observe too much with their eyes, and their Memories are too good,
so that they conclude with their own Judgment too soon without the Riders,
reckoning as it were without their host, whereas they should obey his hand and
heel, and that not by Rott neither, but by Art which is an habit got by many
Lessons methodically taught: The Spanish Horse may be justly called the Prince
of Horses, and if well chosen is I assure you, the Noblest Horse in the World;
For first there is no Horse so curiously shaped all over from head to foot, he
is also the most beautiful that can be, being not so thin; and Lady-like as
the Barb, nor so gross as the Nepolitan, but between both, he is very docile,
and of great Spirit and Courage, has the proudest walk, stait, lie Action in
his Trot, Loftiest Gallop, and swiftest Carrier, and is also the Lovingest and
Gentlest Horse, and fittest for a King in a day of Triumph to show himself to
his People, or on the head of an Army, of any Horse in the World.

Therefore no Horse so fit to breed on as a Spanish Horse, either for the
Manage, Wars, Journey, Hunting, or Running; I say he is absolutely the best
Stallion in the World for all these uses I have named, if you do wisely
appropriate such Mares to him, as shall be fit for such uses as you would have
your Breed, and so he is fit for all Breeds, but to breed Cart Horses; The King
of Spain has many Races, but his best a while ago was at Cardona in
Andaluzia, and besides these of his Majesty, there are other most excellent
Races, belonging not only to Noblemen, but also private Gentlemen; As for their
prices it has been affirmed by very Credable Persons, that three or four
hundred Pistols for a Horse, is no extraordinary Rate at Madrid.

So you see that a right Spanish Horse is dear ware, and then reckon his
Journey from Andaluzia to Bilbo, or St. S^bastien, which is the next Port for
England; And at least four hundred miles match, and that also a horse cannot
travel above ten miles a day, with a Groom and Farrier at least, besides the
Casualities of Lameness, Sickness, and Death, and I assure you before he come
to your hands he will be a very dear horse.

Secondly. Of the BARB.
THE Barb is next to the Spanish Horse for Wisdom, but not near so wise, and
that makes him the much easier to be dressed, besides he is of a Gentle nature;
docile, nervous, and light, he is as fine a Horse as can be, but some what
slender, and a little Lady like, and also so lazy and negligent in his walk,
that he will stumble in a Bowling green; he Trots like a Cow, Gallops low, and
has no great movement in any of these actions, but commonly he is Sineuy and
Nervous, has a clean strength, is excellently winded, and consequently good
for running and to endure great Travel; he is also very apt to learn, and easy
to be dressed, being for the most part of a good disposition, excellent
apprehension, judgment and memory, and when searched and wakened, no Horse in
the World goes all kind of Airs better in the Manage.

The Mountain Barbs they say are the best, I believe they are the Largest, but
the midling or less size, which as is reported are to be had at an easy enough
rate in Barbary are rather to be esteemed, for it is said, that there you may
buy a very fine Barb for twenty, twenty five, or Thirty Pounds at most; But
then their journey is somewhat great, not by Sea, for from Tunis to Marseilles
in France is no great Voyage, but from Marseilles to Calais by Land, you go all
the length of France, and then at Calais they are Shipped for England.

The Barb is not so fit a Stallion for the Manage, as for running Horses, for
he gets long and loose Horses, therefore I would not advise you to Breed of him
for the Manage, except he be a short Horse from Head to croup, strong, well
coupled, and of a superfluity of Spirit which few Barbs have, therefore Breed
rather of a Spanish Horse, with choice English Mares, and if you have a
delicate well chosen Dutch Mare or two, that will make an excellent composition
for the Manage, to conclude then what I have to say of the Barb, I say that as
the Spanish Horse is called the Prince, so the Barb may be called the Gentleman
amongst Horse kind.

Thirdly, Of the English Horse.
THe English horse is less wise than the Barb, fearful and skittish for the
most part, and dogged and rebellious to the Manage, being commonly not so apt
to learn; but those they call English horses, are so compounded of horses of
all Countries, that they always participat something of their Sires, and so
that may somewhat alter the case, yet certainly English horses are as good as
any horses in the World for all uses what soever, from the Cart to the Manage,
and some are as beautiful horses as can be, being as I said bred of horses of
all Nations: But if ye would buy horses fit for the Manage at Faires, you must
go to Rowel Fair, Harborow Fair, and Melton Fair, to Northampton and
Leicester Shire, but Northampton is thought the best.

You must buy such Horses as they sell for the Cart and Coach, which are
absolutely the best for the Manage, and commonly a great dale handsomer then
the Dutch Coach Horses are, therefore do not buy delicate shapt horses, like
the Spanish horse, Barb, or Turk; but choose a short trust Horse and well
coupled, with good Feet and Legs, Lively, full of Spirit and Action, and if he
leap of himself so much the better, if your Groom has skill to buy such they
cannot do (...) for the Manage, and will prove most admirable Horses, both in
all Airs and upon the ground, but I would not by any means advise you to breed
on them; There are at Molten Fair for the most part, Stoned Horses, and some
Geldings, but fitter for Padds and Hunting than for the Manage; Rippon Fare is
but the Remnan^ (...) Molte^ Fair, and commonly but Geldings and Nages; these
Faires are in Yorkshire, Lenton Fair is in Nottingham Shire; and is a great
Fair of all sorts of Horses, but especially of Geldings and Nages, fitter for
Journey and Galloping then for the Manage: There are also sometimes Stoned
Horses to be found there.

In Stafford Shire there is a great Fair at Pankridge, but it is for the most
part of Colts, and young Horses, though sometimes by chance there are also
others, the other Faires in the Northen parts of England which are many, are
not worth Naming, in Worchester Shire and in the Vail of Esam there is good
strong Cart Horses, in Cornwall there is good Nages, and in Wales Excellent good
ones: But in Scotland these which they call Gallowayes, are by very far the
best Nages of all for Travel and Fatigue: but that kind of breed is now almost
quite worn out.

As for English Mares there are none like them in the World to Breed on, but
then you must choose them fit for such Horses as you would Breed; As for
example, if you would breed for the Manage; The Mares must have fine fore
hands, but not too long Necks, fine Heads, and well set on, there Necks rightly
turned, with broad breasts, good Eyes, and great bodies, that their Foles may
have the more room to ly in them, they must have good Legs and Hoofs; short
and bending Pastorns, and are to be short from Head to Foot, this is the shape
of Mares which best fits the Manage, and if your Mares be thus chosen it is no
great matter what Color they are of, or what marks they have, so they be full
of strength, have a superfluity of Spirit, and not above six or seven years
old, But I must tell you that if you have two or three fine Dutch Mares Shaped
as I have told you; It will make a fine Composition with a Spanish Horse for
the Manage, and also a Spanish Horse with such English Mares as I have
descrived to you, will make a breed not only fit for the Manage, but for all
manner of uses whatsoever, except the Plough and Cart.

But if you would have Mares to breed running Horses upon, then they must be
Shaped thus, as light as possible, large and long, but well shaped, a short
back, but long sides, and a little long Legged, their breast as narrow as may
be, for so they will Gallop lighter and Nimbler, and run the faster, for the
lighter and thinner you breed for Galloping so much the better; your Stallion
by any means should be a Barb, and somewhat of the Shape I have discrived the
Mares to be of: For as I was Credibly informed by one of the greatest
Horsematchers that ever England bred, a Barb that is a Jade, will get a better
running Horse than the best running Horse in England, some commend very much
the Turk for a Stallion to breed running Horses by, but they are so scarce and
rate, that I can give no Judgment of them, and therefore I advise you to the
Barb, which I believe is much the better Horse to breed running Horses by

Fourthly, Of the Frison or Dutch-horse.
THE Frison is less wise than the English, but no Horse goes better in the
Manage, either on the Ground, Terra a Terra, or all Airs, and no Horse is of
more use, either for a single Combat upon Horseback, or in the Wars for a
Shock, he is hardy, can live upon any thing, and will endure either heats or
colds, and upon no Horse whatsoever does a man appear more a Sword man then
upon this Horse, being so quiet, so Bold, and so assured; he is also Manly and
fit for every thing but running away, for although he will run fast for a
while, yet he cannot run long, because his wind is not like that of Barbs;
However I believe a heavy man well Armed upon a Barb, and the same weight upon
a Dutch Horse, the Dutch Horses Strength is so much above the Barbs, as
compaired thus; I do realy believe the Dutch Horse may run as fast and as long
as the Barb, for the Barbs wind serves to no purpose when his Strength is so
overpowered that he cannot carry his weight, and thus the Barb will want his
little light Jockie upon him, with a couple of Trenshers for a Saddle, and a
Lute String in his mouth for a Bitt.

Fifthly, Of the Danish-horse.
THE Danish Horse is an Excellent Horse, almost of the same kind with the
former, but commonly apter to learn, and lighter, there are more leaping Horses
of these Countries and kinds, then of any other Countries in the World; The
greatest difficulty is to get them well shaped.

I Had almost forgot to make this remark to you of the Dutch Horses, that their
Breeders to make the more profit of them, Geld the most part of their Stoned
Horses for Coatches, and in time of peace send a great many into France and
other Kingdoms: So that a Man can hardly get a Stoned Horse worth any thing,
there Colts at two years old Spring their Mares, and then they geld them; so
you see that by avarice their breeds are spoilt, sometimes also A Town will
join and give above Two Hundred Pounds for a Stallion, but then he covers all
the Mares which belong to it, like to a Country Town Bull.

Sixthly. Of the Almain or Germain-horse.
THose who write that they are like Flanders Horses, are much deceived, it
seems they must mean the common Country Cart horses; but let me inform them
that there are but few Princes in Germany who have not excellent Races, and
breeds of horses, And their Stallions are always either Coursers of Naples,
Spanish Horses, Turks, or Barbs, and breeding of these Stallions, their Mares
come to be very fine, like their Sires and make very pure Breeds.

Seventhly, Of the Courser of Naples.
MOnsieur La Brow in his Book, says that the Race of these horses was
mightily decayed: And that is almost a hundred years ago. Monsieur Pluvinel
also in his Book, says that there are not now such Neapollitans as there were
formerly, all the Races being bastardized and spoiled: Thus you see things do
not stand at a stay, for what has been formerly is not so now, as in the
Nepollitan, and all the rest of the Races in Italy, which are decayed: The Duke
of Florence is thought to have now a days the best Race in those parts.

Eighthly, Of the Turkish-horse.
I Shall here set down what the Duke of Newcastle says of the Turkish Horses,
which is this; I have says he seen very few of them; but two Merchants brought
three Turkish Horses to Antwerp while I was there, which were indeed very fine
Horses, but odly shaped, their heads were very fine but like to a Camels, they
had good eyes, thin Necks, and excellently risen, some what great Bodies, their
Croup like a Mules, Legs not great but marvelous sinewy, good Pastorns, good
hoofs, and their backs risen somewhat like a Camel, they appeared not so fit
for the Manage, as for to run a Course; which I believe they would have
scoured, they Trotted very well, but ambled not at all.

I have spoke with several Gentlemen who have been at Constantinople, as
likewayes with diverse Merchants who have come from thence, who all agree, that
there are there the most beautiful Horses in the World; Saying that in Soil or
Grazing time, there are many hundreds teddered, who when they have eaten one
place bare, are shifted to another, every Horse having a man to look to him,
and every man a little Tent to lie in; And they also said, that it was one of
the most glorious sights that could be, to see those Horses thus teddered,
which were the most beautiful Horses could be, and certainly they are brave
Horses, for the price of one of them, will be about a hundred or a hundred and
fifty Pounds, and then there is great difficulty to get a pass, for the
Grandsignor is very strict, in not suffering any of his Horses to go out of his
Territories, And when that difficulty is over, you have also another, which is,
if you have not a Turk or two for your convoy, they will be taken from you by
the way: There is also the difficulty of a long Journey, and the danger of
sickness or Lameing, for you must come through Germany, which is a long way;
and you must have very careful men to conduct them: A good Groom, and expert
Farrier, and by no means to suffer any to shoe them but him, for when they
perceive a fine Horse among them, they will hire a Farrier to prick or spoil
him in the shoeing, that they may have him, which is a thing but too frequently
practiced in these Countries.

Ninthly, Of the Arabian-horse.
THe Arabian Horse is commonly nursed, (as it is reported) with Camels milk, and
there are the strangest reports in the world of these Horses; for it is
affirmed by credible Persons, that the price of a Right Arabian, will be
sometimes one thousand, two thousand, and three thousand Pistols a horse, (an
intolerable and incredible price) and that the Arabs are as careful and
diligent in keeping the Genealogy of their Horses, as any Princes can be in
keeping any of their own Pedigrees.

They keep the Genealogies of their Horses with Medals, and when any of their
Sons come to be Men, then their Fathers give them two Suies of Arms, with two
Cymeters and one of these Horses, prays GOD to bless them, and that is every
ones portion, it is said they will ride fourscore miles in a day without
drawing bridle, but this is not so extraordinary a matter, because a man may
for ten pounds buy a good Scots Galloway, which will easily do as much.

Tenthly, Of the Polonian, Hungarian, and Swedish-horses.
THe Polonian Horses are nothing extraordinary, being for the most part shaped
as the common and ordinary Horses and Golding in England, and the Bitts they
use are just like our Snaffles, and have only Rings for the head-stal and Reins
to be fastened to, but want these little crosses which ours have, to prevent the
slipping of the Snaffle through the horses mouth. It has been an old saying,
that the Poland Horse are the best in the World, but it is to be understood of
the Polanders themselves when they fight upon Horseback, and not of their
horses.

As for the Hungarian and Swedish Horses, they are not worth speaking of, but
if you will believe the People of these Nations, they will magnify them
extremely, and so do all Nations whatsoever mightily commend their own Horses,
in Imitation of the Grow, who thinks still her own Bird the Fairest.

Now having given you a short account of the different kinds of Horses, I must
tell you that there are good and bad of all Countries in the World, but a great
many more bad then good, as there are of Men; For though there be millions of
Painters, yet there was but one Vandike in many Ages, the like in Music,
Hosemanship, Weapons, and Horses, for a rare Horse in any kind is a difficult
thing to find I assure you; It is a hard thing also to find fit Horses for the
Manage, either on the Ground, or in Airs; It Is true Art does much, but Nature
is the Ground for Art to Work on, for without it Art can do but little.

I must also tell you, that running Horses are the most easily found, and of
none of the greatest Use neither when you have them; They run commonly upon
Heaths, which resemble a green Carpet for softness, and must there run all upon
the Shoulders, which in troublesome Grounds is ready to break ones Neck, and
but of little use, although it be a Divertisement, at present much in request
in these Islands: For my own part I would rather dress a Horse for the War or
Manage, than prepare him for such Courses, where the pains and trouble do very
often far exceed the Profit.

You now see how difficult a thing it is, to have a good Horse in any kind, for
any thing; Therefore I conclude, that a knowing Horseman is not so happy for
Horles as a Citizen of London, who knows nothing more, then to buy a Horse in
Smithfield for eight Pound ten Shillings or thereabouts, to carry him to the
Country, and let him have never so many faults his ignorance finds none,
wherein he is very happy; And this much of Outlandish Horses.

CHAP. VII. Of the Spanish Mules.
AS for the Spanish Mules, CHAP: VII.
there are some of them very finely shaped, having the smallest Heads and best
set on, the finest turned Necks, thinnest and well risen, excellent Backs, good
Bodies, their Legs clean and sinewey, admirable Hoofs, their Croups a little
slender; And in a word, no horse in the World better shaped, but only their
Ears are a little long, which me thinks is a Grace to them, they are of all
Colors, as Bays, Dapple Grayes, and so forth, extremely strong, and very
large as any Horses whatsoever, and also of great prices, as three or four
hundred Pistoles a Mule; The King of Spain has sometimes very beautiful ones
for his Coatch, they use them also very much for the Sadle, for they amble most
curiously, and easily, seldom stumble, and when they do, they never fall
further then their Knees, so that they are very safe and sure to ride upon.

There be some very little and fine ones, like Scots Gallowayes, and upon those
it is that Generals and great Commanders do commonly ride, when they go to
view the Trenches, or other fortified Places, and the larger sort they use for
Sumpters, Wagons, and many other Uses; They also ride Post upon them: And it
is reported that they will amble as fast as any ordinary Horse will go at a
hand Gallop, they live long and sound, thirty years at least; And there are
Males and Females of them, both very hot in the act of Generation, but neither
the Males nor Females, get or bring forth any thing, either when they copulate
together, or with any other Creature.

It is also said, that a man is never assured of them from bitting or striking,
although he has been their constant Keeper for twenty years, but I do not
believe it; They are reputed also to have bad mouths, but that is because they
are spoilt with horrible Bitts, for people use both other Bitts and other
Sadles and Furniture to them, then to Horses, wherein they are very much
mistaken, because to those that are for the Sadle, I would use the very same
Bitts and Sadles as for Horses and none other: It Is true that for Sumpters,
there be some peculiar things which they use for them only, and not for Horses,
which I confess are very comely: In Spain they used a while ago Ropes, both for
the Mules and Horses to draw the Coatches by; In stony ways there is no Horse
like them, they are so sure footed.

Now the Stallions which get these Mules, are large Asses, upon very fine
Spanish Mares, and it is reported by very credible Authors, that a good
Stallion Ass will coast, at least two hundred and fifty Pistols, and sometimes
more, for which there is a very good Reason, seeing Mules are of so great use
to them in Spain; And these Stallion-Asses, are also greater and larger then
most kind of Horses, and are so furious and full of spirit, that there are men
who live only by the ordering of them, and no other People can do it, but these
persons who make a Trade of it; For others would be killed by them, these
Keepers also hood the Asses when they cover any Mares, that they may not see
them, for otherwise they would pull the Mares in pieces and kill them, when
they are in the rage of Lust, and to hear them bray is a most loud and horrid
noise, beyond the roaring of any Lion in the World.

So you see there is good Reason why they should be of so great Prices, but one
who thinks they are just such little dull Asses as are in England, of twenty or
thirty Shillings a piece, will certainly laugh to hear what I have been saying,
because they think there is nothing more in the World then what they have seen;
As in such a Case Sir Walter Rawly said well, that there were stranger things
in the World, then between Stains and London, the Asses in France are just like
those in England, little, lazy, dull, and woeful things, and of as small a
price, only in those parts of France which border with Spain, the Asses are
somewhat larger, but nothing in comparison of those in Spain. The she Asses in
Spain are also very fair and large, for otherwise how could such huge and bigg
Creatures be produced.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Curiosity and Care, which most of the abovementioned
Kingdoms take, in keeping and ornamenting their Horses.
THE Turks are the most curious in keeping their Horses of any Nation, CHAP:
VIII.
and value and esteem them most: Using all the ways of dressing, and keeping
them clean, that can be imagined, for first they Cloth them with a fine
Linning Cloth, and Hood nixt their Skin; Then with a Hair Cloth and Hood
lined with Felt, above their Linning Cloth and Hood, and all these are made so
fit, as to cover their Breasts, and to come pretty low down upon their Legs,
so that there cannot be a better way than this for Clothing.

The Spainards are also very curious in all things about their Horses, and
their Grooms are so diligent that they never stay long out of the stable, but
are always doing of something about them, especially making clean their Mains,
Toppeings, and Tails, also washing and pleating them; They esteem highly their
Horses, and no Nation loves them better; The Master is frequently in the Stable
to see the Grooms do their duty, but for all that the Spainards and Turks are
none of the best Horsemen, for they Ride short, have strange Spurrs and Sadles,
but especially Bitts which are most abominable.

The Italians are very careful and neat about their Horses, but they have lost
that Reputation which they formerly had of being good Horsemen: And to tell the
truth they never justly deserved it, but our Ignorance made us think that they
did rarely, the contrary of which is now in this last age sufficiently
discovered.

Most part of the French are curious in keeping and dressing their Horses, and
also highly Esteemed them, giving great rates sometimes for Horses which they
fancy, but French Grooms never ^ub a Horses Legs well, unless a man be always
over them to keep them to their deuty.

The Almains or high Germans love Horses well, some say they are very curious,
and have good Grooms, but certainly there are no better Grooms in the World
then our English Grooms: Yet no Grooms are good except the Master look Strictly
after them, for the Masters eye makes the Horse well dressed, according to the
Proverb, the Masters Eye makes the horse fat.

Denmark, Swede, Poland, Transylvania, Hungary, and all those Countries
thereabouts are much like the Almains, for little curiosity in keeping and
dressing their Horses, their Riding also is for the most part alike, and no Man
in Germany will Ride without a a Cavezone, though he knows not at all the use
of it; In Flanders, Brabant, as also in Holand, and the Countries adjacent to
it, they are much like the Germans.

The Emperor of Muscovy, I have heard has a Stable of Horses, and commonly a
French Groom to wait upon them, he gets his Horses for the most part out of
Tartary, and Turkey, for he has none good in his own Country; A Rider is also
of no great use there unless he could dress and make a ready Bear, of which
there is plenty in these parts.

In the Moguls Country there is nothing to dress except you would dress
Elephants, and the best horses they have come from Persia, Sir Walter Rawly
reports, that in the West Indies there are the best shaped Horses, and the
finest Colors in the World, beyond all the Spanish Horses and Barbs that ever
he saw, and that they know there so little the use of horses, that they kill
them for their skins.

In Denmark there are excellent good horses, and in Norway little strong
horses, but not very well shaped having their heads commonly a little too bigg:
And as for Island Horses, they are all courled like Watter Dogs, and are so
Frizled that no curry Comb nor any thing else can dress them, they are also but
very dull Jades, and not worth the inquiring after.

CHAP IX What stature or size of Horses, is best and most convenient, either
for the Wars, a single Combat, or any thing else; As also, at what age it is
most proper to begin to work a Horse, either for the Wars or Manage.
THERE are great Disputes amongst Cavaleers about this business, CHAP: IX.
I shall not therefore trouble you with the arguments, they use Pro and Con
upon this head, but only deliver to you my opinion anent it; Now those who are
for High and Large Horses, say they are strong for a Shock, but they must know
that all large Horses are not strong; Nay, for the most part they are not only
the weakest Horses, but commonly without Spirit and vigor: But put the case a
great and large Horse were strong, yet being so tale and big, his strength is
diffused, and indeed so out of his strength; that a middling horse ( Enter deux
Selles as the French say,) or a less fised horse having his strength united,
and being a little lower, or as it were beneath him, would certainly overthrow
him, so that a middlng or less sised horse, is certainly and without doubt the
best for the War, or a single Combat.

Middling and less sized Horses have also for the most part, both strength,
Spirit, and Agility, and not one in an hundred but proves well, when of large
Horses, not one in a Thousand; Nay, the middle sized Horse is the most propper
for all uses: For the Padd, Buck-hunting, Hauking, Running, Galloping upon the
high way for many Miles, or Posting, for the Coatch, for the Cart; Yea for any
thing, and if he falls, a little Horse will do the Rider less hurt to ly upon
him then a large and heavy one: However, Geldings and Gelt Nages are fiter for
great Journies, Hunting or Hauking in Summer, then Stoned Horses, because the
natural heat in Stoned Horses with the beat of the weather, does soon fire
their Feet and fownder them, whereas Geldings are Colder, and so travel better,
not becoming so soon weary in the heat of Summer. The great Inconveniency of
Geldings is, that they soon disgust and looss their appetite: But the only way
to prevent it, is to make choice of such as are well Bellied, and then they
will keep their Stomachs pretty well, yet never so well as stoned Horses.

As to the Age in which it is most propper to begin to work a Horse either for
the Wars or Manage; It is certain that a Young Horse of three years old is
but Grisle, and besides, his understanding if one may so speak is not come to
him, so that wanting understanding, and being so weak, you must have patience
to stay three years more at the least until he has both, for stopping and
going back will strain his back, stress his Hams, and consequently spoil him,
so that I would rather have a Horse of six, seven, or eight years old, so he be
sound and not vicious, then a Horse only of three, for then I can force him and
make him a ready Horse in three months: But perhaps some will say, that as
Boys learn better then men, so will Colts learn better than Horses, I answer
no, for if men could be beaten to it as Boys are, they would learn much better
and sooner: but I can force a Horse of these years, who having both
understanding and strength, will, and must of necessity learn much sooner and
better, then if he were younger.

Again, If you would have a Horse of use for ordinary occasions, as Journeying,
Hauking, Hunting, etc. I would advise you to buy one who is already almost
past mark; and if he be sound of wind, Limb and Sight, he will last you eight
or nine years with good keeping, and never fail you; when a young horse will
have many diseases, as Children have, and you must leave him with your Host,
and hire another for your occasion, have your Hosts Bill, and the Farriers to
pay at your return, which perhaps will come to more than your horse is worth,
and there is your young horse, but your old horse shall never fail you: I would
therefore always buy for such purposes, an old Naig of some Hunts-man or
Falconer, which I know to be sound, and that is the useful Nage; For he
gallops on all Grounds, leaps over Ditches, and Hedges, and will not fail you
in your Journey not any where, and is the only Nage of use for pleasure or
Journey: But not for a Soldiers horse, or the Manage, for every horse should
be appropriat to what he is most fit for.

CHAP. X. What Equipage is mostproper for the Horse, and most commodious for
the Horseman.
FOR the Sadle, Cavezon, Stirrops and Spurs, CHAP. X.
you will see the figures of them lively represented in the following Plate,
which is the fourth, and therefore I shall say no more of them in this place.

As for the Girths, I would advise you to have one Girth as broad as two, or
two sewed together, and only seperat about three inches at each end, as if they
were two, though being thus joined together they appear to be but one, as also
an Italian Surcingle over them, which is so excellent a thing, that if the
Girths or Straps should break, yet the Surcingle will not fail to hold.

You must also fit your horse with a Bitt proper for him, to know which shall
be taught you more distinctly in the thirteenth Chapter, and with the same Bitt
which you give him at first, I would have you always ride him, unless you find
an absolute necessity to alter it, your horse should be so hard girt, as to
keep the Sadle fixed and from turning: For the Italians say, he who girds well
Rides well, but a Groom may gird well and yet not ride well, therefore they
mean no man can ride well who does not gird well; For how can he sit fixed when
the Sadle turns round? Horses of Manage force also the Girths, a great dale
more than Journey horses do, because of the violence of their Airs. And I must
tell you, that you should never gird up your horses hard and strait, but just
as you are going to mount them, for being a long time hard girt in the stable
before you ride, they are apt to grow very sick with it.

But why do they not also grow sick with it when they ride say you? I Will tell
you why, because the violence of their exercise makes them put out their
Bodies, and so streatches the Girths and makes them easier; There is a cunning
also which Horses make use of when they are accustomed to be hard girt, and it
is this, when the Groom comes to gird them up, they will so streach out their
Bodies and Bellies with holding in their Breath, that he will have much ado to
gird them, and then when the Groom is gone they let their Bodies fall again,
which is very craftily done of them, that they may have ease after they are
girded. And yet say the Learned, like to the Horse who has no Understanding,
but although they will allow it no other Name then instinct, yet this instinct
has the same effect in horses as reason has in Men, so that it is only to
disput the name and not the thing, because this instinct is found to be as
infallible and to fail and mistake it self as seldom, as Reason it self.

Another thing I am to advertise you of, Is that you make the Nose-band as
strait as possible you can, because it hinders him to make sheers with his
mouth, as they say, or to gape and disorder the working of the Bitt, or to bite
at your Legs or Rod, when you help him with it, but the Nose-band being very
strait makes the Bitt ly in its due place, and work orderly as it ought, both
upon the Bars and Crub, and so firms and setles his head; And I assure you
there is nothing better then this for many things, therefore I would have also
the Cavezon tied as strait as you can, for the same Reasons, but remember that
your Cavezon be never sharp, but always lined with double Leather at least,
for fear of hurting him, and though the old Saying is, A Bloody Nose makes a
good Mouth, yet I would neither hurt his Mouth nor Nose, nor any thing else
about him, if I could help it; and then I am sure he will have a better Mouth,
than if his Nose were hurt.

Sakers, Dockes or Trouse-Ques (which are all one) are very becoming for a
Leaping Horse, for they make him appear Plumper, more together or Racoursi, and
also to go higher, therefore I would have you make use of them for all kind of
Leaping Horses, whither for Croupadoes, Balotadoes or Capriols, but then the
horses tails must be tied up short in the Sakers, for horses that go the
Manage de soldat, Terra a Terra, in Corvets, or Demi Airs, there is nothing
more becoming then to see them with good Tails, hanging naturally down without
any thing upon them; and to see them sweep the Ground with their Tails is
Graceful, and shows that they go upon their Haunches, which is the
perfection of the Manage; But if you intend to beautify their Mains and Tails
before great Princes, or Persons of Quality, then there is nothing more
graceful then to tie their Mains with several collourd Ribbons, or all of one
color, and after different ways, either plateing them or letting them hang
loose.

It is also observed, That Horses do commonly become plain Furniture. (I mean
Sadles and Bridles but not the Houses) better then rich, therefore the Sadles
should be plain white Spanish Leather, and Silver Nails, stitcht also with
Silk, and a good black Leather slip-Cover over it, the Bridle soft black
Leather and small, by no means too broad, two Girths as I said joined in one,
but parted at both ends like two, and a good Italian Surcingle, which will be
worth both the Girths for sure holding, you must be also very careful to see
that nothing about your Horse hurt him, as Sadle, Bridle, Cavezon, or any thing
else, for assure your self that so long as any thing hurts him, he will never
go well.

Horses also go very seldom well in a high wind, for it does so whisk about
them, blow into their ears, and make such a Noise, as it mightily diverts them
from the Manage, and so does any new help, or other thing they are not
accustomed to, for Horses are very sensible and ticklish kind of Creatures, and
care for nothing which appears new to them.

Plate 4 Chap: xi, of Sup:
Fig: 1.
The Best and most modern Fashion of Cavezon, with its Reins.

depiction of cavezon

Fig: 2.
The Best and most modern Fashion of Great Saddle, or, Selle a piquer.

depiction of saddle

Fig: 3.
The Best and most modern Fashion of Rope Cavezon, For the Pillars.

The best and most modern Fashion of Stirrups.

The best and most modern Fashion of Spurrs.

depiction of cavezon, stirrups and spurs

Fig: 4.
The True and perfect Seat upon Horseback.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 5.
The true and best way of Ordering An Unruly Colt, Before Backing.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 6.
The true and best way of suppling a Horses shoulders, Upon large Circles to
the Right Hand.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 7.
A true and perfect Stop, Upon large Circles to the Left Hand.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 8.
A true and perfect Short, or Petit Galop, Upon Large Circles to the Right Hand.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 9.
A true and perfect Passage a long a Wall, to the Right Hand.

depiction of horse and rider



There is also another thing which is most uncomely, and the disgracefullest
thing a Horse can do, and that is to whisk his Tail in all the Actions which he
makes: The common Remedy People use for it, is to ty his Tail with a Quinsel,
which does indeed prevent that disagreeable Action so long as it holds, but the
most infallible Remedy in the World for it, is to cut Cross the great Nerve
which is under the Tail, and then he shall never whisk or shake it again,
neither will this do him any harm in the World, more then the small pain he
finds when it is first cut, there is therefore no Remedy like it.

As for the Horse-mans Habit, I would have him always make use of that Garb
which is most commonly made use of in the Country where he lives, but for his
Boots they must of necessity be Limber and not strong, that so he may both grip
the faster with them, and also make use of his Aids with the more ease, which
it is not possible for any Man to do either so neatly or unperceptibly, when
his Boots are so very stiff and strong, as those commonly used for the Warts;
It is true, for a Shock such strong French Boots are certainly best, but I am
now giving directions for Riding and not for fighting, therefore in this case
the Limber Boots must take place.

CHAP. XI. Of the true and perfect Seat, which a Man should keep upon Horseback.
HAving in the preceding Chapter given you an account of what Equipage is most
convenient for both Horse and Rider, I think it will not be a miss to give you
in this, CHAP: XI.
and before I proceed further in discoursing of the Art, ane exact Description
of the true Seat upon Horseback, without which it is impossible for any Man to
be an excellent Horseman: And therefore before you mount your Horse, you must
see that every thing be in order about him, which you may do in an instant,
without Peering and Prying about every thing, pour fair L'entendu, as the
French say: And when you are in the Saddle, (for I suppose you know how to get
up) you must sit upon your Twist, and not on your Buttocks, though Nature has
made them for sitting on every where else, but a Horse back.

Being thus placed upon your Twist, and in the middle of the Sadle, advance
your Belly toward the Pommel of it, as much as you can, leaving a handbreadth
of space, between your hinder parts and the Cantle or L'Arson of the Saddle,
but keep your Shoulders a little back, your Legs being straight down, as if
you were on Foot, and your Thighs and Knees turned inwards to the Saddle,
holding fast with them both, as if you were glewed to the Sadle (for a Horseman
has nothing but those two with the Counter-poise of his Body, to keep him on
horseback) plant your feet firmly upon the Stirrops, your heels a little lower
then your Toes, and let the ends of your Toes pass through the Stirrops a large
Inch, or a little more; your hams stiff, and Legs not too far from the Horses
sides, nor too near neither; that is only so near as not to touch them, which
is of great use for certain helps, which I shall show you hereafter.

The Reins of the Bridle are to be in the left Hand, your little finger
seperating the Reins, and grasping the rest in the Hand, with your Thumb upon
the Reins, and your Arm pretty close to your Body, but not constrained; the
Bridle Hand just over the neek of the Horse, and about three fingers above the
Pommel, and two before it, that the Pommel may not hinder the Reins in their
Working.

In the Right Hand you must have a whistling Rod, neither too long, like an
Angling Rod, nor too short like a Poincon; But if either, let it be rather
short as long, for there are many graceful helps, which may be given with a
short Rod, that a long one will not admite of, you must also hold it a little
from the bigg end beyond your hand, not only to make much of your Horse
sometimes with it, but also to hold it the faster; and make the point of it
bend a little inwards: Your Right Hand where the Rod is, ought to be a little
before the Bridle Hand, and the Right Arm also a little looser and more
degadged from the Body then the left, but not too far from your Body neither.

You must look a little Gay and Pleasant, but not laughing, and look directly
between the Horses Ears, when he goes forward: I do not mean you should be
stiff as a Stake, or like to a Statue on Horseback, but much otherwise, that
is free and with all the Liberty in the World, and as the French say in
Dansing, a la neglegence, So I would have a man on Horse back En Cavalier, and
not Formal, for that shows more a Scholar than a Master, now a good Seat is of
such Consequence as you shall see hereafter, that it is one of the chief things
makes a Horse go perfectly; the very manner of siting being almost beyond all
other helps, therefore do not despise it; for I dare boldly say, that he who is
not Bell homme a cheval, or a Handsome and Graceful Horseman, shall never be Bon
homme a Cheval, or a good Horseman; And so this is enough for the Seat, of the
Cavalier. See plate fourth, figure fourth.

CHAP. XII. Of Backing a Colt, or young Horse.
NOw that you know how to sit upon Horseback as also understand what Furniture
is most fit for him: CHAP: XII.
I think it will not be a miss to discourse a little in this Chapter of the
manner of backing a Colt, or young Horse: concerning which many people have
been very nice in their Directions, which in my Opinion there was no great need
for, because if you have Ordered your Colts as you are directed in the
Discourse of Breeding, immediately preceding this Treatile, which is to house
them every Winter, and after the first Winter to use them all the rest as your
other Horses, with combing, picking of their Feet, leading to the water, and
such other things which I need not here trouble you with; then they will be as
quiet and peaceable as any other Horse, so that you need not fear their
Plunging and Leaping, nor a hundred Extravagancies more, neither will you need
when you come to back them, to tire them in a Bogg or deep plowed Field, to
take off his Spirit and break his Heart, or at least his Wind before you dare
get upon him, for being Ordered as I have told you, you may safely Mount him
the first day you design to back him, and you will find him as quiet as a Lamb,
neither will you need a Cavezon of Cord, nor a Bardel or Pad of Straw, but such
a Saddle as you ordinatly Ride Horses of Manage in, with Stitrops and other
accountements belonging to it, and on his Nose an ordinary Cavezon, which you
use to your other Horses: But it must be well Lined with double Leather to
prevent its hurting his Nose; and if you will, you may put a Trench or Watering
Bitt in his mouth without Reins, and only the head-stal, and that only for a
few days the Reins of the Cave^^ supplying the place of them, and then give
him such a Bitt as you intend always to Ride him with, of which I shall speak
in the next Chapter, and stepping him thus abroad twice a day, from between
three and four Years old, until he be five or six; you may then begin him those
Lessons which I shall distinctly set you down hereafter. However at first
backing I would advise you to Ride him without Spurrs, and as for the manner of
placing the Cavezon upon his Nose, you will find it set down in the twenty
third Chapter of this Treatise, to which I refer you.

But if you should light upon an older Colt, and which is very stubborn and
unruly; then you must put him for some days to the single Pillar with a Long
of Cord tied to the fore-ring of the Cavezon, and there Trot and Gallop him
round it (making sometimes use of a good Shambrier when you find him rebel)
until he become peaceable and suffer you to take his back, which he will rarely
fail to do in five or six days at most; You must also at first mounting Ride
him without Spurrs, and by degrees you will find him become abundantly
Tractable, if you make use of this Method with Discretio^^ and Calmness: For
from a Passionate Rider and unruely Horse, what can be expected but disorder
and confusion? therefore the more unruly a Horse is, the more Calm^^^ and
Judgment is there required so to Master him, as that in obtaining the Mastery
you do not utterly spoil him, which I am persuaded you can never do, if you
punct^^ally observe this method of ordering and Backing Colts, or unruly young
Horses, which I have here set you down. See plate fourth, figure fifth.

CHAP. XIII. A Discourse of Bitts, with some general Directions to know, and
make choice of those which are universally most proper, for all Horses.
NOtwithstanding of the most exact Directions you have had in the Discourse
immediately preceding this Treatise of Horsemanshp, CHAP* XIII.
for bitting all kinds of Horses; I Judge it will not be amiss, to make in this
place a general Recapitulation, of what was more fully and at large set down in
these directions, that so this Treatise may be both the more complete of it
self, and also give you a general notion of what Bitts are most universally to
be made use of, for all Horses, who have not something very extraordinary in
either their Mouths or Necks.

Now it seems the Generality of Horsemen long ago, thought themselves wise and
great Masters, by the Diversity of Bitts which they made use of, in which they
were mightily deceived: for can any Man imagine, that a piece of iron in a
Horses Mouthwill bring him Knowledge; no more I assure you, then a Book in a
Boys hand will at first sight make him read; or a pair of Spurrs planted on an
Ignorants heels make him ride well. There is however I confess a Propriety or
skill, in knowing how to fit a Horses Bitt to him, according to the Turn of his
Neck, the Branches either shorter or longer, stronger or weaker, Mouth and
Liberty wider or narrower, the eye longer or shorter, streighter or more
bending, the Hooks according to the just Measure of the Bitt, the Curb equal
and consisting of three good round Esses, with one ring where it is fixed to
the eye upon the far side, and two Rings or Mallious, whereby it is Curbed or
fixed upon the near side, the Cheeks of the Bitt handsomely furnished with
bosses, not too big, and either rich or plain according to your fancy; not two
Rows of little Chains tied to the Bitt within his Mouth, but only one at the
most.

But above all, This Rule is chiefly to be observed, to put as little Iron in
your Horses Mouth as possibly you can. If his tongue be very bigg the Liberty
must be the wider, if little, the Liberty the less; but you must take heed that
the Apuy, or resting place of the Bitt, be never made too near the Liberty for
it would gall him; but the resting place must be where it ought, which is about
a fingers breadth from the Liberty upon each side of it, and the Bitt must rest
upon the Bars a fingers breadth above the Tushes: Those branches are weakest,
whose extreamities when the Reins are slackt, come nearest to the Horses Neck,
and those strongest, which go most forwards from his Neck, and good reason for
it, because you have the greater Pull: you may also measure with a little
string, or piece of a Rideing Rod, from the eye of the Bitt straight down, and
if the extremitys of the Branches be within that line, they are weak and
Gentle, and the more they are within it, they are still so much the Weaker, but
if they be without it, then they are strong or hardy, and the more they are
without it, they are still so much the more strong.

You must also consider another thing which is, that the Cheecks are like to a
Lever the longer it is it has the more force, and the shorter it is it has
the less; for a Boy with a long Lever will lift up more, then the strongest man
with a short and so in a Bitt the longer the branches are, they have the more
force, and the shorter they are they have the less, for that which is the
furthest from the Center, has the most force for Lifting or Pulling, and that
which is nearest the Center the least force, so that very short branches make
them as strong or hardy as you will, can never have that force which longer
Cheecks have.

Again, if a Horse hold too much up his head and out, then they make use of
shorter branches and stronger, to pull his head down and in, wherein they are
pretty Right: and so if a Horse hold his head too low, and brings it in so
round that he arms himself against the Bitt, which is to rest the branches upon
his breast, so that you have no further Pull or Command of him at all: and
because this vice is contrary to holding up his head and out, for which they
used short branches and stronger to bring it in, they therefore think they
should make use of long and weak Branches to pull it up; For they reason thus,
that if a strong Branch pulled him down, then a weak Branch will pull up his
head: Wherein they are mightily deceived, for when a Horse arms himself against
the Bitt, as it is certain that long Branches will sooner come to his Breast,
then short ones; so is it as certain that weak Branches will come sooner to his
Breast then those which are strong; but it seems this they do not very exactly
consider, otherwise they would be very soon sensible of their error.

For to a Horse that arms himself against the Bit, you must have not only a
short branch that will not so soon touch his breast, but also a strong branch
to keep it yet further from his breast: the hooks of the Curb ought likewise to
be made a little longer, and so justly turned, as not to offend or hurt the
sides of of his Cheecks, and if the Curb does not ly in its right place, two
little iron Rings fastened closs to the Top of the Hooks, to keep them steady
and fixed, is the best Remedy: all other devices in Bitts or Curbs being
insignificant and to little purpose.

Now the Bitts following are generally the best for all Horses whatsoever, Viz.
First, A plain or simple Canon, with Branches a La Conestable. Secondly, A
plain Seatch with branches a La Conestable. Thirdly, a Canon a La Pignatel,
which is a Bitt with a gentle falling and moving up and down, and the Liberty
so low as not to hurt the Roof of the Horses mouth, which is the best Bitt
certainly for all Horses which have any thing of a big Tongue, which I am sure
they do not like to have pressed; and therefore I recommend that Liberty above
all things in Bitts, with the branches a La Conestable.

To discharge a Horses lips, I would have Olives, with the Liberty a La
Pignatel, those Olives extending not so far upon every side of the Mouth, as to
the extremitys of them, and having little Rings at the ends of them, give
Liberty to his Lips and discharges them; but indeed I would have of all, but
two sorts of Bitts, which are first the Canon a la Pignatel, and secondly the
Olives a la Pignatel to discharge his Lips if need be, but the branches
always a la Conestable.

Thus you have the Truth of Bitts brought into a narrow compass: There is
little virtue in them to bring a Horse to understanding, on which a man must
work, and that is his Reason, by the favor of the Logitians distinction of
reasonable and unreasonable Creatures, for were they as good Horsemen as
Scholars, they would have made another distinction: Well then, you see it is
not a piece of Iron can make a Horse knowing, for if it were, the Bitt-makers
would be the best Horsemen: No, it is the Art of appropriated Lessons, fitting
every Horse according to his Nature, Disposition and Strength; punishing, and
with good Lessons rectifying his Vices; rewarding him, and preserving him in
his Horse Virtues, which will make him a Just and ready Horse: and not the
Trusting to an ignorant piece of Iron, called a Bitt: For I will undertake to
make a perfect Horse with a Cavezon without a Bitt, better then any man shall
with his Bitt without a Cavezon, so highly is the Cavezon when rightly used, to
be esteemed; and that is the true Art which makes a Horse, and not the
Ignorance and Folly of a strange Figured Bitt.

The Famous Pignatel at Naples, never used but simple Bitts, which made the
ignorant wonder how he could Dress Horses so perfectly with so few kinds of
Bitts; but he freely told them, It was their Ignorance made them wonder at his
Art: And so likewayes that great Master in this Art, Monsieur de Pluvinel, did
the some, for he had always a plain Cavezon, and not too sharp, and to make it
yet the Gentler, did always line it with double Leather at least; again
working with the Cavezon, and making use of such Bitts as I have named to you,
It rarely falls out that a Horse either wryes his Head, sucks up his Bitt, or
puts his Tongue over the Bitt, because the liberty a la Pignatel hinders his
Tongue from going over the Bitt, which is the one, and the working with the
Cavezon tied to the Pommel of the Saddle, as I shall hereafter show you, fixes
his Head, and so preventeh the other. And this much in general for the right
Bitting of a Horse; Those who are more curious, may turn back to the discourse
of Bitts immediately preceding this Treatise of Horsemanship, where they will
be satisfied to the full, in every particular circumstance which can possibly
occur in the fitting of any kind of Horse with a Bitt, see Plate second and
third.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Operation of the Bitt in several Circumstances. And
FIRST, When a Horse goes straight forewards.
TO Work regularly with the Reins of the Bridle, which work upon the Bitt,
CHAP: XIV.
is an Art which requires a great deal of more consideration and Judgment,
then many who understand it not do imagine, for you must consider that the Bitt
is an Engine which works upon the Horses Bars and the Curb, and the two
Branches are like Leavers to work on these two places accordingly as the Reins
pull the Cheeks; The Bars and the place where the Curb rests, are much lower
then the Nose upon which the Cavezon works, and the Rings whereto the Reins
of the Bridle are fastened at the end of the Cheeks, are also lower then either
the Bars or the Curb, but as the Branches are pulled by the Reins of the
Bridle, so does the Bitt work upon the Bars, or the Curb upon the place where
it rests.

I must also tell you that the Branches ly slope to you, and the Reins more
slope before you take them into your hand: So the Bitt cannot press very much
upon the Bars, the Bridle hand and Reins being so far from the Perpendicular
line to the Branches; The Perpendicular Line is, when you thrust your Bridle
hand so far forewards as that it is Perpendicular to the ends of the Cheeks,
which makes you have a fuller pull of the Branches, and consequently makes
them work extremely upon the Curb: So when a Horse goes straight forewards
either Trotting, Galloping, or upon Corvets, if you hold your hand low, the
Bitt presses more upon the Bars then the Curb, because the Cheeks of it are
not so much pulled to you, or toward the neck of the Horse, and consequently
the Curb is not straightened so much, and the Horse is at more liberty, and his
head a little high, but when you hold your Bridle hand a little more forewards,
and pull it upwards, then the Curb works more, and so pulls down the Horses
head: Now the reason of this is plain, for when you pull the Branches hard and
up, then you pull the mouth of the Bitt down, and so the Horses head also,
because the Branches work hard upon the Curb, for it is most true, that when
the Cheeks of the Bitt are pulled up, the mouth goes down, and straitens the
Curb, the hand being high, and when the Branches are not pulled hard, then the
Curb is a little slackt, and the Horses head at more liberty; because the
pressure of the Bitt upon the Bars, and of the Curb upon the place where it
rests, depends upon the Branches; for when the Branches go up, the Mouth of
the Bitt goes down, and when the Branches go down, the Mouth of the Bitt goes
up; this is the true Operation and Effect of the Bitt, when a Horse goes
straight forwards.

SECONDLY, When a Horse goes to either the Right or Left Hand, his hinder
parts being at Liberty.
FOR the Right Hand: Your little Finger seperating the Reins, the left Rein
lies under the little Finger; and the right Rein above it, so that to turn him
to the Right, you must turn up your little Finger and Nails; and as you put it
up, put it a little upon the inside of the turn or Volt: But then at the same
time, you must also advance a little your outward or left Shoulder, that your
Body may incline a little to that Hand you are turning to, and thereby appear
the less constrained when your Horse is a turning.

Again for the left Hand, your little Finger also seperating the Reins, you
must do quite the contrary; for now you must turn down your Nails and Thumb,
and in the time of your turning them down, put your Hand a little upon the
inside of the Volt or Turn, that is a little to the Left Hand; but then you
must also advance a little your outward or right Shoulder, as upon the right
Hand you did your left, that so your Body may incline to that Hand to which you
are turning, which is now the Left: And that the Horses fore-parts may not rise
too high, keep the Bridle-hand low, which will help to put him upon the
Haunches; for the Bridle hand should never be above two or three Fingers
breadth, above the Pommel of the Saddle, and a little advanced and easy, but
by any means firm; for there is nothing makes a Horse go more upon the
Haunches, then a light and firm Hand, because when he has nothing to rest upon
before, he will rest behind, for he must rest upon some thing; and if it be
behind, then it is right, because it will be upon his Haunches, a light hand is
one of the greatest Secrets in Horsemanship; but there is no Horse can be light
and firm upon the Hand, except he suffer the Curb, and obey it: and this is the
Truth and Quintessence of the Bridlehand for the outward Rein, upon either
right or left Hand.

THIRDLY, Of the use of both the Outward and Inward Rein.
YOU must help your Horse with the Outward Rein of the Bridle in the Piroite,
because his fore parts are straightened, and his hinder parts at liberty, so you
must also help with the outward Rein in Demi Volts of one Pist, and in Passads
along a Wall; The Demi Volt consisting of either three or five times, and
that for the same reason, because his fore parts are pressed or straightened, and
his hinder parts at liberty, the Demi Volt being as it were half a Piroite; and
so shall you also help with the outward Rein in Corvets backward in a straight
Line, his fore parts being pressed, and his hinder parts at Liberty because
they lead; in all leaps as Croupadoes, Ballotadoes and Captiole, whither
straight forewards or upon the Volts, you must also help with the outward Rein;
because in these Airs the fore parts of the Horse are always pressed, and his
hinder parts at liberty; otherwise it were impossible for him to Leap.

But for Terra a Terra you must help with the inward Rein, because his hinder
parts are pressed, and his fore parts at liberty, that is, your chief Aid must
be with the Rein upon the inside, which is done by putting your hand upon the
outside of his Neck or Volt, which streacheth the inward Rein, and so makes it
work, but if your Horse throw his shoulders too much out of the Volt, then you
must instantly turn your hand upon the inside of his neck, and work the outward
Rein to bring in his shoulders, and when they are brought in, then immediately
place your hand again upon the outside as it was before; you must also work
after the same manner with the inward Rein upon Demi Volts-Terra a Terra,
because in them the hinder parts are pressed, and the fore parts at liberty, as
likewayes for Corvets upon Volts of two pists, because the hinder parts are
pressed, and the fore parts at liberty, that so they may with the more ease
lead; You must also make use of the same inward Rein, upon Corvets straight
forewards: And that for the same reason of the hinder parts being subjected and
pressed, and the fore parts enlarged and at liberty; for the more easy
advancing and leading of the way.

Again in Passaging a Horse, you must always whatever hand you are going to,
For the most part make use of the outward Rein; Which is, to turn your hand
upon the inside of the Volt: That so the Horse may the more easily pass, or
Lapp his outward fore leg over his inner, or that within the Volt. But
notwithstanding of this, I do not pretend, that you should never make use of
the inward Rein; especially, if your Horse straiten his Volt by too much
turning of his neck and shoulders within the Circle: For in that case, you must
of necessity keep him up, or Soutener him with the inward Rein, and so make him
enlarge his Volt, which you found he inclined to close; but still I desire that
your principal Aid may be with the outward Rein, and that immediately after you
have given him your Aid, Whither it be with the outward or inward Rein, or that
you have Soutened, or keept him up from advancing too quickly: That immediately
I say, after your Aid given, you would slaken and yield your Bridle hand a
little; This is not only a General, but also a very Useful direction; and
therefore I entreat you to remember it.

FOURTHLY, Of the Operation of the two Reins separate, one in each hand.
WHEN you work with the Reins separate, one in each hand, (I shall first speak
of the inward Rein) if you pull the inward Rein from his neck, toward the
inside, then you pull the inward Cheek or Branch into the Turn, and then the
mouth of the Bitt goes to the Contrary side, which is without, and presses
the Horse upon the Bars without the Turn; and likewayes presses the Curb upon
that same outside, which makes the Horse look out of the Turn, and
consequently presses his Legs within the Turn, which is not at all proper for
Terra a Terra: And it must of necessity do so, to whatever hand you are going,
when you thus pull the inward Rein from his neck, upon the inside of the Volt:
For when the Cheeks are pulled in, the mouth of the Bitt must go out, because
of what side soever the Cheeks are pulled, the mouth of the Bitt goes still
contrary to them; The Bitt being a Machine which is made so to do.

Therefore in Terra a Terra the Reins separated one in each hand; I pull the
inward Rein (if I am going to the Right hand) slopwayes over his neck, toward
my left shoulder, the Knuckles of my Right hand down, and Nails up, which
pulls the inward Cheek toward me, and as it were without the Turn, and then
the mouth of the Bitt bends into the Turn, and makes the Horse also look
into the Turn, presleth his legs which are without the Turn, and gives
liberty to those within: Which is the true action of a Horses Legs, for Terra
a Terra.

The inward Rein likewayes pulled thus when you have both the Reins in the Left
hand, works the very same effect: For going to the Right hand, if you turn
your Knuckles quite down, making your Nails as it were respect a little your
left shoulder, and thereby streatch the inward Rein, by this motion of the
inward Rein You pull the inward Branch to you, and as it were out of the Turn,
and then the mouth of the Bitt goes into the Turn, and pressing the Horse upon
the inside of the Bars, makes him both look into the Turn, and also presses
his legs without the Volt, and gives liberty to those within, all which is
most proper for Terra a Terra: Now what I have said of the Right hand, may be
easily applied to the Left, and this much of the inward Rein, either both Reins
being in the Left hand, or the Reins being separate, and one only in each hand.

Let us now consider the working of the outward Rein, what operation it has
upon the Branches, which Branches govern the mouth of the Bitt and Curb; As for
example, going to the Right hand, I turn my hand on the inside of his neck, my
Nails a little up; this pulls the outward Rein, Which outward Rein pulls
the outward Cheek toward me, and therefore must of necessity put the mouth of
the Bitt from me, and press the Horse upon the out side of the Bars, which is
on the outside of the Turn, and so the Horse must look out of the Turn, have
his legs pressed within the Turn, and at liberty without the Turn, and all
this, because the Branches are pulled to me, and as it were within the Volt,
and therefore the mouth of the Bitt must go from me, which is without the Volt:
And it is impossible it should work otherwise, but then it is true that this
is not at all fit for Terra a Terra, but excellent for suppling his shoulders.
The reason is this. The H^rses legs are as I said, pressed upon the inside of
the Turn, And therefore he must needs bring in his Shoulders, although he is at
the same time constrained to look out of the Turn, the same thing is for the
left hand, and the same reason serve for both: Thus you have the Bitt and Reins
truly Anatomized, which if I be not mistaken, will be sound very useful to
those who design to understand the true Foundations of Horsemanship: The
superficial Knowledge of it, being for the most part but a mere Routin, and not
worth a Farthing.

CHAP. XV. Of the Trench or watering Bitt, Snaffle, Martingal, and false Reins.
ALL these are of no use at all for dressing of Horses, CHAP: XV.
since the end of Riding is to go with the Bitt, for with the Trench and
Martingal you must use both hands, and you have not a third for the Sword, but
with the Bitt your left hand governs the Horse, and your Right is free for
the Sword, but I must let you also see, that to use the Trench and Martingal,
is just so much time lost as you ride your Horse with them, and that they also
nowayes prepare him for the Bitt, for first the Trench has no Curb, therefore
a Horse cannot come to understand the Curb by it, because it has none. Then
Secondly, There is no Trench in the World, or Snaffle which is almost the same,
being only a smaller kind of Trench, that ever wrought upon the Bars of a
Horse, but only upon the Weeks of his Mouth and Lips, so what preparation is
there I pray for the Bitt by making use of the Trench? when it can neither make
him understand the Curb, not Pressure of a Bitt upon the Bars, and yet you see
that the Bitt works only upon these two places, and also that without them,
it is impossible to make a ready Horse, nay pull down a Horses head as much as
you can with a Trench or Martingal, and they shall never work upon his Bars,
so that use them never so long, the Horse shall not be settled on jot the
better upon the hand when you take them away; You may see therefore how
unuseful a folly the making use of the Trench and Martingal is for dressing of
Horses, merely so much time lost to no purpose, and Labor in vain, so that I
wonder at the Horsemen who had no more Wit long ago then to use it.

To work Horses again with false Reins, is altogether as false work, for they
being tied to the Arches of the Bitt, when you pull them you slack the Curb,
and make the Bitt like a Snaffle, so that no Horse can be firm and settled with
it, for that Horse who does not suffer the Curb shall never be a ready horse,
it is therefore the Bitt and C^vezon, and the True Art of Riding that settles a
Horse upon the hand, makes and dresses him perfectly, and not the Trench, false
Reins, and Martingal, no nor the Martingal accompanied with the Bitt neither,
Because as I said, if it be tied to the Arches of the Bitt, the Curb can never
work; and without the Curb, a Bitt is of no more use for the Manage, then a
common Snaffle or watering Trench, but when a Horse comes to answer the Bitt
and working of the Curb, then he will be put upon his Haunches, and go so
perfectly and easily, as you shall hardly feel him upon the hand, the Bridle
will be so slack and he will go so just.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Cavezon, its Operation and Use.
THE Cavezon is quite another Machine then the Bitt, CHAP: XVI.
for the Bitt works upon the Bars and the Curb, and has two Branches
whereunto are fastened the two Reins, one upon each side of the Horses Neck, and
the Bitt is in his Mouth, and the Curb under his Chin, and these all low,
especially the Branches, but the Cavezon is higher and upon his Nose, and
works only there, without either Mouth or Curb, so that the Cavezon being
fastened as I shall hereafter order it, if you pull the inward Rein cross his
Neck in an oblique line toward the outside of the Turn, your Kouckles down, it
pulls his head up a little; and works the same effect for the bending of
his Neck, as the Bitt does, but much more because you have a greater pull, the
Cavezon being upon his Nose, and being also further from you then the Bitt, the
ply of his Neck is the greater.

Consider also, That when the inward Rein of the Cavezon is tied to the Pommel
of the Saddle, it makes almost the same oblique line as when you hold it in
your hand, and has the same opperation in every thing, only that it is a
little shorter: But then again if you hold it in your hand, and pull it
strongly on the inside of the Volt, and low, then you pull down the Horses
head, which makes him bring in his outward shoulder, which is good upon large
Circles, either in Troting, Galloping or Passaging, for to supple his
Shoulders, so that the Cavezon and Bitt differ so much in working, that when
you pull the Cavezon Rien a little high, it brings also up the Horses head,
and when you pull the Branches high, your hand well advanced and near to the
perpendicular line of the Branches, they bring the Horses head down, again when
you hold the Cavezon rein low, and toward the inside of the turn, it pulls
his head down, but if you hold your Bridle-hand low, it gives his head liberty.

You may perceive then by this, that the Cavezon and Bitt differ very much in
their manner of Operation, so great is the difference between working upon the
Nose, and the mouth or Bars; It is true that the cavezons inwards Rein tied to
the pommel of the Saddle, is so rare and so effectual a thing, as you need not
almost care what you do with the Bitt so long as you work with it, because it
indeed does all, yet when a Man comes to work with the Briddle alone, he may
easily be mistaken, for except he understand the true effects of both, the
excellency of the Cavezons inward rein thus tied, may very readily deceive him,
when he comes to work with the Bitt alone.

Now the great use of the Cavezon, is to stay, to raise, and make a Horse
Light, to teach him to turn, to stop, and to assure and adjust his Head and
Croup, and also ply his Neck, and supple his Shoulders and fore Legs, without
offending his Mouth, or place of the Curb; therefore I would advise you to use
it to all Horses whatsoever, for they will go much better, when you come to
make use of the Bitt alone; having their Mouths thereby preserved and made so
sensible, that they will be attentive to the least motions of the Hand; so that
there is nothing comparable to it for the Exercise of the Manage, with a Bitt
for the most part a la Pignatel, and the Branches a la Conestable; because the
Cavezon does so supple them, and is so right, that it will dress all Horses
whatsoever, if you work them upon their Trot, Gallop, Stopping, and going back,
with Passaging, and raising them as you ought, conform to the Rules of Art, for
this makes them subject to the sense of Feeling, causing them to Feel and
Answer the Hand and Heels, which is the Sense we ought to work on, and not to
the Sense of the Sight, which is the Routin of the Pillars, or the Sense of
Noise, which is the Rote of Hearing, and that only by applying the Aids in
these two places, to wit, the Mouth and the Sides: Seeing is all the Art by
which People teach Horses Tricks and Gambals, and though the Ignorant admire
them; yet these persons shall never teach a Horse to go well in the Manage;
for there are many things in the Sense of Feeling which are to be done with so
great Art and Judgment, and which require so great Experience of the different
Dispositions of Horses, that it is not every man who can Dress a Horse for the
Manage, as he can make a Dog or Horse to Dance.

Now the Cavezons inward rein tied short to the pommel of the saddle, is
excellent to give a horse an Apuy, settle him upon the hand, and make his head
firm and steady; so it is excellent for a horse that is too hard on the hand,
for the cavezons rein within the turn being always tied very strait to the
pommel, keeps him from resting too much upon the Bitt, which makes him Light
and firm on the hand, the cavezons inward rein being thus tied short is also
excellent to supple a horses shoulders, which is the best thing that can be;
for it gives Apuy where there is none, and where there is too much it takes it
away, and suppleth his shoulders extremely, which is an excellent thing; it
also makes a Horse Gallop very right with his Legs for Terra a Terra, for it
in a manner lengthens his Legs within the Turn, and gives them liberty; but
shortens and presses his Legs without the turn, which is as they should be
for terra a terra: So you see that the Cavezons inward Rein thus fixed to the
Pommel of the Saddle, is good First for suppling his shoulders, helping him
with your inward Leg, and outward Rein of the Bridle: And next for working his
Croup, helping him with your outward Leg and inward Rein of the Bridle; and
this is the verity of tying the Cavezons inward Rein short to the Pommel of the
Saddle.

The Cavezon works also powerfully upon the Nose; and so gives you the
stronger pull to make the P^y and Bent the greater, because it is the part
farthest from your Hand; and this ply or bent is from the very Nose to his
Withers, which is to bend his Neck, bring his outward Shoulder in, and make him
also look into the turn; and this is done with the inward Rein of the Cavezon
pulled hard and strait, and so tied to the Pommel as it may be kept fixed, and
at a stay, which is much better then keeping it in ones hand, for he might come
to force your hand; but when the Rein is tied to the Pommel, it still keeps
the Horse in a right ply, and then you may work with the Bitt as you list.
Either with the Reins separate, one in each hand, or else both in your left:
Therefore if you would Passage him his Croup in, large or narrow, you must help
him for the most part with the outward Rein of the Bridle, and your outward
Leg, because it is upon the Action of a Trot, which is cross; and therefore he
must have his Legs without the turn free and at Liberty, to lap over his
inward Legs: And if you would have him to go Le petit Gallop his Croup in, or
terra a terra; then you must help with your outward Leg, but with the inward
Rein of the Bridle, your hand on the outside of his Neck with the Knuckles
down, and Nails respecting your left Shoulder, if it be to the Right, but
respecting your Right, if it be to the Left Hand your Horse is going; and that
to press his Legs upon the outside of the turn, and give Liberty to these
within; but for the Petit Gallop, you must put your bridle Hand sometimes on
the inside of his Neck, but immediately remit it again, and that because it is a
Gallop, and the outward Rein serves to bring his Shoulders a little into the
volt when he turns them too much out; if to Trot or Gallop upon one Pist, in
large or narrow Circles, the Cavezons inward rein still tied to the Pommel of
the Saddle; you must then help him with the inward Leg and inward rein, but
sometimes also with the outward Bridle-rein, to bring in his Shoulders, and
narrow him before, if the Piroite, only with the outward rein of the Bridle, if
Demp Volts upon Passades, the outward rein; for all Leaps, Corvets either
forwards or backwards, or upon the Volts, and Demp Aires, still the outward
rein of the Bridle, for the most part; but for terra a terra, or passads-terra
a terra, stopping and going back, you must help with the inward rein and
outward Leg; and all this with the Cavezons inward rein tied strait to the
Pommel of the Saddle, which is the best thing in the World; for being so fixed,
you see how you may give your helps which the several reins of the Bridle, as
occasion shall offer, and as I have told you in these several Airs preceding.

So that the Cavezons inward rein held in your hand, or thus tied to the Pommel
of the Saddle, which is certainly the most secure way, is for all things
whatsoever, Croup in or out, Trot, Gallop, Passage, all Airs, Stopping, going
back, Passads, or any thing else that belongs to the Manage; for without it
no Horse can have his Shoulders well Suppled, his Neck made pliable to look
into the Turn, his Legs to go right, or agree as they should in every
different Action, or his Body rightly bent to be part of the Circle, wherein he
is going; And consequently without a Cavezon can never be perfectly dressed,
therefore it is all in all for every thing, every Air, and every Action a
Horse can make; for it preserves his Mouth, Bars, and place of the Curb, and
is so effectual that it will Dress a Horse without the Bitt, which a Bitt shall
never do so well without the Cavezon, for the Bars and place of the Curb are
tender, besides, the reins of the Bitt can never so well Supple his Shoulders,
ply his Neck, or give his Body that Just Bent which is required in the Manage,
because they are so near to you, and work only upon the bars and Curb, which
cannot possibly bend him so much as that which is upon his Nose, for the bars
and Curb are low, and the branches yet lower, so that there is not so much room
and distance to pull, as with the Cavezon that is so much higher; and has the
distance from the very Nose to the Shoulders, where you may pull him; whereas
the Bridle-reins can but pull his Musle and Head, but scarcely any more: For to
Supple his Shoulders with the Bridle Reins, you must help with the inward Leg
and outward rein, and stay his outward Shoulder with the inward rein of the
Bridle, which has not near that force which the inward rein of the Cavezon
has.

Therefore I would advise you, to use it for all things, and to all Horses,
Colts, half Dressed Horses, Ready Horses, Young, middle-aged, and Old, and in
short to every Horse whatsover, for there is no Dressing of them without it but
with great difficulty; and with it you will Dress all Horses, of what
Disposition so ever, weak, middle strength, or strong; and with it also reduce
all Vices, and when you come to use the Bitt alone, they will go much the
better, for having been continually wrought before with the Cavezon.

CHAP. XVII. Of the several Helps and Corrections, with Body, Voice, Spurrs,
Rod, Calves of the Legs, etc. And
FIRST, Of the Secret Helps of the Horseman 's Body in General.
YOU must understand, CHAP: XVII.
that the Body on Horseback is divided into three parts, two Moveable, and one
Unmovable: The first Moveable is the upper parts of the Body to the Wast, the
Unmovable is from the Wast to the Knees; and the other Moveable, from the
Knees to the Feet.

The Helps of the Body are to be Gentle for all Horses, because to sit strong
on Horseback Astonishes a weak Horse, And causes a strong one to go in
Counter-times, because it forces him too much, it makes a Furious Horse mad, a
resty Horse yet more Resty, and a Horse hard on the Hand to run away; Being
displeasing to all sorts of Horses: You are therefore neither to sit too weak,
nor too strong upon Horseback, but betwixt the two, because Gentle Helps fit
and please all Horses best; And you must also fit Straight upon the Twist, and
always keep your self as much so as you can, what action soever the Horse
makes: And to do it with the more ease, you must oppose his rude and
unexpected motions, by acting quite contrary to what ^e does.

As for example, If the Horse rise before, then you must incline your Body a
little forewards to him; For did your Body go along with the Horse, it would go
backwards, and be both very uneasy for you and the Horse: In like manner, if
the Horse strike out behind, or raise his Croup, you must put your Body
backwards, which is contrary to the Horses motion; For did you follow the
Horse, you would put your Body forewards, and so be in danger of being thrown,
therefore the best way, is still to sit straight as much as possible, and then
the Action of the Horse will keep you on your Twist.

SECONDLY Of the Voice and Tongue.
THE voice is used three manner of ways, First for correction, which is done
in a threatening way, and is good in the beginning to astonish and Allarum any
ill natured, and Malicious Horses, which with all their might Rebel against
their Rider. Secondly, It is made use of, as an Aid or Help, and to Encourage
Horses when they are doing what the Rider would have them. And Thirdly, it is
made use of as a token of kindness, and to court and flatter them: But it is
never otherwise made use of, except in these three cases I have told you, and
but seldom in these neither, because it is not by the sense of heating, or
seeing, but by the sense of feeling or touch, and hand and heel, that Horses
are perfectly dressed: However, I do not condem themakng use of the Voice at
Seasonable times, that so you may gain upon and overcome such Horses as are
vicious, and ill natured, or who incline to rest by refusing the Spurr; because
in the beginning it Succeeds very often well, but when once a Horse is come any
length in his Manage, it must then no more be made use of.

As for the help of the Tongue, it is admirable for Encouraging and animating,
or bringing a Horse together, and uniting him in Terra a Terra; You should
therefore from time to time always make use of it. But there is nothing more
rediculous then to see some people, who so soon as ever they have begun their
Reprise of Terra a Terra, never cease Claking with their Tongue until they
have finished it, which serves for no other use but to dull a Horse, and make
him unsensible: However, to make use of the Tongue sometimes produces a every
good effect, especially in all kind of Airs: But I must here reprehend a
certain kind of people, who so soon as ever they see any Horse slaken in his
Manage, who ever be upon his back, or that he goes not as they would have
him, never fail to speak or Clake to him with their Tongue, which is very
impertinent in him who does it, for not being the Rider, it is not very good
manners to speak to to the Horse, except he belongs to the person who
speaks; for if the Horse do not belong to him, and that he still Clake to him
with his Tongue so long as he Rides, he will be thought but very officious and
rediculous upon that head: Those who are guilty of this will be perhaps better
satisfied to receive this advice in Writing, then by word of mouth, at least I
would be so, were the case my own.

THIRDLY Of the Rod. And:
1st, Of its use for a Soldiers Horse or Manege de Guerre.

THE Rod is seldom used for a Correction, but only for a Help, and that many
times also more for Grace then use: For one Rod should serve a Man a month,
because it is the hand and Heels that dress a Horse, and nothing else; also the
Helps with the Rod are not so proper for Soldiers Horses, because they should
go only with the hand and heel, for the Sword is to be in the Right hand, and
not the Rod, but in dressing a Horse only for the Wars, you must at first use
the Rod, if it were but only to show it still upon the contrary side to which
he is going, or to hold it straight up with a grace at every change.

2ly, Of the Use of the Rod in Terra a Terra.

FOR Terra a Terra upon the Right hand, hold up your Rod pretty high with a
Grace, and give him sometimes a gentle blow upon the left shoulder if there be
need for it, or sometimes over your left Arm, upon the side or Flank if he
require it.

For Terra a Terra upon the left hand, hold the Rod also a little high, or put
it to his Right Flank, and hold it there with a Grace during his reprise, or
give him a blow with it, upon the Right Flank or shoulder as he shall require
it.

You must also use the same helps with the Rod, upon Demi Volts, or Passads,
but for the piroite, hold it still upon the contrary side to which he is going.

3ly, Of the use of the Rod in Corvets.

FOR Corvets upon the Volts, and going to the right hand, help him cross the
Neck upon his left shoulder with a Grace, and give him now and then a pretty
smart blow, if he require it, or that you find he do not rise well enough
before; but going Corvets to the left, you must help him upon the right
shoulder, also with a Grace and in just time.

Another help with the Rod in Corvets, is to hold it a little long, and to
whisk it forwards and backwards, your Arm up and bending a little at the Elbow:
But there is not a more Graceful help with the Rod in Corvets, then when you
are going straight forwards upon them, and your Horses right side to a Wall; to
strike the Wall frequently, and in Cadance with the motion of the Horse, a
double strock at each time.

4ly, Of the Use of the Rod in all manner of Leaps.

TO Whisk the Rod forwards and backwards in Leaps, as I desired you to do in
Corvets, is a very Graceful help; but in my Opinion it forces a Horse a little
too much forwards, until he be accustomed to it; to help also in Leaps with the
Rod, not over your right shoulder, but over the bent of your right Arm, your
Arm lying a little degadged from your Body, and so plied, as that the point of
the Rod may fall in the middle of the Horses Croup; this is a Graceful help,
yet somewhat difficult to be performed.

But the best and surest help, although not altogether so Graceful, is to turn
the Rod in your hand, the point toward the Horses Croup, and help him so each
Leap and in Cadance, but only one stroke at a time; yet if he raises not his
Croup enough, then help him with two or three strokes for each Leap, which is
called in French, aider de tout temps, and this is the surest help of all; you
may also help him just behind the Saddle, with the big end of the Rod in place
of a Poin^on or Puncheon; the Rod being turned in your Hand as before, which is
also a good help and very frequently made use of in the Schools.

But if your Horse be very light behind, which few are, then help him only with
the Rod upon the Shoulders, and in time; If you would make your Horse only to
Croup with his hinder parts, which is for the Balotade; and not strick out but
only show his Shoes, then help him just upon the Middle of his Croup; But if
you would have him strick out, then help him with your Rod, upon the setting on
of his Dock, and if you would have him bring both his hinder Legs under his
Belly, which is for the Croupade then strick him with the Rod a little above
the Gambrels. So these three several helps with the Rod, will make your horse
either to Balotade, strike out, or Croupade.

But there is no help with the Rod so good, as to help him with two Rods, one
to raise him before, and the other to help him under his belly, which puts
him so much upon the Haunches, as no help with the Rod is comparable to it,
especially when he is going upon Corvets, but then you must have a Person upon
foot, who has Judgment enough to give the help with the Rod beneath his
Belly, in Just time and Cadance, otherwise it will more confound and astonish
the horse then assist him, and this much of the Rod.

FOURTHLY. Of the Secret Helps of the Calves of the Legs.
YOU must know that when you are stiff in the Hams, which is done by putting
down your heels, then the Calves of the Legs come to the Horse, and you are so
much the more Narvous and strong upon Horseback, but then the heels are
removed from him, again when you bend in your Hams, which is done by putting
down your Toes, then the Calves of the Legs are removed from the Horse, but the
Heels come to him, and you are thereby more easy and slack upon Horse back.
Now these Helps of the Calves of the Legs being Truths as great, as secret and
unknown to many who pretend to be no small Horsemen. I thought fit in this
place to discover them to you.

FIFTHLY. Of the Several Corrections and Helps with the Spurrs.
THE Correction of the Spurrs being a Punishment, comes commonly after a fault
is committed, to put either in his Croup or Buttock, when he shall have put it
too far out, or out his Croup when he shall have put it too much in, or be
Entier as the French call it, which is to refuse to turn to that hand you would
have him, and this is done commonly with one Spurr; but he is to be corrected
with both Spurrs, when he is Resty and will not go forwards, or to settle him
on the hand, when he joggles his head, or when he is apprehensive and skittish,
or that he offers to bite or strike, in all these Cases the Spurrs will do
him good, also if he rise too high before, or bolt upright, then to give him
with both your Spurrs as he is falling down, will be a great means to put it
from him, but take heed not to make use of them just as he is rising, for then
they may cause him come over upon you: Again if he will not Advance which is to
rise before, then a good strock with both Spurrs will make him rise, providing
that at the same time, you keep him firm and stayed upon the hand, and as it
were support him a little with the Bitt, likewise if he be a dull Jade, or lazy
and slack in his Manage, then to give him the Spurrs will quicken him.

So you see the Spurrs are as a Correction for many things, therefore you must
give them strongly and sharply, and with as much Vigor as you can; and have
them always very sharp, that he may feel them to the purpose so as to make
Blood follow, for otherwise they would not prove a Correction; You must also
strike your Horse alwise some three or four fingers behind the Girths, and
sometimes toward the Flanks if it be to put in his Croup, and believe it,
there is no Correction like the Spurrs when Seasonably given: For what makes a
Horse sensible to the Heels, but the Spurrs? Therefore use them, and that also
until he obey you; for no Horse can be a Ready Horse, until be obey the Heels,
and consequently answer the Spurrs: But however, take heed you do not dull him
with them, for then he will care no more for them than if he were a Stock or
stone; Therefore remember to give them but seldom, and upon just Occasion; but
when you do give them, let it always be smartly, and to the purpose.

If your Horse maliciously Rebel against what you would have him do, leave not
Spurring of him, and that soundly, until you find him begin to obey you; and
when he obeys you in the least, then light off and send him to the Stable, and
the next Morning try him again, and if he obey you, Cherish and make much of
him, forgiving him many other faults that day, that he may know you have Mercy
as well as Justice; And that you can Reward as well as Punish; so you see of
what great Efficacy the Spurrs timely and discreetly given, are for the
dressing of Horses, for a man has but his hand and heels to do it, and the
Spurrs do half the business, although it must be confessed that the hand has
the preheminency; For though there be two Spurrs, and but one Bridle, because a
Horse has but one mouth, and two sides: Yet if he be not settled upon the
hand, you cannot make him subject to the Heels, but withal, the Correction of
the Spurrs is so necessary and effectual, that no Horse can be made very ready
without them, therefore esteem them highly, nixt to settling a Horse upon the
hand, which must always be first.

As for Helps, they are to go before and prevent Faults, as corrections come
after, to punish for offending, therefore the spurrs are to be used as a help
thus, when the horse goes Terra a Terra your outward leg closs to him, when
he slacks turn your heel to him, and pinch him with the spurrs, which you may
easily do, even to bring blood and no Body perceive it, for it ought to be done
nearly and delicately, because the spurrs are a neat and most excellent Help,
and the Quintessence of all Helps in the Manage, so that if a Horse suffer and
obey this while you Sta^ him upon the hand, you may with very good reason say
he is an excellent Horse; for this quickens him, and puts him forewards: Yet
let me tell you, though this is an excellent Help for Terra a Terra, yet it is
not so good for it as other Airs, because it raises a Horse much before, and
presses him forewards. However, you may Pinch with both your Spurrs at once,
or only one of them as you find it needful, and that as well in Terra a Terra
as other Airs: now the use of Pinching in Terra a Terra, is to make him Croup,
press him foreward, and put him much upon his Haunehes; whereas for all Airs,
it raises him, and puteth him forewards but a little, and therefore it is a
great deal more proper for Airs then Terra a Terra, although it be very useful
for both when rightly timed, and thus much of that excellent Help called
Pinching

There is another Help with the Spurrs, which I call a Help, because it is
nether so violent as a Correction, nor so pressing as pinching, but between
Spurring and pinehing; and it is this, when your Horse Gallops his Croup in, or
Terra a Terra. If he obeys not your outward Leg enough; being close to, or
very near his side, then make a Motion of the Leg as if you did Spurr him, but
with as Gentle a touch as possible, and only to let him feel it and no more;
Now this is the Gentlest of all Helps with the Spurrs, which also puteth him
forewards, and is excellent for Terra a Terra, or the Hand Gallop his Croup in;
Yea much better then Pinching, for it both puteth him forewards, and makes him
obey the Spurrs at the same time, but it is not so good for Airs, for in them
he should both leap up and forewards but a very little, and therefore Pinching
is better for Airs then this last Help I have been discriving: Because
Pinching as I said, raises his Croup, and he advances with it but a very
little; whereas this last Aid or Help puteth him forewards, and raises him but
little, and therefore is more proper for Terra a Terra, and Le petit Galop, or
hand Gallop his Croup in; Now if your Horse yield to your Correction, and
understand these two preceding Helps with the Spurrs, being made sensible to
him, you may assure your self he will need them but very seldom after a while,
but be so sensible as that he will go freely, and obey you willingly, with the
Calves of your Legs only, for as for the Help of the Thighs, it is a rediculous
Conceit, seeing there are indeed no Helps below a Riders middle, but the
Spurrs, and Calves of the Legs, that a Horse can posibly feel. There is also
nothing in the World makes Horses more Resty, and vicious many several ways
then the Spurrs given out of time, and nothing in the World dresses them also
more perfectly then the same Spurrs given in time, and thus you have all the
Helps of the Hand and Heels discrived to you, which are the only things that
can dress a Horse, and make him perfectly ready, either for the Manage of
Pleasure, or Service of War.

CHAP. XVIII. Of rewarding and punishing Horses, and that Fear does much, but
Love little.
IT is imposible you can dress any Horse, CHAP: XVIII.
until he first know and acknowledge you to be his Master by obeying you; That
is, he must Fear you, and out of that Fear, love and obey you, for it is Fear
makes every body obey, both Man and beast, therefore first see that he fear
you, and then it will be for his own sake that he will obey you, because
otherwise he would be punished, Love also is not so sure a hold, for there you
depend upon his will, but when he Fears you, then he depends upon your own,
which makes a Ready Horse; Whereas if you depend upon his, it would make you a
Ready Man, so Love you see does no good but Fear all, therefore make him Fear
you, which is the ground and foundation for dressing all Horses whatsoever, and
the Council of a friend who wishes you to succeed in all your undertakings of
this Nature.

Yet Pluvinel, and most of the great Masters in Horsemanship, praise always
Gentleness, and Flatteties, and making much of Horses, either by Claping,
Stroaking, Speaking Flattingly unto them, or giving them something to eat, and
Pluvinel says one ought to be Prodigal of Caressing, and Nigard in
Correcting, or offending them, and that there is no other way of dressing
Horses like to this, but some Horsemen never make much of Horses, or very
rarely, and yet these Horses go well, neither do they threaten them with the
Voice, or ever speak to them, and no doubt they do it on purpose to keep them
in subjection, and to cause them fear them; For as the Proverb goes,
Familiarity breeds contempt, and Courtecy does no good, but Incourages them to
presume upon it, neither do they use the Rod much, but only their hand and
Heels, and seldom let a fault escape unpunished, which is indeed the only true
way to dress Horses; Then when they have Corrected them one morning, it may be
they will spare them the next, but they never punish them without a fault, and
if they make none they are not Corrected, and that is a sufficient reward for
them; For hope of reward and fear of punishment governs this whole World, not
only Men but Horses, which makes them incline the rather to obey you, that
they may receive the Reward, and shun the Punishment.

Now the severest Chastisement that a Horse should receive, is with the Spurrs,
for all Whips, Chambriers, and Bulls Pisles, have not near that effect which
Spurrs have, the Rod also is more for Grace then Use, but Rewards or no Rewards
are triffles, and in a manner of no use for the Mannaging of Horses, in
comparison of the Art of Riding; For let an ignorant Horseman flatter his Horse
and not punish him, or punish him and not flatter him, yet I will not flatter
the Rider, but must tell him that he shall spoil his Horse let him do what he
can, and that only because he wants Art.

CHAP. XIX. That Opposition in Horses against the Rider, is for the most part a
sign, of Strength and Spirit.
BE not discouraged if your Horse do Oppose you, CHAP: XIX.
for it is often times a token of Strength Spirit, and Stomach, and a Horse
having all these, cannot choose but be made a Ready Horse, if he be under the
Discipline of an Understanding band and Knowing heels, for when a Horse does
not Rebel, it shows Weakness, Faintness of Spirit, and want of Courage, and
where Nature is so much defective, it is hard for Art to supply it.

But truly I never knew almost any Horse, but before he was perfectly Dressed,
would Rebel either less or more, and certainly there is no Horse but will
strive at the first when Dressing, to have his own will, rather then to obey
his Riders, nor does a Horse more as any other Creature love Subjection, until
there is no Remedy, and then he will obey, and the Custom of Obedience makes
him a Ready Horse.

Now no man in the World, no not the wisest with his suppream Understanding,
were he put in the form of a Horse, could possibly find out more subtle ways
to oppose a Man then a Horse will, nay nor near so many I dare say, for they
will strive all the ways possibly they can to be free and not Subjected, but
when they find it will not do, then they yield, but not till then, so that they
deserve no thanks for their Obedience; Whence I conclude that a Horse must know
you to be his Master; That is, he must Fear you, and then he will Love you for
his own sake; For as I said in the preceding Chapter, Fear is the Surest Hold,
because it does almost all things in the World, and Love but little, therefore
see that your Horse first fear you, and then it will be your own Fault if you
make him not Obey you.

CHAP. XX. What it is makes a Horse go by Rote, or Routine, and how to Remedy
it.
THat which makes a horse go by Rote, CHAP: XX.
is absolutely his Eyes, and therefore to prevent it, I would advise you to
have as few Marks as you can in the Manage, that is no Pillars but on the
outside, and but one there neither, so that will not fix his sight, and then he
must take notice to the Hand and Heels, neither would I have you ride him
always in one place, for there his Eyes will make him go by Rote again,
therefore to ride him always in different places, is certainly the best, for
that will make him attend the hand and the heels, and this and no otherway, can
cure him of going by Rote.

CHAP. XXI. A true Description of all the natural Paces, And
FIRST, Of the Walk.
THere is no Man can make or dress a Horse perfectly, CHAP: XXI:
that does not exactly understand all the Natural Paces and Actions of a Horses
Legs, as also those made by Art, for it is a General Rule that Art must never
go against Nature, but must follow her and her order as much as possible, now
as for the Motion of a Horses Legs upon his Walk, the Duke of Newcastle says
that it is two Legs in the Air, and two upon the Ground at the same time, in
form of a St. Andrews Cross: But I must beg leave although I am no very old
Horseman, to differ from his Lordship upon this point, because he is therein
mightily mistaken, and there is no such thing which any Man may make Trial of,
by only causing lead his Horse gently out of the Stable in ones hand, and then
he will find that the Motion of a horses Legs in his Walk, is so far from
being two in the Air and two upon the Ground at the same time, in form of a St.
Andrews Cross, that it is quite another Motion as follows.

The true Motion then of a Horses Legs upon his Walk, according to my own
Observation, which upon trial will be found to be as true as it is new, is one,
two, three, and four, as follows, the horse when he begins his walk, must
either lead with the Legs of his Right fide, or with these of the left, if he
Lead with those of the Right, then the first foot he lifts is his far hind
foot, which makes one, and in the time he is setting it down (which in a step
he does always short of the tread of his fore foot upon the same side) I say
in the very time he is setting down his far hind foot which makes one time,
he lifts his far fore foot, and sets it down before his near fore foot,
which makes the second time, again just as he is setting down his: far fore
foot, he lifts his near hind foot, and sets it down again short of his
near fore foot, which makes the third time, and just as he is setting it down,
he lifts his near fore foot, and sets it down before his far fore foot,
which makes the fourth and last time. So you see that the Motion of a horses
Legs in his Walk, is so far from being two Leg in the Air, and two upon the
Ground cross, that it is two Legs of a side one after another, which four
Legs in setting down the feet, mark one, two, three, and four, and so
successively one after another, so long as the horse walks, he always
beginning his Walk, with the hind foot of that side wherewith he leads, be it
either his Right or Left, and this is the true Motion of a horses Legs upon
his Walk, which I believe has always been mistaken until now, that I hope
this shall discover the error, it was Curiosity which put me upon the
Observation of it, and although it may be thought a kind of Presumption in me
to contradict so famous a Horseman as the Duke of Newcastle, yet seeing I found
my Observation to hold, I thought I might safly venture to own it, Because
Truth will always vindicat it self, whatever may be objected against it; And
that my Observation of a Horses Walk is such, cannot in my Opinion be better
demonstrat, then by making a Trial, which I believe will be no great difficulty
where any kind of Horse is to be had, and this much of the true and real
Motions of a horses Legs upon his Walk.

SECONDLY, Of the Amble.
BEcause the Motion of a Horses Legs upon his Walk, is two Legs of a side one
after another, as I have made appear, which mark one, two, three, and four, so
a Horse in an Amble, removing both his Legs of a side at one and the same
time, the Action of the Walk must certainly be the foundation of it, for we
find that the only true way to make a horse Amble, is to press him from the
Walk; so that when a horse is walking, if you stay him well upon the Bridle
hand, and press him gently forwards with your Thighs, you force him to set down
the fore foot of that side wherewith he leads, sooner then otherwise he
would, which makes it just answer the Motion of the hind Leg of that side,
and so the two Legs of that side, instead of Marking two times as in the Walk
make only one, which is the true Motion of the Amble: As for example, If the
horse lead with the far side, he removes his hind leg and fore leg of the
same side at one time, whilst the other two Legs of the Near side stand still,
and when these Legs of the far side which he first removed are just a setting
down, he removes those of the Near side, and thus successively each side after
another, so long as he continues his Amble, and always both the Legs of one
side at once, which is two of a side in the Air, and two upon the Ground at the
same time, and this is a True and Perfect Ambie, see Plate fifth, fig: Ninth.

Now although strickly speaking, the Amble might be reckoned amongst the
Artificial Motions, because few Horses have it naturally; Yet because some
have it, and also that it is a shuffling Motion, which changes sides every
Remove, and therefore is so contrary to the Manage as any thing can be, I
thought it more fit to place it amongst the Natural Paces, then Artificial
motions of a Horses Legs, for whereas upon a Trot, you must Trot your horse
fast to make him take his Gallop, upon an Amble, you must stay him well upon
the hand and almost stop him, before he can begin it, which would make but a
very unpleasant Action, and bad figure in a Manage.

THIRDLY, Of the Trot.
IN the Trot, the Action of a horses Legs is two Legs in the Air, and two
upon the Ground at the same time, in form of a St. Andrews Cross, for example,
his far fore leg and near hind leg are in the Air, and just as he is setting
down them, he advances his near fore leg, and far hind leg, and so
successively at every Remove changes his Legs cross; So that as those that
were in the Air are set down, those that are upon the Ground are pulled up,
which is the True and just Motion of a Horses Legs in a Trot, see Plate
fourth, fig: Sixth.

Now although the Action of a Horses Legs in a Walk, be two Legs of a side
one after the other, yet the Walk is the foundation of the Trot, which forms
a St. Andrews Cross, as well as of the Amble, Which as I said is two Legs of a
side removed both together, and the sides changed successively; because as
staying a horse well upon the hand, and pressing him gently forwards with the
Brans of your Legs upon a Walk, makes him sooner set down the fore foot of
that side wherewith he leads, so that it is as soon set down as the hind foot
of the same side, and which Action from the Walk frames the Motion of the
Amble; So the flacking of your Bridle hand in a Walk, and pressing him
forwards, forces him to advance the hind leg of the contrary side wherewith
he began to lead, sooner then otherwise he would, and so to move at the very
same time with the fore leg of that side wherewith he began to lead, which is
the true Action of the Trot, because he is thereby compelled to move his Legs
cross, that is fore leg of one side, and hind Leg of the other at one and the
same time, and so successively each Remove, so great a difference you see there
is, between staying a Horse upon the Hand and pressing him on, and slacking the
Bridle hand or giving him head, and pressing him likewayes forwards, for
although both these motions of the Hands and Brans, work upon one and the same
foundation, which is the Walk, yet that Walk according as those motions of the
Hand and Brans are applied, produces Actions in the Horses legs so very
different, as are these of the Trot and Amble, which no Man would ever dream
of, or imagine, did he not clearly see that it is so, and this much of the
Trot, of which I have said as well as of the Walk, somewhat more extraordinary,
then you will find in any Book as yet extant, the Observations being my own,
and I dare affirm altogether new.

FOURTHLY. Of the Gallop.
AS for the Gallop it is another motion, for in a Gallop straight forwards, you
may make a Horse lead with what Leg you please, although it be most common to
cause him always lead with his Right, or far fore leg, but with whatever
fore leg he lead, the hind leg of the same side must follow it, whether he be
Galloping straight forwards, or upon a Circle, but upon a Circle he should
always lead with the fore leg within the Turn, but still the hind leg of the
same side must follow, otherwise his Legs will be disunited; Now this is all
the difference between a Gallop straight forwards and that upon a Circle, that
in the first he may lead with what fore leg you please, but in the second, or
Circle, he is confined to lead alwise with his fore leg within the Turn, but
in both cases the hind leg of the same side wherewith he leads must always
follow, and then it is a perfect Gallop.

However it is certain, that though a horse gallop right, and with his Legs
united, which is his hinder leg to follow the fore leg wherewith he leads,
yet if he be not accustomed to lead with that side, he will gallop neither so
nimbly nor so fast, as if he led with that side wherewith he is most
accustomed, for it is just in this case with a horse, as it is in ordinary
excrcises with a Right and Left handed man, custom very much prevailing both
over Man and beast, also when a horse gallopeth straight forwards never so slow
a gallop, the Prints of his binder feet exceed always those of his fore, and
even of that fore foot wherewith he leads, but galloping upon a Circle he
stricks over but sometimes, and not so much neither.

Now to understand what is meant by a horses fore leg leading, and his bind
leg of the same side following, it is thus, if the far fore leg lead, by
that fore leg leading is meant that it should be always before the other fore
leg, and the bind leg of the same side to follow it, which hind leg must
also always be before the other hind leg, and to demonstrat to you that this
is the true motion of a Gallop, you may at any time observe that a Horse in
galloping lifts both his fore legs at once, that fore leg wherewith he
leads being always most advanced, and as his fore legs are falling, I say
before they touch the Ground, his hind legs follow both together in that same
very posture which the fore legs did, that is the one before the other, so
that all four are in the Air at one time, which makes the gallop to be a Leap
forwards, for how is it possible else, that a horse in Running (which is but a
swift gallop) should spring near twice his own length forwards.

But although the gallop be a Leap forwards, and that also a horse lifts two
Legs at a time; To wit, First his two fore legs and then his two hind, yet
that does not hinder him in setting down his feet, to mark one, two, three, and
four with them, for galloping upon a Circle his Croup out, if he lead with the
inward fore leg, as he always should, and that the hind leg of the same side
follow, then those Legs within the turn which lead are pressed, and these
without it are at Liberty, which is the reason that in the Action he makes,
his outward fore leg is set to the Ground first and is at Liberty, which is
one time, then his inward fore leg which leads and is pressed, is set down and
makes a second, which is two, next his outward hind leg which is at Liberty
is set down and makes three, and last of all his inward hind leg, which is
one of the Leaders upon the inside and is pressed, makes the fourth time, so
that the just Action and time of a gallop is, one, two, three, four, and a Leap
forwards, now this description of a Gallop is most true, both as to the Motion
and posture of a horses Legs, it is true that in a soft and slow Gallop it is
hard to be perceived, but in Running where the Motion is more violent, it is so
percep^ table, that there you will see all his four feet in the Air at one
time, for when a horse runs, the motion he makes and the Action of his Legs
are all one with a Gallop, only a great dale swifter; So that Running may be
very properly called a swift Gallop, and galloping a slow Running, and this is
the Truth of the motion and Action of a Horses Legs in the Gallop. Se Plate
fourth, Fig: eight.

But I must now make you understand some other things which occur in a Gallop,
whereof many people talk, but none explain what they are; A Horse then in
Galloping upon a Circle may Gallop wrong two ways. First, if in going to the
Right hand he lead with his Left fore Leg, or that which is without the Turn,
even although the hind Foot of the same side follow it; That is the first way,
and when a Horse does it, he is said to Gallop false, because he should always
lead with his Fore Leg within the Turn. The second is, that although he lead
with his Fore Leg within the Turn, which is right, yet if his Hind Leg of the
same side do not follow it, but that his hind Leg of the opposite side, or
without the Turn follow it, which is the Action of the Trot; he will also
Gallop wrong, and when he Gallops after this fassion, which is his wrong hind
Leg following the fore Leg which led, then his Legs are said to be
disunited, therefore you must make a distinction between these two ways of
Galloping wrong, and remember that when a Horse Leads with his wrong Fore
Leg, or that which is without the Turn, he is alwise said to Gallop false, but
when he leads with the right fore Leg, or that within the Turn; and that the
hind Leg of the same side does not follow, but that of the oposite side or
without the Turn, which is the Action of the Trot, then his legs are said to
be only disunited, because for his Legs to be united in a Gallop, the hind
Leg of the same side in which his fore Leg led, should still follow; So that
when a Horses fore Legs in Galloping go wrong, he is said to Gallop false: But
when his hind Legs go wrong, and do not follow his fore as they should, then
he is said to be disunited, and this is the only distinction which Horsemen
make between these two ways of Galloping wrong.

Now the inconveniency which arises, from a Horses leading with his wrong fore
Leg upon a Circle, and his hind Leg of the opposite side following it, is
that it makes him to be upon the Action of the Trot, which is two Legs cross
in the Air at one time, and his other two Legs cross upon the Ground at the
same time, which in a Gallop is so disorderly an Action, and so contrary to the
true Motion of it, that if the Rider should but press him a little hard, he
would be in danger of falling, so contrary to Nature is this Action of a Trot
upon the swiftness of a Gallop; therefore for the security of the Rider, it
were far better that the Horse in Leading with his Fore Leg without the Turn,
made also his hind Leg upon the same side follow it, for then although he also
would Gallop false, yet he would not be upon the Action of the Trot, which is
Cross; and consequently not in such danger of falling, now the same thing is to
be understood to whatever hand he is going upon Circles, but Galloping straight
forewards, he can never Lead with the wrong fore Leg, if the hind Leg of the
same side immediately follow it, and therefore can never be said to Gallop
false, but if his hind Leg of the same side wherewith he led, does not
immediately follow his fore, when he is Galloping straight out, then his Legs
will be disunited, but it is impossible he can be false, for the Reason above
specified. I advise you to understand these two ways of Galloping false and
disunited, and to fix them well in your memory, for I assure you the knowing of
them is of great consequence in Mannaging of Horses.

Another way is this, that when a Horse is upon the Action of a Gallop, where
he should always keep two Legs of a side forewards; He changes sides every
time, fore leg and hind Leg of a side, which is two Legs of one side in the
Air, and two legs of the other upon the Ground, which is the Action of the
Amble upon the swiftness of a Gallop, and Differs so much from the Motion of
a true Gallop, that it makes the Horse ready to fall* Now these two, the
Action of a Trot upon the Gallop, which is when a Horse is Disunited, and the
Action of the Amble, which is two Legs of a side, and the sides changed each
time, is what some ignorant people call the wrong leg before, but I think I
have sufficiently made you understand how to distinguish them, and therefore
shall close this Chapter with another Observation which is this

As the Pas or Walk as I have made already appear, is the Foundation not only
of the Amble but also of the Trot; so is the Trot the Foundation of the Gallop,
and the Reason is this, the Trot being two Legs in the Air, and two upon the
Ground at the same time in form of a St. Andrews Cross, and the Gallop two
Legs before, or two behind in the Air at the same time; If you Trot your
Horse a little quick, and beyond the swiftness of a Trot, you force him (when
his fore leg wherewith he did not lead is in the Air) to set down so quickly
his hind Leg upon the opposite side, which is that side wherewith he did lead,
that it causes him lift at the very time the fore Leg of the sameside, so
that both his fore Legs are in the Air at one time, and the fore Leg which
was last a lifting exactly followed with the hind Leg of the same side, which
also is acompanied with the hind Leg of the oposite side, So that both his
fore Legs are raised and in the Air together, the Leg where with he led
being alwise most advanced, and both his hind Legs are also in the Air
together in the same very posture, but before either of the two come to the
ground, the other two are raised, and so he has all four in the Air at once,
which is the trueand exact Motion of a Gallop as I have already discrived,
being a leap forewards, and all four in the Air at the same time, and this
much of the Natural Paces.

CHAP. XXII. Of all the Artificial Motions which a Horse can make.
GEnerally speaking, CHAP: XXII.
there are only two Artificial Motions, Viz. Terra a Terra, and the high Airs,
each of which being but a Leap upwards, and all four in the Air before the
Horses fore parts fall to the Ground, are accounted but one Artificial Motion,
although the Horse carries his Legs differently in each of them, but if they
are considered in a more strict sense, then there will be found to be seven of
them; to wit, Terra a Terra, a Demi Air or Demi Volt, a Corvet, a Capriole, a
Croupade, a Balotade, and a Pace or step and a Leap, of all which in order. And

First, in Terra a Terra a Horse always Leads with his Legs within the Turn,
as in a Gallop, his two fore Legs in the Air, and as they are falling, his
two hind Legs sollow: So at that very instant of time all his four Legs are
in the Air at once, which makes it a Leap forewards, but in Terra a Terra his
Croup being in, and the Motion quick and pressed, makes that not only his hinder
Legs come always short of the Prints of his Fore, which they do not so much
in a Gallop, but also causes his Leap to be low, and near to the Ground, which
is the cause of his four Legs, marking but two times, one, two, or Pa, ta;
Whereas in the Gallop, his Legs mark four times, one, two, three, and four, as
I have already explained in discoursing of the Gallop, and this is all the
difference between a Gallop, which is the Foundation of Terra a Terra, and
Terra a Terra it self, for Terra a Terra is nothing else but a short and pressed,
or earnest Gallop with the Croup in, in which a Horses Legs do move more quick
then in an ordinary Gallop, which is the reason as I have already said, of his
Legs marking only but two times, as Pa, ta, and not four as in the Gallop, see
Plate fifth, fig: Second.

Secondly, the Air called a Demi Air or Demi Volt, is founded upon Terra a
Terrs for all the difference between it and Terra a Terra, is that the Demi
Volt is an Air, in which the Fore parts of the Horse are more raised then in
Terra a Terra, whereas in Terra a Terra they go more low and near to the
Ground, also the Motion of the Horses Legs is more quick and pressed in Terra a
Terra, then upon the Demi Airs or Demi Volts.

Thirdly, The Corvet is founded upon the Demy-Volt, for as in the Ayre-Demy
Volt, the fore parts of the Horse are more raised then in Terra a Terra, so in
Corvets the fore parts of the Horse are yet more railed, then in the
Demy-Volts, the Corvet being a kind of Leap, in which the Horse raises both
his fore legs at once equally advanced; That is, when he is going straight
forewards, and not in a Circle, and not the one before the other as in a
Gallop, Terra a Terra, or Demi Volts; and as his fore legs are a falling, he
immediately raises his hind legs as he did the fore, that is, equally advanced
and not the one before the other, so that all his four Legs are in the Air at
once, but as his Legs are set down he marketh two times with them, one with
his two fore legs which fall first, and one with his two hind legs which fall
last, and this is the true Motion of a Corvet, being as I said only a leap up,
and a little forwards each time he rises, see Plate fifth, fig: fifth.

Fourthly, The Capriole is founded upon the Corvet, and is a Leap in which the
Horse when at the full hight of his Leap, yerks or stricks out his hind legs
as near and even together, and as far out as ever he can streatch them, in
which Action, he makes a Noise or Claque with them, which the French call
Nouer L' esquillette, see Plate fifth, fig: seventh.

Fifthly, The Croupade is founded upon the Capriole, and is nothing else but a
Leap, in which the Horse pulls up his hind legs, as if he drew them up to his
Belly, which makes him Croup, and is that from whence the Leap has its Name,
see Plate fifth, fig: Eight.

Sixthly, The Balotade, is also founded upon the Capriole, and is nothing else
but a Leap, in which the Horse offers to strick out with his hind legs, but
does it not, making only an Offer as it were, and but showing the Shoes of his
hind feet, but does not strick; Now of these three Leaps, the Capriole is most
frequently made use of, and also most esteemd in the Academys of Riding, where
they have the best Leaping Horses, because it is the most Perfect Leap of all,
and requires also the greatest Vigor of any to be performed exactly, and in
Just time and Cadance.

Seventhly, A Pace or Step, and a Leap, is as it were three Airs, the Pace or
Step Terra a Terra, the raising a Corvet, and then the Leap which finisheth it;
Horses commonly take themselves to this Air of a Pace and a Leap, when they
have not a good Apuy, for the Pace puts them upon the Hand, and gives them
a Rise or Advantage to Leap, like to a Man who Runs before he Leaps, and
therefore it assisteth a Horse sometimes to Leap higher, then if he Leapt every
time: Now no Horse can be forced to go any of these Airs well, unless Nature
has disposed him for them, it is true by Art a Horse may be somewhat
constrained to them, but then they are never performed with that Life and
Vigor, as when Nature is only assisted by Art and not compelled, which she
should rarely be in any thing relating to the Manage, it being as I have
already shown you, a received Maxim amongst Horsemen, that Art is designed to
assist and perfect Nature, but not to Cross and Oppose her.

Thus I have shown you all the Natural and Artificial Motions which a Horse can
make, as also how they depend each upon other; But to fix it yet the better in
your Memory, I shall make a short Recapitulation, of what I have said of each
of them being the Foundation of the other, because it is of very great Use in
Horsemanship, and therefore you would remember that the Pas Or Walk, is the
Foundation of both the Amble and Trot, for if you would have your Horse Amble
from a Walk, you must stay him well upon the Hand, and press and work him
forwards with the Brant of your Legs, one after the other; But if you would
have him Trot from a Walk, then you must slack your Bridle hand, and press him
on with both your Brans at one and the same time, which will compel him
immediately to take the Trot, so you see that according as you either Stay your
Horse upon the hand, or give him Head, the Aids of your Brans being dewly
applied, the Walk is the Foundation of either Amble or Trot: again the Trot is
the Foundation of the Gallop, the Gallop the Foundation of Terra a Terra, Terra
a Terra the Foundation of the Demy-Ayre, or Demi Volt, the Demy-Volt, (or Terra
a Terra Releve, or fore parts of the Horse well raised, and which is all one
with the Demy-Volt,) is the Foundation of Corvets, Corvets are the Foundation
of all Leaps, as Caprioles, Crupades, Balotades, or whatever other kind they
can be of, so that I will make bold to say that no Man can succeed in dressing
a Horse, unless he make him go Gradually and in order, from the one of these to
the other, which is from Walk to Trot, from Trot to Gallop, from Gallop to
Terra a Terra, from Terra a Terra to Corvets, from Corvets to all kind of
Leaps, however all Horsemen are not of this Opinion, yet a little Practice will
in my Opinion convince any thinking Horseman, that this is the only true and
regular Method which I propose, any other way of proceedure being but confused,
and without any true Order or Method whatsoever, let this therefore suffice at
present, for a sufficient Description of all the Artificial Motions which a
Horse can make, the Natural Paces being already descrived in the preceding
Chapter.

CHAP. XXIII. The true Method of Suppling a Horses Shoulders, or working at
first either Colts, young Horses, or old ignorant Horses, upon Large Circles
D'une piste, or of one Tread.
HAving in the preceding Chapters shown you the true Seat upon Horseback,
CHAP. XXIII.
with all the Helps and Corrections of both Veice, Rod, Legs, and Spurrs, as
also all the Natural and Artificial Motions which a Horse can make, I think it
is now full time to teach you, how you are to work at first Colts or young
Horses, upon Large Circles of one Piste or Tread, but before I begin, I will
first show you how to order and fix your Cavezon.

Take therefore one of the Reins of your Cavezon, (which is also to have a
Headstal and Chaulband,) and which must be of a good length and having a Ring
at one end of it, thorrow which put the other end of the Rein, drawing it still
thorrow the Ring until you form a noose or Loop, at that end of the Rein next
to the Ring, which Loop put over the Pommel of the Saddle, making the rest of
the Rein to come down between your Thigh and the fore bolder of the Saddle, and
then put the rest of the Rein through the Ring of the Cavezon upon that same
side, and bring the end of it back again toward you, either to hold in your
hand (which I would alwise advise you to do, so long as you are Suppling of a
Horses Shoulders.) or to fasten with a Buckle to the Pommel of the Saddle there
to remain fixed, so long as you intend to Ride him to that hand upon which the
Rein of the Cavezon is made fast, and when you have done with Riding him to
that hand, do the same with the Rein upon the other side, in every particular
as I have ordered you in this.

Your Cavezon being this ordered, and you upon Horseback, and the Reins of the
Briddle in your left hand, if you go to the Right, pull with your Right Hand
the inward Rein of the Cavezon low, and toward your Knee within the Volt or
Circle, helping him also with your Leg within the Turn, to bring in his
Outward Shoulder, which is Rein and Leg of a side, and this is to be done
first upon a Step, the Bridle hand some what low, and a little upon the inside
of the Horses Neck, but from time to time you must carry it upon the out side,
and then immediately bring it again to its place, which is a little upon the
inside, afterward again place it upon the outside as you shall find Occasion
for it, now this pulling of the inward Rein of the Cavezon, and helping also
with the inward leg or Spurr, gives a Horse a good Plye, and although the
Principal Aid of the Bridle should be always with the outward Rein, which is
to carry the Hand a little upon the inside of his Neck, yet the inward Rein is
also made use of, (which is to carry the Bridle hand upon the outside of his
Neck) to enlarge the Circle, and prevent a Horses Straitning or Closing it too
much: It also gives him an Apuy, by making him endure the Bitt, for this
makes it both work upon his Bars and place of the Curb.

If you continue a little upon a Step this Lesson, of Rein and Leg upon a
side, you will find your Horse grow easy upon it, which will prepare him for a
good Trot and to Gollop large upon Circles of one Piste, his Croup always out,
which will supple his Shoulders extremely, especially that without the Turn, so
that it may pass for the best of all Lessons, the Suppling of the Shoulders and
Body of a Horse being the Source and Foundation of a good Manage, and that
which all good Horsemen should at first chiefly aim at.

However, the working thus with Rein and Leg of a side the Horses Croup out,
does at first put a Horse very much upon his Shoulders, and makes him also
press a little too hard upon the Bitt, but in five or six days riding he will
be no more upon his Shoulders, but upon the contrary, he will begin to plye his
Haunches, and endure to be keept upon them, if you support him a little with
the Bridle, and stay him upon the hand now and then, and immediately slack it
again, I tell you this but only by the bye, because the chief design of this
Lesson is, for Suppling the Shoulders of a Horse, and not to put him upon his
Haunches.

You must also know that in performing this Lesson, if you do not bring in the
Horses Outward Shoulder with it, you do nothing, and therefore to bring it in,
you must cause the Inward Shoulder to come back within the Turn, as it were
toward you, that so it may be pressed and carry the whole weight of the fore
parts of the Horse, while at the same time the Outward Shoulder is at Liberty,
that it may Supple, so that although you are no^ and then to carry your Bridle
hand without his Neek, yet you must immediately replace it again within, and
work with the Outward Rein of the Bridle that you may bring in his Outward
Shoulder, for if a Horses Shoulders be not made extraordinary easy and supple,
it will not only be a means to cause him resist and defend himself against you,
but it will also make him incapable to perform any thing in the Manage as he
ought, many of the Disorders which are seen in Mannages, proceeding from the
Horses not being sufficiently Suppled in the Shoulders, and there is nothing in
the World which does more Supple them, then this Lesson with the Cavezon Rein
and Leg of a side, nor which does fix and place their Heads better.

Now if you perform this Lesson exactly, the Horses bind legs will make two
Circles considerably lager than those made by his Fore, and although his Croup
be very much out, and that he inclines and leans so very much upon his
Inside, as may make you apprehensive that he will fall, yet it is so much the
better, and he goes also so much the more secure, therefore give him no other
Lesson but this upon the Trot and Gallop, either in large or narrow Circles,
until his Shoulders be extremely well Suppled, and that you find him Gallop
light, for it is not enough that a Horse be made Supple, he must also be made
easy and light, which can be done by no other Method but this, which is the
very Basis and Foundation of the Manage; However, do not at first begin to
Gallop him until you find him so Light and Ready, that he offer to take the
Gallop of his own accord when he is Troting after this Fashion, that is Cavezon
Rein and Leg of a side, or his Head in and Croup out, and using this Method
you will first Supple him upon a Walk or Step, next upon a Trot, and then upon
a Gallop, which was what you intended: See Plate Fourth, Fig. sixth, but in
that Figure the Cavezons inward Rein is pulled high and eross the horses neck
as it were, and not low toward the knee, and therefore is more proper for a
short Trot then suppling of the shoulders, although it be very good for both.
Now what I have said of Going to the Right Hand, may be easily applied to the
Going upon the Left, the difference being only this, that you must hold your
Bridle with your Right Hand, and pull the Cavezons Inward Rein with the Left.

CHAP. XXIV. How to Stop a Horse, and make him Go back.
AS for Stoping, I would have you in the beginning to practice it but seldom,
CHAP. XXIV.
and very Gently, and when you do it, Stop him rather by degrees, and with two
or three Falcades or times, then all at once and upon a sudden, for this
weakens the Reins and Back of a young Horse very much, who has not been
accustomed to it; Therefore when you intend to make a Stop, put your Body and
Shoulders a little back to make the Horse Ply his Haunches, and gripping your
Thghs a little hard to advertise him, pull the inward Rein of the Cavezon, and
make him in this posture to Form pretty firm Stops, at the same time helping
him with your outward Leg, but you must never attempt such Stops until your
Horse begin to be light, and easy upon his Trot, and when you find that he
begins to Supple and Gallop light, his Head in and Croup out, then accustom
him to frequent stoping; to per^om which exactly, you must pull hard as I said
the inward Rein of the Cavezon, and make your outward Leg by approaching it
near his side, bring in your Horses outward bind Leg, otherwise he cannot
Stop upon his Haunebes, because his outward Haunch would be without the Volt,
also you would take care not to make him advance or rise before, when you are
first teaching him to Stop, for this has spoiled many a Horse, making them at
the least pull you give them to rise so high before, that they are in danger of
Renversing, or coming over upon their Rider, therefore never teach your Horse
to advance or raise before, after you Stop him, until he obey your hand and
beel pretty well, and be also well settled upon the hand; in short the raising
of a Horse before or upon Pesates, should be one of the last things a Man
should teach his Horse, unless he intend to spoil him, this much of Stoping.
See Plate Fourth, Fig. seventh.

Now when you would have your Horse go back, if it beupon a straight line, then
leaning back a little with your Body, and slacking your Thighs, pull equally
both the Reins of the Cavezon one being in each hand, very strongly, to see if
you can force him back but one single step or two at first, for if you can
bring him to perform that, he will in a short time do more, but if he
altogether oppose you by fixing his fore Legs upon the Ground, and remaining
immovable as a Rock, then pull hard the Reins of the Cavezon, one after the
other, as if you were sawing of wood, and this perhaps will make him yield to
you; But if notwithstanding of this he still resist you, then it is a sign his
Shoulders are not as yet Supple enough for it, therefore continue to supple
them yet better, and then he will certainly comply with you.

This you are to do when you intend to make your Horse go back in a straight
line, which is the most useful, but if you are to make him go back upon a Round
or Circle, then make use of the inward Rein of the Cavezon and outward Leg,
just as you was ordered to do upon a stop, and after this fassion make him go
back in a Round, which will help also extremely to put him upon his Haunches,
and although I advise you to make but gentle Stops at the beginning, as also to
have him answer the Hand and Heels, and pretty well settled upon the hand,
before you offer to raise him before; Yet I do not say this of going back,
because the sooner you accustom your Horse to go back, the sooner he will be
put on his Haunches, and made a Ready Horse, however see you supple him well in
the Shoulders before you attempt to force him to go too much back, because if
you find him altogether refuse you, then you may assure your self the fault
lies in his Shoulders not being sufficiently Suppled, therefore first ply them
and make them easy, and then you will find your Horse with ease and pleasure
comply with you, the which that he may the better do; I advise you to a
frequent practice of this following Lesson.

Another excellent Lesson for suppling a Horses shoulders, and to make him
attentive to the will of the Rider, is this, Trot him, and without stoping him
upon his Trot, make him go Gently from it to a short and slow Gallop, and from
the Gallop to his Trot again, and though he go still upon the same hand, yet
change him from Trot to Gallop, and from Gallop to Trot, until you think it
sufficient, and then make him stop either upon his Trot or Gallop as you shall
think fit, this is a most excellent Lesson not only to supple his shoulders,
but to make him attend and obey the will of his Rider: For having no continued
Rule to fix his mind on, and to make him go by Rote either in Trotting or
Galloping, he must absolutely obey both the hand and the heels, for not knowing
when or where he will be stopped, will make him still to be expecting it, and
always attentive to the Motions of the hand and heels of the Rider, so that he
will be always ready to answer them, and therefore there can hardly be a
better Lesson for suppling a Horses shoulders, and preventing his going by Rote
then this, for all our design in Horsemanship, is to make a Horse answer and
obey the hand and heels, and this Lesson brings a Horse a great length in
both, therefore I advise you to esteem it. See plate 4. Fig. 8.

If your Horse Retain his force or Mettle, then Gallop him fast and quick,
afterward softly, and then fast again as need requires, and this softly and
quick, and quick and softle upon his Gallop (not knowing when he must do
either) will be a great means to make him obey both his Riders hand and beels,
which is the Quintessence of the Manage.

But after you have Suppled your Horses Shoulders sufficiently, and that you
find him hard on the Hand by not being upon his Haunches, then Trot him upon
large Circles of one Piste or Tread, and Stop him often with pretty hard Stops,
helping him always with your outward Leg to bring in his outward Haunch, and
your Shoulders and Body a little back, and stop him thus when he least thinks
of it; But if he incline to Stop of himself, then Press him forewards without
Stoping of him, and then upon a sudden Stop him again when he is not expecting
it: Repeat this Lesson often, both upon the Trot and Gallop, and you will in a
short time find him very much upon the Haunches, for this is an excellent
Lesson both to settle him on the Hand, and to put him upon his Haunches; But
after you have gained this point, you must then not practice this Lesson so
frequently as before, because it Pinches a Horse very much on the back, as also
makes him afraid to go frankly forewards, which maybe a means not only to
cause him Rest, but also to produce other inconveniences; Therefore your
Judgment must work according as you find occasion, and as I have already told
you you must accustom him, first to Stop upon a Walk and Trot, before you
adventure to stop him upon a Gallop, otherwise you will put your Horse in a
fair way of not only Pinching his Reins, and straining his back Sinews, but of
utterly disgusting the Manage.

Now all these Lessons are only to supple a Horses shoulders, therefore see
that you make use of no other Lessons but these, until you find your Horse
extremely supple and light, and also firm on the hand, for they are excellent
to settle a Horse upon the hand, to supple his shoulders, and make him look
into the Turn, to Trot and Gallop right (as he should) both Legs, head, Neck,
Body and all, besides, they prevent a Horses being Entier, called by the
Italians the Credenza, which is an Aversion that Horses have to Turn, and is
certainly one of the worst and most dangerous Vices which a Horse can have,
especially upon any kind of service; use therefore always these Lessons upon
both narrow and large Cireles, until you find your Horse extremely supple in
his shoulders, that being the first and principal thing a Man should aim at in
dressing of Horses, for they as well as Men do nothing but by custom and
habit, and the Help of good and Methodical Lessons often Repeated, which fixes
it in their memories: give then these good Lessons, and Repeat them often to
you Horse, and you will find by them benefit and contentment; And remember I
tell you, that in making use of them, you work more upon his Judgment, then
upon the labor you give his Body, for I assure you a Horse has imagination,
Memory, and Judgment, let the Philosophers and Learned say what they please.

I must likewayes tell you, that to unite a Horses strength and Mettle, to
assure and settle his head and Haunehes, and to make him light on the hand, and
just and firm in all sorts of Mannages, depends absolutely upon the
Perfection of the stop, but first he must be Leosened and well suppled upon the
step and Trot, therefore never Gallop your Horse until you find him so Light
upon his Trot, that he offers to Gallop of himself, for the exercise of the
Trot is the first and most necessary foundation to make him Light, and the
Ground of every Lesson which can make a Horse Adroit, and Obedient in any kind
of Manage. Again the property of the Gallop is to give him a good Apuy, and to
settle his head, also if he have too much fire, a short or slow Gallop will
appaise him, and give him patience, or if he Play too much upon the Back
beneath a Man, it will take it off, but all this must be performed upon large
Circles, of at least twentyfour or Thirty foot Diamiter, and so it will calm
his Spirits, make him well winded, and take away his too violent apprehensions,
also divert him from evil designs, or Jadish tricks, from Restiness, or having
a Double Heart, for it will Supple his shoulders, and make him attentive to the
Hand and Heels of his Rider; and consequently, prevent and remedy all the
abovementioned Vices.

So here is the end of the Lessons for working and Suppling a Horses Shoulders,
the which if you can make him perfom exactly, I assure you the better half of
the work is done, for dressing and making him a perfect Horse; the next Lessons
I shall give you are the other half, and easiest of the two, which is to make
your Horse sensible and obedient to your Heels; and therefore I shall begin
with one which will work both his shoulders and Croup at one and the same time.

CHAP. XXV. How to make a Horse Sensible and Obedient to the Heels, or to
answer exactly the Spurrs.
HAving in the two preceding Chapters shown you, CHAP: XXV.
how to work and supple a Horses Shoulders, with the Cavezon Rein in your hand,
and not tied to the Pommel of the Saddle, which is the better half of your
work, I will now teach the other half, which is to make him obey your Heels,
and to work both Shoulders and Croup together, the Cavezons inward Rein being
still kept in your hand, and not tied to the Pommel.

To work therefore a Horses Croup and Shoulders together, you must make use of
the inward Rein of the Cavezon, and outward Leg; pull then the inward Rein of
the Cavezon with your hand, to bring in his outward Shoulder and press him upon
the inside of the Turn, that his Legs without the Turn may be free, and at
Liberty to lap over his inward Legs, which is called by Horsemen, Passager or
Chevaler, the Croup in; Now although in this Passaging the Horses Legs be upon
the Action of the Trot, yet it is less violent then a Trot, and more then a
Walk, so consequently one of the best Lessons can be for making a horse
attentive and obedient to the Heels of his Rider, and as it were to keep him
equally balanced between the two Spurrs, that so he may answer either the one
or the other, as Occasion shall offer.

The first Lesson therefore that you shall give him upon this Action, must be
with his head to a Wall or Palisade, pulling the inward Rein of the Cavezon, to
whatever hand you are going hard to you, and helping at the same time with your
outward Leg, to make the Horse go sidewayes, and with the half of his
Shoulders always before his Croup, which will make him narrow and pressed
behind and so upon his Haunches, because he is upon the Action of a Trot; if he
do not obey your Heel give him the Spurr gently upon that side, and continue
this Lesson until you find him obedient to your heels, now when a horse is thus
Passaging his Legs within the Turn are pressed, and these without are at
Liberty, otherwise they could not at every other time, with ease lap or cross
over these within, you may also with the same helps give your horse this Lesson
in the Open fields, where you have neither Wall, Palisade, nor any thing else
to confine him. See Plate fourth figure ninth.

If your horse will not answer your Heel by putting in his Croup, but throws
it always out, and upon your Spurr, then his head being to the Wall, pull the
outward Rein of the Cavezon from the Turn, helping him also with your outward
Leg, and spurr him also if there be need for it; Now this will infallibly
force in his Croup, but then he will go false, because the outward Kein of the
Cavezon being pulled, will cause him look from the Turn, and so his Croup will
go before his Shoulders, then which nothing can be more false, but that which
is Pleasent to the Taste, is often times had for the S^^mack; And a Man cannot
rectify many things at once, therefore after you have wrought him thus salsly
to cure his Vice, fall to the True way of Riding again.

When your horse obeys perfectly your Heel, upon the Passage along a Wall, then
work him with the same Lesson upon Large Circles, pulling as I said the
Cavezons inward Rein hard to you, to bring in his outward Shoulder, bending his
Neek extremely and helping with your outward Leg, which is Leg and Rein of
contrary sides, taking always care that the half of his Shoulders go before
his Croup, and if he do not answer your Heel then give him the Spurr with your
Outward leg, also whatever hand you teach him to Passage upon first, make him
do as much to the other, which is but changing Bridle hand, Cavezon Rein, and
Leg, and when you find him obedient in passaging upon Large Circles his Croup
in, which will put him upon his Haunches, then make him go the passage in
little Circles, whose Diamiter is little longer then his own length, See Plate
fifth, figure first. And if he be obedient, and answer your Hand and Heel there
upon both hands, I assure you he is advanced very far toward a Ready Horse,
for if a Horse obey your Hand and Heel upon this passaging, which is a Gentle
Motion, and therefore very proper to teach a Horse, be cause it will make him
patient, and so fortify his Memory the better, I say if he be obedient to you
upon this Action, which is the Quintescenee of dressing Horses, then you may
make him do any thing that his Force and Strength will permit him.

Your Horse being perfect in the aforesaid Lessons, of Passaging along a Wall
and in Cireles upon a Trot, to either hand his Group in, then put him to a
short or slow Gallop upon large Circles his Croup in, after this manner, pull
the Cavezons inward Rein hare to you on the inside of his Neck, and help him
with your Outward Leg, poising or resting a little more upon your Outward
Stirrup then upon the Inward, and taking also care to adva^^ your Outward
Shoulder, to what ever hand you are going, and thus bend his Neek extremely,
that he may be pressed upon the outside of the Turn, and his Legs at (...)
within the Turn, which is most proper for the short Gallop his Croup in, or
Terra a Terra, there being here almost no difference between them but only in
their name; help him also now and then with your Tongue, and make him form good
Stops, and you will find him go in a short time pretty perfectly, which will be
a certain sign of his being advanced very far toward a Ready Horse. See Plate
fourth, figure eight.

When your Horse obeys you in all these Lessons perfectly, which is to answer
your Hand and Heels, stop short, and go easily back, for Going Back, is I
assure you an Excellent Lesson to put him upon the Haunches, to Accommodate and
Adjust his hind feet, and make him light before, that so he may stop easily,
and in just proportion: I say when he can perform all these Lessons perfectly,
then teach him to advance upon a Pesate, which is to rise before, see Chapter
29, without which no Horse can be accounted a Ready Horse; You may do it after
you stop him, because a True and Exact Stop should be always finished with a
rising before or pesate, I mean when a Horse is pretty far advanced in the
Manage but not before, because as I have told you else where, the raising him
before too soon, might prove a Means to make him rest or renverse, and so spoil
him, but being come so great a length as I am discoursing of, he can receive no
prejudice by it, therefore you may either make him rise after his stop, or you
may stay him well upon the Hand now and then, when you are working him upon
large circles, helping him with your Tongue, Legs, and Rod if there be need
for it, and put him forewards still after it, and then within a little stay him
again, and then raise him, but if he rise of himself, then press him forewards,
and never suffer him to rise but when you would have him, and using him thus,
in a short time he will come to obey you.

Now when he rises perfectly as you would have him upon Large Circles, his
Croup being at a little liberty, then put his Croup in, and so raise him,
feeling him upon your Hand, and staying and supporting him a little in the Air,
and this will both put him upon the hand, and upon his Haunches, but as I said,
I would not have you adventure to Rise him, until he be advanced to such a
length in his Manage as I have told you; because it would disorder his mouth,
put him off the Hand, and make him Resty, for many Horses rise Restly, because
they have no great mind either to go forewards or turn, and therefore until
they obey the hand, fly the heel, and stop pretty short, there is no Rising of
them, however in teaching him to Rise I would always have you begin upon larg
Circles, his Croup a little out, and afterward put in his Croup, and so make
him Rise, and then end your Repise.

When your Horse is perfect in all these former Lessons by the help of the
Cavezons inward Rein (...) your hand, I would advise you then to work a little
more with the Bridle, that so he may come to understand its opperation upon his
Bars, and the place of the Curb a little better then he has done hitherto,
and for that effect I desire, that as before you held the inward Rein of the
Cavezon in your hand, you would now fix it with a Buckle to the Pommel of the
Saddle, and so work him upon all the former Lessons, but now more upon a Square
then upon Circles, and see that you make him round the Angles well: For it is
found by Horsemen that the exact way to perfect a Horse, and make him go
perfectly, is upon a Square and not upon a Circle, because a Circle subjects
his Croup too much, therefore when you come to work him with the inward Rein
tied to the Pommel, forbear the Circle, and take your self to the Square,
making use of either Cavezon Rein and Leg of a side, and helping for the most
part with the outward Rein of the Bridle to supple his shoulders, or Rein and
Leg contrary to put him upon his Haunches, and press him upon the outside of
the Turn, and give his Legs liberty within, helping him for the most part with
the inward Rein of the Bridle, and outward Leg, (which is admirable for Terra
a Terra, or the short Gallop his Croup in) and sometimes also with the outward
Rein of the Bridle, when his shoulders go too far out, and his Croup too much
in; for remember this as an infallible Maxim, that when ever a Horse is to
Ride with his Croup in, the half of his shoulders or one shoulder, should
always go before his Haunches, otherwise he will go false, which is with his
Croup foremost, which no Horse should do, it being a Horses fore parts and not
his hind, which should always lead the way, whither it be upon a square or
Circle that you are working, but if it be upon a square, you would take special
care to make him round the Angles or Corners exactly, and then fall into the
next side of the square, and so continue from side to Angle, and from Angle to
side, so long as you continue your Reprise.

Another excellent Lesson, the Cavezons inward Rein being tied to the Pommel is
this, make your Horse first Gallop a narrow Circle of one Piste, and when he
has finished that, put him forwards upon a large round or square, and make
another of the same bigness, and so on until he make fou^ little ones, which
should be all contained in one large Circle or square, and after you have made
him go over all the four Circles, his Croup a little out, then make him go over
them all again his Croup in, and upon a short Gallop, and still as he finisheth
one small Circle, put him forewards upon the large Circle or square, to begin
another upon the Angle or corner of it, and thus repeat all four so long as you
think fit, which will make him attend the hand and heel, and become most
obedient to both; Here is also another very good Lesson, make your Horse go
sidewayes, or Passager upon one hand, then put him forewards twice or thrice
his own length; afterward make him go sidewayes upon the other hand, and then
put him forewards again, and so sidewayes and forewards from hand to hand,
which will make him very attentive to the Motion of your Bridle hand and heels,
but to perform this Lesson exactly, there is required a good deal of bounds,
and therefore the open fields are a great deal more proper for it then a close
or covered Manage, these being all most excellent Lessons, I therefore with
the more earnestness recommend them to your practice.

Now because it is very matterial for the dressing of Horses, that a Horseman
know the several and different opperations of the Cavezons inward Rein, tied to
the Girths or Pommel, I shall not withstanding of what I have already said of
them in discoursing of the effects of the Cavezon, give you in this place a
further discovery of their different uses and operations; And first therefore
of the Cavezons inward Rein tied to the Girths, or even held in ones hand, and
pulled low within the Turn toward the Riders Knee, the inward Rein of the
Cavezon then being pulled thus low, or tied to the Girths, works a Horses
outward shoulder, presses his Legs within the Turn, and leaves his Legs at
liberty without the Turn, is excellent in Troting or Galloping him upon large
or narrow Circles of one Piste, for this supples his shoulders his Croup being
a little out, which brings in his outward shoulder more, it is also excellent
in Passaging his Croup a little in, to make him with the more ease lap one leg
over another, because by the help of it his outward shoulders is brought in,
but if you should press his Croup to much in, it would be imposible for him to
go, because the Rein being tied to the Girths, or pulled low, works and
brings in his outward shoulder, and by putting his Buttoek to much in, you
put back his outward shoulder, which is a quite contrary Action, and cannot be
done at the same time, therefore as I said let the half of your Horses
shoulders, or one shoulder, always go before his Haunches, this inward Rine is
also most proper for the short Gallop, his Croup a little in, because although
^his Croup be in, yet it works his shoulders at the same time, it is also
excellent for Cervets upon Circles, because it brings in the Horses outward
shoulder, and so consequently gives liberty to the Croup. Now in all these
Lessons, if his outward shoulder come not in enough, you must then turn your
Bridte hand a little within his Neck, which will work the outward Rein; And
consequently, help to bring in the outward shoulder, which will make your Horse
supple and easy to Turn, and so he shall never be Entire, which is to refuse
to Turn when you would have him.

But as this tying of the Cavezons inward Rein to the Girths, or pulling it
low, makes an oblique Line within the Turn, and therefore works the Horses
outward shoulder, So secondly the same Rein tied fast to the Pommel of the
Sadle, makes an oblique Line cross the Horses neck, which line with the help
of the Riders outward Leg, puteth back the Horses outward shoulder, and
foreward his inward shoulder, and so presses him upon the outside of the Turn,
and gives his Legs liberty within the Turn, which is most proper for Terra a
Terra, or the short Gallop his Croup in, but it is naught for Corvets, because
it subjects his Croup too much, yet it works his Croup mightily, either Leg
and Rein contrary his Croup out, or in passaging his Croup in upon narrow
Circles of his own length or a little larger, and if you thus raise him upon
Pesats, it subjects him extremely to the Heel; But this oblique Line cross his
Neck and fastened to the Pommel, is not so powerful as when it is in your Hand,
and you pull it toward your Outward Shoulder, although your hand has not that
strength to hold it so steady, as when it is fastened to the Pommel, now I say
notwithstanding of this weakness of your hand, the oblique line of the Cavezon
Rein which is held in it, is of more Force and Efficacy then when it is tied to
the Pommel, because the line is longer when it is in your hand, and pulled
cross the Horses Neck toward your Outward shoulder, then when it is tied to
the Pommel, and it is the length of this oblique Line, and not the Stayedness
or Fixedness of it, which gives it the Power and Force to press a Horse so
much upon the out side of the Turn, and give him so much Liberty within, and
consequently to work his Croup; therefore when you have his Head to the Wall,
if you would work his Shoulders pull the Cavezons inward Rein low and toward
your Knee, but if you would work his Croup, then pull it cross his Neck, with
your Nails up and toward your Outward Shoulder.

Yet there is no doubt, but that though the Inward Rein be tied to the Pommel,
or pulled cross the Horses Neck, and be wrought upon the Trot and Gallop in
large circles, his Croup out, As in Plate fourth figure sixth but that it
Suppleth his Shoulders, although not so powerfully as when it is tied to the
Girths, or pulled low, and the Reason is because his Croup is out, and it is
certain that when a Horse is wrought with his Croup out, what ever way the
Inward Rein be pulled high or low, his shoulders are always suppled, because
when his Croup is put out, of necessity his outward shoulder must come in, and
so be suppled.

Having now shown you the different Operations of the Cavezons inward Rein,
when tied to the Girths or pulled low, and tied to the Pommel or pulled high,
and cross the Horses Neck, which is of great consequence to be exactly
understood, by any person who designs to be a Complete Horseman, I shall now
show you to what degree of straitness that same inward Rein should be drawn,
when first to be made fast to either Pommel or Girths, you must then at first
fastening, draw the Rein no straiter, then to make your Horse look with one eye
into the Turn, that is just only so strait, as that he may not look out of the
Turn, because if you should draw it straiter, he not being as yet accustomed to
it, it would make him still to turn round, almost in one place, in stead of
going foreward, which would make but a pitiful kind of Manage, and be a ready
Means also to make him become Rosty, therefore to prevent that inconveniency,
shorten only the Rein of the Cavezon proportionably, as you shall find your
Horse well accustomed to Ride with his Neck thus plied and bent, so that at
length you will come to make him look with almost both his Eyes into the Volt
or Turn, which will perfect him mightily in his Terra a Terra, and make his
Body ply and form a part of the Circle wherein he is Riding, which is the true
and exact posture of body, which a Ready Horse should always frame, in going
his Manage upon a Volt or Circle his Croup in.

Now after your Horse can perform all his Lessons dexterously, the Cavezons
inward Rein being thus tied short to the Pommel of the Saddle, and you helping
him still with your Bridle hand as he shall require it; There is no doubt, but
by this time he will be brought a great length, in knowing and understanding
the different Operations of the Bitt, both upon his Bars and place of the
Curb, and therefore after this time I would advise you to lay wholly aside your
Cavezon, except for once or twice a Week, that you should alwise give him his
Lessons with it, and make only use of your Bridle Reins, either both in one
hand, or otherwise sometimes separate one in each hand, but I am rather for
having always both in the Left hand, for then the Right is still free to make
use of the Rod, or Sword if you shall have Occasion for it, having therefore
your Bridle in your Left hand, and your Rod in the Right, work him in all the
preceding Lessons until he be perfect in them, taking special care to work him
always more upon a Square then Circle, and having still recourse, when you
shall stand in need of them, to these Helps of the Bridle, Voice, Rod, Calves of
the Legs, and Spurrs, which I have most exactly explained to you already in
the 14. and 17 Chapters of this Treatise, and therefore shall not in this place
trouble you with a Repetition of them, seeing you may easily turn back to those
Chapters where they are discoursed of; But before I proceed to the more nice
part of the Art, which is to teach you how to make your Horse go the Terra a
Terra, Piroyte, Passades, Corvets, and all Leaps in perfection; I shall
conclude this Chapter with a few very useful Directions as follows,

First then, If your Horse press forewards too much, stay him well upon the
Hand, or pull him back, if he offer to go back, press him forewards, if he go
sidewayes against your will to the Right hand, put him sidewayes upon the Left,
and if he will go sidewayes upon the Left hand, force him to go sidewayes upon
the Right, if he put too much out his Croup, by throwing it upon your Outward
heel, then with your Outward spurr put it in, and if he put it in too much, by
throwing it upon your Inward heel, then with your Inward spurr force it out
again, if he go too much upon his shoulders, then stop him frequently, and make
him go back, and also stay him well upon the hand as you are Galloping him, but
if he go upon his Haunches, then continue him so; if he advance or rise before,
when you would not have him, then as he is a falling give him the Spurrs, and
keep him down, and do all this first upon a Walk, then a Trot, and last of all
upon a short Gallop, which will make him attend your hand and heel, and follow
your Will, and so of necessity he must ^bey you, because he is thus put from
his own will to yours, and so it cannot choose but make him a perfect Horse.

There is no Lesson comparable to Passaging the Croup in, to make a Horse obey
the hand and heel, and to raise him now and then upon Pessates, and then
passage him again, afterward raise him upon pessates, and passage him again,
but as I have already told you, your Horse must be well advanced, before you
adventure to make him rise before, otherwise you may come to spoil him, if you
find he is not well upon his Haunches, then Walk or Trot him upon large
Circles, or rather a Square, and stop him hard and raise him, now all these
Lessons must be done upon the Walk or Trot, and in passaging; Therefore you
see what a ^are thing VValking and passaging a Horse is, for to make and dress
him perfectly.

If your Horse do not incline to rise easily before upon pesates when you are
upon his Back; then put him between the pillars, as in Plate fifth figure
fourth, helping him with two Rods upon the outsides of his fore things, and in
a shourt time he will come to do it, now I do not think that the pillars serve
for any other use but this, neither would I ever advise you to make use of them
but in this Case, and so soon as ever you find your Horse to rise easily, then
take him quite from them, with a resolution never to put him betwixt them
again, for I assure you they constrain and subject a Horses Croup too much, and
also make him to go by Rote, which is what a Man should shun, as much as any
one thing in the mannaging of a Horse, but the Use of the Cavezon does
absolutely help this, for with it he cannot go by Rote, because with it,
neither the Eyes nor Ears do any thing, but the Horse merely obeys the Hand and
Heels of his Rider, which makes all Horses go perfectly, of what Nature or
Condition soever they be, and very rarely fails.

Lastly, Never force or press your Horse too much to any thing, as Going back,
Stoping, or Rising before, until you find him very supple in the Shoulders, and
pretty sensible and obedient both to your Hand and Heel, because young Horses
must never be much pressed, nor stopped too hard or short at first, for if you did,
it would give them such a Crick or Taint in their Back, as they would scarcely
ever recover it, now if you can work according to these Precepts, and apply all
these Excellent Lessons to your Horse seasonably and in time, and that you know
where his fault lies, whither in his Shoulders or Croup, you will I dare
answer for it, infallibly make and dress all Horses that shall ever come into
your hands, which I wish you may do, that so out of a mistake you may not blame
the Lessons I have given you, (because of your not being capable to put them
exactly in Practice,) as the Cause and Reason of your bad Success.

CHAP. XXVI. The true and exact Method, to make a Horse go Terra a Terra
justly, and in Perfection.
THE Square for Terra a Terra, CHAP: XXVI.
as well as for any other Manage that is not performed in a direct line
forewards, is without all debate preferable to the Circle, therefore when you
intend to make your Horse go Terra a Terra perfectly well, work him always
upon a pretty large Square, of at least twenty four, or thirty foot Diamiter,
and do you sit your self straight in the Saddle, poising a little more upon
your Outward Stirrup then upon the inward, but do not lean too much upon it,
only the Outward Leg to be a little longer than the Inward, and the Inward
Leg to be a little before it, and but a very little neither, now as I said you
must rest all upon the Twist and Stirrups, and sit as near to the Pommel of the
Saddle as you can, your Outward Leg closs to the Horse with the Knee of it
turned inwards, and stiff in the Ham, to bring the Calfe of your Leg the
nearer to the Horses side; then for the Bridle hand, if you are going to the
Right Hand, put your Hand upon the outside of his Neck, turning up your little
finger to make it respect your Left Shoulder, which will pull the Inward Rein
that lies above your little finger, your Arm being a little from your Body
Oblique, and your Left Shoulder turned a little in, which will make your Body
respect a little the Right Side, and this posture will of necessity make the
Horse go a little couched upon his outside; But now I must tell you where you
must look, or turn your Head, which must be upon the inside of the Turn, to the
inside of the Horses Head, which will be a means to keep your hand steady, for
did you look to your inward shoulder, it would remove your Bridle hand too much
within the turn, and did you look just between the horses ears, your outward
shoulder would not come in enough, so that neither it, nor you, nor the horse,
would be oblique as you should, and your Bridle hand in rounding the corners or
angles of the Square, must be carried circularly with the horse and steddely,
but yet only so as to feel him.

Now the horse being thus couched upon his out side by the posture of your
Body, the pulling of the Inward Rein of the Bridle enlarges him before, by
pulling as it were his inward fore Leg, from the outward fore leg; Which
puts his inward hinder leg, near to his outward hinder leg, which narrows
him bebind, makes him bow in the Gambrells, especially in his outward hinder
leg whereon he rests most, and thrusts his inward hinder leg under his
belly, which with all the Helps above mentioned, makes him go very much upon
his Haunches, for thus the Horse is pressed upon the Outside, and therefore must
of necessity look within the Square or Turn, and his fore parts being enlarged,
will make him embrace the Corners of the Square the better when he is to round
them, also his hind legs being within the Lines of his fore legs, he must
needs be upon the Haunches, and his inward fore leg being in a manner pulled
from his outward fore leg, his inward fore leg with which he leads, will
appear to be longer then his outward fore leg, and make the first and largest
circle or Square, which is right, and so his outward fore leg will make the
second, and his inward hind leg the third, because it is thrust so much before
his Outward hind leg, and under his Belly, and then his Outward hind leg will
make the fourth and least square or Circle, because it is so much plied in the
Gambrel by resting upon it; And thus a Horse will make four perfect Squares or
Circles, according as he is wrought upon either of them about a Pillar, or
imaginary center as I have told you, and given the reasons for it; For you see
a Horses fore parts go always before his hind parts, at least they should do
so, that is half his Shoulders, or one shoulder within the Turn or Square,
before his Croup or inward haunch, which is his fore leg within the Turn,
before his hind leg within the Turn, and thus a Horse can never go false, but
most exactly true, with Head, Neck, Body, Legs, and all.

Besides, going after this manner he is within your hand and heel, and so you
drive him and make him go as you list, slower or faster, higher or lower, but
remember that you keep not your hand too high, but low, that so your Horse may
go low and pressed, because if you keep your hand low, the Horse will go low, and
if you keep your hand high, the Horse will go high, for he will certainly
always go according to the hight of your hand; now Terra a Terra should
always be Low and Pressed, and therefore a low Bridle hand is most Plate 5,
Chap: XXVI of Sup:
Fig: 1.
A true and perfect Passage upon narrow Circles to the Left Hand.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 2.
A true and perfect Terra a Terra upon large Circles or a Square to the left
Hand.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 3.
A true and perfect ^ir^^^^ to the right Hand.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 4.
The true and exact way of raising A Horse before upon P^sates or Corvets,
between the Pillars.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 5.
The true and exact way of raising a Horse before upon P^sates or Corvets,
without the Help of the Pillars.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 6.
The true and exact way of teaching A Horse all kind of high Airs, by the help
of one Single pillar only.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 7.
The true and exact way of teaching a Horse to go in Capriols.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 8.
The true and exact way of teaching A Horse to go in Croupads.

depiction of horse and rider

Fig: 9.
A Back-band.

depiction of back band

A Hose.

depiction of hose

A Side Rope.

depiction of side rope

The true and exact way of teaching A Horse to Amble.

depiction of horse and rider

proper for it: But I must also tell you that the pulling of the inward Rein of
the Bridle, presses the Horse upon the out side, weighs him up, and puts him
upon the Haunches, especially upon his outward hind leg, so that all his body
leans upon the outside, and he cannot bring in his outward shoulder, for it
is bound up as it were, to give his fore leg within the Turn liberty to lead,
now you may know by his Neck whither he is couched or leans upon his outside or
not, for if he do, his Neck will lean all on the outside, and your body if you
follow the Motion of the Horse will incline to be concave upon the outside, and
Unequal within, which would be very unbecoming, and therefore you must as much
as possible prevent it, so that the Horse being thus pressed and couched upon the
outside, brings in his Haunch as he should do, and has three legs in the
Air at once; to wit, his two fore Legs and his inward hinder Leg, with a
leap forewards, low and pressed.

As for the Left hand, the very same directions must be observed as for the
Right, only altering the Bridle hand, Body, and Legs, and for the Bridle hand
it is necessary, that when you go on the left hand, you should put your Body,
and Knuckles of your Bridle hand turned toward his neck, which will pull the
inward Rein of the Bridle for the Left hand, because it lies under your little
finger, and this will make both your Body and the Horses Oblique, and make also
every thing else answer as well in going to the left hand, as it did in going
to the Right.

But if you intend to change hands upon Terra a Terra, then your Body being
still oblique with the Horses, and your Kauckles toward his neck, and upon the
outside of it, to which hand soever you are going let his shoulders first come
in a little before you change him, and then help him with that Leg, which was
the inward before you changed to whatever hand you are going, and then hold him
up with your Bridle hand upon the outside of his Neck, and put him forewards.
Now why his shoulders should come in a little before you change him; is to fix
his Croup that it may not go out: Remember also to be always stifl in the
Hams, and to keep your Heels down, that so you may bring the Calves of your
Legs to him, the same is to be observed in changing upon Demy-Volts, and this
is the most exact truth of Terra a Terra, with all the delicate and subtle
Helps that can be made use of for it, See Plate fifth figure second.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Piroyte.
THE Action of a Horses Legs in the Piroyte is very extraordinar, CHAP: XXVII.
for your hand being upon the outside of his Neck, to make him look into the
Turn before you begin the Piroyte, you must in an instant work violently with
the outward Rein of the Bridle, to straiten his fore parts, and give his hinder
parts more liberty, but you are to give him no help at all with any of your
Legs, and so the Action of the Horses Legs will be thus;

As he is going to the right hand, at the same time that he lifts his two
fore legs, he lifts his hind leg without the Turn, so that he has three
Legs up at a time, and all the weight of his Body at that time rests upon
his inward hind leg only, and when those three Legs that were up come to the
ground, his outward shoulder comes in so quickly, that it makes his inward
hind leg to move at the same time almost in one place, to supply the place of
a Center, that so he may make an exact Turn or Circle; I say that at the same
time, his three legs which were in the Air are set down, his inward bind leg
removes to accompany the Round or Circle but in a manner still in one place, so
that indeed the inward hind leg is the Center, upon which the Horse turns,
though at the same time it move round, and when the Horse is so Giddie that he
can go no longer for fear of falling, he then thrusts his inward hind leg
forewards beneath his Belly to stop himself.

These are exactly the Helps and motions of a Horses Legs in the Piroyte, else
he could not go so swiftly as he both ought, and as Horses always do when they
are performing that Action, and because the Horse is upon his shoulders, and
pressed upon the inside of the Turn, therefore is it that the only help is with
the outward Rein of the Bridle, to bring quickly in his outward shoulder, and
give his Croup a little liberty, and that without any assistance from the Legs
at all, but as the Horse is turning you must take care, to turn your body well
to the Turn, and also look upon the inside of his Neck, and thus let him turn,
once, twice, or thrice, as you shall think fit, See Plate fifth figure third.

Now when you intend to make a Horse go the Piroyte, you should Gallop him upon
a Square, and cause him Piroyte upon each corner of it, once or twice, and then
gain the next side of the square, and when you are at the other corner, Piroyte
him again, and do this upon every corner, so long as you continue your reprise,
you may also Piroyte him upon the end of Passads, which will make him very
ready and useful for a single Combat.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Passads.
FIrst walk your Horse straight forewards, CAP: XXVIII
either by a wall, or Palisade, and at the end stop and raise him two or three
pessates, and then turn him gently, helping with the outward Rein of the
Bridle, and outward leg, and see that he do not falsify his Demi Volt either
with his shoulders or haunches in Passaging, but that both be just after he
has turned.

Do as much upon the other hand, and then begin to Trot him upon the same
straight line, stoping, raising him before, and turning him as you did upon the
Walk, and when he is perfect upon the Trot, then put him to a short Gallop upon
the straight line, also stoping and advancing him as you did before; but now
let him perform his Demi Tour or Volt not by Passaging, but upon his Avre, and
when he is perfect in this, then let him make a passade upon a short Gallop,
without either stoping or raising before, but only turning when at the end of
the straight line, which he will do exactly in a very short time, but you must
remember in Galloping to keep his head always a little from the Wall, that his
Croup may come to it, and so keep the line that he falsify not his Demi Volt,
also before he turns it will not be a miss to cause him make two or three
Falcads or times, to firm his Haunches the better, and to make him also turn
with the better Grace.

If you intend to passade or run your Horse at his full Carrier, then keeping
his head a little also from the Wall, slack the Bridle hand a little, and when
at the end of the passade, press him with your Thighs, and stay him a little
upon the hand to cause him make two or three Falcads before you turn him, and
then close him with your outward Rein as in the Piroyte, for the Demi Volt of a
passade a toute bride or at full speed, is nothing else but a half Piroyte, and
therefore must have the very same Helps with it, and thus passade him from one
hand to the other, making commonly the straight line of it, when you do it at
full speed, about five or six times the Horses length only, and so your Horse
will go perfectly upon passads, which is the Touchstone of a ready Horse, and
absolutely one of the most useful things in the Manage for a single Combat.

But it may be here objected, that if a man in a single Combat make use of
these falcads, or half stops, which I order before he turn upon the end of his
passade, it will give opportunity to his Adversary to gain his Croup, which is
accounted a very considerable advantage in a single combat; To which I answer,
That it cannot be denied, but that such half stops have that inconveniency: But
upon the other hand, if a Man do not make use of them upon passads at full
speed, he will run into another inconveniency which is large as dangerous, and
that is, That his horse being upon his full carrier, without he make him form
those half stops, he will be in danger of coming over every time he turns,
being riding with such force as a Man should always do in passading, and
therefore I leave it to your choice which of the two hazards you would rather
undergo, whither to have your horse fall upon you, and perhaps break a Leg, or
to have your Adversary upon your Croup, in my opinion the last of the two is
the safest, especially if you are upon a ready horse, and be also any thing of
a Sword-man your self; Therefore I shall discourse no more of it, but leave the
Event to be decided by your Skill upon Horseback, and Dexterity in handleing
the weapon, wherewith you are engadged.

CHAP XXIX. Of Corvets, and how to dress a Horse perfectly upon them, without a
pillar, which is the surest way.
IT is as I have already told you, a Maxim in Horsemanship never to force any
Air, CHAP: XXIX.
but to set Nature in order by Art, and this I am persuaded should be as much
observed in choising a Horse for Corvets as any one thing in the Manage,
because for Corvets a Horse should have a great deal of pat ience, but say
some, the Air of Corvets with discreet Riding gives a Horse patience, in
which I doubt there is a mistake which is this, first the Horse has patience,
and then that Horse may go in Corvets, but I assure you it is very seldom that
impatient Horses are made patient by Corvets, therefore such people seeing most
Horses which go upon Corvets to have patience, they think it is the Corvets
which give them patience, when it is patience that gives them Corvets, but
there is no Rule without an exception, And although I know that some young
Horses may go upon Corvets, yet I can assure you, Horses for the most part must
have a great deal of time, with the custom of often repetitions, before they
can be well settled and firmed to go certainly in Corvets, both forewards and
upon the Volts, so that if a Horse be not perfectly in the haand and heels, and
upon the Haunehes, and withal have a natural disposition for them, he will
never go well upon Corvets; However, if you have a Horse you think naturally
inclined for that Air, and that you intend to try your Skill upon him, then in
my opinion the method I am going to set down to you, will be found the most
certain of any you can make trial of, either for going upon Corvets straight
forewards, sidewayes, backwards, or upon the Volts, of all which I shall
discourse in order. And,

FIRST, Of Pesates.
A Pesate, is when a Horse rises handsomely before, and upon his Haunches, and
at the same time bends his fore legs up to his Body; now this is so necessary
an Action, that without a Horse can do it perfectly, he shall never go well in
any Air, and therefore before I proceed to them, I shall show how to cause
your Horse perform an exact Pesate, which is thus, the Cavezons inward Rein
being in your hand, or tied to the Pomel, help him with the outward Rein of the
Bridle, and in Passaging raise him as high as you can, and hold him there
gently, and without fougne, or giving him occasion to fret, then walk him away
a little, and afterward raise him again, and do this quite round the Volt or
large Circle you are working him upon, which will make him in a short time form
a right and very just Pesate: Now the teaching of your Horse Pesates, must be
the first Lesson before ever you offer to put him upon any Air, for there is
nothing more graceful in all Airs, then to see a Horse bend his fore legs
well up to his Body, but there is also more in it then that, because whatever
Horse goes in Airs, if his fore legs be stiff before, or that he Paws with
his fore feet, he is necessarly upon his shoulders, for that stiffness of his
fore Legs and pawing, puts him upon them, whereas if he did bend his fore
Legs up to his Body, it would put him upon the Haunehes, because it pulls him
backward, as being stiff before puts him foreward, and consequently upon the
shoulders, but if you find your Horse very much oppose you when you first
attempt to make him rise before, then put him as I have already told you
betwixt the Pillars for some days, and then no doubt he will yield to you; for
this is all the use in my opinion that the Pillars serve for, and therefore
keep him as short while there as possible, See Plate fifth, figure fourth and
fifth.

SECONDLY, For Corvets straight Forewards.
WHen your Horse is perfect in pesates, CHAP: XXIX.
and that you intend to work him upon Corvets straight forewards, before you do
it, you must make him rise in pesates, and to stay upon the hand, using always
the Cavezon at first, then to make him go in Corvets straight forewards or
along a Wall, you must tie the Cavezons Rein which is from the Wall, to keep
that hind leg near to his other hind leg which is next the Wall, and begin
with two or three pefates or corvets, and then walk him forewards a little,
then corvet him again, and if you feel him on the hand, and that he also go
forwards with it, he will quickly be dressed, but if he press forewards too much,
then cause him make his Curvets in one place, and then put him on again, which
you will find very soon help him; But to make this yet the more plain to you,
suppose it be your Right should^^ that is next the Wall, then you must tie the
left Rein of the Cavezon to the Pomel, which does not only keep back the hind
leg upon the same side the Cavezon Rein is tied, but also suppleth him and
prepares him, nothing being like it, to go Corvets upon the Volts to the Left
hand, again if it be your Left shoulder which is to the Wall, tie the Right
Rein of the Cavezon to the Pomel for the same Reasons, and work him as I told
you before, first walking him, and then raising him upon Corvets, until you
make him continue his Corvets without intermission the whole length of the
Wall, and as for the Bridle hand, you must remember that in Corvets forewards,
you are always to help with the Rein next to the Wall or outward Rein, to
enlarge him before and to narrow him behind, because he leads with his fore
parts, and his hind parts follow to keep the ground which his fore parts has
got, his fore parts being at Liberty, and his hind parts pressed.

As for your Seat it must be just as in Terra a Terra, but neither so stiff nor
so oblique, the Bridle hand even with his Neck, and your Knuckles toward his
Neck on which hand so ever he goes, but the hand still even over his Neck, two
or three fingers above the Pomel and a little foreward, without any other Help
but to stay him a little upon the Hand, for every Horse will take his own time
better then you can give it him, but quick it should be from the ground, and
then Stay him in the Air upon the hand, your Body always going to that end of
the Horse which comes to you, that is, bend a little to him as he rises, but
so insensibly, that the Beholders may not perceive it, you are also to sit as
foreward to the Pomel as you can, your Body being straight, and your Thighs and
Knees as closs as if they were glewed to the Saddle, but your Toes a little
down and low, that you may be weak in the Hams, that is to have your Nerves
weak from the Knees downwards, and strong from the Knees upwards, neither help
him at all as I have said already with your Legs, but leave his Croup free and
at liberty to follow his fore parts which lead.

For when a Horse is between the Pillars, or at the fingle pillar as I shall
show you hereafter, and no Body upon his Back, he goes as just as can be, and
yet he has no Legs to help him there, therefore I say you are not to help him
with your Legs at all, for if you should help him with your Outward Leg, then
he will think he must go Terra a Terra releve, and if he should in this posture
perform his Corvets, he will go all a wray, and lean on the Outside, so again
if you help him with the Inward Leg, he will put out his Croup, and lean all
on the Inside, and if you should help him with both your Legs, it would press
him too much, and make him go too quick a time, therefore I say again, that the
right way is to help him only with the Bridle, and not with your Leg: at all.

But if your Horse should of his own accord put in his Croup too much, then of
necessity you must put it out with your Inward leg, and if he puts it out too
much, then you are also to put it in with your Outward leg: But except in
these Cases, or that he go not enough forwards at each time, I would advise you
never to help him with your Legs at all. Lastly, If your Horse beat upon the
Hand, it is because he does not endure or obey the Curb, and in that Case, you
must raise him very high upon Pesates and hold him there, which will put him
upon the Curb, and make him to endure it, but if this will not do, then Gallop
him upon a straight line by a Wall or otherwise, and from his Gallep stay him
upon the hand, and then let him go in Corvets, or let him Gallop forewards a
short Gallop, then stop him and raise him three or four Pesates very high, and
hold him on the hand when he is up, and this in all probability will cure him,
if not, then Trot him and stop him with good hard Stops, and also pull him back
sometimes, and this will settle him on the hand I warrant you, your Stirrups
being of an equal length, except you have one Leg shorter than the other, and
rather a hole shorter than too long, that so you may sit upon your Tuist, and
equally upon your Stirrups: And this is the most exact way for teaching a Horse
to go in Corvets forewards, that in my Opinion can he made Use of, See Plate
fifth figure fifth.

THIRDLY, For Corvets Side ways.
TO make a Horse go sidewayes in Corvets, help only as I said with the Bridle,
and putting his Head to the Wall and going to the Right hand, help with the
Outward Rein, and let the Horse go sidwayes, that is the half of his shoulders
before his croup, and cause him thus make three or four corvets sidewayes, then
walk him again sidewayes, afterward corvet him again, and thus walk him and
corvet him sidewayes, by degrees deminishing his Walk, and augmenting his
Corvets, until he go all in Corvets, which he will soon do and very perfectly;
Use the like Helps for the Left hand in every thing, as I have told you for the
Right.

FOURTHLY, For Corvets Backwards.
TO make your Horse go backwards in Corvets, first pull him back, and then
cause him make three or four Corvets in one place, then pull him back again,
and afterward Corvet him in one place, and thus pulling him back, and
Corveting in one place, diminishing the pulling back, and augmenting the
Corvets, he will at last go backwards in Corvets as perfectly as can be, but in
Corvets backwards, you must remember to help always with the Bridle Rein next
to the Wall, to narrow him before and enlarge him behind, that so he may be
there at Liberty, because his hind parts lead, and his fore parts follow to
keep the ground which his hind parts has got, therefore his hind parts being
at Liberty, and his fore parts pressed, your Bridle hand must be low that the
Horse may not go too high, and your Body a little foreward, to give his hinder
parts the more liberty to Lead, and do not help with your Legs at all, but
with your Bridle hand pull him back every time he falls to the Ground, and
with these Aids he will come to Corvet backwards perfectly well.

FIFTHLY, For Corvets upon the Volts
TO put a Horle upon Corvets in a Circle or Volt, the Cavezons inward Rein must
be at first tied to the Pommel, and his Croup must not be put in too much, but
be should rather at first teaching go upon Circles of one Pistle or Tread, for
here to keep out the inward hind Leg is the business, help therefore a little
with the outward Rein of the Bridle, and raise him three or four Corvets, then
Walk him upon the Circle, and afterward Corvet him again, and so diminish your
Walk and augment your Corvets, until he make a whole Turn or Volt upon Corvets,
and when he is perfect upon them in Circles of one Piste or Tread, then let him
go upon Corvets with his Group a very little in upon the Volts, which is the
perfection of Corvets upon them: You must always in Corvets upon Volts help
with the outward Rein, not only to keep him up, but to give him the ply, and
make ^im embrace the Round or Angles of the square the better; but give him no
help with your legg^^ at all.

To change upon Corvets, do it thus, if your Horse be going to the Right hand,
and you would change him, then put your inward or Right leg gently to him, and
hold him a little up with your Bridle hand (called in French Soutener) on the
inside of his Neck, your Knuckles always down upon which hand soever you go,
and as soon as he has changed, take (...) your right leg from him, and help
no more with your legs at all, only the poise of your (...) Body in changing
is to be a little upon the outside, the same very helps are to be made use of
(...) when you change from the left, that is left leg and outward Rein: Now
the reason why up (...) on changing, I begin first with the Leg and not with
the Bridle hand, is this, if I should begin with the hand he would stop, and if
I turned my hand to the inside, his Croup would go too much out and be lost,
because I would have no feeling of it, and therefore I begin with the leg, but
instantly I hold him up with my hand, so that the two Helps are down so quickly
after other that none can perceive it, but if his shoulders do not come in
enough, then turn well your hand to the inside, and help with the outward Rein:
All this must be done so neatly and gently, and with as much Art as can be, for
it is the quintescence of changing upon Volts in Corvets.

SIXTHLY, For the Cross and Sataban upon Corvets.
IF you know hou to help your Horse upon Corvets, forewards, backwards, and
sidewayes, as I have been showing you, then put these helps together, and you
may make your Horse frame the Cross upon Corvets when you please, and without
any difficulty in the World.

For the Saraban in Corvets, you must help still with the outward Rein, which
is to be pulled first upon the one side, and then on the other after every
Corvet, from side to side, helping as I said only with your Bridle hand, and
your outward shoulder always following it, without any help from your legs at
all.

Now to conclude this Chapter of Corvets, I must again tell you that Horses
which have either of these two extremes, that is who are either very dull and
retain their Forces, or are fiery and impatient, are very improper for Corvets,
because to furious and impatient Horses, all Airs augment and increase their
Choler, and deprive them of their memory and obedience, therefore they are a
great deal more proper to go upon the ground then in any kind of Airs
whatsoever.

I would also as I have already told you, have the first Lessons you give your
Horse for Corvets, to be made very leasurely and high before, which are his
Pessates, for this gives him means to assure his Haunches, firm his head, and
bend his fore Legs, and diverteth him from being apprehensive and unquiet, or
to fret and trample, which is called in Franch, Trepigner, and this much for
dressing a Horse in Corvets upon all hands, o^ which I have the longer
insisted, because they are one of the most difficult Airs that a Horse can go,
and require a great deal of Judgment in the Rider, as well as patience in the
Horse, to perform them truly and justly as they ought.

CHAP. XXX. Of Leaping Horses, and how to Dress them.
THere are many Ignorant and presumptuous People, CHAP: XXX.
who in a smileing and deriding manner, say they will make any horse a leaping
horse, And why, because forsooth they can make a horse leap over a stick, like
a Jackanaps or Doge, or make him leap over a Barrel, Rail, Hedge, or Ditch. I
confess if that were all, there would be many leaping Horses, because there is
hardly any Horse but will do it without any great Art, but their ignorance is
very much to be pitied in this, for such leaping is vastly different from the
leaping of a Horse in the Manage, because for Horses which leap over Hedge and
Ditch, a Man must lay the Reins of the Bridle on his Neck, and so put him
forewards, which is a leap of their fashion, but not such a leap as is
performed in the Manage, for where they give a Horse the Reins to make him
leap, we hold him and help him up with the hand to leap, and also with our
heels at the same time, if there be need, for it, and thus the Horse obeys both
the hand and the heels at the same time, and has an excellent Mouth and a good
Apuy, both upon the Bars and the Curb.

So that a Gentleman's Hunts boy, though he can leap his Masters Golding over a
Hedge, will not make him leap upon the Bars and Curb with a Snaffle, since his
Snaffle has no Curb, and never works upon the Bars as I have else where
tol^ you, but upon the VVeeks and Lips of a Horses Mouth, besides, managed
Horses will leap in one place, and not at leap-frogg two or three yards
forewards, without le^ting you feel them upon the hand, as their Horses do,
thus does their ignorance make them talk of things they do not understand, nay
some Horsemen have been so foolish, as to think they could make a leaping
Horse, with laying brush faggots before him to leap over, so far have they been
mistaken.

Again, some would have leaping Horses to be of a huge and vast Strength, have
an excellent Mouth and perfect good Feet, in which last they do not say amiss,
for good Feet are very requisite, else a Horse dares never light upon them for
fear of hurting himself, no more then a Man who has the Gout dares leap, and
therefore such a Horse will never Rise as he should, to perform his Leaps
perfectly.

As for a good Mouth, I could indeed wish that a Horse which is designed for a
Leaper had one, that is, a good Apuy which is neither too hard not too delicat;
but such a one as can endure a good pressure upon the Bars, and so to suffer
the Curb, which is what is to be understood by a good Mouth, yet I must tell
you, there have been many rate leaping Horses, which have not at all gone upon
the Curb, but upon the Bars, for which they were not to be commended, but it
was better for to have them leap so, being so rare Horses, then not to suffer
them to leap at all, because they went not upon the Curb.

But for the third Property of a leaping Horse, which is that he should be very
strong; is I think a very great Error, because it is not the strongest Horses
which are fittest for the delight of the Manage, especially to be leaping
Horses: And the Reason is, when Horses are very strong, they must be Galloped a
long time before you can abaite the strength of their Chines, and all that
while they will do nothing but Yerke, and gives such disordered Countertimes
and false leaps, that the best Horseman in the World shall never make good
Leapers of them, so you see they are not the strongest, but best disposed
Horses, which are the fittest to be made Leapers.

I shall yet further confirm this Truth by a Comparison taken from Men, for
take one of the strongest Fellows you can get, and I shall bring a little Man
that shall outleap him several feet, yet that strong Fellow would Crush the
little one to Death in his Arms, so you see it is not Strength, but
Disposition that fits Horses as well as Men for Leaping. Its true, that
sometimes a great and strong Fellow will outleap a little Man, but that is
rare, because the Spirits of such bigg Men, are more dilated and diffused than
in little Men: The like is I assure you in Horses as well as amongst men, for
there may be a strong Horse disposed for leaping, and that horse will no doubt
be an excellent Leaper, but for the most part, they are weak Horses which are
most disposed for leaping, Sometimes also Horses which are very weak, find
themselves so pincht upon the haunches with Corvets, that they find ease in
leaping, thus you see then that Horses are generally more disposed by Nature
than Art for leaping, which is when they are full of Spirit, and light, so that
Horsemen have nothing almost to do in making leaping Horses, but only to give
them the time, which is the greatest part of the Art, which is to be made use
of in making of them, and he who thinks to show more of his Art in dressing a
Horse for leaps, in stead of showing his skill, discovers only more of his own
ignorance and folly: Therefore the short and only true way to dress all leaping
Horses, is this which follows,

First then, For Capriols walk your Horse foreward, and then cause him make one
leap, presently after raising him high upon a pesate or two, and staying and
keeping him upon the hand, and thus augmenting your leaps, and diminishing your
pesates, he will by little and little leap perfectly, and after he is perfect
upon a straight line forewards, then you may put him upon Volts or Circles, and
continue the same Method, but the Circles must be a little large at first, and
you must remember when you raise him to leap, that you help him with your Rod
behind, as I have already shown you in the Chapter where I discourse of all the
Helps, and do it with one or more Strokes as you please, so it be done in time,
which is when he is raised before, and always when you are done leaping, cause
him make a high pesate or two.

As for your Seat it must be straight, and your Stirrups a little shorter than
ordinary, suppose a hole or so, for too short would throw you out of the
Saddle, and too long would disorder your Seat, and make you lose your Stirrups,
you must also keep your Toes a little down, to slack your Nerves from the Knees
downwards, or else the Horse would bolt too much forwards each leap, for a
leaping Horse should never go forewards above a foot and a half at most with
one leap, and when you raise him, instantly put your breast out, which will
make your shoulders go a little back, though unsensible to the Beholders, for
if you did it not just as the Horse rises before, it would be to late to do it
when he rises behind and strickes out.

I must also tell you, that your Thighs and Knees must be as closs as if they
were glewed to the Saddle, and for your Bridle hand, you must always make it
work the Outward Rein, to bring in the Horses Outward Shoulder, and narrow him
before and enlarge him behind, that so he may be pressed upon the inside of the
Turn and at Liberty without, that his Croup may go a little out, and be the
more Free and at Liberty; for were his Croup subjected or bound up he could not
leap, therefore the Outward Rein is to be used for all leaps whatsoever, either
straight forewards or upon Circles, and here I will also tell you a kind of
Secret for the Hand when you are Leaping a Horse, which is this, the Bridle
being a little longer than ordinary, raise your Horse well, and every time when
he is beginning to rise behind, put your Bridle hand a little foreward, to hold
him up before, and stay him there upon the Hand, as if he hung in the Air, and
so help him in every Leap, taking always the just time, as if it were a Ball
at the Bound. See Plate fifth figure seventh and eight.

Now all Leaps are made upon the Hand, and no way else, therefore see that your
Horse be well s^ttled upon the Hand, before ever you offer to try if he will
Leap, because nothing disorders a Horses Mouth more than leaping, and this much
of Capriols, which is certainly the most perfect Leap that a Horse can make, as
for Balotads and Croupads, they are to be taught the very same way, the
difference consisting only in the way of Helping with the Rod, which is fully
explained in the Chapter of Aids to which I referr you, and so I conclude this
Chapter of Leaps.

CHAP. XXXI. A New and Pretty Invention, to Dress Horses upon all Airs, by the
Help of one Single Pillar.
ALthough it must be confessed, CHAP: XXXI.
that this method of dressing horses upon all Airs by the help of one single
pillar, is far inferior to these most excellent Lessons and Directions, which
I have been all along giving you, for the more ready and perfect dressing of
all kinds of horses, yet it being Curious and Extraordinary, And also in its
kind very good, I thought it would be acceptable to a Curious Reader, to find
here the method of doing it set down; Which is as follows,

First bring your Horse, being Saddled and Bridled to the single pillar, and
there put him under the Button of the Bridle Reins, which is to draw down that
little Button of leather which moves up and down upon them so near to the
Horses Main, that it may stay and fix the Branches of the Bridle at such a
degree of straitness, as the Horse may have but a very gentle feeling at first
of the Bitt, either upon his Bars, or place of the Curb, this being done, if
you intend to make your horse go to the right hand, let a Groom take the
cavezons inward rein for the right hand, and putting it about the single pillar
a little higher then the horses head, keep it there very short, then let
another person hold the long Rein of the cavezon upon the other, or outside of
the turn, in one hand, and a stick with a botkin at the end of it in the other,
to prick him if he should put out his Croup too much, and also make another
person go behind the Horse with a Rod to keep him from going back, then do you,
or the person who is to dress the Horse, being a foot, raise him De firm a
firm, which is still in one place, and be satisfied with a very little from
him at once, For Rome was not all built in a day: Now thus tying him short, he
cannot rise high, and therefore to find his ease he goes upon his Haunches,
and no thanks to him, because he is forced to it; After you have used him so a
little, then help him with three Rods, your self with two before, one upon each
fore Thigh, and a second person with the third under his Belly, which will put
him very much upon the Haunebes.

After your Horse can perform his Lesson exactly De firm a firm, or in one
place, then keeping still the same inward Rein of the Cavezon short about the
Pillar, make him go upon his Volts, helping him as I have already told you with
three Rods, two upon his fore Thighs, and one under his Belly, but be you then
upon the out side of the Horses shoulders, to give him the more liberty to
Turn, and thus in a short time he will go perfectly well Corvets upon the Volts
forewads, keep him still so tied with the Cavezon Rein, and help with the three
Rods as before, and go before and f^^e him, and this will make him go Corvets
backwards upon his Volts, continue again still the same Rein of the Cavezon
about the Piliar, and you may make him go sidewayes upon Corvets.

When your Horse is perfect in all this for the Right hand, then tie the left
Rein of the Cavezon thus about the Pillar, as before you did the Right, and
give him the same very helps which I ordered you for the right, only changing
sides, and thus your Horse will go perfectly upon Corvets, both forewards,
backwards, and sidewayes, without any person upon his Back, which is a pretty
piece of curiosity, and I believe can be performed by no other method but this.

Lastly, When your Horse goes perfectly thus without any person upon his back,
then get upon him, the same Rein of the Cavezon being still very short about
the Pillar, and make him go as you did before in every thing; And after this
manner may you make a Horse go in all other Airs, which is a piece of Art that
is curious, and also in my opinion some what Extraordinary, See Plate fifth
figure sixth.

CHAP. XXXII. A short Recapitulation, of what has been already said concerning
the Dressing of Horses, which if got by heart, and punctually practiced, will
give a man such insight in the Art, as that he will seldom fail to make and
dress any Horse, that shall come to his hands.
HAving put a close to the most considerable part of this Treatise, CHAP: XXXII
which is the Directions for making a Horse go perfectly in all kind of
Mannages; I am resolved in this Chapter, to make a short Abstract of the
abovementioned excellent Directions, which I have at a little more length
discoursed of in the preceding Chapters, that so the Reader may as it were at
one view, behold the whole Grounds and Intrieasies of this most Heroic and
gentlemany exercise; And which will also I hope be of so much the greater use,
because whatever thing Essential may escape his Memory, he may with one glance
find it in this Chapter, there being contained in it, the very strength and
Marrow of Horsemanship. And

FIRST, Of the Natural Paces.
THE Natural Paces are three, the Walk, the Trot, and the Gallop, to which may
be added the Amble, because some Horses although not many, naturally have it,
and such are commonly the swiftest Amblers of any.

SECONDLY, Of the Artificial Motions.
GEnerally speaking, there are only two Artificial Motions, Terra a Terra, and
the high Airs, but if taken in a stricter sense there are seven, to wit, Terra
a Terra, a Demi Air or Demi Volt, a Corvet, a Capriol, a Croupade, a Balotade,
and a Step and a Leap.

THIRDLY, How those Natural and Artificial Motions are founded each upon other.
THE Step or Walk is the Foundation of the Amble and Trot, the Trot the
Foundation of the Gallop, the Gallop of Terra a Terra, Terra a Terra of the
Demi Arres or Demi Volts, the Demi Volts of Corvets, Corvets of Capriols, and
Capriols of all other Leaps, so that if a man intend to dress a Horse
Regularly, he must make him go by degrees from the first of these Motions to
the last, otherwise he may be fair to spoil him.

FOURTHLY, Of Backing a Colt or Young Horse.
THE true way to make a Colt tame for backing, is to house him every VVinter,
and use him as the rest of your Horses, which will make him become so Calm and
familiar, that when you intend to back him he will not stir, but be most quiet
and peaceable, but if he should prove untuly at backing, then work him for some
days before you take his back, about a single pillar with a Cavezon upon his
Nose, And this I assure you will tame him, especially with the assistance of a
good VVhipe or Chambrier, applied seasonably and with Judgment.

FIFTHLY, Of Bitting a Horse.
THE Bitt and Branches should be made always proportionable to the Mouth and
Neck of a Horse, that is longer or shorter, as his Mouth is wider or narrower,
or his Neck short or long and the Bitts which are of most general Use, are the
simple Cannon, the simple Seatch, the Cannon a la pignatel with a Libirty, and
the Cannon with Olives to discharge a Horses Lips, having also a Liberty for
the Tongue, but the Branebes should be for the most part a la Conestable,
unless the Horse carry either his head very low, or his Nose high and too much
out and in the Air, in which Case you must give him Branches accordingly, for
which you will find particular Directions, in the discourse of Bitts immediately
preceding this Treatise.

SIXTHLY, Of the Riders Garb and Horses Equipage.
THE Rider should always be in a Modish and Fashionable Garb, and have limber
and neat boots, with pretty long ne^ked spurrs, whose revells should be fix
pointed and very sharp, because it is a great deal better with a sharp spurr to
bring the blood, than with a rustie one to occasion an inflammation or fester,
he should also carry in his right hand a neat rod of a middle size and length,
wherewith he is to help his horse either before or behind, as he shall find it
needful; As for the Equipage of the horse, he should have in his mouth a bitt
exactly fitted for it, upon his nose a good Cavezon, and upon his back a
fashionable great saddle or selle a piquer, with sufficient strapps, girths,
stirrups, curper and tie: And if he be a leaping horse, then his tail is to be
tied up in a sacker or trousse^queue, to make his leaps appear the higher and
more graceful.

SEVENTHLY Of the HORSE-MANS Seat.
A MAN should sit upon Horseback, with his Body as straight as when he is
walking afoot, that is, he must as much as possible keep himself always upon
his twist, his feet almost parralel to the sides of the Horse, and his Toes a
little higher than his heels; And also appearing about an inch thorrow or upon
the fore side of the Stirrups: In short, a Horseman should always look gay
upon Horseback, and have as degadged and unconstrained a Seat as possible, a
right Seat being of such consequence to make a Horse go well, that this is a
received Maxim amongst Horsemen, Qui n'est pas bell homme a cheval, ne sera
jamais bon homme a cheval, which is, that he who is not a Graceful horseman,
shall never be a good horseman.

EIGHTHLY, Of the first Riding a Horse upon Circles, or Suppling of his
Shoulders.
TO make a Horse obey the hand and heel of his Rider perfectly, is what the
whole Art of Horsemanship only aims at, and to make him first obey your hand,
you must supple his Shoulders; now it is always the Inward Rein of the
Cavezon, or Outward Rein of the Bridle, and Inward leg of the Rider which does
this: therefore practice your Horse always upon this Lesson, Rein and leg of
a side with the Cavezon, until you find him both very supple and easy to Turn,
and also very light, but be sure in working of him, to cause him bring in his
Outward Shoulder, Otherwise you do nothing, which is done by frequently
helping of him with the Outward Rein of the Bridle, yet if he close his Circle
too much, help him with the Inward Rein of the Bridle to enlarge him a little.

NINTHLY, Of putting a Horse upon his Haunches, or making him Obey the Heels.
AS the Answering the Hand is the first thing a Man should teach a Horse, so
the making him obey the heels, or putting him upon his Haunches, is the second
and easiest Task of the two, and is generally performed, with the Inward Rein
of the Cavezon or Bridle and Outward leg of the Rider, which is Rein and Leg
contrary, as the suppling of the shoulders is with the Cavezon Rein and Leg of
a side, although you must also sometimes help him with the Outward Rein of the
Bridle, to bring in his Shoulders if they go too much out.

TENTHLY, Of Stoping and Going Back.
A Horse should be always taught first to stop upon a Walk, then upon a Trot,
and afterward upon a Gallop, and not upon a sudden neither, upon any of them
at first, but in two or three times, and when you stop, help always with the
Inward Rein of the Bridle, and Outward leg, to bring in his Outward hind leg,
otherwise he would not stop upon his Haunches. In pulling back a Horse, you
must also help him with the Inward Rein and Outward leg, and If he do not
answer you willingly, then force him back, by pulling the Reins of the Cavezon
one after the other, as if you were sawing of Wood, and in the time you are
doing of it, slack your Thighs a little, and keep your Body and Shoulders a
little back, and so let him go; Now you must know that both going back and
stoping, are excellent Lessons to put a Horse upon the haunches, and settle him
upon the Hand.

ELEVENTHLY, Of Passaging.
PAssaging is performed for the most part, with the Outward Rein of the Bridle
and Outward leg, that so a horses legs may have the more Liberty to lap the
one over the other, however the Inward Rein is sometimes to be made use of to
stay him, if his Shoulders go too far before his Croup; A horse should be
wrought upon passaging first along a Wall, then upon a large circle, and lastly
upon a Square, and all this first upon a Stepp, and then upon a Trot, which
will at last prepare him mightily for Terra a Terra.

TWELFTHLY, Of Pesates.
PEsates or raising a horse before, should never be taught him at first Riding,
because a horse should be rendered pretty obedient, and to understand and answer
the hand and heels, before a Man should attempt to raise him upon Pesates,
therefore see it be one of the last things you teach your Horse, to which if he
be very refractory, the putting him between the Pillars will make him comply,
and you will by experience find, that this is truly the Advice of one who
wishes you to succeed in all your Undertakings in Horse manship, and who does
not at all desire you should spoil your Horse, for lake of a good Advice, of
which Nature I assure you this is one of the chief.

THIRTEENTHLY, Of the Helps of the Bridle, Legs, and Rod, in all Airs.
FOR Terra a Terra, and the Air Demi Volts, help for the most part with the
inward Rein of the Bridle, and outward Leg, and when going to the Right hand,
put your Rod cross his Neck sloapwise upon the outside, and when going to the
left, also either upon the outside of his Neck, or behind your Right Thigh.

For the Pirovte, help always with the outward Rein and outward Leg, and keep
the Rod still upon the contrary side to which he is going.

For Passads, help your Horse always according to the Air with which he
closes the end of his Passade, if with Terra a Terra, then with the inward
Rein and outward Leg, but if with a half piroyte, then with the outward rein
and outward Leg, and help always with the rod upon the contrary side to which
he is going.

For Corvets, both forewards, Backwards, sidewise, and upon Circles or Volts,
help for the most part with the outward rein, but not at all with your Legs,
except he be going upon Volts of two pistes, or his Croup a little in, in which
case you must help him a little now and then with the outward Leg, to subject
his Croup a very little, and help always with the rod upon the contrary side
to which you are going, but going along a wall, then help alwise upon the side
from the Wall:

For Leaps of all kinds, help with the outward rein, and give no help with your
Legs at all, only hold him up well with the Bridle hand when he rises before,
that so he may rise the higher behind, and time the motion of your Bridle hand
so, as that you may take him as if he were a Ball upon the Bound, which is the
greatest secret of all in leaping: Horse right; But as for the Rod, you must
help with it according to the kind of leap you intend he should make, if
Capriols, then help with it either with its point near his Dock, or with the
great end of it just behind the Saddle, the red being turned in your hand and
your Thumb downwards; if Balotads, then upon the middle of his Croup; if
Croupads, then a little above his Gambrels, sometimes also you may help a
leaping Horse with a rod upon his shoulders, if you find he do not rise easily
enough before, but this help of the Rod upon the shoulders is not by far so
common as that given behind, although there may be sometimes an absolute
necessity, as in this case I have told you, to make use of it.

FOVRTEENTHLY, Some more excellent Directions and Observations of very great
importence, for the right Mannaging of Horses.
IN a Walk, a Horse lifts two Legs of a side the one after the other, bginning
with his hind Leg first, so that he has two Legs of a side in the Air, and
two upon the ground at the same time.

In the Amble the Horse has likewise two legs of a side in the Air, and two
upon the ground at the same time, the differnce between a Walk and an Amble
being only this, that in a Walk he lifts his two Legs of a side one after the
other, and so his four Legs or feet mark four times, 1, 2, 3, and 4, whereas
in an Amble, the two Legs of a side are raised at the same very time, so that
his four Legs mark but only two times; to wit, the two legs of that side
which moves first marketh one time, and the other two legs of that side which
moves last marketh the second.

In a Trot, the Horse has two legs in the Air, and two upon the ground at the
same time, in form of a St. Andrews cross, and also marketh but two times with
his four legs, the first when he sets down those that were up cross in the
Air, and in the second when he raises and seteth down again these that were
cross upon the ground.

In a Gallop a Horse has all four feet in the Air at once, it being alwaise a
leap forewards, but he lifts first his two fore legs, and then his two hind,
and also his two fore legs are raised, or lifted the one advanced before the
other, and so do the hind legs also follow in the same posture, the one
advanced before the other, and albeit that all his four feet be in the Air at
once, yet in setting them down he marketh four times, to wit, the first with
his fore leg which did not lead, the second with his fore leg which did lead,
the third with his hind leg which did not lead, and the fourth with his hind
leg which did lead, or accompany the fore leg which first lead the way, so
that in a Gallop a Horse marketh four times with his four feet, which are, 1,
2, 3, and 4, although all his four feet be in the Air, at once, which will at
first appear some what extraordinary to any man, who has not been at the pains
to consider and reflect upn it.

A Horse in Galloping straight forwards may lead with any fore leg he
pleases, although Horses do it most commonly with their right fore leg, but
with whatever fore leg they lead, the hind leg of the same side must follow
it, otherwise they will be disunited in their Legs.

To bring a Horses Legs right which are disunited, you must stay him a little
upon the hand, and help him with the Spurr upon the contrary side, to that in
which he is disunited; For example, if he be disunited upon the right side,
help him with the left Spurr, and if he be disunited upon the left side, then
unite him with the right Spurr, by staying him as I said a little upon the
hand, and also helping him at the same time with the Brans of your Legs.

In Galloping upon a Round or Circle, a Horse should always lead with his fore
Leg within the Turn, and as I have said, the hind leg of the same side should
always follow, otherwise he will be disunited, but if he should lead with his
fore leg without the Turn, then he would Gallop false, although his hind legs
be united with his fore, now to remedy this false Gallop, and put him as they
say upon his right fore foot again, you must make use of the same help with the
Spurr, which you do in remitting and rectifying a horse which is disunited, to
which I referr you, and therefore I need not make a repetition of it, seeing
you have it in the Paragraph immediately preceding this.

A Horse is never to be pressed to much in any Lesson, but to be taught it
slowly, and by degrees, for practice and custom prevail over Horses as well as
men.

Walking a Horse, and staying him a little upon the hand, stoping, going back,
passaging, and pesates, or raising a Horse before, help all mightily to put a
horse upon his baunches, but see that your stops at first be performed gently,
and in two or three times or falcads, otherwise you may come to strain your
Horses back; But above all see that raising your Horse before, or upon Pesates,
be one of the last things you teach him, otherwise you will certainly spoil
him.

When you first supple your Horses shoulders, hold always the Cavezons inward
Rein in your hand, and work him upon a Circle, but when he is well suppled,
then ty the Cavezon Rein fast to the Pomel, and work him always afterward
upon a Square, for a Square as I have else where told you, is the quintesence
of figures for the Manage.

Your Horse being perfectly well accustomed, to perform all his Lessons with
the Cavezons inward Rein thus tied to the Pomel of the Saddle, perfeit him with
the Bridle alone, working him still upon a Square, and taking notice to cause
him point a little out with his head at each Corner or Angle, and then to Round
them well, after that he is thus perfectly finished, or exactly dressed; See
you never make him go above once a week at most, but work him if you please
every day with the Cavezon, upon his Trot, Gallop, Passager, and pesates, and
keeping him thus in Tune if I may so speak with the Cavezon, he will go rarely
when you would have him go any Air, or Terra a Terra; I say a Horse is thus to
be tuned, for a Horse having four Legs, is like a Fiddle of four strings, and
if the Fiddle be not tuned, no Musician whatsoever can ever play well upon it,
so if a Horses Legs be not rightly tuned, he will never dance his Round right,
again, although a Fiddle be well Tuned at the first, yet if you always play
upon it, it will soon go out of tune, so a Ready Horse if you make him go
perpetually, will be soon out of Tune, and therefore you must still keep him in
tune, by giving him frequently his Lessons with the Cavezon as I have told you,
also until your Horse be perfectly finished travel him as little as possible.

I shall make only one other Musical observation, and then shall put a close to
this Chapter, and it is this, there is no Man who has not a Musical head that
can be a good Horseman, because all Horses ought to go in a just and Musical
time, although the time varieth in every Horse, some going slower, and some
quicker, and besides, as no man plays upon the Lute or any other stringed
Instrument, but the same strings he stops with his left hand, he always
strikes with his right, or else it would be bad Music: So in Riding,
whatsoever you touch or help with your Left hand you must strike with your
heel, or Calf of your leg, otherwise it will be ill Music upon Horseback,
and therefore a good Horseman, should never fail to make hand and heel
Horseback, and therefore a good Horseman, should never fail to make hand and
heel go together, no more then a Musician his two hands, when he is playing
upon any Musical Instrument.

CHAP. XXXIII. A Discourse of Ambling.
HAving in the twenty first Chapter of this Supplement, CHAP: XXXIII
where I treat of the Natural Paces, mentioned the Amble as one of them, both
because some Horses naturally take themselves to it: As also, that because of
its Shuffling Motion, it is very improper to be listed amongst those Motions,
which in a more peculiar manner belong to the Manage, yet seeing all Horses
Amble not naturally, and that People because of the Ease and Convenience they
find by it in Traveling (especially such who are Creasie and Infirm) judge it
very well worth their Pains to Supply with a little Art that defect in Nature,
by causing teach it to such Horses who either have it not naturally, or which
they design mostly for Pads or Journey Horses, I think it reasonable before I
proceed to discourse of the Vices incident to Horses, with their Remedys, which
I intend to do in the very next Chapter, to discover to you in this, the sure
and infallible Method to teach any Horse, of what Age or Disposition soever,
the true and perfect Strock of the Amble, so that although I cannot promise
with this Method, to teach all Horses to Amble swiftly and easily, those being
Qualifications in an Ambling Pad, for which we must be beholding more to a
Natural Disposition in the Horse, than any Art we can possibly make Use of, yet
I dare engadge to teach with it any Horse whatsoever the true Strock of the
Amble, which is all in my Opinion, can be by Art forced upon any Horse in
relation to Ambling, a natural Disposition being the only Artist which can best
assist us, in producing the other Qualifications, required in a perfect Ambling
Pad.

And I think this Discourse of Ambling so much the more needful, because of the
great number of Pretenders, who take upon them to teach Horses perfectly to
Amble, and yet most of them make use of different Methods, some of which are so
very rediculous, that I think it will be for the Readers advantage, that I in
the first place discover some of them to him, that so he may know their errors,
and not be imposed upon by the impudent assertions of such, who by so
unreasonable Methods as I shall discover to him, pretend to teach all Horses
the perfect Amble; the which to make a Horse go in perfection, is I assure you
a great deal more difficult, and requires more Art and Judgment, then such
Pretenders to Skill, or the most part of our common Horse Coursers do imagine.
therefore

FIRST, Of the Errors or False Methods, by which many People pretend to teach
Horses the Perfect Amble, Where
1st, Of Ambling by the Help of a Plowed Field.

THere is one commends the new Plowed Lands, and affirms that by Toyling the
Horse therein upon his Foot Pace, there is no way so excellent for the making
of him Amble, but he forgets what weakness, nay what lameness such disorderly
toil brings to a young Horse, nay to any Horse, because the work cannot be
done without weariness, and no weariness is wholesome.

2ly. Of Ambling by the help of the Gallop.

ANother will teach his Horse to Amble from the Gallop by sudden stopping, or a
more sudden chocking him in the Cheeks of the mouth, and by thrusting him into
such an amazedness betwixt his Gallop and his Trot, imagins that losing both,
he cannot choice but find out Ambling.

But this Man forgets not alone the Error before spoken (which is too great
toil) but also spoils a good Mouth (if the Horse had one) losses a good Rein
(if there were any) and by overreaching and clapping one foot against another,
endangers upon every step, an Hoof-breach or Sinew strain.

3ly. Of Ambling by the help of Weights.

ANother says there is no better way then Ambling by Weights, and thereupon
overloads his Horse with unmerciful Shoos, of intolerable Weight, and forgets
how they make him interfere, strike short with his hind feet, and though his
Motion be true, yet is it so slow that it is not worth his labor, another
folds great Weights of Lead about* his Pasterns, and forgets that they have all
the mischiefs of the former; Besides the indangering of incureable strains, the
crushing of the Goronet, and the breeding of Ring bones, Crown Scabs, etc.

Another loads his Horse upon the Fillets with Earth, Lead, or some other
Massy substance, and forgets the swaying of the back, the overstraining of the
Fillets, and a general disabling of all the hinder parts.

4ly. Of Ambling in the hand without being Mounted by the teacher.

ANother struggles to make his Horse Amble perfectly in his hand before he
mounts his back, by the help of some Wall, smooth Pail, or Rail, and by
Chocking him in the mouth with the Bridle hand, and Correcting him with his Rod
on the hinder Legs, and under the Belly when he treadeh false, never remembers
in what desperate Frantickness it drives a Horse, before he can make him
understand his meaning, as Rearing, Sprauling out his Legs, and using a World
of Antique postures, which once settled, are hardly ever after reclaimed,
besides, when he has spent all his labor, and done his outmost, as soon as he
mounts his back, he is as far to seek of his Pace as if he had never known such
a Motion.

5ly. Of Ambling by the help of Shoos.

ANother finds out a new Stratagem, and in despite of all opposition in the
Horse will make him Amble perfectly, and thereupon he makes him a pair of
hinder Shoos with long Spurns or plates before the Toes, and of such length
that if the Horse offer to Trot, the hinder foot beats the Fore foot before it,
but he forgets that the Shoos are made of Iron, and the Horses Legs of flesh
and blood, neither does he remember with what violence, the hinder foot follows
the fore foot, nor that every stroke it gives can light upon any place, but the
back Sinews, then which there is no part more tender, nor any wound that brings
such incureable Lameness.

6ly. Of Ambling by the help of fine Lists.

ANother (out of quaintness more then strong reason) strives to make his Horse
Amble by taking of fine soft Lists, and folding them strait about the Gambrels,
in that place where they commonly long ago used to garter a Horse for a stiffle
strain, and then turns him to Grass for a Fortnight or more, in which time
(says he) he will fall to a perfect Amble (for it is true he cannot Trot but
with pain) then taking away the Lists the work is finished.

But under the Correction of the professors of this foreign trick (for it is a
Spanish practice) I must assure them that if they gain their purpose they must
offend the Limbs, and if they hurt not the Limbs they loose their Labor;
however this is most assured, that the Amble thus gained must be disgraceful
and with Cringing in the hinder parts, without comeliness, speed, or any other
good quality required in a perfect Amble.

7ly. Of Ambling by the Help of the Bridle hand only, the Teacher himself being
Mounted.

ANother (and he calls himself the Master Ambler of all Amblers) affirms, There
is no true way of making a Horse to Amble, but by the hand only, and I am of
his Opinion could this secret be found out, or could a Man make a Horse do all
that he imagined; but Horses are rebellious, and Men are passionate, and the
least of either of these spoils the whole work; also it is impossible for any
Man to compel a Horse to a New Motion utterly unknown, against which he will
not resist at first with his uttermost power, besides to do this Action with
the hand only, it must only be done from the Horses mouth, and that mouth must
of necessity be altered from its first manner of working upon, for to use all
one hand, must preserve all one Motion, and then where is his Ambling, which
was not known at the first backing; Again we strive at the first backing of a
Horse, to bring his mouth to all sweetness, his Rein to all statelieness, and
the General Carriage of his Body to all Comeliness, now in this Method of
Ambling by the hand only, the mouth must be changed from the Bars, to the
Weeks of the Mouth, which is from sweetness to harshness, his Rein must be
brought from Constancy to Inconstancy, the Nose and Muzzle which were couched
inward, must be turned outward, and the General Comeliness of his Body, must be
brought to a disorderly and disgrateful Carriage, or else he shall never
accomplish the true Art of Ambling by the Hand only.

8ly. Of Ambling by the Help of the Tramel.

THere is another (I will not call him the best, because his Errors may be as
great as any) and he will make his Horse Amble by the Help of the Tramel only,
which I confess is nearest the best and most assured way, yet he has many
Errors as follows;

9ly. Of the Faults of a False Tramel.

FIrst he loses himself in the want of Knowledge, for the length of the side
Ropes of the Tramel, and either he makes them too long which gives no strock,
or too short which gives a false strock; the first makes a Horse Hackle and
shuffle his feet confusedly, the latter makes him roll and twitch up his hinder
feet so suddenly, that by custom it brings him to a string halt, from which he
will hardly be recovered ever after. Another loses himself and his labor by
misplacing the Tramel, and out of a niceness to seem more expert than he is, or
out of fearfulness to prevent falling (to which the Tramel is subject) places
them above the Knee, and above the hinder foot hoof, but the Rule is neither
good nor handsome, for if the Tramel be too long or loose, that is, gives no
offense to the sinews and other ligaments, about which the hose must necessarly
be fastened, when they are raised so high then they can give no true strock,
neither can the fore leg compel the hinder to follow it; And if they be so
short or strait, that the fore leg cannot step foreward, but the hinder must
go equal with it, then will it so press the Main sinew of the hinder leg, and
the Veins and fleshy part of the fore thighs, that the Horse will not be able
to go without halting before, and cringing and crambling his hinder parts so
ill favouredly, that it will be very unpleasant to behold it, besides it will
occasion swellings, and draw down humors, which will be more noisome than the
Pace will be benefical.

Another (and he is the last I shall mention) makes his Tramel of such course
and hard stuff, or else girts it so strait, or leaves it fretting up and down
so loose, that he Galls his Horses legs, and leaves neither hair nor skin upon
them, at the best it leaves such a foul Print and mark upon the legs, that
every one will accuse both the Horse and his Teacher of disgrace and
indiscretion.

The Errors being now confuted, it remains (after all these faults finding)
that I show the truest, the easiest, and that way which is most infallible, for
the making of any Horse Amble with all the gracefulness and perfection, that
can be required.

SECONDLY, Of the Certain and Infallible way, to Teach a Horse the True and
Perfect Strock of the Amble, Where.
1st. Of Trying if the Horse be Naturally disposed to Amble.

WHen you are about to make a Horse Amble truly and perfectly, first mount his
Back, and try with your hand by a gentle and deliberate racking, and pressing
of the Horse foreward, by hlping him in the weeks of his mouth with your
snaffle, (which must be smooth, big, and full,) and correcting him first on one
side, then on the other with the Calves of your legs, and sometimes with the
spurr; now if you can make him of himself stricke into an Amble, though
shuffling and disorderly, there will be much labor saved, for that Disposition
and Readiness to the motion of the Amble, will make him with more easiness and
less danger endure the use of the Tramel, and also make him the more easily
understand the motion without stumbling or amazement: But if you find he can by
no means, apprehend the motion you design to teach him, then struggle not with
him, but fall to the use of the true Tramel in this manner following;

2ly. Of the Form of the True Tramel.

BUT before I come to the Use and Virtue thereof, I will show you the Form and
Substance whereof it ought to be made, because nothing has ever done this
device more injury, then false substances and false shapes, therefore some make
these Tramels all of leather, and that will either reach or break, the first
marrs the work by uncertainty, the other loses the labor.

Another makes it of Canvass, and that galls; A third makes it of strong and
streaching lists, and that has all the faults of both the former, for the
stiffness will not let it ly closs, and the gentleness makes it stretch out of
all compass, or break upon every stumble. And as these, so there are a world of
other useless Tramels, for you must understand that touching the true Tramel,
the side ropes must be firm without yielding a jot; the hose must be soft, lie
closs, and not move from its first place, and the back-band must be flat, no
matter how light, and so defended from the Fillets, that it may not gall, and
this Tramel must be thus made, and of these substances.

First, For the side ropes they must be made of the best, finest, and strongest
pack-threed, such as your Turkey thread, and twisted by the Rope maker into a
delicate strong cord, yet at the utmost, not above the bigness of a small
Jack-line, with a noose or loop at each end; so strong as is possible to be
made; Neither must these side ropes be twisted too hard, but gentle, and with a
yielding Quality, for that will bring on the motion more easily, and keep the
tramel from breaking, now these side ropes must be just thirty six inches in
length for a Horse of an ordinary stature, and so longer or shorter according
to the size of the horse, and so equal one with another, that no difference may
be perceived.

For the hose which must be placed in the small of the fore leg, and the small
of the hinder leg, above the pastern joints, they must be made of fine
girt-web which is soft and pliant, and loined with double cotton, over the
girt-web must be fastened strong tabbs of white Neats leather well Tallowed,
and suited to an evenlength, and stamped with holes at equal distance, which
Tabbs shall pass through the nooses of the side ropes, and be made longer or
shorter at pleasure with very strong buckels, and which Hose are to be made
fast about the horses legs with small buckels, now these hose of girt would be
four inches in length, and the long tabbs with the large buckels ten.

The back-band being of no other use, but to bear up the side ropes, would (if
you tramel all the four legs) be made of fine girt-web, and loined with
cotton, but if you tramel but one side, then an ordinary tape will serve, being
sure that it carries the side ropes in an even line without either riseing or
falling; for if it rise, it shortens the side rope, and if it falls, it
endangers tangleing, Thus you see what the true tramel is, and how to be made,
See Plate fifth, figure ninth, Now touching the use of it, it thus follows;

3ly, How to make use of the true Tramel.

WHen you have brought your horse into an even smooth path, without Rubs or
Roughness, having the Hose made fast about his Legs, you shall there untye the
long tabs of the near ferelegg, and the near hinder leg then put to them the
side rope, and see that he stand at that just proportion which Nature her self
has given him, without either straitning or enlarging his natural situation,
and in that even and just length stay the side Rope, by a small Tape fastened up
to the Saddle, then with your hand on the Briddle straining and pulling his
head, put him gently forward, and if need be have the help of a Bystander to
put him forward also, and so force him to Amble up and down the Road with all
the Gentleness you can, suffering him to take his own leisure, that thereby he
may come to an Understanding of his Restraint, and your will for the
performance of the Motion, and though he snapper or stumble, or peradventure
fall now and then, yet it matters not, do you only stay his head, give him
leave to rise, and with all Gentleness put him forward again, till finding his
own fault, and understanding the Motion, he become perfect and Amble in your
hand to your contentment.

And that this may be done with more ease and less amazement to the horse, it
is not amiss (at his first Tramling) that you give your side Ropes more length
then ordinary, both that the twitches may be less sudden, and the Motion coming
more gently, the Horse may sooner apprehend it; But as soon as he comes to any
perfectness, then instantly put the side Ropes to their true length, for an
inch too long, is a foot too slow in the Pace, and an inch too short causes
Rouling, a twitching up of the Legs, and indeed a kind of Plain halting.

4ly. When to alter the Tramel.

WHen the horse will thus Amble in your hand perfectly, being Tramled on one
side; you shall then change them to the other side, and make him Amble in your
hand as you did before, and thus you shall do, changing them from one side to
another, till with the half Tramel he will Run and Amble in your hand, without
snappering or stumbling, both readily and swiftly; when this is attained unto,
which cannot be above two or three hours labor (if there be any Tractableness)
you may then put on the whole Tramel, with the broad flat Backband, Tramling
both sides equally, See Plate fifth, figure Ninth, And so Run him in your hand,
(at the utmost length of the Bridle) up and down the Road several times, then
pause cherish, and to it again, and thus exercise him, till you have brought
him to that perfection that he will Amble swiftly, truly, and readily, when,
where, and how you please, then put him upon uneven and uncertain ways, as up
hill and down hill, where there are Clots and roughness, and where there is
hollowness and false treading.

5ly. When to Mount his Back.

WHen he is thus perfect in your hand upon all these, you may then adventure to
Mount his Back, which (if you please) you may first do by a Boy, or Groom,
making the horse Amble under him, whilst you lead and stay his head to prevent
danger, or to see how he strikes, then after Mount your self and with all
Gentleness and Lenity increase his Pace more and more, till you come to the
hight of Perfection, and thus as you did before in your hand, so do now on his
back, first with the half Tramel, then with the whole, and change the tramel
from one side to another, and also alter grounds, till you find that
Exquisiteness which you desire, and this must be done by daily Exercise and
Labor, as twice or thrice in the day.

6ly, When to Journey.

When you have obtained your Wish in the perfection of his strock, the
nimbleness of his limbs, and the good carriage of his head and body, you may
then take away the tramel altogether, and Exercise him without it; but this
Exercise I would have upon the Highway, and not Horse courser like in a
private smooth Road, for that affords, but a cousening-pace, which is left
upon every small weariness, therefore take the high way forward, for Three,
Four, or Five Miles in a morning, more or less, as you find his Aptness and
Ability to please you.

Now if in this Journeying, either through Weariness, Ignorance, or
Peevishness, you find in him a willingness to forfake his pace, then (ever
carrying in your pocket the half tramel) alight and put it on, and so Exercise
him with it, and now and then giving him ease bring him home in his true pace;
this Exercise you shall follow day by day, and every day increase it more and
more, till you have brought him from one Mile to many; which done you may then
give him ease, as letting him rest a day or two, or more, and then Exercise him
again, and if you find in him neither Error nor Alteration, then you may
conclude your work is finished. But if any Alteration do happen, to which many
fantastic horses are subject, if it be in the motion of his Pace, then with
your hand reform it, but if that fail, then the use of the half Tramel will
never fail you.

Now If the error proceed from any other occasion, look seriously into the
cause thereof, and taking that away the effect will soon cease; For you are to
understand, that in this manner of teaching a Horse to Amble, you are forbidden
no help whatsoever which belongs to Horsemanship: There might be a great dale
more spoken upon this Subject of Ambling, but seeing my intention in this
Treatise, is to discover and teach nothing, but what is both true and
experienced, I shall weave discoursing any more of it in this place, and
therefore shall proceed to the next Chapter, wherein as I have already told
you, I intend to treat of the most considerable vices, Horses are commonly
subject to when either Backing or Mannaging, with the most reasonable and
approved Methods to cure and rectify them.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Vices and Imperfections of Horses, and how to Prevent and
Remedy them.
NO Horse makes a fault, but it is either in his Head and shoulders, or Croup,
CHAP: XXXIV
which is either before or behind, that is, he does either disobey the hand or
the heel, I shall discourse in this Chapter of both, and offer to you the best
remedies hitherto known, to prevent and rectify the faults in either, and
therefore shall begin with the Imperfections of a Horses Mouth.

FIRST. Of the Imperfections of a Horses Mouth.
THe most part of Writers on Horsemanship, as well Ancient as Modern, are
mightily troubled and concerned, about the Vices and Imperfections of a Horses
Mouth, for Example, the first is, when a Horse pulls and sucks up his Tongue;
The second, when he puts his Tongue over the Bitt: The third, when he doubleth
it about the Bitt: And the fourth, when he lets his Tongue hang out of his
Mouth, either before, or upon one side of it; for all which they have taken a
great dale of pains, with many curious devices and inventions, and a great dale
of labor to cure them; so as there several Writings about these particular
Vices of the mouth, would make a great Volume, when in truth most of their
Bitts designed to remedy these Imperfections, are greater vices then these
they would rectify, and their Physic worse then the Disease, which brings
more inconveniences along with it, then the Vices they go about to cure.

For my own part, I could indeed wish that a horse had none of these faults,
but put the case he has, as putting his Tongue out, over the Bitt, or sucking
or drawing of it up, or doubling it, all these I wish were not, but if they be,
the Horse is little or not at all prejudiced by them, for he will have as good
an Apuy or feeling of the Bitt with them as without them, and will be as firm
and steady in the hand, and as sensible of the Bars and Curb, as if those
Vices were not; because the Bitt will rest and work still upon his Bars, and
the Curb in its due place where it ought, in spite of his Tongue, let it be
where it will, for if a Horses Tongue should be cut out, would that hinder the
Bitt from working upon the Bars, or the Curb to work in its due place?
Certainly not at all, Nay horses have been known to have had their Tongues
pulled out by the Roots, and yet have Rid afterward as justly as ever they did
before, so the carrying of the tongue this or that way out of the mouth,
although I confess it is not very becoming, yet it is but of little consequence
for true going in the manage, because as I said, the bitt will always work
upon the bars and curb, whither the horse have a tongue or not, and it is this
working of the bitt, which makes a horse go well, and not the different
positions of a horses tongue, which you see can be no hinderance to him in the
World for Rideing, so you may perceive with what vain curiosity, our Great
Masters have not only troubled themselves, but also puzsled many of their
Riders, and tormented poor horses to no purpose in the World.

SECONDLY. Of a Horse who throws up his Head, either to shun the pressure of
the Curb, or the trouble of being put upon his Haunches.
THere are many horses, who when ever they are pressed, will throw up their
heads, and they do it commonly to shun one of two things, which is either the
pressure of the curb or bitt, or the uneasiness of being kept upon their
haunches: if the first, then it is a sign they do nor obey the curb or pressure
of the Bitt upon their bars, to remedy which, you must first trot and stopp
them, then gallop and stop them, and also pull them back frequently, all which
being done with Discretion and Judgment, their head in and their croup out, or
cavezon rein and leg of one side will cure them; but if it be to shun being
kept upon their haunches, then tie the cavezons inward rein pretty short to the
pomel of the saddle, and this will pull down his head, and consequently put him
upon his haunches, but then the horse to hinder it, will strive still to go off
his haunches by putting out his croup, in which case, you must always give him
the spurr upon that side to which he puts his croup until he obeys you, and
then he Vice is rectified.

THIRDLY. Of a Horse who goes Incaputiato, or Arms himself against the Bitt.
MAny Authors are mightily mistaken about this Vice, as they call it, saying a
horse is hard on the hand; and under no command, because the branches of the
bridle rest upon his Neck or Counter so, that you cannot pull or help him at
all with your briddle hand, wherein they are very much deceived, for many
horses have been known to Arm themselves against the Bitt, as much as any
horses could do, who yet were very commandable, and as light on the hand as any
horses in the World; For if a horse go perfectly upon the haunches he must of
necessity be light on the hand, let him arm himself as he pleases, or carry
his head never so low, therefore they are deceived who think otherwise;
However to prevent the Arming of a horse against the Bitt, Mr: La Broue orders
a ball of wood covered with Velvet, or any other thing to make it appear neat,)
to be put upon his Chaul band, which when ever he brings in his head too
much, will press him between his jaw-bones, and so prevent his head coming too
closs to his neck or counter, the invention is good and seldom fails to
answer expectation; Therefore I recommend it to you, the only difficulty lies
in proportioning the bigness of the Ball, to the distance which is between the
Horses Jaw bones, for were it too small, it would have no effect, and should it
be too large, it would appear too much, and consequently be Vnbecoming,
therefore your own Judgment must direct you as to the Bigness, for according
to the Ouverture between the Jaws, narrower or wider, so must the Boul be
higger or smaller.

FOURTHLY. Of a Horse who will not Turn, or Obey the Hand.
IF you have wrought your Horse in his first Lessons, as I have directed you,
he can never be Entier which is not to turn, for when a horse is Entier he puts
always in his Croup, and out his shoulders, and those Lessons which I have
given you for suppling his shoulders, put out his Croup, and force in his
shoulders, which is just contrary to being Entier, so that suppling thus a
horses shoulders, he can never have this vice, for indeed it proceeds more
from the stifness of his shoulders, then any resistance he makes with his
Croup, and therefore if you work him with the Cavezon, Rein and Leg of a side,
his head in and Croup out, he will never be Entier, but if you shall find him
very obstinate, then pull the Cavezons inward Rein very hard to you; giving him
the spurr upon the inside, and this will certainly cure him.

FIFTHLY, Of a horse who will not Obey, or Answer the Heels.
IF your horse when you intend to work him with his Croup in, to put him upon
the Haunches, will not answer your outward heel, but puts out his Croup upon
it, then if his head be to the Wall, pull the Rein of the Cavezon which is
opposite to the side whereto he is going, and this will make him put in his
Croup, but then your horse at the time you do this will go false, because he
will look from the Volt or Turn; however if you find that this has not effect
enough, then put him upon a large Circle, and pull the outward Rein of the
Cavezon quite without the Turn, at the same time helping him with your Outward
leg and Spurr, which will infallibly bring in his Croup, but then this will be
yet falser than the other, for now his head will be pulled quite out of the
Turn, whereas he only looked a little without the Turn in the former, but as a
Man cannot do two things at once, especially Contrarys, so he must be satisfied
with this False Lesson, until once the fault be rectified, and then he must
begin again, and work his Horse according to the true Rules of Art.

SIXTHLY, Of a Horse who in Riding upon a Circle or Square, brings too much
in his Outward Shoulder, and therefore keeps not his Ground as he ought: As
likewayes who Goes false upon his Terra a Terra, because he also brings too
much in his Shoulders.
THis of bringing in too much the Outward shoulder, is a Vice by which a Horse
disobeyeth both the Hand and Heels, but especially the Hand, for no Horse can
bring in his Shoulders too much, but at the same time he must put out his
Croup, and no Horse also that brings in his Shoulders too much, but he
straitens and narrows his Volt or Circle, and so keeps not his Ground, also if
he go too high before, he will yet have more liberty to bring in his Outward
shoulder, therefore to recover him of this Vice, the main Business is to keep
him Low, and make him go forewards truly, both with his Legs and Body: To
perform which, you must sit oblique, as I have else where shown you for Terra a
Terra, and pull the Cavezons inward Rein with your hand, in an oblique line
cross his Neck, and the Nails of it respecting your Outward shoulder to
whatever hand you are going, and thus keep him down, that he rise not too high,
your Bridle hand being also as Low as his Main, which will also help to keep
him down, now his being thus keept low, will cure the half of the Vice of
bringing in his shoulders too much, that is, he will not do it so much as he
did before, but to keep him from coming in at all, because his coming too much
in, is also occasioned by his not going forewards: Therefore to make him go
forewards, you must help him with both your Legs, and as your Outward leg
keeps in his Croup, so your Inward leg must put him forewards, and thus you
see your hand keeps him Low, and both your Legs put him forewards, which will
infallibly in a short time cure him.

But if your Horse go false upon his Terra a Terra, by bringing in his
shoulders too much, and embracing too much ground at once with his fore parts,
then there is no way to Remedy him, like tying the Cavezons inward Rein, as
strait as possible you can to the Pomel, that so he may with both his Eyes
almost look into the Volt, and then he will not have so much Room to bring in
his shoulders as he had before, although it appear otherwise to those who do
not exactly understand the Opperation of the Cavezon; For this will force him
to take shorter stepps, and consequently to embrace less ground at a time with
his fore parts, which will certainly cure him; Now whereas I can only say of
other Helps that they may do, of this I say it will do and is most certain;
therefore I set you down none but it, because I intend you should make use of
no other.

SEVENTHLY, Of a Horse who in the Manage makes a Shuffling kind of Amble, As
also Wrangleth in his Trot.
MAny Horses though they can do nothing but Trot, yet when they are pressed in
the Manage, they will make a shuffling Amble, nay they will perfectly Amble,
which is the worst Action for the Manage that possible can be, and therefore
to prevent it, there is nothing better, then to pull your Horses head into the
Turn as much as possible you can, and Ride him also upon very narrow Circles,
which will hinder him from Ambling, to give him also the Spurrs soundly when he
Ambles, will help to put him from it; Now although some strong Horses Amble
when they are pressed in the Manage, yet they are commonly weak Horses, who
either by nature, or because they are almost wearied, incline to Amble in the
Manage, for we frequently see, that the most part of Foles when first brought
forth, naturally take themselves to the Amble, because they are as yet weak,
but so soon as they are a little stronger, they altogether quite their Amble,
and take themselves to a Trot.

Again, if your Horse do not Amble, but only Wrangle in his going, between a
false Trot and a false Gallop, then also the inward Rein of the Cavezon pulled
very hard with your hand, or tied strait to the Pomel, to put out his Croup
very much upon large Circles will help it, especially if at the same time you
give him the Spurr within the turn, or both Spurrs soundly if need be, and this
with good and frequent stops, will infallibly make him trot right, and make him
go just both upon his Trot and Gallop, as he should.

EIGHTHLY. Of a Horse who goes too much upon his Chine or Back.
Whenever a Horse goes too much on the Back, and fetches disordered Leaps,
there is no way better to hinder him, then to hold him fast and firm on the
hand, for a flack and easy hand will give him Liberty to Leap, when a hard and
stiffer would prevent it: Also when a horse is accustomed to go commonly low in
Corvets, but by Long rest and little Riding begins to go too much upon his
Back, there is nothing takes him more off it then to put in his Croup
sufficiently well, for this will so subject his hinder parts, that it will
hinder and tie him up from Crouping or going upon the Back, but before you put
in his Croup, it were very good to Trot and Gallop him so long upon large
circles of one piste, or tread, until you find that you have totally abated his
Chine, and taken him off his Back, and then put in his Croup to subject him,
that so he may only go upon his Haunches, and not upon his Back; for there is
nothing in the World puts a horse more upon his Haunches, then the Cavezons
inward Rein tied to the Pomel, the Rider at the same time pressing him upon the
outside of the Turn, which will make him lean upon the outside, that is lean
upon his Outward bind leg, which is done by the inward Rein of the Cavezon,
either pulled cross his Neck, or tied to the Pomel, and helping at the same
time with the outward leg, which is Leg and Cavezon Rein contrary, as I have
several times told you already, and cannot do it too often, it is of such
consequence for the right dressing of horses; especially for the putting them
upon their haunches.

NINTHLY, Of a Horse who is Resty, or retains his Forces.
A Resty Horse is he who will not go forewards, the way then is to pull him
backwards, and perhaps he will then go forwards, this seldom fails; but if it
should, then make use of your Spurrs to the purpose, causing also another
person who is a foot, whip him forwards with a good Shambrier, and although he
rebel a great while, the Spurrs and Shambrier will persuade him at last, they
being the best argument you can use to him, if they be given sharply, soundly,
and in time, and be also continued until he yield, which he will certainly do
at last; for whereas the most part of other Remedies fail, this never does, and
you had as good apply Rose water and Suggar candy to him, as attempt to
rectify him with such foolish Remedies, as many old Writers have recommended
for this Vice, therefore they are the Spurrs and Shambrier that must do the
Bussiness, let people who understand no better talk what they will.

For a Horse who falls down upon the Ground, or in the Water, nothing is
better then a pair of good Spurrs timeously applied.

But if your Horse be Retenu, paresus or Contre coeur, which is all but a kind
of Restiness, by which he retains his forces, you must then Gallop him quick,
as also press him upon his Terra a Terra to put him from thinking, for it is
his Resty thinking that nurishes this Vice, and let me tell you, that bad
Horsemen and Bunglers at first breaking of a Horse, are the Cause of all these
Vices, by correcting them either out of time, or letting them have too much of
their will, which is every white as bad, if not worse than the other.

I must also tell you for a Truth, that the worst natured Jade in the World by
nature, is more easily dressed and reduced to Obedience, then a Horse who has
been spoiled and made Resty by ill Riding, so much worse to rectify is a bad
habit, acquired by custom and continued, then an evil disposition by nature;
for a customary Drunkard we see is hardly reclaimed, although by nature he be
not much inclined to it, and if it be thus in Men who are Rational, we need not
much wonder if we find it also so in Horses, who are accounted but poor
irrational Brutes.

TENTHLY. Of a Horse who forces the Riders Hand, commonly called a Runaway.
FOr a Runaway-Horse, you must have a Gentle Bitt, with a slack Curb, and easy
Cavezon, that so nothing may hurt his Mouth, or trouble his Nose, for certainly
sharp Cavezons, and Rud Bitts hard Curbed, which the Horsemen of old made most
use of, did make more Runaway Horses by turning them to despair, than any thing
else, you must also take care to keep a gentle and easy Bridle hand, that so
you may offend him no manner of way, and then Walk him first without Stoping,
but only Steying him upon the hand little by little, and then Trot him,
afterward put him from his Trot to a Walk, also staying him by degrees, and
always make much of him when he obeys you, when you find him thus far
peaceable, then put him from his Trot to a Gentle Gallop, and from the Gallop
to a Trot, and from a Trot to a Walk, and then from his Walk stay him little by
little with a Gentle hand, and using this Method for a while with Patience and
Judgment, you will in all Probability prevent his Ruuning away.

But say you, put the case he do Run away, what is to be done then? for certain
it is that the more the Cavezon be pulled, the harder he will press upon the
Hand, and faster he will run to oppose the Rider, and the more you pull the
Bridle Reins and hurt him by straitning the Curb, the more he will pull and run
the faster, so that your pulling will signity no more then if you pulled a
Wall, in answer to this I say, that if you have Field-room, when ever you find
him begin to run, let him go by slacking the Bridle, and giving him the Spurrs
continually, sharply, and soundly, until he begin to slack of himself, and so
be contented to stop, and so often as he begins to run, use him always after
the same manner, and I dare undertake that at last you will cure him, for there
is no Remedy I assure you like this for a Runaway Horse.

But if you have not Room to run him straight out, and are circumscribed and
confined in a narrow bounds, then make him run circularly until he be weary,
but if you have only a very little space, then the absolute best way is to put
him to the single Pillar, with a good strong Rope, which a second person must
keep fast about the Pillar with his hand, both which will hold him, and there
he can run no way but round and circularly; neglect not to give him the Spurrs
soundly, until he be weary and willing to stop, and this at last will no doubt
cure him.

ELEVENTHLY, Of a Skittish Horse, and to assure him for the Wars.
WHen a Horse is Skittish and apprehensive of Noise, there are many Inventions
made use of by unskillful people to help him, which are none of the best, such
as to stop his Ears with W^ol that he may not hear, that is, to make him deaf
as well as Skittish, for the Vice still remains, and if the Wool should fall
out, you would find it to be so; but you may be also deceived as to the sense
which occasions this Vice, for perhaps it may not be from the Sense of Hearing,
but seeing, that his Skittishness proceeds, and should he be afraid of the Fire
when Guns are shot, would you cover his Eyes with Lunettes or Spectacles of
Leather, to make him both deaf and blind, these are all but great follies,
therefore the only sure way is to accustom him by little and little to shot,
and the noise of Drums, Trumpets and Colors, and the practice of this will
make him endure them, and go upon any of them, yea even upon a Sword or
Halbert, for as Custom prevails with Men, so does it also with Horses, it is
also very good to teach a Horse to leap hedge, ditch, and Rail, for all these
things are useful especially for a Soldiers Horse, as also to Swim well is
very necessary, and has saved many a Man's Life.

TWELFTHLY, Of a Horse who is Vicious, by Biting, Stricking, or Rising so high
before, that he is always in danger of coming over upon his Rider.
WHen a Horse Bites at his Shoulders, and at the branches of his Bitt, or at
his Riders legs, and also rises and turns round ready to come over, the best
Remedy that I know, is to ride him with a Gentle Bitt, and without a Cavezon,
offending and hurting him as little as possible, and to tie the Nose band of
the Bridle strait, as also to have another Nose band below, where the Bitt is
fastened, and to draw that so very hard, that he cannot open his Mouth, and
when the Horse finds that he cannot Bite, he will in a little time quite those
Jadish Tricks; Now because the giving him the Spurrs out of time, appears to be
the cause of his Vitiousness, Therefore do not give him them of a great while,
but only walk and Trot him upon large circles quietly and peaceably, and when
you have gained him to this point, then Gallop him gently now and then, making
but just feel that you have Spurrs and no more, and this Method continued will
cure him, or else nothing.

Yet I must tell you, that for Vicious Horses who endanger the Company, by
Kicking or Stricking out behind, there is no better way then to cause geld
them, for if that cure them not, nothing else in the World will; But the worst
of all Vices or rather Defenses, and which puts a Rider in most danger, is when
a Horse Rises so high before, that he is ready to Renverse or come over upon
his Rider, those Horses which are fiery and weak in the Gambrels, are most
subject to it, and put frequently their Rider in peril of his Life, and
therefore I call it a troublesome or dangerous Defense, now those Horsemen who
teach their Horses to rise before, or upon pesates, before they be settled upon
the bond and answer the heels, teach them this Defense, so that upon the least
pull, or holding fast of the Bridle when the Horse rises, he is brought over
upon his Rider; besides what I have already desited you to do in this Case,
which is to keep a gentle and light hand, and to trouble your Horse as little
as possible, yet here is an infallible way without any kind of hazard for the
Rider, to cure a Horse of this Vice, even when he has had it so long, that it
is convetted into a kind of habit.

Tie therefore your Horse very short between the Pillars with a Rope Cavezon,
without any person upon his Back, and with a Stick about six foot long, pointed
at one end with an Iron Punchion or Needle, prick your Horse upon the outside
of his Thigh, to make him strick out, and when he does it make much of him,
continue thus to make him strick out, until he do it easily, and without any
kind of difficulty, which will be in two or three Days at most, if you
continue it for half an hour each Day, when you find that he stricks out when
ever you offer to prick him, although you do not touch him with the Needle,
then take his Back still between the Pillars, and keeping the Bridle a little
long in your Left Hand, help him behind the Saddle with your Right, in which
you must have a short Punchion, another person upon foot at the same time,
helping with the Stick upon his Thigh, and if he strick out easily with you
upon his Back, then Caresss him, and continue for several Days this Lesson,
until you find him strick out by the help only of the Punchion which is in your
Right hand, without the assistance of the Stick upon his Thigh, which will be
in four or five Days at farthest, then take him from between the Pillan, and
put him to the single pillar with a long Rope, which must be kept about it by
the Person who is a foot, and there make him strick out in one place with the
help of your Right hand, and of the long stick upon his Thigh if need be,
afterward make him go forewards two or three Steps, and then make him strick
out three or four times upon end, and thus continue first Stepping or VValking
him, and then making him strick out, until he perform it a whole Round without
making one Step or Walk, but always stricking out; when he is brought this
length, then Gallop him about the Pillar, and as you stop him make him strick
out, without raising him at all before, and if he should offer to rise of his
own accord, then make use of your Punchion behind the Saddle, which will at
that inflant of time make him strick out, and so prevent his rising before, and
using him thus for some time he will be so accustomed to it, that he will not
so much as offer to rise before at all, let alone to come over or Renverse,
even although you should Gallop him in the Fields, and without any kind of
Long or Rope fixed to the Bridle, and all this in the space of eight or ten
Days at farthest, I have had experience of this Remedy for Renversing many a
time, and it never yet failed me, so that after I have made use of it for eight
or ten Days, I make no difficulty to give them the Spurrs sharply if they
need them, and vet they never think of rising before: when you have once
brought him from rising before, it is an easy matter to cure him of his
stricking out, so here you see is a Vice or Defense rectified in a very short
time by its Contrary, and without any kind of difficulty or danger to the Rider.

If I have not in this Chapter named all the Vices with their Remedies, which
the most part of cross natured Horses are subject to, and defend themselves by
when dressing, it is because those Horses who are Rid according to the Method I
have prescrived in this Treatise, are not subject to them, because they are not
too much troubled and pressed, for by this Method you follow Nature, and make
every thing become easy to them by degrees, and do not force and press them
either with the stroacks of the Spurrs, or lashes of the Shambriet, and as by
practice they become supple and easy, they press themselves of their own
accord, and aim at nothing else but to obey, for it is a foolish thing to
expect to make a Horse obedient and ready in eight or ten Daves time, by the
force of Blows, because it is not Force as I have else where told you, but good
and methodical Lessons judiciously applied, which make and dress Horses, and
render them perfectly obedient to the hand and heel; and if I be not very much
mistaken, you have in this Treatise as true and Artificial Ones, for the
Dressing and perfecting of Horses, and also descrived with as few Repetitions,
as you will find in any Book as yet extant: Therefore practice them with
Patience and Judgment, and I make no doubt, when once you have a little trial
of them, but you will acknowledge them, notwithstanding of their being thus
compendized, preserable to the many and unnecessary Varietys, of larger and
more expensive Volums.

CHAP XXXV. Of Running Horses, and how to Diet them for a Match.
ALthough I chiefly intended this Treatise of Horsemanship, CHAP: XXXV.
for directing how all Horses might be perfectly broak for the Manage, and
also that the Divertisement of Raceing, is no ways comparable to this most
Heroic exercise of Riding, yet seeing Horse Matches are mightily esteemed in
these Isles, and that by persons of the most considerable Fortunes, and
greatest Quality, I judged it would be very acceptable to a curious Reader, to
give him in this Chapter, two methods of preparing running horses, the first
more modern, which I have had Experience of my self, and is I believe indeed
one of the best which has been as yet published, and which I have taken as
well as the preceding discourse of Ambling, from a Book in English, Entitled
The Experienced Farrier, which to do the Author who collected it justice, I
must confess I look upon to be one of the best Books upon the Subject, that I
have ever seen in our Language; The second is more Ancient, but however finding
it placed at the end of the French Coppie Of the Parfait Marshall, which Book
I have taken the pains to translate, I thought fit to remove it from that place
and insert it here, that so both Methods might be found and compared together,
and that of them made choice of which shall be found most agreeable to the
Readers fancy, although if he take my advice he shall keep him to the first,
and that for two reasons. First, Because the French are generally great
Strangers to this kind of Divertisement. And secondly, Because the Method set
down by Monsieur Solizel, was given him only by another Esquier who received it
from an English Jockie, so never having made trial of it himself, he only
gives it upon the Recommendation of this Esquier from whom he received it, now
although it must be confessed, that it differs vastly from the manner of
preparing Race horses used now a days, yet seeing it is some what
extraordinary and Ancient, I thought fit to subjoin it to this other, that
whoever has the curiosity may try either, and then keep by that which be
finds most successful, for I am persuaded, he will find one of the two to
answer his Expectation. Therefore to begin with

FIRST. The Modern way of preparing a Horse for a Course or Match.
Seeing Racing or Horse Matching is so highly esteemed by the Gentry of these
Islands, and that a good horse for that purpose is much looked upon and coveted,
by those who delight in this short and fickle, although it must be confessed
(during its continuance) very pleasing Divertisement, I shall in this Chapter
endeavor to give you some insight in it, and first, in choosing a horse for
Running, see that he be tractable and no ways Resty or Skittish, but familiar
with his Keeper, and sprightfull in his Looks and Actions, let him have also an
indifferent large reach, and a great share of beels if possible, For take my
word for it, that is a chief ingredient in a Running horse, Wind and Length
being with a great dale of more ease increased by Art, then heels and
swiftness, also let him (if possible) be altogether well shaped, that is, well
set in the Shoulders, well turned in the Buttock and Gascoyns, and well Coupled
in the short Ribs, his Legs right planted, and to be sure let him have good
feet, for these are both the foundation, and Wings of this Flying Machine upon
earth; his head small and slender, with lean and firm Cheek bones, a sharp or
Hauk nose, wide nostirls, and a large Throple, his Age not beneath six, no
horse under that Age having sufficient strength and vigor, either to furnish a
four mile course or heats, without Running the hazard of being over strained,
all their Bones and Joints being only a kind of firm Gristle, neither is this
all, for the main point of bringing him into a condition to run successfully,
is yet to be spoak to, which consists in Dyeting, and carefully ordering him
before the day appointed for the Match, and therefore I shall first discourse
of the Limitation of time, to be allowed for preparing a Running horse for any
ordinary Plate or Match, that is not for too extraordinary a sum, because all
Judicious Horsemen must acknowledge this for a truth, that the longer a horse
be in good Keeping, providing no accident intervene, the better heat he will
make when strained, because Custom and Practice without excess, do convert any
exercise a most into a (...) Nature.

1st. Of the time allowed (...) prepare any Horse for a Match.

THerefore as for the Limitation of time for a Plate or small sum of money, I
allow but of two Months at any time of the year what soever, for an old horse,
or a horse formerly traintd, for I speak not here of Colts, and I am persuaded
that if a horse make not a good heat in two Months, he will not make it in
fifteen.

Yet many do affirm, that a horse newly taken from the Grass, and soul, cannot
be prepared under six Months, by which they Rob their Masters of four Months
pleasure, engadge him in an expensive charge, which will make the sport become
loathsome and uneasy to him, and can get nothing to defend and cloak what they
say withal, but their ignorance, and perhaps a few false got Crowns which
evanish so soon as gained, yet as Heretics cite Scripture, so these people
find Reasons to defend their want of skill and Experience, as the danger of too
violent Exercise, the offense of Grease too suddenly melted, the moving of
humors too hastily, which leads to mortal sickness, and the moderating and
helping of all these by a slow proceeding, or bringing the horse into order by
degrees and time, or as I may rather say by an ignorant delay and sufferance.

Now all these Reasons if but superficially viewed, seem to have somewhat of
Foret in them, for too early Exercise is dangerous, but not if given moderatly,
and free from violence; to break or melt Grease too suddenly, is an offense
insufferable, for it puts both Limbs and Life in hazard, but not if it be
purged away with wholesome Scourings; The hasty stirring up of Humors in the
Body where they superabound, and are generally dispersed and not settled,
cannot choice but breed sickness, but not where Discretion and Judgment expel
and evacuat them, with wholesome and moderate Airings; And as for moderating of
all these by the length and tediousness of time, as two Months for the first
and two Months for the second, and as much for the last, it is like the ouring
of a Gangaren in an Old Man, Better to die then be dismembrrd, better loose the
Prize or Beats then bear the Charges, for I appail to any Noble Judgment whose
Purse has experienced such Actions, if six Months Preparation with the
Dependants to it, does not eat up and devour the better half of a twenty five
or thirty pound Wager, therefore for any ordinary Match or Beat, I allow as I
said but of two Months to prepare a Horse for it, it being most certain, that a
Horse who cannot make a good heat in that time, will very rarely make an
Extraordinary one, though you should Diet him triple or quadruple that space.

2ly. Of Scourings and their use

BUt Reply they, No Scourings are to be allowed, because they are Physical,
force Nature, and so are prejudicial to her, by occasioning sickness, and
emparing health, and therefore nothing is comparable to the length of time,
because Nature works every thing of her self, and although she do it but
slowly, yet she does it with so much the less danger.

I indeed confess that scourings given immoderately, and which are stuffed with
unwholesome and poisonous ingredients, cannot choose but bring on infirmity and
sickness, but wholesome scourings, which are composed of Beneficial and
Nourishing Simples, neither occasion sickness, nor any manner of infirmity, but
bring away Grease and all foulness so abundantly, and in so kindly a manner,
that by the moderate use of them you shall effect more in one Week, then in two
months by a Dilatory and Doubtful forbearance of them; I call it Dilatory and
Doubtful, because no Man in this lingering course, can certainly tell which way
the Grease and foulness will be voided or expelled, as whither in his dung
which is the safest, or by sweat which is hazardous, or by his Limbs which is
very dangerous; Or lastly, if it will remain and putrefie in his body, which
proves often times mortal, since the Issue of any or all these fall out,
according to the strength and condition a Horses body is brought to, by the
care and diligence of his Keeper, for if either the one fail in Power, or the
other in Care and Diligence, Farewell Horse for that Match.

Now all this the greatest Envy cannot choose but confess, only they have one
broken Crutch to support them, and that is, they know no scouring, and
therefore will allow of none, indeed against Obstinacy I am resolved not to
Dispute, only shall appeal to Art and Discretion; whither Moderate and
Beneficial Purgations, or painful sufferance when Nature is offended, be the
better Doers, but still they will maintain their Argugument, and urge, That
whatsoever is given to a Horse more then his Natural food, and which he will
Naturally and willingly receive, is both improper and unwholesome.

To this I answer, That the Natural Food of Man is Bread only, all other things
according to the Philosopher being superfluous, and therefore to be avoided;
But we find by Experience and the general practice of Mankind, that both
Humanity and Divinity laugh at this Argument, because other helps, as Physic,
variety of Meats, and diverse other Means appointed by Divine Providence it
self, tell the Contemners hereof how grossly they Err, in this foolish Opinion,
nay allow them a little shadow of Truth, that things most Natural are most
Beneficial, then it must follow that grass, or hay which is but withered grass,
are most Beneficial because most Natural, now grass is Physical, for in it is
contained all manner of Simples of what Quality soever, as Hot, Cold, Moist,
Dry, so that whatsoever is given in his scourings which is good, is but what he
has gathered Naturally when at Soil, only with this difference, that what he
gathered was mixed in a confused manner, contraries being so clap together, that
it is not possible to judge where the predominant Quality lies; but that which
we compound is so ordered by Art and Reason, that we know how it should work,
and accordingly expect the Event, if it be not crossed by some extraordinary
Disaster.

I would therefore gladly ask these Gentlemen, If they will undertake to
prepare their Running Horse with only Grass or Hay? But they know in this case,
that the end of their Labor would be loss, and therefore they are satisfied to
allow of Corn, nay diverse kinds of Corns, some Loosening as Rye, some Binding
and Astringent as Beans, and others Fatening and increasing both blood and
Spirits, as Wheat; Nay they will allow Bread, yea Bread of diverse compositions
and mixtures, as one kind before heats, another after, some Quick of Digestion,
and others Slow; And if this method of Dyeting be not almost as Physical, as
the gentle scourings which are given by a good and understanding Horseman; I
confess that all I have said in Vindication of Beneficial and rightly
appropriate scourings, is of no force at all: Nay these Contemners of scourings
will yet allow of an Egg, and that mixed with other ingredients, and for Butter
and Garlic they will use it, though it be never so fulsom; the reason is,
because their knowledge in Physic can arise to no higher pitch, and so
Authorized Ignorance will impudently ever wage War with the best Understanding.

There are yet another sort of Feeders, who in a contrary extreme run beyond
these into mischiefs, and these are they who over scour their Horses, and are
never at peace and ease; but when they are giving of potions (which they call
scourings) sometimes without Cause, and always without Judgment and Method,
which bring upon a Horse such untollerable weakness, that he is not able to
perform any violent Exercise; Now from this too little and too much, I would
have you to gather a mean for scourings which is founded upon Reason, and that
is, First, that the Simples be wholesome and propper, nixt that you be sure
there is foulness; And lastly, that the state of the body be such, that you may
by your scourings rightly Administrate, rather Augment then decress Vigor, and
thus shall your undertakings be prosperous, and your method of Preparation
without controlement: To conclude, I allow two months for this preparation,
and according to that time shall lay down my Directions as follows.

3ly. Some Considerations concerning the different States of Body, wherein a
Horse shall be found when Matched.

ALbeit the Office of a Feeder belongs generally to all Horsemen, yet it is
in a more particular and Critical sense appropriate only to the Keepers of
Running Horses, because as other horses have a general way of being fed, so the
dyeting of these is Artificial, and full of Curiosity and circumspection, in
which whosoever erreth, shall sooner bring his horse to destruction then any
kind of perfection; To prevent which you are therefore to have regard to three
estates of Body, in any horse who is Matched,

The first is, If he be very fat, foul, or taken from either Grass or Soil.

The second, if he be extreme lean and poor, either through over Riding, bad
Keeping, or other infirmity.

The third and last is, if he be in a good and likely state of Body, neither
too fat nor too lean, but has been well kept and moderatly exercised.

Now if he be in the first state of Body, you shall take longer time to prepare
him, as two Months at the least, and therefore must order your Match
accordingly, for he will take much Labor and Airing, great carefulness in
heating, and discretion in Scouring, as also rather a strick then Liberal hand
in Feeding.

If he be in the second state of Body, (which is poor and lean) then take yet a
longer time, and let his Airings be Moderat, as not before or after Sun, but
rather to increase Appetite then harden flesh, and also have a bountiful and
Liberal hand in feeding of him, but still not so as to cloy him.

In fine, If he be in the third state of Body, which is a mean between the
other two extremes, then a Month or six weeks, and sometimes less if the Match
be inconsiderable, may be a sufficient Allowance of time to prepare him for it,
now as this third estate participats of both the former, so it must borrow from
them a share in all their Orderings, that is to be neither too early nor too
late in Airing and exercising, to give him pretty sharp but not straining
heats, with beneficial and nourishing Seourings, as also to be constant in a
Moderat way of Feeding.

Again as you have considered the General State of your horses body, so you
must also have an eye to some other particular constitutions of Body which may
perhaps more nearly concern him, as if he be fat and foul, yet of a free and
wasting Nature, apt quickly to consume and loss his flesh, in that case you
must not have too strick a hand, neither can he endure so violent exercise, as
if he were of an hardy dsposition, and will feed and be fat upon all meats and
exercises, but if he be in extreme Poverty through disorder and Mismannagement,
and yet by Nature very hardy, and apt both soon to recover his Flesh and keep
it well, then by no means you should have so liberal a hand to him, nor for
bear that exercise, as if he were of a tender constitution, weak Stomach, and
free spirit, provided always you have regard to his Limbs, and the
Imperfections of Lameness; now these few things being premised, I shall next
begin with the Method of ordering him for the first fortnight of the two
Months, which I have generally alloted as a competent time to prepare for a
Match, except that the Beat be either somewhat extraordinary, or the Horse in a
very weak and bad state of Body, in which case a longer time is to be demanded,
according as your own Judgment shall direct you.

4ly, The first fortnights Feeding of a Horse for a March, who is fat, foul, or
nowly takin from Grass or Soil.

IF you Match a horse that is sat and foul, either by Running at Grass,
standing at Soil, or any other m^ans of Rest, as too high feeding or the like,
you shall (after his Body is emptied and the Grass voided, which will be within
three or four days at most) for the first Fortnight at least, rise early in
the Morning before day, or at the Spring of day, according to the Season of the
year, and having put on his Bridle being first washed in a little Ale or Beat
and tied him up to the Rack, take away his Dung and other foulness of the
Stable about him, then dress him as you have been already taught in the
fi^tieth Chapter of this first part of the Parfait Marshall; When that work is
finished, take a fair large Body cloth of thick House-wiffes Kersie or Scots
Tartain, (if it be in Winter) or of Cotton or other light stuff, (it in Summer)
and fold it round his Body, then clap on the Watering Saddle, and girt the
formest Girth pretty strait, but the other some what slack, and wisp him on
each side his heart, with pretty soft Wisps between the two Girths that both of
them may be of equal straitness, then put before his Breast, a Breast Cloth
suitable to the Body cloth, and let it be so long as to cover both his
Shoulders, then taking a little Ale or Bear in your Mouth, squitt it into the
Herses, and so lead him out of the Stable and take his Back, leaving a Boy
behind you to trim up the Stable, by carrying out the Dung, and trussing up the
Litter, for you are to know that your Horse must always stand upon good store
of dry Litter both Night and Day, and it must be either Wheat straw or Oat
straw, for Barley straw and Ry^straw are unwholesome and dangerous, the first
breeding heart burning, and the last causing Scouring.

When you are Mounted, Walk or Rack him only a foot pace, (for you must neither
Amble nor Trot, because they are both prejudicial to Speed or Swiftness) at
least a Mile or two, or more if you think fit, upon smooth and equal Ground,
and if it have a Gentle Rising so much the better, there Gallop him Gently,
afterward Walk him softly, that so he may cool as much one way as he warmeth
another, and when you have thus exercised him a pretty Space, and seeing the
Sun begin to rise, or else newly risen. Rack him down to some fresh River, or
clear Pound, and there let him drink at his Pleasure, after he has drunk bring
him gently out of the Water, and Rack him away very easily, and not according
to the ignorance of some Grooms, who rush their Horse presently as he comes
out of the Water into a Gallop, for that brings commonly along with it two
mischiefs, either it teaches the horse to run away with you so soon as he is
watered, or it makes him refuse to drink, fearing the violence of his exercise
which is to follow, when you have thus walked him a little calmly, put him into
a Gallop gently, and exercise him moderatly as you did before, then Walk him a
little space, after which offer him more Water, if he drink, then Gallop him
again gently; if not, then Gallop him a little more to occasion thirst, and in
this manner give him always exercise before and after water, when you judge he
has drunk sufficiently, bring him home gently without a wet hair, or the least
sweat upon him, and when you are come to the Stable d^o^, provoke him to piss
if you can, by stirring up some of the Litter which is at the Stable door,
under him, if he do not stale at first no matter, for a little custom will
bring him to it, and it is wholesome both for his health, and the sweet keeping
of the Stable.

This done bring him to the Stable, and tie him up to the Rack, then rub him
well with Wisps, afterward loose his Breast cloth, and rub his head and Neck
with a dry cloth, then take off his Saddle, and hanging it up with his Body
cloth, rub him all over, especially that part of his Back where the Saddle was
placed, then cloth him up, first with a Linen Sheet, and then over that a
good strong Housing Cloth, and above it his VVooling Body cloth, which in
Winter it is not a miss to have lyned with Cotton, but in Summer a single one
is sufficient, when these are all on, girt on his Surcingle, and stop it with
small and soft wisps, which will make him so much the easier.

After he is thus clothed, stop his feet with Cow dung, or his own Dung being
a very little moistened with fresh Water, then throw into the Rack a little
bundle of Hay well dusted and wrapped hard together, and let him eat it standing
upon his Bridle, when he has stood an hour or so upon his Bridle, take it off,
and rub his Head and Neck very well with a Hemp or Hair cloth, for this is
good to dissolve all gross and thick humors which may be in his Head, then
after you have made clean the Manger, take an English Quart or Scots Chopin, of
sweet, dry, old, and clean dressed Oats, for those which are unsweet breed,
infirmities, those that are moist cause swelling in the Body, those that are
new breed Worms, and those which are but half dressed deceive the Stomach, and so
bring the Horse to ruin; as for Black Oats although they are tolerable, yet
they make foul Dung, and hinder a man from knowing so exactly the state of his
Horses Body as he ought; now this Proportion of Oats you shall clean and dress
in such a Sieve, as shall keep the good and full, and let a Light Grain or Oat
pass through it, and if he eat them with a good Appetite, let him have again the
same Quantity, and so let him rest till Eleven a clock with the windows closs,
for the darker you keep him the better, because it will make him ly down and
take his rest, which otherwise he would not so readily, therefore you are to
arm your stable with Canvass, both for Darkness, Warmth, and that no filth may
come near him, eleven aclock being come, rub his head and neck as before, and
dress him another English quart, or Scots Chopin of Oats, then leave him the
Stable being made dark, till one a clock in the Afternoon, at one a clock use
him just as you did before, with Rubbing, Feeding, taking away his Dung, and
then leave him dark till watering time; but only at one a clock give him
another small and hard bundle of Hay, to chaw upon till Watering time.

Watering time being come, go to the Stable; and having made all things clean,
Bridle, take off his Clothes, and dress him as in the Morning, then cloth,
Saddle, lead him forth and urge him to empty; afterward take his Back, and
Rack him abroad, but not to Rising Ground as in the Morning, if you can have
the convenience of any which is plain, and there Air him in all points as you
did in the Morning, when you have watered him, and spent the Evening in Airing
until it be near Night, (for nothing is more wholesome and consumes foulness
more, then Airly and Late Airings) Rack him home to the Stable door, and there
alight, and do as you did in the Morning both without doors and within, and so
let him rest till nine at Night.

At nine come to him, and rub down his Legs well with Wisps, and his Head and
Neck with a clean cloth, and turning up his Clothes, rub all his hinder parts,
then give him an English Quart or Scots Chopin of Oats in the same manner as
you did before, and after that a little hard bundle of Hay, then toss up his
Litter and make his Bed soft, leaving him so till next Morning.

The next Morning, do every thing to him without the least Omission, as has
been formerly declared, and thus keep him for the first Fortnight, which will
so take away his Foulness, and harden his Flesh, that the nixt Fortnight you
may adventure to give him some Heats, but before I proceed to the second
Fortnights feeding, I shall answer an Objection which may be urged, touching
the quantity of Provender which I prescrive, being but one English Quart or
Scots Chopin of Oats, at a Meal, seeing there are many Horses who will eat a
larger Proportion and Quantity, so that to scant them to this little were to
starve, or at the best to breed Weakness: To this I answer, that I set not
down this Proportion of Provender as an infallible Rule, but as a President
which may be imitated or augmented at pleasure, for I have given you this
Caveat, that if he eat this Quantity with a good Stomach, you may give him
another, still leaving the due and just Proportion to your own discretion and
Judgment.

5ly. The second Fortnights Feeding.

IN this Fortnight you shall do all things as in the first, only whereas in the
first Fortnight, you give him no Oats before his Morning exercise, In this
second Fortnight, you shall before you put on his Bridle in the Morning, give
him an English quart or Scots Chopin of Oats, then Bridle him up and dress him
as before ordered, afterward Cloth, Saddle, Air, Water, Exercise, and bring
him home as before showed, only you shall now put no Hay into his Rack, but
give it him out of your hand, handful after handful, and so leave him on his
Bridle for an hour, when you come to him again, Rub him, and after other
Ceremonies sift him another English quart or Scots Chopin of Oats, and set them
by, then take a Loaf of Bread that is three days old at least, and made after
this manner.

6ly, The first Bread.

TAke three parts of Clean Beans, and one part of Wheat, according to the
Quantity of Bread you intend to back, mix and grind them together, when
grinded, Bolt it pretty fine, and kned it up with good store of fresh Barm and
Lightning, but with as little Water as may be, labor it very well in a Trough,
and break it, then cover it up warm that it may swell, and after wards back it
in the form of big Loaves thoroughly, and let them soak soundly, and when they
are drow'n from the oven, turn up their bottoms that so they may cool; when
they three days old let your horse eat of them, but not sooner for new Bread
is hurtful, when you give it him Chip it very well, and Crumbling it pretty
small, mix it with his Oats you formerly sifted and set by, (the Proportion of
Bread is left to your own discretion, and then leave him till eleven a cloak,
about eleven a cloak give him the same Quantity of Oats and Bread, and let him
rest till the Afternoon, at one a clock in the afternoon if you intend not to
give him a heat the next day, feed him with Bread and Oats as in the Forenoon,
and so every Meal following, for that day.

But if you intend the next day to give him a Heat, at which now I aim, then
you shall only give him an English quart, or Scots Chopin of Oats clean sifted,
but no Hay, and so let him rest till evening, at four a cloak give him the like
quantity of clean sifted Oats, and after they are eaten, Bridle him up, Dress,
Cloth, Sadle, Air, Water, Exercise, bring nome, and order him as before
showed, only give him neither Hay nor Bread amongst his Oats for that night;
after he has stood about an hour upon his Bridle, give him another measure of
Oats, and after they are eaten put a sweet and clean Muzzle upon him, and thus
let him rest till nine at Night: Nine a clook being come, give him another
English Quart, or Scots Chopin of clean Oats, and when he has eat them, put on
his Muzzle again, toss up his Litter, and so leave him till next Morning.

7ly, Of the use of Muzzles and how they are made.

THe use of the Muzzle being rightly made, is to keep a horse from eating up
his Litter from gnawing upon Boards, and Mud^walls, and indeed to keep him from
eating any thing, but what he receives from your own hands, they are made
sometimes of Leather, and stamped full of holes, but these are unsavory and
unwholesome, all Leather Muzzles whatsoever being indeed unpleasant; besides
they are too closs and hot for the Horse, there are also Muzzles made of double
Canvass with a round bottom, and two long Square Latices Of small Tape, one
before each Nostirl, which Latices reach down to the very bottom, and go also
upwards more then a hand breadth; but the best Muzzles of all both for Winter
and Summer, are the net Muzzles made of strong Pack thread, and knit very thick
and closs in the bottom, and then enlarged wider and wider upwards to the
middle of the Horses head, at which place they are bound about with a Tape, and
have also a Loop and string, whereby they are fastened to the Horses head, this
much of the Muzzle and it use.

Your horse having stood all night in his Muzzle, give him early the next
Morning, an English Quart or Scots Chopin of Oats rubed between your hands with
some Bear or Ale, and when he has eaten them, then dress and Sadle him as
formerly, and being ready to lead him out, give him a new laid Egg or two,
washing his Mouth after it with a little Bear or Ale, and so lead him out not
forgetting also to provoke him to empty at the door, then Mount and Rack him
gently to the Course or Ground where you are to Heat, making him by the way
smell at any other horse dung you shall meet with.

When you are come within a little way of the Starting place, dismount and take
off his Body cloth and Breast cloth, and girt on the Sadle again, leaving
your Groom to take care of his Clothes, until you shall come to him again, all
this being done, Rack your Horse gently up to the Starting post if there be
any, making him smell at it, that so he may both be acquainted with it, and
also know the beginning and ending of the Course, there start him roundly and
sharply, and give him his heat according to the following Directions.

8ly. Some few things to be observed in giving of Heats.

IN giving of Heats you are to consider first, that two in the Week are
sufficient for any Horse of whatsoever Condition or State of Body.

Secondly, That one of themshould always be given upon that day of the Week in
which your horse is to run his Match, and that also still to be the sharpest
for increasing of his Heels or Swiftness, the other being only a slow Galloping
over the Course, more to increase Wind and cause Sweat, then to improve his
Speed, and therefore I would have you to order them thus; Suppose your Match
day is to be upon a Monday, then your Heating days must be Mondays and
Frydays, and the sharper Heat to be upon the Monday, because it is the day of
his Match, if the day be Tuesday, then your Heating days are Tuesdays and
Saturdays, if Wednesday then Wednesdays and Saturdays, by Reason of the LORD's
Day; if Thursday then Thursdays and M^ndays, and so of the rest, still
observing to Run him more smartly upon these Heating days of the Week, in which
the Match is appointed to be run, then any of the other, and that for the
Reasons I have already given you.

Thirdly, You shall give no Heat (but in case of necessity) in rain or foul
weather, but rather defer hours, and change days, for it is unwholesome and
dangerous; And therefore in case of sudden shoure and uncertain weather, you
shall have for your Horse a Hood loynd quite through, to keep out the Rain: For
nothing is more dangerous then cold wet falling into the ears, and upon the nap
of the neck, and Fillets.

Fourthly, Observe to give your Heats (the weather being seasonable) as Early
in the morning as you can; That is, by the spring of day, but by no means in
the dark, for it is to the Horse both unwholesome and unpleasant, to the rider a
great testimony of folly, and to both an act of danger and Precipitation.

Fifthly and lastly, When you begin your heat, start your Horse roundly and
sharply, at near a three quarters speed, and if it be upon the day of the Week
which his match is to fall in, then according to his strength, goodness of
wind, and cheerfulness of Spirit, run him the whole course through, and by no
means do any thing in extremity, or above his wind, but when you find him a
little yield, then draw a little and give him ease, that he may do all with
pleasure and not with anguish, for this manner of training will make him take
delight in his labor, and so the better endure it, but the contrary would
bread uneasiness, and make his exercise become a toil, but if his heating day
be upon any other day of the week, then that his Match is to be run upon, then
make him only go over the course at a slow and gentle Gallop, only to increase
his wind, and cause sweat, that so the scouring you are to give him after his
heat, may have some loose grease to work upon and bring away, for this is the
only design of the second heat in each week, otherwise were both the heats
smart, the Horse would not be able to hold our, there being so short an
intermission between them, for him to rest and recover his vigor, therefore
you would do well not to mistake, and in stead of two Heats in a week which I
order, the one to be smart and the other gentle, you give not both with the
same degree of swiftness, For that is not at all my meaning, and therefore I
desire you would take notice to it; also during the time you course him, you
shall observe upon what ground he runs best, as whither up hill or down
hill, upon smooth ground or tough, upon wet or dry, or upon a Level, or some
what rising ground, and according as you find his Nature, so Manage him for
your own advantage, and these are the most considerable things to be observed
in giving of a Heat.

When you have finished your Heat and gently Gallopt him up and down, to rate
his wind and cheer his spirits, you shall then (the Groom being ready) Ride
into some warm place or corner, and with your Glassing or scraping knife, made
either of some broken sword blade, or for want of that a thin piece of old hard
Oaken wood, fashioned like a long bread knife, with a sharp edge, the shape
whereof you may see in the first Plate of this book, Scrape off the sweat from
your horse in every part (Buttocks excepted) until you can make no more arise,
still moving him now and then a little to keep his limbs in motion, least they
become stiff, then with dry clothes rub him all over, afterward take off his
Sadle, and having with the glassing knife also seraped his back, and rubbed it
near dry, put on his Body cloth and Breast cloth, and set on the Sadle again
and girt it, then mount and Gallop him gently, now and then rubbing and wiping
his head, Neck, and body, as you sit upon his back: Last of all, walk him about
the Fields to cool him, and when you find him begin to dry apace, then Rack him
homewards, sometimes Stepping and sometimes Galloping, But by no means bring
him to the Stable till you find him thoroughly dry; when you are come to the
stable door, entice him to empty, then set him up, and ty him to the Rack, and
(having either prepared it your self before, or at least one for you against
your coming) give him one of these scourings following, which you please; The
way to compose and make them being thus;

9ly. Two excellent Scourings for Running Horses, any one of which may be very
safely given after a Heat, to bring away molten Grease, or any other foulness
which may be lurking in the Horses Body.

FOR the first, take an English Pint or Scots Mutchkin of the Syrup of Roses,
or for want of it the like quantity of strong Honyed Water, and desolve into
it, of Cassia, Agarick, and Myrrh, of each an Ounce, shaking them well
together in a Glass, then being mul'd and made warm upon a gentle fire, and the
Horse newly come from his He^^ (as before showed) give it him luke warm.

For the second, take an English Pint or Scots Mutchkin of Canary, Mallaga, or
Cherrit, and Pulverizing an ounce of the finest Rosin, put it therein, which
being Incorporated, add to them six ounces of Olive Oil, and an ounce and an
half or two ounces of brown Sugareandie beaten to powder, with an ounce of the
juce of Savin, or powder of Rubarb, mix all well together, and warming it over
a gentle fire, give it the Horse Milk or Luke warm.

10ly. How to order him after his Scouring.

WHen you have given it him, rub his Legs well, then take off his Sadle, and
if his body be dry, run slightly over it with your Currie Comb, after that with
the French Brush, and lastly rub him all over very well with a dry cloth, and
cloth him up warm, throwing also over him if the weather be very cold a loose
Blanket or Covering, let him fast full two hours upon his Bridle after having
taken the scouring, and during that time go not out of the stable, but keep him
stirring now and then, which will cause his Scouring to work the better.

After he has fasted upon the Bridle two hours, then take a handful of wheat
ears, and coming to him handle and feel the roots of his ears, and under his
clothes nixt to his heart, and upon his Flanks, and if you find any new sweat
arise, or coldness, or that his Flank beat or breast move fast, then forbear to
give him any thing, for it is a sign that there is much foulness stirred up, on
which the scouring is working with a conquering quality, therefore it is that
the Horse is brought to a little sickness, so that in this case you shall only
take off his Bridle, put on his Collar, toss up his Litter, and absent your
self, (having made the Stable dark and quiet) for other two hours, which is
commonly the longest that that sickness will continue, but if you find him have
no such indisposition, then give him the ears of Wheat by three or four
together, and if he eat one handful give him another, and so until he eat
three or four handfuls, but no more, then drawing his Bridle and rubbing his
head well, give him a little Knab of Hay well Dusted; about an Hour after give
him an English Quart or Scots Chopin of clean Oats, putting two or three
handfuls of split Beans, very well picked amongst them, and break also amongst
these two or three shaves of Bread clean chipt, and then leave him for two or
three Hours.

At Evening before you dress him, give him the like quantity of Oats, Beans,
and Bread, and when he has eaten them, Bridle, dress and cloth him, but you
shall neither Sadle nor Air him abroad this evening, because the Horse being
foul, and the Scouring as yet working in his Body after the Heat, he must not
get any cold water at all, after he is dressed and has stood two Hours on his
Bridle, then wash three English Pints or three Scots mutchkins of clean Oats in
Bear or Ale, and give him them, for this will inwardly cool him as if he had
drunk Water, and you are sure he can receive no prejudice by it, after he has
eaten his washed meat, and rested after it a little, you shall at his feading
times with Oats and spelt Beans, Oats and Bread, or all together, or simply one
of them according to the liking of the Horse, Feed him that night in plantiful
manner; and leave a Knab of Hay in his Rack when you go to Bed.

The next day early, first Feed, then dress, cloth, Sadle, Air, Water, and
bring him home as at other times, only have a more careful eye to his Emptying,
and observe how his Grease and Foulness wastes, at his Feeding times feed as
was last showed you, only but little Hay, and keep your Heating days, and the
preparation of the day before them, as has been already ordered, and thus you
shall order him during the second Fortnight, in which your horse having
received four Heats Horseman like given him, with four Scourings, there is no
doubt but his Body will be drawn inwardly pretty clean, you shall therefore
during the next or third Fortnight, order him according to the Directions
following;

11ly. The third Fortnights Feeding.

The third Fortnight, you shall make his Bread finer than it was formerly; As
thus,

The Second Bread.

TAke of elean (...) and fine Wheat, an equal proportion of each, according to
the Quantity of Bead you intend to bake, and grind them well together, then
Bolt and Knead it with Barm or Lightning, and make it up as you did the former
Bread, with this Bread being a little stale and the Crust taken away, feed your
horse as before showed for the second Fortnight, putting it amongst his Beans
and Oats, and also observe to Dress, Air, heat, Feed, and prepare him before
the heat, as in the former Fortnight, only with these few differences.

First, You shall not give the heat which falls upon the day of the Week the
Match is to be run in, so smartly and violently as before, but with a little
more ease and pleasure to the Horse, that so his Body and Limbs may not be
overstrained, and made fore before the Match, next you shall not after his
heats, give him any more of the former Scourings, but instead thereof,
instantly upon the end of his heat, after he is a little cooled and clothed
up, and in the same place where you rub him, give him a Ball as bigg as a Hens
Egg of these Cordial Balls, the Composition whereof is as follows,

12ly. The true Receipt of Mr. Markhams famous Cordial Balls, so much esteemed
by the Generality of our English Farriers.

TAke Anniseeds, Cuminseeds, Fennegreek seeds, Carthamus seeds, Elecampain
Roots, and Colts foot, of each two Ounces, beaten and scarched very fine, as
also two Ounces of the flouer of Brimstone, then take an Ounce of the juice of
Liquorish, and dissolve it one the fire in half an English Pint, or half a
Scots Mutchkin of White Wine, which done, take of the Chemical Oil of Anniseeds
one Ounce, of Sallet Oil, Honey, and Syrup of Sugar, or for want of it
Molosses, of each half an English Pint, or half a Scots Mutchkin, then mix all
these with the former Powders, and with as much fine Wheat Flower as will bind
and knit them together, work them into a stiff Past, which keep in a Gally Pot
closs covered, and make Balls thereof as big as a Hens Egg, to give your horse
as you shall find occasion for them.

Now for the use of these Balls, because they are Cordial and have many
excellent Virtues, you must understand how and upon what occasions to use them;
if then it he to prevent sickness, take a Ball and anointing it all over with
fresh Butter, give it your Horse in the Morning fasting, in manner of a Pill,
then Ride him a little after it, or let him stand upon his Bridle for an hour,
which of them you please, Feeding and Watering him according to your usual
Custom, and do this three or four Mornings together.

Again if you use them to cure either a Couch, or violent Cold, or to satin a
Horse, then give them after the same manner for a week together, or longer if
you find it needful; but if you use them in the nature of a scouring, as in the
case I have above told you for your running Horse, then give them instantly
after his Heat.

Lastly, if you find that your Horse has at any time taken a little cold or
Rhume, which you may easily know by his inward rattling, then taking one of
these Balls, disolve it in an English Pint or Scots Mutchkin of Seck, and so
give it him warm, which you will find a very good and effectual remedy; also
to disolve a Ball in warm Water, and give it your Horse to drink, works the
same effect and fatteneth exceedingly, to give a Horse one of these Balls in
the morning before travel, will prevent his too soon weatieing, to give it in
the Heat of Travel will refresh his Spirits, and to give it after travel, will
help to recover weariness, and prevent inward sickness, they are also good upon
many other occasions, which would be too tedious here to rehearse, therefore
let what I have said suffice, both as a true ^^scription of their composition,
and also virtues and use.

13ly, The Fourth and last Fortnights Feeding.

For the Fourth and last Fortnight, you shall make your Bread much finer then
for either of the former; As thus,

The last and finest Bread.

TAke three parts of fine Wheat, and one part of Beans, according to the
Quantity of Bread you intend to bake, grind and Bolt them through the finest
(...) you ^an get, then knead it up with new strong Alt and Barm beaten
to^^ther, and the Whites of twenty or thirty Eggs, or more, according to the
quantity (...) Flower you bake, and be sure to put no Water at all, but in
place thereof some small q^^ntity of new milk then work it up, Bake and order
it as the former, and with this b^o^d having the crust cut first away, and
clean Oats well dried and dressed, as also (...) pure Split Beans, all mixed
together, or severally as you shall think fit, Feed you ^orse at his ordinary
Meals, as you did in the second and third Fortnights to which I refer you; only
in this last Fortnight, you shall observe these few directions following.

First, You shall keep your heating days the first Week of this Fortnight, but
the second or last Week, you shall forbear one heat, and not give your Horse
any five days before his Match, but for it give him only strong and long
Airings, and watering Courses.

You shall not need this Fortnight to give him any Scouring at all, and if
morning and Evening during this Fortnight, you burn the best Frankincence in
the Stable, you will find it very wholesome for your Horse, and he will also
mightily delight in it.

In this Fortnight, when you give him any washed meat, let it be washed either in
the Whites of Eggs, or a little Muskadine or Cherrie, for it is most wholesome,
and prevents pursiveness.

This Fortnight give him no Hay, but what he takes out of your hand after his
heats, and also let that be but in little quantity, and clean Dusted.

The last week of this Fortnight, if the Horse be a foul feeder, you must use
the Muzzle continually, but if a clean feeder, then three days before the
match is sufficient.

The Morning of that day before the day for the Match, feed well both before
and after Watering and Airing, and water as at other times, but before noon and
afternoon diminish his Portion of meat a little, as also before and after
evening Airing feed as at noon, and water as at other times, but be sure to
come earlier home then ordinary that evening from Airing: For,

This Evening you are to Trim and Shoe your Horse, and do all extraordinary
things of Ornament about him, providing always you take care neither to hinder
his feeding nor interrupt his rest, for I have heard some Horsemen say, that
when they had shod their Horses with light shoes or plates, the night before
the course, their Horses have taken such notice thereof, that they would
neither eat what they gave them, nor ly down to take any rest all the night
following; But to have so much understanding and cunning, a Horse must be old
and long experienced in this exercise, otherwise he cannot make such subtle
observations: However to pass over other curiosities, as Pletting the Main and
Tail, etc. I do advise you, that things which are of most necessity and use be
alwise done this day, which is the day before the match, rather then upon the
morning of the Course, because your Horse that morning, should be troubled as
little by handling or otherwise, as possible.

Late at night feed as you did in the evening, and give him of what he likes
best, according to his Stomach, only as little bread and Beans as possible,
then putting on his muzzle, and tossing up his Litter, leave him quiet till next
morning.

The next morning (being that of the match day) come to him very early, and
taking off his Muzzle, rub his head well, right his Clothes, and then give him
a pretty quantity of Oats, washed as I said in the whites of Eggs, Muskadine or
Cherrie, or if he refuse them washed, give him them dry, or mixed with a little
Wheat, after he has eaten them, if he be a slow emptier, walk him abroad, and
in the places where he used to empty, there entice him to it, which when he
has done, bring him home, and putting on his Muzzle, let him rest until you
have warning to make ready, but if he be a free emptier, let him ly quiet.

When you have warning to make ready, take off his muzzle and put on his
Snaffle, being well washed in a little Muskadine or Cherrie, but before you
Bridle him (if you think him too empty,) give him three or four mouthfuls of
the washed meat last spoke of, then Bridle him up and dress him, afterward
Pitching the running Saddle and Girths with Shoemakers wax, set it on and girt
it Gently, so that he may but only feel the Girths, but have no straitness,
then lay a clean sheet over the Saddle, over it his ordinary Clothes, then his
Body Cloth and Breast Cloth, and wisp him round with soft wisps: Finally if
you have a Cloth of State let it be neatly fastened above all, and being ready
to draw out, give him half an English Pint or half a S^^ts Mutchkin of
Muskadine or Cherrie, and so lead him away.

In all your leading observe to use gentle and calm motions, suffering him to
smell upon any dung, and in special places of advantage, as where you find
Rushes, long Grass, Heath, or the like, walk in and entice him to piss, but if
you find no such help, then in some certain places where you lead him, and
especially near to the place where you are to mount, and having accustomed him
to it before, break some of the straw wherewith he is wisped, under him, and
thus entice him if you can to stale or piss, also in leading, if any white or
thick Foam or Froth arise about his mouth, with a clean napekin wipe it away,
and causing carry a bottle of clean water about with you, wash his mouth with
it now and then.

When you are come to the place where you are to take his back, before you
uncloath rub and chaff his Legs well, then pick his feet, uncloath, wash his
mouth with water, get upon his back, and adjusting your Stirrops and other
things about your Body, walk him softly to the starting post, and there
starting fair, perform you your part by running him to the greatest advantage
he is capable of, and leave the rest to providence, for although we are
oblidged to use the means and helps of second causes, yet it is that which
decideth and determines all, even the most trivial actions any of us poor
Mortals are concerned in.

14ly. Some other useful Observations to be taken notice of by a keeper, in
sundry Accidents which befall a Race Horse, during the time he is preparing for
a Match.

THere is no unreasonable creature of pleasure, subject to so many disasterous
chances of Fortune as the Horse, and especially the running Horse, both by
reason of the multiplicity of diseases, belonging I may say peculiarly to him,
as also the violence of his exercise, and nice tenderness of keeping, therefore
it is fit that every keeper should be Armed with such observations, as may be a
means for him both to prevent mischiefs and Accidents, and also remide them
when they do happen; Therefore the first Observation I shall begin with, shall
be,

1. Observations from Meat and Drink.

LET the Feeder or Keeper therefore observe, if there be any Meat, Drink, or
other nouris^ment which he knows to be good for him, and yet the Horse refuse
it, that in this case he is not to force it violently upon him, but by gentle
means and cunning enticements to win him thereto, tempting him when he is most
hungry, or most thirsty, and if he take but a bit at a time he will soon come
to take a greater quantity, and rather give him less as he desiteth then more;
also that he may be brought the sooner to take it, mix the meat he loves worst
with that he likes best, till both be made alike familiar, and so shall your
Horse be a stranger to nothing that is good and wholesome.

2. Observations from the State and Condition of his body, Both laward and
Outward.

OUR Keeper must observe, that the strongest state of body (which is generally
accounted to be that which is highest and fullest of flesh, so it be good,
hard, and without inward foulness) is always the best and ablest for the
performance of great Matches; Yet herein he must also consider two things, the
first the shape of the horses body, the second his inclinations and manner of
feeding.

For the shape of the horses body, there are some who are of a round, plump,
and closs knit shape, so that they will appear fat and well shaped, when they
are lean and in poverty, others again are raw boned, slender and looss knit,
and will appear lean and deformed, when they are fat, foul, and full of gross
humors.

So likewise for their inclinations, some horses in feeding will grow plump and
lusty outwardly, and carry (as we say) a thick Rib, when they are inwardly
lean as may be, and others will appear outwardly lean to the eye, when they are
inwardly full of grease; Now in this case our Feeder has two helps, the first
outward, and the second inward, whereby he may be always kept from being
deceived with such false appearances.

The outward help is the outward handling and feeling the horses body generally
over all his Ribs, but particularly upon his short or hindermost ribs, and if
his flesh feel generally soft and loose, and the fingers sink into it as into
down, then is he without all question foul; but if he be universally hard and
firm, and only upon the bindermost rib is softness, then he has grease and
foul matter within him which he must be made ridd of, how lean and poor so ever
he seem in outward appearance.

As for the Inward help, it is only sharp Exercise, and good and Beneficial
Seourings, for the first you are sure will dissolve the foulness, and the later
will not fail to bring it away.

3. Observations from Sweat.

OUR Keeper should take a special notice in all his Airings, Heatings, and
other Exercises whatsoever, of the Horses Sweat and causes of it, for if he
Sweat upon little or no Occasion, as walking a Foot pace, standing still in the
Stable, and the like; It is then Apparent that the Horse is faint, foul fed,
and wants Exercise, but if upon good Occasion, as strong Heats, great Labor
and the like, he Sweat, yet his Sweat is white and frothie and like Soap suds,
then is he yet inwardly foul, and also wants Exercise, but if his Sweat be
black, and as it were only water thrown upon him without any frothieness, then
is he clean fed, in good Lust and good Case, so that you may adventure Riding
without danger.

4. Observations from the Hair.

OUR Keeper shall also observe his Coat or Hair in general, but especially his
Neck and such parts as are uncovered, and if the Hair ly slick, smooth and
closs, and also keep the Beauty of its natural Color, then is he in good case,
but if it be rough and staring, or discolored, then is he inwardly cold at the
Heart, and wants both Clothes and warm keeping.

5. Observations from the Privy Parts.

OUR Keeper must observe his Horses Stones, for if they hang down side or low
from his Body, then is he out of Lust and Heart, and is either sick of Grease
or other foulness, but if they ly closs couched up, and are contained in a
small room, then he is Healthful, and in good plight and Vigor.

6. Observations from the Limbs.

OUR Keeper must observe to Rub and Bath frequently his Horses Legs,
especially the night before he runs either his Heat or Match, and that from
the Knees and Gambrels downwards, with either clarified Dogs Grease, Marrow
Head and Feet, good Brandy or Spirit of Wine, any of which are very good, and
let him work them well in with his hands, and not with fire, for what he gets
not in of the Ointments at first rubbing, will be got in next Morning, and what
is not got in the next morning will be got in when he comes to uncloath near
the Starting post, and before he begins his Heat, so that he needs not to
use the Ointment but once before each beat, but the Rubbing as often as he
shall find Opportunity.

7. Observations from the Ground to Run in.

OUR Keeper shall observe, that if the Ground whereon he is to run his Match be
dangerous and apt for mischievous Accidents, as Strains, Over reaches, Sinew
bruises and the like, that then he is not bound to give all his Heats upon it,
but having made his Horse only acquaint with the nature thereof, shall take a
part of the Course as a mile or two or more according to the goodness of the
Ground, and so run him out and in, which we call turning Heats, taking always
care that he end and finish his Heat at the weighing or starting post. And also
that he make not his Course less or shorter, but rather longer then that he is
to run upon his Match day, but if for some special Reasons he take no part of
the Course, as because his Horse is subject to Lameness, or tender footed and
apt to Surbate, then he may many times, but not always, give his Heat upon any
other good Ground, where the Horse may lay down his Feet, streatch his Body,
and run at pleasure.

8. Observations for Watering.

OUR Keeper shall also observe, that albeit I have given no Directions for
Watering after Heats, yet he may in any of the last fortnights, (finding his
Horse clean and his Grease quite consumed) give him water somewhat late at
night, being made lukewarm, and letting him fast-an hour after it; also if at
any time else thorrow the unseasonableness of the weather, you cannot water
abroad, then you shall at your ordinary Watering hours water in the House with
warm water as aforesaid, throwing a handful of Wheat Bran or Oat Meal, but Oat
Meal is the best, into the water, which you will find to be very goo dand
wholesome for your Horse.

Many other Observations there are, but these are the chief and most material,
and I hope sufficient for any ordinary Understanding; And thus much of the True
and Modern Method of preparing a Running Horse, which I hope you shall find
hold good when tried: Let us in the next place consider the other Method set
down by Mr. Solizel, which is a little more Ancient, And is as follows,

SECONDLY, A Method to prepare Running Horses, somewhat more Ancient than the
Former, and set down by Mr. Solizel at the close of the second Part, in the
French Impression of the Parfait Marshall.
IN England (says our Author,) they have Horses which are only designed and
kept for performing of great Courses, and they delight so much in this
Divertisement, that they diet Horses expressly for it, so that their Horses who
are naturally well Winded and extremely swift, are put into such a Condition by
this manner of Preparation, that they perform Courses which are Incredible, and
that not at a slow or round Gallop as our Horses, but at full speed, so that
people who have never seen it can scarsely be persuaded, that any Horse could
endure and hold out with the violence of such Courses, for five or six miles,
and yet many Horses in that Kingdom, are known to furnish Carriers of that
length.

I have never put this Method I am going to show you in practice my self, and
therefore shall only insert it at the end of this Book, upon the honest Word
and Recommendation of a brave Cavaleer, who assuren me he had it in England
from a person whose only Employment it was, to prepare and diet Running Horses,
which Horses are neither charged with fat nor too much flesh, but are so
vigorous and hearty, that they can scarsely be paralleled; if your Curiosity
lead you to make trial of this Method, I hope that observing exactly what
follows, you shall find Contentment.

To choose then a Horse for Running, he should be somewhat long Bodyed,
Nervous, of great Mettle, and very swift, and who also besides ahving a good
Wind, should be sensible of and obedient to the Spurrs, and have a good
Appetite, the Horse likewayes notwithstanding of all these Qualities, should be
of an English Bread, a Borb, or at least of a little size, having pretty small
Legs, but the back sinews well detached and separate from the bone, short
Jovnted, and neat and well shaped feet, for bigg feet are not at all for this
Employment.

Now to prepare a Horse after this Method for a Match, you must give him
neither H^^ nor Oats, but cause make Bread for him of half Barley and half
Beans, baking them in form of large and pretty thick Cakes, and not giving them
to the Horse until they be a few days old, and rather hard and stale then new;
three pound (at sixteen ounces in the pound) at twelve aclock, and three pound
at night, is sufficient for him in twenty four hours, and that in place of his
Oats or provender; in stead of Have let him have Wheat-sheaves (...) and with
the eats upon (...), luke warm water to drink, upon which you shall throw a
hand^ full or two of Bean and Barley meal mixed together, keep him well covered
with a sheet and covering above it, in a Stable where he has no light, and let
him be well littered, and kept warm night and day.

Having thus nourished and fed him for four days, upon the morning of the
fifth day, having keept him upon the bridle for three hours before, give him
balls made of a pound of fresh Butter, at sixteen ounces in the pound, That is,
so soon as ever the Cream is turned to Burter and before it be washed or salted,
then put to it twenty five or thirty Cloves of Garlic bruised, and being all
well mixed, make balls of the bigness of large Wall-nuts, which you shall make
your horse swallow, with an English quart or Scots chopin of white Wine,
afterward keep him tied up in the bridle his bead pretty high, for three
hours, then feed him according to your ordinary custom with his Bread, warm
Water, and Wheat sheaves, but with the Wheat sheaves only moderately, because
you are not to fatten him, but upon the contrary (by diminishing and hardening
his flesh,) to augment and increase his Wind and Vigor.

Upon the seventh day, that is the second day after the taking of his pills or
balls, Air him abroad just after Sun rising for the space of an hour, and as
much at night before Sun set, sometimes racking or steping, and sometimes
galloping him; but if he continue too far, then you must take him abroad in the
morning an hour before Sun rising, and in the evening keep him also abroad for
an hour after the Sun is set, then bringing him back to the stable, rub and
cover him well, and give him his ordinary portion of Food. And thus continue to
Air and Exercise him every day, giving him always every fifth day his pound of
butter made up with garlic into balls; And also observing not to Air or take
him Abroad, neither the day that he takes his balls, nor the day following.

When he has taken three dozes of his Garlic balls, that is, fifteen days
after you first begun to put him in keeping, you are to Exercise him for two
hours in the morning and as much at night; sometimes at full speed, then at a
good gallop, and afterward at a step, that so he may again recover his Wind:
Remembering and taking care as I have already told you, neither to Air him that
day he takes his Balls, nor the day thereafter, but upon the other days when
you have Gallopt him hard, you are to dismount and lead him home in your hand
well covered, and when you are come to the stable, rub and wipe him all over
until he be perfectly dry, then let him stand upon his Bridle, his head being
tied up for three Hours, after which give him his Water to drink, which must be
made more as look warm, then feed him as at other times, and thus you are to
order and keep him for a month, giving him always his Pills or Garlic Balls
every fifth day, but the last five or six days of the Month, you are to run
and Gallop him as sharply as his wind will allow him, giving him Listenings now
and then in running to take his wind, and continue also his exercise but only
for two hours in the Morning, and as much at night, leading him always back to
the Stable in your hand, having first covered him well with a Sheet and
Covering, and then rubbing and drying him well, let him have his water and meat
as I have already showed you.

If after all this, you observe that his Dung is still slimy and viscous, it is
a sign that he is not as yet well prepared; you are therefore in that case to
continue his diet Pills, and former exercise, until you find that his dung come
from him pretty dty, and without humidity, and then will your Horse be in a
condition to make and perform what Courses you have a mind for.

Two nights before the Match he shall be put in the Muzzel all night, and about
two a Clock in the Morning you shall give him three English Pints, or three
Scots Mutchkins of Sack, in which you must beat twenty or twenty five Yolks of
new laid Eggs, then ty him up to the Rack for two full hours after he has
taken it, after which mount his back, and immediately put him to a gentle
Gallop, then to a full speed as long as his wind will allow it, afterward to a
Gallop again to give him wind; and thus you are to exercise him for three
hours, then cover him, lead him home in your hand, and rubbing him down, and
drying him well, ty him up with the Bridle to the Rack for three hours, after
which give him his water, but it must now be as hot as he can drink it, and
then feed him as at other times.

The day of the Match, you shall give him his former quantity of Sack and yolks
of Eggs, being well beat together two hours before he is to run, and he must be
also tied up to the Rack six hours before that you give him his Sack: You are
also to observe that upon the day of the Match, and that emediately preceding
it, he is only to eat half his allowance of Bread at each meal, and also but
half of the Wheat shaves that you were accustomed to give him.

Upon the days that your Horse is not to run, or that it is as yet a pretty
while to a Match or plate, you are always to feed and exercise him as I have
told you, only after that you find him exactly prepared, you are not to give
him his Garlic Balls, but every ninth day.

If during the time of his dyeting or afterward, the Horse should disgust, or
become costive, you must then give him good Glisters made of two English
Quarts, or Scots Chopins of Milk, and one English Pint or Scots Mutchkin of
Olive or Sallet Oil, the whole being well mixed and made Luke warm.

These kind of Horses are never to be Rid but with very small Snaffles, for
fear of hindering their breathing and wind, which one of our great Bitts would
certainly do; the Rider is to lean a little forewards to prevent the wind
taking too much upon his Body, and to have also Clothes very light and fit for
him, but no flying or loose coat, only a Cap in place of a Hat, very small and
sharp Spurrs, and he is to Spurr near to the Flanks with little strokes,
because strong and great strokes retard a Horse in stead of making him run, no
Curper nor Tie or Poitral, only a very light Saddle, and the Rider so too.

This is what that Cavaleer taught me of the running Horses in England, it is
enough to satisfy the curiosity of such, who shall be desirous to prepare and
diet Horses after that manner they practice in England, for my own part I
confess, I like better to dress a Horse for the War or Manage, then to
prepare him for such Courses where the expenses and trouble, are often times far
greater then either the pleasure or profit that is got by them.

So here ends the Method of preparing a running Horse, set down by our
Author, you may choose which of the two you will make trial of, I believe both
may be good, but having had experience of the first, I can with more confidence
recommend it to you then this last, and as I have set down both, merely to
gratify a curious Reader, so I expect that if any one of them hold, you will
not fret and repine at the disappointment you may meet with from the other
should it fail, especially seeing you are at liberty to make choice of that,
which you shall Judge most agreeable to reason, and the Modern practice of our
greatest Jockies.

In fine to put a close to this Supplement, in which I have to my knowledge
ommitted nothing material belonging to the Art of Horsemanship, I think it will
not be amils to conclude it with a few lines, which are in my opinion very
apposite to the subject matter of this last Chapter; for they were made upon
the last famous Horse-Match, run before King CHARLES the Second of Blessed
Memory, by Dorsett Ferry near Windsor Castle.

1
NOt Ancient Rome with her Olimpick Game,
By which she did achive so great a Fame,
When o'r the Circus the Bright Chariots whitl'd,
Surprising with delight the Gazing World;
Coud e're compare to Englands Nobler Chase,
When suift as Lightning or the Winged Race.
The Generous Beast out-Strips the wind,
And leaves the wondering Crowd behind.
2
In this debate Monarchs their Vmpirage boast,
And even an Empires wealth is won and lost:
The Noble Bruits with Emulation Fired,
Scorning by Mannagers to be inspired,
As if they understood their Betters will,
They show with pride their Eager force, and skill.
And without Aid of Spurr or Rein,
They cut the Air, and scour the Plain.
3
To Future times may these illustrious sports,
Be only the Divertisements of Courts,
Since the best man, best Judge, and best of Kings,
Whose President the best example brings;
When e're his God like mind unbent from care
To all his pleasures this he would prefer:
So Gods of old did not disdain,
The rural pastimes of the Plain.
4
And Dorsett ever Celibrated be,
For this last Honor which Ariv'd to thee,
Blessed for thy prospect, all august and gay,
Blessed for the memory of this Glorious day:
The last great Race the Royal Hero Viewed
O Dorsett! to thy much Loved Plains he owed.
For which alone a lasting Name,
Records thee in the Book of Fame.
The End of the First part.
THE CONTENTS OR An Alphabetical Table OF The Principal Matters contained in
the First Part.
A
AGE HOw to know a Horse's age while he has Mark p. 19 What a man should
Remember for the more ready knowing a Horse's Age. p. 21 A great and general
mistake in many People anent the age in which Horses are most serviceable. p.
22 How to know the Age of a Horse that is either past Mark, shell or hollow
toothed, or even Counter-marked. p. 23 Several signs of old age. p. 24 How to
judge of a Horse's age by looking to his Palate. p. 25
AGILITY How to judge of a horse's agility and vigor. p. 72 AMBLE That to go
with the haunches low and plied is a token of a good Amble. p. 75 The best
observation whereby to know a true and easy Amble. p. 75
ANBURYS What they are, and how to remove them. p. 66 ANCIENTS If to be imitate
in all their designs of Horses or not. p. 15 That in most of their designs they
have placed the Head in a bad posture. p. 15
APERIENT The 5 aperient or opening Roots. p. ^86 APPETITE How to know if a
Horse has a good appetite and if he be subject to the Tick. p. 88 How to
recover a Horse's appetite that disgusts upon a journey. p. 102
ARCHEDLEGS How to know them. p. 36 How such Horses as have them are to be
shoed. p. 137
ARMING How Horses arm themselves against the Operation of the Bridle. p. 255 A
good method to prevent a horse's arming himself against his Neck. p. 255
ARMS See Forethighs. ARRESTES See Rats Tails. ATTITUDE What it is. p. 14 AUBIN
A kind of Pace, and what it is. p. 76
B.
BACK-SINEWS How to know when they are good and sound. p. 37 A Recapitulation
of what was said concerning them: p. 38
BAITING See Feeding. BARS What they are. p. 3 How they should be shapt. p. 8
BAY One of the most common of all Colors. p. 80 Chastnut Bay. p. 80 Dapled
Bay. p. 80 Dark Bay. p. 80 Gilded or yellow Bay. p. 80 Light Bay. p. 80
BEAK A good invention for keeping the shoes fixed upon such Horses as are very
sensible of the Flies in Summer; as also for such as having a great Itch,
strike hard with their Feet against the stones. p. 91 etc. BEARD Where placed.
p. 3 How it should be shapt. p. 8.
BELLY How to know if a Horse be well bellyed or full in the Flank; as also if
he be light bellyed. p. 52 Whither or not it be a proper expression, to say a
Horse has no Belly. p. 5 That it is a great imperfection in a Horse to be
light-bellyed, by being strait turned in the Ribs. p. 53 A good method to cure
Horses whose Bellies fall too low. p. 54
BILE Of Medicaments which purge Bile or Choler. p. 174 Digestives of Bile. p.
182, 184
BITTING That all Horses, especially such as are to Travel, should have Bits
that not only fit them exactly, but which are also very light. p. 92
Instructions for fitting all kinds of Horses with proper Bits. p. 222 A good
Advertisment to such as have a desire to give alwise Rude Bits to Horses. p.
244 How to choose a proper Bit for a Horse. p. 158
BIT-MOUTHS Of all the different kinds of Bit-mouths which are of most use. p.
223 Of such Bit-mouths as are most Gentle. p. 224 1 A Canon simple. p. 224 2 A
Canon a Trompe. p. 224 3 A Canon a Gorge de Pigeon. p. 224 4 A Canon Montant.
p. 225 5 A Canon a Piston. p. 225 6 A Canon a Pied de Chat. p. 225 7 A Canon a
Col d'Oye. p. 226 8 An Escache Montante. p. 226 9 An Escache a Paston. p. 226
10 The Olives a Couplet. p. 227 11 The Escache a Col d' Oye avec une bavette.
p. 227 12 A Canon a Compass montant, p. 22^ 13 A Canon a Arcade. p. 228 14 A
Canon a Pignatellc. p. 228 15 A Canon a Mirouer ou a Double pas d'asne. p. 229
16 A Canon secret a Arcon p. 230 17 A Canon a Col d' Oye La Liberte Gagnee. p.
230 18 A Canon a Basculle. p. 231 19 An Escache a Pignatelle p. 231 20 An
Escache a Basculle. p. 231 21 A Canon Montant d'une piece. p. 232 22 A Canon a
Pas d'asne p. 232 23 A Canon a Pas d'asne a (...) antique. p. 232 24 An Escache
a pasd'asne p. 233 25 An Escache a Pignatelle La Liberte Gagnee. p. 233 26 An
Escache a pas d'asne ta Liberte jettee sur les Talons p. 234 27 A Campanelle a
Col d'Oye p. 235 28 The Olives a Piguatelle. p. 235 29 A Canon a Pas d'asne la
Liberte gagnee. p. 236 30 An Escache a Pas d'asne la Liberte gagnee. p. 236
Of Bit-mouths that are more Rude than the preceding. p. 237 1 A Canon a Pas
d'asne Roulant. p. 238. 2 A Canon a Pas d'asne Secret. p 238 3 An Escache a pas
d'asne Quaree p. 238. 4 The Tambours a Col d' Oye. p 239 5 The Tambours a
Pignate I Will. p. 239 6 The Olives Tambours a Pignatelle. p. 240 7 The Poires
droites a pas d'asne ou autrement. p. 240 8 An Escache a Bouton, a Melon, ou a
Balottes, la Liberte a la Pignatelle. p. 241 9 The Canon Coupe a Pignatelle. p.
241 10 The Berge a Pignatelle. p. 242
Of Bit-mouths that are most Rude. p. 243 1 The Poires Renversees. p. 243 2 A
Canon coupe a pas d'asne. 243 3 The Annelets or Chain-bit. p. 244 4 The Berge a
pas d'asne. p. 244 5 The Balottes a Col d'oye. p. 245 6 The Tambours a pas
d'asne. p. 245 7 The Poires Reversees Roulantes a Pignatelle. p. 246 8 A Canon
Coupe with a very high Liberty after the form of an Asse's Tread. p. 246 9 The
Poires Secrettes a pas d'asne. p. 247 10 The Poires a Cul de Bassin a
Piguatelle. p. 247 11 The Balottes Secrettes a pas d' sne. p. 248 12 The Poires
a pas d'asne. p. 248 13 The Poires Vuidees. p. 248 14 The Poires Renversees
Canelees. p. 249 15 The Poires a Arcon ou Arce elct. p. 249 16 The Genette or
Bit a la Turque. p. 350

BLACK Of two kinds. p. 80 BLAZE etc. Of Blazes or Stars in Horses foreheads,
and other white Marks which they have upon their Legs. p. 83 BLOODING Of
blooding horses and the benefit thereof. p. 188 Reasons for Blood letting p.
189 At what time horses should be let Blood, with a short Account of its
Circulation, and at what hour each Humor predominats in it p. 190 etc, Of the
parts of the Body wherein horses are commonly bled. p. 192 How to stop the
excessive Blooding, when a horse is bled in in the Palate. p. 194 Precautions
to be observed in Blood-letting. p. 194 How to judge of the Quantity and
Quality of Blood. p. 196
BLOWER How to know when a horse is a blower or Wheezer p. 57 BRANCHES Of a
Bridle, what they are, and their effects. p. 251 Of all the different kinds of
Brauches most in use. p. 251 1 A Branche droit a pistolet p. 252 2 A Branche a
la Conestable p. 253 3 A Branche a Gigotte p. 253 4 A Branche a Genouil p. 254
5 A Branche Francoise p. 255 6 Another Branche a la Conestable, but which is
more hardy than the preceding. p. 256 7 Another Branche a la Gigotte, but
which brings in a horse's head more than the preceding. p. 256 8 Another
Branche a la Francorse but which is more hardy than the preceding p. 257
BREAST See Counter BREASTPLATE Of how great use, and how its Buckles should be
placed p. 99 BREEDING A discourse of Breeding, and how to raise and bring up a
good and beautiful Race of Horses. p. 205 BRIDLEHAND An excellent direction for
the Bridle-hand. p. 250 BROKENWINDED How considerable an imperfection it is. p.
55 That a horse far gone or spent with it is incurable. p. 56
BUCKLES How the Buckles which suport the Poitral or Breast Plate should be
placed. p. 99 For the Girths, after what fashion they should be made. p. 99
BUYING What is to be observed to prevent being deceived, when a Man is a
buying a horse. p. 18 A continuation of what is to observed in buying horles.
p. 32 After what manner a man should mount and try a horse he intends to buy.
p. 74 A general direction to be observed in buying a horse p. 90

C
CALKINS THe best fashion for Ordinary use. p. 141 Several reasons for and
against the ordinary use of Calkins. p. 141 etc.
CANON MOUTHED BITS See Bit-mouths. CAPELET What it is. p. 60 CATTHIGH'D What
horses are so called. p. 13 CHANFRAIN An old French word much used, and what it
Signifies. p. 84 CHANNEL Betwixt a horse's nether jaws, how it should be shapt.
p. 8 CHESTFOUNDERED The difference betwixt it, and Pursyness or being broken
winded. p. 57 CHESTNARROW Its Imperfection and Inconve^ieny. p. ^3 CHOLER See
Bile. CIRCLES In horses hoofs, a token the the feet are altered. p 41 That
horses which have Circle^ joining a Jardon and Spavin are incureable. p. ^^
CLEFT See False-quarter. CLOTHING Reasons why horses should (...) always
Clothed or Cover^^ in the Stable. p. 16^ COACHHORSES That Coach-horses and
horses for draught, are the better for having their shoulders pretty large and
Fleshy. p. 3^ To prevent their Galling with their Harness. p. 113 That their
First shoeing is (...) consequence when they are first brought from abroad p.
^^^ Of the Food and Entertainment of Coach-horses. p. ^65
COFFINBONE What it is. 5^ COLOR The names of all the different Colors of
horses, with (...) Observations that may (...) drawn from them. p. 7^ An
observation to be remarke^ in Dark-colored Hor^^ p. ^^ Of the different
Colors a^^ Marks of horses; and which is the most proper for a Stallion. p. 20
COLTS To strengthen the small an^ Feeble legs of Colts. p. 22 COMBING See
Currying. CORDIAL The Cordial waters and flowe^^ p. 2^ CORNERTEETH What they
are. p. ^^ CORNS An approved Receipt for Co^^ in Men's feet. p. 2^ CORONET What
it is. p. ^^ That a horse's Coronet sh^^ be no higher than the rest his hoof.
p. ^^
COVERED Reasons why horses should be al. ways covered in the Stable. p 169 How
Mares are to be Covered or receive the Stallion. p. 214 etc.
COUNTER Where placed p 4 How it should be shapt p. 10
COUNTER MARKED How to know when a horse is Counter marked. p. 25 COURBATTURE
See Chest-foundering. COWDUNG That Cow dung, contrary to the common Opinion,
dryes up the hoof, although it is good for, and Moistens the Sole p. 109
CRAPAUDINE What it is p. 51 CROWNSCABS What they are, and how many kinds of
them. p. 47 CROUPE Where placed, and how it should be shapt. p. 4. 11 CRUPPER
The difference betwixt Cruppers for Traveling and those for hunting. p. 98
After the English fashion, better than those commonly made use of for hunting.
p. 98 After what fashion the Dockpiece of a Crupper should be made. p. 98
CURB What it is p. 61 CURRYING That a Horse which has swet much all day with
Exercise, should be Curryed in the Evening if dry, but if not, then he is only
to be rubbed well down with Straw. p. 113 Of the necessity there is for Currying
and dressing Horses, where is also contained an Abrigement of the natural
Aeconomy which passes in a Horse's body. p. 149 etc. How Horses are to be
Curryed and dressed. p. 153
CUTTING Four things which occasion a Horse's cutting. p. 144 How Horses which
cut or interfere are to be shoed. p. 144 A method to preserve upon a necessity,
a Horse's Legs which cut or interfere, from being galled and spoilt. p. 145
CYMBALHEADED What Horses are so called. p. 7
D
DAPPLED GRAY SEe Gray. DELIVERY To assist a Mare at her Deli very p. 216
DIGESTIVES Of Bile. p. 182 Of Phlegm or Pituit. p. 183 Of Melancholy p. 183 Of
all the Three. p. 184
DISH-FACED What it is p. 6 DISTILLED WATERS Which are commonly made use of for
Horses p. 203 DOCK How a Horse's Dock should be shapt and set. p. 11 That a
firm and stiff Dock, is generally a sign of strength p. 59 How to prevent a
horse's galling beneath it. p. 99
DRESSING See Currying DUNG That a Man may judge of a horse's inward
Disposition by observing his Dung. p. 114 DIE How to Die the Manes and Tails of
horses, of either a Scarlet or Gold Color. p. 203
E.
EARS HOw a Horse's Ears should be shapt and placed p. 6 A good and true
observation of Pliny, concerning a Horse's Ears. p. 6
ELBOW. How to know if a horse eats well, and if he has the Tick. p. 88 Where
placed, and a very good observation taken from the manner of its situation. p. 4
ENTREPAS. What it is. p. 76 EQUIPAGE A particular advice to such as have the
command or charge of an Equipage p. 91 EYES Of a horse's Eye and its parts p. 2
How they should be shapt p. 6 Of the knowledge of the Eyes. p. 28 How to
distinguish between the good and bad. p. 29
EYE-PITS. Very hollow, a certain token of Old Age. p. 24
F
FALSE-QUARTER See Quarter. FAT That good water contributes much, to the
keeping of horses fat and plump p. 148 FATTEN How to fatten a horse with grass
or green Barley. p. 160 FATIGUED How horses that are much fatigued and lean are
to be ordered. p. 159 FAULTS See Imperfections. FEATHERS A good observation of
Feathers in a horse's Flank. p. 11 Of all kinds of Feathers in horses. p. 87 A
Roman Feather in a horse's neck or Forehead a good mark. p. 88
FEEDING How horses are to be ordered or fed, at Dinner and Supper while upon
Travel p. 104 How horses of Value are to be ordered and fed, while at home p.
146 Four Maxims to be observed in feeding horses at home p. 146 Of the fond and
entertainment of lean, fatigued, and light bellyd horses p. 159 Of the food and
en (...) ainment of horses of manage p. 164 Of the food and entertainment of
Coach-horses p. 165 Of the quantity of food which should be given to all sizes
of horses. p. 167
FEET Of what parts they consist p. 4 How to know when a horse lets down his
feet right, or trends well. p 43 How to know if a horse's feet are good. p. 48
Fat feet, how difficult to be known. p. 49 Ox feet, why so called p. 51 Feet of
an extraordinary form or shape. p. 5^ Of white footed horses, in French
Balzanes p. 8^ How to pare the feet well, (...) the shoes, and drives the nails
p. 121 Of flat feet, and round and high soles, and how they are to be shoed. p.
125
FET-LOCK What it is. p. 13 FIERYNESS Described, and how much different from
vigor p. 53 7^ FIGS In the Frush, what they are as also to know if ever horse
has had any. p. ^ FLAN-DRINS Why so called. p. 52 FLANKS Where placed. p. 4
How to know when a horse Flanks are altered or out (...) order. p. 5^ That the
redoubling of a Horse Flank cannot be exactly discovered, without great
attention. p. ^^
FOALING To assist a Mare at her Fo^ing. p. ^^ FOALS At what time they are to
be weaned, and how ordered p. 218 Aremedy against all Diseases in Foals beneath
6 Months old p. 219 How to strengthen their small and feeble Legs p. 220
FOAL-TEETH Why so called. p. 3 FOOD See Feeding. FOREHEAD How it should be
shapt to appear Beautiful. p. 6 FORE-THIGHS Where placed. p. 4 How they should
be shapt p. 11
FORM What it is. p. 40 What horses are most subject to it p. 47
FOUNDERED In the body, See Chest-foundering. In the feet, how such horses are
to beshoe'd, as also a remedy somewhat extraordinary for the same p. 139 FRUSH
Where placed. p. 4 How it should be shapt. p. 12
FUZIES What they are. p. 39
G
GALLING SEveral methods to preserve tender skinned horses from galling beneath
the Sadle. p. 94 That Mares are more subject to galling beneath their Tails
than horses, and how to prevent it. p. 99 To prevent a horse's galling beneath
the Hulsters by reason of their weight. p. 99 To prevent a horse's galling in
the sides by the motion of the stirrup Leathers. p. 100 To help the galling of
horses, occasioned either by a Saddle or Harness. p. 112
CASKOINS See Thighs GATHERERS What Teeth so called, with their Division. p. 3
GELD INGS When once they contract a Vice, they rarely quite with it p. 73
GIRTHS After what fashion the saddle-Girths should be made p. 99 GLANDS See
Kernels. GLYSTER Of Glysters, and the Etymology of the word p. 185 The models
of several kinds of Glysters. p. 185 Emollient. p. 185 Carminative. p. 185
Purging. p. 185 To appease a great beating in the Flanks. p. 186 Astringent. p.
186 Anodine. p. 186 Diuretic. p. 186 After what method a Glyster is to be
Administered to a horse. p. 187
GRASS How to fatten horses with grass or green Barley p. 160 Directions anent
turning horses to grass. p. 161
GRAY Dappled, a very common and excellent color, and why it is so. p. 80 83
Sad or poudered p. 80 Silvered, a bright and lively color. p. 80

H
HACKNEYS WHen their motions are unequal, how incommode they are to the Rider
p. 75 HALTING That the surest way to know if a horse halt, is to cause trot him
along a Pitchtstreet or Causey, in ones hand p. 68 HAMS Where situate. p. 5
How they should be shapt p. 13 In ham'd, what it is p. 42 That although Inham'd
horses be commonly good, yet they are very unfit for hilly-countreys, As also
how the horsecoursers Sweeten that term p. 42
HAMS That the hams are one of the chief parts, wherein the least Infirmities
are of consequence. p. 60 That horses designed for the maunage, should not be
bought with the least infirmity in the Hams p. 64
HAND An excellent direction for the Bridle-hand p. 250 HARASSED See Lean
HAUNCHES Where placed p. 4 How to know when they are too long p. 46
HEAD How a horse's head should be framed to be well shapt. p. 5 That horses
which have their heads much charged with Flesh, are generally Subject to the
infirmities of the Eyes. p. 5 When a horse is said to have his head well
placed. p. 7
HEAD-STALE That the best Head-stales and Reins for Bridses are made of
Hungarian leather, and the Reason why that leather is best. p. 92 HEALTH A
method whereby tomaintain or preserve horses in health. p. 197 HEAVY On the
hand Explained. p. 242 HEEL What part so called. p. 4 That to have the one side
of the heel higher than the other is a considerable imperfection. p. 50 That a
horse's heels are never to be opened after the common way, when shoeing. p. 120
HEELS LOW See Shoeing. HEELS NARROW See Hoof-bound. HIGH METTL'D The
difference betwixt highmettle and Fireyness. p. 53 HIGHT A common Observation,
where by People pretend to know of what height their Fo^^ will be, when they
come ^ Age, but not much to be (...) lied upon. p. ^ HIND-HAND How it should be
shapt. p. 4 What the imperfections are (...) which it is Subject etc. p. ^^
HONEY The Composition of Mercur^ honey. p. ^ HOOFS That a horse's hoofs should
be somewhat shining, high and smooth. p. ^ How they should be shapt. p. ^ What
is to be done when the are so hard and brittle, the the Nails will not drive
without bending. p. 1^ An Ointment to make th^^ Grow. p. ^^
HOOF-BOUND What it is, and the cause of the infirmety, as also how such horses
are to be shoed. p. 129 and^ HORN-HIPPED What it is. p. ^ HOR^ES A pretty
commendation of (...) horse. p. ^ The names of all the parts which Generaly
frame or compese a horse's Body. p. ^ How the parts of a horse's Bods, should
be framed to appe^^ comely and well shapt. p. ^ Curious remarks upon horse
represented either in Rel^^ or Flat-painting. p. ^ At what Age horses are
commonly most serviceable. p. ^^ Of the shapes of horses in gea^rall, and of
horses of deferent Kingdoms. p. 20^
HUMORS The four Humors which are is the Bodies of horses. p. ^ A discourse
upon them. p. 17 To prepare the Humors, (...) such horses as people inte^ to
Purge. p. 18^

I.
JADS The defenses they commonly use against the Rider. p. 73 JARDON Where
Situate, and as much, if not more to be feared than the Spavin. p. 62 That
horses having a Circle-joyning a jardon and spavin, are incureable. p 63 That
Jardons and Spavins are hereditary imperfections p. 64
JAW-BONES Where placed. p. 2 How they should be shapt p. 7
JOURNEYING How a man should order and take care of horses in the beginning of
a journ^y, p. 100 How a horse is to be put in wind, before he begin a long
journey p. 100 That a horse which is to make a long journey, should be made to
increase his days journeys by degrees. p. 101
JOINTS Long, See Long-jointed. Short, See short jointed.
IMPERFECTIONS The perfect knowledge of the faults and imperfections in horses.
p. 18 Acontinuation of the knowledge of the faults and imperfections in horses.
p. 32 A further Continuation of the knowledge of the faults and imperfections
in horses. p. 46 A yet further continuation of the knowledge of the faults and
imperfections in horses, especially such as come in the Hind-quarters. p. 59
INFIRMITIES What the imfirmities are, which the horse-merchants are by Law
obliged, to warrant and secure those horses from, which they Sell. p. 69 INSTEP
What part of the hind leg so called. p. 13 INTERFERING See Cutting.
K.
KRENELLS Several kinds of them to which horses are Subject. p. 32 KIB'D HEELS
What they are. p. 67 KNEE, Where placed. p. 4 How it should be shapt. p. 12

L.
LAMENESS THe true Method to know if a horse be Lame, or halteth. p. 68 LEAN Of
the Food and entertainment of Lean, fatigued, and Lightbelly'd horses. p. 159 A
continuation of the Method for Recovering horses, which are h^rassed and Lean
after a long journey. p. 162
LEAVE EARED What it is. p. 6 LEEKHEADS See Poireaux. LEGS Of what parts a
horse's forelegs consist. p. 4 That the broadest and flattest legs are the
best. p. 12 How a horse's Hind-legs should be shapt. p. 13 How to know when a
horse's Legs are good p. 35 The First mark of bad legs p. 35 The Second mark of
bad legs. p. 36 The Third mark of bad legs. p. 36 Other imperfections of the
legs p. 37. etc Some other marks and Observations, whereby to know when a
horse's legs are used and spoilt. p. 41 Of the imperfections of the Hind-legs
from the Ham downward, where are Explained all the infirmities to which
Coach-horses Legs are most Subject p. 65
LEGS That the Manvaises Eaux, which is a white, corrupt, and sharp Humor, are
the cause of almost all the infirmities of the Legs, such as Poireaux, Rats
Tails, etc. p. 67 That the infirmities of the hind Legs are most dangerous for
Coach-horses. p. 67 That horses at their first Arrival should not have their
Legs rubbed hard down. p. 107 A Charge to preserve a Horse's Legs, and prevent
their spoiling either upon Travel or by Hunting, p. 108 A Remedy for removing
the Gourding or Swelling from a Horse's Legs. p. 109 How to take away the
Gourding or Swelling from a Horse's Legs, and to unweary them with quenched
Cinders. p. 110
LIFTING When the Lever, raising or lifting up of a Horse's Legs, may be said
to be good. p 42 LIGHT-BELLY'D The reason why Horses that are much subject to
the infirmities of the Hams, become commonly light bellyed p. 54 Of the Food
and entertainment of light bellied horses, p. 159
LIPS That thin and little Lips contribute to a horse's having a good Mouth. p.
8 LITLE-FOOT See Coffine bone. LONG-COUPLED That horses which are pretty long
Coupled, are the most easy. p. 44 LONG-JOINTED What it is. p. 35 That Barbs,
and such horses as are slender built, are most subject to be long joynted p. 36
That horses which are long joynted, are fittest because of their easiness, for
Persons of Quality that are Crazy or Aged. p. 36
LYARD That to be Lyard above the Eye brows, is a certain sign of Old Age. p.
24
M.
MALLENDER What it is. p. ^^^ MANE What kind of Mane is b^^ p. ^^^ How to die
the Manes and Tails of Horses, of either (...) Scarlet or Gold Colo^^ p. 2^^
MANAGE That Horses designed for the Manage, should not (...) bought with the
least infamities in the Hams. p. 6^^ That an orderly and well regulate Manage,
cannot be prejudicial to, nor sp^^ Horses, as also the Advantages they Reap by
it. p. ^^^ Of the Food and Entertainment of Horses of Manage p. 16^
MARES That Mares are never to be suffered to piss when they are riding. p. 10^
What Mares are best to br^^^ upon, and how they are (...) receive the Stallion.
p. 2^ How to assist Mares at the Delivery. p. 21^
MARK What is meant by saying: Horse has Mark. p. ^^^ How to express all a
Horse's good Marks in few Wor^^ p. ^^^
MASH How to make a Horse-Ma^^ p. 195 MAUVAISES EAUX What they are, and that
they are not very dangerous (...) the beginning, but of very bad consequence if
not timeously looked to. p. 6^^ MELANCHOLY Of Medicaments which purge
Melancholy. p. 17^ A Digestive for it. p. ^
MERCURI ALHONEY Its composition. p. ^^^ METTLED See high Mettl'd MOUTH Its
parts both external and internal, described. p. 2 The general Qualifications of
a good mouth. p. 8 That Horses for draught, whose mouths are insensible, are
far more proper for a Cart than a Coach. p. 10 How to know if it be good and
Loyal. p. 70
MIDDLE-TEETH See Separaters MILK TEETH See Foal Feeth. MULES What kind of
shoes are most proper for Mules. p. 136 MULES TRAVERSE See Kib'd heels. MUZLE
That the Cutting out the Nerves of this part in Colts, contributes very much to
the right shape of the lower parts of the head. p. 7
N.
NAILS DIrections for driving them p. 119 What kind of Nails are best. p. 120
What is to be done after the Nails are driven, before they be rivetted. p. 122
To prevent a horse's being pricked with street Nails or Stubs. p. 142
NECK How it should be shapt. p. 8 That the Barbs and Spanish Horses, are
rather the better as the worse, for having their Necks a little thick and
charged with Flesh. p. 8 A good property in a Mare to have a horse's Neck. p. 9
Several kinds of Necks, viz. Renversed, Deer-Necked, etc. p. 9 John Tacquet's
opinion of a horse's Neck. p. 9
NEIGHING To prevent it. p. 7 NIPPERS. What Teeth so called. p. 3 NOSTRILS How
they should be shaped. p. 7 Why the Spaniards cut up their Horse's Nostrils. p.
7

O
OATS WHether more proper to be given, before or after watering. p. 105 The
quantity of Oats that is to be given to all sizes of horses, during the Space
of 24 hours, p. 167
OPENING Opening of a Horse's heels after the Common way, a bad practice. p.
120 The five opening or aperient Roots. p. 186
OSSELETS What they are. p. 39 OVER-RID A good remedy to strengthen and refresh
horses that have been over-rid. p. 106 OUTWARD TEETH See Corner Teeth. OXLEG'D
What it is. p. 12 OILS Of the Oils commonly made use of for horses. 202
OINTMENTS The names and virtues of Ointments, Plasters, etc. Commonly made use
of for Horses. p. 200 etc. The four hot Ointments. p. 200 The four cold
Ointments. p. 200

P.
PAINTERS THat the Modern Painters and Sculptors, chiefly imitate the Ancients
in their designs of Horses. p. 14. Their Answers to the Objections made against
them. p. 17
PALATE How to judge of a Horse's age by looking to his palate p. 25
PANTON-SHOE What is is. p. 131 PAREING See Feet. PASTERN What part of a horse's
Leg it is. p. 4. A horse's Pasterns Boulettez (as the French call it) how to
know them, and what Operation is to be performed on them. p. 13^ etc.
PASTERN JOINT How it should be shaped, and to what infirmities it is subject
p. 12. 40 PEACH-FLOWER That Horses of the color of a Peach flower or blossom,
are rarely sensible or obedient to the Spurrs. p. 80 PEIGNES See Crown Scab.
PIG-EYED What horses are so called. p. 6 PHLEGM Of Medicaments which purge
phlegm or pituite, p. 175 Digestive of phlegm. p. 183. 184.
PLASTERS Of the names of all the plasters etc, made use of for horses. p.
200 PLANCH-SHOES See shoe PLANTED How to know when a horse is right planted
upon his Limbs, and if he walks or treads well. p: 41 etc What is meant by
saying a horse has a planted Coat: p. 170
PINCON See Beak. POIREAUX Poireaux, Leek heads, or mattering kind of Warts,
where they grow. p. 65 PISSING That the most part of good horses piss in the
Stable at their first arrival. p. 103 That Mares are not at all to be suffered
to piss as they are Riding, but upon the contrary horses as often as they
please p. 103
PORT-MORDS That the Port-Mords or Leathers which carry the Bit, should be of
good fresh leather, and not in the least spoilt or burnt. p. 92 POWDER The
Lieutenants Powder, a preventer as well as curer of diseases in Horses. p. 191
Its Use. p. 99
PRESSING Pressing, or resisting the Riders hand, explained. p. 24^ PRICKING
How many ways a horse may be pricked. p. 120 PURGING Of purging in general. p.
170 The physical terms of the four classes of purging Medicaments. p. 173 Of
Medicaments which purge Bile or Choler. p. 174 Of Medicaments which purge
phlegm or pituite. p. 175 Of Medicaments which purge Melancholy. p. 177 Of
Medicaments which purge serosities or watery humors. p. 178 A good Purge for
men. p. 178 How and at what time to administer a Purge to a horse p. 179 An
excellent direction, for the right proportioning of drugs designed to make up a
Purgation. p. 180 A Table of the chief purgations contained in the second part.
p. 18^ How to prepare the humors in horses which People intend to purge. p. 182
PURSEYNESS How considerable an imperfection it is. p. 55 when best discovered,
and wherein the whole knowledge of that discovery consists. p. 56 When it is
incurable. p. 56 The difference there is betwixt it, and the Courbature or
Chest -- foundering p. 57
PY-BALD Of Pybald horses, and from whence they derive that name. p. 80
Q
QUARTER. QUarter behind or behind, before, what is meant by it. p. 119
QUARTERS. What parts of a horse's Feet so called. p. 4 QUARTERS. FALSE. What
they are, and when most dangerous. p. 49
R.
RAISING. WHen the Lever, raising, or lifting up a horse's Legs may be said to
be good p. 42 RAMINGUES. What horses are so called. p. 73 RAMPINS. What horses
are so called, and how they are known. p. 68 How they are to be shoed. p. 138
RATTAIL'D. What horses are so called. p. 11. 65 RATSTAILS. Or Arrestes, in a
horses Legs how to know them. p. 65 REDOUBLING. See Flank. REINS. Where a
horse's reins begin p. 4. How a horse's Reins should be shapt. p. 10 What is
meant by saying that a horse has a great deal of Reins. p. 36
RESISTING. RIBS. Resisting the hand explaiend. p. 242 How they should be
shaped. p. 11 The imperfection of narrow turned Ribs in horses, as also what
will probably befall such of them as are great feeders. p. 53
RIDING How a horse should walk, that so a man may ride easily. p. 44 ROAN
COLOR Several kinds of it: p. 80 ROOTS. The five aperient or opening Roots. p.
186 RUBBING That horses at their first arrival should not have their Legs
rubbed hard down p. 107 RUBICAN What color so called. p. 81
S.
SADDLE WHat is to be observed in fitting a horse with a convenient Sadle. p.
93 How a Saddle should be fashioned to be well shapt and commodious for the
Rider. p. 93 That a Saddle should be pretty long in the seat. p 95 What is to
be observed by a Saddler, to make a Saddle ly or sit low upon a horse's back.
p. 96 Saddle half after the English Fashion, how commodious p. 97 A la Royal,
what it is p. ^7 After the Dutch, or Holland Fashion, what it is and its
conveniences. p. 97 After the Scots fashion, the most convenient and easy of
all Saddles. p. 98 Of the appurtenances or furniture belonging to a Saddle. p
98 The reason why a Saddle designed for a Mare, should be made higher before
than one designed for a h^rse. p. 99
SADDLE-BACK'T. What horses are so called. p. 10 SCATCH. See Bit-mouths. MOUTH,
SCRATCHES. What kind of Scratches are the most dangerous. p. 54 SCULPTORS. See
Painters. SEELING See Lyard. SELENDER. In what part of a horse's hind Legs it
comes. p. 63 SEPARATERS. What teeth so called. p. 3 SHANK. Where placed and
how it should be shapt. p. 4. 12 SHAPES. Of the Shapes of horses in General,
and of horses of different Kingdoms. p. 209 SHOEING The Art of Shoeing in
general p. 118 Four general maxims to be observed in shoeing. p. 119 etc. That
in shoeing, a horse's heels are never to be opened after the common Method. p.
120 How to pare the feet well, to fit the shoes, etc. p. 121 That shoeing at
the Change of the Moon makes a horse's feet to grow, but for Brittle hoofs
shoeing in the decrease is better. p. 122 123 How to shoe horses which have low
heels. p. 123 That in shoeing horses which have low heels, the Soles are only
to be pared at the Toes, and that also but very gently. p. 124 How to shoe
horses which have Flat feet, and high and round Soles. p. 125 How horses which
are hoof-bound, or narrow heel'd, should be shoed. p. 129 How horses which have
False-quarters, in French des Seymes, are to be shoed. p. 133 How horses whose
forelegs from the knees to the Coronets go in a straight line, in French
droits sur leurs Members, should be shoed, as also those which are Boute or
Boulettez. p. 135 How horses which have Arched Legs, (in French jambes Arquees)
are to be shoed. p. 137 How horses which Tread only upon the Toes of their hind
feet (called in French Chevaux Rampins) are to be shoed, as also such as
stumble. p. 138 How to shoe horses which have been foundered in the feet. p.
139 How horses appointed for the Manage should be shoed. p. 142 How horses
which Cut or Interfere are to be shoed. p. 143
SHOES That shoes are by no means to be vaulted or made hollow in the inside.
p. 127 Panton shoe what it is, and how to be Forged. p. 131 Half pauton she
what it is, and how to be forged. p. 133 What kind of shoes are most proper for
Mules. p. 136 Planche shoe what it is, and why people make not use of it for
horses, as well as for Mules. p. 143 Shoes after the English fashion, excellent.
p. 143 A pretty invention of shoes, that may be accommodate to all sizes of
feet by help of a screw Nail, and is therefore very convenient when a horse
shall come to loss a shoe betwixt Towns. p. 145
SHORT-COUPLED That horses which are short or well coupled, are not so Subject
to become Pursy, or altered in their Flanks, as those which are long coupled p.
11 Whither short or long couple^ horses, are the most easy p. 44
SHORT-JOINTED Of horses which are short-jointed. p. 35 That horses which have
thick, stiff, and short joints, are very unfit for the Manage. p. 36
SHOULDERS How a horse's Shoulders should be shapt, and to know when a horse is
charged in his shoulders. p. 10 How to know when a Horse's shoulders are well
shapt. p. 33 That a horse very much charged with shoulders is only fit for
draught. p. 34 That upon the good shapes of the shoulders and Neck, does very
much depend the Gentleness and delicateness of a horse. p. 34 That a horse with
too large shoulders, is preferable to one who has them too small. p. 35
SILVER-GRAY See Gray. SINEWS See Back-sinews. SKILFUL What a man should know
relating to horses, before be can be called Skillful, p. 17 A very good advice,
to such as intend to become Skillful it horses. p. 17
SOLES The Sole of a horses foot described. p. 4^ How it should be shapt. p. 12
Of high and round Soles. p. 125 How to rectify them, when they are extremly
high and round. p. 12^ For what service such high and round soled horses are
most proper, and how long they should be accustomed to Panton shoes before they
are to be wrought with them. p. 12^
SORREL COLOR A Color somewhat resembling a very Red Bay, as also of all the
different kinds of it. p. 80, 81 Horses of this Color commonly good. p. 81
SOUTIEN When a horse has the Soutien, stay, or keeping up of his legs good.
p. 42. 43 SPAVIN What it is, and where it comes. p. 61 That a dry Spavin is an
impediment to swiftness. p. 62 Spavins and Jardons hereditary imperfections. p.
64
SPLINT Its definition, and how to know it. p. 38 SPUNGES Of Horse's shoes, how
to be fashioned. p. 121 How to be placed at the heels when the shoe is put on.
p. 121
STABLE The dimensions of a fine stable, together with its Movables. p. 168
169 Reasons why horses should be alwise covered in the stable. p 169
STALLION What Colors are most proper for a Stallion. p. 207 What kind of
Horses are fittest for a Stallion, and how he is to be ordered. p. 214
STANDING See Planted. STAR That it is an imperfection for any horse of a Dark
color, not to have a Star in his forehead. p. 6 Of Stars, Blazes, and White
marks which horses have upon their feet or legs, in French Balzanes. p. 83 What
is meant by the common saying, That a Horse's star is a drinking, or that he
drinks out of his while. p. ^4 A star in a Horse's forehead a good Mark. p.
86 How to make a white star in a Horse's forehead. p. 204
STARLING COLOR What-it is. p. 80 STIFLE Where placed. p. 5 STIRROF-LEATHERS
What Leather is most proper for them. p. 100 STIRROP-JRONS What Fashion of
Stirrup Irons is best and most commodious. p. 100 STRAW A good observation
anent the Feeding of Horses with straw. p. 147 etc. Straw of Languedock for
what reason excellent. p. 148
STREIGHT-MEMBERED Of Horses which are straight set upon their Members. p. 135
etc. STUMBLING How to shoe a Horse that stumbleth. p. 138 SWELLING Swellings of
all kinds in a Horse's h^nd-legs, very troublesome and hard to cure; as also in
what parts of the hindlegs they usually come. p. 61 etc Restrictive to repel a
swelling upon a Horse's back, by reason of a bad Saddle. p. 112 Another for the
same. p. 113
SWIMERS Swimers of a Horse, in what parts of the Legs they are situate. p. 46
T
TAIL HOw a Horse's Tail or Dock should be shaped and Set. p. 11 How to die the
Manes and Tails of Horses of either a Scarlet or Gold Color. p. 203
TEETH Their division and number 3, 19. etc. Shell or hollow Teeth, how to know
them. p. 26
THIGHS Where situate, and how they should be shaped. p. 5. 59 TICK How to know
if a Horse has the Tick. p. 88 Several ways of Ticking, as also that Horses
learn that bad Habit from one another. p. 89
TIE See Breast plate. TIGER Color p. 81 TOE What part of a Horse's foot it
is. p. 4 Toe before and quarter behind, or before behind, behind beore, the
first and general precept for the right shoeing of Horses. p. 119
TONGUE How it should be shaped. p. 7 To prevent its hanging out p. 229
TRAQUEN ARD Traquenard or Entrepas, a mixed kind of pace between the amble and
walk. p. 76 TRAVEL The true method to preserve Horses sound and hearty upon
Travel. p. 91 How a man should order Horses at Dinner and Supper while upon
Travel. p. 104 A Continuation of the directions, for preserving horses sound
upon Travel. p. 111 What is to be observed, after People are arrived from a
Journey or Traveling. p. 116 Several methods, whereby to unweary Horses when
they come first from Travel. p. 117
TRAVERSED Traversed and cross Traversed what they fignisie. p. 85. etc
TRAVERSE MULES What they are. p. 67 TREAD Of the setting down or Tread of a
Horse's Foot. p. 73 TUSHES What Teeth so called, and that Mares generally have
none of them, and when they have, are reputed the worse for it. p. 3 How to
know a Horse's age by them. p. 23
VARISSE. What it is. p. 61 VESSIGON What it is. p. 60 VIGOR. How to judge of
a Horse's vigor and agility. p. 72 The difference between vigor or being high
mettled and fieryness. p. 53

W
WALK. How to know when a Horse walks well. 41 etc An explication of some
terms relating to walking. p. 42 How a Horse should walk, to walk lightly,
surely, quickly, and easily. p. 43 etc What are the true motions of a Horse's
Legs upon the step or walk. p. 45
WALK That a Horse in walking, should not at each step turn out has Hams,
neither rub the one against the other, which is an action quite contrary to the
preceding. p. 45 WARTS See Poireaux. WATERING. At what time a Horse should be
watered upon Travel. p. 101 The unreasonableness of watering Courses. p. 101
That in watering, a Horse's draught is to be interrupted several times. p. 101
An odd method of watering horses, practiced by the Dutch Wagoneers. p. 102
Whether a horse after Travel, should be watered before he get his Oats, or not.
p. 105 How to correct the sharpness and crudity of water, which horses are to
drink. p. 106 That good water contributes to the keeping a horse fa^ and plump.
p. 148
WATERS. Of the Distilled Waters commonly made use of for horses. p. 203
WEANING See Foals. WHEEZER See Blower: WHITE Horses which have too much white
commonly feeble. p. 83 WHITEFOOTED Why horses which have only their far hind
Feet white, in French Arzels, are not esteemed by the Spaniards. p. 84 White
only in the near hind Foot, a good mark. p. 84 White in all four, a sign of
good Nature. p. 85
WILL That a horse should have no other will, save that of his Rider. p. 73
WIND Of horses which are thick winded. p. 58 WINDBROKEN See Purseyness.
WINDGALLS What they are, and where placed. p. 38 That those windgalls which are
called Nervous, make always a horse halt. p. 68
WITHERS Where placed. p. 3 WOLFCOLOUR How they should be shapt. p. 9 What it
is.

Z
ZAIN WHat color it is. p. 81 A Spanish Proverb relating to it. 82 What horses
only so called. p. 134

The Contents of the Supplement, of HORSEMANSHIP.
Chap: I. OF the Excellency of the Art, and of the most considerable Authors
who have writ of it. Page 1. Chap: II. That it is a very foolish thing, and a
token of great ignorance in the Art, to think the Manage useless. page 3 Chap:
III. Of the great mistake which many people are in, who think it a great
disparagement to Horsemanship, if by chance a Good Horseman be thrown from his
Horse. page 5. Chap: IV. That people are mightily deceived, who by mere
speculation without practice, think to become good and skilful Horsemen. page
6. Chap: V. Of a strange mistake in some Horsemen, who by double exercise
fancy they will make a Horse sooner ready, then by moderate Teaching. page 7
Chap: VI. A short Description of the different kinds of Outlandish Horses. page
8. Chap: VII. Of the Spanish Mules. page 12. Chap: VIII. Of the Curiosity and
Care, which most of the Abovementioned Kingdoms take, in keeping and
Ornamenting their Horses. page 13 Chap: IX. What Stature or Size of Horses is
best and most convenient, either for the Wa^s, a single Combat, or any thing
else; As also, at what Age it is most proper to begin to work a Horse, either
for the Wars or Manage. page 14 Chap: X. What Equipage is most proper for the
Horse, and most commodious for the Horseman. page 15 Chap: XI. Of the true and
perfect seat, which a Man should keep upon Horseback. page 17 Chap: XII. Of
Backing a Colt, or Young Horse. page 18 Chap: XIII. A Discourse of Bitts, with
some General Directions to know, and make choice of those which are universally
most proper, for all Horses. page 19 Chap: XIV. Of the Operation of the Bitt in
several Circumstances. page 21 Chap: XV. Of the Trench or Watering Bitt,
Snaffle, Martongal, and false Reins. page 23 Chap: XVI. Of the Cavezon, its
Operation and Use. page 24 Chap: XVII. Of the several Helps and Corrections,
with Body, Voice, Spurrs, Rod, Calves of the Legs, etc. page 26 Chap: XVIII. Of
rewarding and punishing Horses, and that Fear does much but Love little. page
30 Chap: XIX. That opposition in Horses against the Rider, is for the most part
a sign of Strength and Spirit. page 31 Chap: XX What it is makes a Horse go by
Rote, or Routine, and how to remedy it. page 32 Chap: XXI. A true Description
of all the Natural Paces. page 32 Chap: XXII. Of all the Artificial Motions
which a Horse can make. page 36 Chap: XXIII. The true Method of suppling a
Horses shoulders, or working at first either Colts, young Horses, or old
ignorant Horses, upon large Circles d'une Piste or of one Tread. page 37 Chap:
XXIV. How to stop a Horse, and make him go back. page 39 Chap: XXV. How to make
a Horse sensible and Obedient to the Heels, or to answer exactly the Spurrs.
page 41 Chap: XXVI. The True and exact Method, to make a Horse go Terra a Terra
justly, and in Perfection. page 46 Chap: XXVII. Of the Piroyte. page 47 Chap:
XXVIII. Of Passads. page 48 Chap: XXIX. Of Corvets, and how to dress a Horse
perfectly upon them without a Pillar, which is the surest wa^. page 49 Chap:
XXX. Of Leaping Horses, and how to dress them. page 52 Chap: XXXI. A new and
pretty invention to dress Horses upon all Apres, by the help of one single
Pillar page 54 Chap: XXXII. A short recapitulation of what has been already
said concerning the dressing of Horses, which if got by heart, and punctually
practiced, will give a man such insight in the Art, as that he will seldom fail
to make and dress any Horse, that shall come to his hands. page 55 Chap:
XXXIII. A Discourse of Ambling, and how to teach a Horse the true and perfect
strok of the Amble. page 60 Chap: XXXIV. Of the vices and imperfections of
Horses, and how to prevent and remedy them. page 65 Chap: XXXV. Of Running
Horses, and how to diet them for a Match. page 71
FINIS.
THE Complete Horse man Part the 2d

engraved title page

AN ADVERTISEMENT BY THE PUBLISHER.
LEst the Reader should think it strange, why the Second Part of this Book does
not only carry a different Title from the First, but is also called the First
Part, as well as that which is really the First; It is thought fit to give him
in this place the Reason of it; which, in short, is this.

About a Year ago it happened that the Translation of this excellent Book was
undertaken by two different Persons, the one in Scotland, and the other in
England, without either of 'em knowing, or so much as in the least suspecting,
one another's Design; however when they came to understand that both of 'em had
the same Project on Foot, they judged it convenient not only to communicate
their Designs to one another, but also to discover what Progress each of 'em
had made in it; and it very luckily so fell out, that they did not both begin
their Translations at one and the same Part; but that the First Part, which was
Englished in Scotland by Sir William Hope, (and which is truly the First Part
as the Book came at first from Monsieur Solleysel's own Hands, as the Reader
may see more at large in the Preface) happened to be that Part which was last
to be Translated by the Undertaker in England: whereupon they judged it most
convenient, both for the speedy publishing of so useful a Book, and to save
themselves a great deal of unnecessary Trouble and Charges, to join their
Translations together, thereby to complete more quickly this Impression, which
has been so much longed for.

This is the true Reason, not only of the two Parts having different Titles,
but also of both of 'em being called the First. And as it cannot be denied, but
that that Part translated in Scotland carries the truest Title, so likewise the
Title of that done in England is made good by the Excellent Collection of
Horsemanship, subjoined by way of Supplement to the First Part, by Sir William
Hope. So that, at present, by this Addition of his, any Gentleman may be made,
by the serious Perusal of this Book, not only a Skilful and Complete Farrier,
but also an Understanding and Complete Horseman; which I think makes both the
Titles to correspond abundantly well with the general Scope and Design of the
Book, and may sufficiently satisfy any Judicious and Candid Reader, who
certainly will, or at least should value more the Goodness and Excellency of
the Matter, than the Omission of a little stiff and precise Regularity in the
Form, especially when committed by so very unexpected an Accident, as that of
the Translation being undertaken at one and the same time by Persons living in
different Kingdoms.

And for the Reader's more easy finding out the Chapters and Sections of this
Second Part, which are quoted in the First, the Translator of the First Part
designing to reduce his Second, had he gone on with it, into Chapters and
Sections, which however is not done in this Edition of the Second Part, the
Undertaker in England not falling upon that Method; here immediately follows
the Table of Contents, which mentions the Chapters and Sections, and directs to
the Pages where they are to be found; besides the Alphabetical Table of the
Diseases and Remedies at the End, exactly after the same Manner as they are
quoted in the First Part; which makes this Second Part, although not subdivided
into Sections, to answer altogether as well to the Citations of the First, as
if both of 'em had been done by the same Hand.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. OF the Diseases of Horses, and their Remedies. page 1 CHAP. II.
Observations concerning the Signs of Sickness in a Horse. p. 5 CHAP. III. Of
the Lampas. p. 6 CHAP. IV. Of the Barbs. ibid. CHAP. V. Of the Tick. ibid.
CHAP. VI. Of Wolves Teeth. p. 7 CHAP. VII. Of Hurts or Wounds in the Mouth.
ibid. CHAP. VIII. Sect. 1. Of Loathing of Food, or Want of Appetite. p. 8 Sect.
2. An Arman for a sick Horse that loathes his Food. p. 10 Sect. 3. Chewing-Balls
to restore lost Appetite. p. 11 Sect. 4. Fills or Balls for the Stomach. p. 12
Sect. 5. How to nourish a Horse that forsakes his Meat, during his Sickness.
ibid.
CHAP. IX. Sect. 1. Of the Strangle. p. 15 Sect. 2. A Remedy for the Strangle.
p. 16 Sect. 3. The Suppurative Ointment, commonly called Basilicum. ibid. Sect.
4. Of the Electuary of Kermes. p. 17 Sect. 5. How to promote the Evacuation of
the Humor by the Nose. p. 19
CHAP. X. Sect. 1. Of the False or Bastard-Strangles. page 20 Sect. 2. An
Ointment to ripen Kernels. p. 22
CHAP. XI. Sect. 1. Of the cold Rheum or Morfounding. p. 22 Sect. 2. For a Cold
accompanied with a violent Cough. p. 23 Sect. 3. A Draught for a Cold joined
with a Palpitation or Beating in the Flank. p. 24 Sect. 4. A softening Clyster.
ibid. Sect. 5. The universal Cordial-Powder. ibid. Sect. 6. Of the
Cordial-Balls, or Treacle-Pills. p. 25 Sect. 7. Other Cordial-Powders. p. 27
CHAP. XII. Sect. 1. Of the Glanders. p. 28 Sect. 2. How to expel the Matter by
the Nose. p. 31 Sect. 3. How to resolve a Gland or Kernel. p. 32 Sect. 4.
Another Remedy for the Glanders. p. 33 Sect. 5. A Perfume to draw forth the
offending Humor. p. 35 Sect. 6. Another Remedy for the Glanders. ibid. Sect.
7. Another Remedy for the same Distemper. p. 36 Sect. 8. Of the Emetic Wine.
ibid.
CHAP. XIII. Sect. 1. Of the Diseases of the Head, caused by Choleric Humors.
p. 37 Sect. 2. Another Remedy for Diseases in the Head. p. 38 Sect. 3. A Remedy
for the Diseases of the Head, called the Fiery Evil. p. 39 Sect. 4. A Clyster
for Discases of the Head, or the Fiery Evil. ibid. Sect. 5. A Bag to give the
Horse an Appetite. ibid. Sect. 6. A Remedy to provent Diseases of the Head.
ibid. Sect. 7. A Charge for Diseases of the Head. p. 40 Sect. 8. An excellent
Remedy for the Diseases in the Head, called the Spanish Evil. ibid. Sect. 9. A
purging Medicine, to be given to Horses after they are cured of the Diseases of
the Head. p. 41 Sect. 10. Of the true Preparation of Scammony. p. 42
CHAP. XIV. Sect. 1. Of the Diseases of the Eyes. ibid. Sect. 2. A Remedy for
Rheums in the Eyes. p. 44 Sect. 3. An Eye-Water for Horses. p. 45 Sect. 4.
Another Eye-Water. ibid. Sect. 5. An Ointment to divert the Rheum from the
Eyes. ibid. Sect. 6. A Charge to divert the Defluxion from the Eyes. p. 46
CHAP. XV. Sect. 1. Of Blows on the Eyes. ibid. Sect. 2. Of Lapis Mirabilis, or
the Wonderful Stone. p. 47 Sect. 3. To consume a white Film on the Eye. p. 48
CHAP. XVI. Sect. 1. Of Lunatic or Moon-Eyes. p. 49 Sect. 2. Of the best way
of making Rue-Water, to cure Moon-Eyes. p. 50 Sect. 3. Of Oil of Lead, called
Oleum Saturni. ibid. Sect. 4. A Frontlet to divert the Defluxion. p. 51. l. 41
Sect. 5. Of Cleansing the Eye below, or Cutting out the Haw. p. 51 Sect. 6. How
to cleanse the Eye above. p. 52 Sect. 7. Pills for Lunatic or Moon-Ey'd
Horses. ibid. Sect. 8. The Preparation of Aloes. p. 53 Sect. 9. How to
cauterize or burn the Parts above the Eyes. ibid.
CHAP. XVII. Sect. 1. Of Haemorrhagy or Bleeding. p. 54 Sect. 2. Clysters. p. 55
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Stag's Evil, or Palsy in the Jaw^ p. 56 CHAP. XIX. Sect.
1. Of the Vives. p. 57 Sect. 2 Of Remedies for the Vives. p. 58 Sect. 3. A
Clyster for the Vives. p. 59 Sect. 4. Another. ibid. Sect. 5. Another Remedy
for the Vives. ibid.
CHAP. XX. Of the Colic, Fret, or Gripes. ibid. CHAP. XXI. Sect. 1. Of the
first kind of Colic. p. 60 Sect. 2. Of Orvietan. ibid. Sect. 3. Of Essence of
Vipers. p. 61
CHAP. XXII. Sect. 1. Of the second kind of Colic. p. 62 Sect. 2. A Clyster to
expel wind. p. 63 Sect. 3. A Clyster for the Wind-Colic. ibid. Sect. 4. An
excellent Clyster to break and dispel Wind. ibid. Sect. 5. A Carminative and
purging Oil for Clysters. ibid.
CHAP. XXIII. Sect. 1. Of the third kind of Colic. p. 64 Sect. 2. Remedies.
ibid. Sect. 3. An exellent Oil. p. 65
CHAP. XXIV. Sect. 1. Of the fourth kind of Colic. p. 66 Sect. 2. A specific
Powder for all the four kinds of this Distemper already described. p. 67 Sect.
3. A purging Medicine to destroy Worms. ibid. Sect. 4. A Powder for the Colic.
p. 68 Sect. 5. Another Remedy for the Colic. ibid. Sect. 6. Another. ibid.
CHAP. XXV. Sect. 5. Of the fifth kind of Colic. p. 68 Sect. 2. A Clyster to
provoke Urine. p. 69 Sect. 3. A Remedy to provoke Urine. p. 70 Sect. 4.
Another. ibid. Sect. 5. For a Flux of Urine. p. 71
CHAP. XXVI. Sect. 1. Of a Horse that stales Blood. p. 72 Sect. 2.
Treacle-Diatesseron. ibid. Sect. 3. Another Remedy for pissing of Blood. p. 73.
CHAP. XXVII. A Remedy for the Stones that are drawn into the Body by the
Violence of the Pain. p. 73 CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Sixth Kind of Colic, called by
some the Red Gripes. p. 74 CHAP. XXIX. Of the Stavers or Staggers. p. 75 CHAP.
XXX. Sect. 1. Of a Shoulder-Wrench ^^oulder-Pight, and Shoulder-Splait. p. 76
Sect. 2. A R^medy for a Strain, Blow, or any other Hurt in the Shoulder. p. 77
Sect. 3. Ointment of Montpelier. p. 78 Sect. 4. The Baron's Ointment for
Strains in the Shoulders or Hips. ibid.
CHAP. XXXI. Sect. 1. Of a Shoulder-Splait. p. 80 Sect. 2. Of the Red
Honey-Charge. p. 81 Sect. 3. Another less compounded Honey-Charge, commonly
called a Remolade. p. 82 Sect. 4. Of the Ointment Oppodeldoch for dry withered
Shoulders, that are deprived of their usual Nourishment; And for all Strains or
Wrenches in the Shoulders or Hips. p. 83
CHAP. XXXII. Of broken Legs or Bones. p. 85 CHAP. XXXIII. Sect. 1. Of stiff,
tired, decayed, or bruised Legs. p. 86 Sect. 2. Another Remedy. ibid. Sect. 3.
Another. ibid. Sect. 4. To comfort and strengthen the Sinews of the Legs. p. 87
Sect. 5. Another. ibid.
CHAP. XXXIV. Sect. 1. For Blows, swelled or Gourdy Legs, whether the Swelling
be occasioned by some Accident, or proceed from any other Cause. p. 87 Sect. 2.
A Remedy for a Blow, and to assuage a Swelling. ibid. Sect. 3. To cure a
swelled Leg. p. 88 Sect. 4. A Bath to resolve a Swelling in the Thigh or Leg.
ibid. Sect. 5. A Remedy for a hard Swelling, proceeding from a Blow, or any
other Cause. ibid. Sect. 6. To prevent the Swelling of the Legs. p. 89 Sect. 7.
A Honey-Charge or Remolade for a Blow, or to assuage a Swelling in the Legs.
ibid. Sect. 8. Another Re^^dy for a Swelling in the Legs occasioned by a Blow.
ibid. Sect. 9. The Duke's Ointment for Swellings and Bruises, accompanied with
Heat; and for Inflammations in any part of the Body. p. 90 Sect. 10. For the
Swelling of the Sheath and Stones, though the Tumor sprend it self under the
Belly about the Thickness of two Fingers. ibid. Sect. 11. Of old Swellings in
the Legs, occasioned by an ill-cur'd Sinew-sprain. p. 91 Sect. 12. For hard
Swellings that cannot be cured by ordinary Remedies. ibid. A Continuation of
the Receipts for spoiled Legs.
CHAP. XXXV. Sect. 1. Another Remedy for stiff and tired Legs, and to assuage
the Pain and Swellings that remain after Foundering and other Distempers. p. 92
Sect. 2. The same Remedy more methodically prepared. ibid. Sect. 3. A Bath for
the Legs, Shoulders and Hips. ibid. Sect. 4. An excellent Oil for stiff and
tired Legs. p. 93 Sect. 5. Another way to make the same Oil with less trouble.
ibid. Sect. 6. A Balsam for the Legs spoiled by traveling. p. 94
CHAP. XXXVI. Of Malenders or Selenders. p. 95 CHAP. XXXVII. Sect. 1. Of
Splents. p. 95 Sect. 2. A Remedy for the Splent. p. 96 Sect. 3. Another Remedy.
ibid. Sect. 4. Another Remedy for the Splent. ibid. Sect. 5. To cure a Splent
methodically. p. 97 Sect. 6. Another Remedy to take away a Splent. ibid. Sect.
7. Ointment of Beetles for Splents, Wind-Galls, and (even the greatest)
Farcy-Knots or Cords. p. 98 Sect. 8. Ointment of Worms for Splents, Wind-Galls,
Water-Farcy, and other Swellings. p. 99 Sect. 9. To soften a hard Swelling.
ibid.
CHAP. XXXVIII. Sect. 1. Of Wind-Galls. p. 100 Sect. 2. To repel or assuage a
Wind-Gall, Wen, or any other soft Swelling. p. 101 Sect. 3. To take away a
Wind-Gall. ibid. Sect. 4. Of Retoires or Ruptures, called by the Italians
Dead-fire. p. 102 Sect. 5. A Retoire or Dead-fire. ibid. Sect. 6. Another
Retoire. p. 103
CHAP. XXXIX. Sect. 1. Of Wrenches, or Luxations, and Dislocations of the
Pastern-Joint. p. 103 Sect. 2. Remedies for a Strain. ibid. Sect. 3. Remolade
of Bohemia. p. 104
CHAP. XL. Sect. 1. Of a Sinew-sprain, or Sinew-sprung. p. 106 Sect. 2. The
Nerve-Ointment for Sinew-sprains, tired and decayed Legs, and all old Strains.
ibid. Sect. 3 Another cheap Remedy. p. 107
CHAP. XLI. Sect. 1. Of swelled and gourded Pastern-Joints. p. 107 Sect. 2. A
Remedy for swelled Pastern-Joints. p. 108 Sect. 3. To resolve a Swelling that
grows at the side of the Pastern-Joint. ibid. Sect. 4. The Plaster of Walnuts
to resolve Swellings. ibid.
CHAP. XLII. Of an Attaint or Overreach. p. 109 CHAP. XLIII. Sect. 1. Of the
Scratches. p. 110 Sect. 2. Remedies for simple Scratches. ibid.
CHAP. XLIV. Sect. 1. Of sinewy Scratches. p. 111 Sect. 2. Remedies for the
second kind of sinewy Scratches. p. 112 Sect. 3. Of sinewy Scratches of the
Third kind. ibid. Sect. 4. An excellent liquid Caustic. p. 114
CHAP. XLV. Sect. 1. Of the Third sort of Scratches, commonly called
Quitter-Bone. p. 116 Sect. 2. The Doctor's Ointment to cleanse Quitter-Bones.
p. 118 Sect. 3. An Ointment to dry up Sores on the Cronet. p. 120 Sect. 4. How
to cure Quitter-Bones by giving the Fire. ibid.
CHAP. XLVI. Of the Ring-Bone. p. 121 CHAP. XLVII. Sect. 1. Of the Vices of the
Feet and Hoofs. p. 123 Sect. 2. The Ointment of Plantane, otherwise called the
Ointment for the Feet, to rectify the Hoof, and make it grow. p. 124 Sect. 3.
Connestable 's Ointment to make the Hoof grow, and to render it soft and tough.
ibid. Sect. 4. To make the Hoof grow very speedily. p. 125
CHAP. XLVIII. Sect. 1. Of surbated Feet. p. 125 Sect. 2. Several Remedies for
painful and surbated Feet. p. 126
CHAP. XLIX. Sect. 1. Of a False Quarter. p. 127 Sect. 2. A Remedy for a False
Quarter and Chinks or Rifts in the Hoof. p. 128
CHAP. L. Sect. 1. Of narrow Heels. p. 130 Sect. 2. Of taking out the Sole. p.
131 Sect. 3. An Incarnative, or Ointment, to make the Flesh grow. p. 133
CHAP. LI. Sect. 1. Of Figs growing in a Horse's Foot. p. 134 Sect. 2. Remedies
for the Fig in a Horse's Foot. p. 135
CHAP. LII. Sect. 1. Of Retreats or Pricks with Stubs, or with a Nail in
Shooing, or in the Street. p. 137 Sect. 2. Of Pricking with Stubs or Nails in
the Streets. p. 139 Sect. 3. Oil of Gabian. p. 145. Sect. 4. Oil de Merveille.
ibid. Sect. 5. A Green Balsam highly esteemed for its excellent Virtues. p. 146
Sect. 6. Mr. Sicar's Ointment for Pricks with a Nail or Stub. ibid. Sect. 7.
Mr. Curtie 's Ointment for Wounds, Bruises, or Pricks with a Nail or Stubs. p.
147 Sect. 8. Bartholomew 's Ointment for Pricks with a Nail or Stub, and for
Bleynes. p. 148 Sect. 9. A hot or burning Balsam for Wounds, Bruises, and cold
Pains; as also for Pricks with a Nail or Stub. ibid. Sect. 10. Remedies for an
Impostume in the hairy part of the Foot. p. 149 Sect. 11. The Countess's
Ointment to heal and close up the Sores occasioned by Impostumes in the hairy
part of the Foot. p. 150 Sect. 12. To assuage and resolve hard Swellings on the
Cronet. ibid.
CHAP. LIII. Sect. 1. Of the Casting of the Hoof. p. 151 Sect. 2. Schmit 's
Ointment. p. 152
CHAP. LIVE. Of Bleymes. p. 153 CHAP. LV. Of scabb'd Heels or Frush. p. 154
CHAP. LVI. Of the Crown-Scab. p. 155 CHAP. LVII. Of fleshy Excrescences on the
Frush, by some ignorant Persons mistaken for the Figs. p. 156 CHAP. LVIII. Of
the Mange in the Legs and other Parts of the Body. p. 157 CHAP. LIX. Sect. 1.
To restore decayed and wasted Feet deprived of Nourishment by several
Distempers. p. 158 Sect. 2. A Pultiss. ibid.
CHAP. LX. Sect. 1. Of Wounds. p. 159 Sect. 2. How to prepare a Sponge for the
opening of Wounds. p. 161 Sect. 3. Cinnabar- Pills for Wounds, Worms, Mange,
and Farcin, and for the shedding of the Hair from the Head and Neck. p. 162
Sect. 4. Unguentum Aegyptiacum. p. 163 Sect. 5. A Powder to make the Flesh
grow, and cover the Bone. p. 164, l. 19 Sect. 6. The Sympathetic Powder. p. 164
Sect. 7. The Hermit's Ointment for Wounds in Horses. p. 165 Sect. 8.
Limewater, or the yellow Water. ibid. Sect. 9. Of a Gangrene. p. 166 Sect. 10.
A detergent and cleansing Water for a Gangrene. ibid. Sect. 11. Another
cleansing Water. ibid. Sect. 12. How to stanch Bleeding. p. 167
CHAP. LXI. Sect. 1. Of a Horse that is wrung or hurt in the Withers. p. 167
Sect. 2. To draw and ripen a Swelling. p. 168 Sect. 3. The Vulnerary Water. p.
170 Sect. 4. Powders to dry up a Wound. p. 172 Sect. 5. Other Powders to dry up
Wounds. ibid. Sect. 6. Another Powder to dry up Wounds. ibid.
CHAP. LXII. Sect. 1. Of Swellings or Wounds on the Reins or Back. p. 173 Sect.
2. An excellent Digestive. p. 174 Sect. 3. The Hunters Ointment for deep
Wounds. p. 175 Sect. 4. Of Waters for Gunshot Wounds, or Vulnerary Potions.
ibid. Sect. 5. A simple Water for Gunshot Wounds. p. 176 Sect. 6. Another more
compound. ibid. Sect. 7. Another. ibid. Sect. 8. A compound Wine for curing
Wounds in a Horse. ibid.
CHAP. LXIII. Sect. 1. Of Wounds or Hurts on the Pastern-Joint, and other
nervous and sinewy Parts. p. 177 Sect. 2. An Anodyne Pultiss. p. 178
CHAP. LXIV. Sect. 1. To prevent the Madness, occasioned by the Biting of a mad
Dog, either in Men, or any sort of Cattle. p. 179 Sect. 2. An infallible Remedy
for Madness occasioned by Biting. ibid. Sect. 3. Another easy Remedy. p. 180
Sect. 4. Of the Biting of a venomous Beast. p. 181
CHAP. LXV. Sect. 1. Of Pursiveness, or Shortness of Breath. p. 181 Sect. 2. A
Remedy for Pursiveness. p. 183 Sect. 3. Another Remedy for Pursiveness. p. 184
Sect. 4. Another Remedy for Pursiveness. ibid. Sect. 5. The way of exhibiting
Honey to Horses that are pursive, or troubled with Disorder in the Flanks; and
other Distempers. p. 185 Sect. 6. A Powder for Heat and Disturbance in the
Flanks. p. 186 Sect. 7. How to loosen a pursive Horse's Belly. p. 187 Sect. 8.
An excellent Powder for pursive Horses. ibid. Sect. 9. Of the Cure of
Pursiveness with Eggs. p. 189 Sect. 10. The Emetic or Angelic Powder for
Pursiveness. ibid. Sect. 11. The yellow Pills for short-winded Horses. p. 190
Sect. 12. Tincture of Sulphur for short-winded Horses. p. 191
CHAP. LXVI. Sect. 1. Of the Cough. p. 192 Sect. 2. A Powder for a Cough
whether old or newly taken. ibid. Sect. 3. An Electuary for a Cough caused by
Preternatural Heat. p. 195 Sect. 4. Other Powders for a Cough. p. 196 Sect. 5.
A Remedy for the Cough. ibid. Sect. 6. Another Remedy. ibid. Sect. 7. The
English Pills for an old Cough. p. 197
CHAP. LXVII. Sect. 1. Of Chest-Foundering, and Foundering accompanied with a
Fever. p. 197 Sect. 2. A Clyster for Horses that are Chest-founder'd. p. 198,
l. 21 Sect. 3. A Decoction for Chest-Foundering. ibid. l. 31 Sect. 4. A Remedy
which purges and gives Ease to a Chest-founder'd Horse. ibid. l. 57 Sect. 5.
Another Decoction for Chest-Foundering. p. 199, l. 10 Sect. 6. Remedies for
Obstructions of the Lungs caused by Foundering. ibid. Sect. 7. A Powder for
Chest-Foundering. p. 200, l. 1 Sect. 8. For a Chest-founder'd Horse that is
very sick. ibid. l. 10 Sect. 9. Another. ibid. l. 18 Sect. 10. A Remedy for a
foundered Horse that is troubled with a Fever, and very sick. p. 200 Sect. 11.
A Potion, or Drink for a foundered Horse, that is very sick, either with or
without a Cough. p. 201 Sect. 12. The Lieutenant's Decoction for a Horse that
is foundered, and very sick. ibid. Sect. 13. Crocus Metallorum. p. 202 Sect.
14. Liver of Antimony. ibid.
CHAP. LXVIII. Sect. 1. Of tired Horses that pine away after hard Labor or
Riding. p. 204 Sect. 2. Of Sal Polychrest, or fusible Sulphur. p. 205 Sect. 3.
A Fomentation for a lean and tired Horse. p. 207 Sect. 4. To loosen the Belly
of a tired Horse. ibid. Sect. 5. A purging Remedy for a tired Horse. ibid.
Sect. 6. The Golden Sulphur of Antimony. p. 208 Sect. 7. Of a Horse tired with
hard Riding. p. 209 Sect. 8. A purging and comforting Potion. ibid.
CHAP. LXIX. The Method of Fattening Horses. p. 209 CHAP. LXX. Sect. 1. Of the
Shrinking of the Sinews, and Gauntness of the Belly, occasioned by Foundering
of the Body, and other Distempers. p. 210 Sect. 2. An Anodyne Ointment. ibid.
CHAP. LXXI. Sect. 1. Of the Anticor. p. 212 Sect. 2. A comforting Potion for
the Anticor. p. 213 Sect. 3. Oil of Rue. ibid.
CHAP. LXXII Sect. 1. Of Palpitation of the Heart. p. 214 Sect. 2. A Remedy for
the Palpitation of the Heart. ibid. Sect. 3. A Clyster for the Palpitation of
the Heart. p. 215 Sect. 4. A Clyster to dispel Wind. ibid. Sect. 5. A Clyster
for the Palpitation of the Heart accompanied with Heat. ibid. Sect. 6. Another
cooling Clyster. p. 216 Sect. 7. A Cordial Potion for the Palpitation of the
Heart. ibid.
CHAP. LXXIII. Sect. 1. Of Fevers. p. 216 Sect. 2. A simple Fever. p. 217 Sect.
3. A putrid or humoral Fever. ibid. Sect. 4. A pestilential Fever. p. 217 Sect.
5. Of the Causes and Signs of a Fever. p. 218
CHAP. LXXIV. Sect. 1. Of the Cure of a simple Fever. p. 219 Sect. 2. A
Clyster. ibid.
CHAP. LXXV. Sect. 1. Of the Cure of putrid Fevers. p. 220 Sect. 2. A
Febrifuge, or Remedy to drive away Fevers. ibid. Sect. 3. A Clyster for a
Fever. p. 221 Sect. 4. Another Clyster for Fevers. ibid.
CHAP. LXXVI. Sect. 1. Of the Cure of a Pestilential Fever. p. 221 Sect. 2. A
Remedy. p. 222, l. 3 Sect. 3. Of the Method to be observed after a Horse's
Recovery from a Fever. ibid. Sect. 4. A purging Remedy for a Horse after his
Recovery from a Fever, and generally in all other Cases. p. 223 Sect. 5. An
excellent Catholicum for Clysters. p. 224
CHAP. LXXVII. Sect 1. Of the Farcin. p. 224 Sect. 2. The flying Farcy. p. 226
Sect. 3. The corded Farcin. ibid. Sect. 4. The Farcin resembling a Hen's
Fundament. p. 227 Sect. 5. The internal Farcin. ibid.
CHAP. LXXVIII. Sect. 1. Remedies for the Farcin. p. 227 Sect. 2. A Purge for
the Farcin. p. 228 Sect. 3. Pills for the Farcin. p. 229 Sect. 4. A specific
Remedy for the Farcin. ibid. Sect. 5. Another easy Method. ibid. Sect. 6. To
cure the Farcin by giving the Fire. p. 230 Sect. 7. The Ointment of Portugal
for Farcin Knots. ibid. Sect. 8. A Cautery or Caustic. p. 231 Sect. 9. Another.
ibid. Sect. 10. The Ointment of Naples, which alone cures the Farcin. ibid.
Sect. 11. The Remedy of a German Farrier for the Farcin. ibid. Sect. 12. An
excellent Remedy for the Farcin. p. 232 Sect. 13. Corrosive Sublimate. p. 233
Sect. 14. Mercurius dulcis, or sweet Sublimate. ibid.
CHAP. LXXIX. Sect. 1. Remedies for the Farcin that resembles a Hen's
Fundament. p. 234 Sect. 2. Pills for the Farcin. ibid. Sect. 3. The German
Ptisan for the Cure of the Farcin. p. 235
CHAP. LXXX. Sect. 1. Of an inveterate Farcin. p. 236 Sect. 2. The Decoction of
Guaiacum. ibid. Sect. 3. The Decoction of China. ibid. Sect. 4. The Decoction
of Sarsaparilla. p. 237
CHAP. LXXXI. Of the Farcin in the Head. p. 237 CHAP. LXXXII. Sect. 1. To
dissolve and assuage all sorts of Swellings, caused by the Farcin, both in the
Legs and other parts of the Body. p. 238 Sect. 2. A resolving Ointment for
Swellings occasioned by the Farcin. p. 239, l. 1. Sect. 3. A Receipt for the
Farcin. p. 240 Sect. 4. An easy Remedy for the Farcin. ibid.
CHAP. LXXXIII. Sect. 1. Of the Ebullition of the Blood, or Blood-running Itch.
p. 241 Sect. 2. Crystal Mineral or Sal Prunellae. ibid.
CHAP. LXXXIV. Of the shedding of the Hair from the Head, accompanied with the
Mange; and of the Falling of the Hair from the rest of the Body, especially
about the Neck, and hinder part of the Thighs. p. 242 CHAP. LXXXV. Sect. 1. Of
Molten-Grease. p. 243 Sect. 2. Of the Cure of Molten-Grease in the beginning.
p. 244 Sect. 3. Stinking Pills for Foundering, Molten-Grease, Chest-Foundering,
and the Colic. p. 245
CHAP. LXXXVI. Sect. 1. Of Foundering. p. 247 Sect. 2. A Remedy for Foundering.
p. 249 Sect. 3. Other Remedies for foundered Horses. p. 250
CHAP. LXXXVII. Of another kind of Foundering which resembles a Swaying of the
Back. p. 251 CHAP. LXXXVIII. Sect. 1. Of Pains in the Feet after Foundering. p.
252 Sect. 2. A Broth or Decoction for Pains in the Feet remaining after
Foundering. ibid.
CHAP. LXXXIX. Sect. 1. Of the Mange, Itch, or Running-Scab. p. 253 Sect. 2. A
Remedy for the Mange. ibid. Sect. 3. Purging Pills for the Mange. p. 254 Sect.
4. A Drench or Potion for the Mange. ibid. Sect. 5. A Bath for the Mange. p.
255 Sect. 6. Another Bath and Water for the Mange in Horses and Dogs ibid.
Sect. 7. An excellent Ointment for the Mange. ibid. Sect. 8. A Fomentation for
the Mange. ibid. Sect. 9. A Poinade for the Mange. p. 256 Sect. 10. The
Neat-Herd's Ointment for the Pains, or watery Sores in the Legs, foul Wounds,
or Ulcers, and the Mange. p. 256
CHAP. XC. Of the Mange or Itch in a Horse's Tail. p. 257 CHAP. XCI. Sect. 1.
Of Worms, Bots, or Truncheons that breed in the Body of a Horse. p. 257 Sect.
2. Remedies for the Worms. p. 258 Sect. 3. A Powder for the Worms. p. 259 Sect.
4. Purging Pills to destroy Worms. ibid. Sect. 5. Another Remedy to kill Worms.
p. 260 Sect. 6. A Powder that kills the Worms, and expels the Matter of which
they are generated. ibid. Sect. 7. Another cheap Powder for the Worms. ibid.
CHAP. XCII. Sect. 1. Of Swaying of the Back, and Falls. p. 261 Sect. 2. A
Potion for Falls. p. 262 Sect. 3. An Anodyne Clyster for Falls. ibid. Sect. 4.
Another Potion for falls or a swayed Back. ibid.
CHAP. XCIII. Of Hip-shot, or a Strain in the Hips. p. 263 CHAP. XCIV. Sect. 1.
Of the Swelling of the Cods and Stones. p. 265 Sect. 2. A Pultiss ibid. Sect.
3. An astringent Pultiss to assuage the Swelling of the Cods. ibid. Sect. 4.
Another resolvent Pultiss. p. 266 Sect. 5. A Remedy for a Rupture or Burstness.
ibid.
CHAP. XCV. Sect. 1. Of bruised, swollen, or hard Stones. p. 266 Sect. 2. A
very excellent Remedy. p. 267
CHAP. XCVI. Sect. 1. Of the Lask, Looseness, or Flux of the Belly. p. 268
Sect. 2. A Remedy for the Flux. ibid. Sect. 3. A scowring Clyster. p. 269 Sect.
4. A cooling and binding Clyster. ibid. Sect. 5. A Potion for the Flux. ibid.
Sect. 6. A binding Clyster. ibid. Sect. 7. Another Remedy. ibid. Sect. 8.
Another Remedy for a Flux proceeding from a cold Cause. p. 270 Sect. 9. A
Potion for a Flux proceeding from a cold Cause. ibid. Sect. 10. A binding
Clyster. ibid. Sect. 11. A Potion for a Flux proceeding from a hot Cause. ibid.
Sect. 12. Astringent Baths for a Flux. ibid.
CHAP. XCVII. Sect. 1. Of the Falling of the Fundament. p. 271 Sect. 2. Another
Remedy. ibid.
CHAP. XCVIII. Sect. 1. Of Strains, Hurts, and Blows on the Houghs. p. 272
Sect. 2. For Blows on the Houghs and other parts of the Body. ibid. Sect. 3. A
Remedy for a Swelling caused by a Blow. ibid. Sect. 4. Another Remedy for a
Swelling, occasioned by a Blow or Stroke with another Horse's Foot. p. 273
Sect. 5. Another Remedy to assuage a Swelling caused by a Stroke. ibid.
CHAP. XCIX. Sect. 1. Of the Relaxation and Straining of the Master-Sinew. p.
273 Sect. 2. An admirable Balsam for Strains in the Hough, Wrenches,
Dislocations, Hip-shot, Blows, Bruises, Sinew-sprain, or Sinew-sprung. p. 275
CHAP. C. Of the Cramp. p. 276 CHAP. CI. Sect. 1. Of the Hough-bony. p. 277
Sect. 2. A resolvent Plaster. ibid.
CHAP. CII. Sect. 1. Of Vessigons, which are soft Tumors somewhat resembling
large Wind-Galls. p. 278 Sect. 2. To resolve a Tumor. ibid. Sect. 3. Another
Remedy. p. 279 Sect. 4. The Duke of Newburg 's Ointment. ibid.
CHAP. CIII. Sect. 1. Of the Jardon. p. 280 Sect. 2. A resolving Plaster. ibid.
CHAP. CIV. Of the dry Spavin, or String-halt. p. 281 CHAP. CV. Of the
Ox-Spavin, or Bone-Spavin. p. 281 CHAP. CVI. Of the Varix, by some called the
Blood-Spavin. p. 282 CHAP. CVII. Of the Curb. p. 283 CHAP. CVIII. Of the Manner
of Giving the Fire to Horses. p. 283 CHAP. CIX. Of all the Sores, Pains,
Swellings, and Distempers of the hinder-Legs, from the Hough downwards. p. 287
CHAP. CX. Of Rat-Tails, or Arrests. p. 28^ CHAP. CXI. Of Mules. p. 28^ CHAP.
CXII. Sect. 1. Of Warts. p. 28^ Sect. 2. An excellent Remedy for Warts. p. 28^
CHAP. CXIII. Of Clefts, Cracks, or Chops. p. 2^^ CHAP. CXIV. Sect. 1. Of the
Pains and watery Sores in the Legs. p. 2^^ Sect. 2. An Ointment to dry up the
Pains or watery Sores. p. (...) Sect. 3. The Ointment of Oldenburg to heal and
dry up the Pains, Rat-Tails, Mules, and (...) foul and watery Sores in a
Horse's Legs. i^^^^ Sect. 4. Another Remedy to dry up the Pains, or running
Sores. p. ^^^ Sect. 5. A Water to heal and dry up the Pains and Warts, though
the Leg be swoll'^ gourdy. i^^^^ Sect. 6. The black Ointment, or Coachman's
Ointment to heal and dry up all manner of Scr^^ the hinder-Legs. i^^^^
CHAP. CXV. Sect. 1. Of swollen or gourdy Legs by reason of the Pains, or other
fleshy Sores. p. ^^^ Sect. 2. The perpetual Caustic, or Lapis Infernalis. p.
^^^^ Sect. 3. The white Honey-Charge or Plaster, for the Pains, Warts,
Rat-Tails, Mules, C^^^ Scratches, and Halter-Cast. p. ^^^^ Sect. 4. A Mercurial
Ointment to assuage the Swellings of the hinder-Legs. p. (...)
CHAP. CXVI. The Method of taking up a Vein. p. (...) CHAP. CXVII. Of
Halter-cast. p. (...) CHAP. CXVIII. Of the Hungry-Evil. p. (...) CHAP. CXIX. Of
Crepances. p. (...) CHAP. CXX. Of the Numness of the Hoof. p. (...)

The END of the CONTENTS.
Plate 6. By this Plate may be known the Names of all the External Malladies
incident to Horses The Dark Lines directing to ye Parts afflicted; And Figures
within the Circles to the Chapters wherein they are Treated.
diagram of a horse

THE Complete Horseman. PART I.
CHAP I. Of the Diseases of Horses, and their Remedies.
THEY who love Horses, will, doubtless, read this Work with Pleasure, which I
have with so much Pains and Study brought to so great a Degree of Perfection.
In the several Impressions of it, that have been already published, I have
freely communicated to the Public the Knowledge that I had acquired, not only
of New Medicines, but of several Experiments and Observations concerning the
and Use Application of 'em. And, ^hope, this last Edition will abundantly
satisfy the Curious, and clear all those Doubts ^at have been proposed to me.
My continual Practice furnishes me with daily Opportunities of seeing an
infinite Number of sick Horses, and of improving my self in the knowledge of
such things as were either doubtful or unknown to me before; and have always
made it my Business to discover easy Remedies, by the Help of which might
restore diseased Horses to a Condition fit for Service; neither have my
Endeavors been altogether unsuccessful. And in this last Impression the Reader
will perceive ^at I have left out several Remedies that are difficult and
laborious, and substituted ^ers that are easier though no less effectual:
besides, I have corrected the Errors of the ^^mer Editions, and made this
which is now offered to the Public, so complete in all (...) Parts, that I am
consident the Ingenious Peruser of it will readily acknowledge, ^t a Work of
this Nature could not be carried on and finished without a great ^al of Labor
and Pains. All the New Remedies that are proposed in it have been ^^firm'd by
undoubted Experience; and for the Convenience of those who desired it, ^ave
divided it into Two Parts.

In pursuance of my Design to treat of the Diseases of Horses, it would be
needless (...) insist on unprofitable Speculations. The main Business of a
Skilful Practitioner, ^u'd be, in the first Place, to discover the Nature of
the Distemper, according to ^t Maxim, Morbum nosse curationis principium, The
Knowledge of the Disease is the Begin^^g of the Cure; and then to choose such
Remedies as have been approved by long Experience, and to apply 'em in Time and
Place convenient. I have read many Authors ^o imagine that they can never treat
of any Disease accurately, unless they begin ^h an exact Definition of it,
which must be followed by a curious Discourse on the ^mology of its Names, and
a tedious Catalogue of all its Signs. After these Prelimina^^ they proceed to a
particular Examination of the Causes that may be supposed to con^ute to the
Production of the Distemper they propose to cure; and having with a ^at deal of
Ceremony laid down all the various Prognostics, they come at last to (...)
Indications on which they ground their Practice, and would be vexed to omit any
(...) Remedy that has been proposed by an Author, if it be of the Number of
those ^t are called Universals; for they abhor particular Remedies, and pretend
to banish (...) Specificks from the Practice of Physic, which, in their
Opinion, consists merely (...) the Art of discoursing handsomely concerning it.
Without Offense to honest and Learned Physicians, I may apply the Words of
Hippocrates to the rest, Medicinam vocat omnium Artium nobilissimam, sed
propter ignorantiam eorum, qui eam male exercent, esse omnium vilissimam. For
my part, I can perceive nothing but Vanity and Ostentation in such pompous
Discourses; and all these noisie Preambles do oftentimes end in a Trifle. Such
nice and artful Definitions usually confound the Author without instructing the
Reader. A diligent Writer is indeed obliged to give a clear Account of the
Nature of Distempers; but after all, the Eye and Experience are surer Guides
than all the Books that ever were written. I Am persuaded we ought rather to
search after good Medicines, than polite Expressions, in opposition to those
abovementioned Pretenders to Physic, who are very careful to make fine
Harangues, but never give themselves the trouble of enquiring after effectual
Remedies. And I dare confidently assure the Reader, that if he be well-grounded
in the Principles, and proceed with Caution in the Use of those Remedies
contained in this Book, he cannot possibly miss of Success. I have omitted
nothing that I thought necessary to explain the Nature of Diseases, and without
running into useless Digressions concerning the Causes of 'em, I have proposed
such Remedies as I have found to be effectual by my own Experience. And since
we have few Books in our Language, that explain the Manner of Preparing and
Compounding Medicines, I have endeavored with all possible Clearness, to
prescribe the best Methods of Composition, and the exact Doses of my Remedies.

This Treatise is adapted to all Sorts of Readers: For the Use of the Ignorant
(or greatest) part of Mankind, who have not the least Tincture of Learning, or
Skill in Physic, I have proposed easy and familiar Remedies; And I have also
frequently confirmed the Rules of Practice with Reasons, for the Satisfaction
of those who are not unacquainted with the Principles of Art, or have practiced
Physic themselves: neither am I altogether without Hope that the Learned will
find some Passages in it worthy of their serious Consideration. They that know
my Profession, or shall read this Book, will soon perceive that I am neither
Doctor nor Physician. Yet several professed Physicians, or such as assume that
Title, have pretended that I procured some Physician to compose this Treatise.
But to undeceive these Gentlemen, if they still persist in their Error, I must
beg leave to tell 'em, that it is not impossible for an inquisitive Person to
understand the Theory of Medicine, without pretending to the Practice of it.
It Is true, I never had the Advantage of a Learned Education, but I have
carefully perused the best Authors, without the Assistance of which I could
neither have discovered new Remedies, nor discoursed rationally concerning
their Effects. I must indeed confess that my Labors are very imperfect; but I
dare affirm that some of my Remedies will be found upon Trial, to be Good and
Methodical, and even applicable to Humane Bodies, by such who know how to
proportion their Doses.

Before I enter upon the Subject Matter of my intended Discourse, it will not
be improper to advertise the Reader, that if in any part of this Book he shall
find several Remedies prescribed for the same Distemper, he may do me the
Justice to conclude that I used that Method only for his Ease and Convenience.
It will perhaps be objected that there are several Persons who will be puzzled
to choose one among so many, and that it was needless to mention more than one
Approved Remedy for every Disease. I answer, in the first place, that they are
all Good and Approved; and we oftentimes find by reason of the Variety of
Climates, and the different Constitutions of Horses, that the same Remedy which
has cured one, may be unsuccessfully applied to another; so that after one
Remedy has disappointed, another will perhaps answer our Expectations. Besides
my Design is to write for the Use of all sorts of Persons, and for all Cases:
and since there may be occasion to consult my Book for the Cure of a Horse in
some Country-Village, or in an Army, far from any Druggist's Shop, I thought it
convenient to prescribe Choice of Receipts, that in such Cases my Reader might
be able to choose a simple Remedy that may be prepared on the Spot. Moreover
there are some Compositions more difficult than others; and they who are not
acquainted with the Art of Mixing Drugs, may use such Medicines as are more
easily prepared. And, to add one Consideration more, there are some Cases, in
which we must begin the Cure of a Distemper with one Remedy, and in the
Progress of it have Recourse to another, which must be again changed for a
Third, in the Declination of the Disease. Thus you see that Variety of Remedies
instead of being an Inconvenience, is very useful and advantageous to those who
keep Horses: for they may choose that which pleases 'em best, or that which may
be prepared with least difficulty, since they are all good, though some of 'em
must necessarily be better than others.

To proceed methodically in the Cure of Distempers, some general Rules must be
laid down, which we ought always to observe. And these Rules either respect the
Subject of the Disease, the Distemper it self, the Remedies that are
prescribed, or the Person that applies 'em.

As for the Subject of the Disease, or the sick Horse, we must diligently
enquire into his Constitution, Age and Strength, together with the Occasion of
his Sickness; for there are some Horses, as for Instance those that have been
managed, who are naturally tender and squeamish. We must consider whether they
are too old, or too young, whether their Strength has been exhausted by hard
Labor, or Want of Food; and whether their Distempers were occasioned by some
Excess: for all these Circumstances forbid the Use of strong Remedies, or at
least require small Doses; since it is not at all convenient to purge and bleed
a Horse, or to torment him with Medicines, when he has only need of Rest, and
good Nourishment.

In the next place, We must consider the Nature of the Disease that is proposed
to be cured. For it is equally ridiculous to imagine, that a violent Distemper
will yield to weak and gentle Remedies, and that every slight Indisposition
requires powerful and long continued Medicines.

We must never attempt the Cure of a particular Distemper, so long as the whole
Body is out of Order; for it would be in vain to apply Medicines to a sore
Foot, while the Leg and even the whole Habit of the Body is full of bad
Humors: Yet some Farriers are guilty of this Error, though they might with as
probable Hopes of Success, undertake to dry a River without stopping its
Spring. There are also some Diseases that obstruct the Cure of others, and must
be removed before 'em. And besides we must examine, whether there be any Venom
or Malignity lurking under the Distemper; for the Biting of a mad or venomous
Beast differs very much from a simple Wound.

Concerning the Remedies that are to be used, you must observe these Rules. If
you find it necessary to proceed to some Manual Operation, let it be performed
dexterously; and let all your Drugs be well chosen, exactly prepared, and
skilfully applied. You must not imagine that the scarcest, dearest, and most
operose Medicines are the most effectual: Despise not the Herbs that you daily
tread under your Feet; but you may justly suspect a costly Drug. Gold, Pearls,
Precious Stones, Unicorn's Horn, and Bezoar, are often prescribed without any
other Effect than the draining of the Patient's Purse. And therefore in
Diseases of long continuance we ought to try the gentlest, easiest, and
cheapest Remedies, before we proceed to extremities, as Arnold de Villa Nova
has well observed in his Tratise on the Aphorisms, where he affirms expressly,
That it is a Cheat to use Compound Remedies, when Simples are at hand. Besides
it may be observed, that when I mention a great Number of Medicines, I do not
pretend that none of 'em ought to be omitted; for the Efficacy of a Remedy does
not consist in the Multitude of Drugs. Only I thought fit to propose a
considerable number of 'em, that every Man may choose such of 'em as he can most
easily procure: but there are some particular Compositions for dangerous
Diseases, in which I would not have the least Circumstance omitted.

It Is, certainly, a great Happiness for such as keep Horses to live near
skilful and expert Farriers. In the most considerable Towns you will always
find some, on whose Skill you may securely depend, and who are able to perform
boldly without Presumption, and certainly without Confusion, all the Operations
that are necessary for the Cure of the Diseases mentioned in this Book. But
since the Convenience of such skilful Neighbors is not to be found every
where, the surest way will be for every Man to endeavor after a competent
Measure of Knowledge in this Art, and to neglect no Opportunities of
Instruction. And since there are several laborious Compositions, it will be
necessary to have Recourse to an Apothecary, who ought to be faithful in
choosing, skilful in preparing, and reasonable in setting a Price on his Drugs.

I am consident that all those who have any Inclination for Horses may by a
serious Perusal of the ensuing Discourse attain to a perfect Knowledge of their
Diseases, and be able to cure 'em successfully.

Before you proceed to cure a sick Horse, you must labor, in the first place,
to know the Nature and Causes of his Distemper. I confess it is very hard to
make an exact Judgment of these things in Horses, who are destitute of Reason,
and the Use of Speech. We are, for the most part, for^^d to depend on bare
Conjectures, from which we must draw such Inferences as are necessary for the
Discovery of proper Remedies. It Is plain that Experience, Study, and above all,
a great deal of Care and Attention are necessary Qualifications of a Farrier;
since the Cure of those Diseases that are already supposed to be known depends
on Two Things, the Choice, and Application of Remedies.

If the Horse be of sufficient Value to merit a particular Care, you must stand
behind him, and diligently observe the least of his Actions, that you may
proceed with more Certainty in the Choice of convenient Remedies.

The Neglect of this Observation is the main Reason why the greatest part of
Farriers have so ill Success in the Cure of Internal Distempers. It Is
impossible, by a transient View of a Horse, to observe whether there is any
thing unusual about him, or to prescribe suitable Remedies, and apply 'em in
due time. For even though we stand behind him, and consider attentively the very
least of his Actions, that we may draw some Light from 'em to guide us in our
Proceedings, we are frequently apt to fall into Errors notwithstanding all our
Care to prevent 'em, according to that Saying of Hippocrates, Occasio praeceps,
judicium difficile, experimentum periculosum. Daily Experience teaches us, That
it is very difficult to make a right Judgment of Diseases in Humane Bodies; and
how much harder must it needs be in the Case of Horses, the Nature of whose
Diseases is so little known, because they have not been so carefully studied as
those of Men; and besides these Animals are not able to discover their own Ails.

The Practice of Country Farriers is usually grounded on a Traditional
Conveyance of their Experience from Father to Son, from Master to Servant, or
from one Companion to another, which, for want of Knowledge and Study, is not
always attended with Success. And those Diseases that might have been crushed
in the Beginning, are oftentimes rendered incurable for want of a timely
Discovery of their Nature and Causes.

These Practitioners pass for Men of Knowledge, though they are acquainted only
with External Distempers, and Manual Operations, which nevertheless they
perform after a very indifferent Manner, and are perfect Strangers to the
Fundamental Principles of the Art they profess. Si constitutionem ab initio non
cognoscat, and id quod in corpore dominatur, non poterit ea quae animali
conducunt offerre. These Words which I have borrowed from Hippocrates contain
the Sum of what I have said on this Occasion; and those who understand 'em will
be of my Opinion.

Another Essential Reason, why even the most expert Farriers are frequently
unsuccessful, is, because they husband their Drugs lest they should not be
sufficiently paid for 'em: For Instance, suppose they should give a Remedy to a
Horse to the Value of four or five Shillings, they must expect to be laughed at
for demanding such a Price. The same may be said of Cordials that ought to be
given in Fevers, which are so dear that one single Potion would cost Six or
Eight Shillings. People are not accustomed to see such Remedies given, and
would refuse to pay for 'em. And therefore the Farriers make their Drenches
with old Drugs, which are to be had at low Rates; and prepare such Cordials as
are apt rather to increase than allay the Heat and Inflammation. People are
generally pleased when they see their Horses void a great deal of Matter,
without considering the Quality of the Matter that ought to be evacuated; and
think their Horses well purged, which is directly opposite to the true Method
of Cure, if we may give Credit to Hippocrates, Si talia purgantur qualia
purgari oportet, confert, and leviter ferant; sin minus, contra: But this
Error proceeds rather from Avarice than Want of Skill. Nevertheless in all my
Practice, I never observed any Horses to recover that were seized with a
continual Fever without any Intermission for Eight and forty Hours, even though
they were committed to the Care of the most Skilful Farriers. For, to speak
plainly, Physicians themselves, as well as others, are strangely puzzled about
the Cure of these Fevers; Nature is neither able alone to overcome 'em, nor we
to assist her upon occasion.

I will not pretend to prescribe a Method for the Cure of continual Fevers,
since they are not to be conquered by the best Medicines; yet the sick Horse
may recover, if the Disease be nipp'd in the Bud by a Remedy timely
administered, and the Heart be preserved sound without inflaming it by such
Cordials as are usually given: For Farriers are wont to compose their Cordials
of the most common and cheapest Drugs. Propose the Cordial Powder to 'em, which
you will find described in this Book; it is too dear, they will tell ye, and in
the mean time they suffer the Horses to perish. For a Cordial Remedy should
strengthen by a Specific Virtue, and not by a fiery Heat; and all Cordials for
Horses ought to be composed of Simples that strengthen without Inflammation.
The Cordial Waters of Scorzonera, Carduus Benedictus, Scabious, Roses, and
other Plants are admirable, for they both moisten and corroborate; but one
Horse must have three Pints of 'em, with some good Confection, such as that of
Hyacinth or Alkermes, without either Musk or Amber, which then are not so dear
as it is commonly believed, or with half a Dram of the Grain that is used in
dying Scarlet, with the Roots of Zedoary, Contra-yerva, Elecampane, Cubebs,
etc. The Essence of Vipers is the Basis of true Cordials, able to preserve the
Heart from the Venom and extraneous Heat of a continual Fever, and to relieve
the sick Horse if it be given as soon as the Fever appears. These Cordials and
Bleeding are the proper Remedies of Fevers, as we shall afterward declare when
we come to treat of these Diseases. I have often observed that the Feverish
Heat has been extinguished by another greater, which being agreeable to Nature,
is assisted by her to destroy that strange Fire which consumes her. But this is
not applicable to Men, who have a very different Constitution from that of
these Animals.

The Theriacal Salt of Vipers is also an Excellent Cordial; and all the Parts
of the Viper are endu'd with an admirable Virtue to preserve the Heart of a
Horse from the Malignity caused by a Fever. But since these Remedies ought to
act quickly, the most excellent Cordials are such as are liquid, or composed of
Volatile Salts; for they penetrate immediately, and exert their Force as soon as
they are put into the Mouth.

I have preserved an infinite Number of Horses from Head-Achs by the Help of a
Mineral or Powder, described in this Book; but there is no certain Remedy for
the Cure. For after the Disease has taken Root, the Cure sometimes succeeds,
and sometimes fails; and never any hitherto could boast of an Infallible Remedy
in this Case, though these that I have proposed are very good. But since these
Diseases change, and do not still continue the same, we must also invent new
Remedies.

CHAP. II. Observations concerning the Signs of Sickness in a Horse.
TO proceed with Success in the Cure of the Distempers of Horses, we must not
only have a general Idea of their Diseases, but also consider them attentively
to discover their particular Ails. The first Sign that a Horse gives of his
Indisposition is his Loathing his Food; then you must observe whether he has a
wild and hagard Look, for the Eye of a Horse is, as it were, a Glass through
which you may discern the inward Disposition of his Body; whether his Ears be
cold, his Mouth hot, and foamy or clammy; the Hair on his Flanks rough and
staring, and paler than usually about the Ends; his Dung hard, and black or
greenish; and his Urine clear and undigested like Water. There are also other
Signs which denote Sickness; his Eyes weep; his Head is heavy, and hangs down;
he is apt to stumble as he walks; he is slow and dull though he was vigorous
before; he never troubles other Horses, contrary to his former Custom; he rises
often and lies down in the Stable, looking toward his Flanks which are doubled
or folded in; his Heart beats, which may be felt by laying your open Hand
between the Shoulder and Sengle on the left Side; he takes no notice of what is
done to him; besides several other Signs which shall be particularly described
in their proper places.

When a Horse that has been long sick pisses without striding, and even without
thrusting forth his Yard, letting his Water drop into the Skin or Sheath, it is
almost always a Sign of Death; unless in such Horses as have the same Custom
when they are in Health, in which Case you must draw no Conjectures from this
Sign, though they continue to piss after the same manner during their Sickness.

Another no less fatal Sign is when the Hair of his Tail and on his Skull may
be easily plucked off.

It Is a dangerous Sign when a sick Horse either never lies down, or starts up
again immediately, not being able to breathe freely in a lying Posture; whereas
if in the Declination of his Sickness he lie down, and continue long in that
Posture, it is a very good Sign.

When a sick Horse turns up the Whites of his Eyes above, you may conclude that
he is in Pain, and that his Disease will be of long continuance.

From these Signs you may conjecture in the general, that your Horse is sick;
and afterward you must endeavor to discover his particular Distemper, that
you may be able to apply suitable Remedies. A Disease that is known is half
cured: Morbum nosse curationis principium.

I shall consider in Order the Diseases of all the Parts of the Body, beginning
with those of the Head, not omitting the least Distemper. And in particular I
shall observe this Method. In the first place, I shall propose a short
Definition of the Disease, with an Account of its Causes; and then, having
described it as clearly and plainly as it is possible to do on Paper, I shall
proceed to prescribe the proper Remedies.

CHAP. III. Of the Lampas.
THE Lampas is a Lump or Excrescency of Flesh, about the Bigness of a Nut, in
the Roof of the Mouth, which rises above the Teeth, sometimes more, and
sometimes less. The Horse endeavoring to eat his Oats feels a Pain in this
Part, so that he is forced to leave off Feeding: Young Horses are usually
troubled with this Distemper. As Soon as you open their Mouth, you may perceive
the Roof of their Mouth to be higher than their Teeth, which we call the
Lampas. It is cured by taking it away with an Instrument of Iron made for that
Purpose, and heated red hot. The least Farrier's Prentice knows how to perform
this Operation: but you must beware lest an awkward Operator having made his
Iron too hot, after he has cut through the Thickness of the Excrescency, should
by touching it over several times, burn the Bone: for then the Bone will scale,
and several dangerous Consequences may follow, which must be avoided by taking
off the Lampas at one stroke, without coming over the Place again after it is
cut off.

The Farriers at Paris make a Scruple to burn the Lampas in young Horses, so
long as they have any of their Colt's Teeth: and it is my Opinion that this
Excrescency ought not to be taken away till they have put forth all their
Teeth, if it does not very much trouble 'em, and hinder 'em from 'eating.

Of the Barbs.
These are small and inconsiderable Excrescences of Flesh under the Tongue,
like those that we see in Barbels: They hinder the Horse from Drinking, and may
be seen by drawing the Tongue aside. They are cured by cutting 'em off as close
as may be with a pair of Cizzars, and rubbing the place with Salt, which heals
of it self, without further trouble.

Of the Tick.
You may find a particular description of that which is called the Tick, in the
Five and Twentieth Chapter of the Second Part. The Remedies that are used
against it do not always succeed. Some tie a Leathern Thong of the breadth of
three Fingers about the Horses Neck, near his Head, yet so as not to obstruct
his Breath; which makes him either leave off this Custom, or use it very little.

Others cover the Brims of the Manger with Plates of Brass or Copper, on which
the Horse is afraid to lean his Teeth, and abstains from his usual sport for
some time; but there are some so addicted to that Recreation, that they will
not be thus frighted from it.

At the beginning it will be sufficient to rub the brims of the Manger with
some very bitter Herb, or with Cow's or Dog's Dung. Some cover them with a
Sheep's Skin, the woolly side outward, which makes the Horse desist for some
time from this Custom.

But the surest way is to make him eat in a place where there is no Manger, but
only a Rack, and tying him with a Buckle to the Wall, to give him his Oats in a
Haver-Sack or Bag which hangs at his Head by a String, such as Troopers use in
the Army.

I have seen Horses perfectly cured of this ill Custom, by one of these means,
even after they were eight Years old, and consequently habituated to it.

CHAP. IV. Of Wolve's Teeth.
IN this Distemper the Grinders grow either outward or inwards, so that when
the Horse feeds, the points of those Teeth that are higher than the rest, hurt
him, by pricking his Flesh or Tongue and make him give over Eating.

This Inconvenience is of no great consequence, yet it puzzles several Persons
when they see a Horse forsake his Meat, without any manifest cause, and pine
away when there is no apparent defect either in his Eyes or Hair, and even when
he is otherwise brisk and lively. You must handle his Grinders, and if you feel
the points of 'em through his Lips, take a sort of Upset of Iron, which Farriers
commonly use, and setting his Mouth open, these points will appear, which you
may break off with a Googe, an Instrument with which every Farrier is
furnished; but you must beware lest by striking heedlesly on the Googe, a good
Tooth, or even the whole Jaw be loosened. To prevent this Inconvenience, which
may easily happen, instead of using the Googe, you may make the Horse champ on
a great File used by Lock-smiths, which will break off the overgrown points, if
they are not too big: But he must chaw the File a quarter of an hour on both
sides.

I had once a Mule, one of whose Nether-Grinders grew to a prodigious length:
It happened that the upper Tooth, directly opposite to it, fell out, and that
below grew up into the void space, and by degrees pierced the Roof of his Mouth
about the thickness of ones Finger, which tormented him exceedingly when he
drunk. I have related this Example as an extraordinary case, to show that when
once the Teeth exceed their due measure, and are not daily worn by chewing,
they may grow to an extraordinary length, and even cut the Roof of the Mouth.

I saw an old Horse, one of whose great Teeth below was a whole Finger's
breadth longer than the rest of his Grinders; we were forced to cast him with a
great deal of trouble, before we could break it off with a Googe, and his Jaw
was so loosened by the violence of the Operation, that he could not eat without
much pain for fifteen days after: But at length he recovered and fed heartily,
which he could not do before that monstrous Tooth was broken.

Young Horses are as rarely subject to this Distemper, as they are frequently
troubled with the Lampas: For the Roof of the Mouth grows lank and dry as the
Horse grows in Age.

You must observe that when you open the Horses Mouth with the abovementioned
Upset, to take away the Lampas, Barbs, or Wolve's Teeth, that part of the
Instrument which rests upon the nether Jaw must be covered with some old Rags,
to preserve the Jaw from being hurt by it. I have seen several Horses whose
Mouths were spoiled by neglecting so necessary a precaution.

CHAP. V. Of Hurts or Wounds in the Mouth.
WHen the Bit bears too hard upon the Horse's nether Jaw, whether by the
carelessness of the Rider, or some other reason, the Bars are oftentimes wounded
or broken. If the Hurt be small, and the Bone entire, you may rub the part with
Honey of Roses, eight or ten times every day.

But if the Bone be broken, and when you touch the Sore with your Finger, if
you find a sharp point or prick, or if there be an Ulcer already produced,
moisten a little Cotton in Spirit of Vitriol or Spirit of Salt, which you must
put into the hole of the Jaw, and while it remains there, hold the Horse's
Tongue with one hand, and with the other keep his Mouth open: For it is
dangerous to pour the Spirit by drops into the Ulcer, lest some of it should
fall upon a sound part, and corrode it also. Afterward rub the Sore every day,
with Honey of Roses or common Honey; and the Escar or Scab will fall off, and
the Bone Scale of it self: The Scab being fallen, anoint the part frequently
with Aqua Vitae, or put Sugar into it till the Sore be healed. If there be a
hole in the Jaw, accompanied with Rottenness and Stench, which you may know by
putting your Finger into it, without finding a Scale, and by the stinking
Corruption with which your Finger will be smeared when you pull it out; you
must fill the hole 3 or 4 times every day with Sugar beaten small, which will
quickly cleanse it, and continue after the same manner till the hole be closed
up, and the Jaw healed. But you must take care afterward to put a single
Canon-bit in the Horses Mouth, and never to use any more the Bit that hurt him,
which would spoil his Mouth without Remedy. If only the Tongue be hurt, it will
quickly heal of it self, without any application, if you change the Bit, and
take another that will suffer his Tongue to move freely.

Sometimes it happens that the Bone is split quite downwards under the Flesh of
the Jaw, where Matter gathering corrupts the Bone; and by the provident care of
Nature to throw off that putrid Matter, it corrodes the Skin, and causes a
Tumor or Swelling, to open a passage to the Corruption, and discharge a part of
it. In this case you must first search the depth of the hole with a Probe; for
I have sometimes found that the Probe reached into the very Mouth: And then
make an Incision above the Beard with a Red-hot Knife, reaching downwards, and
dividing the Skin to the very Bone; after which put in the Probe again to guide
the actual Cautery or Red-hot Iron, with which you must touch the Bone several
times, till all the corrupted part of it be thoroughly burnt. And to hasten the
Exfoliation or falling off of the Scales, you must anoint the whole burnt part
with good Oil of Bay, every six hours, for the space of two days.

But since it is necessary that the Horse should eat to preserve his Life, the
motion of the Jaw, and of the part affected which is very moist, will make the
Flesh grow excessively, which, unless prevented in time, will stop the hole you
made in the Jaw, and hinder the Scales from falling off. And therefore you must
take care to keep the passage open, by burning the proud Flesh with a hot Iron;
and even sometimes the burning must be repeated three or four times: or,
instead of that, you may put Powder of Sublimate in the hole over against the
Beard where the Flesh grows too fast. For on the Bars within the Mouth you must
only put Sugar into the hole, and the scale of the Bars will easily fall off:
But on the Jaw you will find it very difficult to separate the scale that
should come out of the hole on the Beard, and this is the part where the Flesh
grows so excessively. In the last place, after the scales are fallen off, you
must put Sugar beaten small into the hole within the Mouth, and on the Wounds
made on the Beard, and afterward wash 'em with Aqua Vitae and Burnt Alum,
continuing in the same manner till the Cure be perfected.

CHAP. VI. Of Loathing of Food, or, Want of Appetite.
A Horse is said to be troubled with this Distemper, either when he eats less
than he was wont to do, or eats slowly and without Appetite, or when he
abstains from eating any Oats at all. This Disease may proceed from several
Causes, some of which are easlly known and cured, whereas others are uncertain,
especially in the beginning of dangerous and doubtful Diseases.

I shall proceed to consider the various Causes of this Distemper, with the
proper Remedies of each case. Some Horses are naturally so nice and squeamish,
that the least bit of Filth, or sprig of musty Grass, which they find among
their Oats, any inconsiderable Trifle, or almost nothing at all, is sufficient
to put 'em out of conceit with their Food. But as they are apt on every slight
occasion to forsake their Meat, so they easily recover their wonted Appetite.
This Infirmity proceeds from certain little Worms within the Lips of the
Horses, both above and below, which cause such an Itching, that they are
continually rubbing their Lips against the Manger, and without any other
Indisposition abstain from Eating. If you turn back their Lips, the Worms
appear like little Lumps or Pushes.

To cure this Distemper you must cut the uppermost Skin within the Lips, in the
parts where you see the Worms, with a sharp Knife or Lance, and afterward rub
the Incisions, and all the Inside of the Lips with Salt and Vinegar, and the
Horse will quickly recover his Appetite.

If you are wholly ignorant of the cause that makes your Horse loath his Food.
I am of opinion that it is very proper in the Morning to bleed him in the Roof
of the Mouth with a sharp pointed piece of a Heart or Buck's-Horn, or (which
produces the same effect) with a Lance. The Operation is thus performed; find
out the middle of the Roof between the two Crocks, or, if it be a Mare, at the
third or fourth Furrow of the Mouth, and prick the part with a Lance or piece
of Buck's-Horn, either of which mey be used without any difficulty: Then give
the Horse two Pecks of moistened Bran, to stop the Bleeding.

If he continue to bleed after he has eat his Bran, draw up his Head with a
Halter, as if you were going to give him a Drench, and immediately the Bleeding
will be stopped.

But if after you have kept his Head in that posture for a considerable time,
he begin to bleed again as soon as you let it down, you may easily stop the
Blood, without raising up his Head, by applying an empty Nut-shell to the
Wound: You must press it on somewhat hard, and hold it there for some time;
after which it will stick, and stop the Blood more easily and effectually than
most other Remedies. For if I could cure a Horse with a Trifle, I would prefer
that Trifle before the most precious Drugs in both the Indies.

This way of Bleeding may be used on all occasions, when the nature of the
Disease is uncertain: For it does frequently a great deal of good, and is
always innocent.

It Is practiced so universally in Germany, that most Coachmen carry a Horn at
their Girdle, both because they esteem it an Ornament, and for the convenience
of bleeding their Horses in the Roof of the Mouth. For as soon as a Horse
begins to grow dull and stupid, or to forsake his Meat, immediately they prick
him with the Horn, which (as I have already told you) they carry always about
with 'em.

But if the Distemper will not yield to this Remedy, you must make the Horse
champ on a Bit for two Hours, and from time to time take it out of his Mouth,
and put it in again. Give him also good innocent Clysters, and labor to
discover the true cause of his Distemper.

Whatever be the original Cause of his Aversion to his Food, and even though he
be sick (which happens not unfrequently) you must make him chew a Ball tied to
the Bit, keeping him bridled two hours; and as soon as you take the Bridle from
his Head, he will eat. You will find the Description of the Ball, toward the
End of this Chapter.

If the Horse be troubled with this Distemper, when Radishes are in Season,
which are cried about Streets so commonly, you must make him eat a good
quantity of 'em, both Leaves and Roots: for they will restore his Appetite, and
make him stale: it is an easy Remedy, and grateful to Horses that slight their
Food; and the same may be said of red Parsnips boiled, which are often very
effectual in this Case. The Herb Horse-Tail, called in Latin Cauda Equina or
Equisetum, is also a good Remedy either dry or green, to restore a Horse's
Appetite, and to cleanse his Teeth: It grows in most places, and serves to
scour Vessels.

Half an Ounce of Assa-foetida, and as much Powder of Savin, put into a Bag,
tied to the Bit, and left for two hours in the Horse's Mouth, will cure his
Loathing: but the Use of this Remedy must be repeated every day several times,
and the same Bagg will serve a long time.

You must observe whether there is not an unusual Heat in the Horse's Body,
which you may perceive by the Beating or Heaving of his Flanks: if there is
not, you may give him an Ounce of Treacle well diluted in White or Red Wine,
for want of which you may use Orvietan; for these Medicines consume the
Crudities that remain in the Stomach, and restore lost Appetite.

If he does not abstain totally from eating, as we only speak of Horses that
slight their Food, supposing that they eat sometimes, though little and slowly;
let Savin be steeped in Water, and with that moisten his Oats and Bran, and
even his Hay, which will make him feed more heartily. This Method must be
continued for some time.

The following Remedy is generally known and prepared by all sorts of Persons;
yet since I Am resolved to omit nothing that may be of Use, I shall insert it
here. Take about two Glasses of Verjuice, or of Vinegar, seven or eight Heads
of Garlic bruised, about two Ounces of white Salt, and half a Pound of Honey;
Mix 'em in a Pot, and dip the end of a Stick wrapped about with Linen, in this
Composition, with which you must rub his Gums, Lips and Tongue; then take the
Bit out of his Mouth, and he will infallibly begin to eat, but if he leave off
too soon, you must repeat the Use of the Remedy. Some put Honey of Roses into
this Mixture, but common Honey is sufficient, and very effectual.

Before you rub his Mouth with this Composition, it is very convenient to wash
it well with a Sponge dipped in cold Water, to take away the bitter Foam, which
oftentimes is the main Cause of his Aversion to his Meat.

You may also beat five or six Heads of Garlic with a little handful of Salt,
and tying 'em in a Clout to the Bit, leave 'em in his Mouth for the space of
half an hour, or a whole hour.

I often make use of an Ounce of good Assa-foetida, tied to the Bit in a Clout,
which I suffer him to chew for the Space of two hours; and the Disease must be
very inveterate if it yields not to this Remedy. As Soon as he leaves off eating
I put the Bit in his Mouth again, and the same Assa-foetida will serve till it
be perfectly dissolved.

If after all these Remedies the Horse continue still to slight his Food, take
a Branch of Laurel of an indifferent bigness, and put it between his Jaw-Teeth,
that he may champ upon it: then rub the Laurel-Branch with Honey of Roses, or,
if that cannot be had, with common Honey, and put it into his Mouth; rub it
again with Honey, and continue after the same manner for the space of half an
hour, after which he will certainly begin to eat.

A Branch of a Fig Tree will almost produce the same Effect.

When a Horse forsakes his Meat, you must leave no Means unessay'd to make him
eat without Constraint: you must be often with him, especially if his Aversion
proceed from Sickness, give him a little Hay to eat from your Hand, and if he
refuse to take it, let him stand half an hour with a Bit in his Mouth; then
take it out again, and offer him some Pieces of Bread, and if he will not eat,
wash his Mouth with a Sponge, and afterward give him some Oats out of your
Hand; and, to conclude, use all the Ways imaginable to prevent the total Loss
of his Appetite, for which Purpose the following Arman is of wonderful Efficacy.

The surest Remedy that can be used is to mix an Ounce of Liver of Antimony in
fine Powder, with moistened Bran, repeating the Dose twice every Day; for it
will infallibly make him eat heartily, and preserve him in good Health. You
will find the Description and Composition of this Remedy in the 125th. Chapter.
You may continue the Use of it as long as you please, without the least ill
Consequence, unless when the Horse has an Inclination to void the Strangles,
for Liver of Antimony cools, and in that Case hot Remedies are proper.

CHAP. VII. An Arman for a sick Horse who loathes his Food.
TAke a Dish-full of the Heart of a white Loaf crumbl'd small, moisten it with
Verjuice, or for want of that, with Vinegar; add a sufficient qanutity of Salt
and Honey of Roses or if Violets, or, if neither of these can be had, of common
Honey: then put the thin Paste into a Pot, and let it boil over a gentle Fire
about a quarter of an hour, till the superfluous moisture be consumed.
Afterward add two drams of Cinnamon in powder, a dozen and a half of Cloves, a
Nutmeg grated, and half a pound of Powder-Sugar; then boil 'em again over a
slow Fire half a quarter of an hour, that the Ingredients may be thoroughly
mixed, and the Spices may incorporate with the Bread: but the Fire must be very
small, for the least excess of heat would make the Virtue of the Aromatic Drugs
exhale.

Take an Oxe's Pizzle, let the great End of it soak in Water four or five hours
till it be softened, after which make the Horse chew it between his Grinders or
Jaw-Teeth, which will flatten it a little, or you may beat it with a Hammer:
then putting the quantity of a Nut of the Arman upon it, open the Horse's
Mouth, making him put out his Tongue on one side that he may not be able to
stir it, and thrust in the Pizzle with the Medicine as far as you can: then let
his Tongue go, and after he has champ'd a while, put more of the Arman on the
Pizzle, and thrust it again into his Mouth. Do this five or six times, and
after the space of three hours suffer him to eat if he pleases: then put in the
Pizzle again as formerly, and continue after the same manner every three hours.

This Arman is very proper for all Horses that are sick and forsake their Meat,
provided they have no Fever, and I have always found it effectual: for it
nourishes, and infallibly restores lost Appetite. You must not thrust in the
Pizzle violently, but suffer the Horse to draw it in to the bottom of his
Throat, holding it by the other end: and it will make him cast forth a great
deal of bitter and choleric Phlegm which makes him loath his Food. As often as
you take out the Pizzle you must cleanse it and wipe it with Hay, before you
put it in again.

This Remedy is not the less valuable because it is common; for if the Use of it
be continued, it will certainly produce the desired Effect; it nourishes,
increases the Appetite, and strengthens the natural Heat.

It Is also good to clear the Throat of a Horse that has swallowed a Feather, or
any other Matter that sticks in his Throat; for which purpose you must suffer
him to chew the Pizzle with the Medicine, and suck it in, without thrusting it
violently forwards. To conclude, this is a very safe Remedy, and is never
attended with any ill Consequences: but if the Pizzle be not softened, or if
you thrust it in violently, you may kill the Horse by bursting his Throat;
which Misfortune may be easily prevented by a careful Observance of the
abovementioned Directions, the neglect of which has, to my Knowledge, been
fatal to some Horses.

CHAP. VIII. Chewing-Balls to restore lost Appetite.
THere cannot be a greater Vexation to a Man who loves his Horses, than to see
'em lose their Appetite, and forsake their Meat on a Journey. Accidents of this
Nature are very common, and the usual Remedies that are prescribed in this Case
are ineffectual; nor could I ever meet with any sure Medicine but this, which I
have tried so often, and with so good Success, that I thought my self obliged
not to deprive the Public of the Knowledge of so useful a Remedy, not only for
Horses that are troubled with Want of Appetite without any other Distemper, but
even when this Symptom proceeds from another Disease.

These Balls bring forth that salt Humor and bitter Phlegm which obstruct the
Passages of the Throat, and make 'em loath their Food. And they will also
produce the Effect of those Remedies called Apophlegmatismi, which are
prescribed by Physicians to purge the Brain.

Take a Pound of Assa foetida, as much Liver of Antimony. half a pound of the
Wood of a Bay Tree, an equal quantity of Juniper-Wood, and two ounces of
Pellitory of Spain: beat all the Ingredients apart, to a gross Powder, for
which reason the Woods must be dried, then put 'em all together into a large
Mortar, and incorporate 'em with a sufficient quantity of good Grape-Verjuice
well clarified, pouring it in by degrees, till they are reduced to a Mass, of
which make Balls of the weight of an ounce and a half, to be dried in the Sun.

Take one of these Balls, wrap it in a Linen Clout, and tying a Thread to it,
make the Horse chew it two hours in the Morning; and he will eat as soon as you
unbridle him: Do the same at Night, and persist in this Method till the Horse
recover his Appetite. When one Ball is consumed put in another.

You may use these Balls on the Road, by tying one of 'em to the Bridle: and
you must persist in the Use of 'em till the Horse begin to feed heartily, which
he will quickly do, if he be not troubled with some other Distemper.

You may also make use of Cordial-Pills made of Treacle, which produce almost
the same Effect. You must tie 'em in a Clout to the Bit, and make the Horse
chew 'em two hours in the Morning, and as long in the Afternoon; and as soon as
the Bit is taken out, he will infallibly begin to eat, and his Appetite will
increase by degrees, if the use of the Remedy be continued.

Pills or Balls for the Stomach.
These Pills are good to make Horses eat, but they must be swallowed down,
whereas the former Pills are only ordered to be chewed. The abovementioned
Balls are proper for all sorts of Horses; but these Pills must not be given to
a Horse that is either actually troubled with the Strangles, or inclined to
'em, because they are not hot. And besides, it is not so difficult to tie a Ball
to the Bit, as to make a Horse swallow a Pill.

The Pills are thus prepared; Take a pound of Liver of Antimony, beaten to a
very fine Powder, and with the Mucilage, or thick and slimy solution of Gum
Tragacanth, make Pills or Balls each weighing ten drams, and lay 'em to dry.

Make the Horse swallow two of these Balls whole, with a Pint of Wine, keeping
him bridled two hours after, and repeat the same Dose every day, for the space
of a Month. These Pills are very useful, but they are Cooling, and therefore
(as I intimated before) must not be given to Horses when they are casting forth
the matter of the Strangles through their Nostrils, or are inclined to do so, nor
in any case that requires hot Medicines.

CHAP. IX. How to nourish a Horse that forsakes his Meat, during his Sickness.
SOme Horses, when they are Sick, abstain totally from Feeding, in which case
you must labor with all your Might, to deliver 'em from the Disease that
oppresses 'em, both by the choice of good Remedies, and a due and convenient
application of 'em; and in the composition of every Medicine you must have a
special regard to the restoring of their Appetite, that the Remedy may not only
be proper for the Cure of the Disease, but agreeable to the Stomach. The
application of these Rules to particular cases would require an account of all
the Diseases to which Horses are subject, and therefore I shall at present
content my self with laying down this general Observation, that when a Horse
abstains obstinately from all manner of Food, you must use all means that are
not contrary to his Distemper to make him eat, lest you be forced at last to
have recourse to violent Methods, such as the usual way of pouring in his
necessary Sustenance with a Horn, which cannot be done without drawing up his
Head with a Halter, and putting him into a very uneasy posture, which hinders
him from breathing freely, and increases the Fever when he has any. I confess
you may make him swallow a Draught without using the Halter; but even that
cannot be done without exposing him in some measure to the same Inconveniences.

I cannot approve the Method of those who if a Horse abstain from eating for
the space of twelve or fifteen hours, and even though he be seized with a Fever,
immediately give him a Quart or two of Milk with Yolks of Eggs, which they
imagine is sufficient to prevent all the ill effects of his preceding
Abstinence. But besides that, a Horse may be suffered to fast two days without
any danger; this sort of Nourishment is not at all agreeable to his Stomach,
and even is apt to make him Sick, though he was not so before: It Is true Milk
yields good Nourishment, and is easily digested; but it is subject to the common
Inconveniency of the best Aliments, that it quickly corrupts in a disordered
Stomach, where it curdles and occasions violent Pains, and if it be not cast
forth at the Mouth (which a Horse cannot do, since he never Vomits) it hardens,
and produces dangerous Obstructions. So that Hippocrates had reason to forbid
the use of it in Diseases of the Head, Fevers, and some other cases, though he
recommends it on certain occasions. Lac dare capite dolentibus malum, malum
etiam febricitantibus. If that famous Author thought it inconvenient for Men
who are accustomed to it, and can discharge it by Vomiting, how prejudicial
must it be to Horses, who never taste a drop of it after they leave off
Sucking, and besides cannot Vomit? I have made some Trials of it, but always
without the least Success, especially when the Horses were Feverish. In
Stomacho aegrotantium Animalium acessit lac, sed non imprimitur vitali
Caraciere, propterca aciditas fit putrefactiva, quae non nutrit, sed malum
auget. Those who will not be dissuaded by these Reasons fromfeeding their Sick
Horses with Milk, may blame their own Indiscretion for the ill success of the
Cure. For, let a Person who is in Health drink a Glass of Milk fasting, and
immediately Vomit it up again, as some can do without the least difficulty, he
will find that it is already become sour, and even half coagulated, or turned to
Choose, by reason of the Acid or Sharp Juice in the Stomach of all sorts of
Animals: For it is a vulgar Observation that Acids have a power to curdle or
coagulate Milk, which therefore cannot be agreeable to the Stomach of a Sick
Horse, where it presently turns to Corruption, and instead of nourishing him,
increases his Disease. It Is true, this Experiment cannot be made upon a Horse
who never Vomits, but it may serve for a convincing Argument, that Milk is
rather hurtful than profitable to a Diseased Horse.

Some give their Horses strong Flesh-Broths or Jellies, which I have found by
experience to be very prejudicial to 'em; for it would be more proper to give
em Extracts of Hay and Oats, which are their usual Food. The dangerousness of
this Method will appear more evidently, if we confider that Horses have so
strong an avernon to Flesh and Fat, that such Broths are apter to destroy than
to restore their Appetites: And all the World knows that if the Teeth of a
Horse, who is in perfect Health, be rubbed with Fat or Suet, he will forsake
his Meat, much more when he is actually Sick.

I am not ignorant that the Fat may be taken away from Broth; but still it is
plain that any sort of Broth is nauseous to a Horse, and disagreeable to his
Stomach, and therefore ought never to be given, since there are other Aliments
which are more natural, and in all respects more convenient.

I commend a very thin Broth made of Bread, especially the Crum, boiled with
Water and a little Salt; for it is certainly very proper Nourishment for a Horse
that will neither eat Hay, Oats, nor Bran. I have seen some Horses drink this
Liquor like Water, which nourished 'em for a considerable time; and if they
should happen to loath it, you may force it down their Throats with a Horn, for
a very little quantity will serve to sustain 'em.

You may also feed the Sick Horse with a Broth or Liquor, which is both cheap
and easily prepared, and besides, is of the same nature with his usual
Nourishment. It Is made of Oats or cleans'd Barley well boiled in pure Water,
without Butter, Fat, or any other mixture; you must strain the Liquor from the
Grains, and give it him lukewarm. It differs from his ordinary Food only by the
boiling of the Oats or Barley, which cannot make it prejudicial to a Stomach
that is weakened by the continuance of a Disease. This Method seems to be
founded on Reason, and agreeable to the dictates of good sense: And experience
will discover its usefulness.

Take a pound of Barley-flower, well fears'd and purified from the Bran; boil
it in about two pints of Water to a sufficient thickness, then take it from the
Fire, and add a quarter of a pound of Sugar. The quantity of Broth here
prescribed is sufficient to sustain a Horse four and twenty Hours, and must be
given with a Horn. It moistens the Body when dried by a Feverish heat or any
other cause; but if the Fever be very gentle, and the want of Appetite proceed
from some other Cause, you may add to the Broth an Ounce of the Cordial-Powder
hereafter described, which will contribute powerfully to the recovery of his
Appetite: Or you may mix with the Broth an Ounce of Ever of Antimony in Powder,
which will make him Hungry, and allay the preternatural heat of his Entrails.

When a Horse is troubled with a Fever, Palpitation, or unusual beating of the
Heart, or any other hot or violent Diseases which seldom continue long; you
must be careful in proportioning the quantity of his Food, and neither give nor
suffer him to eat too much. Excessive Eating has, to my certain knowledge,
proved fatal to several Horses, who might have escaped, if they had been kept
to a convenient, that is, a thin and spare Diet. A great quantity of Hay is
very hurtful to Sick Horses; and Straw is better, when it can be had. It Is
certain, that in those Diseases that are of short continuance, few or no Horses
die of Hunger, whereas a great number of 'em are killed by excessive Eating.

When you are forced to give the Horse his Food with a Horn, you must proceed
in that method according to his strength and size. But if he eat without
constraint, as it happens frequently by virtue of the prepared Antimony mixed
with his Bran, which gives him an Appetite, you must keep him to a strict Diet:
For when the natural Heat is wholly taken up in the Digestion and Concoction of
Aliments, it canout, not exert its force to consume the Humor that causes the
Disease; and consequently the Cure is retarded.

I recommend a strict Diet only in violent Distempers, which are not of any
long continuance; for when the Disease lasts long, you must take other
Measures, and feed the Horse, lest the preternatural Heat should be augmented,
and the body of the Horse so dried, that you could not afterward restore him
to his wonted Constitution.

The Rules here laid down for the Nourishment of Sick Horses shall not be
repeated afterward.

Before I engage further in the description of Remedies, it will not be
improper to admonish those who are Lovers of Horses, to beware of being Cheated
by those deceitful Praises that are given to the Remedies commonly called
Secrets. The custom of extolling Remedies is grown so general, that it is very
hard to perceive whether those who magnify 'em so extremely, act out of a
principle of Justice, or are swayed by a vain desire to make a Figure in the
World, and to persuade the Public that they are Masters of some rare and
extraordinary Medicines. You may observe, that they who are desirous to gain
Credit to their Remedies, will at least assure you that they are admirable, and
that they cure all those who use 'em: You must not seem to doubt of their
Infallibility, though in all their Descriptions you can neither perceive any
Method, Regularity of Doses, nor the least appearance of Reason, but must
blindly believe that those rare Secrets have performed innumerable Cures. I
advise you not to suffer your self to be bubbl'd by such ill grounded Praises:
For experience will convince you, that they who have good Remedies never impart
'em but after long and earnest Solicitations, and only to their best Friends.
My design is not by discrediting others, to recommend my own Remedies; I only
desire you to communicate 'em to Judicious and Learned Persons, and after you
have heard their Opinion of 'em, to try, and value 'em according to their
Success. In the mean time I assure you that you have in this Book the Sum of
above Forty Years Labor and Experience, during which time I have been still
endeavoring to find out and make trial of the best Remedies for Horses; I have
carefully perused all the Books that treat of this Subject, consulted Learned
Men to resolve my Doubts, studied the various Effects of Simples, and tried the
Virtue of 'em not once but a hundred times.

I have made Additions and Alterations according to the various Success I have
had in my Practice, and without desiring in the least to magnify my Skill, I
can assure you that the greatest part of the Remedies here communicated to the
Public, are of my own Invention, and all of 'em composed Methodically, and
grounded on Reason. Besides, I have freely imparted all that I know, without
concealing any thing, that the Public may enjoy the fruit of my Labor. Before
I was Master of that little Knowledge which Time and Experience have taught me,
I esteemed the Remedies which I found to be effectual, so precious, and kept
'em so secret, that I communicated 'em to very few; but I have since overcome
all those Prejudices. For it is certain, that those who excel in any Art are
never jealous of the rest of their Profession; whereas common Artists and half
Proficients cannot endure to hear any Man praised but themselves; and far from
doing Justice to the Merit of others, they imagine that every acknowledgment of
the Skill of their Fellow-Professors is a diminution of their own Glory. I
pretend no right to the Title of Learned; but I cannot forbear expressing my
satisfaction to perceive that the favorable reception of this Treatise has
stirred up the Indignation of some Persons who would be thought skilful.

As soon as it appeared, it was received by most Farriers with furious
Exclamations against the Method I prescribed for the Cure of the Diseases
incident to Horses, because I did not think fit to follow their threadbare way
of Practice. Since that time several Persons of Quality, who put some
confidence in my Experience, having commanded their Farriers to observe my
Directions punctually, they found 'em to be successful on a thousand Occasions:
They yielded at last to the evidence of Truth, and by degrees began to read my
Book, which cured 'em of some of their old Prejudices, and convinced almost all
of 'em, one after another: Insomuch that within these fifteen or sixteen Years
the Method of curing Horses is almost wholly changed at Paris, and the Farriers
come daily to ask my advice concerning the Sick Horses that are committed to
their care, by which means they satisfy their Customers, who almost all read
my Book, and will have their Farriers to observe exactly the Method that is
prescribed in it, when their Horses are seized with any Distemper. If things
continue in this posture, as according to all probability they will, the Art
which we profess, will in a little time be very much improved, and attended
with better Success than it was heretofore. So important an Effect is already
owing in a considerable measure to this Book, which ought to recommend it very
advantageously to the Public.

CHAP. X. Of the Strangles.
FEW or nor Horses that are foal'd in this Country escape being troubled with
the Strangles, which is a Throwing forth or Evacuation of superfluous Humors
gathered in the Bodies of Foals, either according to the usual Method of Nature
through the Nostrils, or by Swellings or Boils under the Throat between the two
Jaw-bones. They seem to differ from the Smallpox in Children, only with
respect to the Place where the Humors are expelled.

I know there are various Opinions concerning the Cause of this Distemper: For
some look for its Original in the Mare's Womb, from whence (they think) the
Foal brings the Seeds of it, which some Years after, when the natural Heat is
considerably augmented, break forth, and agitate the Humors, which by degrees
are discharged on some part of the Body, where they usually come to
Suppuration. Others are of Opinion that the Change of Nourishment, that is, of
Milk to more solid Food, makes a notable Alteration in the Body, both in the
Humors, and in the Parts that are nourished by 'em, which is followed by a
Fermentation, that obliges Nature to make an Attempt to expel the Remainders of
the first Nourishment, which serve for a Ferment in this Distemper. And in the
last place there are some who believe that all Liquors have their peculiar
times of Fermentation, as Wine, Beer, Cider, and Syrups boil, cast forth a
Scum, and are purified, some sooner, and others later, according to the various
Constitutions of the Liquors; and from hence they infer that the Blood of
Animals has different times of Purification, for which reason Men are seized
with the Smallpox at diverse Periods of their Age, but there not being the
same Variety in the Constitution of Horses, they are usually troubled with the
Strangles about the Third or Fourth Year of their Age. But the Consideration of
the Cause of this Distemper is of no great Importance for the Cure: and it is
much more necessary to know the way by which Nature expels the Humor, which,
as I intimated before, is oftentimes evacuated by Swellings under the Throat,
or by the Nostrils. Sometimes the Horses discharge the Humor visibly by these
Boils; whereas it happens not unfrequently that the Swellings are never
ripened, the Humor being resolved, and insensibly transpiring through the Skin.
But the Cure is always most certain, when the Swellings come to Suppuration.

Sometimes the Humor is evacuated by several Parts of the Body, as the
Shoulders, Hams, the Parts above the Kidneys, the Feet, and generally
whatsoever Member is weaker than the rest.

Thus it is voided by such Parts as have been hurt or wounded: for when Nature
is irritated by her Enemy she makes an Attempt to drive it out; and it is
certain that the stronger Parts cast their Load on the weaker. But if the Part
that receives the Humor be either cold, nervous, or of small Capacity, it is
never able wholly to discharge its unequal Burden, but ever afterward remains
weak and infirm.

When there is only an imperfect Evacuation of the Humor, the Horse is
frequently troubld with False-Strangles at the Age of Six, Ten, or Twelve
Years; which being neglected degenerates to the Glanders. When the
False-Strangles take their Course through the Nose (which rarely happens) the
Horse is much more troubled with Sickness, than when they find another Passage:
And in the general it is certainly the best and sasest Evacuation that is
performed by the Kernels or Swellings under the Throat, for when they are
opened the Horse is out of danger, and even those who void the Humor by the
Nose, are very much eased by 'em.

The most favorable time for Horses to be seized with this Distemper, is when
they are Foals, and run in the Meadows; for their Heads being continually bowed
down to feed on the Grass, the Evacuation is performed with less Trouble and
Pain; and besides Grass being a moist Aliment, increases the Fluidity of the
Humors, and by making 'em run out more easily, hastens the Cure. But you must
not conclude from hence that Grass is good for this Distemper: the Strangles
require hot Medicines, and Grass is cooling; but the Foals that are troubled
with 'em in the Meadows have a sufficient Stock of natural Heat and Strength to
expel the Humor; and therefore they do not stand in need of additional
Supplies of Heat, since notwithstanding the Coolness of the Grass, they are
able of themselves to conquer the Disease. But Horses that are used to dry Food
must not be turned out to Grass, which would cool 'em too much, and perhaps
turn the Strangles to the Glanders.

None of all the Italian and Spanish Authors, who write of the Diseases of
Horses, take notice of the Strangles: and it is very improbable that le Ruiny,
who has described all their other Distempers so exactly, would have omitted
this, if he had known it. But in those Southern Countries the Horses are either
never troubled with the Strangles, or discharge the Humor by the way of
insensible Transpiration. Pascal Caracciolo does not mention this Distemper in
his large and excellent Treatise, Entitled, Gloria del Cavallo, which deserves
to be translated by some skilful Hand: And therefore I think my self obliged to
insist the longer on this Subject.

In Gascoign and some Parts of Bearn, where the Climate is hot, and approaches
to that of Spain, almost all the Horses die of the Strangles; for by reason of
the Imperfectness of the Evacuation, the Disease ends either in Blindness or
Death; and I have seen some Spanish Horses at Paris, who were seized with
Blindness, because they had not voided the Humor that causes the Strangles. To
return to Gascoign and Bearn, the Climate is not hot enough to resolve the
Humor, and dissipate it entirely; and therefore since it ought to be expelled
by more open Passages, the Horses discharge it imperfectly and out of season;
and if they be not powerfully assisted, the least damage they receive by the
Disease is the Loss of their Eyes. But in this Country we are not afraid of
such Accidents for our own Horses, because of the Temperateness of the Climate,
which enables 'em to expel the Humor without any difficulty. This difference
might be illustrated by a common Observation, for it is well known that at Paris
Blows on the Head are not at all dangerous, and Sores in the Legs are rarely
cured; whereas a quite contrary Effect is observed in Provence and Languedoc.

A Remedy for the Strangles.
To make a Horse discharge the Humor perfectly, you must cover the Parts under
his Throat with the Skin of a Lamb or Sheep, laying the woolly Side next his
Throat. Keep him warm and well fenced against the Wind, and every day rub the
Parts about his Jaws with the following Composition. Take Oil of Bay, and fresh
Butter, of each an equal quantity, Ointment of Marshmallows, the weight of
both; Mingle 'em cold in a Pot, and besmear the Part with this Ointment, which
will ripen the Kernels. As Soon as you perceive that there is Matter within 'em,
if it cannot pierce the Skin, (as it were to be wished it should) you must
apply to each Swelling a red-hot Iron of a crooked Figure, for fear of hurting
the neighboring Gullet; and after the Scabs are fallen away, apply a Tent
covered with the Suppurative or Ripening Ointment, to the Hole that is left
open. The Description of the Ointment follows.

The Suppurative Ointment, commonly called Basilicum.
Take Yellow Wax, Sheep's Sewet, Rosin, and Black Pitch, of each half a pound,
cut 'em into small Pieces, then put five pounds of Oil-Olive in a Basin or Pot,
set it over a pretty strong Fire, and when the Oil is hot, add the other
Ingredients: after they are wholly melted, strain the liquid Mass through a Piece
of Canvass or course Cloth, and then add a pound of Turpentine, stirring it
constantly till it be cold: so shall you have an excellent Suppurative, called
Basilicum.

You may either chafe the Parts that you would have ripened, with this
Ointment, or anoint Tents with it.

It digests and ripens the Matter, and asswages the Pain that is caused by the
Matter or Quittor when it is generated.

If you mix Verdigrease, and white Vitriol, both in fine Powder, with this
Ointment, it will heal a Wound, and bring it to a Scar.

If the Flesh grow too fast, and stop the Hole that should give passage to the
Matter; or if the Flesh about the Hole be bloody or foamy, you must rub the
Tents with Aegyptiacum, which is an Ointment commonly used for the cleansing of
Sores; (...) Verdigrease and white Vitriol with the Basilicum.

If the Hole close up too soon, you must open it again with a hot Iron.

If the Horse void the Humor sufficiently by the Nose, you must not disturb
Nature by endeavoring to assist her; only keep the Horse warm, and walk him
every Morning and Evening: for there is no Danger after the Passage is opened.
But if his Nose be obstructed by hard or dry Matter, so that he can neither
breathe freely, nor expel the Humor without Pain: you must inject into his
Nostrils, with a small Syringe, a warm Liquor made of equal parts of Aqua-Vitae
and Oil-Olive shaken together, which will loosen the Flegmatic Humor that
stops the Passages, and help Nature to throw it out You will find great Benefit
by the repeated Use of this easy Remedy.

If the Matter be evacuated in too small a Quantity, and Nature seem to be
languid; you must endeavor to warm the Horse's Body with Cordial Pills, the
Cordial Powder, or the Electuary of Kermes; or you may give him some Doses of
the Lieutenant's Powder, described in the Second Part: Or if none of these
Medicines can be had, you may give him every Morning half an Ounce of Treacle
mixed with a Pint of Spanish Wine.

A large Quantity of the Herb Periwinkle chopp'd small and mixed with moistened
Bran, will make the Horse void the Humor plentifully.

Afterward you may put Feathers into his Nose, in this manner. Take two large
Goose-Quills, of those that grow in the middle of the Wing, anoint 'em with
fresh Butter melted in a Plate, and as soon as they are cold, sprinkle the Ends
of 'em with a little Powder of Pepper or of Tobacco: then thrust 'em up into
the Horse's Nostrils, and to keep 'em from falling out, tie a strong Thread to
the great Ends of the Quills, and fasten it to the Halter, leaving him in that
Posture with a Bit in his Mouth for the space of two hours. This must be done
two days, and on the third you must sprinkle the Ends of the Quills with Powder
of white Hellebore, continuing after the same manner till all the Matter be
evacuated.

It will be convenient to repeat the use of the Cordial Pills, or Powder, or
the Lieutenant's Powder, as often as there shall be occasion: or you may use
the following Electuary.

When the Disease is stubborn, you must syringe the Horse's Nostrils from time
to time.

The Electuary of Kermes is of excellent Use in this Case, and corrects the
Corruption and Stench of the Matter.

CHAP. XI. Of the Electuary of Kermes
THis Electuary would be in all respects as noble a Remedy for Horses, as the
Confection Alkermes, if instead of the dry Grains of Kermes, which are properly
nothing else but the Bark, Farriers would make use of the true and precious
Pith or Pulp enclosed in 'em, which is first a liquid Substance, but when it
grows ripe, is reduced, without any artificial Preparation, to a very red
Powder, which falls of it self out of the Hole in its Bark or Cover, on that
Side where it sticks to the Wood or Leaf of a Shrub called the Scarlet-Oak, on
which it grows. As Soon as this Powder begins to be animated, and to turn to
little Worms of the same Color, you must quench it with Juice of Limons
rectified and separated from its Phlegm to the Consumption of a fourth part;
then knead it, and make it up into little Troches, which must be dried. Thus
prepared it is much better than its Bark, which is brought to us from Languedoc.
Take four Ounces of these Troches, if they can be had, or if you have only the
Grains, take a Pound of the freshest and fairest of 'em, though dry; half a Pound
of Juniper Berries, ripe and dry; Cubebs, and Bay Berries, of each six Ounces;
Roots of Spanish Scorzonera, Master-Wort, Zedoary, Flower-de-luce of Florence,
and Shavings of Hart's-Horn and Ivory, of each four Ounces and a half;
Elecampane-Roots, Bark of Oranges and Citrons dried in the shade, of each four
Ounces; Cinnamon half an Ounce; Cloves and Nutmeg, of each two Drams.

All the Ingredients must be reduced to a fine Powder, sears'd, and then
weighed; if you take the full Doses of each, the weight of all together will
amount to three Pounds ten Ounces, and two Drams of Powder. Then take eleven
Pounds of clarifi'd Honey, and boil it to half the thickness of a Syrup; after
which take the Vessel from the Fire, and while the Honey is yet hot, pour in
the Powders by degrees, and incorporate 'em thoroughly together. You must suffer
the Electuary to ferment two Months in a Pot before you give it to the Horse.

The Dose is a quarter of Pound in a Quart of White Wind, or two Ounces in a
pint of Spanish-Wine. It must be Infused over Night, and next Morning given to
the Horse, who must stand Bridled two Hours before, and as long after.

'Tho' this Electuary is composed of the same Drugs that are used in the
preparations of Cordial Powders, it will be found to be more effectual; because
the Fermentation exalts the virtue of its Ingredients, and the Honey being
impregnated with their Volatile Salt, communicates it to the Stomach, Lungs, and
Heart, and from thence to all the parts of the Body. Thus it is plain that this
Medicine operates more vigorously and quickly than Cordial Powders, since it is
prepared by the succeeding Fermentation, before it enters into the Stomach.
Avicen makes a long discourse to prove the usefulness of Fermentation, which he
confirms by the example of Treacle, demonstrating that the Fermentation that
succeeds the Composition of that Remedy produces a certain Quality and Virtue
out of an infinite number of Simples, which can only be attributed to the
digestion of the Ingredients; Ait enim duplicatae esse virtutis Medicinam, quae
fermentationem sit passa. The same effect appears evidently in natural
Productions; for Must by Fermentation is changed to Wine, and Water boiled with
Barley and Hops turns to Beer, from whence a burning Spirit is drawn: And for
the same reason Bread would be very unwholesome if it were not leavened, for
it is only Fermentation that makes it light and agreeable to the Taste. The
mixture and variety of Ingredients is necessary to produce Fermentation, as it
appears plainly in Spirit of Wine, which never ferments alone, but if it be
mixed with a little Oil of Turpentine, the Particles of the Liquor do
immediately ascend with a great deal of Impetuosity, and make a considereble
Ebullition; for by virtue of the two Principles which cause that remarkable
Digestion, the subtle Particles being mixed with those that are grosser, dilate
'em, and produce that Fermentation, which is admirably well explained by Dr.
Willis, a famous English Physician.

This Electuary is good for Defluxions, Colds, Palpitation of the Heart, Loss
of Appetite, Dullness and Leaness of Horses; and besides it may be given for
Preservation; for it strengthens Nature, and helps her to expel by the usual
Passages, every thing that offends her, and that is apt to degenerate to
Corruption.

You need not be afraid of the Heat of this Remedy; for such Cordials as this
never inflame the parts of the Body, and by the help of this Electuary you may
sooner consume corrupt and offending Humors, than by Purgation, which oppresses
Nature, and disorders the Body of a Horse. It Is true, it does not operate so
quickly, but it is more innocent; for whereas Nature is weakened by Purgation,
she is powerfully assisted and envigorated by this Remedy to expel noxious
Humors, and the sick Horses grows lusty and fit for Service.

A Dose of this Medicine may be several times repeated, as well as of the other
Cordials that shall be described; and you may also give the following Balls to
the sick Horse.

Take of Butter, the quantity of an Egg, Cinnamon a Dram, a large Nutmeg
grated, and two Drams of Sugar: Mix 'em all thoroughly, then add half a Glass of
Aqua Vitae, stirring 'em over a gentle Fire to incorporate all the Ingredients;
and put the whole or one half into a Clout, tying it up in the form of a round
Bag, which must be fastened to the Bit, that the Horse may chew it three or
four times every day: Half an Ounce of Assa-foetida tied to the Bit in a piece
of Linen, will, as I intimated before, produce almost the same effect.

CHAP. XII. How to promote the Evacuation of the Humor by the Nose.
WHen a Horse, without losing his Appetite voids the Humor that occasions the
Strangles imperfectly, or in too little a quantity by his Nostrils; it is
convenient to stir up languid Nature to expel her Enemy; for which purpose you
may give the following Remedy.

Take the quantity of an Egg of fresh Butter, melt or fry it in a Skellet or
Drying Pan till it begin to grow black, then add strong Vinegar and Oil Olive,
of each half a Glass, and twice as much Pepper as you can lift with the ends of
your Fingers: Mix 'em all together in the Skellet, and while the Composition is
yet warm pour it into the Horses Nose through a Horn, one half into each Nostril.
As soon as he has taken this Remedy cover him with a Cloth, and walk him in
your hand half an hour, during which time he will be seized with a Palpitation
or bearing in the Flank, as if he were just ready to burst, which ought not to
surprise you, for it will not last above an hour or two, and after you have put
him into the Stable he will void the Humor plentifully.

The days following you must lead him abroad for a quarter of an hour, in the
Morning and Evening, in the Shade if it be Summer, and in the Sun if it be
Autumn, suffering him to walk with his Head bowed down snuffing the Ground. And
besides, you must always make him eat low, to facilitate the Purgation of the
Brain.

You will doubtless be surpised to perceive that, by the use of this Medicine,
the Horse will void more Phlegm and filthy Matter in one day, than all the
usual Remedies could have made him expel in fifteen days. But it must be used
sparingly, and with caution; for if it be given to a perfectly sound Horse, it
will immediately make him void a great quantity of seemingly corrupt Phlegm by
the Nose; but the Matter thus expelled only appears to be filthy, because it is
drawn from its natural place, where it was neither hurtful nor corrupt, though it
seems to be so after it is evacuated. And therefore this Remedy must only be
given to those Horses whose Passages are open, that is, after they have begun
to void Humors by the Nose, or when it is plain that they are not able to expel
the Matter by reason of their Weakness, or the defect of natural Heat; in all
which cases we may exhibit this Remedy safely and with good Success, since by
so doing we pursue the way that Nature has already marked out, which is always
the surest course.

When Nature informs us, that the Horse ought to be relieved, and helped to get
rid of a burden that oppresses him, and hinders him from performing his usual
Functions, and that the Humor ought to be expelled by the Nose, we are obliged
in prudence to follow, aid, and strengthen her Motions; by which method the
Horse will certainly be cased, whereas all rash and unseasonable Attempts are
not only prejudicial, but will at last prove fatal to him.

I have given this Remedy to Horses that returned from the Army spent, lean,
and harassed, whose Age, and every other Circumstance made it altogether
improbable, that ever they should be able to expel noxious Humors by the Nose;
and yet they did actually void great quantities of Phlegm, and were eased for a
time, though not without danger of sinking under the violence of that Evacuation;
which, in my Opinion, ought never to be provoked, whatever success it may have
had in some particular cases, till you are convinced by evident signs that the
Horse is disposed to discharge the Humors by those Passages; in which case
Nature is your Guide, and you can never err, while the end of all your Attempts
is to help her to expel that which offends her, by the most convenient
Passages, which, according to the present supposition are the Nostrils. But if
any Man shall be so fond of this Medicine, because he is not obliged to go
further than his Kitchen for the Ingredients of which it is compounded, as to
use it inconsiderately, and without observing these Directions, he must expect
at last to pay dearly for that convenience, since he forces Nature to such
Methods of Evacuation as are contrary to the present disposition of the Horse.

I had once occasion to attempt the Cure of a Horse that was suspected to have
the Glanders; and intending to provoke a plentiful Evacuation, I gave him a
double Dose of this Remedy, which made him so averse to all manner of Food,
that he was five days without Eating, and in the mean time seized with a
vehement beating in his Plank, which made me conclude that he would certainly
die, though, after all, he escaped, contrary to my expectation. Nevertheless I Am
convinced by daily experience, that when a Horse is troubled with the Glanders,
this Medicine may be given safely, and even seyeral times repeated, after
considerable Intervals, provided the Dose be not much augmented: For it is plain
that Nature has already taken that course, and we only assist her to shake off
the load that overwhelms her. Immediately after the taking of the Remedy, the
Horse seems just ready to expire, by reason of the violent Beating which it
causes in his Flank; but that Storm is quickly appeased.

It Is by no means convenient to administer this Remedy to Horses that have lost
their Appetite, for they are not able to bear the violence of its Operation:
Nor can it be given in very cold Weather, without hazarding the Horse's Life;
for all extraordinary Evacuations are equally dangerous in extremely Cold and
Hot Seasons.

When any of the noble or principal Parts are vitiated, you may save the Charge
and Trouble of a tedious Sickness, by giving this Medicine, which will hasten
the Horse's Death: For it is impossible that he should subsist long when one of
the noble Parts is corrupted, and since you must lose him, the sooner you are
rid of him it is the better.

This Remedy should be given rather in the Wane, than in the Increase of the
Moon: For when it is administered during the Increase, it makes such havoc, and
so disorders the Economy of Nature, that it cannot be restored to its wonted
course in a long time after; but in the declination or Wane it does not produce
such violent Disturbances. It ought not to be given on the day of the
Full-Moon, but it may be administered with very good Success the next day
after. These Observations are very useful, and may be cautiously observed, when
the disposal of the Time is in our Power.

There is a certain Salt in the Matter that is evacuated, which is grateful to
the Horse's Taste, and makes him lick and swallow it: But since it is sharp and
biting, it may ulcerate his inward Parts; and therefore you ought to wipe his
Nose with Hay as often as you can.

Besides, you must never suffer him to drink raw Water; but instead of that
give him Water that has been boiled, mixed with a little Bran, or rather Flower:
If you could make him drink it hot, it would be so much the better; but few
Horses will drink any Liquor that is not either cold, or at least only
lukewarm.

You must never forget to separate the Horse, during the time of his
Evacuation, from all other Horses: For not only this is a contagious Distemper,
but a sound Horse may catch the Glanders from one that is troubled only with
the Strangles, and even though he should not lick the Matter that flows out of
his Companion's Nose, which he will certainly do if he can; because the very
Smell is sufficient to communicate the Disease, which may be also propagated by
drinking out of the same Pail.

I shall propose other Remedies to promote Evacuation by the Nose, in my
Discourse of the Glanders, which may be used upon occasion; though that which I
have already described is of excellent use when there is not an Ulcer in the
Bowels.

If the violence of the Evacuation caused by this Medicine make the Horse
abstain from Eating, which happens very rarely, give him the Electuary
described in the preceding Chapter, or some Cordial Powders; and if, after all,
his aversion to his Food continue, make him chew the Balls proposed in the
Eighth Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. Of the False or Bastard Strangles.
SOmetimes the Humors are not disposed to produce the Fermentation that causes
the Strangles at the usual time, which defect of Fermentation may proceed
either from the strength or weakness of Nature; so that in such cases the
agitation of the Humors is imperfectly and weakly performed, for want of proper
Remedies, from whence it is plain that the noxious Matter cannot be fully
expelled, but a Ferment remains in the Body, which in its proper time will
agitate the Humors that are disposed to follow its Motions, and cause a sort
of Fermentation, which will oblige oppressed Nature to renew her Endeavors to
cast forth the Remainders of those Impurities, which she could not fully
evacuate before: Sometimes in this kind of Strangles she expels 'em by the
Nose, and sometimes also by Swellings under the Throat, as in the true
Strangles. When the Horse is old the Humor is usually discharged by a large
Swelling at the side of the Jaw Bone, in the same part out of which the Vives
are drawn, which suppurates and breaks at the age of Ten, Twelve, or Fifteen
Years. These Horses must be very diligently assisted, for they are hardly able
to expel the venomous Matter; for which purpose I make use of the
Treacle-Balls, which I have frequently repeated six or ten times, and some
softening Clysters when the Disease was accompanied with Loss of Appetite; for
Clysters are never hurtful in any Case whatsoever. Usually these Horses void no
Matter by the Nostrils, but the whole Malignity is evacuated by the Humor that
is drawn out of the Swelling: and after it is wholly expelled, I make 'em eat
two Ounces of Liver of Antimony in Powder mixed with Bran, till they have
consumed two Pounds, to complete their Recovery; for they are commonly very
much worn and extenuated by their Disease.

Sometimes the False Strangles are known by the same Signs that denote the
Disease properly so called, which are much different from the Glanders; only
the last mentioned Distemper begins not with a great Beating in the Flank, and
difficulty of Breathing, as the False-Strangles do. And when after the use of
Remedies a Swelling appears at the side of the Jaw Bone, in the part from
whence the Vives are drawn, you may certainly conclude that the Horse is
troubled with the False-Strangles, which are rarely evacuated by the Nostrils
in old Horses, but almost always by a Tumor at the side of the Jaw Bone, though
sometimes when they are not above six or seven Years old, the Swelling breaks
forth between the two Jaw-bones, in which case they also void Matter by the
Nose, and it is plain by their Age that their Distemper is not the Glanders.

This Distemper makes the Horses a great deal more sick than the true
Strangles, and sometimes they die for want of due Assistance, or the Disease
generates to the Glanders: And therefore great care must be taken to keep 'em
warm, and to administer effectual Remedies.

You may give the sick Horse, once in two days, a Dose of the Electuary of
Kermes, or of the Lieutenant's-Powder, Cordial-Powder, Cordial-Balls, or Pills,
and some Clysters, then Syringe him, and put Feathers into his Nose, and Bags
into his Mouth, as in the cure of Strangles. When he slights his Food, and eats
little, you must not give him any Powders, but good softning Clysters, after
which give him the Cordial-Waters of Scorzonera, Bugloss, Carduus Benediclus,
and Roses, of each half a Pint, with an Ounce of the Confection of Al-Kermes,
without Musk or Amber-grise, or of the Electuary of Kermes, and the same
Evening a good Clyster with Sal Polycrest, repeating the same every two days.
But if he is only troubled with a loathing of his Food, without Beating in his
Flank, or a Fever, you must observe the Directions proposed in the Sixth
Chapter; prepare a Bag for him with an Ounce of Assa-foetida, and every day
make him drink a Pint of good Spanish Wine, which is very good for the Bastard
Strangles.

Afterward, if he has any Kernels, you must bring 'em to Suppuration; which
you will find a harder Task to perform, than in the true Strangles, whether
they be under the Throat or at the side of it: And if they be not prevented by
proper Remedies, they will either strike inward, or harden and remain in that
condition, or perhaps grow so big as to hinder Respiration. To advance the
Suppuration, you may give him two or three Doses of Cordial Balls, which are
very useful to drive out the Humor. If notwithstanding these Remedies the
Matter or Quitter is not yet generated, you must give him three Doses more with
a Pint of Spanish Wine mixed with the same quantity of some other sort of Wine
for each Dose; then rub the top of the Gland with a Retoire, holding a red-hot
Iron near it, that the Retoire may penetrate, which will promote the
Suppuration, and draw the Matter powerfully. If all these Remedies prove
ineffectual, you must have recourse to the Medicine for resolving Glands
described in the Twentieth Chapter, which, if it be carefully prepared, will
infallibly resolve and dissipate the Gland or Kernel.

Besides all these Remedies, you may burn the Hair on the Glands with a searing
Candle, and afterward apply to the part a large Plaster made of Emplastrum
Divinum, or of Manus Dei, or of the greater Diachylum with the Gums, both which
may be had from Apothecaries, spread the Plaster on thin white Leather, and
apply it to the Gland, laying over it a Lamb's Skin, which ought also to cover
some of the parts under the Head: You must let the Plaster stick till the
Matter is ripened in the Kernel, and then open it with a red-hot Iron, putting
in Tents, as before.

If these Plasters be not strong enough to bring the Glands to Suppuration,
you must use another of the Ointment of Beetles, or that which follows.

CHAP. XIV. An Ointment to ripen Kernels.
THis Ointment is not only fit to be applied to the Glands between, or at the
side of the Jaw-Bones, but good for all manner of Swellings that ought to be
suppurated, if the part be often chafed with it, and kept very warm. It Is
prepared thus: Take four Ounces of Basilicum, melt it in a Skellet, and add an
Ounce of Emplastrum Divinum, or of Manus Dei, which is as good, and is kept by
all Apothecaries: after they are melted into one Mass, remove the Skellet from
the Fire, and add three Ounces of old Treacle, the older the better; mix 'em
all thoroughly, and make an Ointment, with which you must every day chafe the
Gland, or the part that is to be brought to Suppuration, and you will soon
perceive its Efficacy. Sometimes the Ointment is too hard; for the Farriers of
Paris desire their Basilicum to be made very hard, and the Apothecaries, to
please 'em, add a great deal of Rosin to thicken it, which does not at all
augment its Virtue; and therefore in that case you may add to the whole
quantity an Ounce of old Oil- Olive, which will bring it to a due consistency.

To avoid Repetitions, I referr the Reader to the Directions proposed in the
Chapter concerning the True Strangles, which must be observed in the present
Case, and even with greater Care, because this is a more dangerous Distemper.

CHAP. XV. Of the Cold Rheum, or Morfounding.
THE word Rheum, in the general, signifies all sorts of Defluxions that flow
from one part and fall upon another; but properly speaking, the Rheum in Horses
is a Defluxion under the Throat, and on other neighboring parts of raw,
phlegmatic, and superfluous Humors, that are gathered either by a great Cold,
or for want of Digestion, or by reason of some particular Distempers, or
exhaled from the inward parts.

The remote causes of this Disease are of a different Nature: Sometimes it is
occasioned by being suddenly exposed to the Cold, after having suffered a
vehement Heat. Thus immoderate Exercise or Labor, beyond the strength of a
Horse, heats not only his outward, but even his inward parts: And if he be
suffered to catch Cold presently after, or exposed to the cold Air in a
Harvest-night, immediately the Defluxion seizes on some inward parts of the
Body, and hinders 'em from performing their Functions.

Sometimes thick and viscous Humors being dissolved and melted by long and
violent Exercise, fall upon the Lungs, where they cause Obstructions, which are
attended with difficulty of Breathing: Or if Nature be strong enough to expel
'em, they flow out of the Nose in the form of white or green Snot, which,
according to its sharpness, produces a Cough.

The abundant flowing out of the Humor has given occasion to frequent
Mistakes; and several Horses have been suspected to have the Glanders, who were
only troubled with a Cold.

This Disease may be also occasioned by suffering a Horse to Drink while he is
hot, without riding him afterward; or by his drinking very cold Water too
greedily in Summer, or melted Snow.

The signs of a Cold are these; Dullness, Want of Appetite, a Cough, and running
at the Nose: To distinguish it from the Strangles, you must enquire whether the
Horse has been exposed to any of those Inconveniences that may cause a Cold,
and if he has, you may certainly conclude that to be the Disease.

Another sign is, when his Throat is drier and harder than usually: You may
easily perceive whether it is harder by feeling it; and this hardness proceeds
from the Heat and Dryness, which are the effects of the Cold.

Sometimes the Cold is so violent, that it throws the Horse into a Fever, with
manifest danger of his Life; in which case his Neck-Vein must be opened, and
oftentimes the same Operation is repeated. Bleeding is also esteemed proper,
when a Horse is troubled with so great an Oppression in his Breast that he
cannot Breathe.

Horses are also let Blood when the Cold is accompanied with a Quinsie, or
Inflammation of the Throat that hinders 'em from swallowing. In these three
Cases Bleeding is profitable for a Horse that is troubled with a Cold.

This Disease is very dangerous when it seizes a Horse in the Increase of the
Moon, for his Lungs are oppressed with a multitude of Humors, that increase
with that Planet; besides, the Defluxion falls upon all the inward parts of the
Body, and almost always the Disease is of long continuance, as being caused by
Fullness. For it is certain that all Diseases proceeding from Fullness, when they
happen during the increase of the Moon, are stronger and more apt to overwhelm
Nature, and disturb her in the performance of her Functions, by reason of the
increase of Humors at that time.

But when it happens in the Wane of the Moon, it is of shorter continuance, and
less violent; for the Humors decrease with the Moon, and the Horse recovers
speedily.

If these Observations be not attentively considered by those who undertake the
Cure of Horses, they will hardly be able to make a certain Judgment concerning
the length and dangerousness of their Distempers, or to prescribe a successful
Method of Cure. This Assertion is grounded on a certain knowledge of the Causes.

The way of curing a Cold is the same with that which I prescribed for the
Strangles, For you must cover the Horse's Neck with a Furred Skin, keep him
warm, give him the Electuary of Kermes, put Baggs with Assa-Foetida into his
Mouth, thrust Feathers into his Nose, Syringe him, and proceed in all other
respects as in the Cure of the Strangles.

If you perceive that your Horse has not wholly lost his Appetite, you may give
him the Cordial Powder every three days, or rather the Electuary of Kermes. And
when the Disease is attended with a total loss of Appetite, you cannot give a
better Remedy than that Electuary in a Pint of Spanish Wine, once in two days,
if he has not a Fever; or if he have a Fever, you may give him the Cordial
Waters with Clysters both before and after.

The Arman described Chap. VII. is very good in this case: It may be given five
or six times in the day, tying it to the Bit, and will be found to be a
Sovereign Remedy.

Take the sick Horse's Urine, while it is yet hot, mix it with an equal quantity
of Wine, about a Pint, or a Pint and half of each, and make him drink it all
up; then cover him, and let him stand Bridled two hours. Repeat the same
several times.

If you cannot have his Urine hot, take a Pint of Flesh-Broath, without Fat or
Salt, and as much Wine, mix 'em for a Draught. Repeat the same three or four
days, and if he Sweat not after the first Dose, add to the Draught an Ounce of
the Cordial-Powder, and cover him well. Continue after the same manner for some
days.

For a Cold accompanied with a violent Cough.
Take Honey of Roses, and Juice of Liquorice, of each four Ounces;
Fenugreek-seed, Grains of Paradise, Cummin-seed, Cinnamon, Cloves, Ginger,
Gentian, Birthwort-roots, Anni-seed, and Coriander-seed, of each two Drams.
Reduce all the hard Ingredient into Powder, and give the whole to the sick
Horse in a Pint of White Wind, with six Ounces of Carduus-Benedictus-Water.

Let not this Composition offend those who are only pleased with Cooling
Remedies; for Horses must not be used like Men. If you cool 'em too much, when
they are troubled with this Distemper, you will stifle em; and therefore beware
of purely cooling Medicines. You will quickly be sensible of the good effects
of This, which contains many hot Ingredients; but since they are agreeable to
the nature of Horses, they do not inflame 'em, and cause only so much Heat as
is necessary to strengthen the Parts. Experience will convince you of the Truth
of my Assertion, for the Remedy will succeed; and I shall take occasion
hereafter to demonstrate, that there is need of a great deal of Prudence to
administer cooling Remedies to a Horse with safety and success.

You must also walk him frequently in the Sunshine if it be Summer; and
observe the same directions that I prescribed in the case of Want of Appetite,
Chap. VI. and also in the Chapters of the Strangles.

A Draught for a Cold joined with a Palpitation or Beating in the Flank.
When the sick Horse is troubled with a Cough, a vehement Beating in his Flank,
and even Palpitation of the Heart, you cannot assist him more effectually than
by giving him two Clysters, and then the following Draught, after he has stood
two hours in the Morning, with a watering Bit in his Mouth. It Is compos^d of
the Waters of Scorzonera, Carduus Benedictus, Scabious, Roses, and bitter
Succory, of each half a Pint: Give the Horse a Quart of these Waters, with an
Ounce of Zedoary, and two Drams of Saffron, both in fine Powder; then rinse the
Horn with the half Pint that remains, and make him drink that also: After which
let him stand four hours with a Waterbit in his Mouth, and as soon as you
unbridle him lay moistened Bran before him, leaving him to eat at his pleasure
till Night, and then give him a good Clyster with an Ounce and an half of Sal
Polychrest.

Take Assa-foetida and Powder of Savin, of each half an Ounce, and tie 'em in a
Bag to the Bit; let the Horse stand two hours, then unbridle him, and after two
hours more put in the Bag again. For, besides that this Bag gives him an
Appetite, it eases his Head, by making him void a great quantity of Water and
bitter Phlegm.

Instead of the Zedoary and Saffron, you may mix an Ounce of the Confection of
Hyacinth without Musk or Amber-grise, with the Cordial Waters; and the same may
be repeated two or three times if need require, and if you found any Benefit by
the first Dose: for that which gives Ease, may (if continued) perfect the Cure.

The main part of the Cure consists in giving the Horse one or two softening
Clysters, with Sal Polychrest every day.

A Softening Clyster.
Take Leaves of Mallows, Violets, Herb-Mercury, Pellitory of the Wall, of each
three Handfuls; Annis-seeds one Ounce, or a Handful of green Fennel, if it be
in the Summer; let 'em boil half an hour, in a large Pot or Kettle, in three
Quarts of Water (for a little Horse) or four (for a large one) adding an Ounce
and a half or two Ounces of Liver of Antimony in fine Powder. After the
Decoction is half-cold, press it out, and add to the strained Liquor four
Ounces of Lenitive Electuary, and a Quarter of a Pound of fresh Butter: Mix and
make a Clyster, which must be injected after you have rak^d the Horse; then put
him again into the Stable, and let him stand half and hour bridled.

If these Remedies be applied with Prudence when the Occasion requires, and
without either Rashness or Negligence, the Horse will certainly be eased by
'em, unless the Disease be extremely violent.

CHAP. XVI. The Universal Cordial-Powder.
TAke Sassafras, Zedoary, Elecampane, Gentian, Carlin-Thistle, Angelica,
Cubebs, Spanish Scorz^nera, Master-Wort, and Marshmallows, of each half a
Pound; Birth-Wort round and long; Bay Berries, Bark of Oranges and Citrons,
Savin, of each four Ounces; Cardamoms, Liquorice, Myrrh, Shavings of
Hart's-Horn and Ivory, Coriander-Seed, Seeds of Carraway, Cummin, Annise, and
Fennel, of each two Ounces; Cinnamon an Ounce; Cloves, Nutmeg, and Oriental
Saffron, of each half an Ounce; all fresh and gathered in due time, for a Root
dug up in Summer is of no Value, and therefore they must be gathered in the
Spring, when they begin to shoot forth, or about the time of Advent, before the
Frost. The Medicine will be more effectual, if you add a Pound of the Grains of
Kermes; but since they cannot be kept without losing a part of their Virtue,
it is better to mix 'em with Balls, that they may be preserved in their entire
Force. Beat all the Ingredients separately, reducing 'em to a gross Powder;
then strain 'em through a Hair-Sieve, mix the whole Powder exactly and weigh it,
for you must not weigh the Drugs before they are beat and searc'd apart. The
Powder may be preserved a long time without any diminution of its Virtue, if it
be pressed hard in a leathern Bag, which must be kept close tied.

This is so universal a Remedy, that every Man who keeps a Horse should always
have some of it by him, especially on a Journey, or in the Army, where there is
not Convenience to make it; for by the Use of this Medicine Horses have been
frequently preserved from several very considerable Infirmities.

The Virtue of this Powder decays if it be kept too long; and therefore the
best way is to prepare a small Quantity of it, that you may always have some of
it fresh. I have lately found out a way, which has proved very successful, to
keep it Thirty Years in its full Strength, and besides to render it portable,
and more effectual, which are certainly very great Advantages. I reduce it to
Balls, which are so hard that the Air cannot penetrate nor spoil 'em; and a Man
may carry 'em in his Pocket, Portmantle, or any other way that shall be most
convenient. It will plainly appear by the following Account of my Method, that
the Cordial Powder is very much improved by it.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Cordial Balls, or Treacle Pills.
TAke a Bushel of ripe and black Juniper Berries, gathered in the End of
August, or the Beginning of September; beat 'em and put 'em into a Kettle with
eight or nine Quarts of Water. Set it on the Fire to boil, stirring it
sometimes till it grow thick; then press it out, and reserve the Liquor. Strain
the remaining Substance through a Searse as they use to strain Cassia, throw away
the Husks and Berries, and mix the strained Pulp with the abovementioned
Liquor. Boil it again over a clear Fire, stirring it from time to time, till it
be reduced to the Thickness of Broth; then take it from the Fire, and when it is
half cold, mix it in a Mortar with the full Quantity of the Powder prescribed
in the preceding Chapter, adding a Pound of the Grains of Kermes in Powder.
Make up the whole Mass into Balls, weighing twelve Drams each, which must be
dried on the Strainer with its Bottom turned upwards. These Balls grow little,
and very hard; but they must be made in Summer, for they are not easily dried
in the Winter, and besides they grow moldy, if they be not kept in a Stove or
Skellet. After they are dry they lose not their Virtue; and the Addition of the
Mucilage of Juniper Berries, which serves for a Cement to unite the parts of
the Powder, does also very much augment its Efficacy; for those Berries alone
are endowed with admirable Virtues: They are good for the Stomach and Breast,
provoke Urine, and may be justly called the Treacle of the Germans. But the
Powder may be made up into Balls without any Mucilaginous or glewy Substance,
after the following Manner: Put the Powder into a large Mortar, and mix it with
a little Cordial Water of Scorzonera, or such like; and after you have beaten
and mixed 'em with the Pestle, pour in more Water, and continue to beat, mix,
and add new Water by turns, till the whole Mass be of a sufficient Consistency
to be made up into Balls.

Those Balls may be dried sooner and more easily than the others, but since the
Mucilage of the Juniper Berries does very much increase the Virtue of the
Balls, instead of that you must add half a Pound of the Berries, which you may
beat with the rest of the Composition, when you mix it with the Water, and beat
it up to a Mass; and it will be still more effectual, as I hinted before, if a
Pound of Grains of Kermes be added to it. When you have occasion to use the
Balls, you must beat 'em to a gross Powder, which you may either infuse a whole
Night, or mix with Wine immediately before you exhibit it: for if you should
give the Balls whole, the Horse wou^d perhaps void 'em as entire as he took
'em. The Dose is two Balls.

They have the same Virtues with the Cordial Powder: I have used 'em with very
good Success, and find 'em very convenient both with respect to Carriage, and
to the Quantity of the Dose, which is always ready weighed.

I give 'em the Name of Treacle-Pills or Balls, because they have all the
Virtues of Treacle, and are even in some respects better, since there is not
the least Mixture of Honey, and they are composed of Ingredients that
strengthen Nature without inflaming it. They resist Corruption, and destroy
that superfluous Acid which is the Root of all Diseases, when there is too
great Abundance of it in the Body, for it causes a Fermentation that cannot be
allayed or stopped but by the Alcali contained in these Ingredients. And
Experience will convince you that this Remedy restores Health, without heating
the Body too much.

The shivering Fits that are occasioned by the drinking of extremely cold
Water, may be quickly stopped, by giving one of these Balls beaten to Powder in a
Pint of good Wine, and the sooner, if you mix 'em with Spanish Wine.

When a Horse forsakes his Meat on a Journey, give him two of these Balls in a
a Quart of Wine, and after you have kept him two hours bridl^d, he will eat
as soon as you unbridle him. This Remedy is not inferior to the Lieutenant's
Powder; and you may also give a Dose of it by way of Prevention to preserve
Horses from Diseases. There are several Persons who would value themselves very
highly upon the Invention of such a Secret, and would be very loath to
communicate it to the Public.

The Dose of the Cordial Powder is two Ounces; but since there is no Danger in
exceeding the Quantity, if you have not Scales by you, you may give three
silver Spoonfuls to large Horses, and two to small ones. Infuse it cold all
Night in a Quart of red Wine, and in the Morning give it to the Horse, keeping
him bridled four hours before, and two hours after. And besides you must rinse
the Pot or Horn with another half Pint of Wine, and give it to the Horse to
wash his Mouth.

You may either infuse the Balls, or mix 'em immediately before you give 'em;
and you may repeat the Dose of either the Balls or Powder every Morning for
three or four Days together. To a Horse troubled with the Cold, who voids
Matter, or coughs, you may give either of these Remedies with very good
Success, in a Quart of Spanish Wine. Neither must you be afraid that they will
heat him too much, for that which is called Heat in Horses proceeds only from
the acid or sharp Juice, that abounds in his Stomach, and flowing out of its
natural Place, disturbs and interrupts the Digestions that ought to be
performed in each part. This Humor being out of its natural Place, becomes the
Principle of Heat and Corruption, and there is none else in Horses: from whence
it is plain that it ought to be blunted and destroyed by Alkalies or fixed Salts,
according to the Doctrine of Learned Chemists. Now these Compositions are full
of Simples that abound with a sweet Alkali, which des^reys the Acid that is the
Principle of Heat in Horses. And besides these Ingredients strengthen the
Heart, and all the Powers or Faculties of Nature, and enable her to expel that
which os^ends her, by the usual Passages. I could easily demonstrate that the
acid Juice, which is of a piercing and dissolving Nature, and causes Digestion
in the Stomach, is the Source of all those Discases that are called Hot, when
it abounds too much, and leaves its natural place, the Stomach. But such a
Dissertation would rather tire, than instruct the Reader; and the little I have
said is sufficient for the Wise. And therefore I shall only repeat my
Assertion, that the preternatural Heat in Horses proceeds usually from the too
great Abundance of the Acid Juice, which flowing out of the Stomach, becomes
the Principle of Corruption and Heat, and the Cause of many Diseases. But to
return to our Subject.

Th^se Remedies are good to promote the ^^acuation of the Humor that causes
the Strangles, when Nature is too languid and remiss in driving out her Enemy.
For three or four Doses of 'em taken successively will rouse and strengthen
Nature, and make the Horse that is troubled with the Strangles, expel the whole
Humor that occasions the Disease, by which means it prevents the false
Strangles, that dangerous Consequence of Imperfect Evacuations. They may be
also given profitably in the Cure of the Trembling or Beating in the Flanks,
Gripes, Vives, Loss of Appetite by the Abundance of Phlegm and Crudities, Cold,
Cough, Strangles, and several other Indispositions, as I shall intimate
afterward. In short, there are few Distempers which they do not help to
remove, and are even proper for Horses, who at their return from the Army or
from a long Journey, are dispirited, lean, and spent, with bristl'd up Hair,
and can never be made fat, how plentifully soever you feed 'em.

A Spoonful of the Powder, or a Ball beaten and mixed with Oats as often as you
allow him any, will cure an inveterate Cough, and make him long-winded.

They will help a Horse to expel Humors by the Nose, when he is disposed to
that kind of Evacuation: but their usual Effect is to provoke Urine, or
insensible Transpiration, and to enable Nature to shake off the Burden that
oppresses her, and to drive out all Impurities, without Purgation which is
contrary to the Nature of Horses.

There are several other Descriptions of Cordial Powders now in Use; but they
consist either of too great, or too small a Number of Ingredients; and they are
usually composed of Herbs which cannot be supposed to operate effectually on
Horses, who daily eat a greater quantity of 'em among their Hay, than you can
give 'em, in six Doses of Powder: but the Roots and Seeds, in which the Virtues
of Simples are united and concentrated, are of more excellent Use. Experience
will convince you of the Efficacy of this Powder, neither is it too chargeable,
for there are many Cordial Powders which cost a great deal more, and are yet
far inferior to it in Virtue. Only the Cubebs are dear, because they are
brought from a remote Country; but you may leave them out, and instead of 'em
substitute a triple quantity of Juniper Berries; though the former are certainly
endu'd with admirable Virtues. They are found only in the Isle of Java in the
Indies, where they grow in Clusters like Grapes, on a Shrub, that like the
Pepper-Tree, must be supported by some other Tree: and the Javaners, to keep
'em wholly to themselves, will not suffer any Syens to be exported, though the
Fruit is sold very cheap there: It strengthens the Stomach, clears the Passages
of the Breast, and chears the languishing Heart.

Since it is convenient and almost necessary to be furnished with several
Remedies for the same design, add since the Cordial Powder is one of those that
are most frequently used, I shall subjoin the Description of another which is
less compounded, though very effectual; for I have used it with good Success,
when the Universal Powder could not be had.

Other Cordial Powders.
Take Bay Berries, Gentian, round Birth-Wort, Myrrh, Flower-de-luce of
Florence, Shavings of Hart's-Horn, and Elecampane, of each four Ounces;
Zedoary, Cummin, Annise-Seeds and Savin, of each two Ounces; Cinnamon half an
Ounce, Cloves two Drams, Flowers of Corn-Poppies dried, two Ounces.

Beat all the Ingredients apart, searse 'em through a hair Strainer; Mix 'em
thoroughly, and keep 'em hard pressed in a Leathern Bag, tied close.

The Dose is two Ounces infused all Night in Wine; or you may give only one
Ounce in a Quart of Spanish Wine.

Its Use and Effects are the same with those of the abovementioned Cordial
Powder, with this Difference, that it is much inferior to the other in Virtue.

The Cordial Powder used by Farriers is composed of the Seeds of Annise,
Fennel, and Cummin; Liquorice, Bay Berries, and Shavings of Ivory; because all
these Ingredients may be had at low Rates. I must acknowledge this Powder is
useful; but there is a vast difference between the Effects of this, and those
that are produced by my Powder: and besides they give but one Dose of it to a
Horse, which they call a Cordial Draught; whereas it is oftentimes necessary to
repeat the Dose five or six Days together. Experience will convince you of the
Truth of what I say; for Farriers commonly use Liquorice, the Seeds of
Coriander, Annise, and Fennel, which they call the four Cordial Powders, taking
half an OUnce of each; and I leave the Reader to judge, whether this
Composition be equal in Virtue to those I have described.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Glanders.
THis is a cold Disease, and may be fitly ranked after the Strangles and Cold,
with which it has some Affinity.

The Glanders is a flowing or running at the Nostrils, of phlegmatic, tough,
white, red, yellowish or greenish Humors, which are sometimes derived from the
Spleen, almost always from the Lungs, rarely from the Liver or Kidneys. The
thinner Humors find a Passage through the Coeliac Vein, or the Passages of
Respiration, and the thickest are carried to the Throat, where they fall into a
little Receptacle between the two Jaw-bones, and from thence by degrees
dilating themselves, they form and nourish the Kernels that are conspicuous to
the Eye, and the rest of the Humor flows out of the Nostrils, and discovers
the Nature of the Disease.

The immediate Cause of the Glanders is frequently an Ulcer in the Lungs,
(rarely in the Kidneys) from which subtle and malignant Vapors are sent up to
the Brain. These thin Steams alter the very Substance of the Brain by their
Sharpness, and being condensed or thickened by the natural Coldness of that
Part, produce a Humor of the same Nature with Aqua fortis, which by its
Acrimony irritates the Parts, and augments the Ulcer; from whence proceeds that
troublesome Flux of Humors through the Nostrils. And whereas the two Jugular
Veins furnish and communicate a great Quantity of Blood to the Brain, the
Substance of which is already altered by the malignant Vapors that glide
thither perpetually through the Coeliac Vein as to the Head of an Alembic; the
Blood instead of being further purified, according to the established Order of
Nature, is corrupted, and from thence falling upon the Lungs heats 'em, and
being rendered incapable of performing its appointed Task, to nourish and
refresh that Part, serves only to augment the Ulcers that are already formed in
it.

The remote or outward Causes are almost the same with those of the Cold.

The Signs by which this Disease may be known, are when a Horse already too old
to be troubled with the Strangles, without a Cough, voids a great quantity of
Matter by the Nostrils; and when there are one or more Glands or Kernels
fastened to the Bone between the two Jaw-bones, which are so tender, that the
Horse can hardly endure you to touch 'em: and though they be not fastened to the
Bone, yet if they be hard and full of Pain, it is almost always a Sign of the
Glanders.

If the Horse void Matter by the Nose, without a Cough, and have a Kernel
sticking to the Bone, you may conclude that his Distemper is not a Cold, which
is usually accompanied with a Cough, whereas the Glanders are often without
that Symptom: and besides in the Glanders, the Matter usually flows out of one
Nostril, whereas in the Cold it runs almost always out of both.

Some cast the Matter that is voided by the Nostrils into Water; and if it swim
on the Top, they conclude the Horse to be free of this Distemper; but if it
sink to the Bottom, it is a Sign of the Glanders. The principal Use of this
Experiment is to distinguish the Pus, which is properly the Matter of an Ulcer
or Imposthume, from the Phlegm that comes out of the Vessels, which is not so
pernicious; for the Matter sinks to the Bottom, and the Phlegm swims on the
Top. But you must not depend on the Certainty of this Sign; for if the Matter
s^ick to the Nostrils like Glue, it is a bad Sign, and you may conclude the
Disease to be the Glanders, though the Matter swim on the Top.

When either the Breath, or Matter that comes out of the Nostrils, stinks, the
Disease is almost always incurable; for that noisome Smell proceeds from some
Ulcer or corrupt Humor, which at least presages the Length and Tediousness of
the Cure. When in the progress of the Distemper, the Humor voided by the
Nostrils turns to a frothy Substance, and continues to be so, the Disease is
usually incurable, and the Horse dies quickly after.

I have seen some Horses troubled with this Distemper, without Kernels, or if
there were any, they were little and moveable; and the only Sign by which we
could discover it to be the Glanders, was the Glewiness of the Matter, which
stuck to the Nostrils; it flowed not out, but obstructing the Passages stopped
the Horse's Breath; but the Passages being cleared by the help of a Syringe, he
found Ease: and even the Matter was mixed with bloody Fibers, which showed that
it proceeded from some Ulcer that rendered the Disease incurable; for not one
of the Horses escaped, though no Means were neglected to preserve 'em.

Some pretend that the Seat of this Disease is in the Brain: but it is certainly
in the Lungs, rarely in the Liver, Kidneys or Milt, and never in the Brain.
This I affirm on certain Knowledge; and the Account I have given of it is
grounded on a Principle, which nothing less than a plain Demonstration of its
Falseness and Absurdity, shall make me renounce.

This is the most contagious Distemper to which Horses are obnoxious, for not
only it communicates its Venom at a small distance, but infects the very Air,
and seizes on all the Horses that are under the same Roof with him that
languishes under it. And therefore as soon as you perceive the least Sign of the
Glanders, you must separate the the sick Horse from all his Companions, and not
suffer him to drink out of the same Pail with 'em; especially when the Disease
is malignant; for there are several kinds of Glanders, some of which are not so
extremely infectious, as others, but there are none of 'em that ought not to be
suspected.

I Am persuaded that this Distemper proceeds from a cold Cause, and I do not at
all doubt of the extreme difficulty of the Cure. All its various kinds are only
distinguished by a greater or less degree of Malignity; and it will be found
that all those who pretend to have cured the Glanders, have only cured either
the Strangles, Cold, or some less malignant sort of Glanders; for certainly
these Cures are very rare, and (perhaps I might justly say) impossible.

This Disease is caused and fomented by an Ulcer in the Lungs (rarely in any
other part) which increases, and, by degrees, consumes the whole Lobes of the
Lungs, and at last kills the Horse. If you do not begin, while it is still
possible to enable nature to consolidate the Lungs, and heal the malignant
Ulcer, you can never perfect the Cure. You may conclude the Disease to be
incurable when it is seated in the Spleen, because that Part will hardly yield
to the Virtue of Medicines. To begin the Cure, you may by way of Precaution,
take up the two Veins in the Neck, two Fingers breadth beneath the Place where
the Horse is usually let Blood; the Operation is performed thus; First, Make an
Incision, and lay the Vein bare; then separate it with a Cronet, and tie it
with a double Thread of waxed Silk, without cutting the Vein, lest the Ends of
it should slip out of the Knot, when the Horse eats and stirs his Jaws, with
which one of the Branches of that Vein communicates: then fill the Wound with
Salt, and do the same on the other side of the Neck. This Operation is also
very useful for the Eyes that are either weak, or troubled with Defluxions; for
these Veins being taken up, the impetuous Course of the Blood to the Brain will
be stopped; and in the present Case, since the Brain receives a less quantity
of Blood, the quantity of the sharp Humor that falls upon the Lungs will be
also diminished, and the Ulcer sooner heal^d: or at the least it is certain that
if the taking up of a Vein does not promote the Cure, it cannot hinder it. I
ad^is'd you not to cut the Vein between the two Knots, because I have seen
Horses killed by so doing: for the Knot slipping, it was impossible to find the
End of the Vein; and besides the Motion of the Blood is stopped as effectully
by taking up the Vein, as by cutting it.

Let the Horse's usual Food be moistened Bran; let him not lie loitering in a
Corner of the Stable, but use moderate Exercise; and his Ordinary Drink must be
prepared thus. Melt two Pounds of Brimstone in an Iron Spoon, and while it
boils, throw it into a Pail of Water; then take out the Brimstone, melt it
again, and cast it into the same Water, which the sick Horse must drink; for
the Water will retain the sweet and balsamic Salt of Brimstone, which is the
Balsam of the Lungs. The progress of this Disease, even when it is incurable, is
not very quick, but rather insensible: for the Sharpness of the Matter
increases by degrees, as the Ulcer grows greater, and the Part affected is
piecemeal consumed; in the mean time the neighboring Parts are spoiled, the
whole Body pines away, and receives no Benefit by the best and largest Supplies
of Nourishment. Some Horses cannot endure the Water prepared with Brimstone,
and therefore you must take the Paste of a Penny White-Loaf, when it is just
ready to be put into the Oven, and steep it in the Water, for the Tartness of
the Paste will correct the loathsome Taste of the Brimstone, and make the Water
grateful to the Horse; and besides it nourishes him, and comforts his inward
Parts.

As the Ulcer increases in a part so near the Heart, it causes a Hectic F^ver
(the usual effect of the Glanders) by which the whole Body is dried, and the
Horse dies about six Months or a Year after. But since it is hard to know
certainly whether the Glanders be of this kind, which almost always proves
Mortal, you must endeavor to discover the nature of the Disease by the
application of proper Remedies, by the success of which you may perceive
whether there be any hopes of the Cure: Thus you may exhibit the Drink which I
prescribed, for it is very proper in all the various sorts of Glanders,
especially in the most dangerous kind, that which affects the Lungs. And to
convince you that you ought not to despair of the Cure, at the first appearance
of this Distemper, it is observed that some Horses recover of themselves in the
Stable; but this happens only when there is not an Ulcer, the matter not being
sharp enough to corrode and waste the part: However, since it is impossible to
judge certainly of the Malignity of the Distemper, you must not neglect the use
of Remedies.

The Horses that are seized with this Disease, are frequently put into a way of
Recovery by the use of good Remedies, which would even perfect the Cure, if the
Lungs were not already wasted; but God alone can restore a consumed Part. I
remember I attempted the Cure of a Horse troubled with the Glanders, and kept
him in the constant use of Remedies for a whole Month together: Every Morning I
made him drink three Pints of the Emetic Wine, with two Ounces of the Cordial
Powder, and in the Evenings I Syring'd his Nose with half a Glass of the same
Wine, which dissolved the Kernel between his two Cheek-Bones, and gave him a
good Appetite to his Meat: His Eye looked well, he voided less Matter, and had
all the signs of Amendment; after which I purged him, and committed the rest of
the Cure to Nature; but the Horse by degrees pined away, and at last died.
After his Death I opened his Body, and found his Lungs wholly turned to a Mass
of Corruption. I confess I ought not to have purged him during the time of his
Evacuation at the Nose: For Experience has since convinced me that the
Purgation of a Horse, when he voids Matter by the Nose, is apt to give him the
Glanders, though he have it not already.

This puts me in mind of another Horse that was committed to my care, to whom I
gave two Doses of the Remedy described in the following Chapter, which made him
void abundance of Matter. Then I purged him, and afterward gave him three
Doses of the Cordial Pills in Wine, for three days together, and eight days
after three Doses more, but the Evacuation of the Matter was wholly stopped. I
ordered him to be air'd and walked; and, to complete the Cure, according to my
judgment at that time, I purged him again ten days after, and at last took out
the Kernel, which was large and fixed. The Wound being closed, I let him Blood,
and concluding him to be cured, sent him to his Master. Six Months after he
began to void Matter again, and continued in that condition above six Years,
during which time he was able to walk a foot-pace, and Work very well; but at
last he pined away, and died.

I thought fit to communicate these two Instances, out of a hundred others I
have met with in my Practice, to demonstrate that oftentimes the Horse is in
the greatest danger when he seems to be cured. And therefore when a Farrier
undertakes to cure a Horse of the Glanders, you may conclude that either he
will hardly be able to perform his Promise, or that the Disease is not really
what you imagine it to be.

It Is a most certain Rule, that a Horse should never be Purged while he voids
Matter at the Nose; for a Purging Medicine may throw him into this Distemper,
though he were free of it before. We must follow Nature in the Cure of Diseases,
and not compel her to change her course, or to submit to one that is opposite
to that which she has already taken, as Purgation is in the present case. It Is
true, most Farriers observe that Method, but I Am fully convinced that it is very
dangerous, and oftentimes fatal.

The Emetic Wine never purges a Horse, though the Dose be augmented to two or
three Quarts; for it works by insensible Transpiration, and is an excellent
Remedy. You will find it described in the Twenty Third Chapter.

CHAP. XIX. How to expel the Matter by the Nose.
I Shall proceed to describe some Remedies proper for this Distemper: And if
the Case be not altogether desperate, you will quickly perceive the good
effects of 'em.

Before you give any Remedies, you must consider whether the sick Horse be a
hearty Feeder: For if he be nice and squeamish, the Cure will never succeed
according to your desire, since some of the Medicines you must give him will
increase the natural Infirmity of his Stomach; so that it will cost you as much
Pains and Time to restore his Appetite as to cure the Glonders, and at the end
you will find it impossible to compass your design. But if the Horse that is
committed to your Care be a good Eater, in the first place make him abstain
from his Oats, then take Aqua Vitae and Oil Olive, of each a Quart, mix or brew
'em together in a Pot, till they be perfectly united, and spurt some of this
Liquor into his Nostrils five or six times every day. These Injections will
cure the little Ulcers in his Nostrils that are caused by the sharpness and
malignity of the Matter, and facilitate the descent of the Humor which is apt
to stick and grow dry in the Passages, and stop the Horse's Breath; and
therefore you must Syringe his Nostrils both before and after you give him a
Medicine to expel the Matter.

Afterward take four Spoonfuls of strong Vinegar, and as much good Aqua Vitae,
dissolve in 'em a Dram of Treacle above two Years Old, and add a Scruple of
White-Hellebor in Powder, and two grains of Powder of Long Pepper: Mix 'em all
together, and inject the mixture into the Horse's Nose, one half into each
Nostril, then walk him in his Clothes at a foot-pace, for the space of an hour,
suffering him to snuff the Ground with his Nose, and he will infallibly cast
forth abundance of Matter: Nor must you be surpised if he lose his Appetite,
for he will quickly recover it. If any noble part be affected he will die in a
little time; but if he live beyond that time, there is some hope of his
Recovery. Let him stand Bridled four hours before you give him this Remedy, and
two hours after; and besides, you must walk him abroad Morning and Evening for
the space of an hour. But tho the Horse have strength to undergo this
Evacuation, and though none of his noble Parts be consumed, I cannot positively
assure you that he will be cured of the Glanders, if there be a great Ulcer;
only he will not die so quickly.

Eight days after, if the Running at the Nose still continue, repeat the use of
the abovementioned Remedy, and endeavor to ripen the Kernel or Gland, by
applying Retoires (or Medicines to break the Skin) and convenient Plasters or
Fultisses, such as the Ointment in the Thirteenth Chapter; or take it off with
an actual or potential C^^tery. The actual Cautery is a red hot Iron, which
must be applied to the Kernel; and the potential Cautery is that which is
commonly called a Caustic Stone, which insensibly burns the part, and makes a
Scab fall off.

Instead of the potential Cautery, you may open the Kernel to the middle with a
Lance, and after it has done Bleeding, thrust the quantity of a Bean of
Arsenic, wrapped in a piece of Paper to the bottom of the Hole, which must be
stopped with Cotton. About the fifth or sixth day the Matter will begin to come
out, and after the ninth or tenth a Scab will fall off, resembling the Kernel
of a Nut. If there remain any Impurity or foul Flesh, keep the hole open as
long as you can with the Ointment Algyptiacum mixed with red Fr^^cipitate.

If with all these Remedies you cannot ripen the Kernel, you must endeavor to
dissolve it, by applying powerful Resolvents, such as Vinegar, strong Lies,
Ashes of Vine^^igs, Alum, Nitre, Oil of Peter, Euphorbium, and other Medicines
that have an attenuating Faculty, and are endu'd with a virtue to make the
Matter thin, volatile, and easy to be dissipated.

The Ointment Dialthae^e, the Resumptive Ointment, and Melilot Plaster, are
good to so^^en and resolve. And you may make a Pultiss of the Roots of Briony,
and Flower-de-luce, Honey, and the Dregs of Linseed Oil.

I have proposed all these Resolving Medicines for the satisfaction and
instruction of the Curious; but if the Kernel be very hard, and fastened to the
Jaw Bone, it will hardly yield to these Remedies: For besides the inconveniency
of the part for the application of Medicines, they are not always attended with
the expected Success. The best way then, in my Opinion, is to soften the
Kernel, and to apply either a red-hot Iron, or potential Cautery made of
Arsenic, Sublimate, or some other Caustic.

Though the usual softening Remedies are not very efrectual, yet there are some
more proper in this case than others; and you may confidently use that which
follows, for in the beginning it may resolve the Kernel before it grow to an
extreme hardness. I have tried it, and found it effectual.

CHAP. XX. How to resolve a Gland or Kernel.
TAke half a Pound of Lin-seed, reduced to fine Flower, mix it with a Quart of
strong Vinegar, and boil it over a little but very clear Fire, stirring it
constantly. When it begins to grow thick, add six Ounces of Oil of Lillies,
mingle 'em thoroughly, and apply the Mixture hot to the Kernel, and cover it with
a Lamb's-Skin, as in the cure of the Strangles. Renew the same Pultiss every
day, and after two or three Applications you will perceive that the Kernel is
dissolved. The same Remedy is proper for the Strangles, whether true or false;
and it is an ill sign when it does not succeed in the Glanders.

When you undertake the Cure of a Horse that is seized with the Glanders, the
Remedies here prescribed, together with such as are given inwardly, ought
either to resolve part of the Kernel, or bring it to Suppuration; and then you
may conclude that the Remedy works well, and assaults the cause of the Disease;
since the Gland is lessened and becomes more moveable, and whereas it was hard
and large before, is now either little, soft, or loose, for it is a very good
sign, when the Remedies that are us^d produce any one of these Effects. But you
must not flatter your self with hopes of Success, though (as it happens not
unfrequently) the Kernel should be considerably diminished during the Wane of
the Moon, and even without the application of any Remedies; for in the next
Increase of the Moon, it will grow as bad as ever, and even sometimes harder
and more fixed than it was before. And therefore when you see it decrease in
the Wane of the Moon, you must let the next New Mood be past, before you
adventure to give any hope of a Cure.

The cure of this Disease is usually begun where it ought to be ended; for as
soon as a Horse is seized with it, the first thing his Master desires, and the
Farrier proposes to be done in order to the Cure, is to take off the Kernel,
but they ought to consider that the Kernel is the Effect, not the Cause of the
Glanders, and that the removal of that can never restore the Horse to his
wonted Health. And Experience, as well as Reason, has couvinc'd me of the
preposterousness of this Method; for I caused the Kernel to be thrice cut out
of the same Horse, and after all could not perfect the Cure, though I gave him
several good Remedies besides.

But when it is convenient to take out the Kernel, you must observe the
following Directions. In the first place, you must cast the Horse, and having
opened the Skin that covers the Kernel, tie two threads to it to keep the
Wounds open during the Operation. Then, without any Instrument, take hold of
the Kernel with your Thumb, and separate it from the Bone; for the cutting of
any of the Veins that nourish it, would cause a Flux of Blood, which you could
not easily stop: But if it stick so fast that you cannot loosen it with your
Thumb, or if you perceive some Vein that must necessarily be cut, you must
carefully tie it with a Thread before you make the Incision, to prevent a Flux
of Blood, and proceed to separate it gently till it be wholly loosened from the
Bone: After which you must tie all the Vessels that nourish it, and fasten it
to the Bone, and then cut off the whose Kernel which is a Mass composed of a
great number of small Glands. The Operation being thus performed, wipe the part
very clean from Blood and all manner of moisture, and touch it every where with
a Pensil dipped in good Oil of Vitriol, which will sear the orifices of the
Vessels that moisten^d, fed, and fomented the Kernel, and produce a sort of
Scurf which will leave a Scar sufficient to stop the course of the Humors, and
prevent the growing again of the Kernel for some time. Then fill the empty
space under the Bone with fine Flax, moistened with strong and truly prepared
Aegyptiacum, and tie on the Bandage with the Threads I ordered you to fasten
when you cut the Skin. And afterward you must take care to consume the Flesh
as it grows; for the Hole will be quickly filled with Humors, or rather with
spongy Flesh, which will still be apt to produce new Kernels, or at least to
fill up the void Space, if you do not keep the Hole open till the Cure be
perfected, by thrusting in Flax anointed with Aegyptiacum, to preserve the
hollow Space between the Jaw-Bones. And even if need require, you may rub the
Part again with a Pencil dipped in Oil not Spirit of Vitriol; for the former is
more effectual, and a stronger Corrosive than the latter. Nor must you forget,
every time you dress the Sore, to wash it with lukewarm Wine, till it be
healed. Thus you may cut out the Kernel, when you cannot dissolve it: and I saw
one so extremely hard, that we could not divide it with a Hatchet, after it was
taken out of the place where it stuck.

If (as it sometimes happens) the Kernel grow again after it has been several
times cut out, you may reasonably despair of the Success of that Method; for if
you do not attack the Discase with inward Medicines, it will never be cured.
And even though after the Operation you rub the Wound with Oil of Vitriol, and
take care not to leave the least part of the Kernel, which would quickly breed
another as big as the former; though, I say, the Kernel be wholly extirpated,
without the least appearance of its growing again, you must not conclude
positively that the Danger is over, for the present good Posture of Affairs may
be only the Effect of the Wane of the Moon: but if the Kernel does not appear
again in the next growing Moon, you may reasonably suppose that your Remedy has
taken Effect; for since the Matter that nourishes the Kernel is voided by the
Nostrils, during the Wane, it is plain that the Swelling must be lessened at
that time, as, for the contrary Reason, it must recover its former Bigness
during the next Increase of the Moon. I have already showed that the Matter
which is discharged by the Nostrils proceeds not immediately from the Brain,
but from the Lungs, Liver, and Spleen, and ascends either by the Gullet or
Passages of Respiration, to a little Cavity between the Jaw-Bones, from whence
it breaks forth; and if its Quantity be so great that it cannot be wholly
voided by the Nose, forms Kernels, which are greater or smaller, according to
the Abundance of the Matter. It Is plain from this Account, that it is in vain to
cut out the Kernel, till you perceive that the Horse voids less Matter, and is
in a hopeful way of Cure by the Use of good Remedies. They who are acquainted
with the Anatomy of a Horse will be soon convinced of the Certainty of my
Hypothesis, That the Matter rises from below to the little Cavity between the
Jaw-Bones: And besides it is absurd to suppose that the Brain is able to furnish
so great a Quantity of Matter as that which continually flows from the
Nostrils; but we may easily conceive that it turns the Matter it receives by
the abovementioned Passages, to a sharp and thin Liquor, which falls upon the
Parts that are already vitiated by the preternatural Heat, and oftentimes by an
Ulcer: And therefore it is necessary in order to the Cure of those Parts, to
prevent their sending up to the Brain these malignant Vapors, which being
changed into Water, fall down again, and cause all the Disordrs that usually
accompany this Disease. This Discourse will perhaps seem tedious to those who
desire only to be informed of a sure Remedy to cure their Horses: I assure 'em
that I would very willingly satisfy 'em if I could; but I have never yet met
with any such Remedy. However they may try those which follow, and perhaps may
find 'em effectual; but I will not pretend to warrant their Success.

Another Remedy for the Glanders.
This Disease is not always cured by the cutting out of the Kernel; nor by the
Remedy I intend to prescribe for the Evacuation of the Matter, which only
expels that part of it which is already in Motion, and on the way, without
removing the Cause: and therefore I shall propose another that is more
effectual, and will perfect the Cure, if the Disease be capable of receiving
any; but I think fit to begin with the former, because it may sometimes be able
to conquer a less malignant sort of Glanders.

In the first place, you must take up the two Neck-Veins, two fingers breadth
beneath the usual Bleeding-Place, as I ordered before: then take an Ounce of
Brazal Tobacco, cut small, as it is commonly prepared for Smoking; infuse it
six hours in a Quart of good Aqua-Vitae, and gently strain it through a Clout,
throwing away the Tobacco. Let your Horse stand four hours bridled in the
Morning, then inject half a Glass of this Remedy into his Nostrils; as soon as
he has taken it, walk him him a Quarter of an hour in your hand, and afterward
let him stand two hours bridled.

If notwithstanding this Remedy, he continue to eat his Meat with the same
Appetite as before, repeat the same next Morning, and for some days after
augment the Dose by degrees, till you judge it strong enough to cause a
plentiful Evacuation. Continue to repeat the same every Morning, or only every
second, third or fourth Day, if he cast forth Abundance of Matter, or be
troubled with a violent Beating in his Flank, or lose his Appetite, till the
Cure be completed, which will happen in a Month or five Weeks. But in
prescribing this Method, I suppose that the Remedy does not make him forsake
his Meat; for if it has that Effect, you must not give it him next Morning, but
wait till he has recovered his Appetite, and then give him another Dose.

If this Remedy work too violently, and cause too great an Agitation in the
Horse's Body, infuse two Ounces of Tobacco in a Quart of Oil-Olive; let it
stand in hot Ashes all Night, and in the Morning strain out a Glass-full, which
you must give him lukewarm, one half at each Nostril. This is a gentler
Medicine, and besides that it will make him void some Matter, it allays the
sharpness of the Humors: but you must observe the same Directions as before,
concerning Beating in the Flank, and Loss of Appetite.

You must take care to augment or diminish the Dose, according to the good or
bad Condition of the Horse's Appetite, and the great or small Quantity of the
Matter which he voids.

Nature oftentimes heals those internal Ulcers, which are the Source of the
filthy Matter that runs out of the Nose, when by a great Evacuation she is
eased of the Burden of sharp and malignant Humors that foment the Distemper.
The Cure of an Ulcer consists wholly in cleansing it; for you may commit the
healing of it to Nature.

This Remedy will expel a prodigious Quantity of Matter: some Horses bear it
well without losing their Appetite, and even the Kernel disappears in the Wane
of the Moon; but if it grow again, you must repeat the Medicine.

If after a long Continuance in this Method, the Horse begins to void less
Matter, and according to all Probability, the Flux of Matter will quickly
cease, forbear the Use of the Remedy for some Days; and if the Evacuation be
wholly stopped, (as it sometimes happens) give him a Dose of the Cordial Powder
for three Days together, in a Quart of White or Red Wine; after which the
Kernel will (perhaps) return no more, and the Horse will perfectly recover.

I have given this Remedy to some Horses, who were not at all troubled with a
beating in the Flank after the taking of it, nor lost the least stroke of their
Teeth: they were cured for some time, but afterward some of 'em relapsed into
their former Disease.

When the the Lungs, which are the usual Seat of this Distemper, are much
wasted, the Disease is incurable, and the abovementioned Remedy hastens the
Horse's Death: but since it is impossible to save him, the best Way is to
dispatch him speedily.

When you undertake the Cure of this Distemper, whatever Remedy you design to
use, you ought always during the Increase of the Moon, to strengthen Nature,
and help her by gentle Methods, to cast forth the Matter that offends her; for
which Purpose repeated Doses of the Cordial Powder, Treacle, Electuary of
Kermes, and the Cordial Pills are very effectual: And during the Wane, you must
syringe the Nostrils, and give Remedies to promote the Evacuation of the
Matter. This Method seems to promise good Effects; but I will not positively
warrant the Success.

Perfumes are not very proper in this Case: it is true they expel a great deal
of Matter, and even without Violence; but they make the Horse too lean and dry,
and spoil his Appetite.

CHAP. XXI. A Perfume to draw forth the offending Humors.
TAke Betony, Vervain, Mugwort, Speedwell, Bawm, Wormwood, Scabious, Agrimony,
Mint, Hyssop, and Sage; burn 'em in a Chafing Dish, and putting a Bag with a
Hole in it about the Horse's Head, make him receive the Smoke into his Nostrils
for a quarter of an Hour, which will expel abundance of Matter.

The wild Vine that grows in the Hedges, called black Briony, sliced small
while it is green, and afterward beaten, casts forth a Smell that will make the
Horse void a great deal of Matter. Some say it hurts the Sight, but Experience
will convince you of the contrary: It has most Virtue when it bears its Flower.

To declare my Opinion ingenuously, I never observed any Horses to receive
great Benefit by Persumes; but I was willing to insert 'em here for the
Satisfaction of some Persons. The Syringe makes Persumes and even Feathers
useless, and spoils not the Horse's Appetite: but since Farriers are very fond
of these Medicines, and continually propose the Use of 'em; I thought fit to
describe the best that can be made, though even that is not very effectual, and I
dare not advise you to use it.

During the Use of these Remedies, keep the Horse to a moistening Diet, which
facilitates the Evacuations you are obliged to procure. Some dislike moistened
Bran, and recommend Oats: but I always found Bran to be the most proper Food,
for Oats give Nature too much trouble to digest 'em.

I have seen Horses void Matter at the Nose six Years together, and yet during
all that time perform their wonted Service; hunt, eat, and undergo Fatigues
like other Horses: The Use of Remedies was laid aside, they were not kept to
any Diet, and the the whole Business of the Cure was left to Nature; but at
last the Disease carried 'em off.

I have also seen others (though very few) who could not be cured by Medicines,
and yet, sometime after the Use of Remedies and Hope of Cure were both laid
aside, they recovered their perfect Health.

CHAP. XXII. Another Remedy for the Glanders.
TAke a Pot large enough to hold five Pints or three Quarts, fill it a third
part full with the second Bark of the Aller or Alder-Tree, which grows in
watery Places, and serves to make Stools, Ladders, and other Utensils of small
Value: scrape the Bark or cut it small, and, having added two Quarts of Water,
boil it to the Consumption of one half, stirring it from time to time; then add
another Quart of Water to that which remains, and boil away that also; after
which add another Quart, and consume that too: then press out the remaining
Quart, and dissolve in the strained Liquor half a Pound of Oil-Olive; pour out
half a Pint of the Liquor thus mixed, and give the rest to the Horse to drink
lukewarm; then inject the other half Pint into his Nostrils, and afterward
walk him abroad in his Clothes for half an hour. This Remedy will draw forth
Abundance of Matter; and though he only voided Matter at one Nostril before, it
will make him run at both: If the Horse be not cured eight Days after, repeat
the same Remedy, and perhaps he will recover. I have both cured some Horses
with this Medicine, and used it several times without any Success at all; but
it never produces any dangerous Effects. If this do not cure the Horse, take up
his two Neck-Veins, and afterward give him a Dose of the Cordial Pills four
Days together, which will either cure him, or you may conclude him to be past
Recovery.

Another Remedy for the same Distemper.
Take of Oriental Caster grossly beaten, an Ounce, Gentian beaten, and Savin
sliced small, of each an Ounce and a half: boil them in five Quarts of strong
Vinegar to three, and after the Liquor is cold, strain it through a Linen Cloth.

Give the Horse a Quart of this Liquor after he has stood bridled three Hours;
then cover him, and put him in the Stable: when the Remedy works he will be
very sick, his Flank will beat, and sometimes he will be seized with a
Trembling all over his Body: if he offer to lie down, do not hinder him, for he
will rise again in a little time. Two Hours after the taking of the Remedy walk
him half an Hour, and if you observe that he voids part of his Lungs at the
Mouth, as it sometimes happens with Coughing, you may conclude the Disease to
be incurable, and dispatch him speedily; but if he only run at the Nostrils,
provided he do not void Blood or green Matter, you have no reason to despair.
As Soon as he has recovered his Appetite, as you may expect he will after the
Space of one or two, and sometimes three Days, give him another Quart in the
Morning, observing the same Directions as before; and after he begins again to
feed heartily, give him the third Quart, ordering him as at the first. After
which lead him abroad every Morning for half an Hour; and if he be in a way of
Recovery, the Running at the Nose will diminish by degrees, and at last totally
cease. If after he has received one Dose, he cast forth greenish Matter, it is a
very dangerous Sign, and in all probability the Horse will never recover.

This Receipt has cured some Horses that were thought to have the Glanders;
many received no Benefit by it, and it has killed others whose Lungs were so
totally corrupted that they could not possibly have lived long, and therefore
their Masters were well rid of 'em.

There is a great affinity between the Glanders and Farcin; and the latter,
when it is past Remedy, degenerates into the former; which, in that case, is
absolutely incurable.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Emetic Wine.
THE Emetic Wine restores lost Appetite; the frequent use of it is very proper
for all sick Horses, and it is mixed with Purging Remedies with admirable
Success: For though it never purges when it is given by it self, it promotes the
Operation of Purgatives, by opening the Passages, and sometimes provokes Urine
very powerfully, when Nature stands in need of such Evacuations: And besides,
it is excellent for Clysters. Take five or six pieces of the finest Glass of
Antimony, beat 'em small, and infuse 'em all Night in a Quart, or five half
Pints of White Wind or Claret: Next Morning take out the Powder, which will
serve a whole Year without losing its Virtue.

You may also make Emetic Wine, by letting it stand four and twenty Hours in a
Cup of Regulus of Antimony, which will serve perpetually, if you take care
after every Inf^^on to scour the Cup-with Water, and to wash away the Dregs or
Sediment that sticks to it.

Or you may put two Ounces of Liver of Antimony in Powder, in a three Quart
Bottle full of White Wind or Claret; after four and twenty Hours you may take
out five half Pints, and fill up the Bottle with fresh Wine, and by taking out
and filling up the same quantity constantly, you may have fresh Emetic Wine
every day in the Year, without any other Charge than that of the Wine. Or you
may make very good Eme^^ Wine by infusing two Ounces of Algarot in a Bottle of
that Liquor.

The Angelical Powder will also produce the same effect, and a great deal
better than any other Preparation of Antimony; you must put an Ounce of it to
three Quarts of Wine. Thus you see Emetic Wine is not very chargeable; and I
can assure you it is extremely useful.

The continued use of this Wine purifies the Blood, resists Corruption,
preserves the Wind, by opening and clearing the Passages of the Lungs, keeps
the Horse in perfect Health, and prevents Sickness.

In those Countries where Wine is scarce and Beer common, you may use the
latter instead of the former, in all the Preparations of Antimony, which I
order to be made with Wine; for it will also grow Emetic, and produce very good
Effects; and there cannot be a better Liquor for Clysters than Emetic Beer, to
which you may add any other proper Ingredients, as you do to the usual
Decoctions.

I shall conclude this Discourse of the Glanders with a very useful Remark. You
must observe, during the Cure, whether your Horse thrives and grows fat, which
is a very good sign; for if the Lungs were wasted, he would certainly pine
away. And therefore when you observe this, you may entertain some hope of his
Recovery; but you must not be discouraged by the tediousness of the Cure, for
two or three Months are quickly past, and the Cure is seldom perfected so soon.

It may be very useful to give a Horse that has been long tormented with
Medicines, a Quart of Emetic Wine or Beer with a Horn, and to inject half a
Pint of the same Liquor into his Nostrils, continuing after the same manner
thirty days.

If during that time he void abundance of Matter at the Eyes, like to that
which he vents at his Nose, you may conclude the Disease to be incurable,
especially if he continue to run at the Eyes eight or ten days.

If while the Horse is under Cure, you observe any Knots of the Farcin to break
forth upon his Body, though they may be easily cured, and the Farcin be not
malignant, yet the Horse will never recover.

There is nothing wanting to complete this Account of the Glanders, but a sure
Remedy to cure it; which, I must confess, I could never find, neither do I
believe it can be found: But oftentimes a Horse is groundlesly suspected to
have the Glanders. When I say Glanders, I mean that which is incurable, which
cannot be distinguished from the less malignant Kinds, till you find it will
not yield to the best Remedies; in which case you may confidently pronounce it
to be incurable. And therefore you must always attempt the Cure, lest you be
afterward troubled to think that a Horse of value has perished by your
neglect, giving credit too easily to the Opinion of ignorant Pretenders.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Diseases of the Head, caused by Choleric Humors.
ALL Mortal Diseases, which Farriers do not understand, are, in France, called
Distempers of the Head, among which there are some that resemble the Jaundice
in Men, and are very fatal and pernicious. To give you a distinct Idea of 'em,
you must know that they proceed from an Inundation of Choler, which affects the
principal parts of the Body. That which floats in the Stomach destroys the
Appetite and spoils Digestion, that which is lodged in the Veins and Arteries
causes a Fever, which quickly proves Mortal; and that which is carried to the
Head disturbs all the Functions that are performed there, which makes the Horse
go heavily, and renders him dull, unactive, and benumbed.

If you let a Horse Blood while he is in this condition, as soon as it grows
Cold you will perceive it to be yellow on the surface, and the Water that swims
on the top will be red and yellowish, which is a certain sign of the redundancy
of Choler.

The inside of his Lips is yellow; and his Eyes are infected with the same
Color.

It Is called Gelbesucht, or the yellow Disease, by the Germans, who are better
acquainted with it than we, and have invented a Remedy for it, which a Farrier
of that Nation sold for a great Sum of Money to a Frenchman, who communicated
it to me, and I found it (by experience) to be very effectual; for when I tried
it, this was the only Disease of the Head that was known. But since that time
the Distemper has changed its Nature, and the alteration of the Cause obliged
us to search for new Remedies, though to little purpose. When a Horse is seized
with this Distemper he eats faintly, hangs his Head and Ears, his Eye is
languid, his Nostrils open, and he is apt to stumble. If these Signs do not
appear, the following Remedy will produce no effect; for all Diseases of the
Head proceed not from the same Cause, and you will never be able, by this
Method, to remove a Distemper that is not caused by the Overflowing of Choler.
The Diseases that were known by this Name in the Year; 166^. and 1661. and
those of 1669, 1670. and the succeeding Years, were not produced by the
abovementioned Cause, and therefore could not be cured by the German Remedy;
nor could we find any other successful Medicine, for more Horses died than were
cured, of those Diseases. Nevertheless I have lately administered a Remedy in
Thea with excellent Success, by the use of which several Horses have been cured
of those late contagious Distempers that were commonly called Diseases of the
Head. The Remedy for the overflowing of the Bile is as follows.

Take four Quarts of Spring or River Water, and make a Lie, with about half a
Bushel of Ashes of Vine-Twigs, by pouring the boiling Water four several times
upon the Ashes, then add a pound of good Oil Olive, and a quarter of a Pound of
Bayberries in Powder.

Let the Horse be kept all Night Bridled, in the Morning let him Blood
plentifully in the Flank, and two hours after give him two Glasses of the
Remedy at the Nostrils; let the Bridle remain on his Head two hours longer,
then unbridle him, and give him some White-Water to drink, and either moistened
Bran, Hay, or Bread to eat; after he has fed a quarter of an Hour Bridle him
again, and let him stand two hours, after which give him a Glass of the Remedy
at each Nostril; two hours after unbridle him, and suffer him to eat and drink
a quarter of an Hour, as before. Continue after the same manner to give him two
Glasses of the Medicine every four hours, unbridling him a quarter of an Hour,
between every two Doses, till you have used the whole Composition.

This Remedy makes the Horse cast forth Water and Snot at the Nose, but it only
appeases or quels the Distemper without removing the Cause: For the Fixed Salt
of the Ashes being communicated to the Lie destroys the Acid that occasioned
these Disorders, and produced the Heat with which this Disease is accompanied;
and besides the Oil contributes very much to qualify the Distemper, as you may
easily perceive in the making of Soap. Afterward leave the Horse in a dark
place, with good Litter, and free from the noise of Men or Horses, that he may
Sleep, for in this case Rest is the Sovereign Remedy.

As soon as you perceive that he has perfectly recovered his Appetite, walk him
gently in the cool of the day, about a quarter of an Hour, for seven or eight
days together; and then purge him with the Medicine described in the Twenty
Sixth Chapter.

CHAP. XXV. Another Remedy for Diseases in the Head.
THE Distempers that are at present known by that Name, are not caused by the
overflowing of Choler; but, though there is but little hope of Cure, we ought not
wholly to abandon the sick Horses: For it is some satisfaction to endeavor to
give 'em ease, though they are seldom fit for Service afterward. As soon as you
suspect the Horse to be seized with this Distemper give him a Dose of the
Lieutenant's-Powder, or of the Cerdial Pills, which have a virtue to resist the
Poison that Suffocates 'em, and not unfrequently Cures 'em perfectly in a
little time: And those who are cured by this Method are as fit for Service as
formerly. And even by way of prevention you ought to give the same Powder or
Balls to all your Horses, and repeat 'em after three days; for they who have
taken these Remedies will certainly escape falling into this Disease. Besides,
you must perfume the whole Stable, and change the Pails, Shovels, Forks,
Curry-Combs, and all the Furniture of the Stable. But if the Horse has been
sick for some time, it will be convenient to try other Remedies: for the Powder
is only proper in the beginning, and has no effect after the Disease has lasted
four and twenty Hours.

Take the bigness of the Tag of a Point of good black Hellebore, open the Skin
on the Horse's Breast, and put the piece of Hellebore between the Skin and the
Flesh, so that it may not fall out: It will make the part swell as big as your
Hat, and draw the Fluxion thither, by which means the Humor may be diverted,
which is carried from the Heart to the Brain.

A Remedy for the Disease of the Head, called, The Fiery-Evil.
As soon as your Horse begins to refuse his Oats, let him Blood in the
Temple-Veins, and afterward prepare the following Remedy. Take of the Herb
called Devil's-Bit, and Fumitory, of each one Handful, Cummin-seed one Ounce,
Assa-faetida half an Ounce, Strong Beer or White Wind a Quart, put 'em into a
Pot covered close with a Hog's-Bladder and Paper, and the Lid of the Pot over
all: Fit the Pot to the Balneum Mariae, that is, place it in a Kettle with a
Straw-Rope between the bottom of the Pot and the Kettle; then pour Water into
the Kettle, till it rise within an Inch of the top of the Pot, and make the
Water boil an hour over a strong Fire; after which take out the Pot, and when
it is somewhat cold uncover it, strain out the Liquor, and make the Horse drink
it Blood-warm two or three hours after his Bleeding; then let him stand four
hours Bridled, and at Night give him a Clyster with Sal Polycrest.

Next Morning Bridle your Horse, and pour a Quart of strong Beer or White Wind
upon the gross substance that remained in the the Pot; cover it as before, and
set it over a gentle Fire, augmenting the Fire by degrees till it begin to
boil: Keep it boiling an hour over a naked Fire, and not in a Kettle as before.
After it is half cold, press out the Liquor as hard as you can, and throwing
away the thick substance, give the Liquor to the Horse to drink, keeping him
Bridled four hours after: Then give him moistened Bran, and lukewarm Water to
drink, and in the Evening, the following Clyster.

A Clyster for Diseases of the Head, or the Fiery-Evil.
Make a good Decoction according to the usual manner with Polycrest, or mix an
Ounce of Polycrest in Powder, with five Pints of Beer, put 'em into a brazen
Pot with a cover, and boil 'em half a quarter of an Hour with an Ounce of
Coloquintida sliced small: Add to the strained Liquor half a Pound of Honey of
Violets, and give the whole Blood-warm, by way of Clyster, to the Horse in the
Evening, for two days together.

A Bag to give the Horse an Appetite.
If your Horse refuse to eat, take Angelica and Assa-foetida, both in Powder,
of each half an Ounce, tie 'em to the Bit in a Linnen-Bag, and let the Horse
champ on it two hours, after which let him Eat two Hours; then put in the Bit
again, and continue after the same manner. This will purge the Horse's Head,
and make him cast forth a great deal of slimy Matter, after which he will feed
more heartily.

The same Bag is very useful for all sick Horses, or such as have lost their
Appetite.

A Remedy to prevent Diseases of the Head.
I propose this Remedy for those Diseases of the Head, which continued to
infest some Horses in the Year 1672. and it will certainly succeed if you
resist the Disease in the beginning; but if the Distemper has made any
progress, it will not yield to this Remedy: And therefore you must prepare the
Medicine as soon as you have the least suspicion that your Horse is seized with
this Distemper; for it is better to make it in vain four times, than once to
neglect the opportunity of making it, since it always produces some good
effects.

As soon then as you perceive the least sign of this Disease: For example, if
the Horse be dull, heavy, and refuse his Oats, give him an Ounce of burnt
Allom, in Powder, with an Ounce of Salt of Glass, or Axungia vitri, and two
Ounces of Sugar Candy in a Quart of White, or (which is better) Spanish-Wine:
Then keep him Bridled two Hours, after which unbridle him; and you will
certainly find him free of the Distemper.

And even though he be not troubled with that Disease, this Remedy will do him
good by consuming the Phlegm in his Stomach, and giving him a good Appetite.

A Charge for Diseases of the Head.
Take about two Pounds of Blood out of the sick Horse's Neck-Vein; receive the
Blood into a convenient Vessel, stirring it with your hand to hinder it from
coagulating; then set it on the Fire, stirring it continually with a Wooden
Slice, and add to it three quarters of a Pound of Oil-Olive, and two Glasses of
Vinegar: Boil 'em to the consistence of an Ointment, with which lukewarm
Charge his whole Head, leaving only his Eyes open: This Charge will dissolve
the Matter that is gathered in the Passages and make it run; besides, it will
strengthen and bind the Parts, and hinder the Defluxion from falling upon 'em.

The frequent use of Clysters will also divert the Humors, and make a
Revulsion; and you must give one at least every day. Besides, you must apply
black Hellebore, as you were taught before, and make a second application two
days after, if the first do not cause a swelling.

CHAP. XXVI. An excellent Remedy for the Disease in the Head, called, The
Spanish-Evil
HItherto there have been but few good Remedies prescribed for the Disease of
the Head, called, (I know not why) the Spanish-Evil. You may know it by the
Horse's staggering or reeling as he goes, which is caused by the motion of the
Vapors in their ascent to the Brain, which make him so giddy that he cannot
walk straight forward: Besides, he has a strong aversion to his Meat, his Mouth
burns, his Heart and Flanks beat violently; and by viewing him attentively you
may easily perceive, that he suffers extremely, and can hardly escape without
timely assistance.

Take one of those Beer-Glasses, which are very large and yellow, reduce it to
Powder, and strain it through a fine searce: Or rather (which is far more
effectual) take four Ounces of Salt of Glass, which is white, and may be found
in Druggists-Shops, beat it very small, and afterward beat a handful of Salt;
mix 'em with three Pints of Cordial-Water in a Pot, and heat 'em till the Salt
be dissolved, that is, as much of it as can be dissolved: The common Salt will
open the Body of the Salt of Glass, and make the Cordial-Water penetrate it,
for Salts do not act unless they be dissolved. Then strain out the Liquor, and
while it boils infuse in it two Ounces of good and fresh Thea, for six or eight
Hours, during which time you must keep the Water lukewarm: Strain again, and
throwing away the Thea as useless, keep the Water that is impregnated with the
Salt, and with the Tincture of the Thea. Afterward give the whole quantity of
the Liquor to the Horse, pouring it into his Throat with a Horn, then cover
him, and keep him three Hours Bridled in the Stable.

If the first Dose do not cure him, give him another four and twenty Hours
after, and every day inject a Clyster of two Quarts of Emetic Beer, or instead
of that, take an Ounce of Sal Polycrest, as much Coloquintida sliced small, two
Drams of Anni-seeds beaten, and two Quarts of Beer; mix 'em, and let 'em stand
in Infusion six hours on hot Ashes, then boil 'em a little, strain, and adding
a quarter of a Pound of fresh Butter, inject it lukewarm.

There is a great deal of Malignity in this Distemper, for it is accompanied
with a preternatural Heat, which destroys that which is natural; and oftentimes
before a Man thinks of giving this Remedy, some noble Part is seized with so
violent an Inflammation, that the Fire cannot afterward be extinguished till
the whole part is consumed, which fatal event may be occasioned by the neglect
of one day. Thus the Horse's Death must not be imputed to the insufficiency of
the Remedy, which is certainly very effectual, but to the untimely application
of it. By virtue of the Fixed Salts, of which it is composed, it puts a stop to
the subtilty, or (if I may use that expression) the great Volatility of the
sharp and subtle Spirits, which, by reason of their lightness, are carried to
the Brain, and by their malignant and poisonous sharpness, change and vitiate
its Substance. And since a Fixed Salt, when it is stronger and in greater
quantity is able to fix a volatile Salt, and unite the same to its own
Substance: the two Salts that compose this Remedy will fix those Saline Spirits
that rise with the Vapors, and occasion all the Disorders that are observed in
Horses when they are seized with this Distemper. This is a very probable
Hypothesis, and I would insist longer upon it, if it could be understood
without some Knowledge in Chemistry. Besides what I have said concerning the
Effect of those Salts, they open the Body of the Thea; and the Water, by their
Assistance, is impregnated with the Essential Salt of that Plant, and extracts
all its Virtue. It Is generally acknowledged that Thea is of exellent Use to
strengthen the Brain, when it is weakened by those volatile, sharp, and malignant
Salts I mentioned before: from whence it is plain, that this Remedy must
infallibly cure the Horse, if the Disease be not inveterate. Afterward you
must administer good Clysters, give him boiled Water for his ordinary Drink,
and keep him to a spare Diet; but if he abstain wholly from eating, you must
give him the Remedies described in the VIth. Chapter. Thus I have freely
communicated this Secret to the Public, which I Am persuaded is the only Remedy
for those Diseases; for Experience has convinced me of its admirable Efficacy
to quench that unnatural and violent Heat which consumes the sick Horse.

The Cause why those Horses that are cured of the Diseases of the Head are
never afterward fit for Service, is the Neglect of Farriers, who take no Care
to purge away the offending Matter. For though the Disorders that accompanied the
Disease are quieted, there remains a Ferment, which may produce very bad
Consequences, if it be not expelled by good Purging Medicines, such as that
which follows.

A Purging Medicine to be given to Horses after they are cured of Diseases of
the Head.
Take extracted Cassia, four Ounces, Agaric two Ounces, fine clear Scammony
three Drams, Powder of Rhubarb sprinkled two or three times with a little Aqua
Vitae, two Drams, Coriander-Seed, and Flowers of Roman Cammomil in Powder, of
each one Dram, Mastich one Scruple: Reduce the dry Ingredients to Powder, mix
'em with two Pounds of fresh Butter, and make 'em up into Pills of the Bigness
of Tennis-Balls, which you must make the Horse swallow, keeping him bridled
eight Hours before and six after: wash his Mouth after 'em with a Quart of
Emetic Wine, or for want of that, of ordinary Wine; and walk him half an Hour.
About four and twenty Hours after, when he begins to purge, walk him abroad
once every two Hours, about a quarter of an Hour, or half an Hour each time, to
promote the Purgation.

Or you may purge him with the Pills called Galen's Smaller Head-Pills: The
Dose is about two Ounces, in a Pound of fresh Butter.

If he be not sufficiently purged, as soon as the Physic leaves working, give
him a Clyster, made as before with Sal Polychrest, etc.

After you have purged him twice, it is to be hoped that he will quickly grow
fit for Service; but you must bring him to work again by degrees, and give
Nature time to recover her strength perfectly, after so great a Disturbance.
And in the mean time you may give him an Ounce of Liver of Antimony in his
Bran, every Day for a whole Month; which will purify the Blood, and complete
the Cure, by consuming the Remainders of the offending Humors, and cooling the
Parts that may be still a little disordered with the preternatural Heat.

Since this Disease usually attacks all the Horses that lodge under one Roof
with those whom it first seized; as soon as you see any one of the rest begin to
refuse his Meat, you ought (by way of Prevention) to give him the Medicines
prepared with burnt Allom in Powder, Salt of Glass, etc. described in the
beginning of this Chapter; or you may make him fast six Hours, and afterward
give him a Dose of the Lieutenant's Powder, or two of the Treacle Balls in
Powder; for one Dose will certainly prevent the coming of the Disease, if it be
given as soon as he begins to forsake his Meat. You may find, in the VIth.
Chapter, proper Medicines to restore his Appetite.

For a Confirmation of the Usefulness of this Method, I might appeal to several
Persons of Quality at Paris and in other Places, who have seen their Horses
preserved by it, and can testify that after the Use of the Powder or Balls,
and the perfuming of their Stables, these Diseases of the Head never entered
more among their Horses, though formerly they lost almost all they kept, by those
dangerous Distempers. The whole Method consists in giving a Dose of the
Lieutenant's Powder, or two Treacle-Balls in Powder, and repeating the Dose
three days after: and since we have so few certain Remedies for the Cure of
this Distemper, we ought by no Means to neglect so fine a Preservative.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the true Preparation of Scammony.
SInce prepared Scammony is a common Ingredient in purging Medicines, I thought
fit to insert a Preparation of it, which is better than Diagridium, and
therefore may be safely given to Herses, since that is familiarly used by Men.

Beat the Scammony to fine Powder, and spread it on brown Paper; then kindle
some Brimstone in a Chafing Dish, and hold the Paper with the Scammony over it,
that it may receive the Fumes of the Brimstone; cast new Pieces of Brimstone
into the Chasing-Dish, one after another for a quarter of an Hour, stirring the
Scammony continually, that it may not stick to the Paper, as it will do if you
put too much Fire into the Chafing Dish. As Soon as the Scammony begins to
change its Color, you may conclude that it is duly prepared; and this
Preparation is the only purging Ingredient that enters into the Composition of
the Powder called Cornachini.

But since the best Scammony may be easily procured at present, I do not think
it worth the while to give my self the trouble of preparing it; for I find that
it may be given in Substance very safely, in a fat and unctuous Vehicle, such
as Fat or Butter, which hinder it from sticking to the Parts through which it
passes, and from spoiling the Appetite of Horses: though it must be acknowledged
the Preparation does certainly improve it.

If you perceive that the purging Medicine you administered to your Horse, has
not so much as loosened his Body, or made the Excrements soft, you may safely
augment the Dose of the Ingredients that were prescribed in the least Quantity,
as being most violent, and serving to quicken and expel the rest. They who
purge Horses know not how much they venture; for as Bleeding is esteemed the
boldest Operation that can be made on a Humane Body, I Am persuaded that Purging
is the most difficult and hazardous Operation that can be performed on the Body
of a Horse, and never to be administered without unavoidable Necessity, since
it is certain that the Motion or Action of a Purgative is contrary to Nature,
for it is essentially destructive, and useful only by Accident. And besides the
Evacuation even of corrupt Humors, is always attended with a great Expense of
Spirits, which weakens the Horse extremely; and therefore if Purgation be not
absolutely necessary, the best way is to content our selves with administering
Cordial Medicines, which strengthen Nature, and help her to expel that which
offends her, by the usual Passages. It Is true, this Method is not agreeable to
Humane Bodies; for if a Cordial Medicine be given to a Man, while his Bowels
are full of Impurities, it will immediately put the Humors into a
Fermentation, which may occasion very dangerous Tumults and Commotions, and not
unfrequently produce a Fever: But the Constitution of Horses is very different
from that of Men; for a Cordial Remedy is not only more agreeable to 'em than a
Purgative, but produces the same Effects with less Danger; for it strengthens
Nature, whereas Purging destroys it.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Diseases of the Eyes.
THE Diseases of the Eyes proceed either from a Rheum, or from some Accident,
that is, from Internal or External Causes.

A Rheum or Defluxion, is an Inflammation of the Eye, occasioned by sharp and
biting Humors, which flow thither and cause Heat and Pain. The Eyes appear
watery, hot, red, and swollen: and since the Defluxion does not usually come in
an Instant, you may easily observe its daily Progress.

When the Disease is caused by a Blow, Hurt, or Stripe, it comes quickly to a
Height, and you may perceive on the Outside of the Eye that the Skin is peeled
off. The other Signs are the same as in the former Case, but this is less
dangerous, because it is not necessarily attended with an ill Disposition of the
Body.

When you are satisfied that the Disease is caused by a Defluxion, you must in
the next place examine whether it be proper to the Eye it self, or be
occasioned by its Sympathy with some other Part which also is affected; and,
when that is cured, the Distemper of the Eye will vanish. For Example, if the
Liver be too hot, and produce thin and boiling Blood, this may cause a
Defluxion and Heat in the Eye, though it be otherwise sound; in which Case the
Distemper of the Eye is wholly owing to the Blood, which is too hot and thin to
afford it suitable Nourishment, and the same may be said of the other Parts.
But when the Disease is proper to the Eye, the Substance of that Part is
immediately affected, either by a Defect in its Formation, or for want of
Spirits to animate it, or by reason of the loss of part of its Substance, which
are the most dangerous Cases, and almost incurable: for Rheums that proceed
from Sympathy yield to good Medicines; but there are few Remedies to cure a
Disease that is seated in the Substance of the Eye; for which Reason those
Distempers that increase and abate according to the Course of the Moon, are
almost always incurable, since they are both Sympathetical and Proper;
Sympathetical, because they follow the Course of the Moon, and Proper, because
the Principle of that Sympathy is in the Eye it self.

But since most Persons are not so fond of Reasoning as of a speedy Cure, you
may pass by these Distinctions if they seem too hard to be understood; for the
ill Success even of those Remedies that are duly applied, will discover but too
plainly the Nature of the Distemper.

As Soon as you undertake the Cure of any Disease in the Eye, you must
absolutely forbid any Oats to be given to the Horse, and only feed him with
moistened Bran; you must also take care that he be not wrought hard, nor kept
in too hot a Stable; for the great Heat of the Stable augments the Distemper,
as well as extreme Cold. If it be a Rheum, the Horse must not be let Blood, for
Bleeding would make him lose his Eyes; in which respect the Method of Cure
differs much from that which is convenient for Men: for Rheums in the Eyes of
Men are cured by Bleeding in the Beginning of the Disease, whereas the same
Remedy would make a Horse blind. Afterward you must take up the Eye-Veins,
thus; Open the Skin over the Vein, separate the Vessel with a proper
Instrument, and without taking any Blood out of it, or cutting it, tie a Thread
about it, which will sufficiently divert the too abundant flowing of the Blood
that way, which heats the Eye by too much Nourishment, and frequently causes
those Accidents which are observed in that Part.

I have found out an excellent Method to take up these Veins without Incision:
for having tied a Cord or String (such as is used for the same purpose in
Bleeding) about the Horse's Neck to make the Veins swell, I pierce the Skin
above the Vein with a crooked Needle made like a Semicircle, with a strong
Thread fastened to it, and running it under the Vein, make it come forth on the
other Side; then I tie the Thread about the Vein with a double Knot, and make
another Knot on the same Vein, a large Finger's breadth from the former; after
which I take up the Vein on the other Side after the same manner. This causes a
little Swelling in the Temple, which may be easily removed by chafing it every
day with Aqua-Vitae; and after the Scab, or rather the Thread that tied the
Vein is fallen off, the Wound will be quickly closed up without further
Trouble. Thus the Vein is stopped without any outward Scar, and you may take up
more Veins in two Hours by this Method, than in a whole Day by Incision; and
besides the Course of the Blood is as effectually stopped as by the other Way:
for I have performed this Operation many hundred times, and always with
Success. If you design to cut the Sinew under the Vein; since you cannot make
use of the crooked Needle, you must necessarily have recourse to Incision: but
if you are afraid to cut the Sinew, as believing it to be too hazardous an
Operation, you must take up the Vein with the Needle. To conclude; You must not
be surpised though the Holes that are made by the Needle should bleed a little;
for as soon as you take the Cord from the Horse's Neck, the Blood will be
immediately stopped.

Under the Eye-Vein there is a Sinew, which is as big as the Vein; after you
have found it out, you may separate and cut it; because its Communication with
the Optic Nerve that furnishes the Visual Spirits which constitute the Faculty
of Seeing, is partly the Cause of Rheums and even of the Disease called the
Moon-Eye. For when the Opti^ Nerve grows loose, soft, and flaccid, the Spirits
that ought to have been carried to the Eye, not being able to find a Passage
that way, are stopped and dissipated; so that the Eye being deprived of its
usual Supplies, grows hot, and if at the same time there happen to be the least
Conjunction of any other Cause, as the Disorder, Heat, or Gorruption of the
Blood, immediately a Rheum is formed, which increases or abates according to
the Causes that foment it. But as soon as you cut this other Eye-Nerve, the
Optic-Nerve with which it communicates, grows immediately stiff, the Spirits
resume their wonted Course, the Disease is easily cured by the Application of
proper Remedies, and the Eye returns vigorously to its former Task:
nevertheless few Farriers have Courage enough to venture on this Operation,
which without any Reason they imagine to be very dangerous.

If you desire a further Confirmation of the Truth of what I have said, you may
easily satisfy your Curiosity, by making the following Experiment on a living
Colt of small Value. Separate the Skin from his Head, and you will not only
perceive the Communication of the two Nerves or Sinews, but that the
Optic-Nerve will appear stiffer and more stretched, as soon as you cut the
other, which you may find without much difficulty, though it lies deep and near
the Bone. But they who dare not venture on this Operation, may content
themselves with taking up the Eye-Vein.

I Am confident you will not find this Remark in any other Author, and I Am fully
satisfied of its Justness and Solidity; since it is not only agreeable to
Reason, but confirmed by many and succesful Trials, both in the Case of Rheums
and Moon-Eyes. If both the Eyes be affected, you must perform the Operation on
each Side.

The most frequent Causes of the Loss of a Horse's Eye are, in my Opinion, the
too great Abundance of Nourishment, and the Defect of Visual Spirits, both
which are removed by the two abovementioned Operations. For the cutting of the
Nerve promotes the Course of the Spirits, and the taking up the Vein keeps back
the superfluous Nourishment, which will be yet more effectually performed, and
the Cure hastened by taking up the two Jugulars, commonly called the Neck-Veins.

When a Horse is troubled with Rheums, you must give him something to cool his
Blood. Thus an Ounce of Sal Prunellae in Powder, mixed every day with his Bran,
will allay the Heat, and lessen the Defluxion: but if you perceive that this
weakens his Stomach too much, and makes him forsake his Meat, you may
substitute Liver of Antimony instead of it, till he recover his Appetite, and
then give him Sal Prunellae again till the Cure be completed.

To what has been said I shall add a very rare but true Observation. I saw a
Horse who had so good Eyes, that 'twas impossible to find any Defect in 'em;
being one Day under his Master in the Field, a great Thunderclap deprived him
of both his Eyes in an instant, and he remained blind ever after.

A Remedy for Rheums in the Eyes.
If the Eye be swollen, hot, closed up, and red or blood-shotten, you must
immediately prepare a restringent Charge to stop the flowing of the Humors.
Take common Bole-Armenic in Powder, mix it with Vinegar and the Whites of two
Eggs, till it be reduced to a kind of Paste, which you must apply Morning and
Evening about the Eye for half a foot round, and bathe the Eye with Aqua-Vitae,
or use that which follows. Take a new-laid Egg boiled hard, and having taken
off the Shell, cut it through the middle, and take out the Yolk, in the place of
which put a piece of white Vitriol about the bigness of a Nut, then join the
two halves of the Egg, and wrapping it in a piece of clean and fine Linen,
infuse it in half a Glass of Rose Water for the space of six hours, after which
throw away the soaked Egg as useless, and reserving the Water, pour eight or
ten Drops of it into the Horse's Eye with a Feather, Morning and Evening, which
will quickly perfect the Cure. If you make use of Aqua-Vitae, you must bathe
the Eye with a little fine Sponge soaked in it, five or six times a day; and
Experience will convince you that you cannot choose a better Remedy either for
Rheums or Blows.

If the Distemper require a present Remedy, you may instantly prepare that
which follows.

Take the White of a new-laid Egg, an equal Quantity of Rose Water, white
Vitriol in fine Powder the bigness of a small Nut; beat 'em well with a stick:
Some of this being put into the Eye will divert the Rheum, and take away the
Heat.

These Waters will not keep good above seven or eight days at most, after which
they turn sharp. Their Virtue is to allay the Heat, and stop the Humor that
flows into the Eyes; and the Smarting which they cause is inconsiderable, and
lasts but a Moment. They are also very useful for Men.

If the Distemper will not yield to this Remedy, make use of the following
Water.

You ought to make choice of a good Medicine at first, and not change it
lightly afterward; for nothing retards the Cure more than the Change of
Remedies: Every one thinks his own best; but when you have begun with one, and
find Benefit by it, you ought to stick to it afterward.

An Eye-Water for Horses.
Take the Herb Ale-hoof or Ground Ivy, which grows in shady Places, and is
altogether different from common Ivy; for its Leaf is smaller, thinner, and
less shining, but of a stronger smell, besides it dies in the Winter, whereas
the creeping Ivy resists the cold Weather, and therefore they are guilty of a
very great Error, who instead of this, make use of Ivy that creeps on the
Ground. Take I say, four Handfuls of true Ground Ivy, beat it in a Marble
Mortar with the Whites of six hard Eggs; then add half a Pint of very clear
White Wind, Rose Water a quarter of a Pint, Sugar Candy, and white Vitriol, of
each an Ounce and a half: Beat 'em all together, and incorporate 'em very well
with the Pestle, strewing upon 'em an Ounce of white Salt: then cover the
Mortar, and place it in a Cellar; after it has stood there five or six Hours,
pour the whole Composition into a Hypocras-Bag of clean white S^rge, and set a
Vessel under it, to receive the Water that drops through, which must be preserved
in a Glass-Bottle; and every Morning and Evening pour some of it into the
Horses Eye.

There are few Rheums which this Water will not cure; but if there remain a
white Film or Skin upon the Eye, you must consume it with the Powders that
shall be afterward described.

Another Eye-Water.
Infuse a Piece of blue or Cyprus-Copperas in any one of the following Waters,
which are all endu'd with a sigular Virtue to cure Rheums in the Eye; viz. the
Waters of Plantane, Fonnel, Eyebright, Rue, Celandine, Roses, Chervil; or for
want of these you may use common Water. The Infusion will be of a bluish Color
drawing toward green, and impregnated with the volatile Salt of Vitriol, which
is quieting, sweet, balsamic, and astringent, and consequently excellent for
Redness and Inflammations of the Eyes; nor can it offend that tender Part by
reason of its Substance which partakes of Copper; for it is of too close a
Contexture to be penetrated by a simple Water, which is not a true Menstruum or
Dissolvent.

The Poor may safely use this Remedy for Diseases in the Eyes, for it is both
cheap and good. And at the same time you must apply the following Ointment.

An Ointment to divert the Rheum from the Eyes.
Take of the Oinment called Album Rhasis, one Pound, Salt of Lead, extracted in
preparing the Oil according to the Method prescribed in the 33th. Chap. half a
Pound, reduced to fine Powder, or if that cannot be had, the Salt commonly used
by Chemists; incorporate 'em very well together; and anoint the Parts about the
Eyes half a Foot round, Morning and Evening for a considerable time, with this
Composition, which will divert the Rheum, and take away the Heat more
effectually than other Astringents, and must be used as long as these Causes
continue; but you must not anoint the Eyes with it, to which other proper
Remedies must be applied.

Plantane and Celandine beaten, and applied to the Eye, take away the Heat, and
dry up the Rheum.

To make the Remedy stick, you must wrap it about the Horse's Poll, leaving
Holes in the Clout for the two Ears, and another for the sound Eye; for this is
the only proper Bandage for those Parts.

A Charge to divert the Defluxion from the Eyes.
Bake three or four Pippins under the Ashes, take out the Seeds, and beat the
Apples in a Marble Mortar, sprinkling 'em with Rose Water, or the distilled
Water of Lettuce or Succory; then apply 'em to the Eye with soft Flax, renewing
the Charge frequently: you may use rotten Apples instead of sound ones, and
spare the trouble of roasting and beating 'em. This is an excellent Remedy, for
it takes away the Pain and Inflammation, and gives ease for some time; during
which you may attack the Cause of the Distemper, and endeavor to remove it, by
taking up the Eye-Vein and cutting the Sinew, according to the Method already
prescribed.

The Crust of a white Loaf hot from the Oven soaked in Cow's Milk, and applied
warm to the Eye by way of Pultice, takes away the Heat and Pain.

A Crust of a Loaf broiled and soaked in strong Aqua-Vitae, if it be applied to
the Eye, and renewed every twelve Hours, is an excellent Remedy to heal a sore
Eye, by removing the Heat that draws down the Rheum upon the Part.

It Is said, that a great Toad dried and applied to the Eye, stops the Rheum,
and takes away the Heat; but I never experienced the Virtue of this Remedy.

You must never mix any fat or oily Ingredients with the Remedies you prepare
for the Eyes, whether the Distemper proceed from a Rheum or Blow; for they
stick to the Part, and cause a continual Motion of the Eyelids, which
increases the Heat.

Some Rheums are so easily removed, that they may be cured with bathing of the
Eye five or six times a day with cold Water.

Some Horses have naturally tender or weeping Eyes, without either Rheum or
Blow; and even not unfrequently the Water that comes out of 'em is so sharp,
that it corrodes the Surface of the Skin which it touches. This Infirmity may
be easily cured, by bathing the Eyes, Morning and Evening with Spirit of Wine,
or Aqua-Vitae, and moistening the Parts above and below the Eye with the same
Liquor.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Blows on the Eyes.
IF the Soreness of the Eye be occasioned by a Blow, Bruise, or Biting, you
must view the Part carefully, not only before you apply any Remedies, but
during the whole Progress of the Distemper, that you be able to judge of the
Greatness of the Hurt, and of the Probability of the Cure; and upon occasion
change your Remedies, applying either strong or weak Medicines, according to
the Urgency of the Symptoms. If the Eye be very big and swollen, and send forth
Matter, you may conclude that the Cure will be long, because the Stroke or
Biting has certainly spoiled and corrupted some Part within the Eye, which is
turned to Matter; and if that continue to run too long, as for Example, twelve
or fifteen Days, the Horse is in great danger of losing his Eye; unless when he
voids the Strangles by his Eyes, which may be done without the least Prejudice
to those Parts.

If when the Horse begins to open his Eye, you perceive the Chrystallin Humor
which was darkened by the Blow, to be covered with a sort of greenish Cloud,
it is a dangerous Sign. If red Spots like Clots of Blood, appear and remain on
the same Part, it is properly an ill Sign, denoting the Violence of the Blow, and
the Greatness of the Contusion, and presaging the long Continuance of the
Disease, but it shows also the Strength of Nature, in expelling that which
offends the Eye.

If the same Part be hurt, as it is almost always by a violent Blow, the Horse
will be in great danger of having his Eye marked with a white Spot or Pearl,
which sometimes is of the Bigness of a Lentil, and sometimes equals a Pea,
being a sort of Callus produced by Nature to fill up the Hole made by the
Stroke.

If during the Progress of a long and tedious Disease, the Substance or Ball of
the Eye grow less, that part is irrecoverably lost: but you must beware of
Mistakes, for you may fancy the Eye to be less than it was, when in the
Declination of the Disease the Swelling disappears, and the same Part which you
were accustomed to see very big and swollen, seems then to be diminished; and
oftentimes the Eyelids are drawn together by the constant use of astringent
Remedies, and make the Eyes seem smaller, though they be not really diminished.

When the Swelling disappears in the upper part of the Eye, though the Parts
below the Eye remain still swollen, it is a sign that the Disease abates, and that
the Swelling under the Eye will not continue long.

If the Blow be small you must immediately cut the tip of the Ear on the same
side, making a Wound equal to the thickness of a Half-Crown Piece, and squeeze
as much Blood out of it as you can. This is an easy and present Remedy, for
the Horse will instantly open his Eye.

If you desire to see the Inside of the Eye, whether the Soreness be occasioned
by a Blow or Rheum, though it be shut; cover the other Eye with your Hand, and
make the Horse walk, for he will certainly open the sore Eye as wide as he can,
by which means you may, in some measure, discover the nature of the Distemper.

If the Blow be great, you must immediately open the Vein of the Eye or Neck,
and take out a large quantity of Blood (whereas you must never let a Horse
Blood that is troubled only with Rheum) for the Bleeding will prevent all
Accidents. Besides, you must take care that he be fed with moistened Bran, and
a little Hay, without any Oats, that he be not Wrought, nor exposed to the
Cold, and that the Stable be not too warm. The Summer-Dew and Night-Air are
good for Diseases of the Eyes, by allaying the Heat. Afterward apply a
Restringent Medicine about his Eye, or the Ointment described in the preceding
Chapter, with Album Rhasis, Salt of Lead, etc. or put into his Eye the Solution
of Lapis Mirabilis in Water, which is the only Sovereign Remedy, and may serve
instead of all others. Note, That you must not be wearied by the long
continuance of those Diseases; for though the Cure is oftentimes very tedious, it
will be perfected at last, if you persevere in the application of convenient
Remedies.

If you cannot procure Lapis Mirabilis, take half a Pint of Plantane, Fennel,
or Rose Water, or a third part of each; or if none of these can be had, the
same quantity of Common Water, White Copperas an Ounce and a half, Powder of
the Roots of Flower-de-Luce of Florence two Drams, suffer 'em to stand about an
hour in a Glass Bottle, in a cold Infusion, then wash your Horse's Eye with it
two or three times a day. This is a very good Remedy.

If after one or two Applications, you perceive that it makes the Eye smart too
much, it is a sign that the Infusion is too strong, and therefore you may temper
it with half a Glass of Water. This is a very excellent and cheap Remedy, and
good both for Rheums and Blows: I have often used it with Success, when Lapis
Mirabilis could not be had.

All the Remedies prescribed for Rheums, are also good for Blows; the only
difference is in Bleeding, which is proper in the latter, but hurtful in the
former Cases.

After you have used Restringent Applications or Charges for some days, the
Disease being now at its greatest height, take Ground Ivy, and Leaves of
Celandine, beat 'em, and press out the Juice, which being settled and strained
through brown Paper, you may put into the Horse's Eye, Morning and Evening. This
Remedy cleanses, drys, and clears the Eye, which otherwise might remain charged
with a Webb or Film.

CHAP. XXX. Of Lapis Mirabilis, or the Wonderful Stone.
THE Effects of this Stone are exactly suitable to its Name; it is composed
thus, Take White Vitriol two Pounds, Roch Alum three Pounds, fine Bole-Armenic
half a Pound, Litharge of Gold or Silver two Ounces. Reduce all the Ingredients
to Powder, and put 'em into a new glazed Earthen Pot, with three Quarts of
Water. Boil 'em very gently over a small Fire, without Smoke, set equally round
the Pot, till the Water be wholly evaporated, and the Matter at the bottom
perfectly dry; then remove the Pot from the Fire, and suffer the Matter to
cool, which ought to be hard, and will still grow harder, the longer it is kept.

Put half an Ounce of this Stone in a Glass-Bottle, with four Ounces of Water;
it will be dissolved in a quarter of an hour, and make the Water white as Milk
when you shake the Bottle: You must wash the sore Eye Morning and Evening, with
the Water, or Solution.

This Liquor, thus prepared, may be kept twenty days.

Some Apothecaries keep this Stone in their Shops, and make use of it for Men:
And as for me, I use it for Horses, nor ever seek any other Remedy for Rheums,
Blows, or Moon-Eyes. Every Man that is Master of a Horse ought to keep some of
it by him; for it will keep good very long, and there are few Remedies for the
Eyes that are not inferior to it.

When this Stone is reduced to Powder, and blown into the Eye, it causes too
much Pain, though afterward it produces good Effects; and therefore I dare not
advise you to make use of it till it be dissolved in Water, lest otherwise it
should occasion some considerable Disorder.

If you dissolve two Drams of it in three Ounces of Water, it will dry a Wound
or Sore, and allay the Heat, if you wash 'em twice a day with the Solution, and
apply a Linen Clout dipped in the same to the grieved part.

Take the quantity of a Walnut of this Stone, and infuse it in a Bottle capable
of containing an ordinary Glass, or half a Pint of Water: This Solution,
applied as before, is excellent for Rheums and Moon-Eyes; and you may fill up
the Bottle with fresh Water, according as you have occasion to empty it, that
it may be still kept full till the end of the Cure, for it is not necessary that
it should be so strong at last as it was at first. You must always remember to
shake the Bottle before you pour any Water into the Eye.

If by reason of the violence of the Blow, the Eye remain covered with a white
Film, after you have taken away the Heat, and stopped the flowing of the Humor
with proper Remedies; you must in the next place endeavor to remove the white
Film, by the following Method. After you have washed the Eye with Wine, make
one of the Assistants immediately open the Eyelids, and taking up some
Wheat Flour with your Thumb, stroke the Eye gently with it. This way of
putting Powders into the Eye with your Thumb, is a great deal better than the
usual Method of Farriers, who blow Powders into the Eye with a Leaden-Pipe; for
after you have blown 'em in two or three times, the Horse is so afraid that he
will do any thing rather than suffer you to serve him so again; whereas if you
put 'em in with your Thumb, though they make his Eye smart extremely, he cannot
so soon perceive whence the Pain comes.

The Wheat Flour frequently applied will consume the Film: But if you perceive
that it has not the desired effect, you must use White Vitriol, or Sal
Prunellae in fine Powder, which is an excellent Remedy, and consumes the Film,
and even a Webb, without heating the Eye, which is the common inconveniency of
other Powders.

To consume a White Film on the Eye.
Besides the Remedies already proposed, there is nothing so effectual as
Sal-Armoniac, beaten and put into the Eye, and constantly repeated till the
Cure be completed. You must not be surpised though the Film continue twelve or
fifteen days, but persist in the use of the Remedy.

Or, Put a little Salt into your Mouth in the Morning fasting, and after it is
dissolved wash the Horse's Eye with your Spittle. This is an easy Remedy, and
perhaps will prove effectual.

Or, Beat common Salt (which is always at hand) very fine, and put it into the
Eye. This exceeds all other Remedies, save only Sal-Armoniac.

Salt of Lead, commonly called the Salt, or Magistery of Saturn, is an
excellent Remedy to consume a white Film that is caused by a Rheum. It Is easily
made, and not very sharp, and by its coldness it repels the Heat occasioned by
the Defluxion. If you are desirous to know its Composition, See Beguin's
Elements of Chemistry, Book II. Page 344. where you will find it described. And
Glazer, in his Treatise of Chemistry, has very distinctly explained the way of
making the Chrystallin Salt, and other Preparations of Lead, which are very
good for the Eyes of Horses.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Lunatic, or Moon Eyes.
THE Eyes of those Horses that are troubled with this Distemper are darkened by
a Rheum, at certain times of the Moon, whereas at other times they appear so
bright, that you would conclude they were perfectly sound. The Defluxion is
usually most violent in the Wane of the Moon, sometimes about the Full-Moon,
and it oftentimes ends in Blindness. Some enjoy an Interval of six Months,
others are troubled with a return of the Distemper once in three Months, and
some grow Lunatic every two Months.

The signs of this Imperfection are particularly described in the Second Part.

During the time that the Eye is actually seized with the Rheum, it appears
hot, swollen, dark, covered, and weeping, which are the proper signs of a
Defluxion: But the surest sign of this Distemper is, when under the Apple it is
of a faint yellow Color, during the time of the Defluxion; for afterward that
Color vanishes with the Rheum.

You must never Bleed a Lunatic Horse on any occasion whatsoever, unless you
are compelled to have recourse to that Operation by some unavoidable necessity,
as by Fevers or Gripings; in which cases you may let him Blood in the Flank.

I have seen Lunatic Horses, who having been let Blood for the Farcin, grew
Blind shortly after.

You must not give the Horse any sort of Grain, while his Eye is actually
troubled with the Rheum, but feed him with Hay, Straw, and moistened Bran. You
may also make a Seton on his Pole between his Ears, by thrusting a sharp Iron,
red hot, quite through the part where his Mane begins, and on which the
Head-stall of the Bridle rests, and putting into the Hole a plaited Cord, one
half Hair, and the other Hemp, anointed with Basilicum, which must be turned
round, and drawn backward and forward every Morning, to let forth the Matter
that has been gathering for the space of four and twenty Hours. Others keep the
Seton open with a Lead-Ring instead of a Cord.

The Seton will divert the Humor from the Eyes, and ease the Horse in some
measure, by evacuating part of it.

Some make two Setons, one on the forepart of the Head, where the Tuft of the
Mane lies over the Forehead, and another behind where the end of the
Head-stall rests; but without any considerable benefit.

If the Weather be fair let the Horse lie abroad to receive the Night-Dew; but
if it be Cold, keep him in a Stable that is not very hot: For the Heat of the
Stable is very hurtful to Lunatic Eyes.

It Is very convenient for a Moon-Ey'd Horse, to take up the Eye-Vein, when the
Rheum is at the height, and when you can meet with an expert Farrier: And it
will not be improper to cut the Nerve that lies under the Vein, as I taught you
before. But though you do not think fit to cut the Nerve, you must of necessity
take up the Vein, which may be easily done with a crooked Needle, as in the
case of Defluxions. Besides, the taking up of the Jugular Veins will very much
promote the Cure; and you may also observe the following Directions.

It Is extremely profitable for Moon-Ey'd Horses to rowel 'em at the side of
each Eye, on the flat part of the Cheek-Bone, to divert the Humor from flowing
to the Eyes, and more especially to evacuate that which is already fallen upon
'em.

The Operation is thus performed. Cut the Skin overthwart with a Lance or
Razor, and separate it from the Flesh, about three Inches upwards with the
handle of a Slice; then put into the Hole a piece of Lead, two Inches long, and
one broad, raising up the Skin a little below the Incision made with the
Lance, to keep the Lead sure. Let the Rowels remain twelve or fifteen days,
and make the Matter run out twice every day, by pressing the part gently
downwards. The Orifices made either by a Seton or Rowel heal of themselves
after the Cord or Lead is taken out: Instead of Lead you may put into the Hole
a little Straw, or a piece of an old Shoe, or Gentian-Root. After these
precautions you may proceed to the use of Rue-Water.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the best way of making Rue-Water, to Cure Moon-Eyes.
SInce Rue-Water is an excellent and specific Medicine for the Eyes of Horses,
and is not to be had every where, I thought fit to subjoin the true way of
preparing it. Take three or four handfuls of Rue, cut it small, and put it into
a Dish of Silver, or Earth glazed, which you must set on a Chafing Dish, with
another Dish on the top of it, and give it a gentle Heat. Remove the upper Dish
from time to time, and take out the Water which you will find sticking about
it, with a Feather, then set it on as before, and let it stand for some time;
after which take it off again, and you will find more Water. When you have
gathered a considerable quantity of Water, as for example, a small Glass-full,
dissolve in it the bigness of an ordinary Walnut of White-Vitriol, and bathe
the Eye with it Morning and Evening; or if this be not of sufficient efficacy,
make use of the Lapis Mirabilis. And if that Stone should fail too, as it may
sometimes happen to do when the Eye is very much inflamed, you must have
recourse to the Oil of Lead, pouring seven or eight drops of it into the Eye
every day, which is an incomparable Remedy, and will fully answer your desires.

Oil of Lead is a specific Remedy for Defluxions on the Eyes, and especially
for those that follow the Motions of the Moon. If you administer it a little
before the usual time at which the Moon brings down the Rheum, that Symptom
will be prevented, and the Eye remain sound: And by persisting in the use of
this Medicine, that is, by putting two drops of it into the Eye every day with
a Feather, you may preserve Horses that are subject to Moon-Eyes for several
Years, without the least appearance of their wonted Distemper, their Eyes
remaining all the while sound and bright.

If the Horse be actually seized with the Distemper, you must administer the
Remedy twice a day, and you will be quickly convinced of its Efficacy.

I have often tried it with a great deal of satisfaction, and you may safely
depend upon it.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Oil of Lead, called, Oleum Saturni.
THere are different Methods of preparing this Medicine prescribed by all the
most celebrated Chemists both Ancient and Modern, who give it the name of Oil,
though improperly, because it is not Inflamable; and I thought fit to retain the
same Name, since the use of it is confirmed by such Illustrious Writers as
Paracelsus, Crollius, Zwelfer, etc. Among all the various Preparations of it, I
chose to make use of that which follows, as the least intricate: But if you are
not expert enough in these Operations, you may employ some Artist to prepare it
Methodically, though you will find the following Description of it so clear and
exact, that it may be easily made by any Man that has the least skill in
Distillation.

Take six Pounds of Ceruse, reduced to Powder, by rubbing it on the bottom of a
Searce turned upwards, put it into an Earthen Pot with ten Quarts of distilled
Vinegar, and digest 'em in a Sand-Furnace, three Days and three Nights,
stirring the bottom of the Matter from time to time with a Wooden Slice; then
filtrate the distilled Vinegar, impregnated with the Salt of Lead, and
evaporate all the moisture, which will leave the true and fixed Salt of Lead,
which you must put into a Glass Retort, leaving two thirds of it empty. Place
the Retort with its Recipient in a Sand-Furnace, giving at first a very gentle
Fire, which must be gradually augmented till nothing come out of the Retort.
Then let the Vessels cool, and you will find in the Recipient the Oil of Lead,
which you may make stronger by evaporating the third part of the Phlegm which
it contains; but without any evaporation, it will be strong enough for the
Lunatic Eyes of a Horse.

The remaining Matter is an excellent Salt of Lead, of good use in several
cases: It may be applied either alone, or mixed with several Ointments to divert
Rheums, or allay excessive Heat, as I shall afterward observe: But it is
stronger than that which is usually Sold by Chemists, who crystallize it to
make it more pleasant to the Eye; neither do I think it proper to be used
inwardly till it be dissolved in Water, filtrated, evaporated, crystalliz'd in
a Cellar, etc.

I know by experience, that some pretended Chemists will tell you that this
Operation is impossible; but I always found that they were either Ignorant or
wanted proper Vessels. I have prepared it, and caused it to be prepared,
neither will any Man who has the least skill in Chemistry, complain of the
difficulty of the Work.

This Salt is called Sugar of Lead, because of its sweetness to the Taste, and
being free of that Acrimony or sharpness which is common to all other Salts,
it is useful not only for Moon-Eyes, but for all manner of Rheums in the Eyes,
without occasioning the least Pain or Smarting; for it allays the immoderate,
and confirms the natural Heat of those Organs, and consequently diverts the
Rheum. You may dissolve two Drams of it in Water of Nightshade, Celandine, or
Eyebright, and bathe the Eyes with the Solution.

A certain Modern Author writes, That if it be exposed to the Air it dissolves
into a Liquor; but I am not altogether of his Opinion; for though the Air has
some influence upon it, yet it cannot reduce it to a Liquor. The Salt is more
easily to be had than the Oil, but it is not so effectual.

They who are professed Enemies to the Art of Chemistry, and endeavor to
discredit all its Operations, pretend that we ought by no means to use the Salt
of Lead, since it is only Lead Calcined, as indeed if it be melted in a Crucible
with Salt of Tartar, or Nitre, it will return to its first Substance: But though
Mercury, however disguised, may be rednc'd to true and fluid Quicksilver, yet
it is applied to several Uses, because the Body of it is artificially opened,
and either made familiar to our Bodies, or rendered proper to empty the part to
which it is applied, whereas in its own Nature it is close, and unfit to produce
those Effects which are daily caused by some Preparations of it. So the
substance of the Lead being opened, and united to the Acid Spirit of Vinegar,
which dissolves it, it has a wonderful Virtue to cool the Eye; but by melting
it with Salt of Tartar, the Spirit of Vinegar is destroyed by that Salt, and
the parts of the Lead having nothing to keep 'em in their new situation, are
again reduced to Lead, though but in a small quantity.

Sometimes the Defluxion is so copious that it cannot be stopped by the Oil, in
which case you must intercept its Course by a restringent Remedy applied to the
Forehead.

Take fine Frankincense, Mastic, and Bole Armenic, of each an equal quantity,
reduce 'em to Powder, and mix 'em with Whites of Eggs, and Juice of House-leek,
which grows on Houses, resembling a little Artichoak. Spread this Composition
on a piece of Leather, and apply it to the Horses Forehead from one Temple to
the other, renewing it once or twice every day according to the violence and
copiousness of the Rheum, and tying it on the part with a Linnen-Band.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of cleansing the Horse's Eye below, or cutting out the Haw.
WHen there is no present sign or appearance of a Defluxion in the Eye, and the
part is as clear as its Infirmity will allow, you may have recourse to a Manual
Operation, which has been successfully administered to some Moon-ey'd Horses,
and without any effect to others; and therefore you must not imagine that this
Operation can restore an Eye which is so weakened by the Rheum that it is almost
quite lost. But all that can be reasonably expected from this Method is, that
it will preserve the Eyes in the same condition, as when the Operation was
performed, and prevent the total loss of 'em.

This Operation ought to be administered (if possible) in the Wane of the Moon,
and after this manner. In the first place having cast the Horse, apply a small
piece of Money, marked, to the corner of the Eye, between the Eye and the Haw,
which is a Cartilage that all Horses have, by the help of which you may thrust
a threaded Needle into the Haw, without hurting the Eye: Then pull back the
lower Eyelid with your Finger, and draw forth the Thread fastened to the Haw,
which will follow and draw after it a piece of glandulous Flesh. Pull it forth
softly, cutting by degrees with a Lance that which holds it on each side, and
as you draw out the Haw the piece of Flesh that sticks to it will follow.
Proceed in this manner pulling and cutting, but very gently, till you have
taken out a piece of glandulous Flesh, of the bigness of an Inch, and half a
Finger in length; and from time to time, during the Operation, wash away the
Blood with Water, that you may see what you are doing. Having cut the Haw out
of each Eye, take up the Eye-Vein, and afterward every Morning and Evening
wash the Eye with Aqua-vitae, or with the Solution of Lapis Mirabilis in Water.
In the mean time you must not suffer the Horse to eat Oats, but feed him only
with moistened Bran, for fifteen or twenty days; after which you may safely
make him return to his Labor, and give him Oats to eat.

This Operation is grounded on a very natural way of Reasoning: For as several
parts of the Body are furnished with Emunctories or Receptacles of bad Humors,
so there is a lump of glandulous or spongy Flesh under the Eye, which is as it
were the sink of the Brain, and receives the sharp, raw, and undigested
Humors, which that part throws off. These Humors exhale and send up hot and
burning Vapors to the Eye, which prick and irritate it, and afterward draw
thither all the Impurities of the Neighboring Parts. Thus we see that the Eye
is always more subject to Heat and Vapors below than above, as you may
particularly observe in Moon-Eyes, which, during the time of the Rheum, appear
of a faint yellow Color below, and almost never above. This being supposed, as
it is certainly true, it is plain that by cutting out this kernelly Flesh, you
take away the Receptacle of the Humors, which therefore must take another
course, and fall upon the Neighboring Parts, such as the musculous Flesh, less
tender and delicate than the Eye, where Nature will be sufficiently able to
digest and concoct 'em. And from what has been said, you may reasonably
conclude, that this Operation can only preserve the Eye in its present
Condition, but not restore it to its former Perfection. Besides, when you take
up the Eye-Vein, you may cut the Nerve that lies under it, for the Reasons
alleged before.

How to cleanse the Eye above.
To perform this Operation, you must cut the Skin in the middle of the hollow
part above the Eye with a Lance, and with a Hook pull out the Fat which is
contained in that part, and may be easily separated from it: After you have
taken out the quantity of a Walnut, wash the Wound with warm Wine, and fill the
empty space with fine Flax, smeared with Aegyptiacum, tying it on with two
threads fastened to the Lips of the Wound. Dress the Sore every day with warm
Wine and Aegyptiacum, till it be healed; and in the mean time great care must
be taken to preserve it from the least blast of Wind, which might produce
dangerous Consequences. But, after all, I never found this Operation beneficial
to the Eyes; and therefore I slight it as much as I esteem the other.

Since all Men are not fond of Knives and Lances, I shall proceed to describe
other Remedies for Moon-Eyes, among which Purgation is usually reckoned, which
must not be administered till the Eye be wholly freed from the Rheum, for
otherwise it will do more harm than good.

Pills for Lunatic or Moon-Ey'd Horses.
Take of fine or bright Aloes two Ounces, Agaric half an Ounce, Troches
Alhandal (which is a Preparation of Coloquintida) three Drams: If the Horse be
of a middle size, this Dose will be sufficient to purge him, but if he be
large, you must add another Dram of the Troches Alhandal. Reduce all the
Ingredients to a gross Powder, and mix 'em with a handful of Betony-Leaves
beaten, and a Pound of fresh Butter. Make up the Mass into Pills of the bigness
of a Tennis-Ball, which you must give the Horse in Wine, and walk him half an
hour after.

Or without giving your self the trouble to prepare a Medicine expressly for
that purpose, you may make use of Pilulae Aureae, or Lucis, of which you must
give at least two Ounces, having injected a Purging Clyster the day before: And
since Aloes is the true Purgative for Horses, and enters into the Composition
of all those Pills, it will not be improper to subjoin the following
Preparation of it, which must not be esteemed the worse, because it is common.

The Preparation of Aloes.
Take of the best clear Aloes (which is finer than the Succotrin) reduced to
Powder, four Ounces: Infuse pale Rose-Leaves in Water, four and twenty Hours,
then strain out the Water, and add fresh Rose-Leaves, and repeat the Infusion
three several times. Sprinkle your Aloes with this Water, and dry it in the
Shade, moisten and dry it a second and third time, after which it is duly
Prepared. It will be better if you wash it with Juice of Damask-Roses, both
which Preparations are known by the name of Aloes Rosata.

The Aloes thus Prepared will produce the desired effect, in a less quantity.
It purges and strengthens the Stomach and the Brain, and resists the Corruption
of the Humors, for which reason it is usually made the Base of Purging Pills.

Though Aloes is rendered more effectual, and much improved by this Preparation,
nevertheless I propose it only for the satisfaction of the Curious: For if you
can procure fine and clear Aloes, it will purge your Horse certainly and
safely; and I know no better Purgative than this, nor any so agreeable to the
Nature of a Horse.

Agaric, by being reduced to Troches, is freed from two defects; its too great
lightness which hinders it from falling to the bottom of the Stomach, and its
slowness in Operation: Nevertheless it is frequently given to Horses without any
Preparation.

It Is prepared with Malmesy and Ginger.

After Purgation you must wait till the Twentieth day of the Moon, and then
proceed to the use of the Cautery, or Fire, if the Eyes be pretty clear.

CHAP. XXXV. How to Cauterize or burn the Parts above the Eyes.
ON or about the Twentieth Day of the Moon, draw a Line with a Red-hot Knife,
from one Ear to the other, under the Head-stall of the Bridle, to conceal the
Mark left by the burning, and draw the Knife backwards and forwards till the
Line it makes be of a Cherry-colour, then burn a Star over the Eye-Veins,
without piercing the Flesh, for the Scar would never wear out. After the Scab
is fallen off, bathe the Sore with Aqua-Vitae, Morning and Evening, and though
you neither apply Pitch nor Butter, there will seldom remain any Scar: But if
you pierce the Skin, you must bathe the part every Morning and Evening with
Aqua-Vitae mixed with Honey.

I have seen Moon-Ey'd Horses cured by this way of burning: And the worst that
can happen is that you may preserve one Eye by putting out the other. For if
both the Eyes be subject to this Infirmity, the visual Spirits of that which is
lost, retire to the other and strengthen it: And besides, you may preserve the
Eyes for some time, by taking up the two Veins in the Neck, called the Jugulars.

All Lunatic and Moon-Ey'd Horses at last grow Blind, unless that Disaster be
prevented by the Methods above prescribed, or by putting out one Eye, which
must be thus performed. Thrust a threaded Needle into the worst Eye, making the
Point come out in the part opposite to that where it entered, and leave the
Thread hanging at it seven or eight days, during which time the Eye will
continually cast forth Water till it grow dry: Then take out the Thread, and by
degrees the visual Spirits which pass to the other Eye, will strengthen and
preserve it from the like Infirmity, and the pierced Eye will be dried up. I
have seen a Horse who had an Eye of Enamel or Glass put in the place of one of
his Eyes which had been put out ot preserve the other. This is a hereditary
Distemper, and therefore great care must be taken to choose Stallions that have
good Eyes: It may be also occasioned by the Foal's eating Oats with his Dam,
when he is but one Year Old, or younger; for by their straining and
endeavoring to chew the Oats, the Veins above and about their Eyes are
stretched and distended, and consequently draw too much Blood to those Parts,
which, by the too great quantity of Nourishment, are heated and rendered
obnoxious to Defluxions; either to that kind which follows the course of the
Moon, or to the other which wastes and destroys the Eye. I have borrowed this
Observation from a Treatise concerning Horses, composed by one John Taquet, who
expressly affirms, that the loss of the Foals Eyes is not occasioned by the
substance of the Oats, which may be supposed to heat 'em, but only by their
straining too hard in chewing that hard sort of Food: And to prevent these
fatal Consequences he advises those who have Foals to cause their Oats to be
ground or stamped; by which means, he says, they will grow strong and lusty,
without the least danger of Rheums, or any other Infirmity of the Eyes. Since I
never found this Remark in any other Author, I thought fit to insert it here;
submitting it entirely to the Reader's Judgment.

Some Horses become Moon-Ey'd at the Age of Eight or Ten Years, who were always
very sound before, which is an Infirmity entailed on 'em by their Sire. And
besides, when young Horses are overtaken by a great Storm in the Fields, they
are oftentimes either rendered Lunatic, or struck Blind with the Thunder and
Lightning.

Hard work hastens the total Blindness of a Moon-Ey'd Horse; and besides, Heat
and extreme Cold are equally prejudicial to him. To conclude, This Infirmity
usually ends in the loss of one or both Eyes; for the best Remedies are not
always successful; and we may justly call that a good Medicine which is found
to be effectual on several Occasions, though it be not always Infallible.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Haemorrhagy, or Bleeding.
HAEmorrhagy is a voiding of Blood by the Nose or Mouth, occasioned by a
redundancy of the Blood mixed with a Liquor full of Spirits and Salt, which
makes the Blood boil and ferment, till the Vessels not being able to contain
it, some of the Veins burst, and disgorge the Blood through the Nose; and the
mixture of that Salt Juice with the Blood, is caused by unusual Fatigues in hot
Weather. The redundancy of the Blood may also proceed from too much Feeding; or
it may be depraved and vitiated; or its Boiling may be occasioned by violent
Exercise, which opens the Mouths of some Veins, from which it gushes out
impetuously, either by the Nose or Mouth. To convince you that a Liquor full of
Spirits and Salt is apt to make the Blood boil and ferment, it will be
sufficient to inform you, that if you mix either the Spirit of Wine, Vitriol,
Hartshorn, or Soot with the Blood that is taken out of the Vein, while it is
hot, you will immediately perceive a violent Ebullition; whereas Salt of
Tartar, and the Solution of Alum trouble and precipitate the Blood; and none
but such as are wholly Ignorant of the Internal Motions and Methods of Nature,
will deny that there are such Liquors full of Salt and Spirits in the Bodies of
Horses.

If the Bleeding be not stopped, it may either kill the Horse or extremely
weaken him; because Nature is quite spent and exhausted by such an excessive
Expense of Blood and Spirits. When such Accidents happen, the Horses remain
unfit for Service a great while after, but they seldom die unless they be also
seized with a Fever, which does not usually happen.

Since these Accidents seldom or never happen but in very hot Weather, every
Rider whose Horse is fat, or rather fiery and full of Mettle, who' out of Wind,
should keep him in and restrain him at the first, and endeavor by all prudent
Methods to prevent the Disorders that are occasioned by Bleeding, or perhaps
some other more dangerous Distemper. And it is certain that in such cases the
most present Remedy is always the best.

As Soon as you perceive the Blood to issue out of the Horse's Nose or Mouth, or
both, you must immediately let him Blood in the Flanks, or the Plate-Veins of
the Thighs, or rather in the Neck, if you cannot take Blood enough out of the
other Parts: then take a large quantity of Knot-grass, (called in Latin
Centinodia, because at its perfect Growth it has a hundred Knots on one Stalk)
which is a Specific Remedy to stanch Blood; beat it to a Mash, and fill the
Horse's Nostrils with it, binding also some of it to his Temples and Reins,
where the Saddle ends, and even to his Stones, if he be not gelt.

This is a very common Herb; but if you cannot find it, take Nettles and apply
'em after the same manner.

You may also put the Horse into Water up to his Flanks, and let him stand in
it two Hours, if it be Summer, which is the usual time in which these Accidents
happen.

If you are not in a convenient place to plunge him into Water, cover his Head
and Back with a Cloth seven or eight times doubld, and dipped in Oxycrate (or
Vinegar and Water): keep him in the Stable with his Head upright, not suffering
him to lie down, and from time to time throw cold Water on his Cods or Sheath:
the next Day bleed him again, and give him cooling Clysters. Some Horses have
been troubld with voiding of Blood six or seven Days together, but it did not
run so violently at last, as at the Beginning, and they were cured by the
above-mentiond Remedies.

CLYSTERS.
The following Clyster will help to allay the boiling of the Blood, if the
Horse be also let Blood.

Take Mallows and Marshmallows, of each one handful, Plantane, two handfuls,
Succory, Lettuce and Purslane, of each one handful; boil 'em in five Pints of
Water, with an Ounce and a half of Sal Polychrest in Powder; and add to the
strain^d Liquor a quarter of a Pound of the Ointment Populeon, without
Verdigrease, which some Cheats mix with it to give it a fine green Color; or
if you mistrust that, take a quarter of a Pound of true Unguentum rosatum, not
Grease washed with Rose Water, and colored with Alkanet; Make a Clyster, to be
injected after you have raked the Horse.

If the Blood continue still to flow, take Plantane Leaves beaten and mixed
with Male Frankincense, Aloes or Myrrh, and put 'em into his Nostrils, holding
his Nose up as if you were going to give him a Drench. Then cover his Head,
Back, and Reins with a Cloth five or six times doubled and dipped in Oxycrate,
as you were taught before, and throw cold Water frequently on his Sheath and
Stones, if he has any.

Sometimes the Blood flows so violently out of the Nostrils, that it cannot be
so soon stopped; in which Case you may use the following Powder, which is
easily prepared. Take the Dung of a Stone-Ass, dry it in the Shade, till it may
be reduced to Powder, and blow it plentifully into the Horse^s Nose through a
Glass-Pipe, Trunk, or Reed: This will quickly stench the Blood.

The same Powder is of admirable Use for Men that are apt to bleed at the Nose,
who may carry some of it in a Box, and snuff it up at the Nose. I have often
seen the Effect of it, and it smells only of dry Herbs: but some nice Sparks
will cry out, They had rather die than take such a nasty Powder. With all my
Heart, Gentlemen, you may follow your Humor; but do you think it impossible you
could be cheated, and have this Powder imposed upon you instead of your dear
Snuff? And besides who can assure such a dainty Beau, that his Apothecary has
not made him swallow many a nastier Medicine to cure him of the fashionable
Disease? But out of pure Complaisance, I shall subjoin another Remedy for
Horses, which their Riders may also use. Take a Hare that is kill^d in the
Month of March, flay her, and without larding her, prepare her for the Spit,
but do not put her upon it: then dry her in an Oven, so that the whole Flesh
may be reduced to Powder, which must be blown plentifully into the Horse's
Nostrils: for it is very effectual to stanch the Blood that flows either out of
the Nose, or of a Wound. Thus I have given you a very good and easy Remedy,
which does not smell of Ass-Turd.

That which follows is also very good, and may be prepared at any time of the
Year. Take Bark of Pomegranates dried, Roman Vitriol, and Allom, of each four
Ounces; reduce 'em to Powder, and reserve 'em for Use. This Powder stanches the
Blood in any part of the Body, and is excellent for all sorts of Wounds. It may
be kept very long without losing its Virtue.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Stag's Evil, or Palsy in the Jaw.
I Know not whether Stags are also troubled with this Disease, as the Name
seems to import, but it proves oftentimes fatal to Horses. It Is a kind of
Rheumatism, which keeps their Neck and Jaws so stiff that they cannot move 'em,
not so much as to eat; and besides they turn up the Whites of their Eyes from
time to time, as if they were just ready to expire. They are also seized at
uncertain Intervals of time, with such a violent Palpitation of the Heart, and
Heaving or Beating in the Flanks, that you would certainly conclude they could
not live two Hours; and these Fits return sooner or later without any fixed
Order. If you feel their Neck, you will perceive it to be stiff and stretched
out, the Skin is dry, and sometimes the whole Body is stiff, and the hinder
Parts as much affected by the Distemper as the fore Parts; in which Case few or
none escape, especially if the Fever be continual, as almost always it is.

This Disease is not absolutely Mortal when it is not an universal Rheumatism,
spread over all the Body, or when the Horses have brought it upon themselves by
violent striving and drawing against the Halter, by which unruly Motions they
strain and stretch the Muscles of the Neck, so as to draw the Humors to 'em.
But that is not the usual Cause of this Distemper; for it is almost always
occasioned by the Horse's being unseasonably exposed to Heat or Cold, or by his
being cooled immediately after he has been overheated; which sudden Change
stirs the redundant Humors, and breeds many Obstructions, that hinder the
Motion of the affected Parts, and cause a Pain not only in these, but also in
the neighboring Parts, or such as have a Communication with 'em.

Though the Beating of the Flank and Heart be very violent, yet when it intermits
for a considerable space of time, the Horse recovers a sufficient measure of
Strength to resist the Distemper: but (which is very dangerous) the Defluxion
on the Jaws is sometimes so strong, that the poor starved Creature dies merely
for want of necessary Sustenance; and the natural Heat not finding any Aliments
to employ its Force in their Digestion, grows sometimes so violent, that it
inflames the Blood, augments the Fever, and at last kills the Horse: to prevent
which, you must give him softening Clysters, Morning and Evening, let him Blood
frequently, and even once in two Days, till you see some Signs of Amendment;
for upon this the Cure principally depends, though since it must be so often
repeated, it will be sufficient to take every time only half the Quantity of
Blood that is usually taken from Horses.

For his Food mix a little Bran with a great quantity of Water, that it may be
as thin as Broth, and leave it before him the whole Day: for he will stir it
with his Lips, and in his best Intervals endeavor to swallow a little of it;
but he can very hardly, or not at all eat any Hay or Straw, being unable to
open his Jaws, and you may give him lukewarm Water to drink. After the Use of
Clysters and Bleeding, take equal parts of Spirit of Turpentine and Aqua-Vitae,
mix 'em in a glass Vial, and shake 'em together, till they be perfectly united:
With this Liquor anoint his whole Neck, upon the Muscles, and all about the
Jaws, chafing the Parts very hard with your Hand, to make the Liquor penetrate,
which will heat the Muscles that are cooled and stiffen'd by the Defluxion; and
two hours after rub the same Parts with the Ointment of Marshmallows, chasing
'em hard as before, which will not only heat the Parts, but help to loosen the
Jaws, and supple the Neck. Afterward rub the Parts affected every Morning with
the Ointment of Marshmallows, and every Evening with Aqua-Vitae. And besides,

If the Disease affect the whole Body, rub the Horse's Reins with Ointment of
Marshmallows and Spirit of Wine, and cover 'em with a Cloth dipped in Lees of
Wine heated, and put his usual Clothes above all. Repeat the Anointing and
Fomentation every day, and let him be put into a hot Stable; for being thus
carefully tended, he may perhaps recover, if his Fever intermit.

You must also give him three or four good softening Clysters every day; and if
the disease be very violent, you may inject one in the Morning, consisting of
two Quarts of Milk, eight Yolks of Eggs, and two Ounces of Sugar, to sustain,
and in some measure satiate the Animal Hunger of the Parts that have a
Communication with the great Guts. The rest of the Clysters must be composed of
softening and cooling Ingredients.

Some thrust a red-hot Iron through the Neck near the Main, in three or four
several places, and others cut the Nerves: I look upon these Methods not only
as unworthy to be recommended, but I think my self obliged to dissuade you from
the Use of 'em; for the Horse endures so much misery already, that we ought by
no means to increase his Torments, without the least Prospect of future Relief.

If they could be made to swallow any thing, it would be convenient to give 'em
some Doses of the Cordial-Powder or stinking Pills, or some other proper
Medicine; but that is impossible, and you can only administer external
Remedies, which are seldom able to save the Horse's Life.

If you perceive some encouraging Signs, or if the Horse be in greater danger
of dying of Hunger than of his Distemper, because he is unable to take any
Nourishment, and if there be long and frequent Intermissions of his Fever, you
may take the Advantage of one of those Intervals, to prepare and exhibit the
following Liquor. Mix a Pound of fine Barley-Flower with a sufficient quanityt
of Water, as if you designed to make Gruel, boil it till it begin to thicken,
then add the quantity of an Egg of Sugar, and while it is moderately warm,
inject it into the Horse's Nose, one half into each Nostril.

Since the Passages of the Nose end in the Mouth, you will perhaps be surpised
that I do not prescribe this Nourishment to be given to the Horse in the
Beginning of the the Disease, when he stands so much in need of it, as not
being able to take any Food at the Mouth: but I consider that every thing that
a Horse takes by the Nose does extremely fatigue and torment him, and therefore
even the most cooling sorts of Nourishment, such as Barley, given after that
manner, might increase his Fever, if he has any, or throw him into a Fever though
he were free of it before. For though this Fever be only accidental, and not much
to be dreaded, it is nevertheless impossible to give any Nourishment by the Nose
without manifest hazard; and therefore I think we ought not to have recourse to
that Method, till the Horse be in danger of starving; in which case it is better
to make an Attempt to save his Life though with some hazard, than to suffer him
to die of Hunger.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Vives.
IT IS certainly a manifest Impropriety of Speech to say, that the Horse has
always the Vives, because he always has those Parts where that Distemper is
seated, and shows it self when he is actually troubled with it. These are
certain Glands or Kernels near the Neck, which being of a soft and spongy
Substance, and held to be the Drainers or Emunctories of the neighboring
Parts, are subject to Inflammation, which causes a Swelling that obstructs the
Throat, and stops the Wind, so that if the Horse be not speedily assisted, he
is in danger of being choked. The Pain and Uneasiness occasioned by the
stoppage of his Wind, makes him lie down frequently, and immediately start up
again, tumble, struggle, and toss his Body after a strange manner; thinking by
these various Motions, to get rid of the Pain that torments and stifles him.

This Distemper may be very fitly compared to that which is called the Quinzie
in Men.

It Is thought that the Vives are always accompanied with the Colic, because the
same Symptoms appear in both.

The most usual Cause of this Disease is a sudden Change from one Extremity to
another, especially from a violent Heat to a sharp Cold, as when a Horse is
suffered to drink immediately after hard Riding, or any vehement Exercise: for
by this means the Humors are melted, and falling too plentifully on the
Kernels, swell 'em, and occasion all the abovementioned Disorders.

The Vives are also caused by over-working or riding a Horse beyond his
Strength, and out of Wind, or by neglecting to cover and walk him after violent
Exercise; and a Horse may bring 'em upon himself by eating too large a Quantity
of Oats, Barley, Wheat, or Rye; besides which they may proceed from several
other Causes, which are almost always owing to the Indiscretion either of the
Rider or Groom.

Of Remedies for the Vives.
Bend the Horse's Ear downwards toward his Throat near the Cheek-bone, and
mark the place where it touches the Skin, for that is the Part where the
Inflammation is seated that causes the Swelling; and if the Hair can be easily
separated from the Skin, by plucking it off with your hand, it is a Sign of
Ripeness, and that it is time to resolve, or at least to give vent to the Matter
contained in the Swelling. Then take hold of the Kernel which you will find in
that Part, with a Pair of Pincers or Plyers, and beat the Swelling gently with
the Handle of a Shooing-Hammer, till you judge it to be sufficiently rotten, or
bruise the Kernels or Tumors with your hand till the Vives be rotted and
softened, making the flatuous or windy Spirits, break through the Skin by way of
insensible Transpiration; after which the Swelling will certainly be resolved
and disappear. This is the easiest and surest Method.

It Is the general Custom of Farriers to open the Vives with a Lance, making an
Incision upon the Kernel or Swelling, out of which they take a certain
Substance like the Fat of Beef, but harder, and afterward stop the Hole with
Salt. Others pinch forth the Vives out of the Inside of the Ear, pretending
that the same Matter that is included in the Kernels, which are the Seat of the
Vives, is also contained in that part of the Ear: but this is a ridiculous
Fancy.

It Is better, in my Opinion, to rot the Vives than to open 'em, because the
last of these Methods renders the Horses more obnoxious to this Distemper.
Farriers think it is the safest way to open 'em, but I choose rather to corrupt
'em, unless the Swelling be so great that the Horse is in danger of being
stifled; in which case you must open 'em without delay to give Ease to the
Horse.

After you have rotted, or in Cases of Necessity, opened the Vives, bleed the
Horse under the Tongue, wash his Mouth with Salt and Vinegar, blow some of the
Vinegar into his Ears, rubbing and squeezing 'em hard to make it penetrate, for
it powerfully asswages the Pain that is communicated to the Jaws, by reason of
their Nearness to the Seat of the Vives.

Then take Hemp Seed beaten, two handfuls, two Nutmegs grated, and six Yolks of
Eggs; mix 'em with a Quart of Wine, and make the Horse drink it, walking him
gently half an hour after. Sometimes the Distemper will not yield to this
Remedy, in which Case, you must give the Horse a good Clyster with Sal
Polychrest, and repeat the Remedy of Hemp Seed, etc. Besides you must not grow
weary of walking him abroad: for Exercise rouzes the Natural Heat, and puts it
in a Condition to resist its Enemy. This I recommend as a very good and sure
Remedy; and besides it is cheap, and easily prepared.

I can assure you from my own Observation, that it is a most present Remedy, to
thrust a Bodkin or Shooe-Maker's Awl, quite through the Horse's Nostrils, two or
three fingers breadth above their Opening. There will run out as much Blood on
each side as would fill the Shell of an Egg, and then it will stop of it self.

At the same time that you bleed him under the Tongue, you must also let him
blood very plentifully in the Flanks, then cause him to be raked thus: Choose a
Boy, or any Servant that has a little Hand, which you must make him besmear
with Oil or Butter, and stretching it out at full length, with the Fingers
joined close together, thrust his Arm up to the Elbow into the Horse's
Fundament, and draw out his handful of Dung. But since a heedless and unskilful
Fellow may hurt the great Gut with his Nails, the safest way is to thrust a
large Tallow Candle, or rather a Piece of Soap, into his Fundament, which will
be quickly dissolved, and bring out with it the Excrements contained in the
great Gut.

When you have either taken out or rotted the Vives, an hour after you have
given the abovementioned Draught, it will be convenient to administer the
following Clyster, to divert the Defluxion, and make an entire Revulsion.

A Clyster for the Vives.
Boil five Pints of Beer, with an Ounce and a half of Sal Polychrest in fine
Powder; remove it from the fire, add two Ounces of Oil of Bay, and inject it
blood-warm. If Beer cannot be had, take equal Quantities of Wine and Water.

Another.
Take the five opening Roots, of each one handful; beat 'em grossly, and boil
'em in three Quarts of Water for a quarter of an hour; add the softening Herbs,
Mallows, Violets, herb-Mercury, and Pellitory of the Wall, of each one handful;
boil 'em again as before, then strain out the Liquor, and add a Pint of Emetic
Wine, or the same quantity of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, Honey of the
Herb-Mercury half a Pound, fresh Butter four Ounces, Oil of Rue, describ^d in
the CXXXIId. Chapter, two Ounces. Make a Clyster, to be injected after you have
raked your Horse. Or you may make a very good Clyster, by boiling two Ounces of
Liver of Antimony in fine Powder, over a strong fire for half a quarter of an
hour in a common Decoction; then strain out the Liquor, and add half a Pound of
Honey, and a quarter of a Pound of Oil.

Another Remedy for the Vives.
Give your Horse an Ounce of Orvietan, or rather of Treacle, in a Quart of
Red-Wine, or in a Pint of Aqua-Vitae if the Disease be violent; and at the same
time prepare a Clyster of the softening Herbs, with an Ounce and a half of
Liver of Antimony in Powder, adding to the strain^d Liquor two Ounces of
Orvietan, or the same quantity of Treacle, with a quarter of a Pound of fresh
Butter. Thus you must give Treacle both above and below, and you will ^arely
meet with any Instance of this Distemper that will not yield to this Remedy.

You will find, in the XLVIIIth. Chapter, the Description of a Remedy composed
of the Spirits of Nitre and Wine distilled together till they be thoroughly
united, which is very useful in this Case, if it be administered according to
the Directions prescribed in that Chapter.

All Horses have a sort of Knob like a Chestnut, hard as Horn, above the Knees,
and under the Hams; cut off a little of this, and casting it into a
Chafing Dish, make a Horse receive the Fume of it at his Nose, covering his
Head with a Bag.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Colic, Fret, or Gripes.
THis Disease is occasioned by the Sharpness of the Humors, which boil and
ferment in the Entrails, by reason of some Salt and Spirituous Liquor that
falls into those Parts: and sometimes it proceeds from Wind, or Crudities,
which Nature is not able to digest.

You may conclude that a Horse is troubled with this Distemper, when he
tumbles, tosses, lies down and starts up again suddenly: for though it may attack
a Horse that is not troubled with the Vives, yet the Vives never appear without
the Colic.

It will not be improper to give a large Account of this Distemper, since it is
not only dangerous, but sometimes fatal to Horses: Clysters are very effectual
in this Case, especially one sort of 'em, which shall be particularly described.

To accommodate my Discourse to the Capacity of the Reader, I shall divide the
Colic into several Kinds, according to the various Causes, from which it may
proceed, and after the Description of every kind, subjoin its proper Remedies.
Qui been distinguit, been docet.

CHAP. XL. Of the First Kind of Colic.
I Shall first consider that sort of Colic which is occasioned by eating too
much Provender; for the Stomach, being unable to digest so large a quantity of
Food, is filled with Crudities, which in a manner stifle the natural Heat, though
not without a considerable Struggle, which raises windy Vapors, that either
fall upon the Guts or remain in the Stomach, causing violent Pains in whatever
part they attack. This defect of Digestion rarely proves Mortal, unless (as it
has been sometimes observed) the Horse be so gluttonous as to eat till he
burst, when he meets with a convenient Opportunity.

A great quantity of Rye eaten unboil'd, is apt to occasion these Pains, by
reason of its Windiness: Wheat is not so dangerous, because more easily
digested: Beans that are usually given to Horses to fatten 'em, breed this
Distemper if they be eaten in too great abundance; and the same effect is
produced by too large a quantity of Oats eaten at one time.

The Cure of this sort of Colic is performed by assisting Nature to digest the
Aliments, after you have emptied the Guts with a convenient Clyster: for you
must never give Vomits to Horses, because, instead of easing them they overturn
the whole Economy of Nature, and never procure Vomiting. The Clyster must be
composed of a Decoction that is endu'd with a virtue to discuss Wind, to which
you must add a Quart of Emetic Wine, or a convenient quantity of the Infusion
of Crocus Metallorum.

As Soon as the Clyster is rejected, make the Horse drink a Pint of Aqua-Vitae,
with an Ounce of Treacle, and as much Saffron as you can lift with the ends of
your Fingers.

If the Distemper continue after the use of these Remedies, walk him abroad in
his Clothes, without suffering him to lie down; and after you have put him up
in the Stable, hold a Warming-Pan full of live Coals under his Belly for a
quarter of an hour, or half an hour, keeping him well covered.

Since Orvietan is not always to be had, it will not be improper to give a
faithful description of it; for it may be profitably given to Men, to Horned
Cattle, and especially to Horses. It must be prepared by a skilful Apothecary.

CHAP. XLI. Of Orvietan.
TAke of Sage, Rue, Rosemary, and Goat's-Rue, of each one handful, Carduus
Benedictus, Dittany of Crete, Roots of Masterwort, Bohemian Angelica, Bistort,
Birthwort round and long, white or bastard Dittany, Galingal, Gentian,
Costmary, Aromatic-reed, and Parsley-seed, of each one Ounce; Bay Berries and
Juniper Berries, of each half an Ounce; Cinnamon, Cloves, and Nutmeg, of each
three Drams; Sealed Earth, prepared with Vinegar, and old Treacle, of each one
Ounce; Powder of Vipers, four Ounces; Walnuts cleans'd and dried, Crum of
Wheat-Bread dried, of each eight Ounces; clarifi'd Honey seven Pounds: Make an
Electuary according to Art.

Chop the Walnuts, and beat 'em with the Bread, then strain 'em through a Searce
turned upside down, adding the Powders and other Ingredients, and at last the
Treacle and Honey, which serve instead of Leven to ferment the rest.

This is the exact description of Orvietan, which I dare warrant to be true,
since that which I have seen thus prepared has the Taste, Smell, Color,
Consistency, and Virtue of the best Orvietan; so that you may confidently
depend upon it, and make use of it, not only for Horses but Men: It Is well
known at Paris, where you may find it ready Prepared.

If Go at's-Rue cannot be had, you may substitute Cinque-foil in its stead; but
the first is the best.

Those who are willing, at any rate, to make the utmost Improvement of this
Medicine, may add four Ounces of the Hearts and Livers of Vipers to the like
quantity of the Powder of those Animals, prescribed in the Composition; but so
considerable an Addition raises the Price of the Remedy so high, that it is only
fit for Men, or Horses of Value.

Orvietan is a durable Medicine, and of excellent use in all cases that require
Heat, or at least where Heat is not to be avoided: It Is very useful for Horses
who have a weak Stomach, and little Appetite, or totally forsake their Meat;
and for those who have eaten a Venomous Plant or Animal, or are suspected to be
Poisoned. It raises lean and wasted Horses, and destroys the Worms that breed
in their Bodies, and make 'em pine away: But it must not be used till three
Months after it is prepared, for so long it must ferment before it come to
Perfection.

You may give it, by way of Prevention, to Horses that have kept Company with
others that were sick of Contagious Diseases.

It may be also given with good Success to Oxen that are troubled with the
Colic; it makes 'em Dung very plentifully, gives 'em present ease, and quickly
Cures 'em: And besides, it helps those who have swallowed a Spider, or any
other Venomous Creature.

You must give the Orvietan in Wine, and afterward walk the Horse, well
covered, who will, perhaps, Sweat and recover. It Is generally good in all sorts
of Colics, and very rarely fails of Success.

The Powder of Vipers alone is more effectual than Orvietan; but it is dear, and
to be had only at certain Times, when it is brought from Italy, and those Parts
where Vipers abound; and besides, a Horse would require half an Ounce of it for
a Dose.

They who are not willing or able to bestow the necessary Charge on the
Preparation of this Medicine, may use the Treacle, called Diatesseron, which I
use frequently, and find to be very effectual. See the Description of it in the
Fiftieth Chapter.

They who know how to prepare Essence of Vipers, need not trouble themselves
with Orvietan; for the former has all the Virtues of the latter, without
leaving the least Impression of Heat: It purines the Blood, resists Corruption,
and consumes all Impurities in the Stomach, and so undermines and destroys the
very Root of Diseases: Besides, it cures the Farcin; but for all its excellent
Virtues, few are acquainted with the true manner of preparing it, or at least,
few are willing to undergo the trouble, (for it is not so great a Secret, as
some who make a Mystery of every thing, would persuade the World) and therefore
I thought fit to subjoin the Description of it.

CHAP. XLII. Of Essence of Vipers.
TAke of purified Nitre, pure Salt of Earth, such as you may have from those
who make Saltpeter, of each one Pound, dry 'em, and reduce 'em to fine Powder,
which must be mixed with four times as much Potter's-Earth sears'd: Then put the
whole Powder in an Earthen Pan, and leave it three or four days in a Cellar,
till the Salts be dissolved; after which beat the whole Mass of Salts and
Earth, till it be reduced to a sort of Paste, out of which frame hard little
Balls, of the bigness of Small-Nuts, adding some drops of Water if the Mass be
too dry. After the Balls are dry, put 'em into an Earthen Retort, distilling
'em as Aquafortis is usually distilled, and yuo will find in the Recipient a
Menstruum fit to dissolve Vipers; in order to which, put the Liquor into a
Mattress with a moderate Heat, and throw a live Viper into it, where she will
quickly expire, and afterward melt away like Anchovy's in Butter. Or you may
proceed thus: Fix Nitre with Charcoal-Dust, as le Fevre teaches out of Glauber,
who calls this Liquor Alkaest: dissolve the Fixed Nitre about the Vernal Equinox
that it may attract the Universal Spirit contained in the Air; then put a live
Viper in this Solution of Fixed Nitre, where, by the help of a moderate Heat the
whole Animal will be dissolved, excepting only the Fat. After the Solution of
the Viper (which must also be observed in the first Method) suffer the Liquor
to settle, then pour off the clear, and throw away the thick Substance that
remains at the bottom as useless. You may also dissolve in the same Liquor,
Corals, Pearl, Roots of Master-wort, Angelica, Contrayerva, and other proper
Ingredients, till the Menstruum be fully satiated, and incapable of dissolving
more.

Then mix one part of this Solution of Vipers with three parts of distilled
Cordial-Waters, such as Scorzonera, or Juniper-Water, and give it a fine yellow
Color, with two or three Chives of Saffron. This is that Essence of Vipers
which is so much extolled, and sold so very dear.

The distilled Menstruum makes it more pleasant than the other, which has a
Lixivial and somewhat nauscous Taste, whereas the former has a pleasant
sharpness.

If you pour one of these Solutions, as that made by the first or distilled
Menstruum, upon the other, or that made by the Liquor of Fixed Nitre, there will
arise a violent Ebullition, after which the dissol^d Viper will be
precipitated, or fall to the bottom of the Vessel, in form of an impablpable
Powder, which is the true incorruptible Powder of Vipers, and better than all
those that are brought from Italy, or any other Country.

Some Persons will be apt to slight all that has been said on this Subject, as
a long and useless Digression; but I hope it will be favorably received by the
Curious, and all that are of Matthiolus's Opinion, who, in a Letter to Andrew
Blau, expressly affirms, That No Man can attain to an indifferent degree of
Knowledge in Medicine, much less can be become a perfect Physician, without a
complete Skill in Chemistry. Neminem Medicum absolutum esse posse, imo ne
mediocrem, qui in Chymia non sit exercitatus. 'Twou'd be needless to transcribe
the Testimonies of other Learned Men, to prove the necessity of that Art, since
Nature her self is an evident Demonstration of it, who cannot produce one Grain
of Seed without the assistance of Chemistry. Ipsa natura pro ea pugnat, quae ne
quidem, sine hac art, seminis Granum producere potest.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Second Kind of Colic.
THE most usual sort of Colic is that which proceeds from Wind, to which Horses
who are given to Ticking are very subject; for the exercise of that ill Habit
fills their Body with Wind, which afterward produces Gripings. If the Horse be
not swollen, one simple i. e. That discusses Wind.
Carminative Clyster will, for the most part, be sufficient to perfect the Cure.

Galen, one of the great Luminaries of Physic, ascribes the Original of the
Flatulency or Wind, which is generated in the Body to a middle degree of Heat,
strong enough to raise Vapors from a cold and viscous Humor, but not
sufficiently vigorous to disperse 'em after they are raised. For mere Cold is
wholly destitute of a Power to attenuate, digest, or dissolve, and therefore
can never produce Wind; and on the other side, a Heat that acts upon the
Humors with a force considerably Superior to their Resistance, makes 'em too
thin to generate Wind, which probably proceeds from a weaker degree of Heat,
according to the Doctrine of Galen.

When these Windy Vapors abound in the Body, they stretch and distend the Guts
beyond their due measure, and occasion violent Pains. Besides, they blow up the
Horse's Body as if it were ready to burst, which Swelling is the most peculiar
sign of the Wind-Colic, in which, as in all the other Kinds of that Distemper,
the Horse tumbles and tosses with extraordinary violence.

Wind may also occasion that painful and dangerous kind of Colic, called,
Convolvulus, which is a Motion of the Intestines against Nature, tending from
below upwards, and may proceed either from the Irritation of the Spirits, or
the malignant Fermentation of the Excrements retained in the Guts. The violence
of this Distemper will be mitigated by the use of the following Remedies, but
almost always it proves Mortal at last, and when a Horse dies of it, Farriers
usually say that he had the Red-Colic. The same Remedies that are good for the
Wind-Colic, are also used in this case, but with littles uccess.

The cure of the Wind-Colic is performed by Bleeding the Horse in the Flanks,
and under the Tongue, and by walking him frequently; for Exercise rouzes and
envigorates the natural Heat, and enables it to dispel the Wind that causes the
Distemper.

Cover him well, and walk him at a Trot, and sometimes at a Foot-pace; and if
the Violence of the Pain be not abated, give him the following Clyster, which I
prefer before many other Remedies.

A Clyster to expel Wind.
I have often had experience of the admirable Efficacy of this Clyster, and
therefore I may boldly recommend it to all those who shall have occasion to use
it. Take a Pound of large fat Figs, chopped, boil 'em in three Quarts of Water
for a full half Hour; then add two handfuls of Rue cut sinall, and boil 'em
again pretty briskly for a quarter of an hour; After the Liquor is half cooled,
strain it out, and pour off two Quarts of the clearest, throwing away the rest.
In this Decoction dissolve half a Pound of Oil-Olive, and inject the whole
lukewarm; after which, walk the Horse before you put him up in the Stable.
This Clyster will draw all the Wind into the straight Gut, and afterward expel
it: It usually remains a great while in the Body, and for that reason works
more effectually.

A Clyster for the Wind-Colic.
The following Clyster is also very useful in this case. Take an Ounce of Sal
Polycrest, and six or eight Handfuls of Sage: Boil 'em in three Quarts of
Claret, to the consumption of a third Part: Strain, and adding two Ounces of
Oil of Bay, inject the whole by way of Clyster.

If the Horse be not cured by this Clyster, an hour after he has rejected it,
give him a Pound of Oil-Olive, mixed with a Quart of Aqua-Vitae, pouring it in
with a Horn; then walk him abroad well covered, making him Trot one quarter of
an hour, and go a Foot-pace another.

An excellent Clyster to break and dispel Wind.
Take two Ounces of the Scoriae of Liver of Antimony in fine Powder; boil 'em a
little (but very briskly) in five Pints of Beer; then adding three or four
Ounces of good Oil of Bay, make a Clyster to be injected lukewarm, and
repeated every two hours till the Cure be perfected. This is the best Remedy
that can be Invented.

In the next place I shall subjoin the description of an Oil, which is a
specific Medicine for the Wind-Colic, and also good against several other
Distempers: For it expels the Impurities of the lower Belly, and makes room for
the rest to descend. This is a cheap and durable Medicine, and therefore 'twill
be convenient for those who have a great number of Horses to keep some of it by
'em, especially in an Army.

CHAP. XLIV. A Carminative and Purging Oil for Clysters.
TAke Rue, Calamint, Origanum or Wild-Marjoram, and Penniroyal, all dried in
the shade, of each one handful, seeds of Cummin, Carrots, and Fennel,
Bay Berries, of each one Ounce; Oil-Olive two Pounds, White Wind a Pint. Reduce
the Herbs to Powder, beat the Seeds, and put 'em all together in an Earthen
glazed Pot, covering it with another Pot somewhat less, and luted with Clay or
Paste. Boil 'em over a flow Fire till half the Wine be consumed, that is, about
six hours. Strain out the Oil after it is half cooled, and adding four Ounces of
the Pulp of Coloquintida, put it again into the same Pot, covering and luting
it as before: then boil it with a gentle Heat six or eight hours, after which
let it boil briskly half an hour, and after it is half cooled uncover the Pot,
and press out the Oil, which must be kept in a convenient Vessel for Use.

Three or four Ounces of this Oil in an ordinary Clyster, will expel the Wind
effectually, and bring forth the tough and viscous Humors, which for the most
part occasion this Distemper. It Is better, though much cheaper than the usual
Electuaries; and Experience will convince you of its Virtues.

I have seen Horses die of the Wind-Colic after a diligent, but unsuccessful
Application of all the abovementioned Remedies; and when they were opened
after their Death, their Guts were found extremely distended, as if they had
been purposely blown up. I know no other way to prevent such Accidents, than by
injecting good Clysters, walking the Horse perpetually, and letting him rest as
little as you can. You must also give him two stinking Pills, and repeat the
same Dose an hour after, and a third time if the Disease continue; in the mean
time you must inject a Clyster between the Doses, for by a careful Observance
of this Method the Wind may be dispelled. You must not be afraid of giving
three Doses of Pills in the space of three hours; for they will not overheat
the Horse's Body, and perhaps may cure the Distemper.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Third Kind of Colic.
THis Kind is not so easily known as the two former, and often puts an end to
the Horse's Life, which the other Kinds rarely do. It Is caused by a sort of
Glassy Phlegm, that owes its Sharpness either to its Rottenness and Corruption,
or to its Saltness and biting Quality, and forces Nature to violent
Strugglings, which produce those cruel and intolerable Pains that accompany
this Disease. The Horse endeavors in vain to dung; he sweats in the Flank and
Ears, and when he voids any Excrements they are in little quantity, and for the
most part only Phlegm, that cannot be separated from the Guts without Pain;
after which he has a moment of Ease, and seems to be perfectly cured; but his
Torments return in an instant.

During the raging Violence of the Pain the Horse frequently lies down, and
suddenly starts up again, he looks upon his Flanks, and refuses to eat. If he
be also assaulted by a Fever, he is in great danger of being overpowered by so
unequal a Force, unless by the Application of timely Remedies the Beating or
Heaving of his Flank be asswag'd.

This Distemper is often preceded by a Looseness, which lasts a whole day, and
carries off all the gross Excrements in the Horse's Body; but the tough and
glewy Humors stick to the Guts, and do not quit their hold so soon, nor at
last without a great deal of Pain.

REMEDIES.
Take two Quarts of Milk, or of Tripe-Broth; Oil-Olive, and fresh Butter, of
each four or five Ounces; the Yolks of six Eggs, and two or three Ounces of
Sugar: Mix 'em for a Clyster, which allays the Sharpness of the Humors, but
removes not the Cause, and therefore must be repeated every three hours, adding
two Ounces of good Diaphoretic Antimony, to dissolve the rebellious and
stubborn Humors. All Purgatives given at the Mouth are hurtful, for they
increase the Agitation of the Humors, redouble the Pain, by violently plucking
away the tough Slime, flay the Guts, add new Torments to a Part that was hardly
able to support those it suffered before, and cannot be administered without
endangering the Horse's Life: and besides they do not begin to operate till
four and twenty hours after they are taken; during which time the Horse either
dies or recovers. And therefore instead of purging Medicines, that are usually
prescribed in this Case, I advise you to have recourse to Clysters, which must
be often repeated and changed, according to the various Circumstances of the
Disease; for sometimes you must give a softening Clyster to assuage the Pain,
sometimes add Antimonium diaphoreticum, to melt the Humors, and if the
Distemper be of long continuance, inject one of Milk or Tripe-Broth. It will
also be convenient to give the following Mixture at several times; take Oil of
Roses and common Oil, of each one Pound, fine Sugar eight Ounces, Rose Water a
Pint; Mix 'em, and pour a Glass-full down his Throat with a Horn every three
hours. This easy and familiar Remedy will open and scour the Guts, cut the
thick Humors, allay the Pain, and by its Slipperiness gliding through the
Intestines, qualify the Sharpness and Heat of the Humors: After every Dose
walk the Horse gently a quarter of an hour, without heating him, lest the
Humors be further enraged.

When you perceive that the Horse is freed of his Pain, feed him with Bran
seven or eight days, after which, since this Distemper is only appeased but not
perfectly cured, you must endeavor to remove the Cause, and expel those
Impurities from whence the Colic proceeds, by a convenient Purgation. The
following Oil is endu'd with a peculiar Virtue to drive out the tough and
glassy Phlegm, that occasioned all the abovementioned Disorders in the
Intestines.

CHAP. XLVI. An excellent Purging Oil.
THE administering of purging Medicines to a Horse, is one of the hardest parts
of a Farrier's Task, and therefore I thought my self obliged to use the utmost
Diligence and Application to find out a safe and successful Method of
Purgation: but notwithstanding all my Endeavors to prevent the Inconveniences
that attend the Use of those Medicines, I observed an extreme Repugnancy in the
Nature of Horses to yield to their Operation, and I found by Experience, that
purgative Remedies are succeeded by such an universal Disorder in the Economy
of Nature, that the Horse cannot be restored to his wonted Temper for a
considerable time afterward. I will not trouble my Reader witha particular
Account of those Inconveniences, but content my self with assuring him that I
have seen more Horses than one killed by purging Remedies that had been
successfully administered to others, for want of a due Preparation of their
Bodies, according to that Maxim of Hippocrates, Concocta medicamentis aggredi
oportet and movere, non cruda. I shall treat of this Preparation in a more
convenient place, and now proceed to acquaint you, that I have seen some Horses
foundered by the Use of Purgatives, and others continue to purge ten Days and
as many Nights, during which time they were in perpetual danger; and those who
tended 'em (and I my self sometimes) were forced to pour down their Nourishment
with a Horn. So many unsuccesful Trials have taught me Circumspection, and I
never purge a Horse without fear, though Necessity often obliges us to make use
of those Remedies, and a due observance of the true Method of administering 'em
may prevent their fatal Consequences. I have considered these things with the
utmost Attention, and after a careful Examination of all Circumstances, I find
Van Helmont's Opinion to be very reasonable, and I Am persuaded that his
Arguments are infinitely more convincing than all that had been urged by others
before him. But since I am not Master of a sufficient Stock of Learning to
explain his Maxims, and reduce 'em to Practice, and cannot attempt to overturn
the received Method of Practicing Physic, without invading a Province that does
not belong to me; I must even content my self with following the Multitude,
till some Person of greater Judgment and Authority shall undertake the
Reformation of Medicine, by extirpating all Purgatives, and substituting some
powerful Diaphoretic in their stead, which may produce the same Effects we
expect from the others, and destroy that preternatural Heat which is the Root
of all these Disorders. However I thought my self indispensably obliged to
enquire into the safest Methods of Purging Horses; and I Am convinced that the
following Oil is one of the most proper Remedies hitherto known, to move a
Horse's Belly without Disturbance.

Take Oil-Olive three Pounds, Claret Wine a Pint, Pulp of Coloquintida five
Ounces, Flower of Lin-seed an Ounce and a half, three Lilly-Roots cut into
round slices, Missleto of the Apple Tree beaten, an Ounce, Cammomil-flowers a
handful. Put all the Ingredients into a Pot covered exactly with another
somewhat less, and lute the Junctures of the Vessels with Clay tempered with a
little Hair or Wool: after the Clay is dried, boil the whole Composition gently
till the Wine be consumed, that is eight or ten hours; then remove it from the
Fire, and when it is half cold strain it through a Linen Cloth, and give one half
lukewarm to the Horse, for the whole quantity is sufficient to purge two
Horses; but if he be naturally hard to be wrought upon by purging Medicines,
give him more of it afterward, proportionably to his Strength; for it is better
to divide the Dose than to endanger the Horse's Life by Superpurgation. This
Oil may be kept Ten Years, without the least Alteration or Diminution of its
Virtue; and therefore you may prepare a sufficient quantity at one time to
serve four or six Horses, and you may also use it in Clysters, if need require.

Keep the Horse bridled six hours before, and five hours after the taking of
the Medicine, which must be given in a Pint of Broth, made with Tripes,
Sheep's-Head, or some other kind of Flesh, but without any mixture of Fat, and
then walk him about an hour. Those who keep many Horses, and even professed
Farriers, may prepare large quantities of this Oil; and keep it by 'em till
they have occasion to use it.

Though Coloquintida be an Enemy to the Guts, and therefore may seem suspicious
in a Disease that is seated in those Parts; yet its sharp and venomous Quality
being tempered by the Oil, it may be very safely given especially in Broth made
with Tripes, or Sheeps-Heads.

This Oil may also serve to purge those Horses that remain lean and meagre
after hard Labor, without any manifest Distemper.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Fourth Kind of Colic.
THis Kind of Colic is occasioned by Worms, which stick to the Stomach and
great Guts, and cause such violent and intolerable Pains, that the tormented
Horse is driven to the most desperate Actions, and sometimes lies stretched on
the Ground as if he were dead.

The Worms or Truncheons, that cause those Gripings, are usually broad, thick,
and short, like little Beans of a red Color: there are others long and white,
sharp at both Ends; but these are not so dangerous as the former, and seldom
gripe the Horse. These little Worms gnaw and pierce the Guts, from whence
proceed the intolerable Pains with which the Horse is tormented: I mean the
first Kind of Worms, that occasion all these Disorders, and even sometimes eat
Holes through the Maw, and kill the Horse.

You may conclude that the Pain proceeds from Worms, when you find 'em among
the Horse's Dung: but the red Sort is not easily discerned, being almost of the
same Color with the Excrements. You may also know that the Horse is troubled
with 'em, when during the Violence of the Pain he bites his Flanks or Belly,
and tears off part of his Skin, as if he were mad; afterward he will turn his
Head, and look upon his Belly, sweat all over the Body, throw himself upon the
ground, start up again, and put himself into several unusual Postures.

Since I design afterward to describe all the various Kinds of Worms that are
generated in the Bodies of Horses, I shall here confine my self to the proper
Subject of this Chapter.

When a Horse is troubled with the Worms, mix half an Ounce of Mercurius dulcis
with an Ounce and a half of old Treacle, and make up the whole into three
Pills, which must be given in a Pint of Claret. An hour after inject a Clyster
of two Quarts of Milk, with the Yolks of six Eggs, and a quarter of a Pound of
Sugar, which by its Sweetness will entice the Worms to the straight Gut. The
best Mercurius dulcis may be had for fifteen Pence the Ounce. See the Hundred
and fifty eighth Chapter, where you will find several ways to destroy Worms, by
Purgation, Powders, Potions, etc.

A Gentleman of my Acquaintance having sent to a little Town for half an Ounce
of Mercurius dulcis, the Apothecary sent him corrosive Sublimate, which he gave
without scruple to his Horse, who died of it; and after his Body was opened the
Disorders caused by the Poison appeared in his Throat and Maw; for the Quid pro
Quo was somewhat too strong on this occasion. To prevent such dangerous Cheats,
you must make the Apothecary put some of the Mercury on the tip of his Tongue,
for that which is truly prepared is so free from all manner of Sharpness, that
it will not so much as prick the Tongue, and I my self usually taste it,
without either Fear or Danger. But if it be corrosive Sublimate, he will either
refuse to taste it, or only touch it very slightly.

There are several other Powders prescribed for killing Worms, of which I shall
treat in time and place convenient; but Mercurius dulcis is the most effectual;
for the Vapor of it alone kills all manner of Worms: yet if this fail you may
have recourse to other Remedies.

The Clysters that are given to Horses troubled with Worms, may be made of
Tripe-Broth, or Barley-water, boiled with Agrimony and Purslane, of each one
handful. In this Liquor dissolve half a Pound of Honey, the Yolks of eight
Eggs, half a Pound of Sugar, and inject it blood-warm; for by reason of its
Sweetness it will draw those troublesome Insects to the straight Gut.

CHAP. XLVIII. A Specific Powder for all the Four Kinds of this Distemper
already described.
SInce it is hard to distinguish certainly the true Cause of the Colic, during
the Fit, I thought fit to propose a Powder which may be given with Success in
all the Kinds of that Distemper mentioned in the preceding Chapters. This will
prevent the ill Consequences of a Mistake; for it is good for the Colic caused
by Indigestion, since it promotes the Concoction of the Matter that floats in
the Horse's Maw: It breaks and dispels Wind; it prepares and digests that crude
and glassy Phlegm which causes the Third Kind of Colic: nor is it less
admirably useful to destroy Worms, with the Additions that shall be afterward
mentioned; besides it makes the Horse piss, and therefore is of excellent Use
in the Fifth Kind, Only it is not proper in that Kind of Colic which proceeds
from Choler; but since the Disease seldom derives its Original from thence, you
may use this Medicine without any Scruple; for it is both cheap and effectual,
and you ought always to keep some of it by you. The Composition of it follows.

Take Roots of Master-wort, Leaves and Roots of Raddishes, greater Centory, and
Tansy; Dry 'em in the Sun, in the Summer, and in an Oven with a moderate degree
of Heat, in the Winter; then take a Pound of each, Germander, Ground Pine,
Roots of Angelica and Elecampane, all dried in the Shade, of each half a Pound,
Corallin or Sea-Moss, and Liver-Aloes, of each four Ounces; Galingal, Nutmeg,
and Sal Prunellae, of each two Ounces; Reduce all the Ingredients to Powder
separately, then mix em, and keep 'em in a Leathern-Bag, or Glass-Bottle close
stopped. The Dose is an Ounce for small Horses, two Ounces for those of a
middle Size, and two Ounces and a half for the largest Horses. Mix it with half
an Ounce or three Drams of old Treacle, or an Ounce of Treacle diatessaron, or
Mithridate; then give it the Horse in a Pint of White Wind, and afterward walk
him in his Clothes.

Those who travel with several Horses, ought always to make provision of this
Powder, not only by reason of its excellent Virtues, but because Horses are
frequently seized with the Colic at a distance from any place where they may
have Assistance, and at unseasonable Hours.

If you suspect that the Disease is occasioned by Worms, since many are
possessed with groundless Prejudices against Mercurius dulcis, I shall propose
another Remedy which will produce the same Effect; but I must first acquainnt
you that you may infallibly kill all the Worms in a Horse's Body, by giving him
an Ounce and a half of the abovementioned Powder, mixed with half an Ounce of
Mercurius dulcis. If this Preparation of Mercury cannot be had, or if you be
afraid to use it, you may give the following Purgative, above two days at least
after the Fit is over.

A Purging Medicine to destroy Worms.
Take of fine Aloes an Ounce, Coloquintida and Agaric, of each three Drams,
Turbith half an Ounce: Mix 'em all in a gross Powder, with an Ounce of the
Powder described in the beginning of this Chapter, and give the whole to your
Horse with a quarter of a Pint of the Gail of an Ox, and a Quart of
White Wind; then cover him well, and walk him for a quarter of an hour: This
Medicine will both purge the Horse, and kill the Worms that are in his Body.

Eight Hours after the taking of this Remedy, give him a Clyster of Cow's-Milk,
Whey, or Tripe-Broth, adding half a Pound of clarifi'd Honey, with the Yolks of
six Eggs, to allure the Worms to the straight Gut.

You must not give this Medicine to a Horse that is naturally squeamish, and
apt to forsake his Meat, for it is only proper for great Eaters: Neither must
you give it to those that are troubled with Worms, during the Fit of the Colic,
but two or three days afterward, as I intimated before.

A Powder for the Colic.
If you have not the abovementioned Powder ready made, you may prepare another
of common Parsley-Roots, dried in the Shade two Pounds, Grains of Paradise, and
Barks of Oranges, dried and reduced to Powder, of each one Pound Pigeon's Dung
half a Pound. Beat all the Ingredients to a gross Powder, mix, and keep it in a
Leathern Bag well tied. The Dose is an Ounce, or two Ounces for a large Horse,
in a Quart of Wine; then cover him well, and walk him gently. This is a good
and cheap Remedy, and more easily prepared than the first.

Another Remedy for the Colic.
This is an excellent Remedy, but it is only fit to be proposed to those who are
willing to spare no Pains for the preservation of their Horses: And besides, it
must be prepared by one that is curious, and is not altogether unlearned.

Take of Spirit of Nitre, about half a Pound, pour it drop by drop upon a like
quantity of the best Spirit of Wine, to prevent too violent an Ebullition;
after the agitation ceases, put the whole Liquor in a Cucurbit, with its Head
and Receiver, and distill with a gentle Sand-heat, cohobating four times, that
is, repeating the distillation of that which comes over into the Recipient four
several times, after which the Spirits will be united; and if you taste 'em,
you will perceive that they have lost their Acidity and become Sweet.

Give your Horse a Dram and a half, or two Drams of this Spirit of Nitre
dulcifi'd in White Wind; and an Ounce and a half or two Ounces of it in an
ordinary Clyster. This is a cheap, sure, and durable Remedy, and any Apothecary
that has the least Tincture of Chemistry may prepare it.

Another.
If you have tried several Remedies in vain, as Bleeding, Clysters, Treacle,
Orvietan, and others, give your Horse two stinking Pills in a Pint of Wine, and
an Hour after a Clyster: If the Pain still continue, give him two Pills more in
another Pint of Wine; and if need require, repeat the Dose a third time,
interposing the same space of time as between the first and second. But you
must not begin with this Remedy, as I have seen some do, with ill success: Only
you may give it after some of those Medicines I have prescribed have been
unsuccessfully used.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Fifth Kind of Colic.
HOrses are very frequently troubled with this kind of Colic, in which they
cannot Stale or Piss, it is occasioned either by Obstructions in the neck of the
Bladder and Urinary Passage, or by an Inflammation of the Bladder, or (though
very rarely) by Sand or Gravel.

This is a very dangerous Distemper, and (without timely assistance) Mortal, by
reason of the violent Pains caused by the stoppage of Urine. You may know it by
these Signs; the Horse lies down and rises, tumbles, and offers to Stale, but
cannot; oftentimes his Body swells, and sometimes he Sweats about the Flanks.

You must begin the Cure with a Clyster, prepared with the five opening Roots,
and Sal Polycrest, proceeding as you were directed in the Forty third Chapter.
Or thus,

A Clyster to provoke Urine.
Take the Decoction of the five softening Herbs, (viz. Mallows, Marshmallows,
Mercury, Violet-Leaves, and Pellitory of the Wall) with an Ounce of
Grommel-Seed in Powder; Strain and add half a Pound of common Turpentine,
dissolved in the Yolks of six Eggs, three Ounces of the Oil for Clysters
described in the Forty fourth Chapter, or (for want of that) of common
Catholicum. Inject the whole by way of Clyster, after you have walked your
Horse half an hour.

If you put the Turpentine into the Water, before you beat it with Yolks of
Eggs, it will grow hard as a Stone, and communicate no Virtue to the Clyster.
But to avoid the trouble of dissolving it, you may mix two Ounces of Spirit of
Turpentine with the Clysters, which provokes Urine more effectually.

As Soon as the Clyster is rejected, give your Horse two Ounces of Powder of
Col^phony in a Pint of White Wind; then walk him, and he will certainly Stale.

Or, Boil two Ounces of Anni-seed in a Quart of Water, add the weight of a
Crown of Wood-Lice, in Powder, and give it lukewarm. This is an easy Remedy,
and does not heat the Horse.

If all these Remedies prove in effectual, anoint his Sheath and Stones with
Garlic, beaten and mixed with Oil-Olive; that is, take five or six Heads of
Garlic, beat 'em, and make an Ointment with a sufficient quantity of Oil, with
which rub his Sheath and Stones. If he be a Gelding, let his Yard be drawn
gently out of the Sheath, and after all the Filth is washed off with lukewarm
Water, rub the whole outside of the Sheath with the Mixture of Garlic and Oil,
which will give him a desire to Stale if he can; for some Horses have an
Inclination to Piss, but cannot.

If this Application do not provoke Urine, mix Powder of Wood-Lice dried
without burning, and reduced to the form of an Ointment with Oil, and anoint as
before, after which the Horse will Stale.

A Quart of Emetic White Wind, given with a Horn, will certainly make the Horse
Piss, if he be walked after it, both at a Trot and a Foot-Pace. I have already
taught you how to make this Wine in the Twenty third Chapter; but since it is
too late to prepare that Remedy after your Horse begins to be troubled with a
stoppage of Urine, you may take Golden Sulphur of Antimony (which you will find
described in Glazer's Chemistry, and afterward in this Book) and fine
Wheat Flour, of each an Ounce, mix 'em well in a Mortar, and give the whole
Powder to the Horse in a Quart of White Wind: It provokes Urine more
effectually than any Wine whatsoever. You may find this Medicine at the Shops
of some curious Apothecaries: It was invented by Glauber, who calls it his
Panacaea, or Universal Remedy.

You may put a couple of Lice or Bugs to the end of the Horse's Yard, to rouse
the expulsive Faculty.

During the use of those Remedies, it will be convenient to foment the Reins
thus, boil two Bushels of Oats in a mixture of Water and Vinegar, till the Oats
burst under your Finger, then apply 'em in a Bag to the Horse's Reins or Back,
as hot as he can well endure, about the place where the Saddle ends. If you
have not Oats, you may make use of Rye.

This Fomentation provokes Urine effectually; but if the expulsive faculty be
languid, beat Darnel, and boil it in Vinegar, and anoint the Yard and Stones
with the Decoction.

Thrust your Hand into the Horse's Fundament, and rake him, then press the
Bladder gently with your Hand, and the Horse will infallibly Stale.

If these Remedies prove ineffectual, choose the whitest Flints you can find on
the Banks of some rapid River, heat 'em red-hot, and quench 'em in a Pint and a
half of strong White Wind, heating and quenching 'em so often, till they
crumble into Powder, then strain the Wine through a Linen Cloth doubled, and
make the Horse drink it; for the Wine being impregnated with the Salt of the
Flints, which is a powerful Diuretic, will certainly make the Horse Stale.

Sal-Prunellae, or Crystal-mineral clears the Passages, and removes the
Obstructions that stop the Urine; but you must not depend upon it during the
Fit, for its virtue principally consists in preventing the Stoppage of Urine in
those Horses who usually endeavor to Stale, but cannot, by reason of a certain
Heat or Obstruction in the Passages; in which case, you must give the Horse
every day in his Bran, an Ounce of Sal-Prunellae, and a Dram of Nutmeg, till he
has consumed a whole Pound.

Sal-Prunellae cools the Bowels, clears the Passages, rectifies the Blood, and
would be an admirable Medicine, if it were not apt to cool the Stomach too
much, and make the Horse lose his Appetite; for which reason I added a Grain of
Nutmeg, which comforts the Stomach, without over-heating the Body: But if the
Horse, notwithstanding that, forsake his Meat, you must not continue to give
him the Crystalmineral.

Take about four Ounces of dried Pigeon's Dung in Powder, boil it in a Quart of
White Wind, and after two or three waums, strain out the Liquor, and give it
Bloodwarm to the Horse: then walk him for half an Hour, and he will Stale if it
be possible. I know some Men who took a Dram of this Dung in a Glass of Wine
for the Colic, and received great benefit by it.

One of the best Remedies for a Horse that cannot Stale, is to carry him into a
Sheep-cote, and there to unbridle him, suffering him to smell the Dung, and
roll and wallow in it; for he will infallibly Piss before he come forth, if he
be not past Remedy. This quick Effect proceeds from a certain Volatile, Subtle,
and Diuretic Salt, that exhales from the Sheeps-Dung, and strikes the Brain;
for, by reason of the Correspondence of that with the lower Parts, it obliges
the expulsive Faculty to void the Urine. It would be needless to prove, that
this Dung is full of such a Salt, since the Truth of that Supposition is
sufficiently confirmed by the great quantity of Saltpeter which may be so
easily extracted out of it.

The Urinary Passages are frequently stopped by thick Phlegm, which will hardly
be removed by the abovementioned Remedies, and therefore you may have recourse
to that which follows, and I Am confident you will not lose your Labor.

A Remedy to provoke Urine.
Take an Ounce of Sassafras-Wood, with the Bark, which contains part of its
Virtue, cut it small, and infuse it in a Quart of White Wind, in a large
Glass-Bottle well stopped, so that two thirds of the Bottle may remain empty,
let it stand on hot Ashes about six hours, then strain out the Wine, and give
it to the Horse in a Horn. This Remedy will quickly produce the desired effect,
for it will certainly make the Horse either Sweat or Stale; and it is generally
acknowledged, that the Matter of Sweat and Urine is the same.

Another.
Oil of yellow Amber is one of the most effectual Remedies to make a Horse
Stale. The Dose is a Spoonful in a Pint of White Wind, and you must walk him
after it.

This Medicine is easily procured, since almost all Apothecaries have it, or at
least ought to have it. It must be made without Addition, and not rectified:
Its excellent Virtues make amends for its noisome Smell. It Is so powerful a
Diuretic, that the Steams or subtle Spirits that are evaporated from it, during
its Preparation make the Artist Piss excessively.

Those who are desirous to know how it is made, may consult Crollius's Basilica
Chymica, or Hartman's Praxis Chymiatrica, Glazer's Treatise of Chemistry, and
several other Authors who treat of that Art. I prefer this Remedy before all
the rest I have described, for it seldom or never fails.

Another easy Remedy for stoppage of Urine, is to wash the Horse's Yard with
lukewarm Water, then Powder it all over with Salt, and suffer him to draw it
in; if it be a Mare, put the quantity of a Walnut of Salt into her Privity.

Another good Remedy is to make him drink a Quart of Verjuice in half a
Pailfull of Water; and if he refuse to drink it, (which few Horses do) mix a
Quart of Water with a like quantity of Verjuice, and pour it into his Throat
with a Horn: Then walk him, and he will Stale.

If it be objected, that I ought rather to have proposed one sure Remedy, than
such a multitude of different Medicines, among which few know how to make a
good choice: I shall only answer, that I have tried 'em all, and leave the
Reader to choose such Medicines as are most proper for his Horse, and may be
most conveniently procured. For some of those Remedies are less Compound than
others, and the Disease is more or less obstinate in several Cases: Besides,
one Horse may receive no benefit by the use of a Remedy that has cured several
others of the same Distemper, by reason of the variety of Causes. Some Horses
are also frequently troubled with this Distemper, and sometimes die of it: And
from all these Considerations laid together, it will appear, that I had reason
to prescribe so many different Remedies. I have seen a great number of Horses
lost by the Ignorance of those who undertook to Cure 'em: For those pretended
Artists endeavored only to make 'em Stale, though the Disease was truly a
Wind-Colic. On the other side, most Farriers and Grooms imagine, that a Horse
is troubled with the Gripes, when his Urine is suppressed, and that Mistake is so
strongly rooted in 'em, that it is impossible to convince 'em of their Error. So
that when a Horse is troubled with a Stoppage of Urine, and the Farriers
pretend that the Distemper proceeds from the Gripes, you may certainly conclude
that they are mistaken, and that the Disease is an effect of another Cause.

When the stoppage of Urine is occasioned by a confirmed Obstruction, or by an
Inflammation of the Neck of the Bladder, you must not persist in the use of
Internal Medicines to provoke Urine, which would only serve to increase the
Pain and Inflammation, and stifle the natural Heat, by driving vast quantities
of serous and flegmatic Humors into the Bladder. But instead of these, you may
safely apply the external Remedies described in this Chapter.

It was never observed hitherto, that Horses were subject to the Stone or
Gravel, or that the stoppage of Urine that occasions this kind of Colic, was
ever occasioned by Sand or Gravel. Nevertheless, in the Year 1668. an old
Spanish Horse died in our Academy, after a Sickness of some Hours, during which
he Sweat all over the Body. To discover the Cause of so cruel a Distemper, I
ordered his Body to be opened by our Farrier, who found in his Kidneys a Stone
that weighed four Pounds and two Ounces, brown and shining like polished
Marble, resembling a little Dutch Cheese, and of a very regular Figure, for it
was not the breadth of a Line thicker on one side than on the other. Both its
Figure and Weight have remained entire ever since, and it has been seen by
almost all the People of Paris with admiration. I presented it to my good
Friend Count Bertholin, who made all those who saw it taken out of the Horse's
Body, attest the truth of the matter of Fact, before a Notary. He preserves it
still, and shows it to all those who desire a sight of it; nor could I forbear
relating so unusual an Accident.

For a Flux of Urine.
Having already discoursed of the Stoppage of Urine, I shall proceed, in the
next place, to give an account of the Cause and Cure of a contrary Distemper,
in which the Horse voids an excessive quantity of crude, and undigested Urine
resembling Water, and at last dies, not being able to support the long
continuance of such an immoderate Evacuation. This Flux of Urine is occasioned
by the Heat and Sharpness of the Blood, and an Inflammation of the Kidneys,
which, like Cupping-Glasses, suck all the serous Humors out of the Veins, and
discharge 'em into the Bladder, every thing that the Horse drinks passing
immediately through his Body, without the least Alteration.

The remote Causes of this Distemper are, Immoderate and Irregular Exercise, or
Working of young Horses, cold Rains in the beginning of Winter, and eating of
Oats that are Imported by Sea, where, being of a spongy Nature, they imbibe and
suck in the volatile saline Spirits that rise out of the Sea.

When you undertake the Cure of this Disease, in the first place you must order
the Horse's Diet, feeding him with Bran instead of Oats, and give him a cooling
Clyster; next day let him Blood, and the day after inject another Clyster,
after which Bleed him again the following day. The whole quantity of Blood that
is taken away must not exceed four Pounds, that is, two at each time.

After you have let Blood twice, and injected two Clysters, boil two Quarts of
Water, and put it into a Pail-full of common Water, with a large handful of
Oriental Bole beaten to Powder. Mix the whole very well, and make the Horse
drink it lukewarm, if it be possible, neither must you give him any other
Liquor for his ordinary drink Morning or Evening.

Horses that are troubled with this Distemper drink excessively; and some of
'em are so thirsty, and their Bodies so heated, that they would drink six
Pail-fulls of Water every day. You must not restrain 'em, but let 'em have
their full liberty to drink as much as they please, provided the Water be
prepared as before with boiling Water and Bole; for the more they drink, the
sooner will they be cured.

When the Horse begins to Stale as he used to do when in Health, and his Belly
and Dung return to their natural Condition, you must restore his Oats by
degrees, exercise him moderately at first, and afterward Ride or Work him with
discretion.

CHAP. L. Of a Horse that Stales Blood.
DUring the great Heats of Summer, if a Horse be ridden long and hard, or
overheated by immoderate Exercise, he will Piss pure Blood; and this Disease is
frequently Mortal, especially if some Vein or large Vessel be broken, which
discharges the Blood into the Bladder. Some Horses Piss Blood abundantly
without a Fever, loss of Appetite, or any other appearance of Indisposition; in
which case the Flux of Blood proceeds only from the excessive Heat of the
Kidneys, and may be easily cured. It would seem indeed that they could not long
bear so vast an expense of Blood; but since a little Blood will serve to tinge
a great quantity of Urine, it is commonly thought that all they Piss is pure
Blood, whereas oftentimes the tenth part of it is not Blood, and if proper
Remedies be applied, during the first days of the Distemper, the Cure will be
easily accomplished. I shall forbear giving a particular Account of the Causes
and Consequences of this Disease, out of complaisance to those who are professed
Enemies to Speculation, and only look for Remedies in a Book of this nature.

Bleed the Horse, and give him every Morning three Pints of White Wind made
Emetic, by the Infusion of unwash'd Crocus Metallorum, otherwise called Liver
of Antimony. The Nitre will give the Wine a red Color, and make it of
admirable efficacy; for it will both Cleanse and Heal, which are the two main
Scopes of the Cure. Keep your Horse Bridled four Hours before you give him the
Wine, and as long after: Repeat the Dose everyd ay, and in six or seven Days
the Flux of Blood will cease, and the Horse will be in a fair way of Recovery.
For the Emetic Wine expels all Impurities out of the Bladder, and consolidates
the part, which is all that can be desired for the Cure of this Distemper.

If the Pissing of Blood be accompanied with Heat and a Palpitation of the
Flanks, as it usually happens, give the Horse a good cooling Clyster every
Evening, bleed him a a second time, if need require, and dissolve two Ounces of
Sal Polycrest in the three Pints of Emetic Wine, which you were ordered to give
him every day, and persist in this Method till the Horse recover.

If the Sal Polycrest make him forsake his Meat, give him once or twice an
Ounce of common Treacle, or of that which is called Diatessaron in his Emetic
Wine, and after he has recovered his Appetite, return again to the Sal
Polycrest, but you must not exceed an Ounce or two at most. Since the Treacle
called Diatessaron is a very cheap Medicine, and of singular use in the Colic,
Want of Appetite, and other Distempers, I thought fit to subjoin the
description of it.

Treacle Diatessaron.
Take of Myrrh, Gentian, round Birthwort, and Bay Berries, all in Powder, of
each half a Pound, clarifi'd Honey, and Extract of Juniper Berries, with which
the Cordial-Pills are ordered to be made, Chapt. XVII. of each six Pounds, and
make an Electuary as follows.

Boil six Pounds of Honey in three Quarts of Water gently, to the consumption
of a large third part, taking off the Scum as it rises, then suffer it to Cool,
and having reduced the other Ingredients to a very fine Powder, incorporate 'em
by degrees in a Mortar with the Honey, and Extract of Juniper. This Electuary
has the virtue of Treacle, for it resists Poison, consumes superfluous
moisture, restores Appetite, and cures the Colic. The Dose is from one Ounce to
two, in White Wind or Claret.

This Treacle is called Diatessaron, because it consists of four several
Powders, mixed with Honey, and Extract of Juniper, which make a very sovereign
Composition, and an excellent Preservative against Malignity. It Is better than
the Treacle commonly used by Farriers, which costs but a Crown a Pound, and has
only the Name, without the Virtues of Treacle.

If your Horse be not cured by the abovementioned Remedies, prepare that which
follows. I have had Experience of its Virtues.

Another Remedy for Pissing of Blood.
Take two Ounces of the best Treacle of Andromachus, or for want of that, the
same quantity of Diatessaron; common Honey, and fine Sugar, of each four
Ounces: mix and incorporate 'em in a Mortar, then add Anni-seed,
Coriander-seed, and Liquorice, of each two Ounces in fine powder. Mix 'em well,
and dissolve the whole in a Quart of Claret. Keep your Horse bridled three
hours before the Dose and as long after, and let him blood the day following.

The day after his Bleeding give him this Clyster: boil five Pints of Whey made
of Cow's Milk, with two Ounces of the Scoriae of Liver of Antimony in fine
powder; as soon as it begins to rise in great Bubbles, remove it from the fire,
and adding four Ounces of Oil-Olive, inject it lukewarm. If the Disease
continue, as I believe it will not, you must repeat the whole Course. I have
seen several Horses very happily cured with this last Remedy.

CHAP. LI. A Remedy for the Stones that are drawn into the Body by the Violence
of the Pain.
I Confess this is not a proper place to treat of this Distemper; and some
critical Gentlemen will perhaps accuse me of neglect of Method: but my Design
is to consider Things, and the Advantage of my Reader, rather than to confine
my self to a strict Observance of such Niceties, which are oftentimes mere
Trifles.

Another Accident no less troublesome than the former, is the Drawing in of the
Stones to the Belly, occasioned by the violent Contraction that proceeds from
Extremity of Pain. Though the Stones hung swagging before, yet when they retire
into the Belly they cause an intolerable Pain, which may kill the Horse before
the Application of Remedies: for if the Cure be not carried on with all
Expedition, the Pain is redoubled, and the Horse lies down, starts up, and
tosses his Body furiously.

This troublesome Indisposition is usually occasioned by the Inflammation of
the Neck of the Bladder.

When you perceive your Horse to be troubled with this Symptom, and cannot feel
his Stones, which are in a manner drowned in his Belly, let him blood
plentifully in the Flanks, and give him a softening Clyster. After which take a
convenient quantity of Mallows, Marshmallows, Powder of Lin-seed, and Violet
Leaves, boil 'em well in Oil-Olive, and add a sufficient quantity of
Lin-seed-Oil, then cast your Horse on a Dunghill or in a Meadow, and anoint his
Sheath and Stones with the Oil, fomenting the same Parts with the warm Herbs:
as soon as the Stones appear, take hold of 'em, and tie 'em about with a soft
leathern Thong; after which make him rise, and he will both stale and dung; for
the Fomentation allays the Inflammation of the Neck of the Bladder, and
asswages the Pain of the Stones.

It Is a certain Rule, That when the Stoppage of Urine proceeds from a confirmed
Obstruction or Inflammation of the Neck of the Bladder, and the Stones are
drawn into the Belly, all Diuretics, or Medicines to provoke Urine, are to be
avoided; instead of which you must have recourse to Bleeding in the Flanks, and
if the the Disease be very violent in the Neck, softening Clysters, fomenting
of the Reins and Sheath. To conclude, if the Case were desperate, and all those
Remedies had been tried in vain, I would give the Horse an Ounce and a half of
the Preparation of Antimony, called the Angelical Powder, made up into a Ball
with Butter, in White Wind, or some other convenient Vehicle; for it is a more
effectual Medicine than any other that can be proposed; you will find the
Description of it afterward in this Book. Those who would have a larger
Account of this Subject, may consult the Ninth Book of a Treatise printed at
Venice, and entitled, La Gloria del Cavallo Opera del Illustre Signor Pasqual
Caraciollo, where they will find all that can be said of this, as well as of
all other Distempers incident to Horses, which are learnedly described in that
Book.

I did not think fit to insert the Description of Pulvis diureticus Reginae, or
the Queen's diuretic Powder, which is a mere confused Hodge-podge of Diuretic
Ingredients, that are hardly to be procured, and at dear Rates. Any Book of
Physic will furnish you with long Catalogues of those Drugs, but you must take
care to choose such as are most convenient. I could have swelled my Book to a
vast and useless Bulk, with such Descriptions, which are usually Heaps of empty
Words. And I have often found that those who read Medicinal Treatises imagine
they can cure all manner of Infirmities with such highly extolled Remedies; but
they are strangely disappointed when they come to make trial of their boasted
Virtues. Let us therefore learn Wisdom at their Cost, and beware of falling
into the like Mistakes. Most Authors borrow what they write from their
Predecessors, and they only copied after those that wrote before 'em, though
perhaps not one of 'em ever experienced the Remedies they commend, but barely
rely upon the Authority of one another. These and suchlike Considerations,
make me set a higher Value on one Experiment duly performed, than on all the
fine Promises, and confident Assurances of Success, that are to be found in
many Physical Books. It must indeed be acknowledged, that there are some
Authors who only write their own Experience, but their Number is
inconsiderable, and it is a hard task for an ordinary Reader to distinguish 'em
from the Multitude.

CHAP. LII. Of the Sixth Kind of Colic, called by some the Red Gripes.
FEW Horses are attacked by this Distemper, and few that are attacked escape.

If you be not acquainted with the Constitution of your Horse, you will hardly
be able to distinguish this from the other Kinds of the Colic: And a Mistake in
this case is very dangerous, for all the Remedies already prescribed for the
Colic are hot, and therefore no more fit to cure this Distemper, which proceeds
from a Heat caused by the Fermentation of the Bile, than Oil is to quench fire,
since the Natural Heat would soon be overcome and stifled by that of those
Remedies.

But the Cure is still more difficult than the Knowledge of this Disease,
because it consists in a Fermentation of the Bile, which seldom or never yields
to Medicines. Nevertheless, to proceed methodically, in the first place bleed
your Horse in the Neck, and an hour after in the Flanks; after which give him a
Clyster of the warm Blood of a Lamb, or at least of a young Sheep: in order to
which, bring a Lamb, young Sheep, or Calf, into the Stable by the sick Horse,
and having cut its Throat, receive its Blood into the Clyster-Bag, which must
be warmed at the Fire, that the Blood may not be coll'd, and so lose its
Spirits. As Soon as all the Blood of the Animal is extracted, it must be
immediately injected (after you have raked the Horse) without the least
Mixture, and hot as it comes out of the Vessels. This Clyster tempers the
Sharpness of the Humor contained in the straight Gut, and eases the Horse
wonderfully, who will not void it till the first time he dungs, in case he
recover: for Nature makes use of it, and at last discharges it with the
Excrements in form of great Clots like Balls.

Instead of this Clyster, which ought never to be omitted when it can be
procured, you may use the Decoction of Purslane, Lettuce, Succory, half a
Cucumber (if the Season permit) and an Ounce and a half of the Scoriae of Liver
of Antimony in fine Powder: let the Ingredients boil only half a quarter of an
hour, and dissolve in the Straining six Ounces of Honey of Roses, to help
Nature to separate and discharge the offending Matter.

If you perceive that the Horse is still tormented, notwithstanding the Use of
those Remedies, cast him on his Back with his Legs up, and spread four Napkins
moistened in lukewarm Water, over all his Belly, without touching his Flanks.
Hold him in this Possure for a quarter of an hour, during which time repeat the
moistening of the Napkins twice; after which some Horses are either cured or
eased, whereas others receive no Benefit, but sink under the Violence of the
Distemper. If you are loath to give your self the trouble of casting the Horse,
you may observe the following Directions.

If the Horse be seized with this Distemper in Summer, order him to be bathed,
and keep him as long as you can with his Belly half under-water, letting him
drink as much as he pleases. If you cannot conveniently bathe him, dissolve
four Ounces of Crystal-Mineral in a Pail-full of Water, and give it him to
drink. But above all give him frequent Clysters; for the Choler occasions such
violent Disorders in a little time, that the Horse cannot hold out above six
and thirty Hours at most. If he begins to desire Food, it is a Sign that the
Distemper abates, but you must not give him any.

I thought fit to propose these Remedies, though very few recover from this
Disease, which almost always seizes on vigorous Horses. If all your Endeavors
prove unsuccessful, you must lay the blame on the Violence of the Distemper.

If all the abovementioned Remedies produce no Effect, give the Horse two
stinking Pills in a Pint of Beer, and half an hour after a Clyster, thus
prepared. Boil an Ounce and a half of the Scoriae of Liver of Antimony in five
Pints of Beer, or (if that cannot be had) of Whey, and after five or six Waums,
remove it from the fire, and adding a quarter of a Pound of the Ointment called
Populeum, inject it blood-warm. Half an hour after give him another Dose of
Pills, and continue after the same manner till he has taken three Doses, and
received as many Clysters. If it be in the Power of Remedies to recover the
Horse, these Pills will certainly answer your Expectation: but if the Horse die
after all, you must not imagine that the Pills killed him, but only blame the
extreme Violence of the Distemper. Farriers call it the Red Gripes, which is
the common Name they give to all Mortal Diseases that are unknown to 'em It
will perhaps be objected, that it is contrary to the Rules of Art to give hot
Remedies, as the stinking Pills, in a Disease of this Nature: but it must be
considered, that it is impossible to allay such an Ebullition or Fermentation,
by the usual cooling Medicines, which are altogether useless in this Case. That
Effect can only be expected from Alkali's, which resist and destroy the acid
Liquor that occasions the Heat from whence the Ebullition proceeds. Now
Assa-foetida contains a great deal of Alkali, and from the Union of that Salt
with the Acid there results a sort of friendly and balsamic Salt that acts
jointly with the Liver of Antimony, which is very agreeable to the Nature of
Horses, and strengthens it extremely. And even that Medicine alone fixes and
thickens the Bile that ferments in the Intestines, and being rather cold than
hot, tempers the Heat of the Bay Berries: So that it is plain from what has been
said on this Occasion, that the Mixture of these three Drugs, in a convenient
Proportion, strengthens the natural, and destroys the adventitious Heat that
causes this Distemper.

CHAP. LIII. Of the Stavers.
HOrses are subject to a certain Distemper called the Stavers or Staggers,
which deprives 'em of the Use of their Senses to such a degree, that they are
almost wholly stupefy'd: and besides it makes 'em stagger, and beat their Head
against the Walls.

It proceeds from hot, sharp and thin Vapors, which rising from the Entrails
disturb the Brain, and hinder its Functions more or less, according to the
degree of their Sharpness, and the measure of their Quantity.

The Causes of this Distemper are hard Riding or Labor in hot Weather, noisome
Smells in the Stable, long Races, wheeling about or quick Turns too often
repeated, excessive Eating; and above all, the Abundance of hot and sharp
Humors in the Stomach, which ferment and boil over, and leaving their natural
place, deprave all the Concoctions.

The Signs of this Disease are obvious; for the Horse reels and staggers as if
he were drunk, beats his Head against the Walls with extreme Violence, lies
down and rises, but with greater Fury than in the Colic, for you would think he
had quite lost his Sight, and he knocks his Head so violently against the Walls
and Manger, that he is every moment in danger of killing himself.

To proceed to the Cure, bleed the Horse in the Flanks, and in the plait-Veins
of the Thighs, then give him a Clyster of two Quarts of Emetic Wine lukewarm,
with a quarter of a Pound of the Ointment Populeum, after which, suffer him to
repose a while.

You must frequently repeat the use of Clysters, and about an hour or two after
the first is voided, give him that which follows: Boil two Ounces of the
Scoriae in fine Powder, in five Pints of Beer: After five or six Waums remove
it from the Fire, and adding a quarter of a Pound of Unguentum Rosatum, inject
it lukewarm, and repeat the same frequently. In the mean time rub his Legs
strongly with a Wisp of Straw moistened in warm Water to make a Revulsion, feed
him with Bran, or Wheat-Bread, and walk him from time to time in a temperate
place. By a careful observance of these Directions you may cure this Distemper,
if it be not accompanied with a Fever.

But if the Disease still continue, give the sick Horse an Ounce either of
Treacle, Orvietan, or Diatessaron, dissolved in a Quart of the four Cordial
Waters, that is, of Scorzonera, Bugloss, Carduus Benedictus, and Queen of the
Meadows, or some other Cordial-Waters, and at the same time prepare this
Clyster. Take two Ounces of Sal Polycrest, and a like quantity of the Medicine
prescribed for the Potion, that is, either Treacle, Orvietan, or Diatessaron:
Dissolve 'em in two Quarts of a Decoction of the softening Herbs, with a
quarter of a Pound of Oil of Rue; make a Clyster to be injected lukewarm,
immediately after you administer the Potion.

Horses are also troubled with another Distemper of the Head, which is not so
dangerous as the Stavers, and may be cured with once Bleeding. It proceeds from
Fullness, and too great abundance of Blood, when the Horse has been kept long in
the Stable without Airing. As Soon as you take him out he falls down suddenly,
and rises up again so dizzy-headed, as if he were troubled with the Stavers.
But you may easily perceive that it is a mere Giddiness, for he is brisk and
eats heartily while he remains in the Stable, and falls down only when he is
taken out; whereas a Horse that is troubled with the Stavers falls in the
Stable as well as abroad; and his Eyes look wild, which is not observed when a
Horse is only dizzy.

This Disorder is caused by the too great abundance of Fumes that rise from the
Blood, which throwing off Obedience to Nature, oppress the Horse, and make him
reel, and at last fall.

The Remedies for this Giddiness are, first a Clyster, then Bleeding, which
must be repeated two days after: And to preserve the Horse from this
Inconveniency, give him moderate Exercise, and less Food, that Nature may not
produce more Blood than she is able to govern.

CHAP. LIVE. Of a Shoulder-wrench, Shoulder-pight, and Shoulder-splait.
SInce these Accidents happen so frequently, it will not be improper to
consider all the Circumstances that attend 'em; for many Horses are Lamed, and
rendered wholly useless for want of a distinct Knowledge of the nature of the
Grief, and a timely and methodical Cure. That you may comprehend the
Infirmities mentioned in the Title, you must know, that the Shoulders of a
Horse, and other four-footed Cattle, are not fastened to the Body by large
Bones, but only applied to the Extremity of the Side, and held in their proper
Situation by Ligaments which fasten 'em to that part. So that by a Slip, false
Step, or undue Posture of the Leg, a Horse may be easily Shoulder-pight or
Splaited, that is, some part of his Shoulder may be separated from his Body,
which cannot be done without stretching the Ligaments. In all the moveable
parts of the Body there are certain glewy Waters or Humors which facilitate
the motion of the Joints: Now, these Waters slip out of their proper place
where they are fixed by Nature, in order to the more easy performance of their
Functions, and are spread through the parts that are dilated or torn by the
Wrench of the Shoulder, where they immediately grow thick and hard, and instead
of facilitating the motion of the part, according to their primitive
Institution, hinder it, and cause that Pain which makes the Horse Lame, more or
less, according to the greatness of the Wrench. The Pain is occasioned both by
the stretching of the Nerves, and by that slimy Matter increased by the Humors
which flow thither from the Neighboring Parts. You must endeavor to attenuate
these Humors, and afterward expel 'em by insensible Transpiration, and by
strengthening the part to restore it to its former Soundness.

It Is hard to discover where the Lameness lies, if you did not see him get it,
and if the Horse does not cast his Leg outward, or make a Circle with it
instead of advancing it straight forward; for that is an almost infallible sign
that the Grief is in the Shoulder.

But if the Horse be Lame, and yet be free of the abovementioned Infirmity in
his Gate, turn him short on the Lame side, and observe carefully how he treads;
for if the Grief be in his Shoulder, he will set his Foot on the Ground
hardily, and endeavor to favor his Shoulder. If you cannot discover the part
affected this way, take hold of his Fore-leg, and make him go backwards and
forwards, that you may perceive how he moves his Shoulder, and whether he does
not complain and shrink when you put him on these Motions. It Is to be observed,
that a slight Strain or Wrench, without a Shoulder-splait, will make a Horse
halt before; but such a Lameness is not very considerable.

The usual way to know whether the Grief be in the Shoulder or Foot, is to
observe whether the Lameness be increased or abated by exercise. For if it be
in the Shoulder the Horse will halt least while he is heated with Riding; but
if it be in the Foot he will halt most when he is ridden. When you perceive
your Horse to be Lame, in the first place you must unshoe him, and order his
Foot as shall be afterward directed when we come to speak of Pricks in the
Foot. If you cannot discern any Hurt in his Foot, feel whether there is not a
Swelling in the Pasterns, or whether the Lameness be not occasioned by
Rat-Tails or Clefts; afterward feel the Fetlock-joint, and all along the
Master or back Sinew, to discover whether there is not a Sprain, and at last
handle the Shoulder pretty roughly, to see whether the Horse will complain of
any Grief in that part.

A Lameness may be occasioned in the Shoulder, not only by a Shoulder-splait,
but when the Horse receives an external Hurt, by a Blow from another Horse, by
a Fall, or when his Shoulder is bruised by the Saddle: In all which cases you
must, in the beginning, order the Sorance, as if it were a proper
Shoulder-splait.

There are several other ways to know whether Horses be Shoulder-splaited, but
there are few or none of 'em who do not draw their Leg, or cast it a little
outward: And the surest way is to observe how they tread, when you turn 'em
short; for, with a little practice and attention, you may easily discover
whether the Grief be in the Shoulder.

A Remedy for a Strain, Blow, or any other Hurt in the Shoulder.
When you perceive that the Grief is in the Shoulder, if the Weather be not
Cold, and the Horse halt but a little, lead him to a Pond or River, and make
him Swim half a quarter of an hour in the Morning, and as long at Night. At his
coming out of the Water rub the part with Aqua-Vitae, and if the Hurt be small,
it will be cured without further trouble. Thus, by the rolling of a Stone under
a Horse's Foot, when he is Galloping, his Shoulder may be strained, or a
Shoulder-wrench may be occasioned by a false Step: In such cases, if the Hurt
be small, the Cure may be performed by bleeding him in the Neck, swimming him
Morning and Evening, and rubbing his Shoulder with Aqua-Vitae at his coming out
of the Water, as I intimated before.

If this Remedy prove ineffectual, bleed him in the Neck, receiving the Blood
in a Vessel, and stirring it with your Hand to prevent its curdling; then mix
half a Pint of Aqua-Vitae with the Blood, and charge the Shoulder, rubbing it
hard with your Hand, to make the Aqua-Vitae penetrate the Skin, which, with the
astringent and strengthening quality of the Blood, does frequently perform the
Cure without any other Remedy: But you must keep the Horse shackl'd, if he
walks awry, or describes a crooked Line with his sore Leg.

If the Lameness continue still, you may conclude that the Hurt is greater than
you imagined: But there is no Hurt so great either in the Shoulder or Hip that
may not be cured with the Ointment of Montpelier, applied after the following
manner.

The day after you let the Horse Blood, and charged his Shoulder with Blood and
Aqua-Vitae, put a Patten-Shoe on the contrary Foot, if he does not lean on his
Sore Foot, and fetter his two Fore-feet, if he walk sloping from side to side;
then chafe the Shoulder very hard first with Spirit of Wine, and then with
black Soap, to make 'em pierce the Skin, rubbing in half a Pint of the former,
and about half a Pound of the latter, and leave the Horse in that-condition
four and twenty Hours; after which, chafe him every day with Ointment of
Montpelier, keeping him shackl'd and shod with the Patten-Shoe, about ten days,
if need require, at the end of which, take off the Patten-Shoe, and trot him
out gently, to see how the Cure goes on. If he Halt a little still, continue to
rub him every Morning with the Ointment of Montpelier, and at Night, without
taking off the Ointment, or any part of it, chafe him with Spirit of Wine.
Continue thus till he Halt but a very little, or only yield or feign; and then
make a Bath or Fomentation, of convenient Herbs with Lees of Wine and Honey,
bathing and chasing the Shoulder with it every day. After the Lameness is quite
gone, suffer him to remain in the Stable for a considerable time, without
either Walking or Riding him all the while, for nothing but Rest can make him
perfectly Sound. And it is a general Rule, that Repose is absolutely necessary
in all Hurts of the Shoulder, that Nature may have leisure to repair the
Disorders caused by the Strain.

Ointment of Montpelier.
Several Apothecaries make use of Tallow, colored red with Alkanet and washed
in Rose Water to give it a Smell, and sell it for Ointment of Roses: But the
true Unguentum Rosatum is made of Roses, from which it takes its Odor, for the
Color is a mere Trifle, since it adds no Virtue to the Composition: And the
like abuse is frequently committed in making the Ointment Populeum, by adding
Verdigrise to give it a bright green color, and make it more saleable. Take
then, of the true Ointments of Roses, Marshmallows, Populeum, and Honey, of
each one Pound, mix 'em cold, and keep 'em in a Pot close covered. This is the
true Description of that famous Ointment so highly esteemed by Lovers of
Horses, for its manifold Virtues; for it strengthens without Heat, and is
proper in all cases, when there is occasion for Charges or Ointments.

CHAP. LV. The Baron's Ointment for Strains in the Shoulders or Hips.
TAke of new Wax, Resin, Pitch, and common Turpentine, of each one Pound,
Oil-Olive two Pounds, Grease of Capons, Badgers, Horses, and Mules, and the
Marrow of a Stag, of each five Ounces; Oils of Turpentine, Castor, Worms,
Commomil, St. John's-Wort, Linseed, and of Foxes, of each four Ounces; Oil of
Gabian, or if that cannot be had, Oil of Peter, two Ounces. Put the Oil-Olive
in a Basin over a clear Fire, with the Wax, Resin, and Pitch beaten together,
stir 'em over the Flame till they be dissolved, then add the Fats and Stag's
Marrow, and afterward the Turpentine, incorporating all together over a very
gentle Fire; in the last place pour in the Oils, stirring the whole Mixture
half a quarter of an Hour, after which remove it from the Fire, and continue to
stir till it be cold.

This Ointment is good for Shoulder-splaits, Sprains, Pricks, Hip-shot,
Wrenches in the Hough or Thigh, Wringing, Surbating, bruised Legs, Sinews
sprung or sprain'd, and for all manner of Defluxions and Feebleness in any part
of the Body.

Before you apply it, you must heat the part by rubbing it with a wisp of
Straw, or with your Hand, then chafe it with the Ointment, as hot as the Horse
can bear it, holding a Fire-shovel red-hot near the part, to make the Ointment
penetrate, and repeat the same Application once every two days till the Horse
be cured. If the Grief be in the Shoulder you may put Pasterns on his Legs, and
a Patten-Shooe on the sound Foot if need require. You must not be surpised at
the Swelling which will happen in the Part, for after the Pain is removed, you
may easily take away the Tumor with convenient Baths or Fomentations.

You may cure even Old Hurts by this Method: but since the Ointment is not
always to be had, you may use the following Remedies.

In the first place you must let the Horse blood, and charge his Shoulder with
Blood and Aqua-Vitae, as before: The day following apply the Honey-Charge,
which you will find described Chap. 57. renewing it daily for three or four
Days; and the Disease must be very stubborn, and deeply rooted if it yield not
to this Remedy. You must not be surpised if the Honey-Charge raise a Swelling,
for that is a good Sign, and takes away the Pain: besides the Tumor may be
easily cured by convenient Fomentations, and even by bathing it with the Water
that has been used to wash Dishes, if the Lameness be quite gone. But if this
Remedy be not attended with Success, wipe the Shoulder very clean, and rub it
till it grow hot, then chafe it with the following Mixture; Take Oil of Spike
an Ounce, Oils of Peter and Turpentine, of each two Ounces, Spirit of Wine
three Ounces; Mix 'em. After which put Pasterns on his Legs, and a Patten-Shooe
on the contrary Foot.

If need require, two hours after you have rubbed the Shoulder with the
Essences, you may apply a good Charge, such as the Red Honey-Charge; and two
days after put a new Charge over the old, the main Design of these Applications
being to concentrate the Virtue of the Essences, and promote their Operation.
Four or five days after bathe the Shoulder with the Fomentation hereafter
described, laying it above the Charges; then take off the Pasterns, and
Patten-Shooe, and walk the Horse gently, that you may perceive what Benefit he
has received: for after the Application of the Essences the Pain for the most
part ceases, and the Horse halts no more. Nevertheless you must suffer him to
rest for some days; for though the Lameness be cured, the Part continues weak;
and if you do not give Nature time to repair her Losses, the Lameness will
return worse than ever, and the Cure will be more difficult than at first.

You must not imitate the old and pernicious Custom of Farriers, in that which
they call dry swimming, for it weakens a Part that is too feeble already,
obstructs the Cure, augments the Pain, and consequently the Defluxion. It Is
performed thus; they tie up the sound Leg, so that it cannot touch the ground,
and make the Horse hop on three Legs, by which means, they pretend, the grieved
Leg is heated, and the Pores both of the Skin and Flesh opened, to facilitate
the Penetration of the Remedies, which are endu'd with a Virtue to dissipate
and consume part of the Slime, Phlegm, or thickened Humors, to assuage the
Pain, and cure the Grief.

This Method may perhaps be allowed, when the Hurt is old, and all other
Remedies fail: though even in that Case you must not torment him by tying up only
the sound Leg, but rather put Pasterns on both the fore Legs: for the way that
Farriers usually take is the greatest Abuse in the World, and no Man of common
Sense will use it.

For a Shoulder-strain you may bleed the Horse in the Neck, and charge the
Shoulder with Blood mixed with Aqua-Vitae; two hours after chase the Part very
hard with a Composition of equal Quantities of Aqua-Vitae and Essence of
Turpentine well mixed in a Glass, without taking away the Blood. Two hours
after anoint the Part with half a Pound of Ointment of Montpelier, rubbing it
in with your hand; next Morning chafe the Shoulder again with a quarter of a
Pound of the Ointment, and at Night with half a Pint of good Aqua-Vitae,
continuing after the same manner for eight Days together; during which time the
Horse must not be suffered to lie down. Then take him out, and trot him, to see
whether he halts; and if the Lameness be gone, let him rest fifteen Days, to
strengthen the Part.

But if at the end of the time prescribed, you perceive that his Lameness still
continues, you must proceed to give the fire, thus. Find out the Joint or Part
where the Shoulder moves, and make a Circle about it of the bigness of a
Trencher; then pierce the Skin with a red-hot Iron, through the whole space
contained in the Round, leaving the distance of an Inch between the Holes: Clap
a good Plaster on the Part, and over that some of the stuffing that is usually
put into Saddles; put Pasterns on the Horse's Legs, and a Patten-Shooe on the
contrary Foot. When the Scab falls off, wash the Part every day with
Aqua-Vitae; and if the Lameness continue after the Sores are healed, you must
take Patience, and give the Fire time to operate, rubbing the burnt Part every
day with Ointment of Montpelier, and walking him in your Hand. But if after all
the Horse continue still to halt, you may even give him over for desperate.

CHAP. LVI. Of a Shoulder-splait.
IF a Horse be Shoulder-splated by a violent Strain, or be grown very lame of
an old Hurt, you must at last proceed to Rowelling: but you ought to try all
other Remedies before you have recourse to so cruel an Operation.

Cast the Horse on a soft place, and hold him so that he cannot stir; then rub
or beat the Shoulder with a Clod of Earth, Brick, or Currier's Pommel, till it
be crushed or bruised, moistening the Part with Water as you bruise it: After
which cut open the Skin on the lowest part of the Shoulder, about half a Foot
wide of the part where the Shoulder is joined to the Brisket, and three fingers
breadth from the Joint, and make another Hole opposite to the Elbow, behind the
Shoulder, overagainst the Side, keeping free of the Joint or place where the
Shoulder moves, to avoid drawing the Matter thither. In the next place, raise
the Skin from the Flesh with your Cronet or Iron Spatula, thrusting in the
Instrument to its whole Length, at the Hole in the lower part of the Shoulder,
and separating the Skin as far as the Mane: then blow into the Holes, and put
in two large Goose-quills anointed with Basilicum, and fix 'em so that they may
not fall out.

Three Days and three Nights after the Operation, take out the Quills to give a
vent to the Matter, and besmearing 'em with old Hog's Grease, Tallow, or
Basilicum, put 'em in again; after which you must take 'em out once every Day,
for fifteen or twenty Days; and then taking 'em quite away, the Holes will
close up of themselves. Some pretend that the Rowel must not be kept in above
ten days, for fear of breeding Felanders, and drawing such a Flux of Humors
upon the Part, that can never be stopped or diverted afterward. But the bare
Digestion of the Humors requires nine days, so that if the Rowel be taken away
on the tenth day, what benefit can be expected from it. It Is plain then that we
must give Nature time to evacuate the Impurities, and the thick Slime or Jelly,
that obstructs the Motion of the Leg. It Is true indeed nine days may suffice
for a fresh Hurt, but after other Remedies have been tried in vain, the Rowels
must be kept in longer. And the breeding of Felanders and hard Lumps of Flesh,
may be easily and effectually prevented, by anointing the Quills, keeping the
Holes open, and taking care to give a free Passage to the Matter.

You must observe that the bruising or crushing of the Flesh before Incision is
only proper when the Shoulders are plump and full of flesh, for when these
Parts are lank and destitute of Flesh, the Ligaments and Nerves lie almost bare
under the Skin, and may be easily hurt and bruised by the outward Contusion,
and an Inflammation occasioned, which may prove fatal to the Horse, as I have
observed oftener than once. In such a Case therefore the bruising of the
Shoulder must be omitted, neither must the Horse be cast, if the Operation can
be performed otherwise; but if he be surly, skittish, or very tender, you must
cast him, and take care to prevent his hurting you: then make an Incision in
the midst of the lower part of the Shoulder, separate all the Skin of that Part
from the Flesh as far as the Mane, blow up the whole Shoulder, thrust six or
eight thin Slices of Hog's Lard of the breadth of two Inches, into the Hole,
slipping 'em up between the Flesh and the Skin to the Top of the Shoulder, then
anoint the whole Shoulder, put Pasterns on the Horse's Legs, and a Patten-Shooe
on the sound Foot. You must not be surpised at the Swelling of the Shoulder,
which will certainly happen; but continue every day to give a vent to the
Matter, by taking out the old Slices of Hog's Lard and putting in new pieces,
and always anoint the Shoulder, as before. After ten days are expired, put no
more Pieces of Lard into the Hole, but only wash the whole Shoulder with warm
Wine and fresh Butter melted together. I use this Method at present with
Success, and it cures old Hurts without any danger.

To cure a Shoulder-Splait of a long standing, instead of Quills some use
Setons, which are made thus: Having made two Incisions, one on the Top, and
another in the Midst of the lower part of the Shoulder, raise up all the Skin,
and draw a Cord, made one half of Hair, and to other of Canvas, through both
Holes, anointing it with Basilicum. This Cord must be drawn downwards once in
twenty four Hours, to let out the Matter; and a great quantity of Humors will
be discharged in fifteen Days, especially if the Skin be well separated from
the Flesh through the whole breadth of the Shoulder.

If the Rowel or Seton occasion an extraordinary Swelling, attended with an
Inflammation and Fever, anoint the Part with Ointment of Roses, or Galen's
Ceratum, and inject Aqua-Vitae. When you think it convenient to close up the
Seton, draw out the Cord, and it will heal of it self.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Red Honey-Charge.
THE Remedy I intend to propose is so generally useful, that it is impossible to
mention all its Virtues in one Chapter, and therefore I shall content my
selfwith naming some of the Principal; as that it is good for tired and jaded
Horses, Strains in the Shoulder or Hips, decayed and swelled Legs; Pain in the
Feet, Surbating, SinewSprains, Swaying of the Back, Wrenches, and Sit-fasts.
Besides it dissolves and ripens all manner of Swellings; neither do I know any
one Remedy so universal as this which I now recommend to you as a Medicine that
never balked my Expectations, and Experience will give you a better Idea and
clearer Proof of its admirable Efficacy than all the Praises I could bestow on
it.

I thought fit to propose all the Ingredients singly, lest by some Omission you
should lessen the Value of the Remedy, for there is nothing useless that enters
into its Composition.

I. Sheep's Sewet melted, a Pound and a half. II. The Grease of a Capon, Hog or
Horse, one Pound. III. The Oil drawn from the Bones of an Ox or Sheep, or if
neither of these can be had, Lin-seed Oil, or Oil-Olive, half a Pound. IV.
Claret, of a thick Body, and deep Color, two Quarts. V. Black Pitch and
Burgundy Pitch, of each one Pound. VI. Oil of Bay, four Ounces. VII. Common
Turpentine, one Pound. VIII. Cinnabar in powder, four Ounces. IX. Common Honey,
a Pound and a half. X. Powder of Cummin-seed, four Ounces. XI. Good Aqua-Vitae,
half a Pint. XII. Fine Oriental Bole in Powder, three Pounds. XIII. A
sufficient quantity of Wheat Flour to thicken the whole Mixture.
Those who are not satisfied with this Composition, and are desirous to see the
Description of other Honey-Charges, may consult the Great Art of Farriers, the
French Farrier, the Expert Farrier, and other Modern Authors, especially the
Italians, who have dedescrib'd the Diseases of Horses more exactly than the
French; such as Pietro Crescenzo, Giordano Ruffo, Pascal Caraciollo, and Il
Colombro. They may also gratify their Curiosity, by reading the Latin
Treatises on this Subject, as those of Vegetius and Absyrtus, which, with the
Hippiatrica, are printed in one Volume: but they will find themselves often
confounded by so vast a Multitude of Remedies. Frequent Experience has fully
convinced me of the Excellency of that which I here propose; and I can assure
the Reader that a Regular and Exact Composition of the abovementioned Drugs,
according to the following Directions, will perform all the Effects that can be
expected from Honey-Charges that consist of as many Ingredients as Treacle.

Take a Kettle, Basin, or Pot that will endure the Fire, and put into it the
abovementioned Quantities of Sheep's Sewet, Capon's or Horse's Grease, or if
neither of these can be had, Hog's Grease, Oil of Sheeps Bones, or instead of
that Oil-Olive or Lin-seed-Oil, with the Claret. Boil 'em over a gentle fire at
first, increasing the heat by degrees, and stirring the Ingredients from time
to time till part of the Wine be consumed, that is, about two hours; then put
in both the sorts of Pitch, and after they are dissolved, the Oil of Bay.
Remove the Vessel from the Fire, and put in the Turpentine and Cinnabar, mixing
'em with the rest about a quarter of an Hour. After the Composition is
half-cold, add the Honey, and afterward the Cummin-seed, continuing to stir as
before: then add the Bole in powder, which ought to be such as will not harden
in the Mixture, but incorporate with the rest; and when the whole Composition
is almost cold, add half a Pint of fine and strong Aqua-Vitae, stirring till it
be perfectly mixed. Then thicken it with a convenient quantity of fine
Wheat Flour, almost to the Consistence of an Ointment, and continue stirring
till it be cold.

If this Remedy be duly prepared, the Powders beaten small, and the Moisture
wholly evaporated, it may be kept a Year or two in a covered Vessel and dry
Place.

If you cannot procure Cinnabar, take two Ounces of Quicksilver, beat it in a
Mortar with a like quantity of Oil of Turpentine, till it be quenched, and mix
it with the Composition; but the Cinnabar is a great deal better, and not so
hurtful to the Nerves as Mercury: Or you may substitute two Ounces of red
Precipitate instead of Cinnabar. If your design be to ripen a Swelling, add to
the Charge either Pitch, Rosin, Turpentine, Pigeon's Dung, Fenugreek-seed, or
Goat's Dung, choosing that which shall seem most convenient, and can be most
easily procured.

During the Heat of Summer you may apply the Charge cold; but in Winter or cold
Weather, you must heat part of it in a little Pot. If it be too thick, dilute
it with Wine or Lees of Wine, and if it seem too thin, bring it to a due
Consistence with Wheat Flour.

To make it stick to sloping and hanging Parts, as the Hips and Legs, you may
add a little more Turpentine and Pitch, and apply it as hot as the Horse can
possibly endure it: but if you design to resolve or repel a Swelling, the
Addition of those two Ingredients will procure a contrary Effect. Or you may
tie it on as hard as you can, without hurting the Part, so that you may thrust
your Finger under the Ligature or Bandage. When you have occasion to put this
Charge into a Horse's Foot, you must apply it boiling hot. This Remedy is thick
and glewy enough to stick for some time to a Part where it cannot be tied on;
neither does it stick so fast, but that it may be easily taken off when the
Part is cured: besides, it is free from the usual Inconveniency of other
Compositions of the same Nature, for it rarely makes the Hair fall off, unless
it be applied too hot; and (which is best of all) it is a surer and more
effectual Remedy than the other Charges.

The Third Ingredient of this Remedy is a sort of Oil, which Tripe-sellers draw
from Bones by Boiling, and sell for Twenty-pence, or Half a Crown the Pint, to
poor People, who make use of it for Blows, Bruises, and Falls: Its Smell
resembles that of Grease; it is yellower and much better than Oil-Olive, for it
asswages Pain more powerfully, pierces deeper, and comforts the nervous Parts
more effectually. If you cannot procure it, use Lin-seed Oil rather than
Oil-Olive.

The Capon's Grease, prescribed in the second Place, is better than Hog's
Grease; it eases Pain, and resolves, and you must melt and strain it through a
Linen Cloth. The same quantity of Badger's Grease would produce an admirable
Effect, or instead of that, Bear's Grease, but the former is not so rare as the
latter.

Another less compounded Honey-Charge, commonly called a Remolade.
The same Reason that obliged me to prescribe two Sorts of Cordial Powders,
makes me propose another Honey-Charge. The Effects of that which I have already
described are admirable, and it deserves the Title of Universal; but since
there is a considerable number of Persons in the World, who either cannot or
will not undergo the Trouble and Charge of so laborious and intricate a
Composition, I thought fit to subjoin another, which may be more easily
prepared, and at a lower Rate; I confess it is inferior in Virtue to the
former, but it is a very good Remedy, and you may depend upon it.

Take thick Lees of Wine three Quarts, Hog's Grease a Pound; boil 'em together
half an Hour, till they be incorporated: then add black Pitch and Burgundy
Pitch beaten, common Turpentine and Honey, of each a Pound; stir 'em over the
Fire till they be well mixed: after which add fine Bole-Armenic, or Bole of
Blois, eight Ounces; remove the Vessel from the Fire, and continue stirring a
quarter of an Hour longer. If the Charge be not thick enough, you may bring it
to a due consistence with a little Wheat Flour: And if it be too thick, you
may thin it with Wine, or Lees of Wine.

The Use and Application is the same with the Red-Charge, instead of which it
may be used with less Cost. The Ointment of Montpelier is also very effectual,
and those who intend to make a Campaign, should never forget to carry some of
it along with 'em. That which follows is of excellent use in all
Shoulder-strains, but since it cannot be Prepared without great Care and
Trouble, it is only used in great and dangerous Hurts.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the Ointment Oppodeldoc, for dry withered Shoulders, that are
deprived of their usual Nourishment, and for all Strains or Wrenches in the
Shoulders or Hips.
WHen a Shoulder-splait or Shoulder-pight is either wholly neglected, or
unskilfully Cured, by the long continuance of the Pain and Lameness, the
Shoulder, either wholly or partly grows dry, withered, juiceless, in a manner
senceless, almost incapable of Motion, and like a dead Member in a living Body.
For the natural Heat is destroyed by a too sharp and fiery Acid, which wastes
the part, and interrupts the course of the Animal Spirits; and unless that
preter-natural Fire, caused by the Acid Juice be quenched and extirpated by
some potent Alkali, the Part will remain for ever useless, and deprived of all
its Functions. The same Misfortune happens to Horses, that by reason of a Hurt
in their Foot, are not able to put that part to the Ground for a Month or two;
for the Shoulder, if the Grief be in the Fore-foot, or the Hip, if it be in the
Hind-foot, grows dry and sapless, by reason of so long a want of Exercise to
cherish the natural Heat. These Infirmities are cured after the same manner as
Shoulder-Wrenches.

It may seem perhaps a vain and unreasonable attempt to restore the natural
Heat in any part of the Body, after it is stifled by an Acid Juice. But there is
still a competent degree of Heat left in the part, if it be assisted, and the
Acid Juice consumed by some powerful Alkali; for that being once performed, all
that remains to be done is only to strengthen the part, and help Nature to
regain what she had lost. There are some Hints concerning this Remedy in Van
Helmont, where he describes the Virtues and Properties of the Sweet Sulphur of
Venus, which is partly contained in this Process: But I claim a right to the
Invention as it stands here, without owning my self obliged for it to any
Person whatsoever; and I Am consident that upon a serious and unprejudiced
Examination, it will be found agreeable to sound Philosophy, and very useful
for Men.

The Description of the Ointment Oppodeldoc.
Take of the dry Roots of Marshmallows, Comfrey, Gentian, long Birthwort, and
Angelica, of each an Ounce and a half; the Vulnerary Herbs, that is, Sanicle,
Ladies Mantle, Mouse-ear, Cat's-foot, Adder's-tongue, and Perwinkle, of each
half a handful; Leaves of Rosemary, Sage, and Lavender, of each a handful and a
half; Flowers of the last three Herbs (if they be in season) of each a handful;
Juniper Berries and Ounces; Cummin-seed, one Ounce; Castoreum in Powder, half
an Ounce; Camphire, four Drams: Stamp the Roots, cut the green Herbs, and beat
the Juniper Berries and dry Herbs grossly, throwing away the Stalks and Husks.
Put 'em in a Glass Cucurbit, or the lower part of an Alembic, and pour upon 'em
three Pints and a half of Spirit of Wine; then fit to it a close Head without
any opening such as is used in the Circulation of Substances. You must try the
Spirit of Wine thus; put some Gunpowder in a Spoonful of the Spirit, then
kindle it, and if it be pure and perfectly freed from its Phlegm, it will set
Fire to the Powder.

If you have not a Cucurbit with its Blind-Head, take a Mattress with a long
neck, and so large that all the abovementioned Substances being put in, two
thirds of it may remain empty; then take another small Mattress, and turning its
bottom upwards, put its Neck within that of the former. This is called a Vessel
of Rencounter, and is very proper for this Operation.

Lute the Junctures carefully, with two or three doubles of Paper, daubed over
with Whites of Eggs, and tied about with Thread. After the Luting is dry,
digest in Balneo Mariae ten Hours, the Mattress being fixed in the middle of the
Kettle, with a lay of Straw under to keep it at the distance of two Inches from
the bottom of the Kettle, During the first eight Hours, you must keep the Water
about it so hot, that you can scarce hold your Finger in it; and for the two
remaining Hours, augment the Heat, but not so much as to make the Water boil.
In the mean time the Digestion will be performed, and the Spirit of Wine
impregnated with the Tincture of the Ingredients, in which their Virtue
principally consists, by the Circulation of the Spirits raised by the Heat,
which in their ascent and descent extract the Tincture.

After the Spirit of Wine is sufficiently impregnated with the Tincture of the
Roots, Herbs, and Powders, suffer it to Cool, and straining it through a
Linen Cloth, pour it again into the Mattress, with a Pound of speckl'd
Castile-Soap, sliced very small. Fit the Vessel of Rencounter to the Mattress,
lute the Junctures, and digest as before, till the Soap be so perfectly mixed
with the Spirit, that the whole is reduced to the form of an Ointment; then
take out the Mattress, and suffer it to cool: The Soap contains part of the
abovementioned Alkali, which will destroy and consume the Acid Juice, or
invisible (though real) Fire, that wasted the Shoulder. If the Doses and other
Directions be duly observed, the Remedy will be of the consistence of an
Ointment, neither too thick nor too thin; and to try whether it be well
prepared, rub some of it on your Hand, which it will immediately penetrate,
leaving only a greenish Stain, though the natural color of the Ointment be brown.

When you intend to make use of it, chafe the part with a Wisp of Straw till it
grow hot, then apply the Ointment, rubbing it in with your Hand till it sink
into the Skin, and lay on fresh Ointment three or four times, rubbing it in
every time, that a sufficient quantity of it may enter. Apply the Ointment,
after the same manner, once every day for seven or eight days; after which, for
four days together, rub the whole Shoulder with Spirit of Wine, pouring it on
by degrees, till half a Pint of it be consumed at every Application, that if
any part of the Ointment remain among the Hair, it may sink into the Skin;
neither must you leave off rubbing till the Half-Pint be consumed, though the
chafing raise a sort of Froth on the Shoulder. After the first Application of
the Ointment you must bind two of your Horse's Legs, putting a twisted wisp of
Straw about each Pastern, and tying 'em together with a Rope or Cord, about
half a Foot long or more, according to your Horse's size. They who have
Shackles may use 'em if they please, or may make use of a Surcingle, but Straw
is less apt to hurt the Pasterns.

This Ointment must be applied cold, for it is of so piercing a Nature, that you
might make the whole quantity which I prescribed sink into the Skin at one
Appplication; but you must only rub in a competent measure of it at each time,
to help the natural Heat, to enliven the part, and draw thither the usual
supplies of Nourishment.

It Is an excellent Remedy to cure all Shoulder-Strains, Hurts, and Blows, even
without using Charges, Rowels, Fomentations, or Setons, as I had occasion to
try in a very long Journey; for one of our Horses being Shoulder-splaited, was
speedily cured by the application of this Ointment, though we did not suffer him
to rest, but only caused him to be led. If you have occasion to apply it to a
fleshly part, as to a Shoulder before it be wasted, or if the Horse be not
cured in the abovementioned time, you must repeat the whole course, or apply
the Ointment one day, and rub in half a Pint of Spirit of Wine the next day,
continuing thus by turns for sixteen or eighteen days without Intermission.

There are several Persons at Paris, of unquestioned Credit, who can attest
that both Coach and Saddle-Horses, whose Shoulders were perfectly dried up
after an ill managed Cure of Strains or other Hurts in the Shoulder, insomuch
that they halted downright, were absolutely cured by the regular Application of
this Ointment, and made fit for Service, without being troubled with these
Infirmities ever afterward. But it is to be observed, that the Horse must not
be wrought or traveled for a Month or two, according to the weakness of the
part; after which time he must be led out or walked for a quarter of an Hour
the first day, and afterward longer by degrees, till the Part be fully
restored to its wonted Vigor: For oftentimes incurable Relapses have been
occasioned by working or riding the Horse too soon after his Cure. This
Ointment does not make the Hair fall off where it is applied; and it is also
excellent for decayed and tired Legs and Feet. I can boldly recommend the use
of it to all Lovers of Horses, from my own successful Experience; and I leave
the Curious to judge whether or how it may be applied to Men.

It Is an infallible Rule, that a Remedy which is of sufficient force to perform
great and difficult Cures, will easily conquer smaller Distempers: And
therefore if the account I have given of this Ointment be true, as most
certainly it is, I need not lose time to persuade you, that it will cure
Shoulder-splaited and Hip-shot Horses, and all other Strains, Wrenches, and
Dislocations in those Parts.

Some Horses, after they are cured of a Dislocation or Shoulder-splait, as soon
as they are ridden a League or two, begin to Halt, and grow well again after a
little repose. Thus their Lameness returns as often as they are traveled, and
is cured by rest: For the Ligaments of the Shoulder being weakened by the
Strains or other Hurts, if they be not strengthened and restored to their
wonted vigor, the Horse will at last remain downright Lame. Such cases as
these require a Remedy of so piercing a nature as to penetrate all the Flesh
that lies in its way, and carry its virtue entire to the Sinews, that fasten
the Shoulder to the Body, and are the Instruments of its Motion, which are
seven in number. And I Am fully persuaded, by frequent and successful Trials,
that there cannot be a better Remedy proposed than this Ointment.

If the Hurt or Strain be small, those who have not this Ointment, may use that
which follows; for it is sooner prepared, but not so effectual.

Put a Pint of Spirit of Wine into a Cucurbit, or strong Glass-Vial, so that
two thirds of it remain empty, add half a Pound of Castile-Soap sliced small,
and stopping the Glass very close, set it on hot Ashes till the Soap be wholly
melted: Let it be quite cold before you unstop the Cucurbit or Bottle, and
reserve the Ointment to be used as the former. It will keep very long, for though
it gathers a crust on the top, it remains very good underneath.

CHAP. LIX. Of Broken Legs or Bones.
WHen the Leg or Thigh Bone of a Horse is broken, he is immediately given over
for desperate; no Man being willing to undertake a Cure that is generally
concluded to be impossible: And the reason that is alleged to confirm this
vulgar Error, is that the Marrow of their Bones is Liquid. Nevertheless I saw a
Horse and a Mule cured by the same Method that is used for the cure of such
Fractures in Men. The Mule whose Thigh was broken was able to walk in three
Months, and fit for Service in four. The Horse had the Bone of his fore-leg
broken, and the Fracture was accompanied with a great Wound, which discharged
abundance of Scales, yet he was perfectly cured: It Is true indeed, the Callus
which supplied the place of the Bone spoiled the shape of his Leg, but it did
not hinder him from performing his usual Work, though he halted a little. It must
be acknowledged, that the Situation of the Parts is extremely inconvenient, and
makes the Cure difficult: But a Horse can rest on three Legs, without making
use of that which is broken, as I observed in the abovementioned Cases, though
they were both at Grass in the Fields. Though, in my Opinion, it is highly
probable, that the Cure might be better performed, if the Horse were hung in a
Stable. Philippo Scacco Datagliacozzo in his Treatise Di Meschalzia, makes the
breaking of the Bone of a Horse's Leg the subject of a whole Chapter, where he
delivers the Method of Cure, which is also described by Signior Carlo Ruini in
the Fifteenth Chapter of his Sixth Book: And it is plain they were both of
Opinion, that those Bones might be reunited and consolidated. Nor do I see any
reason why we ought not rather give credit to the Testimony of those famous
Italian Authors, than to a multitude of Ignorant Farriers, who have the
confidence to affirm, that the broken Bones of a Horse can never be knit again.
And besides, I can, as an Eyewitness, demonstrate the Falsehood of their
Assertion, though the Instances I saw, afford very little Instruction; for he
that performed the Cure was neither Smith nor Farrier. The Mule and Horse were
turned loose, and left at different times near his House, which was on the
Highway; and he ventured to dress 'em with Splents and a Bandage, as he had
seen Men dressed on such occasions, turning 'em loose into a Meadow to take
their Fortune: But he was forced every day to undo the Bandage on the Horse's
Leg to dress the Wound. I saw the Horse several times hopping through the Meadow,
and at last he was cured. The abovementioned Person sold the Mule at a dear
rate, and came several times to my House on the Horse's back; for though, by
reason of the deformity of his Leg, and his halting a little, he could not find
a Customer for him, he made him travel at a Foot-pace upon occasion for above
six Years.

CHAP. LX. Of Stiff, Tired, Decayed, or Bruised Legs.
IN the Thirty second Chapter of the Second Part, you will find a particular
Account of the signs of these Infirmities; and my design at present is only to
propose some proper Remedies.

The Red Honey-Charge, and the Bath described in the Sixty fifth Chapter, are
of excellent use to comfort and strengthen the Legs.

Another Remedy.
Take of Spirit of Wine a Quart, Oil of Nuts half a Pint, Butter half a Pound:
Mix 'em in a glazed Earthen Pot, covered with another less Pot, exactly fitted
to it. Lute the Junctures carefully with Clay, mixed with Horse's Dung or Hair;
and after the Cement is dried, set the Pot on a very gentle Fire, and keep the
Ingredients boiling but (very softly) for eight or ten Hours. Then take off the
Pot, and set it to cool.

First rub the Master-sinew with your Hand, till it grow hot, then anoint it
with this Composition, chafing it in. Repeat the same Composition every day.

Another.
Oil of Earthworms is thus prepared. Take a sufficient quantity of Worms, wash
'em, and leave 'em in clean Water, for the space of six Hours, to vomit up and
cast forth all the Filth contained within 'em; then put 'em in an Earthen Pot
with so much Oil-Olive as may rise the breadth of two Fingers above 'em, the
Pot remaining half empty. Cover the Pot and lute the Junctures with Clay, mixed
with Hair or Saddlestuffings; then bury it in warm Horse-Dung; and after it has
stood there three days and three Nights, take it out, and as soon as it is cold,
uncover it, taking care to avoid the noisome Smell, and strain out the Oil.
When you have occasion to use it, rub the Horse's Legs till they grow hot, then
chafe 'em, and especially the Sinews, with Oil, and afterward rub each Leg
with a quarter of a Pint of Aqua-Vitae, to make the Oil sink in. This
Application must be repeated daily for twelve days; but if the Oil do not
operate sufficiently, you may augment its Virtues by adding to each Pound of
it, Oil of Castor, Foxes, Camomil, and Lillies, of each an Ounce and a half;
Ointment of Marshmallows, and Populeum, of each two Ounces: Mix the whole
Composition over the Fire, and to make it stick the better, you may thicken it
with a sufficient quantity of Beeswax. After the Application of this Ointment,
the Hair will fall off from the Leg, but it will grow again without leaving any
Mark. It Is to be observed that the Oil of Earthworms alone, applied with
Aqua-Vitae, does not make the Hair fall off.

The use of this Ointment is the same with that of the Oil; for you must chafe
the Sinew till it grow hot, then apply the Ointment about the bigness of a
Walnut to each Leg, and repeat the Application once every day, for twelve days.

If the Ointment be composed with the Addition of the abovementioned Oils, but
not thickened with Wax, you must use about half an Ounce of it in every
application. They who are desirous to seed the description of the Oils and
Ointments that enter the Composition of this Remedy, may consult the
Dispensatories of Banderon, Frambesarius, Renodeus, Joubert, and Rondelet.

To comfort and strengthen the Sinews of the Legs.
Take a Goose moderately Fat, and made ready for the Spit; stuff her Belly with
the Leaves of Mallews, Sage, Rosemary, Thyme, Hyssop, Lavender, Magwort, and
other convenient Herbs, with a large quantity of green Juniper Berries beaten;
then sow up the Skin, and set her into an Oven to bake in a glazed Earthen Pan,
that you may not lose the Fat or Grease, with which you must anoint the Legs of
a tired Horse every Evening, and next Morning chafe 'em with Aqua-Vitae above
the Grease, continuing after the same manner seven or eight days. To encourage
the Man whom you employ to rub the Horse, and make him diligent, you may give
him the Goose to eat.

Another.
During the Heat of Summer, make your Horse stand two whole hours every day up
to the Hams in a Stream or Current of Water, which will do him more good than a
multitude of Ointments.

'Twill be very convenient to make him lie abroad in the Dew all the Month of
May; or if you choose rather to keep him in the Stable, you may lead him out
every Morning to a Meadow, and gathering the Dew with a Sponge, bathe and rub
his Legs with it.

Spirit of Wine, mixed with a little Oil of Wax, will strengthen the Sinew,
resolve the hard Knobs that grow on it, and by removing those Obstructions
facilitate the motion of the Leg.

CHAP. LXI. For Blows, swelled or gourdy-Legs, whether the Swelling be
occasioned by some Accident, or proceed from any other Cause.
I Shall in the next place proceed to treat of swelled and gourdy-Legs, and
prescribe convenient Remedies to resolve and dissipate all sorts of Swellings
occasioned by Blows, Bruises, Desluxions, long Journies, hard Riding, and
keeping young Horses too long in the Stable, or any other Swellings or Tumors
whatsoever that happen in a a Horses Legs, either before or behind.

If the Swelling be caused by a violent Blow with another Horse's Foot, or by a
Fall, Bruise, or any other such like cause, apply one of the Honey-Charges
described in the Fifty Seventh Chapter, and continue the use of the Remedy till
the Cure be perfected. But if the Legs, or any part of 'em, remain still swollen,
choose any of the following Remedies that you shall judge most convenient.

When the Swelling is occasioned by a slight Accident, you may take it away by
applying only cold Lees of Wine, once every day; or to make the Remedy more
effectual, you may mix a fourth part of Vinegar with thick Lees of Wine. But if
the Swelling continue, apply the following Charge.

A Remedy for a Blow, and to assuage a Swelling.
Boil a Gallon of Lees of Red-Wine softly, over a clear Fire, stirring
perpetually, till they begin to thicken; then add fine Wheat Flour and Honey,
of each two Pounds, Black Soap, one Pound; boil and stir till the whole Mixture
be reduced to the Consistence of a Charge.

The continued use of this Remedy will strengthen the Horse's Legs, and take
away the Swelling.

This Charge may be also applied to a Swelling that spreads it self under the
Belly, and advances between the Legs; but the Duke's Ointment is much more
effectual in that case.

To Cure a Swelled Leg.
Tumors of a long standing grow hard, because the Humor contained between the
Skin and Flesh is so raw and undigested, that Nature is not able to concoct it:
And therefore the Swelling must be asswag'd, and the hardened Humor resolved by
the application of a piercing Remedy, such as that which follows:

Endeavor to get some of the Horse's own Urine, for so the Remedy will be more
effectual; but if that cannot be had, take of Cow's-Urine a Pint, Flowers of
Brimstone half an Ounce, Alum a Dram; boil away to half a Pint, and bathe the
Swelling with this Liquor, chasing it hard: then take a Clout that has been
worn, dip it in the same Liquor, and wrap it about the part, renewing the
Application Morning and Evening, till the Cure be perfected. You may easily
procure the Urine prescribed for this Composition, by going into a Stall where
Cows are lying, and rousing 'em up: For they use always to Stale, as soon as
they rise, especially in the Morning when their Meat is laid before 'em.

A Bath to resolve a Swelling in the Thigh or Leg.
Take ten Pounds of green Roots of Mallows or Marshmallows when you prepare
the Remedy in the Spring, or during the time of Advent before Christmas: but at
all other times, take six Pounds of the dry Roots: Beat 'em to a mash, and boil
'em gently with ten Quarts of Water in a Kettle for two Hours, then pour in as
much hot Water as you have lost by evaporation, adding three large handfuls of
Sage-Leaves, and continue to boil an Hour and a half, or two Hours longer. Take
off the Kettle, and add two Pounds of Honey, and one Pound of Black Soap,
incorporating all together; suffer it to cool till you can almost endure to
thrust the end of your Finger into it, and then mix a Quart of strong
Aqua-Vitae with the whole Composition. Foment the Swelling with this Bath, and
afterward chafe it with a handful of the dregs, or thickest part of the same:
Then walk the Horse half an Hour, and continue to observe the same Method every
Day, for seven or eight Applications will resolve the Swelling, unless there be
an Imposthume that tends to Suppuration, as you may easily perceive by the heat
and hardness of the Part; in which case lay aside the use of the Bath, and
apply Basilicum.

Take Black Soap and Honey, of each one Pound, good Aqua Vitae half a Pint, and
mix 'em cold. This is a very good Remedy to take away Swellings; you must rub
the Part with it every day, and walk the Horse half an Hour afterward,
repeating the Application till the Horse be cured.

Or if the Swelling be small, bathe it with the Solution of Alum in Wine.

A Remedy for a hard Swelling, proceeding from a Blow, or any other Cause.
Beat the Whites of six Eggs, with a large piece of Alum, for half a quarter
of an Hour, till they be reduced to a thick Froth; after which add a Glass of
true Spirit of Wine, for Aqua-Vitae is not at all proper in this case, shaking
the Spirit with the Froth till they be very well incorporated: Then mix and
incorporate the whole with half a Pound of common Honey, and charge the Horse's
Legs three or four times, scouring off the Charge with Water in which Dishes
have been washed. If the Legs continue swollen, repeat the Charge, and the
Swelling will quickly disappear: For this is a very good Remedy, and I have
often tried it with success both on the fore and hinder Legs.

To prevent the Swelling of the Legs.
Some Horses after long Galloping, and others after a great Journey, though
performed only at a Foot-pace, are seized with a Swelling in their Legs, before
they have stood two Hours in the Stable; and after they have enjoyed a little
Rest their Legs become perfectly round, the Tumor coming and going by Turns.
To prevent this Inconveniency, as soon as your Horse arrives at his Journey's
End, charge the Parts where the Tumor uses to appear, with Cows-Dung mixed
with Vinegar, which will keep down the Swelling.

This Remedy cures, as well as prevents a Swelling.

I cured a Swelling in one of the hinder Legs, which had continued a whole
Winter, by charging it seven or eight times, with Cows Dungs mixed with Spirit
of Wine.

CHAP. LXII. A Honey-Charge or Remolade, for a Blow, or to assuage a Swelling
in the Legs.
THOUGH this Charge consists of few Ingredients, it is good not only for Blows or
Strokes with another Horse's Foot, and Swellings of the fore and hinder Legs,
but for all sorts of Swellings, Bruises, and Hurts in any part of the Body.

Mix a Pound of Wheat Flour with White Wind, to the Consistence of Gruel, and
boil it over a gentle Fire, stirring without Intermission, till the whole be
united; then melt a Pound of Burgundy Pitch in a Skillet, adding a Pound and a
half of Honey, and a Pound of common Turpentine; and incorporating all
together, which must be mixed with the Gruel moderately hot. After you have
removed the Vessel from the Fire, add two Pounds of fine Bole in powder (the
Oriental is best) and make a Charge, which must be applied hot, and repeated
till the Swelling be asswag'd.

They who know but one Remedy, are exposed to frequent Disappointments by
missing some of the Ingredients; and therefore it will not be improper to
subjoin some others.

Another Remedy for a Swelling in the Legs, occasioned by a Blow.
Bathe the Part with strong Aqua-Vitae, chafing it hard, and then charge the
whole Leg with common Honey. The next day chafe the Part again with Aqua-Vitae,
and apply a new Charge without taking away the old. Renew the Application once
every Day, six or seven times; then send your Horse to a River, or wash him
well in a Pond twice every Day, and the Swelling will certainly disappear in a
little time.

Swellings have been often asswag'd by this easy Remedy. Take half a Pint of
good Vinegar, half a Pound of Tallow, and an Ounce of Flower of Brimstone: Mix,
and anoint the Swelling, till it be dissolved.

You may take away a small Tumor by applying a Mixture of common Bole, Honey,
and Water.

CHAP. LXIII. The Duke 's Ointment for Swellings and Bruises, accompanied with
Heat, and for Inflammations in any Part of the Body.
TAke clear and pure Linseed-Oil one Pound, Flowers of Brimstone four Ounces;
Put 'em into a Mattress or Glass Vial with a long Neck, letting it stand in a
moderate Sand-heat for the Space of an Hour; after which augment the Heat, and
keep it up to the same degree till the Flowers be perfectly dissolved. In the
mean time, before the Oil grow cold, lest part of the Brimstone fall to the
Bottom, melt a Pound of Tallow, or of Boar's Grease, in another Vessel, with
two Ounces and a half of white Wax, instead of which if you can procure Horse's
Grease, the Remedy will be more effectual, but then you must take four Ounces
of Wax, because Horse's Grease is not so thick as Boar's Grease. The Grease and
Wax being wholly melted, pour in the Linseed Oil, and removing the Vessel from
the Fire, stir the Ointment with a Slice of Alkanet Root, till it be cold. It
resembles Ointment of Roses; for though you may discover the Brimstone by the
Smell, you will hardly be able to perceive it otherwise, as being so perfectly
dissolved. This Ointment is applied cold; it is a good Resolvent, and both eases
Pain, and asswages all sorts of Swellings in any part of the Body, though they be
accompanied with Heat.

Swellings are frequently occasioned in the Withers, Hams, and other parts of
the Body, by Bruises, Blows, and other Causes; so that if the Inflammation be
not removed, the Humors will flow to the Part, and make the Cure very
difficult: but this Ointment takes away the Inflammation, and dissolves the
Humors that are already lodged in the Part. And therefore as soon as the
Withers are swelled, and like to come to a Head, instead of applying astringent
Remedies with Bole, which do more Harm than Good, rub the grieved Part with
this Ointment Morning and Evening, and cover it with a Lamb's Skin, the woolly
side inwards. The continued Application of this Remedy does oftentimes dissolve
such Tumors without Suppuration; but if the Inflamtion increase, you must open
the Swelling in due time with a red-hot Iron, in one or more parts. And thus
the Cure will be performed safely, surely, and pleasantly.

For the Swelling of the Sheath, and Stones, though the Tumor spread it self
under the Belly, about the Thickness of two Fingers.
Bleed your Horse, and rub his Sheath, and the Swelling under his Belly, with
the Duke's Ointment every Morning and Evening; then walk him softly half an
hour, and after some time wash off the Ointment with warm Wine and Butter. When
the Part is dry apply the Ointment again, and above all, forget not to walk the
Horse half an Hour, or a whole Hour, and though the Swelling reach between his
Legs even to his Brisket, fear not, for it will certainly be asswag'd.

Sometimes, notwithstanding of the Application of this Ointment, the Tumor
will suppurate and come to Matter; and you may know whether it has a tendency
that way, by its Softness, and by the lasting Impression that it keeps when you
press it with your Finger, as if it were Butter: in which Case you must open it
in several places with a red-hot Bodkin, or sharp-pointed Iron, to let out the
red Water; then chafe the Part with the Ointment, and walk the Horse.

If only the Sheath be swelled, the Cure is not very difficult; for it may be
quickly performed in Summer, by keeping the Horse an Hour every Day in the
Water, and in cold Weather, by anointing with the Duke's Ointment, and then
walking him. These Tumors are occasioned by the Heat of the Stable, and Want
of Exercise.

The same Remedy may be applied to all hot Swellings; for it will certainly
take away the Inflammation, and dissolve the Humor if it be not too hard and
stubborn.

It wonderfully helps all Swellings of the Hams or Legs, occasioned by Blows
with another Horse's Foot; Falls and other Accidents, which are usually
accompanied with Heat, by Reason of the Pain caused by the Contusion in the
Nervous and Sinewy Parts.

As for Blows or Kicks on the Muscle of the Thigh, which are attended with such
troublesome Symptoms, this Ointment will certainly promote the Cure, and at
least allay the Heat and Inflammation.

CHAP. LXIV. Of Old Swellings in the Legs, occasioned by an illcur'd
Sinew-sprain.
SOmetimes Sinew-Sprains or Sinew-Sprungs are so unskilfully handled, that though
the Pain be so far removed, that the Lameness ceases, yet the Humors gathered
in the part not being dissolved, there remains a Swelling, which grows so hard,
that it seems impossible to cure it without Burning. Nevertheless on such
Occasions I have seen the cure performed by the following Remedy. Take of
Linseed-Flower, and Bean-Flower, of each one A Measure containing somewhat
above a Pint.
Litron, the strongest Aqua-Vitae a Pint and an half; Mix and boil 'em over a
little Fire to the Consistence of Gruel, stirring all the while; then add a
Pound of Honey, boil and stir till the whole be incorporated; after which
remove it from the Fire, and mix it with half a Pound of Mule's Grease, or for
want of that, Horses-Grease, which you may easily do, for the Grease will be
quickly dissolved.

Then shaving off the Hair, chafe the Swelling very hard with cold Spirit of
Wine, and afterward charge it with the abovementioned Composition, covering
it with Flax, and wrapping it about with a Piece of Linen Cloth, which must be
sewed, and will not hurt the Part so much as if 'twere tied; for the Sewing
binds the Leg more equally, and with less Pain. Let the Dressing remain two
days, then take it off, and bathe the Part with Spirit of Wine: after which
repeat the Application every day, and in five or six times dressing the
Swelling may be asswag'd, and the Cure performed with great Speed, and little
Charge or Trouble.

For Hard Swellings that cannot be cured by ordinary Remedies.
It happens not unfrequently that Swellings in the Legs grow so inveterate and
hard, that the usual Remedies prove altogether ineffectual; in which Case you
must give the Fire along the Swelling, beginning at the Top, and drawing the
Lines or Strokes downwards, at the distance of half a finger's breadth from
each other, or cross-ways if you please, taking care not to pierce the Skin,
and above all to draw a Line on each side of the Leg, between the Sinew and the
Bone, descending as far as the Pastern. You need not be afraid of hurting the
Sinew, since the Fire never does any harm unless the Strokes pierce too deep,
for if they be only made of a Cherry Color there will be no occasion for
Plasters, Pitch, or Wax, but only to wash the seared Parts with Aqua-Vitae and
Honey till the Scab fall off, and then to rub the Sores with Spirit of Wine
alone. If the Flesh grow too fast you may consume it with Allom, or if that be
not strong enough, with Powder of Copperas; and thus by continuing in a careful
Observance of these Directions you may quickly perfect the Cure.

If you have Occasion to give the Fire cross-wise round the hinder Legs, let
the Lines meet on the midst of the back-Sinew; but it is needless to draw the
Strokes over the Bone in the forepart of the Leg.

Note, That the Fire must be given in the Wane of the Moon, and that its
Operation requires the Space of thrice nine days, that is nine days for
Augmentation, nine in a settled State, when it is at the Height, and as many
more for Declination or Abatement, during all which time the Horse must be
suffered to rest.

I thought fit to propose a great Number of good Remedies for Blows or Ki^k^,
Swellings, Bruises, and other suchlike Accidents, because they happen so
frequently.

Another Remedy for Stiff and Tired Legs, and to assuage the Pain and Swellings
that remain after Foundering and other Distempers.
Boil six little sucking Puppies in Lees of Claret till their Flesh be
separated from their Bones; then add Mallows, Marshmallows, white Mullein,
Shepherd's-Purse, Dwarf-Elder, Yarrow, Cammomil, Melilot, St. John's Wort,
Sage, Rosemary, Thyme, Lavender, Hyssop, French Tobacco and Marjoram. Some of
these Herbs will suffice, for I only proposed so many, that you might have the
convenience to choose such as you can most easily procure. Boil 'em with the
Puppies about three Hours, pouring in more Lees, as they are consumed by
boiling; then remove the Vessel from the Fire, and add to your Composition Oils
of Linseed, Lilies, and Worms, of each six Ounces, common Turpentine one Pound,
Honey two Pounds. Mix and incorporate before the Matter grow cold, and anoint
the Horse's Legs as hot as he can endure it, for fifteen days together.

If after Foundering the Feet remain so sore that on hard Ground the Horse
treads only on his Heels, you must join to this Remedy that which is described
in Chap. CLV.

The same Remedy more Methodically prepared.
As Soon as the Herbs and Puppies are boiled to a Mash, take off the Kettle from
the fire, and suffer the Matter to cool a little, without adding the Oils and
other Ingredients; stir it well before you take it out of the Kettle, then beat
it by degrees in a large Mortar, and strain it through a Sieve, throwing away the
Dregs. Put the Pulp or the Substance that you pressed through the Sieve into the
remaining Lees in the Kettle, and boil it, adding the Honey and Turpentine, and
afterward the three Oils, till the Lees be wholly consumed; then remove it
from the fire, and apply it warm about the Horse's Legs like a Pultice with Tow
and a Cloth above all, tying it on gently with two Pieces of List, or only sew
the Cloth without any Bandage.

As often as you unbind the Leg, chafe it with Spirit of Wine, and apply a new
Lay of the Remedy over the old one: by which Method you may strengthen Legs
that are quite spoiled, if the Horse be young.

CHAP. LXV. A Bath for the Legs, Shoulders, and Hips.
TO the Herbs prescribed in the Description of the last-mention'd Remedy, add
the Leaves of Violets, Mercury, Pellitory of the Wall, Brank-ursin, Beets,
Mint, Rue, Wormwood, Mugwort, Paul's Betony, Cowslips with the Flowers,
Ground Pine, Dill-Tops, Bay Berries and Juniper Berries bruised.

Take about a Kettle-full of these Herbs, boil 'em two or three Hours in Lees
of Claret, and removing the Kettle from the fire, add three Pounds of common
Honey. When the Bath is so cold that you can endure to put your hand into it,
rub the Horse's Legs with a handful of the Herbs, frequently taking a fresh
handful.

This Bath is very useful, and costs little: It softens, asswages Pain, brings
down Swellings, and strenghthens the Legs; nevertheless you must not use it
when the Swelling is very hot, but only rub the Part with the Duke's Ointment
till the Inflammation disappear, and then make use of the Bath to take away the
Swelling. The same Bath will serve for the Fomentations which you will find
prescribed on several Occasions; and to make it more softening and asswaging,
you may add about a Pound of Horse's Grease, to the whole.

CHAP. LXVI. An excellent Oil for stiff and tired Legs.
I Know not a better Remedy to strengthen and supple a Horse's Legs when they
are spoiled and grown stiff by Traveling, and the Sinews shrunk or hardened,
than this Oil, which requires a good Artist to prepare it.

Take an old Brick of a Pound Weight, or a little more, heated red-hot, throw
it into a sufficient quantity of Oil-Olive, letting it remain there till it
grow cold, then reduce it to Powder, and moistening it with Spirit of Wine,
distill the whole in a Retort with a Sand-heat. Reserve the Oil that comes over,
which is called Oil of Bricks, or of Philosophers.

Take a Pound of the best speckl'd Soap, scraped very small, and thoroughly mixed
with a Pound of unslack'd Lime in Powder. Distill in a Retort with a Sand-heat,
and reserve that which comes over in a Glass Bottle.

Take two Pounds of Earthworms well washed, put 'em into Water to vomit up
their filth. In the mean time boil two Pounds of Oil-Olive with six Ounces of
Salt, till the Oil grow black, stirring the Salt perpetually, which will not
dissolve. Throw the Worms (first well wiped and dried) into the boiling Oil,
which will immediately scorch 'em; after it is half cold pour in a Quart of
Claret lukewarm, and boil till the Wine evaporate. So you will have an
excellent Oil of Worms, which you must strain, and mixing it with the two
former, distill all together in a Retort with a slow Fire, and there will come
over a most excellent Oil to comfort and strengthen the Sinews. A very small
quantity of it will serve for one application, for there is not so piercing a
Medicine in the World, as you will quickly perceive by its strong and stinging
Smell. It Is extremely useful for Horses, and I know some Men that have received
great benefit by it, in Sciatica's, Pains of the Joints, Palsies affecting half
the Body; and in the general, all Distempers, in which it is expedient to
resolve hard Lumps or strengthen the Parts. This Preparation is difficult and
troublesome, but not chargeable; and the Oil may be applied to the same Uses
with that which Farriers call Essences.

When you have occasion to use it, rub the Sinew of the Horse's Leg, and the
Pastern Joint very hard, then anoint it slightly, and chafe again with your
Hand, using only five or six drops of the Oil at a time. After the anointing,
the part will swell, and the Sinew grow very hot, for the Humors must be
rarefy'd before they can be dissolved. But if the Swelling should increase too
much by the continued use of the Oil, chafe the part with the Duke's Ointment
to take away the Heat, and then make use of the Bath described in the preceding
Chapter, to complete the Cure. If you be discouraged by the difficulty of the
Preparation, you may make the Oil thus.

Another Way to make the same Oil with less trouble.
Quench a red-hot Brick in Oil, reduce it to Powder, and mix it with the Soap
and Lime, then take six-score Earthworms, prepared as before. Distill all
together in a Retort with a Sand-heat, and you will have an Oil which will
produce the same Effects as the former, but less effectually.

To conclude, if the abovementioned Remedies have been tried in vain, or if
the Horse be not fully restored to the use of his Legs, you must fly to your
last Refuge, the Fire, and draw the Strokes or Lines either length-wise or
cross-wise along the whole Sinew; and in a Month or six Weeks the Legs will
grow sound and wellshap'd, and last long; for the Fire strengthens the Sinew,
and stops the flowing down of the Humors that spoiled it.

CHAP. LXVII. A Balsam for Legs spoiled by Traveling.
TAke two Pounds of green Juniper Berries, gathered about the end of August, or
the beginning of September, beat 'em to a Paste in a Marble or Stone Mortar,
and incorporate 'em with two Pounds of fresh Butter: Take the Mixture out of
the Mortar, boil it gently in a Skellet about an Hour, strain it hard through a
Cloth, and afterward squeeze it in a Press, throwing away the gross Substance.
Then add to the strained Butter one Pound of green Juniper Berries beaten to a
Paste, boil gently half an Hour, strain and press forth as at first. Repeat the
same a third time with half a Pound of green Berries beaten, boil and press
forth as before, and you will have the true Balsam for the Sinews.

When you have occasion to use it, rub the grieved Leg with your dry Hand, till
the Sinew grow very hot, then apply the Balsam to the quantity of a Walnut, and
chafe it in with a quarter of a Pint of Aqua-Vitae on each Leg, pouring it on
by degrees: Continue after the same manner for ten days, and then wash the Legs
very clean with Scowrings of Dishes.

Thus the stiff and withered Legs will become nimble and supple; nor must you
be surpised if the first Applications cause a Swelling, which is the usual
effect of hot and piercing Remedies: For, provided the cause of the Distemper
be removed, you may easily assuage the Swelling, with the Remedies prescribed
in the preceding Chapters; and it is to be observed, that almost all Legs that
are spoiled by Traveling, become swelled at last.

I have heard several Persons who live in the Country, complain that my Book
was almost useless to 'em, because they cannot procure the Drugs that are
prescribed in it; and I have been frequently importuned by 'em, to find out a
way to free 'em of that Inconvenience. But these Gentlemen would know every
thing, without giving themselves the trouble of Learning, and as soon as they
hear the most common Drugs named, they fancy a Man talks Hebrew, or some
unintelligible Dialect. And therefore I can return no other Answer, than that I
have always endeavored to prescribe the most easy, familiar, and common
Remedies, and that they may apply themselves to any Druggist or Apothecary for
a Solution of their Scruples, and a satisfactory Answer to their Questions.
This is the best Method I can propose to remove their Imaginary Difficulties,
which will never trouble any Man that has a tolerable knowledge of Drugs.
'Twou'd certainly be a very pretty and commodious Invention to cure Diseases
without Remedies; but since none but Madmen will attempt mere Impossibilities,
and Medicines are absolutely necessary to restore lost Health, those perpetual
Complainers must even learn to understand 'em. Or if they be so much in love
with their Ease that they dare not adventure on a little Study, they may let
their sick Horses alone, and expect the Event: For the Distemper will end
either one way or another, and they will have no other trouble than barely to
provide new Horses to fill up their empty Stables. I do not think my self
obliged to answer every impertinent Question, but shall content my self with
assuring the Reader in the general, that if I had known any better or easier
Remedies than those I have prescribed in this Book, I would have certainly
imparted 'em to the Public.

You will find the description of a burning Balsam in the Ninety Fifth Chapter,
which will be of excellent use in this Case, if it be daily applied, after the
Sinew is well heated by chafing; and besides, it will neither cause a Swelling,
nor make one Hair fall off.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of Malenders and Selenders.
THE Malenders appear on the bending of the Knee, being certain Chops or Chinks
which discharge a red, sharp, and biting Water. They are very painful, and make
the Horse halt, or at least go stiff at his first going out of the Stable: You
may easily know 'em by the staring and bristl'd Hairs that grow about 'em; and
they are frequently accompanied with a sort of Scab, which is bigger or less,
according to the various degrees of the Malady.

The Selenders breed on the bending of the Hough; they proceed from the same
Causes that breed the Malenders, and are known by the same signs; but they
happen not so frequently, and are consequently more dangerous, as denoting that
there is a great quantity of Humors in the Hough, which continually discharge
upon the Leg those malignant Waters that at last rot and corrupt it.

We must not attempt a complete Cure of either of these Sores, but only
endeavor to allay the Humor, and qualify its sharpness by the use of
Alkali's, which blunt and deaden the too sharp Acid, for they who absolutely
dry up the Sore, may be justly compared to those who shut the door of the
Sheep-coat to keep the Wolf in. And therefore you must content your self with
keeping the part very clean, that is, you must wash and scour off the filth and
corruption that sticks on the Hair or Skin with Black-Soap, which is an Alkali,
and rub the Malenders with it; then wash the part with Urine, or a good Lie, or
rub the Chink with Butter fried till it grow black.

The surest way to cure either Malenders or Selenders is to mix equal
quantities of Linseed-Oil, and Aqua-Vitae, stirring and shaking 'em till the
mixture grow white, and to anoint the Sores with it once a day. This will dry a
little, and allay the sharpness of the Humors, so that the Malender will
neither cause a Swelling nor Pain.

The same is an excellent Remedy for Coach-Horses when they begin to be
troubled with Red-Waters, Chinks, and Mules, accompanied with Heat and Swelling.

Sometimes the Selenders cause a Swelling, which grows hard, and hinders the
motion of the Hough, and since the situation of the Part is very inconvenient
for the Application of Remedies, you must proceed to the give the Fire, as I
once saw done with very good Success to a Spanish Horse, who was cured without
the least ill consequence.

Anoint the Malenders with Oil of Nuts, mixed and shaken with Water, after you
have rubbed 'em with Black-Soap.

The Ointment for the Feet, described in the Eighty Fifth Chapter is also very
proper in this Case. Album Rasis dries a Malender when it grows too big, and
asswages the Inflammation. The Ointment of Roses is also an excellent allayer
of Sharpness, if it be faithfully Prepared; for that which is commonly Sold, as
I intimated before, is not made of Roses, but consists only of Hog's-grease,
melted with a little White-Wax to give it a Body. These Impostors stir it while
it is hot, with a Root of Alkanet to dye it red, and wash it afterward in
Rose Water to make it smell of Roses. Mere Tallow is not at all inferior to
this pretended Ointment, with which so many People are cheated.

CHAP. LXIX. Of Splents.
YOu will find a large Account of these Excrescences in the Second Part; and
therefore I shall content my self at present with giving this short Account of
a Splent, that it is a Callous, hard, and insensible Swelling, which breeds on
the Shank-Bone, and spoils the shape of the Leg, when it grows big.

The Splent is usually occasioned by a Blow or other Hurt on the Shank-Bone,
which offends the Periosteum, or Skin that surrounds the Bone; for the Humor
gathering by degrees on that part, forms a Tumor or Excrescency.

A Horse may be also troubled with this Infirmity, if he be over-ridden or hard
wrought when he is too Young, before his Legs be strong enough, and his Bones
of a sufficient solidity and firmness to bear the Fatigues of Traveling. For
by straining of that part it is rendered subject to Defluxions (or the falling
down of Molten Grease) and if the Humor slip between the Bone and its
Membrane, it breeds a hard Lump, that by degrees increases and draws its
Nourishment from the Bone, which I have seen full of Holes like a Sieve in that
part. To protect the weakest part of the Bone against the Humor, Nature fences
it with a Callus, which we call a Splent; and if the Excrescency be augmented
by Traveling, and ascend to the Knee, it makes the Horse Halt, and is more
difficult to Cure than the other kind.

I advise those who undertake the Cure of a Splent, never to consume it with
violent Caustics, which often scale the Bone, and dry up the Sinew. It Is true,
these Medicines take away the Splent, but they weaken the Leg so extremely,
that it were better to let the Swelling remain.

If the Horse be old, you will find the Cure very difficult, and the Splent can
hardly be removed, whereas it may be easily taken away from a young Horse; and
in the general it is certain, that a large Splent may be sooner removed, and
with less trouble when the Horse that bears it is young, than a small
Excrescency in the Leg of an old Horse.

You shall hardly meet with one that pretends to understand Horses, who will
not acquaint you that he is Master of an infallible Receipt for the Farcin, and
another for Splents; though upon trial you will find his performance come far
short of his Promises.

When the Splent is an effect of the depraved Shape of the Shank-Bone, it is to
be esteemed a Blemish or Deformity, rather than a Disease: For it is the same
with that which Physicians call Apophysis, and does not admit of a Cure.

A Remedy for the Splent.
Shave away the Hair, and beat or rub the Swelling with the handle of a
Shooing-Hammer till it be softened, then burn three or four Hazel-sticks while
the Sap is in 'em, and chafe the Splent with the Juice or Water that sweats out
of both ends, applying it as hot as you can without burning the Part; after
which rub or bruise the Swelling with one of the Sticks, and continue
frequently to throw the hot Juice upon the Part, but not so hot as to burn it,
rubbing it still till it grow soft. Then dip a Linen Cloth five or six times
doubled in the Hazel-Juice, as hot as you can endure it upon your Hand, and tie
it on the Splent, suffering it to remain four and twenty Hours. In the mean
time keep your Horse in the Stable, without permitting him to be led or rid to
Water, during the space of nine Days, at the end of which the Splent will be
dissolved, and the Hair will come again some time after. If the Hazel be not in
its full Sap, it will not operate so effectually; nevertheless it may be used,
but the part must be rubbed and bruised more strongly.

If the Splent be not quite taken away, but only lessened, repeat the operation
a Month after.

Another Remedy.
Shave the Hair, knock, rub, and soften the Splent as before, then take a piece
of the Skin of Bacon not very fat, and lay it on the part with the fat side
outward. Afterward apply a flat Cautery, or red-hot Iron of the bigness of a
Shilling, holding it upon the Skin, and in the mean time order another Iron to
be heated, which must be applied on another part of the Skin, but still over
the Splent. Continue after the same manner till the Swelling be dissolved, then
lay a Plaster over it, and shavings of Cloth over that, taking care that the
Horse do not bite it off.

Another Remedy for the Splent.
The Remedies already prescribed are easy, and almost infallible; yet I cannot
forbear mentioning another, with which I cured three Splents in one Horse; and
one on the Knee of another, all in one Morning.

Soften the Splent according to the usual Method; then wrap a red-hot Iron in a
wet Cloth, stroke the Swelling with it two or three times, till all the Hair be
come off, and the Part be as clean as your Hand, and afterward prick it with a
sharp Nail, and rub it with white Salt.

Then prick a head of Garlic with a Bodkin, dip it in boiling Oil of Nuts, and
apply it to the Splent, repeating the Application till the Tumor be softened.

Pill a raw Head of Garlic and apply it to the burnt Part, covering it with
Flax, and binding a piece of Cloth over all. Keep it on Eight and forty Hours,
then take off the Bandage, and six Days after you may lead your Horse to Water,
but you must not Travel him till the Sore be healed. Twice every Day, at his
coming from the Water, bathe the part with Aqua-Vitae. This Remedy, as well as
the last, leaves a Scar where the Hair will never come again, but it is so
small, that the Hair which grows about it will easily cover it.

I have often seen the Bone under the Swelling scaled, not only by the
application of violent Caustics or eating Medicines, but by giving the Fire too
violently, out of an over-eager desire to root out the Splent. This Exfoliation
or scaling of the Bone lasts very long, and is dangerous; but you may use the
abovementioned Remedies securely, for they never occasion such Disorders.

To cure a Splent Methodically.
Soften the Splent as before, and with a sharp-pointed Fleam draw a Line about
all the part you would have taken off, entering about half the depth of the
Skin; then melt a convenient quantity of the Plaster called Apostolorum, add a
sufficient quantity of good White-Vitriol, and after it is half cold, but still
very pliable, make a Plaster of the bigness of the Splent, which must be kept
twelve Hours on the Swelling; after which take it off, and wrap dry Flax about
the Part, with a Bandage over it, to hinder the Horse from biting it off.

The Scab will fall off like the Kernel of a Nut; and you must constantly bathe
the Sore Morning and Evening with Spirit of Wine, till it be healed.

Another Remedy to take away a Splent.
There is a Plant called Briony, which has a very large Root, and sends forth
long Branches that ramp on the Hedges like the Citrul. After you have shaved
and softened the Splent, take a slice of White-Briony-Root, of the bigness of a
Crown-Piece, boil it in Water a quarter of an Hour, wrap it in a fine
Linen Cloth, and as hot as you can well endure it upon your Hand, apply it in
the Cloth to the Splent about half a quarter of an Hour. The two succeeding
days repeat the same Application with two fresh slices of the Root, taking care
that they touch not the Splent, and that the Horse do not bite 'em off. This
Root suppurates the Red-waters, and makes a sort of Scab or Escar fall off; but
the Hair will grow again, and leave no mark of the Sore.

After the three first Days you must Air the Horse every Day, and after twelve
Days are expired, he will be fit for common Service. The efficacy of this Root
depends upon its Caustic Quality, which consumes the Splent without hurting the
Sinew.

If the Splent be upon the Knee, I know no better Remedy than the following
Ointment of Worms; but if that fail, as it frequently does, the best and safest
way is, instead of applying Caustics, which weaken the Leg extremely, and may
lame the Horse irrecoverably, to give the Fire, and extirpate the Splent
entirely, as in the case of the Spavin.

CHAP. LXX. Ointment of Beetles for Splents, Wind-galls, and (even the
greatest) Farcy-Knots or Cords.
IN May, and sometimes in April, between Ten a Clock in the Morning, and Two in
the Afternoon, you may find a certain Beetle or Black-Worm, in tilled Grounds,
or Cornfieldsd, in low and shady Places. It has the resemblance of a Head, at
the end of its true Head, and a sort of Wings which are fastened to its Body
like two Targets, covering all the forepart of the Shoulders, though it does not
fly. Its Back is scaly, and its Tail very fat, and as it were welted. It has
six Feet, and creeps very slowly. There are some of 'em very long, thick, and
fat; and the smallest are about an Inch long: It Is cold to the touch, and if
you place it on your Hand it commonly voids a very stinking Oil. These Insects
are called in Latin, Maii aviculae, or Scarabaei unctuosi; that is, May-Worms,
or Oily-Beetles. Take three hundred of 'em, and stamp 'em with a Pound of Oil
of Bay: Set the Ointment a part for three Months, then melt it, strain through a
Linen Cloth, throw away the gross substance, and preserve the rest as a
Sovereign Ointment for the Uses that shall be afterward declared.

The Oily Beetle or May-Worm.
This Ointment produces the effect of a Retoire or Ruptory-Plaister, without
any considerable Swelling: It draws out all the Corruption and Rottenness that
is lodged between the Skin and the Flesh, and raises Blisters full of
Red-Water, which are succeeded by Scabs that dry up of themselves, and the Sore
is healed without a Scar, for all the Hair that falls off grows again.

When you have occasion to use it, shave off the Hair very close, and hold a
hot Bar of Iron near the part while you apply the Ointment, which will exert
its Operation in the space of nine Days.

It must be applied cold; and if the Swelling be a Splent, you must first
soften it according to the usual manner.

Though Wind-galls are not always attended with Pain, yet they are sometimes both
painful and dangerous, because they may grow hard, and lame the Horse,
especially if they be on the Sinew of the hinder Legs. I shall afterward
propose several Remedies for these Tumors, but they only make 'em disappear
for a time, whereas this Ointment takes 'em away so entirely, that they return
not in a very long time: First you must shave off the Hair, then anoint the
Wind-gall, holding a hot Bar of Iron near the part; and the Swelling that will
immediately appear in the Leg may be asswag'd by applying Aqua-Vitae in the
space of nine Days, during which time the Wind-gall will be wholly dissipated.
You may depend on this Method as that which I have several times tried with
Success: For I relate things with all possible exactness and sincerity, and
shall never be guilty of cheating my Readers by over-strain'd Commendations of
any Remedy.

Sometimes a Swelling remains after an old Sinew-sprain, though the Horse be
freed from his Lameness: In which case, if the Tumor be not very hard, it will
be resolved and dissipated by one, or, at most, two Applications of this
Ointment, but you must not proceed to the second, till you perceive what may be
expected from the first.

To resolve a Farcin-Knot you must shave off the Hair, and besmear the part
with this Ointment, which will draw forth Red-water, and afterward a Scab.
Repeat the Application, and the Swelling will be quite dissipated, or the same
effect may be performed by a Retoire.

The following Ointment is not so Caustic as that of Beetles, but it operates
sufficiently on softened Splents.

CHAP. LXXI. Ointment of Worms for Splents, Wind-galls, Water-Farcy, and other
Swellings.
THis Ointment in some measure performs the effect of Fire, without making the
Hair fall off, and is proper not only for Splents, which it cures in twelve or
fifteen Days; but for all Swellings in the Houghs, if they can be thoroughly
softened, as also for Wind-galls, etc. It draws forth a Red-Water, which in
time turns to a Scurf or Scab, and after that is fallen off, the part remains
as sound and free from Swelling, as if you had applied a Retoire.

Some Meadows are almost wholly covered with a sort of Bulbous Crow-foot, that
has a Root not unlike to a Pistol-Bullet. About the end of April, and in May,
you may find under these Herbs, about the Foot of the Stalk, and never higher
nor under Ground, a little black longish Insect, not bigger than a small Bean,
without Wings, but furnished with Legs, and so hard that you can hardly bruise
it between your Fingers. Gather three or four hundred of 'em, and mix 'em with
old Hog's-grease in a Pot; then cover the Pot very close, till they are quite
dead, and stamp 'em with the Grease to an Ointment, which will be more
effectual the longer it is kept.

If the Horse be troubled with a Splent, rub and crush the Tumor with the
handle of a Shooing-Hammer, till it be softened, then prick it, and apply the
Ointment about the thickness of a French Penny, holding a red-hot Fire-shovel
over it to make it sink in.

Then tie up the Horse, so that he may not be able to reach it with his Teeth,
and keep him thus nine Days, without taking him out to Water; during which time
the Tumor will discharge a certain Red-Water. After the nine Days are expired,
there will appear a certain Scurf or Scab which will afterward fall off, and
carry away the Splent, or lessen it very considerably, without taking off one
Hair, or in the least hurting the Sinew.

CHAP. LXXII. To soften a Hard Swelling.
BEfore you apply the Ointments of Beetles or Worms, or any other Retoire to a
Wen, or any Hard Swelling, you must always take care to soften the Part, for
otherwise the Application will produce no effect. Thus having shaved off the
Hair, you may apply some of the usual Softners, as Gum-Ammoniacum, Galbanum,
Bdellium, and Storax, mixed with Oil of Lillies, Violets, Worms, Linseed, or
Flower de Luce, the Ointment of Marshmallows, Resumptive Ointment, Plaster of
Mucilages, and other Remedies of the same Nature. Or make a Pultiss thus,

Take Roots of Lillies and Marshmallows, of each two Ounces; Leaves of Mallows
and Violets, of each two handfuls; Dill, Wild-marjoram, and Wild-Penny-royal,
or Cornmint, of each a handful: Boil the Roots about an Hour in a sufficient
quantity of Water, mixed with about three parts of Oil, then add the Herbs, and
after they are well boiled stamp all together to a mash, and apply it warm to
the part you intend to soften.

If you perceive by the extreme hardness of the Swelling, that there is need of
a powerful Softner, add Lin-seed and Fenugreek-seed, with the Oils of Lillies
and Dill, and also Goose-grease. Besides, you may add the abovementioned Gums,
dissolved according to Art, that is, take a sufficient quantity of the Gum,
dissolve it in Vinegar with a very gentle Heat, then strain, boil, and
evaporate to the thickness of Honey, stirring it now and then over a clear Fire.

The Red-Snails that appear in wet Weather, chopped, beaten, and then applied,
help to soften the part very effectually.

Or take equal Quantities of the Resumptive Ointment, and Ointment of
Marshmallows; or the Red Honey-Charge, Ointment of Marshmallows and
Oxycroceum, of each a like quantity: Melt 'em together, and lay 'em on warm
with Flax, and a Cover over all; applying a new Lay of the Ointment over the
old once every twenty four Hours for eight or ten Days, tying it up as before.
Or instead of these take Plaster of Mucilages, which is a very powerful
Softner, for besides the Mucilages of the Seeds, it contains several Gumms that
are endu'd with a singular Virtue to soften and resolve: and after you have
used this Plaster for some time, apply the Ointment of Beetles, or that of
Worms, which will infallibly take away the Tumor without making the Hair fall
off.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of Wind-Galls.
WInd-Galls are soft and yielding Tumors, of the bigness of a small Nut, more
or less, without Pain, caused by thin and serous Humors, and seated on either
side of the Fetlock-Joint on the Skin between the Sinew and the Bone.

At the side of the Fetlock-Joint on the Inside of the Leg, and sometimes on
the Outside, not far from the place where the Wind-Gall usually appears, but
lower and more toward the Side, there is oftentimes a little Bone that
resembles (though it is not really) a Wind-Gall, and rarely occasions Lameness,
though I have seen some Horses after long and hard Riding lamed by it. The only
Remedy in this Case is to give the fire, drawing Lines all over the part, and
two fingers breadth about it, and afterward applying a good Plaster: for the
Fire dissipates the Humors and Scurf that are joined to the Bone, without
which it rarely makes the Horse halt.

Take Ashes of Vine-Twigs two Parts, Ashes of Tartar one Part, and make a Lie,
with which (while it is hot) wash the Fetlock-Joint; then apply the Ashes, and
bind 'em on. This Remedy will dissolve the Wind-Gall, and cure gourdy Legs: A
Wind-Gall may be also dissipated by washing it often with Spirit of Wine; or it
may be perfectly cured by applying the Ointment of Beetles, or the Retoire
described in the following Chapter. Though this Swelling be not very dangerous,
it makes the Horse halt in frosty Weather, and is a certain Sign that either he
has been over-ridden, or that his Pasterns are too long, or his Legs too
slender and feeble to support the over-proportion'd Weight of a bulky and
fleshy Body.

Rest cures Wind-Galls in the Beginning.

Or make the Horse once every day stand up to the Knees in Water, in the midst
of a Stream, and as soon as he comes into the Stable apply a Restringent Charge.

Take the Crum of a little Loaf hot from the Oven, soak it in Spirit of Wine,
and apply it warm to the Wind-Gall: lay a Bolster over it, and tie it on with a
broad Band wrapped several times about the Leg. This will cure a Wind-Gall in
four and twenty Hours.

I remember that having applied this Remedy to a Spanish Horse, who was
troubled with a small Wind-Gall, when I removed the Dressing I found the Leg
very much swollen, which surpised me so much the more, because I could not
imagine whence the Swelling proceeded. In so doubtful a Case I applied the
Remedy described in the Sixty first Chapter, consisting of Allom, Whites of
Eggs, Honey, and Spirit of Wine, which asswag'd the Swelling in three or four
times Dressing; but the Wind-Gall remained still, nor did I judge it convenient
to endeavor the Removal of it by a new Application, since my first Attempt had
succeeded so ill; though both before and since that time I have often cured
Wind-Galls without the least appearance of a Swelling in the Leg. This Accident
convinced me that the surest Remedy may fail sometimes, and that we ought still
to be prepared for all Events, and when one Remedy proves unsuccessful to have
recourse to another. The following Restringent is very good.

Take Powder of Red Roses and of Myrtle-Berries, of each two Drams; fine Bole
in powder, and Starch, of each four Ounces; Juice of Plantane and green
Service-Berries, or (for want of these) Medlars, of each an Ounce, Vinegar of
Roses three Ounces: Mix 'em cold, and make a Restringent Charge. If it be too
thin you may thicken it with Chalk, and if it be too thick, dilute it with
Vinegar of Roses.

This Remedy serves not only to dissipate Wind-Galls, which usually return upon
the first occasion of violent Exercise, but also to stop Defluxions, and
assuage or repel Swellings where it would be dangerous to suffer 'em to end in
Imposthumes, as in all Sinewy Parts, on the Hough and Reins.

If you would absolutely extirpate a Wind-Gall, apply some softening Remedy,
and after that the Ointment of Beetles, or that of Worms. The Italians make use
of Retoirs with excellent Success, and the same are now very much used at
Paris. It Is true those Medicines occasion a Swelling in the Part to which they
are applied, but that is soon asswag'd without any ill Consequence.

Yet before you apply a Retoire, you may try the following Remedy.

To repel or assuage a Wind-Gall, Wen, or any other Soft Swelling.
Take a Quart of strong Vinegar, and four Ounces of Galbanum beaten; digest 'em
on hot Ashes four and twenty Hours, stirring 'em from time to time till the
Galbanum be wholly dissolved; then put in a Pound of common Turpentine, and
boil over a slow fire half an Hour, after which add Mastich in powder three
Ounces, fine Bole one Pound; Mix and make a Charge, which must be applied hot,
and covered with a Piece of Paper. When this falls off you will find the
Swelling gone, and therefore you may wash the Part with black Soap, Butter, or
Oil-Olive, for one Application is almost always sufficient. This is an
excellent Remedy.

This Charge will assuage and repel Wens in the Beginning, and take away all
sorts of Swellings.

To take away a Wind-Gall.
I can assure the Reader, from frequent and successful Experience, that the
Ointment of Beetles, described in the seventieth Chapter, or a convenient
Retoire will utterly extirpate a Wind-Gall, and the Hair will grow again as
before. Thus the Cure is performed more surely and effectually than by
repelling Medicines; for the Cause is removed, and the Humors that fomented
the Wind-Gall evacuated, whereas the abovementioned Remedy only drives in the
Swelling, but does not dissolve it.

You must not be surpised at the Swelling occasioned by the Ointment of
Beetles; for it ought to produce that Effect, and the Tumor will fall away by
degrees. And even sometimes when too large a quantity of the Ointment is
applied the Leg swells so extremely, that the Horse seems to be irrecoverably
lost; but you may easily assuage the Swelling, and take away the Heat and Pain,
by washing the Part with warm Wine mixed with a little Butter.

The Fire is the last and best Remedy for Wind-Galls, for it resolves and
dissipates 'em so entirely that they never return again. It Is true it spoils
the Sale of the Horse, but it makes him fit for Service: and I may say truly
and without Vanity, that I have brought this Remedy into fashion at Paris, and
made it so common as it is at present; and even I have often seen the King at
Hunting on the Back of a Horse that had been fired on all his four Legs.

For sinewy Wind-Galls that grow on the Sinew behind the Fetlock, the surest
Remedy is to give the Fire pretty smartly, but without piercing the Skin, which
will certainly cure 'em in the Beginning: but this Operation is oftentimes
delayed till the Wind-Gall grows big, and so hard that you cannot press it down
with your Finger, so that many Horses are irrecoverably lost by mere Neglect:
for they halt right-down, and though you give the Fire it will not produce the
desired Effect in less than six or eight Months; and even then the Cure is
frequently imperfect, because the Tumor is grown so hard that the Fire either
operates very slowly, or not at all. And therefore as soon as a sinewy Wind-Gall
begins to make your Horse halt, you must immediately give the Fire, before the
Swelling grow big and hard; I speak only of the hinder Legs, which are
frequently subject to Accidents of this Nature, whereas the fore Legs are
rarely troubled with 'em.

CHAP. LXXIV. Of Retories or Ruptories, called, by the Italians, Dead Fire.
THE Italian Name of these Medicines is grounded on Reason, for they not only
heat the Part to which they are applied, but even destroy it, if they be rashly
and immoderately used: and therefore a Retoire is a kind of potential Fire.

Ruptories are composed in the Form of an Ointment of almost the same Drugs
that are used in Blistering-Plaisters for Men, which derive their Name from the
Bladders or Blisters full of a reddish Water that arise in the Parts to which
these Plasters are applied. Retoires produce the same Effect in Horses, for
they draw forth red Waters from the Part on which they are laid. These are
excellent Remedies in the hands of a prudent and skilful Person; but if they be
rashly applied either in too large a Quantity, or on some great Veins, as in
the Case of a Blood-Spavin, they will occasion no less dangerous Accidents,
than if a Cautery or Caustic had been applied; for besides the Inflammation and
Pain with which they are constantly attended, they raise prodigious Scabs and
Scurfs, and make 'em fall away from the Part: it is plain then that a Retoire
must be used with a great deal of Care and Circumspection.

The Retoire is of excellent Use to assuage and dissolve any Swelling, for the
Red Water which it draws forth, being evacuated, the Tumor must needs be
lessened. The Application may be safely repeated; and even when it is not of
sufficient Force to take away the Swelling, it serves as a Preparative for the
Fire, which utterly extirpates the Tumor. Thus if your Horse be troubled with
a large Wen, you must first apply a Ruptory, to draw forth the most serous
Humors, and to rarifie those that are not extremely thick, and turn 'em to a
reddish Water by its Heat, and after a second Application of the Retoire has
produced all the Effects that can be expected from a Medicine of that Nature,
you must proceed to give the Fire, which will powerfully assuage the Tumor.

The Retoire serves also to ripen a Kernel under the Chaul, or to dissolve it
when it does not tend to Suppuration: and besides it is very proper to ripen
Anticors, and Swellings in the Withers, to remove Sit-fasts, and to extirpate
Wind-Galls; and the Ointment of Beetles is properly a Retoire.

The Application is thus performed. After you have rubbed the Part, anoint it
with the Retoire, laying it on very thin, lest it should run down, and holding
a hot Bar of Iron near the Part, to make the Retoire sink into it. This must be
done two days together, and the Swelling that is occasioned in the Part, will
vanish of it self when the Remedy has produced its Effect. You must only apply
it once to a Wind-Gall, which is too near the Sinews to bear two successive
Applications: but if you intend to dissolve a very hard Farcy-Knot, you must
rub it with the Retoire two or three days together, that the Water may be
sufficiently drawn forth. Thus you must use this Remedy with Judgment,
according to the Nature of the Part, and the Hardness and Largeness of the
Swelling.

I shall afterward have occasion to add some Observations concerning the
Effects of this Remedy, in treating of the Diseases which it cures: and
therefore I shall content my self at present with subjoining the Descriptions
of two or three good Ruptories.

A Retoire or Dead Fire.
Take two Ounces of Quicksilver, quench it by degrees in a Mortar with a like
quantity of Brimstone in powder; and after it is wholly deaden'd add four Ounces
of old Butter, an Ounce of Euphorbium in powder, a Dram of Cantharides also in
powder, and two Ounces of Oil of Bays. Mix 'em cold in the Mortar, and reserve
the Ointmant for Use.

To give you an Instance of the Manner of applying it; suppose your Horse be
troubled with a Wind-Gall, you must proceed thus: Shave off the Hair, and
anoint the Part, holding a hot Bar of Iron near it, and taking care that the
Ointment do not touch a sound Part, for it would certainly raise a Swelling;
then tie up your Horse so that he may not be able to reach the Swelling with
his Teeth for nine days. The Ointment will finish its Operation in three days,
and in the mean time the Horse must not stir out of the Stable, nor go to
Water, nor be suffered to lie down.

Another Retoire.
Take four Ounces of Oil of Bays, two Ounces of Euphorbium beaten to powder,
and half an Ounce of Cantharides in fine powder: Mix 'em cold, and apply as
before.

Or take a quarter of a Pound of Basilicum, two Ounces of Red Precipitate in
fine powder, and half an Ounce of Euphorbium. Mix and apply as before.

There are so many different Preparations of Retoires, that every Farrier has
one distinct from the rest: but in my Opinion, those that I have described are
sufficient for any occasion whatsoever, and I dare warrant their Success if
they be applied by a skilful Hand.

CHAP. LXXV. Of Wrenches or Luxations, and Dislocations of the Pastern-Joint.
MAny pretend to cure these Accidents with Gesticulations and Words; which are
seldom attended with Success, and are never without Superstition.

The Joint is said to be strained or Luxated, when it slips aside with
Violence, and though it does not go out of its Place, the Sinews and Ligaments
that fasten it to the Pastern are stretched. It Is occasioned by a Slip or false
Step in uneven and rough ground; and if it be neglected, the Humors falling
into the part grow hard, and by corrupting the Sinews, at last make the Horse
downright lame.

There are some Strains which seem at first to be very violent, though they only
make the Horse halt for five or six steps, and may be cured by Rest alone,
without applying any Remedy: but there are others which make the Horse
irrecoverably lame all the rest of his Life. And besides it happens not
unfrequently, that during the Cure of the strained Joint, the contrary Foot is
quite spoiled and lamed by being forced to sustain the Weight of the whole Body.

I have seen some Horses foundered that were kept in the Stable, by reason of a
Strain; and the Foundering not being perceived in time, fell into their Feet,
and made 'em incurably lame, though the Strains were in a hopeful Condition. And
therefore such Accidents must never be neglected, but the Cure must be begun
with all possible haste, by the Application of convenient Remedies.

Strains in the hinder-Legs are much more dangerous and stubborn than those
that happen in the Forelegs: The Cure is very tedious, and seldom succeeds;
the Horse in the mean time pines away, and even after his Recovery, you will
oftentimes find your self obliged to strengthen the Part, by giving the Fire.
And besides you must order his Shoe to be made about a finger's breadth larger
than his Foot, the better to sustain the Joint, and ease the Sinews and
Ligaments that were weakened by the Strain. This Caution must be heedfully
observed, for it helps the Joint to recover its wonted Vigor.

Remedies for a Strain.
As Soon as a Misfortune of this Nature happens, you must immediately alight,
and lead your Horse to a Place where he may rest, without suffering the Part to
cool; for a due Observance of this Caution (if possible) will very considerably
hasten the Cure. Then dissolve white Vitriol to the quantity of an Egg, in a
Quart of cold Water, and wrap the Joint about with a Linen Cloth four times
doubled dipped in the Water, tying another Cloth above it. Repeat the Application
every six Hours, and the Cure will be perfected in two days at most, if the
Remedy be applied before the Joint cool; but if the Application of the Remedy
be delayed too long, or if the Strain happen in one of the hinder Joints, the
Cure will require a longer time. If you either dislike, or cannot procure the
Vitriol, though it is certainly an excellent Remedy, chafe the Part with Spirit of
Wine, or Aqua-Vitae, and apply the Red Honey-Charge warm, with Flax about the
Joint, in form of a Pultiss, which must be kept on the part four and twenty
Hours: Then chafe the part again with Aqua-Vitae, and apply a new Lay of the
Charge over the old, continuing after the same manner till the Horse be sound.
If the Cure be not perfected in twelve Days, take Aqua-Vitae, and Spirit of
Turpentine, of each a like quantity, shake 'em in a Glass till they be well
mixed, and chafe the Joint with the Essence, rubbing it in with your Hand, then
tie up the Horse so that he may not be able to reach the part with his Teeth,
because it will smart. An Hour after the Application, in which time the whole
Liquor will sink into the part, wrap a Honey-Charge, Remolades are softning
Pultisses.
or Remolade about the Joint, renewing the same (but not the Essence) once in
two Days. The Cure is usually perfected after two or three Applications.

If you have no Honey-Charge or Remolade to apply after the Essence of
Turpentine and Aqua-Vitae, you must prepare the Remolade of Bohemia, which
alone is sufficient to cure a Strain.

Remolade of Bohemia.
Boil a Pound of Tar in a Pint of strong Aqua-Vitae over a clear Fire, for a
quarter of an Hour, stirring it often; then add two Ounces of Oriental Bole in
Powder, thicken it with Flower, and apply it hot to the Joint with Flax,
binding it on, and renewing it every two Days. Thus you may cure the most
desperate Strain, by two or three Applications, but you must begin the Cure
with the Essence. This is an easy and most effectual Remedy, only it
discolours the Hair, and stains it with white or gray Spots, which last for
some time, but black Horses are not subject to that Inconveniency. It Is also
endu'd with an admirable Virtue to cure Blows and Swellings in the Knees or
Houghs, without the use of Essences: It exceeds most other Remedies both in
Efficacy and Cheapness, which are the two principal Qualifications that
recommend a Medicine to the generality of Mankind. If the Strain in the
Pastern-Joint be accompanied with a considerable Heat, you may apply the
Remolade without the Essence, for it frequently perfects the Cure after several
Applications.

Or take the Roots of Mallows, Marshmallows, and Comfrey, boil 'em in Lees of
Wine till they begin to grow soft, then add the following Herbs, or such of 'em
as you can readily procure, namely, White-Mullein, Sage, Hysop, Rosemary,
Thyme, Lavender, Wormwood, Ground Pine, tops of Dill, Bay Berries, and
Juniper Berries beaten; boil again about two Hours, pouring in fresh Lees of
Wine instead of that which is wasted by boiling; and just before you remove the
Vessel from the Fire, add Flowers of Cammomil and Melilote. Then take out the
Ingredients, and throwing away all the Stalks, beat 'em to a Mash, and to make
the Medicine more fine, strain the whole through a Hair-Sieve with the bottom
turned upwards; but that Nicety is not absolutely necessary. Mix the Mash with
the Lees in which it was boiled, with a sufficient quantity of Badger's and
Mule's-grease, and boil till the Lees, and almost all the Moisture be consumed.
Then chafe the Joint with Aqua-Vitae, and apply this Composition round about it
with Flax, and a Bandage over all; rubbing the part with Aqua-Vitae, and
renewing the Application without taking away the first, till the Cure be
perfectly accomplished.

When you perceive that the usual Remedies are wholly ineffectual, and that
Nature, the chief Operator, has not performed its part, being unable to resolve
and dissipate the Humors that are already grown thick and hard, and occasion
Lameness and Pain; for the last Remedy you must give the Fire, drawing Lines
with a hot Iron about the Joint, without piercing the Skin, and covering it
with a good Plaster. After the Scabs are fallen off, chafe the Sores with
Aqua-Vitae, and strew 'em with Powder of Oyster-shells, persisting in the same
Method till the Cure be completed. For the Fire being a powerful Resolver will
assuage the Swelling, strengthen the Sinews and Ligaments, and make the Horse
sound, if it be in the power of Remedies to restore him.

It happens not unfrequently, that a real Dislocation of the Bone is mistaken
for a simple Strain; but you may easily avoid falling into that Error, by
observing the situation of the Horse's Foot. If the Bone be out of its place,
and the Pain so violent that the Horse cannot rest on his grieved Leg, you must
grasp the Joint with one Hand, and with the other move the Foot, that you may
perceive whether the Bone be dislocated, or in its right place; for if it be
disjointed, it will move side-wise and very rarely forwards. However, you must
put it in its place, as Bone-setters use to do; then shaving off all the Hair
about the Joint, chafe it with a Mixture of equal parts of Oil of Turpentine
and Aqua-Vitae shaken in a Glass till they be united. Rub in the Essence with
your Hand, and apply the Plaster for broken and luxated Bones spread on very
soft Leather, over which lay a Bolster of Flax about a Fingers breadth in
thickness. Then fit to the Joint six very thin Splents four or five Inches
long, and two Fingers breadth broad, wrapped about with Flax to keep 'em from
hurting the part, and placed about the Joint long-wise, and at an equal
distance. Tie 'em on with a Lace or Ribbon a large Fingers breadth broad, and
about three Else long, beginning below and ending above, and bringing the two
ends almost together: Then to keep all tite, wrap a large piece of Cloth about
the Joint, and sew it on.

Then chafe the whole Leg and Shoulder with the Duke's Ointment; or if the Hurt
be in the Joint of the hinder Leg, rub the Thigh, Hough, and Leg with the same
Ointment. After which, to ease the grieved Leg, hang up the Horse's Body: In
the mean time, to assuage the beating or heaving of the Flanks by reason of the
extreme violence of the Pain, you must inject every Day at least, two good
Clysters made with Sal-Polycrest, for the first six or seven Days. It Is the
usual Custom of Farriers to put a Patten-Shoe on the contrary Foot, to make the
Horse lean on the grieved Leg, lest the Sinews about the Pastern-Joint should
shrink; but the poor Creature is hardly able to bear the Pain that cannot be
avoided without contriving ways to augment it: And besides, the Sinews and
Ligaments are kept in their due situation by the Splents, and the proper
Remedies that are applied, not only to keep 'em from shrinking, but to
strengthen 'em, and assist Nature to regain her former Vigor.

Let the first Dressing remain untouched for the space of nine Days; and in the
mean time rub the Leg and Shoulder once every two Days with the Duke's
Ointment, pouring a little Oil of St. John's-wort upon the Leg, that it may
penetrate to the dislocated Joint, both to moisten the Plaster, and strengthen
the Part.

Some are falsely persuaded, that the Cure must be begun with letting the Horse
Blood in the Toes or tip of the Hoof, but this is a very dangerous Method, for
it draws down the Humors to the grieved Part, which is already oppressed with
'em. It Is true indeed, Bleeding is very proper in this case, and ought always
to preceed the Application of any Remedies; but it ought to be administered in
the Neck-Veins where it makes a Revulsion.

When you take off the first Dressing, chafe the Joint with the abovementioned
Ointment and Aqua-Vitae, apply a Plaster of the same Ointment, or that against
Fractures, put on the Splents, and rub the whole Leg with the Duke's Ointment,
letting the Dressing remain eight and forty Hours. In the mean time keep the
Horse still suspended or hanging, and continue after the same manner, till the
Part be perfectly sound.

Since those Dislocations can never happen without hurting or loosening the
Shoulder Bone, you must also endeavor to strengthen that Part by the Method
prescribed in the Fifty fourth and following Chapters. You may know whether the
Bone be fallen out of its place by feeling and comparing it with the Bone of
the other Shoulder: Neither must you despair of Success, though you should find
it loosened; for time and good Remedies will restore it.

Note, That Dislocations and Strains in the Forelegs may be cured by a careful
Application of convenient Remedies, without any prejudice to the Horse: But if
the Hurt be in the Pastern-Joints of the Hinder-Legs, the Cure will at best be
long and tedious; and besides Imposthumes are frequently generated which break
in the Leg, or Pastern, and draw down the Humors in so great abundance that
they can never be drained: And I have seen several Horses irrecoverably Lamed,
and others Killed by such Accidents.

After the Lameness is gone, you must give the Fire, as for Strains, to
complete the Cure, and prevent a Relapse: And if the Lameness return, the last
Remedy and only way to make your Horse sound is again to have recourse to the
Fire.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of a Sinew-sprain or Sinew-sprung.
THese Accidents are usually occasioned by an Overreach. For when a Horse
Gallops through Ways full of Stones or Ruts, he either strikes his Hinder-Foot
against the Master-Sinew of the Fore-Leg, or interferes and frets one Leg
against another. The Contusion of the Sinew is followed with a Swelling,
Hardness, Obstruction and Weakness, and the Horse is sometimes quite Lamed, or
at least the Pain makes him Halt more or less, according to the various
Greatness of the Hurt.

If you did not see the Sinew sprain'd, and therefore could not observe where
the Foot struck, you must feel along the Sinew, and where you find a Swelling,
Hardness, and Pain, you may certainly conclude that the Grief lies there;
besides, the Hair is frequently carried off by the violence of the Stroke.

If the Strain be newly taken, the best way to cure it is to anoint the grieved
Part with Oil-Olive, holding a red-hot Fire-shovel near it, that the Oil may
sink into the Sinew, then chafe the Part again with Oil, and continue thus
rubbing and anointing for half an Hour, which time is almost always sufficient
for the Cure of the Strain; but though the Pain be asswag'd, the Part continues
weak, and therefore you must chafe it once a Day with Aqua-Vitae, and let the
Horse rest till the Sinew has recovered its strength.

The following Remedy will effectually cure a Sinew-sprain, if it be not very
old, wrap a wet Cloth, five or six times doubled about the grieved Part, and
all the rest of the Leg, and move a Bar of Iron backwards and forwards for a
quarter of an Hour, as near as you can without touching the Cloth, which must
be moistened when it grows dry: Then scarifie the Swelling, that is, cut the
Skin cross-wise (never longwise) to let out the bruised Blood, taking care not
to make the Incisions deeper than those that are usually made before the
Application of a Cupping-Glass. After which cleave a live Cock or large Hen,
and apply it warm to the grieved Sinew, tying it on with a Swathe or Bandage,
and suffering it to remain four and twenty Hours: When that is taken off bathe
the Part six times a Day with good Spirit of Wine till it be cured.

CHAP. LXXVII. The Nerve-Ointment for Sinew-sprains, Tired and Decayed Legs,
and all Old Strains.
AS soon as you have found out the Part where the Grief lies, you must
immediately chafe it with Aqua-Vitae, and apply the same Remedies that were
prescribed for a Strain in a Joint. 'Twou'd be needless to repeat the
Directions that have been already delivered; and therefore I shall only tell
you, that if those Remedies prove ineffectual, you must in the last place have
recourse to the Nerve-Ointment, which will perfect what the others begun, or if
that cannot be had apply the Ointment Oppodeldoc.

It Is called the Nerve-Ointment because it is a specific Remedy for the Sinews,
and is thus prepared. Take Ground Pine, Marjoram, Rosemary Leaves and Flowers,
Mint, Lavender Leaves and Flowers, Rue, Flowers of St. John's-wort, Cammomil,
and Melilot, of each one handful, separate all the Flowers from the Plants, and
put 'em into a Mattress, with a Quart of good Spirit of Wine; Fit a Vessel of
Rencounter to the Mattress, and luting the Junctures well, digest in balneo
Mariae, or on hot Ashes or Sand, with a sufficient Heat to extract the Tincture
of the Flowers, stirring the Mattress from time to time; then suffer it to cool,
pour off the clear and set it a part.

Take of green Juniper Berries beaten, Bay Berries beaten, Mastic, and Roots of
Pellitory of Spain, of each one Ounce; Benjamin half an Ounce, Castoreum and
Camphire, of each three Drams, beat each Ingredient apart, and put 'em
altogether into the Mattress with the Herbs, and four Pints and a half of
excellent Spirit of Wine; fit on the Vessel of Rencounter, lute the Junctures
exactly and digest in Balneo Mariae, or with a competent Sand-heat, that the
Spirit of Wine in its circulation may be impregnated with the Tincture of all
the Substance: Continue to give an equal Heat four and twenty Hours; then
suffer the Liquor to cool, pour it off by Inclination, mix it with the Tincture
of the Flowers, and put 'em both together into a Mattress, with a Pound of
speckl'd Soap, sliced very small: Put on the Vessel of Rencounter, and place
the Mattress in Balneo till the Soap be dissolved, and the Liquor reduced to the
consistence of an Ointment, which you must preserve for use as a most precious
Remedy.

Apply this Ointment cold, rubbing it in with your Hand; it causes no Swelling
or Pain, nor makes one Hair fall off. It retains its Virtue very long, for though
the surface grows somewhat hard, the Ointment is as good beneath the upper
Crust, as it was the first Day. It Is one of the best Remedies I know for
Sinew-sprains, Strains in the Joints, Shoulders, Hips, and Houghs, and
Sinew-sprung or bruised. And if Men would use it for Cold Aches, Rheumatisms,
Cold Sciatica's, Strains in the Hams and Joints, they would soon find that it
exceeds all Galenical Remedies whatsoever.

Another cheap Remedy.
This is a very simple Medicine, yet it is frequently attended with better
Success than the most pompous Compositions: It Is singularly good for old
Sinew-sprains, for though there be a hard Lump on the grieved Part, and the Sinew
it self be swollen and hard, this Remedy will complete the Cure. Melt a
sufficient quantity of Black Pitch in a large Iron-Spoon or Ladle, and as soon
as it begins to boil remove it from the Fire, and add by degrees as much fine
Wheat Flour as will bring it to a convenient thickness; then suffer it to cool
and spread it on a thin piece of Leather. After you have shaved away the Hair,
apply the Plaster round the grieved Part, and walk your Horse: Let the
Plaster stick till it fall away of its own accord, and if the Horse be not
cured apply a second.

If the Plaster leave a Swelling, apply the Ointment of Beetles, which, in
once or twice Dressing will take away the old Tumor, by causing a new one, for
the congealed Humors will be rarified, and disposed for Resolution. But if,
notwithstanding all these Remedies there still remain a Swelling, the surest
way is to draw five or six Lines with a Searing-Iron long-wise (never
cross-wise) and then to apply a good Plaster: But you must never give the Fire
till the Pain be asswag'd; and you may easily know the fit time, for the Heat
and Pain always leave the Part together.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of swelled and gourded Pastern-Joints.
WHen the Pastern-Joint swells after Traveling, if the Tumor be small, chafe
it every Morning and Evening with a Mixture of two parts of Aqua-Vitae, and one
of Oil of Nuts well shaken together.

But if the Swelling be large, and this Remedy ineffectual, apply the Remolade
of Bohemia, or the Red-Honey-Charge, after which a convenient Bath will assuage
the Swelling: Or if it still continue, you may easily drive it away with the
Remedy composed of Whites of Eggs, Spirit of Wine, and Honey, described in the
Sixty first Chapter. If the Swelling about the Joint be hardened, and the
Humors congealed, you must apply a more powerful Softener and Resolvent, such
as that which follows.

A Remedy for Swelled Pastern-Joints.
Chop a convenient quantity of Rue, boil it to a Paste with thick Wine, and
apply it as a Pultiss round the swollen Joints.

Coleworts boiled, and mixed with Bean-flower will produce the same effect, and
all the Remedies for Wind-galls, described in the Seventy fifth Chapter,
especially one near the end, are excellent in this case.

Sometimes the Legs are gourded about the Joints and higher, by reason of want
of Exercise, especially if the Horse be fat and fleshy. The best and speediest
Remedy is to bathe the Joints and other gourded Parts very hard, with a Lie
made of two parts of Ashes of Vine-twigs, and one third of Ashes of Tartar;
then charge 'em with the Ashes that sink to the bottom of the Vessel, and one
or two Applications will take away the Swelling.

To resolve a Swelling that grows at the side of the Pastern-Joint.
Besides the abovementioned Tumors, sometimes there arises a Swelling on the
Bone of the Pastern-Joint a little toward one side, about half the bigness of
a Pigeon's-Egg; it grows bigger if it be neglected, but not very hard, nor does
it make the Horse Halt. I have oftentimes prescribed the giving of Fire in this
Case; but there are other Remedies to be tried before that.

Resolving Plasters are very proper; and among others that which follows, if
it be kept long on the Tumor will certainly resolve and assuage it.

Dissolve two Pounds of Gum-Ammoniac in two Quarts of very strong Vinegar; boil
it over a clear Fire, stirring often, till the Solution begins to grow thick;
then strain it through a piece of Canvas, of that which is used for a Ground to
Tapistry, and throwing away the Dregs, put the rest into the Skellet again, and
boil to the thickness of ^^laister, which must be spread on Leather, applied
and tied to the Part after the Hair is shaved away, where it must be kept on
very long, that is, about four and twenty Days; during which the Swelling will
be resolved by insensible Transpiration: The Plaster must be made an Inch
longer than the Part, about its whole Circumference, and one will serve eight
Days without being changed or touched. The whole quantity here prescribed will
make four Plasters, which will serve two and thirty Days, for so long you must
sometimes wait before the Swelling be entirely dissipated; but those who have
not so large a stock of Patience may apply the Ointment of Beetles, or some
other good Retoire, which will ripen the Tumor, and reduce it to a Red-water.

CHAP. LXXVIII. The Plaster of Walnuts to resolve Swellings.
TAke green Walnuts so small that when they are cut they are equally soft, beat
'em to a Mash in a Marble Mortar, and strain 'em through a Sieve with the bottom
turned up, as Cassia is usually strained, beat that which remains till the
whole pass through the Sieve, and put two Pounds of this Pulp or Mash into a
glazed Earthen Pot, with a Pound of Salt well dried, and a Pound and a half of
common Turpentinel Set the Mixture in a Cellar to ferment fifteen Days, then
evaporate the Moisture over a gentle Fire, stirring all the while, till it be
reduced to the consistence of a Plaster, which cannot be done without some
difficulty, and preserve it in a Pot close covered, as an excellent Remedy to
resolve the Water-farcy, and all other Swellings. It retains its Virtue Thirty
Years.

Since the Pastern-Joint is at so great a distance from the Center of natural
Heat, the Swellings that are formed in that Part require a powerful Remedy to
resolve 'em: And this Plaster will do the work, if it be carefully applied,
and renewed every eight Days, shaving off the Hair, and continuing after the
same manner till the Swelling be perfectly dissolved.

The poorer sort of People may use this Plaster for Swellings occasioned by
the falling down of cold Humors in their Arms or Hams, and even in their
Hands. It resolves Wens or Flegmatic Tumors in the Knees, and all other Parts
of the Body; but in such cases the Cure cannot be perfected in less than a
Month, and sometimes two or three Months, and others are never Cured, according
to the largeness and quality of the Swelling. When this Plaster is applied to
Men, it must be renewed every four Days.

CHAP. LXXIX. Of an Attaint or Overreach.
AN Attaint proceeds either from a Blow with another Horse's Foot, that takes
off the piece above the Cronet, or from an Overreach, when a Horse strikes his
Hinder-Foot against his Fore-Leg.

You may easily know an Attaint by the Wound or piece of Flesh that is torn
away, by the Blood which flows out, and the halting of the Horse.

Wash away the filth or dirt with Vinegar and Salt, and if there be any loose
piece of Flesh, cut it off; then take a hard Egg cut through the middle, sprinkle
it with Pepper, and apply it hot, tying it fast to the grieved Part. If the
Horse be not cured by the first Application repeat it the next Day.

In frosty Weather, when Horses are rough-shod, or their Shoes made with long
Caulks, they are apt to overreach, and make a hole above the Cronet or in the
Pastern, which is not without danger: And therefore you must immediately wash
the Wound with warm Vinegar, then fill it with Pepper, and lay over it a black
restringent Charge, made of Chimney-soot, Vinegar, and Whites of Eggs, or of
Bole and Vinegar, or (which is best of all) of Lime tempered with Water. Repeat
the same the next Day, and the Cure will be perfected. For an Overreach by the
Caulk of the Shoes, fill the Hole with Gunpowder beaten and tempered with
Spittle, as they usually make Touch-Powder, then set Fire to it, and repeat the
same the next Day. In the mean time both the Foot and Wound must be carefully
preserved from Moisture; and if the Attaint be from time to time washed with
Aqua-Vitae, it will heal (though never so deep) if the Tendon be not hurt.

If the Cure do not proceed according to your desire, melt a little of the
Emplastrum divinum with Oil of Roses in a Spoon, and fill the Hole with Cotton
dipped in this Ointment, laying a Plaster of the same over it, and dressing the
Horse every Day after the same manner till the Cure be perfected, as it will be
speedily, if the Tendon or Gristle be not hurt. If the Hole be deep, and
notwithstanding all these Remedies, the Horse continue still to Halt, or the
Part above the Attaint be swollen, the Hoof shrunk, and the Foot contracted
beneath, you have reason to fear that the Tendon is grieved; and therefore you
must carefully examine the Part with your Probe, and if you find that the Hole
reaches to the Tendon, dress it according to the Directions that shall be given
for the Quitter-Bones. If the Attaint be neglected on a Journey, though the Horse
do not Halt at the first, by reason of the Corruption that is generated by the
Cold and Foulness of the Part, the Sore may reach the Hoof; in which case,
after one or two Applications of the Honey-Charge, you must proceed to give the
Fire, and dress it as a Quitter-bone. It Is to be observed, that the Sore will
never Heal, so long as the Horse licks it; and therefore you must cover it with
the Remedies that shall be described in the following Chapters.

If the bottom of the Hole be foul, though the Gristle be not spoiled, which you
may know by searching with your Probe, to hinder the Corruption from reaching
thither, especially if it breeds Matter, or if you perceive a Swelling or
Hardness above, or at the side of the Part, you must wash it with Warm Wine,
and fill the Hole with Schmit's Ointment, renewing the same upon occasion. If
the Cure prove tedious, and the Horse begin to Halt, the Swelling growing big
and hard, and voiding Matter, you must have recourse to the Chapter that treats
of Quitter-bones; for you may certainly conclude that the Gristle is hurt, and
must be extirpated, or the Sore will never be cured.

CHAP. LXXX. Of the Scratches.
THere are three Sorts of Scratches; Simple, Sinewy, and Scratches in the Hoof,
commonly called Quitter-bones. The simple Scratches are most usual, being a
Tumor caused by corrupt Humors contained in the Skin and the Flesh. It grows
in all the parts of the Pastern, especially behind, and the Horse voids by this
Channel or Gutter, all the depraved Humors that were gathered in that Part.
The Scratches in a Horse resemble a Corn in a Man's Foot; he cannot endure you
to touch the Sore, and it usually makes him halt before it be suppurated, that
is, before the Corruption be discharged. Sometimes the Scratches are the
Relics of the Strangles, or of the Impurities expelled by Nature: sometimes
they proceed from Hurts and Bruises; and they are also occasioned by the Dirt
and Flesh that sticks to the Pasterns, which growing hot and sharp, frets and
corrodes the Skin. The Simple or Plain Scratches are most easily cured, and the
Horse is perfectly sound when they are taken away. The sinewy Scratches, so
called, because they are either under, above, or at the Side of the Sinews, may
be divided into Three Kinds, but the First is very rare.

It Is a Tumor generated under one of the Sinews of the Pastern, which hinders
the Matter from running out, and causes so violent a Pain, that the Horse is
seized with a Fever, and halts right down: for all the softening and asswaging
Remedies in the World cannot penetrate to the Swelling that lies under the
Sinews and Tendons of the Pastern. The Part is remote from the Heart, which is
the Principle of Heat, and cannot by its own Force digest those crude and raw
Humors; so that the Horse must unavoidably suffer cruel Torments, and for the
most part perish. This Disease is more dangerous than the Quitter-bone and the
Cure is always extremely difficult.

The Second Sort of sinewy Scratches grows on one of the Sinews of the Pastern;
it swells the Pastern and Leg, makes the Horse very lame, and frequently sends
forth a great Scab instead of corrupt Matter. In this Case you must charge the
Leg, and apply a good softening Remedy; after the Scurf is fallen, dress the
Sore with Schmits Ointment, or (for want of that) with what follows. Take a
pound of Honey, and two Ounces of Verdigrease in fine Powder; Mix and thicken
'em with a sufficient quantity of Wheat Flour, adding a small Glass-full of
good Spirit of Wine. Apply this Ointment with flax to the Sores, and dress 'em
every day, bathing the Leg, and especially the grieved Sinew, with warm Wine
mixed with a little Butter, and the Horse will grow sound.

There is a Third and very dangerous Kind of sinewy Scratches, which breeds at
the side of the Master-Sinew on the hinder-Legs, and the nearer it grows to the
Sinew the more malignant it is, and the Cure less easy. Many Horses have been
incurably lamed, after a continual Application of Remedies for seven or eight
Months. These Scratches are very painful, for they make the Horse halt right
down, and forsake his Meat; they occasion a Fever, and almost all the Horses
that are troubled with 'em are so tormented that they cannot put their Foot to
the Ground, and at laft they sink under the miserable Pain. Having explained
the Three Sorts of sinewy Scratches, I shall now proceed to consider the Third
Member of the first Division.

The Third Sort of Scratches, commonly called Quitter-bone, is seated between
the Cronet and Hoof, and is also very dangerous, because it makes the Horse
cast his Hoof, which much diminishes his Value, for the new Hoof is hardly ever
fit for Service.

Thus I have briefly run over the several Kinds of Scratches, and I shall
propose the Remedies for 'em in the same Order.

Remedies for simple Scratches.
The simple Scratches are cured by taking out the Piece of Rotten Flesh that
lies between the Flesh and the Skin. In order to that end, take the quantity of
an Egg of Leaven made of Rye-Meal, two or three Heads of Garlic beaten, and as
much Pepper as you can lift with the Ends of three Fingers; temper 'em with
Vinegar, and apply the Mixture to the sore place. This is certainly a very good
Remedy, for in four and twenty hours it brings forth the corrupt Piece of
Flesh, without leaving any Foulness at the Bottom of the Sore. If you cannot
procure Rye-Leaven, take Leaven made of Wheat-Dough; or prepare the following
Remedy.

Take the Bulbs of two or three Leeks, or (for want of these) two white Onions
beaten; incorporate 'em with the bigness of an Egg of Hog's Lard, and as much
Mustard Seed as you can take up with the Ends of your Fingers: Apply this
Remedy to the Swelling, renewing it once a day, and the rotten Flesh will
quickly come forth; then wash the Part with Aqua-Vitae, and apply to the Sore
the abovementioned Ointment of Honey and Verdigrease, by which Method,
continued for some time, the Cure will be speedily perfected. If the Scab or
Scurf that falls off be very large, as sometimes it is, you must cleanse the
Sore with fine Flax, and apply the already-mention'd Ointment; which is very
excellent for this Purpose; or rub the Part with the Herb called Greater
Celandine, which grows always in shady places, and has a yellow Juice. You must
beat it, and squeeze out the Juice to rub the Part, and bind the bruised Herbs
upon it; for there is not a more powerful Dryer in the World. Or you may take
out the Corrupt Flesh thus:

Chop two or three Onions, boil 'em in Water with Mallows and Ground-sell; of
each one handful: strain out the Water and throw it away; then add a handful of
raw Sorrel to the other Ingredients, beat 'em all together to a Paste, which
must be thickened with Flower of Linseed to the Consistence of a Pultiss.
Spread it on Lint, and apply it hot to the Scratches. If the Tumor be very
hard, add a little Hog's Grease or Basilicum before you put in the Linseed, and
apply as before, renewing the same once in four and twenty Hours, if there be
Occasion; for one or two Applications will take out the rotten piece of Flesh,
leaving a Hole, which must be dressed as before.

Young Horses are very subject to this Kind of Scratches. I shall name several
Remedies that are good for it, that every one may choose which he pleases: Old
Oil, Butter, the Fat or Grease of Hens, Geese, Ducks, and Hogs, the Marrow of
Stags and Oxen, which may be made up with Rye-flower and Crumbs of Bread.

These are also very good, and cheap Remedies, and easily prepared; and besides
you may use the Plaster called Diachylum, that of the Mucilages, or Basilicum.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of Sinewy Scratches.
THE abovementioned Remedies will not produce any considerable Effect in the
Cure of the first Kind of sinewy Scratches, which lie so deep that they cannot
ripen; for the Sinews that cover 'em hinder the Operation of the Remedies. The
white Honey-Charge, (which you will find described in the Hundred eighty fourth
Chapter) will more effectually soften the Part, if you add Turpentine and
Linseed, and apply the Remedy round the Pastern, charging the whole Leg with
cold Lees of Wine, to prevent the falling down of the Humors.

If there be any Appearance that the Swelling is disposed to come to a Head in
any part of it, you must pierce the Skin with a hot Iron round the part, making
eight or ten Holes according to the Largeness of the space, in form of a
Circle; and sometimes beyond the part, according to the Room you have, and the
Probability of drawing the Matter, by opening these Passages. If the Matter
appear in any part, apply a Rowler of soft Linen, moistened with Basilicum,
and over that a Pultiss of the white Honey-Charge, as I intimated before,
keeping the Leg always charged with the Duke's Ointment, or Lees of Wine, and
continuing to dress the Sore every day till the Scabs fall off, or till you
perceive that it is fit to apply repelling Remedies; for Example, if the Skin
between the two Holes be loosened from the Flesh, and the Matter flow too
abundantly, you must lay aside the white Honey-Charge, and make use of the
following Remedy.

Heat a Pound or two of common Turpentine in an Earthen Pot, by degrees,
stirring it all the while with a wooden Slice; thicken it with very fine Soot,
stirring always over a gentle Fire, till it be reduced to the Thickness of a
Honey-Charge. Then spread it on Flax, and apply it warm to the Part, but you
must first wash the Sore with Aqua-Vitae. This Charge is in some measure
Restringent; it takes away the Heat, and hinders the Humors from flowing too
abundantly to the grieved Part.

As often as you heat the Restringent Charge, you must stir it all the while
it is near the Fire, for otherwise 'twill turn knotty.

Let the Horse feed on moistened Bran, and make him wholly abstain from Oats.

This Sort of Scratches must never be neglected, for all your Care, and the
most powerful Remedies you can apply or imagine, will hardly be able to ripen
it: I shall in the next place, proceed to propose some Remedies for the
Scratches that breed upon the Sinew, and (though without any Danger) make the
Horse halt before the Corruption come forth. You may choose which you please.

Remedies for the Second Kind of Sinewy Scratches.
These Scratches grow in the Pastern upon the Sinew; they are accompanied with
extreme Pain, and make the Horse halt, but yield to the effectual Operation of
proper Remedies.

First, you must rub the swollen Leg daily with the Duke's Ointment, and
afterward bring forth the Corruption or rotten Bit of Flesh, with one of the
Remedies described in the last Chapter, as that made of Rye-flower and Garlic,
or that which is composed of Leeks and old Hog's Grease; or one of those that
follow.

Take fresh Butter and Oil-Olive, of each four Ounces; heat 'em with half a
Pint of common Water, and thicken 'em with two Ounces of Linseed-flower: Then
boil, as if you were going to make Gruel, adding (a little before you take the
Skellet from the fire) two Ounces of Pigeon's Dung in powder, and charge the
Sore warm, having first clipped off the Hair with Scizzars.

If that do not answer your Expectation; take Leaves of Colt's-foot, long
Sorrel, and Mallows, of each one Handful; bake 'em under the Embers, then beat
and incorporate 'em with salt Butter. This Remedy being applied hot, will draw
forth the Rotten Piece of Flesh; but if it fail,

Bake or roast four Lilly Roots under the Ashes, beat, and add Hen's Grease, or
any other convenient Grease, three Ounces, Linseed-Oil two Ounces, the Yolks of
two hard Eggs: Incorporate all together in a Mortar, applying some of it to the
Scratches with Flax, and laying a Cover over it.

If the Sinew of the Leg be swollen, keep it always charged, and as soon as the
corrupt Flesh is come forth, wash the swollen Leg with warm Wine and Butter, or
chafe it with the Duke's Ointment, and fill the Hole with a Tent of fine Flax
moistened with Basilicum, which will ripen the rest of the rotten Flesh, and
cleanse the Sore: but if there be frothy and foul Flesh in the Hole, dip your
Tent in Agyptiacum, which will cleanse the Part, and make the dead Flesh fall
away.

When the Flesh appears fair and clean, apply the Juice of greater Celandine,
binding on the bruised Herbs, or Charcoal-dust, or burnt Copperas, which dries
more powerfully, or sears'd Ashes. Some use only to wash the Sore with
Aqua-Vitae or Urine, and strew it with burnt Oyster-shells, or old Boat-Ropes
dried and beaten to powder.

If the Wound or Sore, occasioned by the coming forth of the rotten Bit of
Flesh, be very large, you may cleanse it with the Mundificative of Opium, and
then dry it with the Unguentum Martiatum or Ointment of Steel, if you are loath
to give your self the trouble of composing the Ointment made of Honey,
Verdigrease, Spirit of Wine, and Flower.

Of Sinewy Scratches of the Third Kind.
Let us now proceed to consider the last Sort of sinewy Scratches, which breed
higher than the Pastern-Joint, upon the Master-Sinew, or at the side of it in
the hinder Legs, and oftentimes opposite to the moving Part of the Joint, in
which Case the Pain is more violent, because the Ligaments about the Joint are
affected. Sometimes they are higher up in the Leg, and grow only upon the
Sinews, or on the Top of the Joint; where they are accompany^d with so violent
a Pain, and so much Danger, that not only the Horse seldom or never puts his
Foot to the Ground, but certainly perishes if he be not seasonably and
effectually assisted; and it happens not unfrequently that the best Remedies
cannot save him from downright Lameness.

In the first place, you must let him blood in the Neck-Vein, keep him
suspended or hanging, if he cannot lean on the sore Foot, or litter him well
that he may lie down, if you perceive that he has Vigor enough to rise again;
for it is a very troublesome and unprofitable Method to keep Horses hanging, if
it can be avoided: nor must you put 'em in so unnatural a Posture without
extreme Necessity. Afterward apply the white Honey-Charge upon and about the
Sore to ripen it, and chafe the whole Leg with Ointment of Montpelier, or if
that cannot be procured, with Lees of Wine cold, renewing the Applications till
the corrupt Flesh come forth. Besides you must take up the Vein on top of the
Thigh, and draw a Star with a hot Iron under the Hough, if the Leg be not too
much gourded, which will put some stop to the flowing down of the Humors. In
the mean time apply the Honey-Charge, or some other softening Remedies, to
hasten the falling away of the rotten Flesh, if there be any; though even after
that is come forth the Horse oftentimes remains as before, that is, unable to
rest on the grieved Foot; in which Case you must give the Fire about the Sore,
piercing the Skin with a dozen of Holes, and continue the Application of the
white Honey-Charge, as before. After the Scabs occasioned by the Fire, are
fallen off, if your Horse be still in as bad a Condition as formerly, you must
open the Part with a red-hot Knife; for when the rotten Flesh comes forth, it
hardly leaves an open Hole, but a foul Sore that oftentimes throws out a red
Water, or burnt and yellowish Matter, both which proceed from the Sinew, and in
the mean time your Horse continues to be very lame, and even unable to set his
Foot to the Ground. The running of the sinewy Matter denotes the extreme
Weakness of the Part and of the Sinews, so that the Natural Motion is
interrupted; and you will never be able to stop the Course of the Matter which
dries and weakens the Sinews; but by drawing Lines with a Searing-Iron about
the whole Leg, both on the Inside and Outside, from the Hough downwards, and
covering it with a good Plaster to concentrate the natural Heat.

These Scratches will throw your Horse into a Fever, spoil his Appetite, and at
last kill him, if you be not very careful to prevent those fatal Accidents, by
administering frequently good Clysters with Sal Polychrest. If he forsake his
Meat utterly you may feed him with a Horn, as you were taught in the Beginning
of this Book, and give him white Water to drink, dressing him every day with
the utmost Diligence.

'Twill be very convenient in this Case to give the Horse two Ounces of Liver
of Antimony reduced to powder, and mixed with moistened Bran, if you can make
him eat it with Bran; and the next day an Ounce of the Cordial Powder in the
same Bran: the third day let him rest without giving him any thing; on the
fourth give him Liver of Antimony, on the fifth the Cordial Powder, and nothing
on the sixth day; continuing after the same manner till your Horse recover.
This Method will very much advance the Cure; for the Powder dissipates the
Humors that fall upon the grieved Part. It Is to be observed, that Horses who
are oftentimes troubled with this Kind of Scratches dare not touch the Ground
with the sore Foot for twenty or twenty five Days; and though the Sore begins
only on one side of the Leg, there happens a Translation of the Humors, which
passing between the Master-Sinew and the Bone, appear on the other side, where
they cause a painful Swelling without any Opening: and therefore you must take
the following Method to widen the Passage.

Take a crooked Probe, and search the bottom of the Sore which penetrates under
the Sinew; but if it run so deep beneath the Sinew, that you perceive by your
Probe that it reaches to the Tendons or the moving part of the Joint, you must
not venture an Incision lest you throw the Horse into a Fever, and perhaps kill
him. For Incision is only proper when the Probe passes directly to the Bone,
and from thence under the Master-Sinew to the other side of the Leg: but if it
hits against the Sinew, clip off all the Hair of the Leg, and give the Fire on
both sides from the Hough downward, drawing the Lines according to the usual
Manner, in an even rank, reaching under the Joint below, at the distance of
half a Finger's breadth from each other; and at the Sore burn a long Hole quite
through the Skin, with eight or ten little Holes about it, all piercing the Skin.
You will also perceive a Swelling over against the Sore on the other side of
the Sinew, and therefore you must also pierce the Skin with five or six little
Holes in that part; then bar the Vein, giving the Fire in form of a Star above
on the slat part of the Thigh; and below under the Hough, to stop the Course of
the Humors. After which cover the whole Leg with black Pitch melted, and above
that with Butter, wrapping it about with a Cover, and leaving the Leg in that
posture nine or ten days, till the Scabs be separated. The Fire thus given
stops the Course of the Humors, which otherwise would have fallen in too great
Abundance on the grieved Part; and so prevents the drying up of the Sinews, for
in this Disease the Humor that should nourish those Parts runs out in form of
Matter, and makes the Horse unfit for Service even after the Cure.

You must inject Clysters with Sal-Polycrest, to allay the beating or heaving
of the Flanks that will be occasioned by the Burning. Litter your Horse well,
feed him with moistened Bran, and afterward dress the Sore like an ordinary
Wound with Schmit's Ointment. If there be occasion to give the Fire again, to
let out some Matter shut up between the Skin and the Flesh, you must not lose
time out of fear or hesitancy, but proceed with all possible diligence, for
this is one of the most dangerous Diseases to which Horses are obnoxious.

I shall, in the next place, describe the manner of making an Incision, which
is only proper when the Probe passes directly to the Bone, or ascends without
reaching the Tendons or Sinew, or running into the Joint. In such a case you
must make a large Incision from above downwards, with a red-hot Knife, piercing
to the Bone; then finding by the Probe that the Hole passes under the Sinew
near the Bone to the other side, you must lay open the Part where the Probe
hits, making another deep Incision as before; then search again with your
Probe, whether there be any other bottom of the Sore, or whether the Hole runs
any other way; for you must cut open the whole Sore to the bottom with your
red-hot Knife, and afterward draw Lines with a Searing-Iron at the side of the
Incisions, reaching both above and below 'em, to bind and strengthen the Part,
and hinder the falling down of the Humors; you must also take up the
Plait-Vein, and sear five or six Lines in form of a Star, both below and under
the Hough; then anoint the Incisions, made with the red-hot Knife, with Oil of
Bay, covering 'em with Flax; two Days after renew the Application, letting it
remain two Days longer to mitigate the Pain caused by the Fire, for in four
Days the Oil will abate the adventitious and unnatural Heat; after which you
may dress the Incisions like ordinary Wounds, with Schmit's Ointment, using
your utmost diligence to hinder the Flesh from growing too fast; for you must
certainly expect to be troubled with Proud-Flesh, if you dress not the Sores
daily with Schmit's or the Doctor's Ointment, which last is a true Mundifier or
Cleanser; but by washing the Sores with the second Water, and then applying the
Ointment as often as you take off the Dressing, you may keep 'em clean and
sweet, and afterward dry 'em with the same Water, and Powder of old Ropes.

The Incisions and Burning will doubtless occasion a Beating or Heaving in your
Horse's Flanks; and therefore you must administer proper Clysters, with two
Ounces of Sal-Polycrest, and give him a like quantity of Liver of Antimony in
his moistened Bran. If he will not eat his Bran with Liver of Antimony, instead
of that give him about an Ounce of the Cordial Powder, once every two Days.

If the Flesh grow too fast, you may consume it with the following Caustic,
which is also very good to exfoliate or scale the Bone of the Foot, when it is
pricked or stubb'd, and to cleanse foul Wounds or Sores.

An excellent Liquid Caustic.
If you perceive that the Flesh grows too fast, or in too great abundance, in
the Wounds made by Incision, or that the Sores are foul and frothy, before you
apply Schmit's, or the Doctor's Ointment, you must wash the part with this
Caustic: Then dry it carefully and apply the Ointment, covering it with Flax.
You may also allay the Itching of those Sores, and of such as breed in the
Withers, or any other part of the Body, which happens about the end of the
Cure, and makes the Horse rub and bite 'em, by washing 'em with the same
Caustic, and applying the Powder of old Ropes.

Take the Spirits of Salt and Nitre, of each two Ounces, put 'em into a
Mattress, and after the Ebullition is over, if any happen, add two Ounces of
Quicksilver, and place the Mattress in a moderate Heat till the Mercury be
consumed or disappear; then add two Drams of good Opium, and you will have an
excellent Caustic, which must be kept in a Glass-Vial.

It Is to be observed, that when Scratches of this Kind break forth in the
Increase of the Moon, they are extremely stubborn and can hardly be conquered
by the Application of Remedies; but if they appear in the Wane, the Cure will
be less difficult.

My Practice has furnished me with some occasions to attempt the cure of Horses
in this condition: Two of 'em continued to halt above half a Year; some were
utterly lamed, and others were speedily cured, especially when the nature of
the Distemper required Incision.

I remember one Instance of Sinewy Scratches, which was accompanied with
terrible Symptoms; and I Am persuaded a particular Account of that Case will
give the Reader a clearer view of the extreme difficulty of the Cure, than all
the Arguments I could allege to convince him of it.

I began the Cure with giving the Fire, ordering the Skin to be pierced with
seven Holes, and afterward I applied a good Honey-Charge all about the Part. I
charged the contrary Thigh and Leg, lest it should be foundered; for the Horse
could not rest on the grieved Leg, and I commanded him to be dressed every day:
After eight days the Disease fell wholly down upon the Pastern, and broke out
in five or six Places toward the edge of the Hoof; upon sight of which I
immediately caused the Sole to be taken out, and applied defensives round the
Cronet, made with Powder of unslack'd Lime, tempered with the second Water, for
I was afraid lest the Hoof should fall off, because the Cronet was swollen above
an Inch. The Red Honey-Charge was applied above, and the swelling of the
Cronet, which was two or three Fingers breadth broad, was charged with the
abovementioned defensive. Over the dressing I applied Splents or Rowls of
twisted Flax, and bound 'em on carefully with a Lace. I was also obliged to
order several Holes to be burnt quite through the Skin, in those Parts of the
Pastern where the Matter appeared, and even afterward to lay open the spaces
between the Holes, to give a freer Passage to the Matter which ran out in great
quantity, and was not extremely bad, for 'twas half digested and bloody.

But perceiving, at the end of five Weeks, that the Cure was so little advanced
that the Horse would not put his Foot to the Ground, I thought 'twou'd be
convenient to use some other Defensive, which might not only allay the Pain
more effectually, but also bind and strengthen the Part. I took then two Pounds
of Turpentine, to which being heated, I added by degrees a sufficient quantity
of Soot well beaten, stirring the Matter about without intermission, till it
was reduced by boiling, to the thickness of a Charge; which I applied not only
about the Cronet, but also round the Joint, as far as the Swelling reached,
rubbing the Leg with the Duke's Ointment. Over the Defensive Charge below, I
laid Flax with a cover, and above that on the Cronet, I fitted Splents with
another Bandage to keep all sure. After two Applications, the Horse was able to
lean upon his grieved Leg; and at length was cured by the continued use of the
last mentioned Remedy. But perceiving that the Part continued still swollen, and
that the Foot was very much dried, I caused the Sole to be taken out, and four
Days after the whole length of the Leg to be seared, drawing the Lines from the
bending of the Hough to the Cronet; and besides, I ordered a good Plaster to
be applied to the burnt Parts, and covered with Hurds or Flocks, till the Scabs
fell away; and then the Sores were healed with the usual Remedies, and the Sole
also. After which the Horse was led every Day through tilled Grounds, for a Month
together. At last he recovered his Flesh, the nourishment returned to his Hip
and Leg, his Sinews grew vigorous, and were extended to their natural length,
he became fit for Service, and after four Months, was completely cured of this
grievous Distemper, which I thought fit to describe, that it may serve as a
Model in all cases of the same Nature.

I believe this Horse could not have been preserved, if he had not, during the
whole progress of the Cure, continued to lie down and rise with the help of his
three sound Legs, and kept a good Appetite to his Meat. As often as we
perceived a Beating or Heaving in his Flank, Clysters were not spared, no more
than the Duke's Ointment, and that of Montpelier for his Thighs and Legs: And
if he had not been both a fine and a good Horse, his Cure would have certainly
cost more than his real Value. To conclude, he was not suffered to eat Oats,
during three Months, but was fed with moistened Bran, good Hay and Straw; he
was always well Litter'd, and lodged in a little Stable by himself.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of the Third sort of Scratches, commonly called Quitter-Bone.
THE Quitter-bone is a Swelling on the Crown or Cronet, which is greater or
less according to the length of time from its first appearance. It proceeds
from corrupt Matter generated between the Hoof and the Bone of the Foot, which
rotting and infecting the Tendon or Gristle under the Cronet, draws the Humors
thither that occasion the Swelling. Nature, in pursuance of her wonted Methods,
to resist and endeavor to expel every thing that is corrupted, opens a Hole in
the Tumor, which is wide enough to let forth part of the Matter, but not to
give a passage to the Gristle: And therefore, since the Cure depends on the
utter extirpation of the rotten and infected part of the Gristle, you must
perform that Operation either with a Razor, or red-hot Knife.

This Distemper is easily known, but the Cure is difficult. You must, in the
first place, search with your Probe how far the Hole reaches; for if it enter
deep into the Hoof, under the Cronet, that part which lies beneath the
Swelling, shrinks and dries up, and oftentimes the Horse halts right down; but
if (as it sometimes happens) the Foot be not dried or shrunk under the Tumor,
the Horse halts little or not at all.

Before I proceed to the Cure, it must be observed, that between the Hoof and
the Bone of the Foot, there is a white Gristle called a Tendon, which is
insensible: it is about half an Inch broad, extending in length from the Heels,
almost to the last Nail of the Shoe, both in the fore and hinder Feet. There
are two of those Tendons in every Foot, one on the inside and the other on the
outside, which begin and end over against each other; and at the Toe, or that
part of the Foot which first touches the Ground, there are more than three
Finger's breadth between the ends of the Gristles. Now the Tendon being
infected by the Matter that is generated near it, the Neighboring Parts
discharge their Humors upon it, which occasions the Swelling; and the
Infection spreading by degrees, the Corruption increases, and seizes on the
whole Gristle, if its progress be not prevented by cutting out that part; for
the putrefaction cannot otherwise be stopped, and part of the Tendon must be
extirpated to preserve the rest.

Over-reaches or Attaints on the Cronet proceed from an external Cause, but
they produce the same effect; for when the Cronet of one of the Horse's Feet is
hurt by the Shoe of the other Foot, or any other way, the bruised Flesh usually
turns to Matter, which touching the Tendon corrupts it; or the Tendon is
immediately hurt by the Blow; in both which cases the same Disorders are
occasioned that accompany the Quitter-bone neither is there the least
difference in the cure.

It happens not unfrequently, that the Cure of those Attaints which reach the
Tendon, is extremely fallacious, even after the Hole is closed up, and the Sore
healed: Thus a Man is apt to imagine that the Horse is perfectly sound when he
cannot perceive the least appearance of any Hurt or Lameness; for by reason of
the insensibility of the Gristle many Horses do not Halt, though the Part be
hurt: But in the mean time the Humors gather in it, and by degrees breed a
large Attaint, which may lurk six Months, because the Horse hardly feels it,
and the Matter that corrupts the Tendon is neither sharp nor malignant during
all that time.

These Sorances are more dangerous and difficult to be cured, when they are on
the inside of the Foot, than when they breed on the outside, and the deeper
they reach, the Cure will advance more slowly. For the Gristle lies deeper
under the Cronet in some Horses than in others, and the Probe passes sometimes
between the Hoof and the Bone of the Foot, to the part beneath the Sole.

The Cure is performed either by giving the Fire, or by the Razor, and the
application of Cauteries. Both these Methods are good, but if the Grief be old
you must immediately, and without losing time, rip up the Sore or Tumor with a
Razor to the very bottom, sparing neither Hoof nor Flesh, but cutting out all
that is corrupted, either under the Hoof or in any other part of the Foot. If
the Hurt be newly taken, you may choose which Method you please; but it is to be
observed, that the Fire spoils the shape of the Foot, which remains long (and
oftentimes ever) afterward disfigured, at least the Marks of the Fire can
never be taken away. And therefore I shall begin with the safest, surest, and
most generally received Method of Cure, which may be thus performed with the
help of a Razor. After you have searched the bottom of the Sore with your
Probe, consider how far the Swelling reaches toward the Toe (for it never
stretches to the Heels) concluding that the Tendon is corrupted as far as the
Swelling extends. The main scope of the Cure is to take out the Gristle; in
order to which you must examine with a Probe, whether the Sore penetrates very
deep between the Hoof and the Bone of the Foot, for in that case you must begin
with taking out the Sole, which will be a great step toward the Cure: But if
you find by the Probe that the Tendon does not lie very deep, the taking out of
the Sole may be omitted, though that Operation be not only very safe, but
extremely useful in all cases whatsoever. Four or five Days after put in the
Probe to the Tendon, to extirpate which, you must shave away the Hair off the
Part where you intend to begin the extirpation of the Gristle, about half a
Fingers breadth beyond the Swelling toward the Toe, and open the Part with a
red-hot Iron as far as the Tendon, which you must feel with a crooked Slice, or
rather with your Finger, and therefore the Hole ought to be made wide enough to
receive your middle Finger or Thumb, if the Horse be of a large size. Then mix
two Drams of Aloes, with six Drams of Sublimate, both in fine Powder, of which
take a sufficient quantity, and with Spirit of Wine make a little Ball to be
thrust into the Hole, as far as the Tendon. In the next place make a Tent of
Flax, sufficient to fill the whole capacity of the Hole, and daubing it over
with the abovementioned Powder, mixed with Basilicum, or some other Ointment,
put it into the Hole. Besides, you must prepare another Tent after the same
manner, and thrust it as far as you can into the Sore; and if the Hole be not
large enough to receive the Tent, you may widen it by putting in your red-hot
Iron to the Gristle or bottom of the Sore, whether the Probe reaches. Then with
a Searing-Iron, much less than the former, pierce the Skin in several Parts
round the Swelling, making the Holes an Inch distant from each other; but you
must take great care not to touch the Cronet. All the Holes ought to pierce the
Skin, and even a little deeper, which may be done without the least danger, by
reason of the Swelling. Having proceeded thus far, you must cover the whole
burnt Part with an equal mixture of Turpentine, Honey, and Tar, applying it hot
with Flax, and binding a Clout over it very carefully, that your Horse may not
be able to bite it off. The Day after the Application let him Blood in the
Neck-Vein, and let the first Dressing remain five or six Days, during which he
will suffer a great deal of Pain. But if he be seized with a Beating or Heaving
in his Flank, give him at Night a good Clyster, with about two Ounces of
Sal-Polycrest, and repeat the same next Morning, if there be occasion. In the
mean time you must feed him with moistened Bran, mixed with Liver of Antimony,
to the quantity of two Ounces every Day.

Some tender Horses are seized with a Fever, and a violent Palpitation in the
Flanks, in which case you must administer proper Clysters. But since the Fever
is only an effect of the Operation of the Cautery; as soon as that ceases it
will also disappear.

If he forsake his Meat (as many Horses do) you must tie one of the
Chewing-Balls, described in the Eighth Chapter, in a warm Clout, to the midst
of his Bit, letting him champ upon it two Hours in the Morning, and as long in
the Afternoon. This Remedy will contribute effectually to the restoration of
his Appetite.

The Scabs will be almost loosened from the burnt Parts, by the removal of the
first Dressing, but the Cautery that sticks to the Gristle, will not quit its
hold for a long time after, and therefore you must patiently attend its
Operation. Nature will endeavor to separate the rotten from the sound Part,
and to expel that which is no longer a Part of the Body, as being deprived of
Nourishment: If she be vigorous, the Scab or Escar will quickly fall off; if
not, you must give her time and liberty to act, without spurring her forwards:
Only you must still continue to apply the abovementioned Composition to the
burnt Parts, renewing it every two Days till the Scabs be separated; after
which you must only wash the Sores with Aqua-Vitae, and cover 'em with Flax
dipped in the same Liquor till they be perfectly healed.

As for the Tents that were applied to the two ends of the Tendon, after they
have done their work, and the Scabs are separated, you must search with the
Probe, whether the Gristle be not entirely extirpated, that you may not be
afterward obliged to apply a new Cautery, like that which you put in at first.
Then dress the Sores with Schmit's Ointment till they be completely healed,
burning the Proud Flesh, or consuming it with Powders, as in the Cure of a
Wound.

CHAP. LXXXIII. The Doctor's Ointment to cleanse Quitter-bones.
MElt half a Pound of Tallow, and while it is very hot, add fresh Butter, and
Oil of St. John's-wort, of each a quarter of a Pound, Oil of Bay three Ounces;
then remove the Pot from the Fire, and when the Matter is half Cold, mix it
with Borax and Realgar, both in fine Powder, of each two Ounces, Powder of
Verdigrease three Ounces, continuing to stir till it be perfectly cold.

This Ointment must be applied cold on Clouts or Tents; it cleanses, dries, and
heals, and without the assistance of any other Remedy, closes up Sores, made by
the application of Caustics to the Cronet. But if there be any Felander, Scale
of a Bone, or piece of the Gristle to be separated; you must strew it with
Sugar or White-Vitriol to it, and then apply the Ointment. If the part that
ought to be separated be small, Sugar will suffice, but if it stick very fast,
you must make use of a Powder composed of two parts of White-Vitriol, and one
part of Sublimate exactly mixed together.

When there are any pieces of the Gristle, Scales of Bones, or Felanders to be
separated, you must not imitate the Farriers, who, out of a pretended
Tenderness, and for fear of hurting the Part, apply a digestive, which moistens
and softens it, whereas it ought to be dried, that the Scales, etc. may fall
away.

After the Scab or Escar is fallen off, wash the Sore, as often as you dress
it, with the second Water, or the abovementioned Liquid-Caustic, which will
keep it sweet and clean; and if there be any Hole that pierces into the Hoof,
or passes through the Foot, fill it with Tents besmeared with this Ointment. When
you perceive no Matter at the bottom of the Sore, you may conclude, that there
is nothing left which ought to be taken tway, and that your Horse is in a
hopeful way of Recovery; and when the Matter leaves off running altogether,
it is a sign that the Sore is healed.

If the Sore be on the outward Quarter, or outside of the Foot, as soon as the
bottom is sound, and the Horse begins to walk upright, it is better to make him
travel, than to keep him still in the Stable. Thus you may perceive, that I had
reason to affirm, that the Sores on the outside are more easily cured, than
those that are on the inside of the Foot; and besides, the Horse cannot so
readily fret or rub off the Skin of the grieved Part with his contrary Foot.

If the Part be not dressed with great care and diligence, the Flesh frequently
grows so fast, that the Sore Place rises higher than the Hoof, and the rest of
the Pastern. This Inconvenience may be prevented by washing it every Day,
either with the second, or with the yellow Water, or (if you perceive that
neither of these are sufficient to curb the growth of the Flesh) with the
Liquid Caustic; and if that be still too weak to put a stop to the growing
Evil, you must cover it all over with Powder of Realgar, laying dry Flax over
it, and binding a Cloth over all: Let the Dressing remain untouched eight and
forty Hours; after which apply the Ointment Aegyptiacum, or Apostolorum, or
that described in this Chapter, to hasten the separation of the Eschar, which
will stick seven or eight Days, and grow to the thickness of a Crown-Piece,
leaving the Sore at last so sweet and clean, that the Cure for the most part
may be perfected, with the usual drying Powders, such as white Copperas, or
some of those which you will find described in Chap. CVIII. as calcined Tartar,
or the like; and in this case the Horse may travel without danger.

It happens not unfrequently, that after the Cure is seemingly completed, the
bottom appearing sound, and no matter upon the Dressing, the Horse begins to
halt worse than before; in which case, if there be no cavity or hollowness
left, it is a certain sign that there is some corrupted piece of the Gristle
still remaining, and that the Incision was not made far enough on the Cronet
toward the Toe, to take in all the infected Part of the Tendon, and therefore
you must repeat the whole Operation, opening a new Hole on the Cronet, and
proceeding as before; though all this trouble might have been prevented at first,
and the Gristle wholly extirpated, by making the Incision an Inch further from
the Hole of the Sore.

It Is to be observed that oftentimes though the Gristle be wholly rooted out, and
the Horse seem perfectly sound, the very next day he will halt right down, and
the whole space on the Toe between the Tendens will be seized with a Swelling,
accompanied with a very considerable Heat. These Disorders are almost always
occasioned by the neglect of those who hold the Horse's Foot when the Tendon is
cut out; for if the Horse be skittish or stubborn, they let go his Foot with a
jerk, and the Hoof is shaken by the Violence of the Shock, because the Gristle
that kept it firm is taken away. And therefore you ought always to make the
Groom or him that holds the Foot, fall back two steps before he let go his
hold, or suffer the Foot to touch the Ground.

As Soon as you perceive this Swelling, anoint it with Oil of Bay, and bind it
up with flax and a Cover, leaving it on eight and forty hours, to take away the
Pain and Inflammation, which the Oil will do very effectually, if it be truly
prepared, and not sophisticated. After the two days are expired, draw Lines
with a hot Iron from the Top to the Bottom of the Tumor, about a finger's
breadth distant from each other, piercing through the Skin into the Hoof, for the
Swelling preserves the Parts from being spoiled by the Fire. Anoint all the
burnt Lines with Oil of Bay cold, applying Flax moistened with the same Oil,
and a Cloth over all; for if this Application be repeated three days together,
it will take away the Pain occasioned by the Fire, and assuage the Swelling.
This done, apply the Mixture of Turpentine, Honey, and Tar, till the Scabs fall
off, after which the Sores may be healed by washing 'em with Aqua-Vitae.

When the Sore reaches far into the Foot, and the Tendon lies so deep under the
Hoof, that it comes near the Sole, after the Cautery has done its Work, and the
Scab is separated, if your Horse continue still to halt, and even worse than
before the Cure was begun, you must immediately take out the Sole, if it was
not taken out before, and search the bottom of the Sore with your Probe. But
there is sometimes so great a distance (as for Example, an Inch, or Finger's
breadth) between the Sole and the bottom of the Sore where the Probe stops,
that you cannot without danger cut that Space to give a passage to the Matter
downwards, and so promote the Cure by Injections and other proper Remedies,
which perhaps may be necessary to separate some Scale from the Bone of the
Foot, that is always in some measure infected by the Neighborhood of the
corrupted Gristle, and must be exfoliated or scaled, before the Cure can be
perfected. And therefore in this Case you must cut away about two, three, or
four fingers breadth of the Hoof from the top to the bottom, with a sharp Knife
red-hot, to uncover the Tendon, which must be cut out with the same red-hot
Knife; after which dress the Sore every day, or once in two days, with Schmit's
Ointment, till it be healed, washing it always with a large quantity of
Aqua-Vitae, before you apply the Ointment.

Note; That you must never cut the Hoof quite through at the Corner of the Heel
from the Cronet downwards; for as an Arch may turned to a Heap of Ruins by the
removal of one Stone; so if the Natural Figure of the Foot be spoiled, it
remains useless, or at least cannot be restored without great Trouble and
Difficulty.

But this is not all, for when the Hoof is cut to lay bare the Gristle that
lies very deep within the Foot, you will find very frequently or almost always,
the Bone of the Foot corrupted by the Neighborhood of the Tendon, and that
it is absolutely necessary to separate a Scale, and sometimes two Scales, from
the infected Bone. In this Case there is no need of a corrosive Ointment, for
the Bone may be exfoliated by the following Powder. Take Aloes and Myrrh, of
each an Ounce, Sugar two Ounces; Mix and make a Powder: of which a sufficient
quantity being mixed with Spirit of Wine, must be aply'd to the Scale, and
Schmit's Ointment laid over it, till the Scale be separated, and the Horse walk
upright; after which the Sore may be healed like a simple Wound.

It Is frequently observed that about the End of the Cure, the Hoof shrinks
under the Sore, and pinching the quick-Flesh, makes the Horse halt; in which
Case you must pare away that part of the Hoof which bruises the Flesh, and
apply convenient Remedies to dry the Flesh. But this Inconveniency may be
prevented, by moistening the Hoof with proper Ointments for the Feet.

The End of the Cure is not unfrequently the most difficult part of it: for
usually there remains a Sore on the Cronet which cannot be dried with Powders,
and therefore you must have recourse to the following Ointment. I am not
ignorant that Farriers endeavor always to dry up Sores with Powders, but that
is a tedious, and oftentimes unsuccessful Method, and therefore I advise you to
persist in the Use of Ointments to the End of the Cure.

An Ointment to dry up Sores on the Cronet.
Beat a red-hot piece of Charcoal in a Mortar, with half the weight of Salt,
then pour in by degrees, a sufficient quantity of Oil-Olive, stirring with the
Pestle, till the Matter be reduced to a very black Liniment, which must be
applied cold with Flax and a Bandage, and the application renewed till the
Sores be healed. It dries and resists Putrefaction; and the Countess's Ointment
produces almost the same effects.

How to cure Quitter-bones, by giving the Fire.
I thought fit to give the precedence to Caustics, because the Foot is not so
much disfigured by those Medicines, as by the Fire, which always spoils the
Hoof. The most skilful Farriers are deterred by this consideration from giving
the Fire, in the Cure of these Sores; nevertheless, this is certainly a very
effectual Method, and even requires less dexterity in the Undertaker, than that
which is performed by Caustics.

Since, as I intimated before, the Cure depends on the utter extirpation of the
corrupted Part of the Tendon, after you have searched the depth of the Sore
with your Probe, you must give the Fire all over the Swelling, beginning above,
and drawing the Lines very near each other to the Hoof under the Cronet, so
deep as not only to pierce the Skin, but to reach and burn the Gristle quite
through, which lies deeper in some Horses than in others: for if the red-hot
Iron pierce only one half of the thickness of the Tendon, the Operation will
prove wholly ineffectual. Then anoint the whole Sore with an Ointment composed
of Hog's-Lard, and Verdigrease, or of Turpentine, Tar, and Honey, heated and
mixed together, and applied hot with Flax, and a convenient Cover and Bandage to
secure the whole Application from Slipping.

About five Days after unbind the Dressing, cleanse and wipe the Sore, and
renew the Application till the Scab fall quite away. This Operation is attended
with so much Pain that the Horse who endures it usually forsakes his Meat, and
is seized with a Beating in his Flank: And therefore you must administer
Clysters with Liver of Antimony, such as were prescribed to be used in the like
case, when the Cure is attempted by Caustics. After the Scab is fallen put your
Probe into the Hole that reaches under the Hoof, and search whether any part of
the Gristle be left. If you can find none, it is so much the better, for all
your Task will be to dress the Sore with the Doctor's Ointment, and wash it
once in two Days with the second or the yellow Water. But since there remains
almost always a Hole, you must put a Tent into it, besmeared with the same
Ointment. And if you perceive no Matter on the end of the Tent, when you take
it out, you may conclude, that the bottom of the Hole is sound, and that the
Cure will neither be tedious nor difficult, if you dress the Sore with the
Ointment Apostolorum, or that of Schmit. But if, after all, the Horse continue
to halt right down, it is a certain sign that the corrupted Tendon was not
wholly extirpated; and therefore you must give the Fire again, to the very
utmost borders of the Swelling toward the Cronet, piercing deeper than you did
at first, with your Probe in your Hand to direct you, and applying the
abovementioned Composition hot, or the Ointment of Hog's-Lard and Verdigrease
to the burnt Part, till the Scab or Escar be separated.

If your Horse continue still to halt considerably, and the Hole be deep, put
in a Tent with the Ointment Apostolorum; and if it bring forth abundance of
Matter, you may conclude, that the bottom of the Sore is corrupted, and that
the root of all the Mischief lies there: And therefore you must immediately
proceed to the taking out of the Sole, if that was not done at the beginning.
When you remove the Dressing of the Sole, thrust your Probe into the Hole of
the Sore somewhat strongly, endeavoring to make it penetrate to the bottom of
the Foot; and if you can perceive the Part under the Sole, that is opposite to
the bottom of the Hole, pierce it quite through with a red-hot Iron, to open a
free passage to the Matter, and put in a Tent besmeared with Hog's-Lard, mixed
with Powder of Verdigrease which will hinder the Flesh from growing too fast on
the Cronet. After the Scab is fallen off, dress the Hole with the Doctors
Ointment, Aegyptiacum, or the Ointment Apostolorum.

If notwithstanding all your care, some extraneous or preternatural Substance
breed in the Hole, or get into it, such as Felander, scale of the Foot-bone, or
any thing else that ought not to be left in it, you must bring it forth by
touching it with the Vulnerary Water or Spirit of Salt, and tenting the Hole
with the Ointment Apostolorum; continue after the same manner for two or three
Days together. If these Applications be not sufficient to separate the Felander
speedily, you must touch it with a Searing-Iron, then apply the Ointment, and
the Felander will fall away, leaving the Horse in a state of Recovery.

The cutting or burning of the Piece between the bottom of the Sore and the
Sole, ought not to be attempted in several Cases; as, besides some other
Instances which might be alleged, when the space that must be pierced is too
thick, or when the Sore is too near the Bone called the Pivot, which governs
the Foot; for since that Bone never scales, its foulness or corruption must be
taken away by scraping, which is very troublesome and painful, and weakens the
Bone so much that it can hardly ever afterward recover its former strength.
And therefore in such cases the best way is to pare away so much of the Hoof as
to uncover the bottom of the Sore, that you may be able to burn the rest of the
Gristle; and if there be any Scale or other Substance to be separated, you may
proceed according to the former Directions.

When your Horse begins to go upright, without any visible halting, 'twill be
sufficient to dress the Sore, though never so large, with Schmit's Ointment,
spread on soft folds of Linen; but before you apply the Ointment, if the Flesh
be foul you must touch it with the Vulnerary Water, or the Liquid Caustic, to
allay the Itching, which is usually so troublesome, when the Sore begins to
heal, that you can hardly keep the Horse from nibbling at it with his Teeth.

You may also keep the Part from Itching, and the Flesh from growing too fast,
by washing the Sore every Day (after the Scabs are fallen off) with the second
Water, which is very effectual in this case.

It Is to be observed, that the Sore must never be touched with common and
unmixed Water, because it hinders the Cure, by increasing the Moisture which
abounds but too much already in the Parts near the Joints. For, to facilitate
the motion of the Bones, provident Nature has filled the Joints with a certain
Moisture, that is easily communicated to the Neighboring Parts; and therefore
we must always endeavor to consume that superfluous Moisture by drying
Remedies.

Since the second Water is of an excellent use, not only in this case, but for
the Cure of all manner of Sores, I shall take this occasion to inform the
Reader, that this name is usually given to Aquafortis, after it has been used
for the solution of Metals, by which means it acquires a green color. You may
easily procure it from Goldsmiths or Refiners of Metals, who sell it at a very
low rate, as being unfit for their business.

When the Matter ceases to run out, though the Swelling be not wholly asswag'd,
to dry up the remaining Sores, dress both these and the Swelling, once every
two Days, with the second Water boiled to a moderate thickness with unslack'd
Lime, which will dry, bind, and resolve very effectually, especially if there
be a Swelling, without any considerable Pain, nor can you make use of a better
Astringent. The Lime must be laid in a dry place; where, in eight or ten Days,
it will crumble into Powder.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Of the Ring-bone.
THE Ring-bone is a Swelling that grows between the Cronet and Pastern-Joint,
on one of the two Tendons that are in that Part. It Is hard and callous,
sticking very fast to the Pastern; the Horse does not complain much when you
handle it: It presses the Tendons and Ligaments, and grows so big when it is
near the Cronet, that by intercepting the Nourishment, it makes the Foot
shrink, and the Hoof wither or grow dry. The longer it continues, it descends
lower upon the Cronet, and increasing to a considerable bigness, makes the
Horse Lame; from whence it is plain, that the Greatness of the Danger which
attends it must be measured by its Nearness to the Cronet.

The Ring-bone is sometimes hereditary; but it is usually occasioned by a Strain
taken in Curvetting, (which tries all the Force of the Sinews) bounding Turns,
and violent Galloping or Races.

This Distemper is not very common; but if the Danger be not prevented by a
seasonable Application of Remedies, it is usually the Cause of irrecoverable
Lameness. It proceeds sometimes from the Indiscretion of those who back their
Horses while they are too Young, before their Joints are well knit and
strengthened.

Sometimes those Tumors are at first no bigger than Beans, but afterward they
increase to half the quantity of a small Apple; and they usually appear on both
sides the Pastern, with a little Swelling between 'em. Since several Persons
are not only ignorant, but afraid of the Effects of giving the Fire, they may
observe the following Method.

In the first place take out the Sole, then clip away the Hair very close, and
apply to the Ring-Bone true Oil of Bay with Flax, a Cover, and Bandage. Two
days after separate the Scurfs raised by the Oil, and renew the Application
with the same Flax. When you take out the Sole you must cleave the Frush, and
when the Dressing is fitted to the Sole with Splents, you must thrust Rowlers
into the Cleft to keep it open, and one Bandage will serve both for the
Ring-bone and Frush. The Fire is the most usual and certain Remedy to Cure
Ring-Bones when they are increased to any considerable Bigness. First, you must
take out the Sole, and six days after, when you remove the second Dressing,
make Incisions with your Fleam, beginning above, and reaching downwards, about
a Finger's breadth distant from each other, cutting the Skin to the Callus that
causes the Ring-Bone through the whole Extent of the Swelling, but without
hurting the Cronet. Since these Incisions are usually attended with a great
Flux of Blood, apply hot Turpentine with Flax, and a Bandage, letting it remain
untouched forty eight Hours; after which remove the Dressing, and with a
red-hot, but not blazing Knife, burn the whole Callus very dexterously without
pressing too hard upon the Part. If the whole Substance of the Ring-bone be not
consumed, your Labor will be entirely lost; and therefore you must burn it
over and over, and penetrate the whole Tumor through the Incisions that were
made before; after which apply a Mixture of Turpentine, Tarr, and Honey, or an
Ointment made of Hog's Lard and Verdigrease, laying Flax over it, and wrapping
it about with a Cloth till the Scabs fall away. Then dress the Sores with
Schmit's Ointment, or Aegyptiacum, or the Ointment Apostolorum, till the Matter
cease to flow; after which Farriers usually wash the Sores with the Second
Water, and then apply drying Powders; in the mean time the Sores ought always
to be kept covered, both to prevent the Growth of proud Flesh, and to hinder
the Horse from reaching 'em with his Teeth: for if great Care be not taken to
dress and cover the Part, there will remain a Swelling where the Ring-bone was,
which may be reckoned a great Deformity in the Leg, though it does not make the
Horse halt. Besides you must be extremely careful in the Dressing of a
Ring-bone, not to tie the Bandage too hard for fear of causing an excessive
Tumor: the best way is to renew the Dressing every day, or at least every two
days. I intend to make the Healing of the Sole after it is cut out, the Subject
of a Particular Chapter, which you may consult on this Occasion.

I had once a Young Horse committed to my Care for the Cure of this Distemper;
and after I had taken out the Sole, and given the Fire, the Strangles, that
were just ready to run, though I could not perceive any apparent Sign of 'em,
fell with so much Violence on the Part where the Ring-bone was seated, which
was on one of the Forelegs, that the whole Skank was extremely swollen, and
the Tumor broke in two places at the Pastern-Joint, out of which a vast
quantity of Matter was evacuated. I kept the Cronet always charged with good
Restringents made of Powder of unslack'd Lime, and the second Water, to
dissolve the Swelling which reached that part, dressing the Sores with
Aqua-Vitae, Honey, and unslack'd Lime well mixed together; and at last the
Horse recovered, though the Cure was extremely retarded by that Accident.

Some affirm that a Ring-bone may be cured before it grow big, by giving the
Fire without taking out the Sole, if the Foot be not very dry and shrunk,
especially if the Vein under the Knee be taken up; but Experience has convinced
me, that to proceed methodically, the Cure of this Distemper must be always
begun with taking out the Sole, whether the Fire be given or not: for the
taking out of the Sole draws the Matter downwards, and makes a kind of
Revulsion; nor is the Fire alone, though given with all possible Care and
Dexterity, able to dissolve a Ring-bone. I have made several Observations that
will not permit me to doubt of this Truth; for I have seen some Horses, who
after an exact Observance of the abovementioned Method, continued to halt as
before: The Sole was taken out, the Skin was pierced with red-hot Knives,
reaching to the very Callus, the whole Tumor was burnt, the Scabs fell, the
Sores were fair, and in a very good Condition; and after all the Horse was as
Lame as ever. I was therefore obliged to order the Sole to be taken out a
second time, and the Frush to be cleft to the Pastern with a Fleam, to widen
the Heels, after which some of the Horses were cured; though I have met with
others that recovered not till I had taken out the Sole a third time. At that
time I had not found out the way of cleaving the Frush to widen the Heels, and
therefore I only did half my work in taking out the Sole: But since I began to
put that Method in Practice, I never was obliged to take out the Sole more than
once. And to convince you of the Usefulness of taking out the Sole in those
Cases, I can assure you that I have cured Horses of the Ring-bone by taking out
the Sole, without giving the Fire, applying Oil of Bay, and proceeding
according to the Directions mentioned in the Beginning of this Chapter; in so
much that the Horse went upright, and was very fit for Service, the Ring-bone
in the mean time making no progress for above three Years; but at last it was
found necessary to give the Fire.

If you cut the part with the Fleam, and then give the Fire through these
Incisions, the remaining Scar will be smaller and less unseemly than if the
Skin had been pierced with a red-hot Knife: for though in several other Cases'
the Skin is only seared till it acquire a Cherry Color, for the Cure of this
Distemper you must not only pierce the Skin, but penetrate the whole Tumor or
Callus, that sticks to the Pastern. However every Man may please himself, and
either pierce the Skin with a red-hot Knife, or cut it with a Fleam, and then
give the Fire through these Incisions. It Is true indeed, the last of these
Methods is the best, for besides that it leaves not so great a Scar, these
Incisions serve to direct the Operator, and he sees more plainly what he is
doing than those who pierce the Skin with red-hot Knives. Nevertheless I use
with good Success to proceed immediately to giving the Fire, and burning the
Callus, without making the least use of the Fleam, when the Horse is of no
great Value: as soon as the Fire is given, apply a Mixture of Turpentine, Tarr,
and Honey, laying it on warm with Flax and a Bandage, and keeping the place
covered till it be healed; after seven or eight days, when the Matter is
generated, you must dress it every day. Sometimes after the falling of the Scab
the Flesh swells and grows too fast; but this Inconveniency may be prevented,
by washing the Sore with the second Water, the vulnerary Water, or the liquid
Caustic, and afterward applying convenient Powders or Ointments, such as that
of Schmit, or the Cleansing Ointment for Quitter-bones. While the Sole is
growing under the Foot, you will seldom be troubled with proud Flesh, and if
you are, you may easily consume it with Powders, or even burn it with a flat
Knife; for provided you touch not the Skin, you may burn the Flesh as much as
you please, without the least danger of leaving a Scar, and after the falling
of the Scab, the Sore will appear fair and clean: but both the Growth of proud
Flesh may be prevented, and the Cure hastened, by keeping the Sore always
covered with convenient Ointments.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of the Vices of the Feet and Hoofs.
IN the first place I shall take notice of those Horses who have pretty
handsome Feet, but their Hoofs are so brittle, that they are apt to break near
the Holes that are made by the Nails of their Shoes. And the Loss of a Shoe,
which usually happens on this occasion, may be the Cause of the Loss of the
Horse.

The Hardness of the Hoof, if it be not accompanied with Brittleness, may be
easily cured; and is only a Defect by Accident. I shall in the second Part
treat of the Vices of the Feet with respect to the Figure and Shape, and of the
Manner of Shooing adapted to every particular Case.

You may easily know at first sight whether a Horse's Hoofs be brittle, for
they will appear all broken about the Shoe: the best way is to shoe those
Horses after the Full Moon, and never during the Increase, contrary to the
Opinion of several Persons; after which you must anoint 'em every Day with the
Ointment for the Feet.

In the Second Part I shall discourse largely of Feet that are ill-shap'd,
flat, and formed like Oyster-shells; but since I have reason to believe, that
many of my Readers will not have the Curiosity to peruse those Chapters, it
will not be improper to say something on that Subject here.

By the following Method you may rectify a flat Hoof, which is commonly so
weak, that the Horse cannot Travel unless his Shoes be made very hollow, and
besides, the least Sand or Gravel that enters between the Shoe and the Sole,
makes him so Lame that he must be kept on the Trench for some time after. In
the first place, you must take up the Pastern Veins in four several places, two
in each Leg: Or you may bleed him plentifully in the four Pastern Veins, and
delay the taking of 'em up till afterward, then set on Pantosle Shoes to widen
the Heels; for almost all those flat Feet have narrow Heels. It Is to be
observed, that you must by no means weaken the Sole toward the Heel, when you
pare the Hoof, but leave it as strong as you can; for otherwise these Shoes
will certainly make the Horse halt: You must also suffer him to rest some Days
after the Shoes are set on, and keep his Feet in his own Dung well moistened,
that he may be enabled by the Moisture to wear these Shoes without any
inconvenience. Besides, you must not open the Heels, but pare the Frush flat,
for otherwise the Sponge on one side would bear too hard against the Frush, and
therefore the Sponges of these Shoes must not be made wide. If these Directions
be observed, the Shoes will bear very little against the Frush; and though they
sometimes press the Sole, there can be no danger since both that and the Frush
are left very strong. Having Shooed the Horse thus, grease the top of the Foot,
near the Hair every Day, and you will perceive it by degrees to acquire a more
regular shape; after which you may take up the Pastern Veins, as I intimated
before: For if the bleeding produce a good effect, the taking up of the Veins
will certainly complete the Cure; and in three or four Months your Horse will
be able to wear flat Shoes, and by degrees his Foot will recover its perfect
shape.

You will find the Reason of this Operation in the Chapter that contains
directions for the Shooing of flat Feet: But since the following Ointment is
necessary in this case, I shall take this occasion to communicate the
description of it.

The Ointment of Plantane, otherwise called the Ointment for the Feet, to
Rectify the Hoof, and make it grow.
Take fresh Butter and Sheep's Suet, melted and freed from its Membrances, of
each one Pound, White-Wax cut into small Pieces, and Common Turpentine, of each
four Ounces, Oil-Olive six Ounces, put 'em altogether into a Basin, and melt
'em: Then add a Pint of Juice of Plantane, and as soon as you perceive 'em
begin to boil, remove the Vessel from the Fire, then set it on again, and
continue after the same manner for the space of eight or ten Hours till the
Juice be wholly Consumed without boiling; after which remove the Vessel from
the Fire, and as soon as the Matter begins to thicken add an Ounce of Olibanum
in Powder, stirring perpetually till it be quite Cold. This Ointment rectifies
the Hoof, and makes it grow without occasioning a preternatural Heat, which is
the usual effect of uncorrected Oils and Greases.

The Juice of Plantane tempers the heat of the other Ingredients, and therefore
you must avoid boiling, which would consume it before it had time to
communicate its cooling quickly. In Winter you may apply an Ointment made of
equal Parts of common Honey, Tar, and Tallow, mixed without heat or boiling; for
it is a very effectual and cheap Remedy.

Connestable's Ointment to make the Hoof grow, and to render it soft and tough.
Of all those who pretend to Skill in this Art, there is not one who has not
the Vanity to boast of some Secret Ointment for the Feet: And even some of our
Farriers have the confidence to affirm, that their Ointment is absolutely
incomparable, and able to make a Hoof grow an Inch bigger in Eight Days; but
that never was, nor ever will be done; for besides the efficacy of the Remedy,
the growth of the Hoof depends on the Season, the dryness or moisture of the
Horse's Constitution, and the nature of the Foot. I must confess I dare not
promise Wonders; but I can assure the Reader that the Composition of this
Ointment is methodical, that the Ingredients are very agreeable to the nature
of the Hoof, that their Doses are exact and regular, and, consequently, that if
we may venture to establish the credit of a Remedy upon Theoretical Principles,
this must certainly be endu'd with excellent Virtues, but that is not all, for
I have found it by experience to be very successful; and Monsieur Le
Connestable, who had the finest set of Horses that could be procured in his
Age, made always use of this Ointment.

Take new Wax, Goat's-grease, or for want of that, fresh Sheep's-Suet, and the
fat of Bacon cut into small Pieces, and steeped in Water twenty four Hours till
it grow fresh, the Water being changed every three or four Hours, of each one
Pound: Melt 'em together, and then add a large handful of the second Bark of
Elder; and if it be in the Spring, two handfuls of Elder-Buds, when they are
about the bigness of your Thumb. Boil 'em over a gentle Fire for the space of a
quarter of an Hour, stirring 'em from time to time. Then squeeze the Matter
through a course Cloth, and put the straining in the same Basin or Pot, with two
Ounces of Oil-Olive, four Ounces of Turpentine, and the like quantity of Honey;
after which remove the Vessel from the Fire, and stir the Ointment till it be
quite Cold, then anoint the Hoof for the breadth of an Inch round the Hair, and
repeat the Application once a day.

You must never anoint the Foot but when it is dry, and you must always take
care to wipe off the Dust and dry Dirt before you lay on the Ointment.

All Books of Horsemanship are full of descriptions of Ointments for the Feet;
and even every Farrier usually composes his own. I might imitate their Example,
and swell my Book to as little purpose as they do theirs, but I am not so fond
of multiplying Medicines, especially since I Am encouraged by often repeated and
successful Experiments to stick to the three Ointments mentioned in this
Chapter, namely, The Ointment of Plantane, that of Connestable, and the other
composed of equal quantities of Honey, Tar, and Grease. The first is chiefly
useful when the Hoof is as hard as Glass, so that the Ointments that are
applied to it glide along without piercing it; and the second and third are
proper in all other cases. The last is cheap, and more effectual than all those
costly and elaborate Medicines that are usually prescribed for the Feet. It Is
to be observed that Spetch Grease must never enter the Composition of Ointments
for the Feet, by reason of its heat, which will make the Foot ragged and full
of Circles.

To make the Hoof grow very speedily.
Having spoken of the Vices and Imperfections of the Feet, 'twill not be
improper to subjoin the method of making the Hoof grow; since it happens not
unfrequently that a Horse who has Traveled without Shoes till his Feet be
worn and decayed, remains useless ever afterward, for want of a sufficient
hold for the Nails that must be driven into his Hoofs. Instead of observing the
usual Custom to anoint the Hoof every Day for the breadth of an Inch about the
Cronet next the Hair, you must spread the Ointment on Flax, wrap it about the
Hoof for the breadth of an Inch round the Cronet at the Hair, and bind it on
carefully, renewing the Application twice a Week, but keeping still the same
Flax that was applied at first. This Method is more effectual than that which
is commonly practiced, for the Ointment being kept constantly on the Hoof, will
moisten and penetrate it, and consequently make it grow. You may apply any of
the three abovementioned Ointments according to the Nature of the Hoof.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Of Surbated Feet.
A Horse's Foot is said to be Surbated, when the Sole is worn, bruised or
spoiled, which happens either when it is too dry, and in a manner deprived of
Nourishment; or when an unshod Horse is ridden on hard Ground, or when the Shoe
hurts the Sole. You may easily know whether a Horse be Surbated by unshooing
him; for that part of the Shoe which touches the surbated place will be
thinner and more worn than the rest of it.

A Horse may be also surbated by a Prick in his Foot with a Nail, if it be not
quickly healed; for the Sole is seized with a violent Heat and Pain, which
draws the Matter to the Part. A Bleime may also occasion the same Disorder; And
even a Horse may be surbated that never stirs out of the Stable, unless when he
goes to the Manage, where by reason of the softness of the Ground it is hardly
conceivable that he can be surbated, especially since his Feet are defended
with good Shoes. You may also bring this Infirmity upon your Horse, by riding
him into the Country, though you take care to keep him well shod; for the Foot
being too dry, bruises, crushes, and corrupts the Flesh, between the Bone of
the Foot and the Sole, so that the Horse halts right down, and receives not any
considerable Benefit by all the Remedies that can be applied. The best way in
this Case is to take out the Sole, to discover the Flesh which you will find
black and bruised, and afterward proceed to the Application of the usual
Remedies which will infallibly prove successful. But since there are other
Causes of surbating, you may try what can be done by a careful Observance of
the following Directions, before you take out the Sole.

When a Horse that has weak Feet is ridden in sandy Ground in the Dog Days, or
extremely hot Weather, his Feet are so heated that the Sole grows perfectly
dry, and bruises the Bone of the Foot, so that the Horse is hardly able to
stand upright; for the Flesh between the Bone of the Foot and the Sole being
bruised occasions a most violent Pain. You may easily know when a Horse is
surbated, because you may perceive the Sole to be hot, dry, and painful, and
the Horse though troubled with no other Distemper, will covet to lie down rather
than to eat. The Remedy commonly used by Farriers, is to take out the Sole of
the surbated Foot; This is certainly the surest Method of Cure; but since it is
tedious, and dreaded by most Masters of Horses, there are other Remedies which
ought to be tried before it. I shall subjoin an Account of some of 'em,
beginning with such that are most easy.

Several Remedies for painful and Surbated Feet.
When the surbating is occasioned by Traveling without Shoes, you must
cleanse the Sole with your Buttress; and having tacked on the Shoe with four
Nails, pour boiling Pitch or Tarr into the Foot, and after it is cold, charge it
with the following Remolade.

Take a Pound of old Hog's Lard, or for want of that, of Tallow, melt it in a
Skillet, add a Pint of Vinegar, and thickening the Composition with Bran, apply
it hot about the Foot, wrapping it about with a Cloth.

The Remolade described in the Fifty seventh Chapter, is excellent for surbated
Feet; you must first heat it, then having picked the Sole, stop the Foot with
the Remolade; or you may pour melted Hog's Lard into the Foot.

If the Shoe bear harder against one part of the Foot than the rest, you must
pare the whole Foot a little, but especially that part which is bruised by the
Shoe; and if the Sole appears red and bruised, you must thrust your Buttress
deeper into that part, and pare the Sole almost to the quick: then apply the
Ointment for Pricks with a Nail, or the Oil of Gabian, or de Merveille, and
tack on the Shoe with four Nails. Renew the Application every day till your
Horse cease to halt, and then stop his Foot with a Remolade, binding it on
carefully. You may use that which follows.

Fry Pigg's Dung with Oil of Nuts, and put it warm into the Foot, laying
Splints over it to keep it in; the next day renew the Application of the
Ointment or Oil de Merveille, and the Remolade, and continue after the same
manner till your Horse leave off halting, and then stop his Foot with Tarr,
when the Shoe is set on for Traveling.

If your Horse's Foot be heated by riding in hot and sandy Ground, you must
take off his Shoe, pick his Foot well, and then stop it with melted Tarr, and
anoint it with the Ointment for the Foot.

Nothing asswages the Pain of surbated Feet more effectually than Vinegar,
boiled with Soot to the Thickness of Broth, and put into the Foot boiling hot,
laying Hurds over it, and Splints to keep it from falling out.

If you dress him thus once every day, Two or Three Applications will probably
perfect the Cure.

There cannot be more excellent Remedy than Tar, for if it be melted into the
Foot, it asswages the Pain, and strengthens the Part with wonderful efficacy.

It may be easily procured at Seaports and other Places where Ships are built
or refitted, and may be made upon occasion by melting a Pound of Black Pitch,
with half a Pound of the thickest Dregs of Oil-Olive, or for want of that of
very old stinking Hog's Grease. This is that with which the German and Flemmish
Carriers anoint the Axle-Trees of their Carts and Wagons.

If all these Remedies produce no effect, and the Heat and Pain seem daily to
increase, you must at last take out the Sole: And in the mean time 'twill
perhaps be some Comfort to you to know, that notwithstanding the bad Success of
the Remedies they are not entirely lost; for the Sole being moistened may be
taken out with less Difficulty and Pain, and the Cure will be considerably
hastened: Nor will ever any Farrier that understands the Art he Professes,
attempt to take out a Horse's Sole till he has first softened his Foot with
good Remolades or Honey-Charges, or at least with old Hog's-Lard.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Of a False Quarter.
A False Quarter is a Chink or Rift in the Hoof from top to bottom, which
happens almost always on the inside of the Hoof, as being the weakest Part; it
proceeds usually from the dryness of the Hoof which straightens the Heels, or
at least breeds Circles about the Feet; so that the Bone of the Boot, for want
of room, bursts the Hoof in the inward Quarter, which is the feeblest part of
it.

This Infirmity in the Hoof is usually occasioned when a Horse that has too
narrow Heels, or a dry Foot, is ridden in hard, hot, or sandy Ground, or in
great Frosts. Sometimes the Hoof is cracked in the Stable, without any other
Cause than its own dryness and brittleness. This, in my Opinion, is one of the
most dangerous Distempers incident to a Horse; for the Pain makes him lame and
unfit for Service. When he sets his Foot to the Ground, the Chink is opened and
gapes, and when he lifts it up again the lips of the Rift are closed and pinch
the Flesh that covers the Bone of the Foot within the Hoof; in the mean time,
since the Periosteum or Membrane that surrounds the Bone, is very tender, and
of a quick Sense; these Chinks are accompanied with a most violent Pain, and
for the most part cast forth Blood.

You may reasonably conclude, when you perceive that a Horse is troubled with a
False Quarter, that he has naturally a bad Hoof; for that Distemper is only the
effect of a dry and brittle Hoof, or narrow Heels; and besides, after the Cure
is perfected, if you have not a perpectual Care of his Preservation, he will
infallibly relapse into the same Distemper. Sometimes the Hoof of the hinder
Foot cleaves from the Hair to the Shoe in the middle of the Toe; and the Feet
that are cleft after this manner are called Oxes-Feet, because of their
resemblance to the Foot of that Animal. This Disease is not so dangerous as the
former, and happens more usually to Mules than to Horses.

To prevent these Cracks you must supple the Sole with Horses-Dung, moistened;
you must also take care not to straiten his Heels when you Shoe him, and anoint
the Coffin-bone with the Ointment for the Feet.

Cows-Dung, contrary to the vulgar Opinion, especially of Horse-Coursers, cools
and moistens the Sole, and at the same time dries the Hoof, or rather burns it;
For though the Hoof and Sole be contiguous, they are of very different Natures,
one being soft and the other hard. Thus we see that most of the Coach-Horses
that are Sold by Horse-Coursers, have dry and burnt Feet, by reason of the
Cows-Dung, with which they continually stop their Horse's Feet to make 'em
grow: And when a Horse comes afterward to be Wrought, all the lower part of
the Foot which was kept continually in Cow's-Dung, breaks off, and leaves the
Horse unfit for Service. It must be acknowledged, that the moisture of the
Cow's-Dung makes the Hoof grow; but it is no less certain that the Hoof produced
or increased by this Method is not at all fit for Service; for as soon as it is
taken out of the Dung in which 'twas kept; it breaks like an Egg-shell, and can
never endure the driving of a Nail. It Is true, the Horse-Coursers by this means
compass their Design; for since they intend not to keep the Horse for Service,
they labor only to make his Feet seem fine and handsome, though to the prejudice
of the Buyer.

A Remedy for a False Quarter, and Chinks or Rifts in the Hoof.
Charge the whole Foot with a Remolade; then set on a Pantofle-Shoe according
to the Directions you will find in the Second Part, in the Chapter that treats
of Shooing; and in the mean time you may ride your Horse on soft Ground, if he
be not Lame.

If the Chink bleed, charge the Foot with a Remolade, and opening the Cleft
with your drawing Iron, make a Border about it with Yellow Wax, and drop some
Aquafortis into it; the Border of Wax will hinder the Aquafortis from
reaching the Hoof, and penetrating through the Crack will burn the quick Flesh or
Membrane that occasions the Pain and Bleeding. This Water has a corroding and
consuming Faculty, and consequently makes the Part to which it is applied
insensible, which is the main thing required in the present case; but if the
Rift do not bleed it is not absolutely necessary to pour in Aquafortis. For you
may make S's of Fire, according to the following Directions; and after the
application of the Aquafortis, you may make an S of Fire on the Cronet,
without piercing the Skin, and another lower down. The S of Fire is made with
an Iron Instrument resembling the Letter S, which must be heated and applied
exactly to the Cronet where the Hoof begins: Another Iron must be applied lower
down upon the Crack, and another after that; then suffer the Scab to fall off
from the Cronet, and the Cure will be quickly perfected, if you take care to
keep the Foot supple with Horse's-Dung, well moistened, or a good Remolade.
This Instrument is very thin, and but a Finger's breadth long: It Is framed like
one of those Irons with which Casks are usually marked, and has a handle after
the same fashion. It Is to be observed, that the Skin on the Cronet must not be
pierced when you apply the S; for the Flesh would rise so high, that the
Swelling could not easily be asswag'd. The Rift being closed about an Inch
under the Hair, you must set on the Horse's-Shoe, and so turn and contrive it,
that the False Quarter may be opened, and that side of the Hoof forced
outward; after which you may ride him on soft Ground, but you must carefully
avoid hard and stony Places. The Method of Shooing Horses that are troubled
with this Distemper, is described in the Forty First Chapter of the Second
Part; and you may also set on a Pantofle-Shoe.

Managed Horses that are not carefully kept are subject to this Distemper, by
reason of the dryness of the Hoof, or ill Shooing; to remedy which
inconveniency, the usual way is to cut the Shoe at the Place where it touches
the Rift, and these Shoes are called Lunet or Moon-Shoes.

When a Horse wears his Shoes cut on both sides, that is, when both the Sponges
are taken away, you must suffer him to stay in the Stable till his Feet gather
strength; and as soon as he ceases to halt, you may ride him as before, but only
on soft Ground.

I have already ordered an S of Fire to be made when the Crack bleeds. The same
Remedy may be used for all sorts of False Quarters, observing always that the
Skin on the Cronet must not be pierced, and even that the S of Fire must never
be applied to the Cronet, unless your convenience will permit you to suffer the
Horse to remain in the Stable till the Scab be fallen, and the Sore healed,
though this is the only way to prevent effectually the return of the Distemper.
If the Cleft be small, and do not make the Horse halt, you need not apply the S
of Fire to the Cronet; but for the greater security, you may apply it to the
place where the Cronet ends, and in two or three places along the Rift, for
they close and reunite the gaping sides of the Crack, and contribute very much
to the Cure. As soon as you have given the Fire take a head of Garlic, and
having pricked it with an Iron, Infuse it in boiling Oil-Olive, then rub the
Chink with it from one end to the other, dipping it often in the hot Oil, that
the Chink may be thoroughly moistened. After two or three Days you may begin to
ride your Horse, if he be freed from his Lameness; and the False Quarter will
be afterward healed, if you take care to keep the Foot moist and supple.

The best way to preserve the Feet of Managed Horses is to beat down their
Heels almost to the Quick, but without opening 'em, as often as you set on a
Shoe, and to take all possible care to prevent their growing high-heel'd. You
must also anoint Feet, and stop 'em with Horse's-Dung well moistened, twice or
thrice every Week. I Am persuaded that if this Method were generally used (as
it is by some, with admirable Success) this Distemper would never appear in our
Stables; whereas, for want of a due observance of this Caution, almost all
Horses are troubled with this Infirmity.

In the first place you must pare the Foot, so that the Shoe do not touch the
Hoof for the space of an Inch about the Chink; and remember afterward to
anoint the Foot from time to time.

If your Horse continue to halt, and the Rift remains still open, and apt to be
filled with Dirt or Gravel, you may give the Fire, drawing four Strokes or
Lines on the Cronet, without touching the Hoof or Coffin-Bone, and without
piercing the Skin; then apply Black-Pitch melted, with a Pensil, laying over it
shavings of Cloth, or stuffings of a Saddle, till the Scab fall; and in the
mean time charge the Foot with a good Remolade, or with Turpentine and Honey
mixed and heated together; and after the Scab is fallen off, dry the Part with
burnt Allom, or some other convenient Powder, keeping the Foot always
moistened, with the Ointment for the Feet.

When the Foot is cleft in the middle like an Oxe's-Foot, heat a Bodkin or
crooked Aul, and thrust it through the thickness of the Hoof, then put a thread
of Copper Wire through the Hole, and fasten it with Pincers. Repeat the same
Operation in two or three places according to the length of the Foot, drawing
the sides of the Clift together; but the Wire must not penetrate into the Foot,
but only into the thickness of the Hoof. And either after or before this
Operation, you must draw three or four Lines with a red-hot Iron upon the
Cronet, length-wise, without piercing the Skin, applying Black-Pitch and
Saddle-stuffings before, and drying the Part after the Scab is fallen off. Then
you may ride your Horse or Mare as formerly, for after the Sore on the Cronet
is healed, the Cleft wears away by degrees if you take care to keep the Foot
moist. This Method is certainly very effectual, but you must carefully examine
the thickness of the Coffin-Bone, that you may neither pierce too deep, nor
take too little hold of the Hoof.

You must not be afraid of this Operation, for it is not at all dangerous, since
by reason of the thickness of the Hoof which amounts to half a Finger's
breadth, you may thrust in the hot Bodkin or Aul to a considerable depth,
without piercing to the Quick. This Method is commonly used in Spain.

Those who cannot be persuaded of the safeness of this Operation may use a
piece of Iron made very narrow, with two Points rising upwards, and sharpend
like Nails for a Horse-Shooe. This Iron may be placed under the Foot, to keep
it close, and prevent the widening of the Cleft, and the two Points may be
fastened to the Hoof, or even rivetted on. That you may the more easily
comprehend my Meaning, you must know that the piece of Iron must be put under
the Foot, and clench'd or rivetted at the two ends, as if it were designed to
hinder a board from cleaving. It must be applied to the Hoof without touching
the Sole, and may be framed exactly like the Iron that hinders the Latch of a
Door from rising too high, or falling too low, but it ought to be a great deal
smaller and thinner, for there is no more strength nor thickness required than
what is just necessary to keep the Foot close, and prevent the further widening
of the Cleft. This is an excellent Invention, and has perfectly cured several
Horses that were downright Lame, and unfit for all manner of Service, by reason
of those Clefts resembling an Oxe's-Hoof. After the piece of Iron is applied,
and exactly fitted to the Hoof, you must set on the Shoe above it; for though
your Horse may complain for some Days after he is new-Shod, he will go upright,
if you suffer him to rest two Days.

Sometimes the Fore-Foot cleaves in the middle of the Toe, in which case you
must take care in setting on the Shoe, that it may neither touch the Cleft nor
the Hoof about it; and besides you must anoint the Foot. You may also draw two
or three Lines with a hot Iron above upon the Cronet, without piercing the
Skin, laying a Plaster over it, and covering it with Hurds or
Saddle-stuffings; then suffer the Scab to fall off, and dry the Sore with
convenient Powders or Ointments.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of Narrow Heels.
THE Horses that are troubled with this Distemper, which is usually attended
with Lameness, have their Frush almost always too narrow, and the Quarters of
the Foot are narrower near the Shoe than toward the Cronet; so that for want
of the due roundness, and out-bowing of the Foot, the Bone within is
streightn'd, and the Flesh that surrounds it bruised, which occasions the
Horse's Lameness.

There is no roundness about the Heels, and the Feet seem rather sharp-pointed
and long, than round as they ought to be; for those Horses who have the
roundest Heels are least subject to this Distemper.

Sometimes this Infirmity affects only one quarter of the Foot, and almost
always on the Inside, which is weaker than the other, because the Hoof is
thinner there than on the outside; if the Disease appear on both Quarters, the
Cure will be more difficult, though the Lameness may be as great when only one of
the Quarters suffer by reason of the narrowness of the Heel.

This Infirmity may be occasioned by ill Shooing, as it may be cured by setting
on the Shoe with due caution, according to the directions laid down in the
Chapter of Shooing; it may also proceed from the dryness of the Foot, when the
substance of the Hoof is spoiled, and full of Wrinkles; and sometimes it is an
effect of the Carelessness or unskilfulness of those who either open the Heels
or suffer them to grow too much, and weaken the Quarters of the Foot, by
pairing then too deep.

Fleet and Light Horses are more subject to this Infirmity than strong German
Horses; and therefore Turkish, Spanish, and Barbary Horses ought to be shod
with great Care, and an exact observance of the best Rules; nor must you
entrust the Shooing of these Horses to common Smiths or Farriers, if they be
not very Skilful in their Profession, which is a Character that belongs to a
very small number of them.

Yet there are some fine Horses who have such excellent Feet, and so tough
Hoofs, that the unskilfulness of the Farrier can never be attended with such
dangerous consequences, but great care must be taken in Shooing German, Race,
and Coach-Horses, who are subject to this Distemper.

If you perceive that the Pantofle-Shoes, and the Remedies prescribed for the
Cure of the Distemper, are not attended with the desired Success, you must
proceed to the taking out of the Sole, which is the last, and oftentimes the
best and speediest Remedy. As Soon as you have unsol'd him, cleave the Frush
with your Fleam, and fit a Splent of Iron to the Part, placing it so that it
may open the Heels, or rather keep them open, an Inch or two wider than they
were before the Sole was taken out. The Heels are opened by the Splent because
the Frush being cleft or divided, yields or opens in the middle; and I have
sometimes caused Horses to be unsol'd who had so narrow Heels that we were
forced to open the Hoof at the Heels, and afterward fit a Splent to the Part,
thrusting it in violently that it might keep the Heels much widen'd. After you
have taken out the Sole, lay on the Dressing about the Foot to moisten it, and
make the Sole grow again, keeping on the Iron Splent all the while; and after
the Sole is grown, you will find the Heel widen'd and reduced to its former and
natural shape; for this Infirmity is rarely a natural Defect, but occasioned
either by some accident or ill Shooing, or proceeds from the dryness of the
Foot, and for want of its being kept moist with convenient Ointments.

When a Horse is troubled with this Infirmity in an Academy, the usual Remedy
is to set on Moon Shoes; And it must be acknowledged that this Method is
useful; but besides that, I have oftentimes, with very good Success, given the
Fire from the Hair to the Shoe, searing five or six Lines piercing the Hoof
about the thickness of a silver Crown, and repeating the same Operation on the
other side of the Heel, which instantly softens the Hoof, and makes it yield
and give way to the Bone of the Foot, that was too much straightn'd to resume
its former place; afterward you must moisten the Foot with often repeated
Applications of Remolades or Ointments for the Feet.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of Taking out the Sole.
THis Operation is usually performed for the Cure of Ring-Bones, False-Quarter,
Pricks with a Nail, Narrow Heels, Scratches in the Cronet, Figgs, Surbating,
Stubbing, and several other Distempers.

The Sole is under the Foot, and applied to it almost like the Sole of a Shoe;
and the Hoof that surrounds both the Sole and the Foot, helps to keep it fast
to the Bone of the Foot which it covers. It Is a dangerous Error to imagine that
the unsoling of the Horse requires the plucking off of the Hoof; for the Value
of a Horse is not at all lessened by taking out the Sole, whereas a Horse that
has lost his Hoof is hardly worth keeping.

When ye design to take out the Sole, you must in the first place beat down the
Heel to make the Sole thin and slender; then provide a Shoe half a Finger's
breadth longer than an ordinary Shoe, and having tacked it on with four Nails,
stop the Foot with a warm Remolade or softening Pultiss, covered with Flax and
Splents; and if the Bone of the Foot be very dry, you must renew the
Applications of the Remolade to nourish and moisten the Foot, that the Sole may
be taken out with less difficulty and Pain; for you must never undertake to
unsole a Horse without such a due and regular Preparation. The Sole being well
moistened with Remolades, or, for want of those, with Hog's-Lard, according to
the usual Custom of Farriers, you must open the Heels, and with the Horn of
your Buttress, separate the Sole from the Hoof, and when you find that
Instrument insufficient, make use of the Renette, which is a common Instrument
among Farriers, and used also by Sadlers for the stripeing of Hungary Leather.

Having loosened the Sole from the Hoof, you must begin to separate it at the
Toe with a Sole-Lifter, which is only a worn Buttress, half an Inch broad, and
flat at the end; then separate it at the sides with the Pincers; and if it
stick so fast that you cannot separate it at the side, divide it underneath
with the Buttress, and afterward separate it on the other side with the
Pincers. If it stick to the Heel, cut it off with the Buttress, then raise it
up at the end with a Sole-lifter, and taking hold with the Pincers, you may
pull it out entirely without the least violence: After which, if the Heels be
too narrow, though the Horse be unsol'd for some other Distemper in his Foot, you
must cleave the Frush quite through the middle with your Fleam, from the inside
of the Pastern, till you come within three Fingers breadth of the end of the
Frush. Then consider whether there is not part of the old Sole still remaining,
which you must also take out, and suffer the Foot to bleed abundantly. When you
perceive that it is time to stop the Blood, tie a Cord about the Pastern, and as
soon as it is quite stopped, set on the Shoe, which must not be taken off again,
only you must leave an empty space at the Toe to drain the superfluous moisture
in the Foot; but if there be some other Sore on the inside Quarter, which the
Shoe covers, you must not set on the Shoe so fast; for otherwise you would be
obliged to Shoe and Unshooe him at every dressing, to the extreme prejudice of
the Horse's Foot; and therefore you must only tack it on with four Nails.

After the Blood is stopped dry the Foot with Flax, and if there be no Sore in
it, stop it with a Composition of equal quantities of Honey and Tarr, melted
over the Fire, and poured in hot, covering the Sole with Rolls of Flax
moistened in the same Composition; then lay on some Splents of Wood, and one of
Iron, and set on the Shoe; after which stop the Frush with Bolsters, moistened
as before, and thrust 'em into the Cleft to keep it open, that the Heel may be
sufficiently wide when the Sole grows again, tying a Bandage about 'em to keep
'em from slipping out of the Cleft of the Frush: Or instead of the former
Composition, you may use one made of common Turpentine and Soot, which is a
very good Astringent, and both asswages the Pain, and is endu'd with a
dissolving quality.

It Is the common Opinion of Farriers, that a straight Bandage, by squeezing the
Part, prevents the growing of Proud-Flesh; but that Method would certainly
produce a contrary effect; for such a hard binding of the Part must necessarily
be attended with Pain, which draws down Defluxions, and hastens those
Inconveniences which they endeavor to avoid. And therefore you must only keep
the Dressing from falling off, without tying the Part too hard; for so the Sole
will grow more speedily, and with less danger of raising too high. Experience
will convince all those who observe these Directions, of the Truth of this
Assertion; for this is the only proper Method of unsoling a Horse.

When that Operation is performed for any Infirmity in the Foot, you must
carefully observe all the abovementioned Directions; but if it be only used as
a Remedy for Ring-Bones, Narrow-Heels, and such other Distempers that do not
properly affect the Foot; after you have stopped the Blood, you must only wash
the Sole with Aqua-Vitae, and pare away the thickness of a Silver Crown of the
Hoof at the Toe, leaving an empty space between that and the Shoe, of the
breadth of your Finger, to drain the remaining moisture from the Foot; then set
on the Shoe, and stop the Foot with a Composition of Honey, Turpentine, and
Tarr, applied hot, with a great deal of Flax and Splents over all, without
pressing the Sole. Five Days after take off the Dressing, without removing the
Shoe, applying only Flax moistened in Aqua-Vitae, and renewing the same
Application every two Days, till the Cure be completed, as it will be in
eighteen or twenty Days at most, if there be no other Sore in the Foot but what
proceeds from the taking out of the Sole.

It Is true, when the Sole is opened for Pricks with a Nail or Stubb, the Part
must be pressed hard to hinder the growing of Proud-Flesh, which otherwise would
certainly appear, because when the Sole is opened only in one Part, all the
Humors flow thither, and form that which we call a Cherry, or a fleshy Lump,
of the bigness of a Nut or Cherry; but the case is quite different when the
Sole is entirely taken away; for nothing presses the Bone of the Foot, as in
the other Instance the Sole does, except only that Part where the opening is
made. It Is plain from this Example, that an Unsol'd Foot must not be pressed;
for that which drives the Humors to the Hole or opening in the Sole, is the
pression of all the rest of that Part, which makes it a very difficult Task to
prevent a Swelling; but when the Sole is taken out there is no pressure, nor
flowing of Humors, and consequently the Foot remains in its natural condition,
whereas if you press it, since you cannot press it every where equally, the
Humors will be driven to some Part, and a Swelling occasioned.

Lay the abovementioned restringent Charge about the Foot, which is made by
boiling Turpentine and Soot together, stirring them always over a little Fire,
to prevent their Curdling, till they be perfectly incorporated, and reduced to
the consistence of a Honey-Charge. Observe also to shave away the Hair on the
Cronet, and to rub the Part very hard till it grow hot, to open the Pores, that
the Medicine may penetrate the deeper. Thus one application will be more
effectual than six would be without observing of that Caution. The Part being
thus prepared, apply the Composition warm about the Cronet; for this Remedy
will both bind the Parts sufficiently, and nourish the Hoof, which is always
too much dried by other Restringents; then lay some Flax over it, and a Cover
over all, binding it on with a Ribbon, about an Inch broad.

When the Sole grows again, if you perceive the Flesh to be higher in some
Parts than in others, apply bruised or beaten Nettles with a Bandage and Sp^ts
upon the Part. If such an Accident happen in the Winter, when there is no
Nettles, moisten the Part with Aqua-Vitae, and apply White-Vitriol, or
Egyptiacum, with a Bolster of Flax, and a Bandage over all; the Countesses
Ointment is also very effectual in this Case.

If any part of the Sole appear foul or frothy, or if the Flesh be not covered
with the Sole, the Countesses Ointment alone will remove those Inconveniences,
and strengthen the Part. If the Flesh rise too high in any Part, strew a little
Powder of burnt Allom upon it, and apply the Countesses Ointment, continuing
after the same manner till the Sole be well grown and firm. Instead of the
Countesses Ointment you may use that of Schmit.

If the live Flesh remain too long uncovered, and without a Sole, bruise the
Leaves of the great Burdock, and apply them to the Part with a convenient
Dressing.

If the Part be weakened by superfluous Moisture, cover it with Bolsters of
Flax, without any other Application; but first you must wash the Sole with
Aqua-Vitae, which binds and strengthens very effectually.

If the Sole be too dry, apply a Remolade or Softening Pultiss. If the Dryness
increase to such a degree, as to make the Horse Lame, melt Tarr upon the Sole,
or Ship-Pitch, which is composed of two third Parts of Black-Pitch, and one
third of Oil-Olive, melted and mixed together.

If it will not grow firm, but still remains so loose as to fluctuate under
your Finger, bruise the Leaves of great Celandine, and apply them to the Part;
for that Herb dries very powerfully, and two or three Applications will make
the Sole firm and strong. If neither Flesh nor Sole will grow on some parts of
the Bone of the Foot, apply the following Ointment.

An Incarnative, or Ointment to make the Flesh grow.
Take a quarter of a Pound of Venice-Turpentine well washed, the Yolks of six
Eggs, fine Myrrh and Aloes, of each two Drams in very fine Powder; beat all the
Ingredients together, and incorporate 'em to the thickness of an Ointment. This
Ointment is by Farriers called a Digestive; neither will I contend about the
Name, if the thing it self be understood: And therefore I shall only acquaint
the Reader, that this Remedy may be very usefully applied to make the Flesh
grow upon any Part. Mr. Curtis's Ointment produces the same effect; for if it
be applied cold to the Bone, by way of Plaster, and renewed every two Days, it
will certainly produce new Flesh: In the mean time you must keep your Horse in
the Stable, till the end of the Cure, which you may expect in three Weeks at
farthest, if he be not troubled with some other Distemper. If the Hoof begin to
separate about the Hair, observe the Method prescribed in the following
Chapter, for the breaking of an Impostume in that Part.

Some curious Persons make use of certain pieces of Iron, surrounded with a
border, which they apply without Nails, by means of a Screw that shuts and
opens 'em. This is certainly a good Invention for a Horse that has a weak Foot,
or for one that is apt to kick, shake his Foot, and will not give you time to
tack on a Shoe with four Nails; but this Instrument of which you may see the
Figure in Frederick Grison, must be purposely made for every Horse, and more
exactly framed than those that are commonly used.

The surest way is to set on a Shoe so fast that it may not be afterward
removed, to prevent the Numness that might be occasioned in the Foot, by such
frequent Shooing and Unshooing. Thus, for Example, if there be an Inflammation
caused by extravasated Blood at the Corner of the Heel, supposing that you have
unsol'd your Horse, you must cut the Sponge of the Shoe on that side, fitting
on the Dressing with an Iron Splent, beginning under the Toe of the Shoe, and
binding it on at the other end; for it is always safest and most convenient to
dress an unsol'd Foot, without taking off the Shoe. But in some cases that
method is impracticable; and after you have taken out the Sole, you must only
tack on a Shoe with four Nails, that you may examine the bottom of the Sore,
as often as you dress it.

It happened once as I was taking out a Sole, that the Horse struggled so
violently, that the Ham-string or Sinew was strained, and the Farrier concluded
that his Thigh was broken. This accident hindered me from removing the Dressing
that was already applied to the Sole, and from taking off the Shoe, for fear
of hurting the Hoof, by lifting up the Foot to dress it; and therefore I
suffered it to remain without renewing the Application for the space of six
Weeks; after which we found the Sole so well grown, that if I had not seen the
Operation performed, I should have concluded, that the Sole had never been
taken out; and this good effect was produced by one application of a Remedy,
consisting of equal Parts of Turpentine, Honey, and Tarr. This Example may
undeceive those who imagine the Cure of an unsol'd Hoof to be very difficult;
for certainly if there be no other Distemper in the Part, it may be perfectly
healed with one Application. But all the abovementioned Directions are
designed for the Cure of those Distempers that occasion the taking out of the
Sole.

CHAP. XC. Of Figgs growing in a Horse's Foot.
AFigg is an excrescency of spongy and fibrous Flesh, sometimes resembling a
Wart which grows on strong, high, and hollow Feet, that have large Heels, and
seldom or never on those that are weak, slender, and flat. These Tumors are
almost always seated on the top, or at the side of the Frush, and seldom appear
in any other place, if they be not occasioned by the Farriers neglect; for if
they be suffered to grow old, or dried with strong Ointments, they take another
course, and spread to the corner of the Sole at the Heel, the side Quarters, or
Toe. The same Inconveniency happens when they are unskilfully dressed; in which
case they stick to the Gristle, or to the Bone of the Foot, and afterward rise
to the Hair, appearing on the Cronet, and are always attended with rottenness
and stink. They are moistened and nourished by a Humor derived from the
Sinews, which being destitute of the Spirits that preserved it in its natural
Condition, while it remained in the Sinews, degenerates into a very noisome
Putrefaction, that can hardly be stopped; for the most perfect Matter, when it
degenerates and is corrupted, is infinitely more dangerous than another less
perfect Matter; and the Cure is so difficult, that unless the fatal
Consequences of its virulencies be prevented by well chosen and seasonably
applied Remedies, the Horse grows irrecoverably Lame.

The Figgs that appear on the Frush, rarely occasion Lameness in the beginning;
but if they be either unskilfully dressed, dried, or too long neglected, they
spread under the Sole, and penetrate to the Hair sticking to the Gristle on the
Bone of the Foot, where they are attended with Pain, though at the first they
were free from that symptom.

The Cause of those Excrescencies, as I intimated before, is the Nervous Juice,
which also generates and nourishes Warts.

They appear either in the form of Warts, when they grow on the Frush, or are
only distinguishable by that fibrous and spongy Flesh that appears under the
Sole, and corrupts part of it by the wise contrivance of Nature, to discharge
by that opening a part of the Matter that offends her.

The Figgs are usually the Sink that drains all the corrupt Humors in the
Body, which flowing thither in great abundance, increase the Malignitie of
those Excrescencies, though they are not the original cause of the Distemper. The
redundancy of those Humors is sometimes so excessive, that it is impossible
either to exhaust the Source of them, or to divert the Stream that flows from
it, so that the Figgs increase to a prodigious bigness, infecting and
corrupting the whole Part, and even sometimes spoiling the Bone of the Foot.

I have seen Gourdy Legs full of Watery Swellings and Warts, which being dried,
were immediately succeeded by Figgs in the Foot; and as soon as these were
extirpated, the Leg was again seized with those running and noisome Sores that
were cured with so much difficulty before. The Cure was a second time
attempted, and no sooner performed, but the Foot was again covered with Figgs;
and those successive Revolutions of these different kinds of Sores are peculiar
to old Horses, whose Legs are Gourded, and cannot be reduced to their natural
Shape, or to those who have a Swelling in their Legs, occasioned by some
remainders of the Farcin; for since the corrupt Humors of the whole Body are
discharged by the Gourdy Leg, if their passage be stopped, they bend their course
to the Foot, where they produce Figgs.

When a Horse has been troubled for some considerable time with this Infirmity,
his Foot becomes deformed, and grows visibly larger than the other.

The Figgs that appear on the Frush, and are not fastn'd to the Gristle or Bone
of the Foot, do not make the Horse halt, unless they accidentally touch the
Ground; so that unless the Part be carefully examined, a Man may be easily
deceived. Thus at Paris the Horse-Coursers never buy a Horse for Service till
they lift up his Feet to see whether he be troubled with Figgs, especially on
the hinder Feet; though all this Caution cannot save 'em from being cheated
sometimes, since there are some Horses that seem to be cured of the Figgs,
which, at the end of three Months, return with as much violence as ever.

Remedies for the Figg in a Horse's Foot.
Before you apply any Remedies to the Figgs, if there be watery Sores or
Swellings in the Leg, you must endeavor to Cure 'em with a white Honey-Charge,
which will assuage the Swelling, remove the Pain, and dissipate the Humors
that nourish the Figg, and hinder the Cure: To proceed with order, I shall
consider, in the first place, the Figgs that grow on the Frush, which may be
sometimes cured without taking out the Sole.

Pare the Foot, cutting away so much of the Hoof that there may be a convenient
space to reach the Sore with your Fleam or Lancet; then cut the Sole about the
Figgs, and extirpate the very Roots of them; for if you take away only the
Tops, the Cure will be imperfect, because though they appear small on the
outside, they are larger under the Sore; but in the mean time, I suppose that
they are not fastened to the Gristle or Bone of the Foot.

Having laid open the Sore, take two Pounds of Honey, a Pint of Aqua-vitae, six
Ounces of Verdigrease in very fine Powder, searc'd through a silken Sieve, a like
quantity of White-Vitriol beaten small, four Ounces of Litharge reduced to very
fine Powder, and two Drams of Arsenick beaten and searc'd through a fine Sieve.
Mix all the Ingredients with the Honey in a clean Earthen Pot, and boil them
over a very gentle Fire, stirring 'em frequently, till they be reduced to the
thickness of an Ointment, which must be applied on Bolsters of Flax to the
Figg. If the Incision make the part Bleed, which must be avoided, if possible,
apply for the first Dressing, the abovementioned restringent Charge made of
Turpentine and Soot, laying it on warm with Rowlers, Bandage, and Splents, to
stanch the Blood. Two Days after apply the Ointment described in the preceding
Paragraph, laying it on warm, and binding it hard with Rowlers and Splents,
placing Tents at the side to keep it firm, and to hinder it from spreading, and
leaving the part of the Frush that touches the Figg uncovered. It Is to be
observed that the Flax must be dry, that the Tents must be rolled hard before
you put the Ointments upon 'em, and that the Horse must be kept very dry; for
Moisture is very prejudicial in this case, and obstructs the Cure.

After forty eight Hours remove the second Dressing, and wiping the Sore with
dry Flax, observe whether there are more Fibers or Roots that must be laid
open; then wash the Figg with the Second Water, and apply the abovementioned
Ointment, which may be called the Ointment for the Figgs, binding it on with
Rowlers and Splents, and placing Tents and Rowlers on both sides to keep it
from spreading, as you was formerly directed; for some part of the Cure depends
on the titeness of the Bandage.

When you remove the Dressing, separate gently with a Slice or Spatula, the
little Scabs, or rather Scurfs, produced by the Ointment, taking all possible
care to prevent Bleeding. If after one or two Applications you perceive not any
considerable effect of the Ointment, add three Ounces of strong Aquafortis to
one half of the Composition, mixing 'em cold, and suffering 'em to foment;
after which make use of the Ointment as before, and it will certainly dissolve
the Figg; but in the mean time you must not neglect to bind on the Rowlers
carefully, and to renew the Application once in forty eight Hours. When you
take off the Dressing, if you perceive that the Figg is sufficiently mortified,
apply the first Ointment, and afterward you may have recourse to the second
upon occasion, observing the varieties of Circumstances with great care and
niceness. If the Flesh grow too fast in any part, apply the Ointment with the
addition of Aquafortis, but when you design only to dry the Part, the simple
Ointment will be sufficient.

If the Figg be fastn'd to the Gristle or Bone of the Foot and communicate with
those Parts, when it seems to be cured on one side, it spreads, and sometimes
runs even to the Heel under the Quarter, which frequently must be cut. And
after you have made an Incision into the Quarter, you must remove the Gristle
with the same Causticks, either in Powder or Ointment that are prescribed in
the Chapter of the Quitterbone; for without taking away the Gristle it is
impossible to Cure the Figg.

If the Figg be very large, as sometimes it is equal to a small Hens Egg, 'twill
be very convenient, after you have searched all around, to discover the hollow
places under the Scale where the Roots of the Figg lurk, and lay 'em open with
a crooked and double edged Fleam, to cut out the whole Figg with a sharp
Buttress, extirpating entirely all the Putrefaction and corrupt Flesh. Then
suffer the Horse to bleed freely, lengthen his Shoes, and tie a Cord about the
Pastern to stop the Blood; after which cover the Wound with small Salt, and
over that apply Flax moistened with Turpentine, boiled with Soot. If the Blood
flow so fast that you cannot strew the Wound with Salt, mix the Salt with the
Composition, apply it warm, bind up the Foot carefully with an Iron Splent laid
cross-wise to keep on the Dressing, and lay the same Defensive about the
Cronet, suffering the Application to remain untouched for the space of three
Days, keeping the Horse in the mean time in a very dry place.

If the Figg be on the hinder Foot, as it is almost always, as often as the
Horse Dungs you must immediately remove his Excrements from under his Feet,
that the Sole may not receive the least moisture, which wonderfully obstructs
the Cure.

When you take off the Dressing, cleanse the Part carefully with dry Flax and a
Slice, then apply the Ointment with Bolsters, binding it on with Iron-Splents
as before; only there will be no occasion for the Defensive about the Cronet.
Two Days after remove the Dressing, and consider the color of the Flesh; and
having washed it with the second Water, apply the Ointment with the Addition of
Aquafortis, if the Flesh be foul, and the simple Ointment to those Parts where
the Flesh is clean and fair, continuing after the same manner for some Days.
Some tender Horses lose their Appetite on this occasion; and therefore you must
tie a Chewing-Ball to the Bit, and give 'em good Clysters with Sal-Polychrest
and moistened Bran to eat.

The continued use of these Directions will restore the Horse's Appetite which
is a point of great Importance.

If the Figg be fastened to the Gristle or Bone of the Foot, the surest Remedy
is to take out the Sole, according to the Method described in the preceding
Chapter; and then dress the Figg as before, and if there be occasion, either
cut out the Gristle, or consume it with Causticks. I shall take this occasion
to advertise the Reader, that I never apply a Caustic when it is possible to
perform the Operation with a Razor; for he that uses this Instrument has the
convenience of seeing what he does, and of directing and guiding it as he
pleases; nor is Incision attended with so much Pain as a Caustic; and even though
there be a Scale of a Bone in the Foot to be separated, it is better to make use
of a red-hot Iron than a Caustic; and for the same purpose I sometimes apply
Egyptiacum with Sugar, or White-Vitriol, or Borax in Powder, mixed with Spirit
of Wine.

Violent Cauteries are dangerous in this case, for they hurt the Bone of the
Foot, and cause an Exfoliation, which is more troublesome and tedious than the
Cure of the Distemper; and besides they repel the Humors which occasion
several not inconsiderable Disorders.

During the Cure of this Distemper, 'twill be very convenient to make your
Horse eat every Day some Liver of Antimony in moistened Bran, to make a
revulsion, by diminishing the quantity of the Humors that fall upon the Part;
for since that Remedy resists all Impurities, 'twill destroy the Causes of the
Humor that moistens and nourishes the Figgs.

After the Cure is completed to prevent any succeeding Danger (though this
Caution be not absolutely necessary) you may take up the Pastern-Veins of the
Sore Foot; for since the Pastern-Veins carry great abundance of superfluous
Blood to the lower part of the Foot, it happens very frequently that the Blood
is changed into Corruption and Matter; and therefore by taking up the Vein, the
Nourishment of the Figg is Intercepted, and the danger of a Relapse prevented,
though the Cure may be performed without that precaution.

Many Farriers endeavor to discredit this Operation, because they are not
accustomed to it, but it is not attended with any dangerous Consequences; for
though the Skin is very thick in those Parts, it is impossible to Lame a Horse by
taking up the Veins, unless it be done purposely: and therefore if your Farrier
endeavor to persuade you, that it is either useless or dangerous to take up the
Veins, you may certainly conclude that he does not know how to perform the
Operation.

When the Cure is perfected, the Flesh every where clean and sweet, no Roots
nor Corruption appearing, and only a great hollow or void place remaining in
the Foot, opposite to the Frush, or in any other part of it, by reason of the
great quantity of Flesh that was either cut out or consumed; strew the whole
Part with Rosin mixed with Flax, or an old Rope sliced small, which will fill up
the Wound with Flesh, if it be kept on with Bolsters of Flax, and renewed every
two Days. If the Flesh grow too fast, as sometimes it does, after one or two
Applications, wash the Part with the second Water, and strew it with chopped
Flax, and Powder of Rosin, covering it with dry Flax and Splents.

I have often observed in those Horses that are troubled with four Figgs, one
in each Foot, that three of 'em may be easily cured; but the fourth is almost
always incurable, because the Humors that fed all the rest is discharged upon
this alone.

When the Part is filled up with Flesh, 'twill be convenient to dry it with
Powder of calcined Tartar, which will produce a Scurf that must not be removed
till it fall away of it self; then apply a Restringent Charge about the whole
Foot made of Powder of unslak'd Lime, mixed with the second Water or Aqua-vitae,
and reduced to a Paste, or, for want of that, a black Restringent Charge, which
will complete the growth of the Sole and Frush; and the natural shape of both
those Parts may be restored by the help of Iron Instruments, after which the
Horse will quickly be in a condition to endure Labor. But, during the whole
progress of the Cure, you must observe with extraordinary exactness and
Judgment all the abovementioned Cautions and Directions concerning the change
and due Application of the Remedies. After you have cut off the upper part of
the Figg, you may burn the rest with a red-hot Knife, which prevents bleeding;
and then apply Bolsters with Oil of Bay, to take away the Pain occasioned by
the burning, and bind on the Dressing and Splents as before. Two Days after
take off the Dressing, wash the Sore, and wipe it very clean with dry Flax,
then endeavor to remove the Scab with a Slice, and apply Oil of Bay, as at
first. When the Scab is fallen off, after two or three Dressings burn the Figg
again, continuing after the same manner till the Flesh appear clean, sound, and
natural; after which dry the Part as before.

Some prefer this Method before the use of Ointments, and it must be
acknowledged, that it performs the Cure more speedily; but the Figgs return,
and besides, the Gristle that keeps the Frush firm is so spoiled by the Fire,
that the Disease can never afterward be Cured, either by the Fire, or
otherwise, as I have oftentimes observed in my Practice, and for that reason
have left off the use of Fire, which I prescribed for the Cure of this
Distemper in the preceding Editions of this Book.

They who make use of violent Cauteries or Caustics will never be able to
perform the Cure with Success; for the Humor is only translated or repelled to
another side, and when the Figg seems to be extirpated on one side, it breaks
out on the other, and sticks to the Gristle or Bone of the Foot; which
inconveniency might be prevented by a due Application of the Ointments for
stopping the course of the Humors, of which Nature there are several
Compositions in this Book, and by mixing Aquafortis with 'em when they are too
weak. If the Figg be fastened to the Bone of the Foot, you must promote the
separation of the Scale, and afterward apply the Ointment Apostolorum, or the
Doctor's Ointment, dressing the Sore below, and endeavoring always to close it
above. I might produce several Instances of the Cure of this Distemper, but
shall content my self with what I have said already on that subject.

CHAP. XCI. Of Retraits or Pricks with Stubs, or with a Nail in Shooing, or in
the Street.
IF a Prick with a Nail be neglected, it may occasion a very dangerous Sore,
and fester so into the Flesh, that the Horse's Foot cannot be saved without
extreme difficulty; and therefore such fatal Consequences ought always to be
prevented by a timely Cure.

When a Farrier perceives in Shooing a Horse, that he complains or shrinks at
every blow upon the Nail, it must be immediately pulled out, and though Blood
follow there is no danger; only you must not drive another Nail into the same
place: such an accident seldom makes a Horse halt, and he may be ridden
immediately after it.

When a Horse halts presently after he is Shod, you may probably conclude, that
some of the Nails press the Vein, or touches him in the Quick. To know where
the Grief lies, lift up his Lame Foot, and knock with your Shooing-Hammer on
the sound Foot, (for some skittish and unruly Horses will lift their Foot when
you touch it, though it be not Pricked) that you may be the better able to judge
whether the Horse be Pricked when you touch the Lame Foot. Then lift up the
sound Foot, and knock gently upon the top of the Clenches on the Lame Foot, and
when you perceive that he shrinks when you strike any of the Nails, you may
conclude him to be Pricked in that place. Horses are usually Pricked at the
Heel in the Fore-foot, and at the Toe in the Hinder-foot. Then you must pluck
off the Shoe, pressing round the Foot with the Pincers, and when you come to
the place that is Pricked, he will endeavor to draw back his Foot, and shrink
extremely.

As you draw forth the Nails, you must observe diligently whether they are
bowed, or whether there be any Flakes, or if the Hole send forth Blood or
Matter; for a bowed Nail may occasion Lameness by pressing the Vein, and a
Flake may either press the Flesh or the Vein, and even sometimes you may
perceive by the Nail, that the Flake remains in the Foot, which is a bad sign,
for you can hardly ever pull it out, and so long as it continues in the Foot,
it is impossible to perform the Cure. Blood or Matter issuing out of the Hole,
is an evident sign of the grieved Part, which being discovered you must search
the place to the bottom with the Horn of your Buttress, then with your Renette
search the Hole, penetrating to the end of it, where the Nail was rivetted on
the Hoof; if in the mean time you find that it does not pierce to the Quick,
nor causes any Pain, thrust a Nail into the Hole, and press the point of it on
that side where the Vein lies; and if you perceive that the Horse complains,
proceed to the application of convenient Remedies, without any further trial.

If the Horse does not complain when you search the Hole, you may certainly
conclude, that he is not Pricked in that place, since you have examined the
whole length of the Hole without finding any Matter, and without occasioning
the least Pain.

It happens not unfrequently, that those Horses who have fleshy Feet, slender
Hoofs, and weak or narrow Heels, are always Lame when they are new Shod; and
sometimes to such a degree, that they are hardly able to stand upright, but
they recover without the use of any Remedy: And it is to be observed, that
English Horses are usually most subject to this inconveniency.

Narrow-heel'd Horses are usually Lamed if the Nails are riveted too high; for
though they be not Pricked, the Nails pierce too near the Quick, and occasion a
Pain that requires no other Cure but rest. If a Nail be bowed in a fleshy Foot,
it frequently makes the Horse halt, though he be not Pricked; and if it be
neglected too long, 'twill cause a Sore, which must be cured as if the Horse
were really Pricked.

If the place be Imposthumated, after you have procured the evacuation of the
Matter, inject boiling Oil with a little Sugar, and stop the Hole with Cotton;
then tack on the Shoe with three or four Nails, and stop the Foot with a
Remolade, which will draw the Heat into the Sole, hinder the Matter from rising
up to the Hair, and take away the Pain: Besides, you must apply a black, white,
or red Restringent Charge about the Foot, keeping it from moisture, and
continue to dress it every Day till your Horse be sound.

The following Remedy is good for Pricking with a Nail: As soon as you have
opened the Sore, inject the Vulnerary Water cold, stopping the Hole with
Cotton; the application must be renewed the next Day, which will complete the
Cure. If you cannot procure the Vulnerary Water, dress the Sore every Day with
Unguentum Pompholygos, and in few Days the Cure will be perfected. If neither
of these Medicines can be had, take a sufficient quantity of Milfoil, beat it,
and boil it with Vinegar, in an Iron-Spoon or Ladle, stirring it two or three
times; then pour the Vinegar very hot into the Hole made by the Nail, and lay
the Herbs upon it, continuing after the same manner till it be healed.

I could make a very numerous Catalogue of Remedies for a Prick in a Horse's
Foot, but there are none more excellent than the Vulnerary Water, Unguentum
Pampholygos, and Oil de Merveille, which are known to be admirably effectual in
this case.

Some Horses have their Heels so low, that they knock 'em against the Ground as
they go, so that they halt downright; and in the mean time the Farrier
searches about the Foot, Pastern-Joint, Shoulder, and other Parts, never
imagining that the Lameness is occasioned by a Bruise in the Frush. If you
perceive that the Frush trembles when you touch it, and that there is Matter
formed underneath, you may conclude the Seat of the Grief to be there; in which
case you must dress the Sore like a Wound made by a Nail, and make the Remedies
penetrate through the Heel between the Frash and Bone of the Foot, applying
proper Restringents of Lime, and the Second Water, or of Soot, Vinegar, and
Whites of Eggs, about the Frush. The Knowledge of these Sores or Imposthumes is
more difficult than the Cure.

All Vulnerary Herbs are good for Pricks in the beginning, as Savin, Vervain,
Birthwort, Speedwell, Agrimony, Zedoary, Adder's-Tongue, Arsmart, Ladies
Bed-straw, Dragons, and several others, which must be applied with Vinegar,
according to the Directions already prescribed in the use of Milfoil.

I thought fit to mention a considerable number of 'em, that as soon as your
Horse is Pricked you may easily find one or other; but those who know none of
'em must make use of proper Ointments.

In the beginning before the Wound be Impostumated, you may with good Success
observe this Method; after the Hole is discovered, pour some Spirit of Vitriol
into it, stop it with Cotton, and set on the Shoe; if your Horse grow Lame
again take off the Shoe, dress his Foot with Spirit of Vitriol as before, and
in few Days he will be perfectly sound. The Ointment of Pompbolix is also an
excellent Remedy for Oxen that are hurt in the Feet with the Plow, as sometimes
it happens by the unskilfulness of the Plowman; in which case you must open
the Sore, wash it well with warm Wine, melt some of the Ointment into it, stop
the Hole and continue after the same manner till the Cure be perfected.

CHAP. XCII. Of Pricking with Stubs or Nails in the Streets.
IN great Cities, the Streets are usually full of Nails, which frequently Prick
the Feet of Horses, and therefore as soon as a Coachman perceives his Horse
begin to halt, he ought immediately to alight and pluck out the Nail, lest the
Horse, by continuing to tread upon the Stones, drive it into the head, as it
happens very often.

Horses are also Pricked with Stubs, or Splinters of Wood, which pierce the
Sole, and sometimes reach to the Bone of the Foot: And both these Accidents are
frequently the occasion of dangerous and stubborn Sores.

As Soon as you perceive that your Horse is Pricked with a Nail or Stub, you
must pluck it out, and if it be followed with Blood, it is a good sign. If no
Blood appear, you may continue your Journey, if your Horse does not halt; but
if he be Lame, the safest way is to apply a present Remedy. After the Nail or
Stub is drawn forth, melt some Spanish Wax, and let it fall into the Hole, to
keep out Gravel or Dirt; and thus you may, without danger, ride your Horse to
some place where you may be able to procure convenient Remedies, as the
Vulnerary Water and Spirit of Vitriol, which must be applied Cold, or, for want
of those, Unguentum Pompholygos. I have often observed, that the application of
Spanish Wax has healed the Wound without any farther trouble; but if your Horse
continue to halt, you must apply the abovementioned Remedies, or good Oil de
Merveille, or any other proper Ointment, and stop the Hole with Cotton. Apply
also a good Remolade to the Sole; and if the Wound be large, a Restringent
Charge about the Coffin-Bone at the Toe, continuing to dress it after the same
manner till it be healed. If these Directions be observed at the beginning,
though the Horse halt right-down he will certainly be cured, if the Bone of the
Foot, or the Sinew be not Pricked. If there be an old Sore, search the Part
with the Buttress, and probe it gently with a Feather to discover the bottom of
it, taking care not to hurt the Part: Then heat Oil of Gabian, or De Merveille,
or some other hot Ointment, and inject 'em warm into the Sore; after which stop
it with Cotton, and lay a Remolade upon it with Flax and Splents, repeating the
Application, till your Horse be sound.

As often as you dress the Sore, squeeze the Matter out with your Thumb,
pressing not only the Sore but the Pastern above the Heel, and then apply the
Remedy.

At the second Dressing, when you unbind the Foot, observe whether the Remolade
be very dry, which, when it happens, denotes a great heat in the Part. Then
taking out the Tent if you perceive a reddish Water to come out of the Sore,
instead of white well digested Matter, it is a dangerous sign. When the Matter
is yellow, stinking, and hard, like Oxe's Grease, you may conclude it to be a
Nervous Humor that portends a difficult Cure; and almost always the Sinew is
found to be pricked, the stench proceeding from the greatness of the
Corruption. And therefore you must immediately take out the Sole, applying good
Restringents to the Toe, and sides of the Foot; but not to the Heels. Or apply
a piece of old Hog's-Grease, charging the whole Leg with Lees of Wine, mixed
with Vinegar, or with the Duke's Ointment to prevent the flowing of the
Humors, and suffering your Horse to eat nothing but Bran. If the Wound
continue still to discharge red Water, or hard, stinking, or congealed Matter;
and if at the same time the Foot be hot, and the Leg swollen, these are certain
signs that the Disease is dangerous, and will be of long continuance. And even
you may reckon your self very Fortunate, if your Horse be not quite spoiled by
the Matter usually generated on those occasions in some part of the Foot, which
may loosen the Hoof at the Cronet. To prevent these dangerous Consequences,
besides the Hog's-Lard and fat Remolades that were applied to the Pastern, to
draw the Matter to that Part, as the least dangerous, you must give the Fire on
the Pastern behind, till you come within an Inch of the Cronet, making about
twelve Holes with a red-hot Iron, piercing the Skin to evacuate the Humors,
and covering the burnt Part with a good Remolade, or with an equal mixture of
Turpentine, Tarr, and Honey; for this Operation will certainly give ease to
your Horse. If before you give the Fire you perceive, that there is Matter
already generated in the Pastern, if the Part be hard and swollen; and if, when
you press it, the Matter runs out at the Hole in the Foot, you must in that
case open a passage to the place where the Matter is generated, and put in a
Leaden Seton, if possible, filling up all the Part with Flax moistened with
Aqua-vitae, with some Aloes, to resist the Corruption; but it is not always
necessary to make a Seton, especially if the Holes be not directly opposite;
for then they must be severally dressed, without making use of a Seton.

When the Sore reaches the Pastern, the Foot is eased. I have seen that Part
pierced in two or three different places; nor is there any danger, unless the
Sore spread to the Cronet, for the Pain in the Foot is abated.

Note; If the Sore be so great that it is necessary to repel the Humor to some
other Part, the most convenient place that can be chosen is above the Heel in
the Pastern, because there is no danger of making the Hoof fall off. And for
that reason I ordered the Defensive to be applied only to the Toe and
Side-Quarters, and not to the Heel, that of two Evils I might avoid the worst.

In the Cure of these Sores, you must be very careful to wash the Part with
Spirit of Wine, Myrrh, and Aloes, to curb the spreading, or growth of the
Corruption.

If the abovementioned Remedies, though applied regularly, and continued for
some Days, be not attended with the least Success, 'twill be very convenient to
make a large opening, which will give ease to the Foot, and promote the
Operation of the Remedies. I have often seen the Pain considerably abated by
this Method; for though the Matter may be evacuated through the Wound it self, and
the Cure performed without making another Hole, yet that seeming advantage does
sometimes retard the Cure; and it has been often observed, that so soon as a
new opening was made the Horse left off halting. When your Horse begins to walk
upright, you may dry the Sore with Powder of Allom, or some convenient
Restringent.

If the Nail or Stub be in a dangerous place, as at the end of the Frush, or at
the side of its end, piercing to the Bone of the Foot, you must apply a
Restringent round the Hoof, a piece of Hog's-Lard to the Pastern above the
Heel, and a Remolade to the Sole. You must also charge the whole Leg and Thigh,
if the Grief be in the Hinder-Foot, with Lees of Wine and Honey; boil the Lees
of Wine, and when it begins to grow hot, thicken it with Flower, then adding a
Pound of Honey, or somewhat more, charge the Thigh every Day with the whole
quantity heated, or with the Duke's Ointment to strengthen the Part, and
prevent the falling down of the Humors, which is a necessary piece of caution
to promote and hasten the Cure. For as soon as any Part is hurt, the rest of
the Parts disburthen themselves upon it, especially when there is a natural
declivity or descent, as there is always to the lower Parts of the Body.

In great Sores caused by Pricking with a Nail, it is very Expedient to give the
Horse two Ounces of Liver of Antimony in fine Powder, one day in moistened
Bran; and the next, to mix the Cordial Powder with his Bran, letting him rest
the third Day, that Nature may not be over-loaded with an excessive quantity of
Remedies. The fourth Day repeat the Dose of the Liver of Antimony; the fifth
give him the Cordial Powder, intermit the sixth, and continue in the same order
till the Cure be perfected. These Powders will contribute to dissipate and
consume the Humors that would otherwise fall upon the Foot; and besides, they
purify the Blood, and preserve the Appetite.

The application of Restringents is also useful, though they may be omitted when
the Sore is regularly dressed with the abovementioned Waters or Oils, which
oftentimes draw forth pieces of Iron that stick in the Wound, and Cure almost
all Sores that do not reach to the Bone of the Foot, or to the Sinew, without
taking out the Sole, though that Operation must neither be dreaded nor neglected
in cases of necessity.

For Example, If the Prick reach far into the Bone of the Foot, the Cure will
be long and troublesome, because of the Sole that must be separated from the
Bone; and the surest way is to take it quite out, though the Cure may be
performed by making a large Incision. In such cases you must regulate your
Proceedings by a careful observation of the Symptoms: For Example, If the Horse
cannot set his Foot to the Ground, or if you perceive that he treads very
softly, and only upon his Toes, you must, without delay, take out the Sole
twenty four Hours after; for if the Operation be neglected, the Matter might
spread to the Hair, and the Pain which the Horse suffers before the Sole be
taken out, does almost always occasion a Fever. You may also judge of the depth
of the Wound by the length of the Nail, and when you draw it forth you may
observe whether it entered straight or sloping; for even the taking out of the
Sole is not always attended with the desired Success, when the Nail pierces
very deep, and breaks the Bone of the Foot.

If the Cure of a Prick with a Nail or Stub be not perfected in the space of
ten Days, by the regular use of the Vulnerary Water, or the Oils de Merveille
and of Gabian, you may certainly conclude, that either part of the Nail or Stub
remains in the Foot, or that the Bone is cleft or shattered, especially when
you take out the Tent, if after the running out of a little Matter, there
follows a great quantity of Blood, which is almost always a certain sign of the
approaching Separation of a Scale, if not of the falling out of the whole Bone.
To leave no room for a doubt, put in your Probe and search the Hole gently; and
if you find that it reaches to the Bone of the Foot, you must immediately make
a large Incision to ease the Pain, and promote the Cure, dressing the Wound
with Sugar, Aqua-vitae, and Aloes, and binding it up hard to prevent the growth
of the Proud-flesh; for so long as the Blood continues to flow abundantly,
'twou'd be in vain to apply any Ointment or Oil. At the second Dressing,
separate all your Flesh with your Fleam, to discover the bottom of the Sore,
nor must you be surprised at the great Flux of Blood, but endeavor to stanch
it with a hard Ligature. Continue after the same manner to dress the Sore once
a Day with the abovementioned Remedies, resisting the Corruption with all
possible diligence, applying proper Remolades to the Sole, and charging the
whole Leg and Thigh once a day, as before.

If the Dressing of the Wound be attended with a great Flux of Blood, though the
Tents be drawn forth gently, without bending the Pastern-Joint, I know no
better Method to prevent that troublesome symptom, than to put off the next
Dressing for two Days; and if the Blood continue still to flow plentifully, you
must dress the Wound once more with Aqua-vitae and Sugar, and suffer the
Application to remain untouched three Days. If there happen a Flux of Blood the
third time, let the Dressing lie on four Days; and if the Blood still continue
to flow out, interpose five Days before the next Dressing, after which the Flux
of Blood will be stopped, and you may dress the Wound every Day, or once in two
Days, according to the variety of Circumstances. I have used this Method with
good Success to stop the Bleeding, which hinders the Operation of the Oils,
Ointments, and Powder.

In all Diseases and Sores of the Feet, it is safer and more convenient to make
an Incision with a Razor or Fleam, than to consume the Flesh with Cauteries;
for besides the Pain occasioned by those Applications, the Matter is frequently
repelled, and lodged in some other Part as about the Pastern; but after you
have made one or two Incisions, you have a full view of the bottom of the Sore,
and may easily stop the Bleeding with Turpentine, applied warm with soft Flax,
and a good Ligature; then removing the Dressing at the end of forty eight
Hours, you will have the convenience of discovering the whole Sore, which must
be dressed and healed according to the abovementioned or following Directions.
Sometimes instead of one Hole made by the Wound, two or three break out at the
side of the Frush, reaching even to the Pastern; in this case you must cut the
whole Gristle that forms the Frush, penetrating to the bottom of the Foot, that
you may see the root of the Sore; for the taking out of the Sole is not always
sufficient to perfect the Cure, if the Sore reach under the end of the Frush to
the Bone of the Foot; and therefore you must cut off that end, or even the
whole Frush, to lay open the bottom of the Sore. When you have occasion to cut
the Gristle that forms the Frush, to prevent a dangerous Flux of Blood, you
must make a strong Ligature about the Pastern to stop the Veins that convey the
Blood to that part; after which mix a great quantity of Salt with your
Digestive made of Turpentine and Yolks of Eggs, and apply the whole to the
Wound with Flax, laying over it a good black Restringent made with Soot,
Vinegar, and Whites of Eggs, with Flax above all, and Splents to keep on the
Dressing. If the Blood continue still to flow from that part of the Frush that
ends at the Heel, besmear a little Flax with Turpentine, and apply it warm to
the Part, with convenient Ligatures. Forty eight Hours after remove the
Dressing, and you will see the bottom of the Sore; after which proceed as
before, washing the Sore with the second Water, and dressing it with
Digestives, Oil of Gabian, and Sugar, or some other Ointment.

As soon as the Scale, or any other extraneous Substance left or generated in
the Wound, is separated from the Bone, the Horse leaves off halting, unless
there be more than one piece to fall away; but the Exfoliation of the Bone
proceeds slowly, and it has been sometimes observed, that the separation of a
Scale could hardly be perfected in thirty, twenty, eighteen, or fifteen Days,
according to the nature of the Part. And therefore you must resolve to persist
with Patience, which at last will certainly be crowned with Success. It Is true,
we are sometimes obliged to cut out a Scale, when it sticks too long; for it is
impossible to complete the Cure so long as it remains in the Part.

The usual Method of Farriers, for the separation of a Scale from the Bone,
consists in the application of Digestives; but these Remedies nourish the Part,
instead of drying it, though it is certain that the Scale never falls away till
the Part be dried: And therefore 'twou'd be better to apply some Powder of
Sublimate, mixed with Aegyptiacum or Spirit of Vitriol, which will quickly
separate the Scale. But the surest and speediest Method, when practicable, is
to Sear the Bone with a hot Iron, which brings away the Scale immediately. I
have also observed, that an equal mixture of Aloes and Euphorbium, in Powder,
with Spirit of Wine, produces the same effect; for the heat and sharpness of
the Euphorbium is tempered by the Aloes, and the whole is rendered more
effectual, and as it were enlivened by the Spirit of Wine, which is also endu'd
with a drying Quality.

Or, at the second Dressing, if you perceive that there is a Scale to be
separated, and can apply the Remedy to the Scale it self, you may mix two third
parts of Opium, and one third part of Sublimate, with Spirit of Wine, and apply
a little of it to the Scale, covering it with a Bolster dipped in Aegyptiacum,
and wrapping a Restringent or Defensive about the Foot. In the mean time you
must charge the Leg every Day, suffering the Application to remain untouched
for the space of three Days; for the Scale will be quickly separated, and open
a large passage, which will promote the Cure.

When there is a Scale to be separated from the Bone of the Foot, great care
must be taken to prevent the growth of Proud-Flesh, lest it cover the Hole that
should give passage to the Scale. And if the Flesh be already risen too high,
you may boldly apply Sublimate in Powder to consume it: If you perceive that
the first Application has not produced the intended effect, strew the
Proud-flesh a second time with Powder of Sublimate; after which apply Sublimate
mixed with Aegyptiacum to the Part, binding it on with Flax, and letting it
remain four Days, if no other reason oblige you to remove it sooner; for you
must at least allow a Caustic three or four Days to perform its Operation.

After the Scale is separated you must not at first apply any Oil or Ointment
to the Bone, but only a Bolster of Flax dipped in Aqua-vitae, dressing it twice a
Day till the Bone be covered with Flesh; after which you may apply the most
convenient Remedies.

There are Sinews and Ligaments that fasten the Bone of the Foot to the Bone
called the Pivot or Pastern-Bone, and the Cure is considerably retarded when
one of these Sinews is pricked. You may easily discover it, by the Swelling of
the Master-sinew, and in that case must immediately proceed to the taking out
of the Sole, especially if Red-Water run out of the Sore instead of Matter; or
if the Matter be yellow, hard, and stinking, and if the Horse keep his Foot
from the Ground, all which Symptoms are certain presages of a tedious and
difficult Cure. Most of those Pretenders to Skill who undertake to Cure
Diseased Horses, are persuaded, or at least would persuade others, that they
are Masters of certain Ointments that infallibly Cure all Pricks and Stubbs in
a Horse's Foot, merely because they have cured all those who were committed to
their Care, which seldom or never amount to above five or six, and those
slightly Wounded, or perhaps pricked through the Foot in some of the least
dangerous Parts; but when the Sinew or Tendons are hurt, the Cure requires a
great deal of experience in the Undertaker, and a nice observance of the
exactest Method; nor is the best Ointment in the World sufficient alone to heal
the Wound. If the Nail or Stub has pricked one of the Sinews of the Foot Bone,
or the Bone it self, though the Sole be taken out, and the very bottom of the
Sore laid bare, by cutting the Frush, and even though the Cure be attempted and
carried on with the greatest diligence, and according to the most approved
Method, it cannot be completed without extreme difficulty; for the separation
of a Scale is very troublesome and tedious, the Wound is pestered with
Proud-Flesh, and at last grows foul and corrupted, and (which is the worst of
all those Inconveniences) the Ligaments are slackened and infeebl'd, the Bone
of the Foot shakes as if it were ready to fall out, and sometimes falls quite
away, as I have seen in more than one Instance.

'Twou'd be needless to add more to convince any Man that is furnished with a
moderate stock of good sense, that without taking out the Sole, altering the
Remedies according to the variety of Circumstances, and searching to the bottom
of the Sore, which is usually very large and deep, it is impossible to apply the
Medicines to the Part that stands most in need of 'em, and that consequently
they cannot help Nature to repair her great and ruinous Losses.

I saw one of those Gentlemen, who, upon the credit of a very slender
Experience, pretended confidently, that he had such an excellent Ointment, that
'twas altogether needless to proceed to the taking out of the Sole, which he
could not be persuaded to do, though the Horse had already suffered such
tormenting Pains for the space of ten or twelve Days, that he durst not let his
Foot touch the Ground, but continued obstinately in the use of his boasted
Ointment. At last he thought fit to invite me to see his Horse, extolling the
wonderful efficacy of his Ointment, and telling me, that he never had occasion
to take out a Sole, and that 'twas an infallible Cure for all Pricks in the
Foot, but confessed that he was extremely surpised at the ill Success of so
noble a Remedy, after a constant application of it for ten or twelve Days. I
replied, that if he designed to preserve his Horse, he must suffer him to be
unsol'd, which was done, and I found all the inward part of the Sole black and
bruised, so that 'twas needless to look for any other cause of the Fever, that
had already attacked the Horse. Four Days after I ordered a pretty large
Incision to be made, to discover the bottom of the Sore, where I found a Scale
that could not be wholly separated till twenty Days after, during which time
the Horse never put his Foot to the Ground; the Scale was above an Inch long,
and half a Fingers breadth broad; and I leave the Judicious Reader to determine
whether it could have been separated without taking out the Sole, and laying
bare the bottom of the Sore, and whether the application of the Ointment,
without Manual Operation, could have possibly saved the Horse's Life; for it is
plain that the Cure could never be performed so long as the Scale remained in
the Foot; and that 'twou'd be ridiculous to imagine, that it could have found a
passage through a small Hole in the Sole. I could allege many Examples I have
observed in my Practice; and several Farriers in Paris who have followed my
Directions can attest the successfulness of my Method: Not along ago a Person
of Quality with his Infallible Ointment for Pricks in the Foot, suffered his
Horse's Foot to be seized with a Gangrene; at last I ordered the Sole to be
taken out, and found the Foot Gangrened, after which I cured him; but if he had
not been seasonably assisted, he had certainly perished. This is the event of
those magnified Remedies, which are only fit to amuse unexperienced Persons;
but the true Method consists in a due and Judicious observation of the various
Circumstances that require the alteration of Medicines, and the most proper
Seasons for applying 'em. For when one Remedy does not succeed, we must have
recourse to another, and even take a third, if the second prove ineffectual;
it is certainly a great advantage to be Master of a good Remedy, but the
well-tim'd Application of it is of higher Importance, and they are oftentimes
both unprofitable, without the assistance of Manual Operation.

It Is true, some Horses are less burdened with Humors than others, or are not
so sensible of Pain, or are of a better Constitution of Body. The Season of the
Year is also to be considered; for Cold is always very hurtful in this case,
and those Circumstances contribute more effectually than the Ointments to the
Cure of these Distempers.

I have long endeavored, with a more than ordinary care and diligence, to
procure all those descriptions of Plasters and Ointments that are so highly
extolled for the wonderful Cures they have performed; and I must acknowledge,
that I have found 'em successful in the Cure of ordinary Hurts, and even in
Pricks that pierced quite through the Foot in the least dangerous Parts, or at
the Frush; but I have often applied 'em without the least advantage to Sores
that were seemingly less dangerous, because the Sinews or Bone of the Foot were
Pricked: So that I was forced to have recourse to the Method already described
in this Chapter. And to convince the Reader, that I used the best Ointments for
Pricks with a Nail or Stub, etc. I shall subjoin the description of Three
Compositions, selected out of a great number of others, and a Green Balsam,
commonly known at Paris by the Name of Madam Feuillet's Balsam. I hope the
Candid Reader will excuse the length of this digression, since 'twas only
designed for the Instruction of those that are willing to be informed.

When, during the progress of the Cure, there is no necessity for making a
large Incision, or cutting a great quantity of Flesh; as soon as the Horse
leaves off halting, you must fill the Hole that was made for the convenience of
Dressing the Sore, with white Tallow or Candle-grease, pressing it down with
Flax, and stop the Foot with black Pitch poured in hot.

As for Retraites or pieces of Nails left in the Foot when a Nail happens
afterward to be driven in the same Hole, it presses the former piece, and
thrusts it against the Vein, or into the Quick, which makes the Horse halt; the
Cure is the same with that of Pricks, and if you feel a Retrait, but cannot
pull it out, you must take out the Sole; though before you proceed to so painful
an Operation, you may try the efficacy of the Vulnerary Water, or the Oils de
Merveille, and Gabian, or the Unguentum Pompholygos, which may perhaps
facilitate the drawing forth of the Retraite, as I have several times observed.

I have seen Retraits that were thrust forwards by a Nail put into the same
Hole, so that the Hoof was drawn inwards against the Bone of the Foot, which
being naturally rough, and full of little Furrows designed by Nature for its
firmer union with the Flesh that surrounds the Bone of the Foot, crushed and
bruised the Flesh in that space, where consequently there was a great deal of
Matter generated, that could not be wholly evacuated for a considerable time,
nor the Part consolidated or healed, and therefore the Horse halted very long.
I preserved a great while the Hoof of a Horse, where the abovementioned case
apear'd very distinctly, he cotinu'd Lame three Months of a Retrait, and served
a long time after. After his Death I desired his Hoof to be brought to me,
where I observed the cause of his Lameness.

I will not trouble the Reader with a description of Ville Magne's Ointment,
though it be an excellent Remedy in all those Cases. You will find it described
in all the lately Printed Books, as in the Sieur d' Epinay's Art of a Farrier,
toward the End: And I shall only add concerning it that the Balsam of Peru,
which is one of its Ingredients, is a more effectual Remedy than the whole
Composition together. Nor have I inserted the description of Unguentum
Pompholygos, which you may find in Bauderon's Pharmacopoea, and all other
Dispensatories; and besides hot and burning Balsams are more proper in this
case than Ointments.

The following Oil is an excellent Remedy for Pricks with a Nail, Stub, etc.

CHAP. XCIII. Oil of Gabian.
THis Oil, or rather Bitumen, swims on the surface of a Fountain near Beziers
in Languedoc; where it is continually gathered, and distributed to those who use
it for diverse Infirmities. I have made trial of it for Pricks with Nails and
Stubs, and found it very effectual; it must be applied warm without any
mixture, and the Application continued according to the Directions which you
will find in the description of the Oil de Merveille, and if the Sore or Wound
can be possibly healed without taking out the Sole, this Oil will infallibly
perform the Cure. It Is sold at a low rate at Montpelier; that which is gathered
in April, May, June, and July is the best, and its Value proportionably
decreases, according to the distance of the time when it is gathered from May.
It Is so common in that Country, that I have seen it burnt in Lamps; however,
the safest way is to entrust the Gathering of it to some honest and faithful
Person who will not adulterate it. It may be rectified and rendered much
clearer, but in the present case there is no need of any Preparation at all.

Its Smell discovers the penetrating Faculty with which it is indu'd; and when a
drop of it falls on a piece of Cloth, it can never be taken out, for it pierces
through the smallest Threads.

It Is a very effectual Remedy to dissolve cold and hard Swellings, for it
penetrates and dissolves very powerfully, and by rarefying the Humors prepares
'em for Transpiration; and besides, it is used inwardly, and with good Success,
for several Diseases incident to Men.

It Is my Opinion and Advice, that all Masters of Horses, especially at Paris,
where the Streets are so full of Nails, should never be without this Oil; but
since those who live at a distance from the Spring where it is gathered cannot
easily procure it, I shall add the description of another that may be
substituted in its place.

The Physicians of Montpelier affirm, that Gabian has all the Virtues of
Petroleum, which are very numerous; and I can assure the Reader that it is of
admirable efficacy in all cases that require the application of a Remedy endu'd
with a dissolving and penetrating quality.

The Curious may find an Account of its Virtues in a Printed Bill, which is
given with the Oil at Montpelier.

Oil de Merveille.
Take of Oil of Turpentine, and of St. John's-wort, of each four Ounces; true
Oil of Peter, two Ounces; mix 'em in a Glass-Bottle over hot Embers, adding the
weight of a Golden Crown of Alkanet, hung unto the Bottle by a Thread; after it
has stood a quarter of an Hour on the Ashes, take out the Alkanet, and preserve
the Oil for use.

You may thicken the Oil to the consistency of a Balsam by a melting a little
Wax in it; but then its penetrating Faculty will be weakened. When you have
occasion to apply it, inject it warm, opening the Sore that the Oil may
penetrate into it, then stop the Hole with Cotton, to keep it open, cover it
with Flax and Splents, and renew the Application every Day till the Horse go
upright.

It Is a sure Remedy for all Pricks with Nails or Stubs, it helps very
effectually Cold Pains, Blows, Bruises, Strains, Cold Gout, Sciatica, Decayed
and Foundered Legs, if it be mixed with an equal quantity of Oil of Worms, and a
double quantity of Aqua-vitae; and it is also good for a Sprain in the Shoulders
or Hips. The Virtue of Remedies consists neither in quantity nor price of the
Ingredients.

There are a thousand Remedies that cure a Prick with a Nail in the beginning,
as Turpentine alone, Tallow or Sewet, melted with Gum-Elemi, Galbanum melted
with Butter or Tallow, all Balsams for Wounds, and several other Medicines.

A Green Balsam highly esteemed for its excellent Virtues.
This is that Balsam usually known at Paris by the Name of Madam Feuillet's
Balsam. It performs such wonderful Cures on Men, that I thought my self obliged
to insert it in this Book for the convenience of those who have occasion to use
it; but it would be needless to describe the Plaster that is usually applied
with the Balsam, since common Diapalma may be substituted instead of that
dearer Medicine; and besides, it is the Balsam alone that performs the Cure,
while the Plaster seems only to keep on the Dressing, and hinder the Air from
hurting the Sore.

This Balsam is an excellent Remedy for Wounds in any part of a Horse's Body,
and for Pricks with a Nail, Stub, etc.

Take of the Oils of Linseed, Olives, and Juniper Berries, of each two Ounces,
Turpentine of Chio; and (for want of that) fine common Turpentine, two Ounces;
Oil of Bay, one Ounce; Oil of Cloves, two Drams; Verdigrease beaten and
strained through a Taffeta Searce, three Drams; White Vitriol, two Drams; put all
the Ingredients into a Glass-Vial, mix them cold, by shaking the Vial from time
to time, during the space of a Month, and keep the Balsam for use.

When you dress a Wound the first time, wash it with warm Wine, then chafe it
with this Balsam, which must be applied with Lint, and covered with a Plaster;
if the Wound be deep, dip your Tents in your Balsam, and lay a Plaster over it.

When your Horse is hurt, dry the Wound with Flax, anoint it with the Balsam
hot, then strew it with the Powder of an old Rope, continuing daily after the
same manner, without moistening the Wound, which, by this method, will be
quickly healed in any part of the Body.

For Pricks with a Nail or Stub, it must be applied as the Oil de Merveille;
but since these Oils and Balsams are not so convenient for Carriage as
Ointments, I shall subjoin some of the most approved Medicines in that form,
beginning with one that is much celebrated, and was long kept secret.

Mr. Sicar's Ointment for Pricks with a Nail or Stub.
Take of the Gum of a Pine Tree, and Gum-Elemi in Powder, of each an Ounce,
melt 'em in a Basin or Pot, stirring them over a very gentle Fire; then add
nine Ounces of Red-Wax beaten, stirring the Substances till they be thoroughly
Incorporated; after which put in three Ounces of Venice-Turpentine, and the
whole being well mixed, remove the Vessel from the Fire, and immediately add one
Ounce of Dragon's-Blood, and two Ounces of Long Birthwort in very fine Powder,
stirring the mixture till it be half cold. Then pour it on a piece of Marble,
or a Table rubbed with Oil-Olive, or Oil of sweet Almonds, and having anointed
your Hands with the same Oil, make it up into Rolls of a convenient bigness,
wrapping them in Paper to be kept for use. The Ointment ought to be reddish if
it be carefully prepared.

If you have no Red-Wax the Ointment may be made thus, Take of good Yellow-Wax,
one Pound; Turpentine, four Ounces; Oil-Olive and Cinnabar, reduced to very
fine Powder, on a dry Marble; melt the Wax, Turpentine, and Oil, stirring them
carefully, and after they are a little cooled add the Cinnabar. Mix and make it
up in what form you please.

This Plaster, which I call an Ointment, in compliance with the common way of
speaking, is better old than new; it may be kept thirty Years, without losing
its Virtue, and is thus applied.

Having laid open the Sore, melt a sufficient quantity of the Ointment in a
Spoon, with a Spoon, with a little Sewet, Grease, Butter, or Oil-Olive, and
apply it warm, continuing after the same manner till your Horse be sound.

Note; That the Dragon's-Blood prescribed in the Composition of this Ointment,
is the Gum of a certain Tree found in one of the Canary-Islands; the Tears or
Drops that distill from the Tree, are of a bright red Color, and are the purest
Dragon's-Blood, for the Gum that is drawn out of the Tree by Incision, is also
called by the same Name, but is inferior in Virtue to the former. The greatest
part is brought from the East Indies, and the goodness of both is judged by the
deepness of their Color. But the Dragon's-Blood usually sold to Farriers,
ought wholly to be rejected as useless, since it is only Gum-Arabic, or some
other common Gum dissolved in Water, and tinged with Brasil-Wood. The Gum is
boiled slowly till it acquire a fine Color; after which it is strained through a
fine Cloth, and the moisture carefully evaporated. This Mixture is Sold to
Farriers for true Dragon's-Blood, because they are not willing to pay a
reasonable price for it; but it ought not to be imagined, that the red Color
increases the Virtue of the common Gums, of which it is composed.

CHAP. XCIV. Monsieur Curtis 's Ointment for Wounds, Bruises, or Pricks with a
Nail or Stubs.
TAke Oil-Olive seven Pounds, and mix it in a Basin or Skillet, with a Pound of
Ceruss, and a Pound and a quarter of Litharge of Gold or Silver, (for they are
both equally effectual) with a Quart of Water; mix them in a large Basin, wide
above, and narrow at the bottom, or in the form of a Sugar Loaf, and
incorporate 'em Cold, stirring 'em with a large and strong Wooden-Slice, for a
quarter of an Hour; after which set the Vessel over a Char-coal Fire, in a
convenient Furnace, and boil the Substances, stirring 'em perpetually, till
after they have boiled upwards toward the top of the Vessel, they begin to
sink, not by abating the heat of the Fire, which ought always to be equal and
strong, but by reason of the consumption of the Water that kept 'em up. After
they are sunk very low, that is, after they have boiled about an Hour and half,
remove the Vessel from the Fire, and add half a Pound of new Wax, cut into
little Bits, incorporating it with the rest, and afterward two Pounds of the
scrapings of an old white, and clean Linen-Cloth, beaten in a large Mortar, and
strained through a fine Searce; mix this with the abovementioned Composition,
stirring it till it be half Cold, after which add half a Pound of fine Myrrh in
Powder, and two Ounces of good Aloes, reduced to a very fine Powder, stirring
all together, till you can endure to put your Hand into the Vessel. Then having
Oil'd the Table, take the Composition out of the Basin with an Iron-Spoon, and
make it up into Rolls, which must be wrapped in Paper, and kept for use. If the
Preparation be duly made, it will be black and solid.

This is an admirable Plaster for all Wounds and Bruises in Men; for it takes
away the Inflammation, and Cicatrizes the Sore very speedily.

These Compositions ought to be called Plasters, by reason of their thickness;
but since the Name of Ointment is better known in the World, I thought fit to
retain it, notwithstanding the Impropriety of the Expression.

Having found the Sore in a Horse's Foot, melt some of the Ointment in a Spoon,
with an equal quantity of Oil-Olive or Butter, to keep it from burning, and put
it hot into the Wound, with Cotton over it, continuing after the same manner
till the Cure be perfected. This Ointment allays and takes away the
Inflammation in two or three Applications, and asswages the Pain sooner than
any other Ointment or Oil whatsoever. It covers the Bones with Flesh in any
part of the Body, in two or three times Dressing, if it be mixed with an equal
quantity of Oil of Roses; and after the same manner it is also applied to
Wounds. If there be occasion for Suppuration, it draws all Impurities out of
the Sore, after which you may apply a more powerful drying Ointment, or
convenient Powders.

For Wounds in Horses, mix it with a somewhat greater quantity of Oil or
Butter, that it may be Liquid, and having wiped the Wound with Flax, and put a
little of the Ointment upon it with a Pencil, cover it gently with Flax, to
preserve it from the Air, without pressing the Wound.

This Ointment heals the deepest and largest Wounds in a little time.

I cannot forbear admonishing the Reader, that he ought to set a high esteem on
this Ointment, for though I have tried many, I never found one so effectual; the
charge of the whole Dose, or a Pound of the Ointment, amounts only to Half a
Crown, and it never loses its Virtue, it allays the Heat and Inflammation in
the Wound, and even in all the Neighboring Parts.

I have oftentimes seen Horses halt above three Months after they were
perfectly cured of Pricks with large Nails, by reason of their weakness, which
was so great, that those who had the care of 'em, were forced to walk 'em
gently every Day in soft Grounds to strengthen their Feet, for if they had been
suffered to remain in the Stable, their Weakness would have continued much
longer. This happens only when the Wound in the Foot occasions the falling away
of Scales from the Bone of the Foot, or when the Sinew is Pricked, in which
case the Cure is so tedious, that the Horse must be kept in the Stable for the
space of five or six Months.

If such an accident happen to a Coach-Horse, you may make him Harrow, but as
for other Horses you must walk 'em in your Hand through tilled Grounds, and by
degrees their strength will return, and they will be as fit for Service as
ever: But if you grow weary, and are loath to continue so troublesome a Method,
you will certainly lose your Horse. It happens not unfrequently, when by reason
of a dangerous Prick with a Nail or Stub, a Horse remains two or three Months,
without putting his Foot to the Ground when the Wound is cured, the Shoulder is
found to be shrunk or dried, or one of the Hips sunk lower than the other, so
that the latter Infirmity is more dangerous than the former, since it is often
absolutely incurable, especially the sinking or falling down of one of the
Hips; and therefore the surest way is to charge the Shoulder to prevent these
Disorders.

Though I cannot follow the Multitude, in imagining that the Cure of these
Accidents depends wholly on the application of a good Ointment; yet since it is
impossible to perform a Cure without the use of some Remedies, I shall subjoin
the description of another, which is reputed, and I have found to be very good,
that the Reader may have the convenience of choosing, which he believes to be
most effectual.

Bartholomew's Ointment for Pricks with a Nail or Stub, and for Bleymes.
Take of Oil-Olive, a Pound; Sugar, half a Pound; thick Red-Wine, a Quart;
Leaves of Rosemary, and Roman Nettles, of each four Ounces; put 'em all
together in a glazed Earthen Pot, so that one half may remain empty, fitting on
its Cover, and luting the Junctures with Dough or Paste; then boil the
Ingredients over a small Char-coal-Fire for the space of six Hours; and after
they are half cold, strain 'em through a Linen-Cloth, and add six Ounces of new
Wax cut into small pieces; after which suffer the Ointment to cool, and if you
use green Herbs, it will be of the same Color. It Is applied after the same
manner as other Ointments, being melted in a Spoon, with a little Oil-Olive or
Butter to keep it from burning.

CHAP. XCV. A Hot or Burning Balsam for Wounds, Bruises, and Cold Pains; as
also for Pricks with a Nail or Stubs.
MIx half an Ounce of Camphire in Powder, with a Pint of excellent Spirit of
Wine; put them into a large Mattress, capable of containing three Pints, covered
with a Vessel of Rencounter, exactly luted on. Let the Spirit circulate in
Balneo Mariae, till the Camphire be dissolved; after which take out the
Mattress, and after it is cold, unlute the Vessel of Rencounter, and put two
Ounces of Yellow-Amber beaten into the Mattress, then fit the Rencounter on
again, and place the Mattress in Balneo Mariae, as before, where it must stand
two Days and two Nights; and after it is cold take out the Balsam, which must
be kept in a well-stopt Glass-Vial. Observe that the Water in Balneo Mariae
must not actually boil, but ought to be as hot as it possibly can be, without
boiling.

The Yellow-Amber that approaches nearest to a white Color is commonly the
most perfect, and fittest for this Composition.

Having laid open the Hole or Wound, pour in a little of this Balsam cold, stop
the Hole with Cotton, and renew the Application every Day till your Horse be
perfectly Sound, as he will be in a little time.

This is an excellent Remedy for decayed and battered Legs, if you chase 'em
once a Day with the Balsam cold, having first heated the Sinews, by rubbing 'em
very hard with a wisp of Hay. It Is also very proper for Bruises and cold Pains,
for Sinew-Sprains and Wounds.

This Balsam may be also used by Men with very good Success, for it heals green
Wounds as speedily and effectually as natural Balsam; it is also good for
Weakness and Pains in the Joints, for cold Pains, Rheumatisms, Sciatica's, and
Strains, and generally in all other cases for which the Queen of Hungary's
Water is commended, and even is much more effectual; nor can you find the
description of it in any other Book, if it be not borrowed from this. If it be
duly Prepared, it will be of a bright and lovely Gold color.

If there be a Scale to be separated, this Balsam will quickly bring it away,
but you must first take out the Sole, and then apply the Balsam cold, till the
Scale be loosened. Note, That by how much nearer the Scale is to the Nut or
Pivot, it will require the longer time before it can be separated; and
therefore you must not blame the Remedy for the tediousness of the Cure; for
it is to be observed, that if the Nut or Pivot, that is, the Bone which is
joined to the Bone of the Foot, be pricked with a Nail, or otherwise 'twill
never throw off a Scale, and the Cure will certainly be very long, because the
Bone must be scraped to take away the blackness. To conclude, Experience will
convince those who use this Balsam, of its wonderful efficacy in all cases; and
even for Men, it is a rare Secret for Wounds, Bruises, cold Aches, Defluxions,
etc. If the curious Surgeon labor to discover its Virtues, with a sufficient
degree of Application, he will find 'em to exceed his Belief, if the Medicine
be duly Prepared.

CHAP. XCVI. Remedies for an Imposthume in the Hairy part of the Foot.
SOmetimes when a Prick with a Nail is neglected, the Imposthume rises above
the Hoof; for the Matter being retained in the Sore below, and not being able
to find a Passage by reason of the hardness of the Sole or Hoof, it ascends
between the Bone of the Foot and the Coffin-Bone, and appears under the Cronet.
This is usually the Case of those Horses who have weak Feet, and is always very
dangerous, because the Hoof may be entirely separated from the Bone of the
Foot, or at least the Matter may harden about the Cronet, and corrupt the
Gristle, though the danger be not so great in this case as in the former. And
even after the Horse is cured, there may remain Swellings on the Cronet, which
increasing, may contract and dry the lower part of the Foot, to prevent which
Inconveniency, you will find some Remedies at the end of the Chapter.

As soon as you perceive the Imposthume, the usual Remedy is to take out the
Sole; but before you proceed to that Extremity, you may try the following
Medicines, by which I have seen several Horses cured. These Swellings are more
dangerous in Mules than in Horses, because they have tenderer Feet.

In the first place you must pare the Foot to open a Passage to the Matter
downwards, and endeavor to discover where it lies, by loos'ning the Sole a
little from the Hoof; then dress the Sore with the Vulnerary Water, or, for
want of that, with the burning Balsam, or the Oil de Merveille applied warm,
charging the Cronet with a Restringent made of unslak'd Lime, mixed with the
Second Water, especially the Part where the Imposthume appears, for there
cannot be a more powerful Restringent. Or you may apply a Composition of Soot,
Whites of Eggs, and Vinegar, to repel the Matter downwards, promoting the
Operation of the Remedy with a convenient Bandage.

If you pour hot Oil into the Foot, it will appear on the Cronet at the top of
the Foot and so Cure the whole Wound, and heal it to the bottom; but if after
the first or second Application of the Restringent, the Hoof be not reunited
to the Hairy-Skin, you must have recourse to the Countesses Ointment.

The Countesses Ointment to heal and close up the Sores occasioned by
Imposthumes in the Hairy part of the Foot.
Take half a Pint of Aqua-vitae, and a Pound of Honey; boil 'em over a very
small Fire in a clean glazed Pot, stirring 'em with a Slice, till the Honey be
thoroughly heated and incorporated with the Aqua-vitae; then add Verdigrease,
Gall, and Venetian-Borax, of each two Ounces, strained through a fine Searce,
with two Ounces of White-Vitriol beaten; boil 'em all together over a gentle
Fire, stirring 'em till they be well incorporated, and keep the Ointment for
use, in the same Pot, well covered.

Apply this Ointment cold on a little Cotton or Flax; and, above that, charge
the whole Foot with a white or black Restringent. Thus the Sore will be healed,
and the Hoof fastened to the Skin, after the first or second Application.

In this case, the main scope of the Cure should be to strengthen and bind the
upper Parts, or to drive the Matter downwards. This may be done, by applying
the Ointment above, with the Restringent Charge over it, and dressing the Hole
made in the Foot with the Vulnerary Water, the burning Balsam, or the Oil de
Merveille, or of Gabian.

If those Cautions be neglected, the Matter will harden, and form a great
Callus on the Cronet, which will occasion the shrinking or drying of the Foot,
by stopping its usual Supplies of Nourishment; and if the Gristle be infected,
the Swelling will be almost as dangerous as the Quitter-bone.

But all these Inconveniences may be prevented by a seasonable observance of
the abovementioned Directions, before the Disease grow inveterate.

If there be only a simple Swelling, observe the following Directions.

To assuage and resolve hard Swellings on the Cronet.
If the Tendon or Gristle be Infected (as you may conclude it is, when the
Probe that is put into the Hole reaches to that Part) you must use the same
Method, as in the Cure of a Quitter-bone; but if the Infection do not reach so
far, and there is only a hard Swelling, whether it obstruct the Nourishment of
the Foot or not, mix unslak'd Lime with the Second Water, or, for want of that,
with Aqua-vitae, though the former is better, and apply it to the Swelling with
Flax, laying a Plate of Lead over it to keep on the Dressing, and binding it
about very hard. Repeat the Application every Day, and in three Days the
Swelling will be asswag'd.

But if, by reason of the extreme hardness of the Swelling, this Remedy prove
wholly ineffectual, you must take out the Scale, and cleave the Frush to
enlarge the Quarter under the Swelling; four Days after shave away the Hair as
close as you can, and heat the Part by rubbing it with the back of a Knife, or
some other Iron Instrument, till the Skin grow very red without Bleeding. Then
anoint it with the best Oil of Bay cold, with Flax and a Cloth wrapped about it,
and a Bandage over all; and in the space of two Days, if the Oil be good, it
will raise little Scurfs, which you must separate from the Skin, and take away
gently. Then dress the Part as before, continuing after the same manner till
the Swelling be dissolved.

If this Remedy be not attended with Success, your only refuge must be the
Fire; and therefore you must pierce the Skin with a red-hot Iron, making Holes
through the whole extent of the Swelling, at the distance of a Finger's breadth
from each other, and half a Finger's breadth from the Cronet, extending the
Holes beyond the Swelling, the breadth of half an Inch; then charge the whole
burnt Part with a mixture of Turpentine, Honey, and Tarr, applied with Flax,
and every four Days renew the Application with the same Flax till theScabs fall
off; after which wash the Sores with Aqua-vitae, and strew 'em with the Powder
of old Ropes.

The Sole must be taken out, and the Frush cleft four Days before you give the
Fire, unless you unsol'd the Horse fifteen Days or three Weeks before, in order
to the Application of the Oil of Bays.

The Powder of unslak'd Lime that enters the Composition of the abovementioned
Restringent Remedy ought to be Prepared thus; put a piece of Lime on a Board,
or in a Pot, and set it in a dry place, where it will draw in the Air and
crumble to Powder, which, as I ordered before, must be mixed with the Second
Water, or, if that cannot be procured, with Aqua-vitae; and this is certainly
one of the best Restringents hitherto known.

It has been often observed, that after the taking out of the Sole for
Surbating, or a Prick with a Nail, when the Sore seems to be perfectly cured,
an Imposthume appears above the Hoof; in which case you must apply the
Countesses Ointment to the Sore, on the Cronet, and charge the whole Foot with
the abovementioned Restringent; for two or three such Applications will
probably be sufficient to perfect the Cure. This Remedy ought to be highly
esteemed, for it may prevent the loss of a Horse's Foot, and the Countesses
Ointment is also good for soft or frothy Soles.

CHAP. XCVII. Of the Casting of the Hoof.
HOof-cast, or the Casting of the Hoof, is when the Coffin-Bone falls quite
away, and leaves the Bone of the Foot, fastened to the Pivot, or Bone of the
Pastern by the Sinews that surround it cross-wise below, the Bone appearing to
the Eye, being of a spongy or porous Substance, and covered with Flesh. This is
one of the dangerous effects of Pricking with a Nail, which sometimes reaches
the Sinew, and makes the Horse Lame. Besides, I saw the very Bone of the Foot
fall away in two or three Pieces, having been pierced and broken by a Nail in
the Street: Two other Horses lost the same Bone entirely on the like occasion;
and though they were at last cured, they remained Lame ever after, and only fit
for the Plow, and other Work of that Nature, because there was no Bone left
within the Coffin. I would gladly be informed, whether those Gentlemen that
pretend to be Masters of never-failing Ointments, could have cured these
Horses, and prevented the falling out of the Bone, since I am persuaded, that
it was in a manner Dead, and no longer a natural part of the Foot. If they
affirm, that they could have brought away the Bone without taking out the Sole,
I must beg leave to dissent from them, till they convince me, that their
Ointments are better, or even as good as mine, which I confess are not
sufficient to perform the Work, without the assistance of Manual Operation, and
after all, not without a great deal of difficulty: But these Boasters must in
some measure be excused, since they never saw any of these dangerous cases,
which happen no where so frequently as at Paris, because the Streets are so
pestered with Dirt and Wheels.

A certain Person of Quality who had often tired me with tedious and
hyperbolical Harangues in Praise of his infallible Ointment, desired my Opinion
of his Horse's Foot that was pricked with a Nail in the Street, and could not
be cured by his boasted Remedy. I ordered a large Incision to be made, and
immediately perceived that the Bone of the Foot was hurt, and that there was a
Scale to be separated, which I dressed with the Vulnerary Water, and quickly
cured the Sole.

After this Accident, the Receipt of the Ointment, that had till then been kept
so secret, was freely communicated to a great number of Persons; which is the
usual Fate of those magnified Remedies, when they fall into the hands of
Ignorant Persons. I acknowledge this Digression is somewhat long, but may,
perhaps, serve to undeceive some of those who imagine, that no Disease is able
to resist the wonderful efficacy of a boasted Secret. The Strasburg Ointment,
Frankfort Pills, Orvietan, and all the famous Secrets are at last brought to
light; and, for my part, I never scruple to communicate all that I know to the
Public; and this freedom is so far from depriving me of the use of the Secrets
which I impart, that it secures me against Mistakes, since I can always have
recourse to the Book, where I find them fully described.

Of Horses who cast their Hoofs few escape irrecoverable Lameness, and
generally they may be turned away as useless, since before the Hoof can be
renewed, the charge of the Cure amounts to more than their Value, especially at
Paris, and after all, they are hardly fit for Service; but if you resolve to
attempt the Cure, and try the success of the best Remedies, I must acknowledge
that I know no better Method, than that which is prescribed by Signior Carolo
Ruini, in his Book, Entitled, Infirmita Del Cavallo; and after him by Philippo
Scacco, in his Treatise, Di Mescalzia, Printed at Venice. I have nothing to add
to what those Gentlemen have said on this Subject, especially the former; only
I think my self obliged to declare, that I have always observed the charge of
the Cure to exceed the value of the Horses; and that, after all, they were only
fit to be employed in Tilling the Ground. Nevertheless, since there are some
fine Horses whom a Man would not willingly lose, without trying the success of
the best Methods, and who may serve for Stallions if they be not Gelt; for the
general satisfaction of my Readers, I thought fit to subjoin the description of
an excellent Ointment to restore the Hoof, which I can confidently recommend as
very effectual, if it be duly applied, and the use of it continued for a
considerable time.

Schmit 's Ointment.
Take half a Pound of Rosin, and a Pound of Oil-Olive, melt them in a
Copper-Bason Tinned, and a quarter of an Hour after you remove the Vessel from
the Fire, add Mastic and Olibanum, in Powder, of each an Ounce and half; stir
the Ingredients together about half a quarter of an Hour, and then add half a
Pound of common Turpentine, continuing to stir a little longer, to incorporate
the whole.

At the same time take half a Pound of Honey, and half a Pint of strong
Aqua-vitae, boil them gently till they begin to Smoke, not forgetting to stir
them; then add Verdigrease and Copperas, in very fine Powder, of each three
Ounces, stirring and boiling till all the Substances be United, and as soon as
the Mixture is half cold pour it into the first Basin where the Oil is, which
ought to be half cold also. Mix 'em together, and immediately add two Ounces of
Burnt Allom in fine Powder, one Ounce of Orpiment, stirring and mixing 'em with
the rest, and as soon as they are all incorporated, add flower of Linseed and
Fenugreek, of each three Ounces, stirring the Mass till it be almost cold; at
last add two Ounces of Aloes in fine Powder, stirring till it be incorporated
with the rest of the Ointment, which will then be completed, and must be kept
in a Pot. Its Color is not much different from that of Aegyptiacum, and if the
abovementioned Directions concerning the different times of boiling, and the
fineness of the Powders be carefully observed, you will find that its Virtues
are not much inferior to those of the Strasburg-Ointment, and perhaps it is the
same that Mr. Floch, the Strasburg Farrier, used to sell in Tin-Boxes to
Travelers; however, it is certain, that it has the same use, and produces very
good effects.

This Ointment cleanses, resists Corruption, heals, and makes a fine Cicatrice,
and this alone may serve to cleanse the greatest Wounds, to separate a
Felander, or any other extraneous Body, and draw them out of a Sore; mix the
Ointment with an equal quantity of Sugar, and apply it cold with a Bolster of
Flax. The same Application is convenient when one of the quarters of the Hoof
is cut away.

Since the Hoof does not always fall quite away at once, but by degrees, and
usually after considerable Intervals; you must apply this Ointment cold to all
the sore and raw Parts, and if the Flesh grow too fast, or appear frothy, burn
the highest part of it, and then apply the Ointment.

This Ointment is also very proper for Wounds in the Withers, and in all other
parts of the Body; for it keeps 'em very clean, and prevents a Gangrene.

Those who carry Trains of Horses to the Army, or Travel with a great number of
Horses, should always make provision of a sufficient quantity of this Ointment;
and if Farriers had it in their Shops, they would daily make new discoveries of
its Virtues, and lay aside the use of the Unguentum Apostolorum, and all drying
Powders. The Application of this Ointment after the use of an actual or
potential Cautery; and after the Scabs are fallen off, is a present Remedy for
all Quitter-bones, whether they proceed from outward or inward Causes.

It may be called an excellent kind of Aegyptiacum; and very effectually
restores and strengthens the Sole, when the superfluous Moisture of the Flesh
hinders its Growth.

You may cure watery or running Sores in young Coach-Horses, by shaving off the
Hair and applying this Ointment daily. The same may be also used in the Cure of
Pricks or Stubs, but there are other Ointments more effectual in that case.

In the general it is good and useful in all those cases, in which the Strasburg
Ointment is used. Only you must not administer it, for a purge, as Floch was
wont to do at Strasburg, though he had not the confidence to give that Advice to
any but Switzers. Some Horses cast one or two of the Quarters of the Hoof, some
part of it remaining entire, which helps to strengthen and support the growing
Hoof; but such Accidents leave always so remarkable a defect in the Foot, that
unless it be a Horse of great Value, and you resolve never to ride him but on
soft Ground in a Manage, the Cure can never be perfected to the satisfaction of
the Owner, especially if the Horse cast the third part, or one half of his
Foot. It Is true, a regular Application of this Ointment will at last perform
the Cure, but it is always attended with the abovementioned defect.

When part of the Hoof is cut off, for the Cure of Quitter-bones, Pricks with a
Nail, and such like Distempers, you must observe the Method prescribed in each
particular case.

A diligent perusal of this Chapter will undeceive those who imagine, that the
taking out of the Sole, and casting of the Hoof is the same thing; and for that
reason are always wont to reject a Horse whose Sole has been taken out: For the
taking out of the Sole by a skilful Hand, does not at all lessen the Value of a
Horse; whereas those who have cast the Hoof, are never afterward able to
endure Fatigues.

CHAP. XCVIII. Of Bleymes.
ABleyme is an Inflammation caused by extravasated Blood within the
Cossin-bone, between the Sole and the Bone of the Foot toward the Heel, where
it turns to Matter, and occasions those Disorders that shall be particularly
mentioned in this Chapter. There are three sorts of Bleymes.

The first are generated in spoiled and wrinkl'd Feet, with Narrow-Heels, and
are usually seated in the inward or weakest Quarter. Managed Horses are most
subject to this Infirmity, because their Feet are extremely dried with the
Dust, if they be not carefully Picked after they return from the Manage.

This Distemper makes the Horse halt extremely, and if it be neglected, we are
frequently obliged to make a large Incision, or to take out the Sole. And
therefore as soon as you perceive your Horse to be troubled with it, you must
pare the Hoof, and open the Bleyme to the Quick, to let forth the Matter, which
is almost always of a brown Color; then pour in Oil of Gabian, or De
Merveille, or the burning Balsam, Charging the Hoof with a Remolade made of
Soot and Turpentine, and continuing after the same manner, by which means the
Imposthume will not reach the Hair, as it would certainly do, if there were not
a passage opened for the evacuation of the Matter. But if you perceive an
Impossible above the Hoof, observe the Method prescribed in the preceding
Chapter, applying the Countesses Ointment as above, or if that cannot be
procured, mix Powder of Litharge with Spirit of Wine, and apply it to the place
with Flax. Sometimes this Distemper is so dangerous, that it occasions the
Casting of the Hoof; for by reason of the long stagnating of the Matter,
Felanders, and other Impurities are generated, that consume and putrify the
root of the Quarter, which must be cut off to the Gronet. And if the Cure be
not perfected by that Operation, to proceed Methodically, having opened the
Sole over against the grieved Part, you must put in your Probe at the corner of
the Quarters to search the concavity and bottom of the Sore. If you find
nothing but Corruption, you must make a large Incision with your Fleam or
Razor, to let forth the Matter, and discover the bottom of the Sore; but if
there be no Scale, or any other Impurity in it, dress the Hole, as if it were
occasioned by a Prick with a Nail.

To prevent these Bleymes you must keep your Horse's Feet clean and moist,
making him stand five or six Hours every Day with his Fore-feet in his own
Dung, moistened with Water. It will be also convenient when he is Shod to knock
down the Heel, that the Sinew may be extended, for it is usually crooked in
those Horses that have great Heels; and besides, the same caution will prevent
the Contraction and Narrowness of the Heels, for the Bleymes are almost always
occasioned by the shrinking of the inside of the Hoof, to prevent which
Inconveniency, if that part of the Hoof be already shrunk, pare the Foot and
set on a Pantofle-Shooe; and if your Horse be very much Hoof-bound, draw three
or four Lines with a hot Iron on the Hoof, from the lower part of the Cronet to
the Shoe, and keep the inside Quarter very supple and moist. I have seen
Horses forced to stand eight or ten Days in Litter, by reason of this
Infirmity, the preventing of which will save a great deal of Charge to their
Masters.

The second sort, besides the usual symptoms of the first, infects the Gristle,
which must be extirpated, as in the Cure of a Quitter-bone. This kind of Bleyme
is infinitely more dangerous than a Quitter-bone, for many Horses are killed by
it, others remain for ever Lame, and some escape after a long and tedious Cure.
It Is sometimes occasioned by an Overreach, which, without making any outward
Wound, makes a Contusion within, and the bruised Blood turns to Matter, which,
seeking a passage, infects the Gristle, and being retained, grows to a
Scirrhous Lump, which must be taken out below, and the Gristle above, and the
Sore cured by the Remedies already proposed in a like case.

During the Cure, instead of Oats, give your Horse moistened Bran, with two
Ounces of Liver of Antimony every Day, to divert the course of the Humors, and
purify the Blood.

You may consult the Chapter that contains the Method of Cure for
Quitter-bones, where you will find the Remedies that are proper in this case.

The third sort of Bleymes is occasioned by small Stones and Gravel, enclosed
between the Shoe and the Sole; but this kind may be easily cured.

If the Shoe be ill set on, or not kept fast by the Nails, the Horse is in
danger either of Surbating, or of the Bleymes; and those who have flat Feet are
most subject to this Infirmity, because the Sand or Gravel enters easily
between the Sole and the Foot.

In order to the Cure you must pare the Foot, to discover the Sore; and if you
perceive that there is no Matter generated, take out the bruised Sole; but if
the Matter be already gathered, let it out, and dress the Sore like a Prick
with a Nail.

If the Cure be seasonably attempted, it will be quickly perfected; but if you
find that the Distemper has already gathered strength, you must have recourse
to the Vulnerary Water, the burning Balsam, the Oils De Merveille and of
Gabian. To conclude, the Cure depends on the evacuation of the Matter below;
the neglect of which might be attended with very troublesome Consequences.

CHAP. XCXI. Of Scab'd Heels or Frush.
SOmetimes the Frush falls away by degrees, by reason of an Eating Scab which
pierces to the Quick, and occasions so great an Itching that the Horse cannot
walk without halting; but these Sores are not so dangerous as they are
troublesome and painful. Before the Horse grows Lame his Feet stink of old
rotten Cheese, so that you may easily discover the nature of the Grief, since
it is impossible to come into the Stable without perceiving the Smell. And
besides, they beat the Ground from time to time with their Feet, by reason of
the intolerable Itching in those Parts.

To begin the Cure you must pare the Frush with your Buttress as near as you
can, then quench a sufficient quantity of unslak'd Lime in Vinegar, strain out
the Liquor, boil it, and throw it boiling hot on the Frush, after which apply a
Restringent Charge of Powder of unslak'd Lime, mixed with the Second Water, or
the black Restringent made of Soot, Vinegar, and Whites of Eggs. The Countesses
Ointment is very useful in this case, for it performs the Cure in three or four
Applications; but the Dre^^ing must be kept on with Splents.

If the Disease return after you have cleans'd the Sores, apply the Neat-herds
Ointment, which will heal them, though the Internal Cause can hardly be removed;
and besides, the Horse may be let Blood in the Toe from time to time. All the
Ointments prescribed for running Sores or putrified Legs, are also good in this
case.

For Preservation, you must often pare the Frush, and rub the Place once or
twice with the Second Water, which will consume part of the Corruption, and dry
up the root of the Scabs so effectually, that they will not break forth again
for a long time after. Then bathe the Part every Day with the following Water
cold; Take of Allom and white Vitriol, of each a Pound and a half; boil 'em in
a Gallon of Water till it be reduced to two Quarts. At last, when you perceive
the Itching gone, melt Tarr or Black Pitch upon the Scabs, and keep the Feet
well picked, and free from Dust, or any other Ordure that might dry 'em. The
last named Remedy is very effectual.

CHAP. C. Of the Crown-Scab.
THE Crown-Scab is a white or mealy Scurf caused by a burnt, yellow, and
malignant Matter that breaks forth at the roots of the Hair where it sticks to
the Skin, and makes the Hair bristle and stare, and at last Scalds it quite
off. You may distinguish the Nature of the Distemper by the bristling of the
Hair on the Cronet, and not unfrequently on the whole Pastern to the Joint. The
place is covered with a mealy Scurf, and the Cronet swollen by the abundance of
Humors that fall upon the Part. The most subtle Particles of those Humors
exhaling through the Pores of the Skin harden into a kind of Salt that sticks to
the Skin and produces the Scurf which usually appears on the Cronet. There are
two sorts of Crown-Scabs: Some are dry without the least humidity, and others
are moist by reason of a stinking Water that Issues out of the Pores, and
communicates its stench and moisture to the Neighboring Parts. Besides, at the
beginning of the Foot under the Cronet, the surface of the Hoof is cracked and
split by the dryness and acrimony of the Humor contained in the Cronet, from
whence the Hoof receives its Nourishment.

But I shall have occasion to treat of this Distemper in that part of this Work
that contains Instructions for the curing of Horses. In the mean time it may be
observed, that it is neither painful nor makes 'em unfit for Traveling, unless
in moist Countries; for in dry Climates it dries up in the Summer without the
Application of any Remedy.

Nevertheless, the Humor that breeds the Scurf is sometimes so hot and sharp,
that the Horse is extremely prejudiced by it; and even sometimes the Scab
over-runs the whole Leg almost to the Knee and Hoof. The common drying Remedies
serve only to palliate the Evil which returns after a seeming Cure; and even
after it is dried up, may continue still to cast forth a Scurf that sticks to
the Hair, and must be every Day rubbed off with a Curry-comb.

A Drying Remedy may be thus prepared, take two Ounces of good Brasil Tobacco
cut small, or at least separated from the Stalks, and infuse it twelve Hours in
half a Pint of strong Spirit of Wine, stirring 'em every Hour that the Spirit
of Wine may pene rate its Substance, and wholly extract its Tincture. Then
chafe the Scab without taking off the Skin, and afterward rub 'em very hard
with a handful of the Tobacco, continuing to rub 'em after the same manner once
every Day. If notwithstanding the use of this Remedy the Scratches are not
dried, or break forth again after an imperfect Cure, use that which follows.

Rub the Part with a Wisp of Hay till it grow hot, but without fleying off the
Skin, or drawing Blood; then touch it gently with Cotton dipped in the Spirit of
Vitriol, repeating the Application the second time, if the first be not
sufficient. Or dress the Sores with the Neat-herd's Ointment, which you will
find described in the hundred fifty seventh Chapter.

I had once a young Barbe, who was troubled with a Crown-Scab not much
different from the Pains or Red-Water in the Legs, for it was very moist; and
in order to the Cure of so troublesome an Infirmity, I applied too large a
quantity of Spirit of Vitriol, which was better rectified, and stronger than I
imagined. Immediately the Sinew and the whole Leg swelled, and the Swelling was
accompanied with so violent a Pain, that the Horse could not stand upright; so
that I was forced to have recourse to the Red-Honey-Charge, to assuage the Pain
of the Leg, and especially the Sinew. And to the Place where the Scab appeared,
which was extremely tormented with the Acrimony of the Spirit, I applied the
white Honey-Charge which allayed the Pain; but shortly after the whole Cronet
fell off. Yet the Flesh and Skin were afterward restored and the Sores healed;
but there was a great Scar left which was never afterward covered with Hair.
In the mean time the Horse was absolutely cured of the Crown-Scab, but by
reason of the violent Effects of the Remedy, he was forced to be kept two
Months in the Stable. This Example may serve to admonish the Reader of the
Danger of applying too large a quantity of Spirit of Vitriol, especially if it
be good; for that which is usually sold at Paris is not so strong; and it is
safer to renew the Application two or three times, than to endanger the Horse
by an over-proportion'd quantity at the first.

Spirit of Salt produces the same effect, and the Experience I have had of its
Nature inclines me to prefer it before the other, for it cleanses more
powerfully. The following Remedy is sometimes sufficient for the Cure of the
Crown-Scab. Infuse a sufficient quantity of Sal-Armoniac in Spirit of Wine,
that is, as much Salt as the Spirit will dissolve; for as soon as you perceive
the Salt to lie at the bottom, you may conclude that the Spirit is satiated.
Then rub the Part and bathe it with the impregnated Spirit.

The Cure of an inveterate Crown-Scab is often attempted without Success; for
the Spirits of Vitriol and Salt are not infallible Remedies in this case; and
it is frequently observed, that larger Sores are more easily cured than this
Scab, especially such as are old and malignant.

CHAP. CI. Of Fleshy Excrescencies on the Frush, by some ignorant Persons
mistaken for the Figgs.
BEsides the Sores occasioned in the Frush by Pricks and Stubs, Scabs, and
Figgs, sometimes fleshy Lumps or Excrescencies arise at the side of the Part
about the bigness of small Nuts, which are occasioned by the heat of the Feet
or Stable, and are not dangerous, though sometimes very painful. Some ignorant
Persons confound these with the Figgs, which are nourished and fomented by a
corrupt, nervous, or sinewy Juice, which is the cause of their Malignity; and
besides, they are oftentimes fastened to the Gristle, whereas the
Excrescencies, which are the Subject of this Chapter, proceed only from an
excess of Heat, so that the Disease is sympathetical, not essential to the
Part, and therefore infinitely less dangerous, though it often makes the Horse
halt rightdown, and if neglected might produce very troublesome Consequences.
And even sometimes, though very rarely, the Sole must be taken out before the
root of the Swelling can be extirpated; but generally these Tumors are as
easily Cured as known.

When you perceive a Lump or Excrescency of live Flesh fastn'd to the side of
the Frush, which usually makes the Horse halt, and oftentimes right-down, if it
be seated on one of the Hinder-Legs, large and high above the Frush, you must
immediately cut it off with a red-hot Knife, sear the Part to stop the Blood,
and dress the Sore with the Countesses Ointment, or for want of that with the
Powders of Crude Allom, Galls, and White Vitriol, equally mixed, and applied
with a Bolster of Flax, laying over it, and over the whole Frush and Sole a
Restringent Charge made of Turpentine, Soot, and Aqua-Vitae boiled gently, and
incorporated with perpetual stirring. Three Days after take off the Dressing,
and touch the Part with Spirit of Vitriol; after which renew the Application as
before, and, by a careful observance of this Method, the Cure will be speedily
perfected.

But sometimes, after a regular Application of the abovementioned Remedies,
the Swelling returns, and must be again cut off with a red-hot Knife; after
which apply the Countesses Ointment, and when you remove the Dressing wash the
Part with Spirit of Wine; then dress it with the Ointment, and continue after
the same manner till the Sore be healed. In the menn time, to promote the Cure,
by cleansing, drying, and strengthening the Part, you may touch it with Spirit
of Vitriol, and apply White Vitriol, with the usual Dressing of Bolsters,
Bandage, or Splents.

It may sometimes happen that all these Remedies will not be sufficient to
prevent the return of the Tumor; in which case you must pluck off the Frush,
and dress the Part, according to the Directions mentioned in the Chapter that
treats of the Figgs.

If the Horse halt right-down, apply only the Countesses Ointment, dressing it
once in two Days, and persisting in the use of that Remedy till he begin to
walk upright. Sometimes those Bunches or Excrescencies appear at the end of the
Frush on the Hinder-Legs, and are so painful that the Horse treads on his Toes,
and can neither endure to stand or walk; but you must not be surpised, nor
dread the Event, since you may easily make him sound, by dressing the Part once
in two Days with the Countesses Ointment.

The Cleft of the Frush is sometimes Imposthumated by reason of the heat of the
Stable, so that a Horse halts right-down, and the Matter, mixed with red-Water,
falls upon the Frush, neither is this case more dangerous than the former,
notwithstanding the Pain and Lameness with which it is attended; for the Cure
may be easily performed after this manner. In the first place, cleanse the Part
by thrusting a Slice or Spatula wrapped about with Flax, and repeating the same
so often till no Moisture appear on the Flax; then put a little Spirit of
Vitriol, or Second Water into the Cleft, and stop it with Flax moistened in
either of these Liquors, proceeding after the same manner till the Symptoms
disappear.

Of the Mange in ehe Leg and other Parts of the Body.
Old Horses are most subject to this Distemper, and some are also troubled with
it when they are Young if they be suffered to rest after hard labor. They are
tormented with a perpetual Itching, which makes them rub their Legs, and
oftentimes pill off all the Hair. To cure so loathsome a Distemper, infuse two
Ounces of Euphorbium reduced to fine Powder, in a Quart of strong Vinegar,
letting it stand six Hours in hot Embers; then rub the Horse's Legs with a Wisp
and chafe 'em with Vinegar, which will kill the Mange at a second Application.
It will be afterward convenient to let the Horse Blood in the Eye-Veins if the
Forelegs be Infected, and in the Plait Thigh-Vein, if the Mange appear in the
Hinder-Legs.

There is a certain red and three cornered Seed called Staves-acre, which grows
in the Hedge, and serves commonly to destroy Lice in Birds of Prey and Oxen;
beat two handfuls of this Seed, and infuse it in a Quart of strong Vinegar and
hot Ashes; wash the Mangy Parts with the Liquor and they will be cured at twice
Bathing.

Or take a large handful of Louse-wort, or Bastard-Hellebore, and rub the Mangy
parts once or twice at most, lest by repeating the Application too often, the
Parts should be Ulcerated. This Plant grows, during the Summer, at the sides of
Hollow-ways in Mountainous Places, its Leaves are long and notch'd, and the
Country People make use of it to destroy the Lice that trouble their Cattle.

The following Remedy is also very good, and certainly Cures the Mange, if the
Part be twice rubbed with it; take Green Copperas and Burnt Allom, of each four
Ounces; Arsmart, two handfuls; boil 'em in two Quarts of Vinegar, to the
Consumption of one half; and rub the Horse's Legs with a Wisp, before you wash
'em with the Liquor.

Sometimes the Skin and Hair peels off at the bending of the Thigh, and the
place remains bare and red, denoting an excess of Heat. Take four Ounces of the
Scoriae of Liver of Antimony, beat 'em to Powder, and boil 'em in two Quarts of
strong Vinegar, with which rub the raw Part every Day till the Hair return.

The same Remedy is of great efficacy for the Cure of the Mange on the Legs,
and all other parts of the Body, if they be often rubbed with it. It cures
infallibly the Universal Mange, if at the same time the Horse's Body be cooled
with repeated Doses of Liver of Antimony in moistened Bran, or instead of that
with Crystal Mineral, or Sal Prunellae. It Is to be observed, that the Cure of
this Distemper must always be begun with Bleeding, and in the mean time the
Horse may be either ridden or wrought.

CHAP. CII. To restore decayed and wasted Feet, deprived of Nourishment by
several Distempers.
HOrses are subject to many Diseases in their Feet, Hips, Hams, Fetlock-Joints,
Pasterns, and other parts of their Legs that obstruct the conveyance of the
usual supplies of nourishment to the Feet; which are consequently wasted, dried
up, shrunk, and in a little time grow so little that they are in a manner
wholly useless.

The signs of this Disease are not obscure; for the Foot appears smaller to the
Eye, and sounds hollow if you knock on the Hoof; and besides, the Horse usually
halts.

To cure the Hoof-bound, raze the whole Foot with a red-hot Knife, as if it
were a Rape, or Drawing-Iron, making large Rases of the depth of a
Silver-Crown, from the Hair to the Shoe, without appoaching too near the
Cronet; after which charge the whole Foot with the following Remolade.

The reason of this effect of the Fire, so seemingly contrary to its nature,
depends on its penetrating and softning the Hoof, for immediately the Bone of
the Foot that was extremely straightened by the Hoof, or at least by one of the
Quarters, resumes its place; and besides, the Remolade penetrates the Hoof more
easily than when it is rased by the Drawing-Iron, which weakens the Hoof instead
of strengthening it.

A Pultiss.
Take two parts of Sheep's-Dung, and one part of Hen's-Dung, boil 'em with a
sufficient quantity of Vinegar and Salt to the thickness of Paste or Dough.

In another Pot boil a convenient quantity of Mallows to a Mash, then add as
much Powder of Linseed as suffices, and boil a little longer; after which beat
'em in a Mortar, with an eighth part of a raw Garlic to a soft Paste, which
you must incorporate with the former, adding a little Oil of Lillies.

Having pared the Foot, put some of the Pultiss into it, covering it with
Splents, and charge the Foot with the following Remolade lukewarm, renewing
the Application five or six times once in two Days, and always observing to
heat the old Pultiss, and only mix a little fresh with it. If you perceive any
effect of these Remedies, you may lay aside the Pultiss, if otherwise, you must
persist in the use of it, and always apply it very hot.

It Is confirmed by frequent Observations, that one of the Quarters of the Hoof
may be shrunk and dried up, while all the Nourishment falls upon the other. The
seat of this Infirmity is usually near the Heels of the Fore-Feet, and the
inside of the Hoof, which is the weakest part; and the Horse halts right-down,
because the Bone of his Foot is too much straightn'd, and pressed by the shrunk
Quarter.

Draw seven or eight Lines with a hot Iron upon the shrunk Quarter from the
Cronet to the Shoe, without touching the Hair; put the abovementioned Pultiss
into the Foot, dressing it with Splents as before, and apply to the Quarter a
Remolade, made of half a Pound of Burgundy-Pitch, four Ounces of common
Turpentine, two Ounces of Oil-Olive, and a sufficient quantity of fine Flower
to thicken the whole, continuing to lay on fresh Remolade lukewarm every Day
till the Hoof be softened, and recover its natural shape, and the Horse be
freed from his Lameness.

If after all the Hoof, especially the inside Quarter, remain still shrunk, you
must take out the Sole, and cleave the Frush in the middle with a Fleam,
piercing to the Pastern, fill the Cleft with a great number of Bolsters,
besmeared with a mixture of equal parts of Tar, Honey, and Turpentine boiled
together, observing in the mean time, that the Bolsters must not be put into
the Frush till the Foot be dressed, and the Splents laid on; after which the
Cleft must be filled with the Bolsters, which will produce a better effect,
than if they were put into the Foot; for the Cleft will be kept wide, the
shrunk Quarter restored; and at last a new Sole will strengthen and support it,
if the Shoe be carefully set on.

CHAP. CIII. Of Wounds.
THere are some Wounds so slight, that the Cure consists only in keeping them
clean; and there are others so painful, that the neglect of 'em is always
attended with the utter ruin of the Horse, whereas if they be carefully
dressed, according to the best Method, they neither lessen his Beauty nor
Goodness: I make no mention of Mortal Wounds, since it would be an useless
waste of Time to attempt the Cure of 'em. To proceed regularly, you must in the
first place consider diligently the nature of the Wound, and whether it was
made with Pike or Sword, or with a Bullet. It Is also to be observed, that
Wounds in the Flesh are more easily cured, than those that break or bruise the
Sinews, Tendons, or Bone, especially if they be in a Joint, where they are
seldom or never Curable: Nor would I advise any Man to undertake the Cure of a
Horse shot through the Body with a Musquet-Bullet, since the Event is always
uncertain, and the Charges extremely great. Wounds are very troublesome in hot
Weather, because the Flies or other Insects breed a Corruption in 'em, which is
often attended with fatal Consequences, such as a Gangrene or Mortification;
and though cold Weather be free from that Inconveniency, it retards the Cure, and
hinders the closing of the Wound. The old and usual Method of Cure is so
tedious, that it will not be improper to spend some time in the consideration
of this Subject, and to propose certain Maxims on which the true way of
proceeding in these Cases is grounded.

First, Then it must be considered, that a Horse's Flesh is extremely subject
to Corruption, and to grow foul upon the least Contusion, which obstructs and
prolongs the Cure of a Wound, since the corrupted Flesh must be separated and
fall away before the Wound can be closed. It Is plain from this Maxim, that a
Wound must be prob'd very gently, and as seldom as possible; the Probes of
Aromatick-Wood, such as Juniper or Rosemary, that are used in Italy, are
certainly very good, but they must be prepared long before you use 'em, that
they may have time to dry.

Those that are made of Silver are best for deep Wounds, and those of Lead may
be put into Setons, instead of the Strings that are commonly used for that
purpose, for Lead never heats the Part.

Secondly, A Wound must be always kept clean, and freed from corrupt Flesh,
which must be consumed with Powders. The Proud-Flesh must be kept down with
Bandages, especially if it be not firm, and if the Situation of the Part be
convenient; or if that Method be impracticable, it may be either burnt or
consumed with Powders. If the Wound be not too near a Bone, you must not be
afraid of eating too deep, or cutting away too much of the naughty Flesh,
provided you neither cut a Sinew nor Tendon; for a Horse's Flesh grows easily
and quickly but that which comes too fast, is almost always bad; and it is
better to cut or burn it, than to eat it away with Powders.

Thirdly, In all great Wounds you must make a revulsion in the beginning, that
is, you must divert the course of the Humors, and prevent their falling upon
the Wounded Part. The revulsion is to be performed by Bleeding, without either
Trouble or Charge, which allays the heat of the Humors, lessens the redundant
quantity of 'em, moderates the impetuosity of their course; and if they be
corrupt and putrified, it eases Nature of a part of so troublesome a Load; and
for these and other Reasons, it might be justly affirmed in the general, that
Bleeding seasonably administered is more effectual in this case than the best
Restringent, and all other Remedies whatsoever.

If the Horse be fat, you must never forget to regulate his Diet, for you can
never err in abridging the quantity of his Nourishment; and if the Wound be
large, let him neither eat Oats nor Hay, but only a little moistened Bran.

Notwithstanding the usefulness of Bleeding two or three times at the
beginning, it must not be repeated too often, for several Reasons too long to
be inserted here, One of the most important Rules to be observed in the Cure of
Wounds, is that they ought never, or as seldom as possible, to be washed with
pure Water; the moistness of which retards the Cure extremely, by fomenting and
increasing the natural moistness of the Flesh, which must be dried before the
Wound can be healed. And therefore when you have occasion to wash a Wound,
instead of Water, make use of warm Wine, Urine, or the Water of a Smith's-Forge
lukewarm, to scour away the filthiness and corruption that sticks in it.

After the Wound is cleans'd, 'twill be very convenient to wash it with the
Second Water, which allays the Itching, takes away the Heat, promotes the
drying of the Flesh, and prevents its Swelling.

Fourthly, You must not suffer the Horse to lick himself, for the Tongue of
those Animals poisons their Wounds, and absolutely hinders the Cure of 'em; and
besides; he must be restrained from rubbing the Wound against any hard thing,
that may bruise the Flesh, which in that case must be separated before the
Wound can be healed.

Fifthly, It Is to be observed, that you must never proceed to Suppuration, if
the Humor can either be dissolved or repelled, especially in Parts that are
full of Sinews and Ligaments, or near the Bones, because the Matter that is
generated, weakens the Part, and oftentimes leaves a Deformity, or not easily
resolvable Tumor; and if it be near a Bone, the Matter corrupts some part of
it; and consequently it must be exfoliated, that is, the corrupt Part must be
separated. From whence it appears; that we ought always, in the first place, to
try the efficacy of Repellents, otherwise called Restringents, which have a
Power and Faculty to repel and dissolve the Humors that flow too abundantly to
the Wound. Physicians forbid the use of these Remedies on certain occasions, as
when a Tumor is Critical, proceeding from an effort of Nature, to ease an
internal and nobler Part, though by endangering a less considerable Member, when
it is seated in the Emunctories or Organs of Secretion, when the Tumor is
caused by the biting of a Venomous Creature, or when the Matter is thick and
tough, or too deeply rooted, and as it were glu'd to the Part: But though
repelling Remedies must not be used in those Cases, we must endeavor to
dissolve the Swelling and diffipate the Matter, by applying Remedies that are
endu'd with a Power to attenuate, heat, and dissolve the Humors before we
proceed to Suppuration.

Sixthly, If the Wound be accompanied with a great Contusion, the Cure will be
more tedious, for the bruised Flesh must putrify and fall away, and its
separation must be hastened by Manual Operation, or by the Application of
Caustics; but the surest and safest Method is to make use of Instruments, which
are easily managed and guided.

Seventhly, The cure of round or circular Wounds is always attended with so
much difficulty, that to facilitate the Work, they ought to be cut into a long
Figure.

Eighthly, A Wound ought to be carefully covered, for the Air retards the Cure;
and for that purpose it is very convenient to make use of a Lamb's-Skin, in
those Parts of the Body where it can be conveniently applied, and in all
others, to cover the Wound with Tow, which must be cut and beaten, that it may
stick the faster.

Ninthly, The Lips of a Wound can never be closed or reunited, so long as they
are Callous; and therefore you may rub them with the Golden Ointment, mixed with
Butter of Antimony, that was never washed or precipitated in Water. This
Mixture will promote the closing of the Bones by destroying the Callus; but
since they are sometimes so large and hard, that such Remedies are not able to
consume 'em; they must be cut off, or rather Lanc'd and Gash'd with a Fleam or
red-hot Knife, which will hasten the forming of a Cicatrice. As soon as you
attempt the Cure of a Wound, shave the Hair very close about two Fingers
breadth round the place, and keep it always neat, clean, and supple, that the
Skin may be easily stretched, in order to the joining of the Lips of the Wound.

Simple Wounds made by the Saddle, or otherwise, if they be not of any
considerable depth, are healed by washing 'em with Urine or warm Wine, and
afterward strewing 'em with the Powder of an old Rope, or Flax cut very small;
but if the Wound be somewhat large 'twill be convenient to substitute the
Second Water instead of warm Wine and Urine, for it allays the Itching, and
hastens the Cure. And to consume the Proud-Flesh, which is usually very
troublesome, you may apply White-Vitriol in Powder, or rather Colcothar, which
is more effectual; Colcothar is only Vitriol burnt, till it grow red.

Sometimes a Saddle-Gall degenerates into a hard Knot called a Sitfast; the
usual Method of Farriers is to anoint it with Oil of Nuts, mixed with an equal
quantity of Water, or with Hog's-Lard or Tallow, till it fall away of it self,
which requires a very long time; and afterward the Sore may be washed with the
Second Water, and for want of that with warm Wine, and strewn with Bran, and
by the constant use of these Applications it will be insensibly healed.

But the Sitfast will fall away more easily and speedily, if you hold a lighted
Candle over it, letting the melted Tallow drop upon the Knob, and after it is
separated, wash the Sore with warm Wine, and the Second Water, or Urine, and
anoint it slightly with old Salt-Butter, strewing upon it the Powder of an old
Rope.

The Butter supplies the place of a Detergent, by keeping the Sore clean, and
quickly brings it to a Cicatrice. I have several times seen a Gangreen,
occasioned by a neglected Sitfast, and always observed, that the Horses died
very speedily.

The surest way to remove a Sitfast, is to rub it with the Ointment of Beetles,
or for want of that with some good Retoire, holding a hot Bar of Iron near the
Part, as soon as the Retoire is laid on, and renewing the Application three
Days together. One Application of a Caustic Ointment will produce the same
Effect; and thus you may prevent those troublesome Accidents that are usually
occasioned by the long continuance of a Sitfast. If the Wound be so large and
deep that it must be Tented, as it usually happens in the Thighs, Withers, and
other parts of the Body, a simple Tent of salted Hog's-Lard will be sufficient,
unless it be necessary to keep the Wound open; in which case, to avoid large
Incisions, which cannot be performed without difficulty, and are never free
from danger, instead of Tents you must use a Prepared Sponge, which will open
the Wound without Incision, and discover the bottom of it. This Method is of
excellent use when the Wound is in those Parts of the Body that are full of
Sinews or Tendons, or when the flowing of the Blood hinders you from seeing
what you ought to cut.

How to prepare a Sponge for the opening of Wounds.
Take a fine Sponge washed clean, tied about very hard with Pack-thread, and
wrapped in wet Paper; then lay it in a hollow place in the midst of the Hearth,
covering it with hot Ashes and live Coals over the Ashes; leave it there to dry
for the space of a quarter of an Hour, or longer; after which take it out, and
when it is Cold untie it, and cut it with a Knife into what form you please:
Then besmearing it with a Ripening or Digestive Ointment, to prevent its
sticking to the Flesh, thrust it into the bottom of the Wound; the next Day
draw it out with your Pincers, and you will find it much swollen, and the Hole
sufficiently widen'd without hurting the Sinews and Tendons, which could not
have been done by Incision: But if the Sponge be not sufficient to open a Wound
that is very foul and full of dead Flesh, provided it be not under the Foot,
incorporate two Ounces of Sublimate in Powder, with half a Pound of melted Wax,
and dip a very fine Sponge in that Mixture, till it has sucked up as much as it
can contain; then lay it in a Press two Days and two Nights; after which you
may cut it into the form of Tents, and it will both open the Wound, and produce
the effect of a Cautery. If you would make it stronger, add an Ounce of Arsenic
in fine Powder, mixing it with melted Wax, and the two Ounces of Sublimate,
which will make an excellent Cautery for Quitter-bones, to extirpate the
Tendon, or any other corrupt Matter: But if the Sore be under the Foot,
occasioned by a Nail or Stub, or any other Accident, the Sponge prepared with
Sublimate or Arsenic must not be applied lest the Humors should be driven
upwards to the Cronet, where they might occasion great Disorders. In such cases
you may use a Sponge dipped in Wax alone, pressed, and cut into Tents as before,
which will open a Wound, but not so effectually as the former, since it
contains not any Caustic Ingredients. However, it has this advantage, that it
neither causes Pain, nor hurts the Nerves, and is very convenient for
preventing the growth of Proud-Flesh in the Feet; for when the Part is bound up
carefully with Splents, the Sponge being swelled by its Heat and Moisture,
presses and keeps down the Flesh.

If the Hole be of a sufficient wideness, you may use Tents of Hog's-Lard,
which cleanse the Part and heal the Wound, without bruising the Flesh; but the
usual Tents, if they be not very carefully and exactly made up, retard the
Cure, instead of promoting it. It Is a very important, though little observed,
Rule, That the Operation of external Remedies should be assisted by a regular
Administration of inward Medicines. Some commend Purgation for the Cure of
great Wounds, which, in my Opinion, is a very preposterous Method, for it
produces a quite contrary effect to the design of the Prescriber, by
occasioning a Defluxion of Humors upon the Part, that are only loosened, and
put in Motion, but not evacuated by the Medicine.

CHAP. CIV. Cinnabar Pills for Wounds, Worms, Mange, and Farcin, and for the
shedding of the Hair from the Head and Neck.
TAke of the finest and cleanest Assa-foetida, Bay Berries of Provence or
Italy, and Cinnabar, all in fine Powder, of each a Pound, incorporate 'em in a
Brass-Mortar, with a sufficient quantity of strong Aqua-vitae, and make up the
Mass into Pills weighing fourteen Drams each, which must be laid in a
convenient place to dry. Give two of these Pills to the Wounded Horse, once in
two Days, or once every Day, till he has taken eight or ten, according to the
greatness of the Wound; and that he may swallow 'em the more easily, you may
give 'em in a Pint, or three half Pints of Wine; making him stand Bridled two
Hours before, and as long after the taking of every Dose.

These Pills may be kept twenty Years: They promote the Cure of a Wound, by
purifying the Blood, and resisting Corruption. They contribute also to the Cure
of Gauls and the Farcin, and drive Worms out of the Body. This Remedy is highly
useful in an Army, where the Wounds of Horses must be cured with all
Expedition; and it may be truly said, that the effects of it are wonderful, and
almost incredible.

Sometimes the Hair falls away from the Head and Neck, by reason of the
excessive heat of the inward Parts. The usual Remedy in this case is Bleeding,
but since that alone is not sufficient, it will be very convenient both to
administer a Dose of these Pills for three Days together, and to rub the bare
places twice a Day with good Limewater. If the Disease continue still, repeat
the whole process, and afterward give your Horse Flower of Brimstone in
moistened Bran, beginning with a small quantity and augmenting the Dose by
degrees, till it arise to half a handful every Day; during which time you may
ride your Horse. For the Cure of those eating Scabs that are so troublesome and
hard to be rooted out of the Mane and Tail, after you have Bled and Purged your
Horse, give him three or four Doses of two Pills each, and the external
Application of Limewater will quickly perform the remaining part of the Cure;
if not, you must reiterate the whole course. The same Pills may be profitably
Administered to Horses that are troubled with running Sores in their Legs, or
the Pains, Warts, or Bunches, Quitter-bones, and such like stubborn Distempers;
for they facilitate the Cure by intercepting and diverting the Humor that
causes and foments the Disease.

After the description of those Pills which are of such excellent use in the
Cure of Wounds, I could not forbear subjoining a brief Account of their other
Virtues, and I hope this digression will neither be useless nor unwelcome to
those Readers who are willing to be Instructed. And to satisfy those Critical
Gentlemen who may peruse this Book with a design rather to pick Quarrels with
the Author, than to improve their Knowledge, I am willing to own, that the end
of this Chapter had perhaps been a more proper place for the description of
these Pills than the beginning of it; but withal I must beg leave to acquaint
'em, that I am not so much in love with Formality, as to give my self the
trouble of making an alteration of so little Importance.

Since Tents are necessary in the Cure of all sorts of Wounds, and those that
are made of Hog's-Lard are very convenient for most of 'em, it will not be
improper to give a short hint of their Preparation and Use. Cut the Lard into
long Pieces, and put one of 'em into the Wound; when you draw it out again you
will find it half melted, and must suffer it to cool, that it may recover its
usual firmness and consistency, after which put it in again, if it be not grown
too short.

If the Wound be foul, or the Flesh corrupt, it must be washed with the
Yellow-Water at every Dressing; but if you perceive that neither that, nor any
other of the usual Detergents are sufficient to cleanse the Wound, or if it be
pestered with Proud-Flesh, add an Ounce of Arsenic in fine Powder, to the whole
Dose of the Limewater that shall be described in the following Chapter. And if
even that be too weak, you must burn the whole Wound with a red-hot Plate of
Iron; for if you take care not to touch the Skin, Tendons, and Sinews, there
will not the least mark of Burning appear after the Cure. As soon as you have
given the Fire, anoint the burnt Part with Oil of Bay, covering the whole Wound
(if possible) with Flax, and continue the use of the Oil, which must be applied
warm, till the Scab or Escar be loosened, and ready to fall off; after which
'twill be more convenient to anoint the Part with Basilicum or Tallow, till the
Scab be quite separated, and you will find the Skin fair underneath, without
the least mark of Burning; for this Method of giving the Fire excels the best
Applications of Powders and Ointments.

The common Detergent and cleansing Remedies are, in my Opinion, too weak for
Horses. They are usually composed of Honey, Vinegar, Bean-flower,
Barley-flower, the Juices of Plantane and Agrimony, Flower-de-luce Roots,
Turpentine, Rosin, etc. These Medicines are only Medicamenta levioris
Armaturae, with respect to the Wounds of which I Am treating: But Unguentum
Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, and the Neat-herds Ointment, are very proper in this
case. We must not play with Horses Wounds, nor vainly expect to Cure 'em with
such feeble Remedies as the Golden Ointment, the Plaster de gratia Dei, and
Betony-Plaister; for it is certain, that Salt-Butter is more effectual for
keeping Wounds clean, than all those Compositions. And therefore the surest
Method is to wash the Wound with Urine, or the Yellow-Water, and afterward to
anoint it with Salt-Butter, strewing the Powder of Old-Ropes upon it: And to
apply Aegyptiacum, if there be a great deal of corrupt Flesh.

The Pain occasioned by the Application of Aegyptiacum ought not to be made an
Argument against the use of it, since 'twas never observed, that any Horse
pined away on that occasion: And to give the Reader a clearer view of the
nature of that usual Detergent of Horses, I thought fit to subjoin the
Description of it.

Unguentum Aegyptiacum.
Take a Pound of common Honey, and a Pint of Aqua-vitae, boil 'em over a gentle
Fire in a glazed Pot or Basin, stirring 'em frequently with a Wooden Slice,
till they be perfectly united, and the Aqua-vitae disappear. Then add two
Ounces of Burnt-Allom, beaten small, and four Ounces of Powder of Verdigrease
searc'd, stirring and incorporating 'em with the other Ingredients. At last put
in an Ounce of Sublimate in fine Powder, stirring and boiling as before, till
the whole be reduced to a due Consistency: After which remove the Pot from the
Fire, and continue stirring till the Ointment be cold, which must be kept in a
covered Pot for use.

I have already communicated a description of Schmit's Ointment, which I use
instead of Aegyptiacum, when I have none of the latter ready Prepared; for it
cleanses and consolidates; and some Farriers, to whom I gave it, having tried
it on certain occasions, have wholly laid aside the use of Aegyptiacum.

The Doctor's Ointment, and the Ointment Apostolorum are also very good, and
produce almost the same Effects; only the Doctor's Ointment is stronger than
Aegyptiacum.

When you have occasion for a more powerful Cleanser, especially when there are
any signs of a Gangrene or Putrefaction, mix two Ounces of Aquafortis with the
Aegyptiacum. If you desire a Caustic to eat away corrupt Flesh, exerting its
Force only upon that, without hurting the Nerves or Muscles, you may safely
apply that which I described under the Name of the Liquid Caustic, putting it
into the Sore with a little Cotton, and keeping it in till the Part grow white
and mortified. It Is to be observed, that the Liquid Caustic never produces any
considerable Effect when it is simply applied to the Flesh, but it operates with
at least a double efficacy, when it is pressed on with a Bandage: You may renew
the Application till you perceive, that the Medicine has sufficiently
penetrated the Part, and after the falling off of the Scab, if it be not large
enough, you may touch the Part again with the Caustic, to extirpate all the
corrupt Flesh, and make the Sore fair and clean. As often as you dress a Wound
or Sore, the surest way is to wash it with the Second Water, or rather with the
Lime or Yellow Water, or with Black-Soap mixed with unslak'd Lime, which
cleanses very effectually. If you put in a Tent anointed with Aegyptiacum, to
cleanse the bottom of a Sore, it will be of a green Color when you take it
out, which is not an effect of the Matter contained in the Sore, but of the
Verdigrease that enters the Composition of the Medicine.

Sometimes after old and neglected Sores, especially in the Feet, the Bones
remain bare, without any Flesh to cover 'em; in this case you must have
recourse to Sarcotic Medicines, that is, such as are endu'd with a Power to
make the Flesh grow, as Aloes, Sarcocolla, and Birthwort, which may be either
applied in form of Powders, or mixed with Turpentine, Honey of Roses, or some
other proper Ointment. Nothing contributes more effectually to make Flesh grow
upon a Bone than Monsieur Curtis's Ointment, if it be melted and mixed with a
like quantity of Oil-Olive. The following Powder is also of excellent use in
this case.

Take true Dragon's-Blood and fine Bole-Armenic, of each half an Ounce; Mastic,
Olibanum, and Sarcocolla, of each three Drams; Aloes, Round-Birthwort, and
Roots of Flower-de-Luce, of each a Dram and half, mix and make a Powder. It may
be applied alone with very good Success, but the best way is to mix it with
Syrup of Roses, Turpentine, or Juice of Wormwood. It makes the Flesh grow
beyond all expectation; and that which is mixed with Turpentine succeeds best,
and is most proper for the Feet.

When a Wound appears fair and clean, the Cure may be easily completed with
the usual Drying Powders; but great care must be taken to keep the Lips clean
and moist, and to clip away the Hair for two Finger's breadth round the Sore.
But since the speediness of the Cure is of great Importance in an Army, where
Gnats and other Insects are so troublesome, and the Sores so very apt to
putresie: I know not a more effectual Remedy in those cases than the Powder of
Sympathy, which produces such wonderful effects, that they who either have not
tried it, or are not capable of so nice an enquiry, cannot be persuaded that
they proceed from natural causes.

The Sympathetic Powder.
Take a convenient quantity of good common Vitriol, (the Roman is best, the
German may be also used, but that of Cyprus is not at all fit for this purpose)
put it in a flat-bottom'd Earthen Pan, and expose it in the open Air to the
hottest Rays of the Sun, removing it always at Night, and in moist Weather,
till the Vitriol be Calcined and reduced to a white Calx. In the mean time you
must stir it every Day with a Wooden-slice, for it must never be touched with
Iron, which is apt to weaken it, and deprive it of its Virtue, especially when
the Sun has opened its Body, and begun the Calcination, the time of which is
uncertain. As soon as you perceive, that it has acquired a perfectly white
Color, take it out of the Pan, and preserve it carefully in a dry place, for
this is the true Powder of Sympathy. Take a Cloth stained with some Blood from
the Wound, and strew this Powder upon it, then lay it in a temperate place,
powd'ring it every Day; and if there be Matter in the Wound, receive some of it
upon a Cloth, and strew it with the same Powder.

If the Wound require Suppuration, lay the Cloth in a moist place; if to be
dried in a dry place; and if you are obliged, by reason of the depth of the
Wound, to make use of Tents, put 'em in clean and dry, and strew the Powder on
'em when you take 'em out, continuing to observe the same Method, till the
Wound be healed. I have seen the Solution of this Powder applied to Men with
extraordinary Success for Wrenches and Sinew-strains; for many Persons have
been cured very speedily and more effectually, than if they had used all other
Remedies, by binding a Linen Cloth, five or six times doubled, and dipped in
this Solution, about the Part, and renewing it twice a Day. It Is true, this is
not the effect of Sympathy, but those who are cured by it are very well
satisfied, though they are ignorant of the cause to which they owe their
recovery; and it is certainly more effectual in these cases, than either the
Imperial or Angelic-Water, or that of the Queen of Hungary, and even than all
Balsams, Oils, and Ointments whatsoever. By the same Method you may cure Horses
of such dangerous Wrenches and Strains in the Houghs, that make 'em unfit for
Service, till after the succesless trial of a vast number of Remedies, you are
at last obliged to give the Fire; but since some Men will not be persuaded of
the incredible effects of this Remedy, and others cannot procure it when they
have occasion to use it, I shall communicate the description of an Ointment for
Wounds that will advance the Cure more in one Day, than other Ointments do in a
considerable space of Time.

CHAP. CV. The Hermit's Ointment for Wounds in Horses.
TAke the green Leaves of Long-Birthwort, Paul's-Betony, and Sage, of each a
handful and half; Sanicle, one handful; Roots of Marshmallows and Comfrey,
dried in the Shade, of each an Ounce; slice the Roots very small, and boil 'em
in a Skillet with a Pint of Cream, for the space of a quarter of an Hour; after
which add the Leaves chopped small, and boil 'em so long till you can perceive
nothing in the Skillet but a pure Butter, produced by the boiling of the Cream;
then strain it out into a Pot, and put into the same Skillet a quarter of a
Pound of the Lard of a Hog fed with Acorns, cut into Slices, and mixed with the
remaining Herbs and Roots; boil all together about a quarter of an Hour, and
strain out the melted Lard upon the Butter; in the next place boil two Ounces
of Oil-Olive in the Skillet, with the same Herbs and Roots, for the space of a
quarter of an Hour, and strain it out into the Pot with the Butter and melted
Lard; after which squeeze out all the Juice and Fat of the Herbs and Roots in
the same Pot, and while they are still hot, add an Ounce of melted Tar, and an
ounce and a half of Burnt-Allom in Powder, incorporating the whole Mass, and
stirring it till it be cold. When you have occasion to apply this Ointment,
melt a little of it in a Spoon, and with a soft Pencil anoint the Wound very
lightly, covering it gently with Flax, or Powder of old Ropes, and renewing the
Application once a Day. The Wound will be quickly healed by this Method, if
Nature, the principal Operator, assist the efficacy of the Remedy, by Sodering,
Gluing, Nourishing, Preserving, and Restoring the Part to its proper
Temperament and Condition.

Besides the Application of the Ointment, you must consider diligently, whether
there be any unnatural or extraneous Substance in the Wound, which must be
taken out; and if you perceive Excrescencies of spongy Flesh, you must either
give the Fire, or consume 'em with White-Vitriol, dissolved in Spirit of Wine,
which is of admirable use in this case; and after the Scab is fallen, or rather
the Swelling asswag'd, apply the Ointment. If you have occasion to cleanse any
part in the Wound, which you cannot see, and dare not burn for fear of hurting
the Sinews, you may use the following Water, which is an admirable Cleanser.

Limewater, or the Yellow-Water.
Those who love to disguise Trifles with hard and lofty Names, call this the
Phagedenical-Water: You may easily prepare it thus; Take two or three Pounds of
unslak'd Lime newly made, put it into a large Basin of fine Tin, and pour upon
it by degrees five Quarts of Rainwater; then set the Basin in a convenient
place for two Days, stirring the Water often; after which suffer the Lime to
fall to the bottom, pour off the Water by inclination, strain it through brown
Paper, and to three Pints of it, add half a Pint of good Spirit of Wine, an
Ounce of Spirit of Vitriol, and as much Corrosive Sublimate in fine Powder. Mix
and preserve it for use in a Glass-Vial. If you perceive a great deal of
Corruption in the Wound, or any appearance of a Gangrene, add to the whole
quantity of the Water an Ounce of Arsenic, diminishing the Dose proportionably,
according to the quantity of the Water. I shall take this occasion to give a
brief Account of the signs and cure of a Gangrene.

Of a Gangrene.
A Gangrene may be considered in two different respects, for in its Progress
it is only a tendency to Mortification, whereas it ends in a Sphace^^s or
confirmed Mortification. The signs of it are a sudden loss of Sense, and
consequently an insensibility of Pain, lividness, and afterward blackness of
the Part affected, a noisome Smell resembling that of a dead Carcass, and an
extraordinary softness in the Part, that was before hard and distended. The
Cure of a confirmed Gangrene is impossible, and ought not to be attempted; but
while it is in the beginning, and even in its progress, the Case is not
altogether desperate.

As soon as you perceive any part of a Wound to be seized with a Gangrene, you
must immediately scarifie it to the quick with your Fleam, wash it with Sea or
Salt Water, and cover the whole Wound with Flax, steeped and soaked in the
strongest Limewater, dressing it twice a Day after the same manner.

A Detergent and Cleansing Water for a Gangrene.
If the Limewater be too weak, you may prepare another thus; Take crude Allom,
one Pound; German-Copperas grossly beaten, half a Pound; Verdigrease in fine
Powder, three Ounces; boil all together in a Gallon of strong Vinegar, to the
consumption of one half; then, without straining the Liquor, reserve it for use
in a Glass-Vial. The use of this Water is the same with that of Limewater;
shake the Bottle as often as you have occasion to apply the Liquor; and if,
after the first Application, you find that it is too weak, add two Ounces of
strong Aquafortis to each Quart, shaking 'em well together.

Another Cleansing-Water.
Take very strong White Wind, two Pints and a half; Aqua-vitae, half a Pint;
Spirit of Vitriol, two Ounces; mix them in a Glass-Bottle, capable of
containing two Quarts; and an Hour after add two Ounces of Verdigrease, in fine
Powder; White-Vitriol, four Ounces; and Green Copperas, one Pound, the two last
grossly beaten; stop the Bottle very close with a Cork, and Hog's-Bladder, then
let it stand in Infusion on hot Embers twenty four Hours, shaking it every six
Hours; after which preserve it for use, shaking it every time, and applying it
according to the Directions prescribed for the use of Limewater. It may be
kept three Months without losing its Virtue.

The greatest simple Wound may be quickly cured, by a prudent and diligent
observation of the Method and Directions prescribed in this and the preceding
Chapters.

When a Horse's back is Gaul'd, during a Journey, the best way is to take out a
little of the stuffing of the Panel over the Swelling, then sow a piece of
white and very soft Leather on the inside of the Panel, anoint it with
Salt-Butter, and every Evening wipe it clean, rubbing it till it grow soft, and
anointing it again with Butter; or, for want of that, with Grease. Wash the
Swelling or Hurt every Evening with cold Water and Soap, and strew it with
Salt, till the Horse be Sadl'd in the Morning.

The Sea-rush that is usually wrapped about Glasses that are brought in Chests
from Venice, is of admirable efficacy for the cure of Saddle-Gauls, during a
Journey. It Is soft, and consequently does not bruise the Flesh; and its
saltness quickly heals the Sore, if a large quantity of it be thrust into that
part of the Panel that touches the Gaul'd place.

Sometimes Coach-Horses are gaul'd in the Breast by their Harness; and the Part
is either Sore, or rises in hard Bunches, especially in Rainy Weather. In this
case you must shave off the Hair very close about the Sore place, and then rub
the whole Breast with Water and Black-soap; or for want of that with any other
kind of Soap, chafing it gently into a Lather, for the space of a quarter of an
Hour; after which wash that part of the Breast, which is usually covered by the
Petrel, with Salt Water, suffering it to dry up of it self. Then look upon the
Harness, and if the Gauling be occasioned by any hardness in the Leather, you
must either take it away, or sow on little Bolsters to hinder the Harness from
rubbing on the Sore place. In Rainy Weather, especially in Harvest, the Crupper
of the Horse is usually Gaul'd, or at least the places that are covered with
the Harness are swollen, fretted, and covered with a sort of Scurf. Rub the
Part with Black-soap, and a little Water, till the Soap be turned to Froth,
chasing it in with your Hand, and letting it dry upon the Part.

By the same Method you may quickly cure a Sore, occasioned by the taking away
of a Sitfast.

How to stanch Bleeding.
The cutting of a large Vessel by a great Gash or Wound, is usually followed by
so violent a Flux of Blood, that the ordinary Methods are not sufficient to
stop it. In this case the Powder of Sympathy is an excellent Remedy; but those
who cannot procure it, or are not willing to use it, must endeavor, if they
can, to lay bare, and bind up the cut Vessel, which is the furest way to stop
the Blood. If that cannot be done, the Orifice of the Vessel must be stopped with
a piece of Roman-Vitriol, and the Wound bound up, if the Situation of the Part
admit of a Bandage; if not, the usual Remedy is to Sear the Part with a hot
Iron, for nothing stops Bleeding more effectually than the Application of an
actual Cautery, or Searing-Iron; but those who are afraid of Burning, may try
the Success of other Remedies.

For Example, Take equal quantities of Colcothar, or Vitriol Calcined till it
grow red; Frankincense, and Aloes, in Powder; mix 'em with Whites of Eggs, to
the thickness of Honey, and add a convenient quantity of the Hair of a Hare cut
small.

If this Remedy prove ineffectual, add to it Dragon's-Blood, Man's-Blood dried,
Plaster, and Calcined Vitriol, either all together, or only part of 'em, which
will certainly stanch the Blood, if it be applied in a sufficient quantity.

And the same effect is produced by the Ligature, which Surgeons call the
revulsive Bandage.

After the Blood is stopped, you must suffer the Wound to remain untouched, for
the space of three Days, that you may know whether the Vessel be exactly
closed. The Simples that are indu'd with a Virtue to stop and prevent Bleeding,
are the Roots and Leaves of Nettles; the Bark of a Pomgranate and Pine Tree;
the Leaves of Plantane and Willows, Services, or Sorb-Apples; burnt Galls,
quenched in Vinegar; Beanflower, Starch, Soot, Litharge, Ceruss, Vitriol,
Colcothar, Allom, a Sponge dried, and reduced to Powder, and dry
Coriander-seeds. But in case of necessity, there cannot be a more pleasant and
effectual Remedy than Caustics or Cauteries, either in Powder or any other
form, which raise a Scab or Eschar that stops the Passage; and I have seen
Powder of Arsenic applied on certain occasions, which quickly makes a large
Eschar. When the Scab falls off, great care must be taken to prevent a new Flux
of Blood; and consequently the Wound must neither be irritated by sharp
Remedies, nor by putting in of a Probe. You may easily compose a Powder of the
abovementioned Simples to stop Bleeding; for example, take the dry Bark of a
Pomgranate, Roman-Vitriol, and Allom, of each an equal quantity; mix and apply
it to the Wound.

CHAP. CVI. Of a Horse that is Wrung or Hurt in the Withers.
HAving treated of the Cure of Simple Wounds, I shall in the next place proceed
to consider those that are occasioned or preceded by Tumors.

If your Horse be hurt, by the biting of another Horse, on the Neck or near the
Withers, keep the Part clean, and wash it with Limewater or Aqua-vitae, or
chafe it with Water and Soap, or wash it with the Second Water, observing the
Directions prescribed for the Cure of Wounds. If there be only a simple
Contusion, use Aqua-vitae; and if the Wound be small, anoint it with Oil of
Walnuts, mixed with Red-Wine, and applied cold. If the Horse have large and
fleshy Withers the Cure will be more difficult than in those who have nothing
but Skin and Bone, by reason of the Moisture contained in the Flesh, and
increased by the Phlegmatic Humor furnished by Nature to facilitate the motion
of the Joints; for the redundant Humidity occasions the growth of Proud-Flesh,
hinders the drying of the Part, and makes the Cure difficult and tedious.

Sometimes a hurt in the Withers is occasioned by the largeness of the
Saddle-Bows which bruise and crush the Flesh; and in that case it is the usual
Custom of Farriers to apply a Restringent Charge of Powder of Bole-Armenic,
Vinegar, and Whites of Eggs. I approve of that which follows, and dare affirm,
that it will cure the Hurt, if it be not very great.

Beat the Whites of six Eggs with a piece of Allom almost as big as an Egg, for
the space of half a quarter of an Hour without intermission, till the whole be
reduced to a very thick Scum or Froth, with which you must rub the Swelling,
and afterward cover it with the rest of the Froth, suffering it to dry upon
the Part. Ten or twelve Hours after repeat the Application, neither must you be
surprised, if the Heat and Swelling still remain; for a repelling and an
astringent Remedy, ought not only to drive the Humors from one part to
another, but to expel it through the Pores, by pressing and binding the Part that
was dilated by the Humor derived from the Veins.

If the Hurt be great, you must begin the Cure with letting the Horse Blood in
the Neck, and the Bleeding must be repeated two Days after, to prevent the
impetuous descent of the Humors upon the Part affected; but if there be only a
small Hurt, you may safely omit the letting of Blood. If the Contusion
occasioned by the Saddle-bows, be followed by a Tumor and Inflammation, anoint
the Sore place with the Duke's Ointment, and cover the Withers with a
Lamb-Skin; after you have bathed them with Limewater, prepared without
Sublimate; for that Remedy does very powerfully allay the Inflammation; and if
there be no Matter generated, may alone suffice to assuage the Swelling; if
not, apply the Duke's Ointment, and cover the Sore place with a Lamb's-Skin,
laying the Woolly side next the Part, and continue to anoint it thrice every
Day; which Method is infinitely more natural than the Application of
Defensives, which produce no effect if there be a great Swelling and Heat
preceded by a violent Contusion; but if the Swelling continue accompanied with
Heat, Distension, and Beating, so that you have reason to believe, that there
is already Matter generated, or that the Tumor tends to Suppuration, you must
alter your Method, and wash off the Ointment with lukewarm Oxycrate, mixed with
a handful of Salt; and as soon as the Part is dry, chafe it with an Ointment
made of half a Pound of Populeon, a quarter of a Pound of Honey, and the like
quantity of Black-Soap mixed cold, and diluted with a large Glass of Spirit of
Wine.

This Ointment being applied gently to prevent a further Contusion of the Part
will dissipate the Humors and take away the Heat; after which the Sore place
must be covered with a Lamb's-Skin to promote the Operation of the Ointment.
Note, That the Application must be renewed at least four times a Day, to divert
the Humor, and prevent any danger of Corruption.

In the mean time give your Horse a Dose of Cinnabar-Pills for two Days
together, keeping him Bridled two Hours before, and as long after every Dose;
two Days after administer the Pills again, repeating the same Dose from time to
time; for they are endu'd with a wonderful efficacy to assist Nature in the
Expulsion and Concoction of the Matter contained in the Withers; from whence
it is plain, that they are very proper to promote the Cure, if you persist in
the use of 'em, till you perceive the Matter to be already generated.

To draw and ripen a Swelling.
When Nature requires your assistance to digest the Humor and hasten
Suppuration, if you cannot procure the abovementioned Ointments, prepare that
which follows.

Take the Powders of Cummin-seed and Linseed, of each an equal quantity, boil
'em in Cow's-Milk, with a sufficient quantity of Pigeon's-Dung in Powder,
rather too much than too little, and make a Pultess, which will ripen the
Swelling, and assuage the Pain. Or,

Take four Ounces of the Roots of Marshmallows beaten, boil 'em in Water, and
afterward add Leaves of Mallows, and Brankursin, of each a handful. After they
are well boiled, beat 'em to a Mash, adding Oil-Olive and Butter, of each two
Ounces, Flower of Fenugreek-Seed, as much as may suffice to thicken the whole,
and apply it warm to the Part. When you have brought the Tumor to Suppuration,
that is, when the Matter is generated, and ready to be let out, make one or
more Holes in the lower part of the Swelling, with a red-hot Iron, about the
bigness of the end of your Finger, and having pressed out the Matter, dress the
Holes with soft Tents, besmeared with the Duke's Ointment, which will both make
the Tents stick, and prevent an Inflammation. Or you may put in Tents of
Hog's-Lard, reaching from one Hole to the other, and carry on the Suppuration
so long as it shall be necessary; but above all, you must take care to make the
Holes in the lower part of the Swelling, and leave no boggy or hollow place
underneath, that the whole Matter may be evacuated; and if you perceive that
there is some Matter left, or that the Skin is separated from the Flesh below
the Holes, you must immediately pierce the Skin with a red-hot Iron at the end
of the hollow Place; for without that Precaution the Skin would never be united
to the Flesh. Then put in Tents moistened with the Duke's Ointment, from one
Hole to another, to draw out all the Matter. Note, That the Tents must be
rolled hard, lest they hurt or bruise the Part.

Having put in the Tents, you must take care to keep the Swelling moist with
the Duke's Ointment to allay the Inflammation, continuing to dress the Holes,
and to renew the Tents till the Cure be completed. And besides, if there be a
large hollow within, you must inject with a Syringe some of the Waters for
Gunshot Wounds, or the Yellow-Water, if there be a great deal of Putrefaction.

Swellings upon the Withers are sooner cured by this Method than by Incision;
for the Flesh that is cut or touched with the Razor, rots and falls away; the
Part remains deformed, and not unfrequently the Sore is very much enlarged
without necessity.

You may safely use this Method when the bottom of the Sore is sound, and when
the Bones are not infected with any Caries or Corruption. But if you perceive
that there is a Scale to be separated, or a Felander, or such like putrefy'd
Matter sticking to the Bone, the surest way is to cut off all that is
Corrupted; and even the Mane, if there be occasion, without touching the Nerve
that runs along it, discovering at once the bottom of the Sore, and piercing to
the Quick. You must not leave any high or swelling Lips, (...) cut the Sore
sloping; and above all, you must take care to give the Matter a Vent, (...)
keep it from stagnating. The Operation must be heedfully performed, for the
cutting of the Neck-Sinew would certainly spoil the Horse; and therefore you
must carefully separate the corrupt Flesh from the Sinew. Having thus freed the
Sore from all Impurities, and cut off all the corrupt and putrefy'd Flesh,
strew the place with red-hot Ashes taken out of a burning Fire, continuing to
cast on the Ashes till the Blood be stopped. Let the Sore remain untouched till
the next Day, and then wash it with the Water of a Smith's-Forge, lukewarm, or
with warm Wine, Urine, or the Second Water, and powder it again with hot Ashes.
Repeat the same two or three times once in twenty four Hours; after which you
will find the Sore in a very hopeful condition, without Swelling, Heat, or any
other symptom that may retard the Cure; for the Salt contained in the Ashes is
heated and melted by the moistness of the Sore, and being a kind of Alkali, it
destroys the Acid and Corrosive Humor that falls by way of Defluxion upon the
Part, and that being destroyed, the Swelling abates and the Heat vanishes. This
is an excellent Method; but since it is not always easy, nor sometimes possible
to procure Ashes, especially in an Army, you may observe the following
Directions. After you have made the Incision, take a sufficient quantity of
Vitriol or Green Copperas (that of Germany is cheapest) dissolve it in Water,
till the Water be fully saturated, and incapable of dissolving any more; and
with this Solution bathe the Wound or Sore, applying afterward Flax dipped in
the same Water, and binding it on carefully. Forty eight Hours after take off
the Dressing, and if you perceive any Inflammation or Swelling, renew the
Application of the Flax dipped in the Solution of Vitriol, which will certainly
assuage the Heat and Swelling. Then wash the Sore with the Water of a
Smith's-Forge lukewarm, and after that with the Second Water, or with
Limewater, and besmear it with Ox-Gall, covering it very softly with Flax, or
Powder of old Ropes, which being removed the next Day, will leave the Sore fair
and clean. Wash it again with the Second Water, or with Limewater, to allay
the Itching that usually obstructs the Cure, and afterward anoint it with
Ox-Gall, and cover it softly with Flax or Powder of old Ropes, as before,
continuing after the same manner till it be healed. If you perceive any corrupt
or bruised Flesh, apply Spirit of Vitriol, or one of the abovementioned
Caustics, or (which is the surest way) burn the Part, and after the Scab falls
off, anoint it again with Ox-Gall, and continue as before till it be perfectly
healed. To consume Proud-Flesh, since it is not always convenient to apply
Caustics, you may strew it with the Powder of white Vitriol, which will quickly
eat it away.

If the Application of the Ox-Gall do not answer your expectation, you may have
recourse to one of the Ointments prescribed for the Cure of Wounds, especially
the Hermit's Ointment, applying sometimes Aegyptiacum, or Powder of Colcothar
to consume the corrupt Flesh.

I have already intimated, and I cannot too often repeat it, that as soon as
you perceive corrupt Flesh in a Wound or Sore, or fleshy Excrescencies that
rise like Buttons above it; you must burn 'em with a hot Iron, or apply the
Powder of Colcothar; that is, common Vitriol calcined till it grow red; and
after the falling away of a very little Scab, the Wound will remain fair and
clean.

During the cure of Hurts in the Withers, or other Parts of the Body, you may
wash the Part with the Vulnerary Water, which heals, cleanses, and allays the
Itching; and the same Effects are also produced by the Second Water. If these
Ointments be not strong enough, powder the Sore with white Vitriol, and lay a
convenient Ointment over it, continuing to dress it after that manner till the
Flesh be sufficiently firm.

CHAP. CVII. The Vulnerary Water.
It Is to be observed, That the Spirit of Vitriol which is usually sold, is only
Aquafortis mixed with Water; nor can this Cheat be discovered by the common
Method of trying true Spirit of Vitriol; for if you put a piece of blue Paper
into Aquafortis mixed with Water, the Paper will be died red, as if it had been
put into Spirit of Vitriol; and therefore the surest way is to buy the Spirit
of those that distill it, and to prove the Goodness of it, dip a new Pen into
it, and write some Letters on white Paper, then heat the Paper, and that which
makes the blackest Characters is the best Spirit. Having thus made choice of
true Spirit of Vitriol, put a Pint of it into a Glass-Vial, with an Ounce of
good Opium cut into small and very thin slices, let it stand cold twenty four
Hours, during which time it will acquire a brown Color, and you will find a
Sediment at the bottom like Slime; pour off the clear, and keep it for use.

This Water, far from causing any Inflammation, allays and tempers the heat of
a Wound; and besides, it does not occasion any considerable Pain, for the Opium
benumbs the Sense of Feeling, and blunts the sharpness of the Spirit of
Vitriol. It strengthens and promotes the growth of a new Sole, and there cannot
be a better Remedy for Quitter-bones, Pricks with a Nail or Stub,
False-Quarters, Proud-Flesh, Scab'd-Heels, and in one word, for all sorts of
Wounds and Sores, if the Bones do not appear uncovered. It allays the Itching
of Hurts in the Withers and other Parts of the Body, and so prevents the
Inconveniences that are occasioned by tying up the Horse so short, that he
cannot lie down, to hinder him from scrubbing the Sore. If you wash the Part
with this Water every Day, and apply a convenient Ointment, the Wound or Sore
will be quickly healed without that troublesome Itching which retards the Cure.

The Cure of great Wounds is also obstructed by Felanders, which breed in 'em;
and therefore you must burn 'em to the very Bone, and apply a Digestive to
hasten the falling of the Eschar.

If the Vulnerary Water do not cleanse the Wound sufficiently from all
Corruption, dip a little Cotton in the Liquid Caustic, described in the Eighth
Chapter, or in pure Spirit of Salt, and apply it to the part of the Wound that
is to be separated.

Sometimes the ends of the Tendons and Sinews are hurt, and weakened by the
Contusion that accompanies the Wound, or are corrupted by the long continuance
of the Matter, or even by the violence of the Remedies; and in these cases
there remains so much weakness in the Nervous Parts, that the Horse continues
ever afterward less fit for Service than formerly. As soon, therefore, as you
perceive the Wound to be fair and clean, and wholly free from foul and corrupt
Flesh, take two Ounces of Aloes, and one Ounce of Myrrh in Powder, and put them
into a large Mattress, with half a Pint of Spirit of Wine, stopping the Vessel
very close, and setting it on hot Ashes till the Spirit be sufficiently
Impregnated with the Tincture of the Substances; this Tincture being applied
cold on Bolsters of Flax to the Tendons and Nerves, asswages Pain, promotes the
healing of Wounds, destroys Corruption, and prevents a Gangrene, and therefore
it ought to be applied to all sorts of Wounds, when there is any sign or fear
of a Mortification.

The Powder of Lime and Honey, described in the beginning of the following
Chapter, is excellent for incarnating and drying up Wounds; and when they are
almost closed, if there remains no Swelling or Deformity, you may rub the Lips
of the Wound with Unguentum Aureum, mixed with the Emetic or Angelical Powder
once washed, which is of great efficacy to join and renew the Skin, when the
Cure is already brought to such a degree of Perfection, that the Application of
Remedies seems to be altogether useless. I have often with very good Success,
anointed the Scar with Oil of St. John's-wort, which makes a fine smooth
Cicatrice, without the least appearance of any Lips, unevenness, or any other
Deformity, which are the usual effects of the ignorance of the Farrier. If you
have no Angelical Powder, you may use instead of it the Golden Sulphur of
Antimony; or (if that be also wanting) with a little Colcothar, mixed with
Unguentum Aureum, anoint the Callous Lips of the Wound; for these Applications
will take away the Callus, and make a fine Cicatrice.

It Is to be observed, That a Horse will put himself into all manner of Postures
to rub the Wound, when it begins to heal, and sometimes thrust his Head under
his Flank to bite and scrub it. These Inconveniences must be prevented with
all possible Care, lest after you have left the Wound fair and clean, you find
it at your return bloody, foul, and bruised, and be obliged to begin the Cure
again; for all the Flesh that is rubbed will certainly fall away.

I cured a Horse of a hurt in the Withers, who was obstinately inclined to rub
the Part, and so industrious in finding out means to do it, that we were
obliged to tie him up in such a manner that he could not stir any part of his
Body; his Head and Tail were tied; and besides, he was hung up for the ease of
his Legs, but so low that his Feet touched the Ground. Yet for all our
Precautions, he found a way to hinder the closing of the Wound by the motion of
the Skin of his Neck, so that if I had not tied his Head very low, I could
never have perfected the Cure.

When the Wounds are fair and clean, you must, in the next place, proceed to
dry 'em with Powders, and you will find those that are least Compound, to be
most effectual, especially this; Take a convenient quantity of old pitched
Boat-Ropes, dry 'em in a Furnace till they may be easily beaten to Powder in a
Mortar, strain it through a Hair-Sieve, and having bathed the Wound with the
Second, or the Yellow-Water, strew this Powder upon it, leaving the Wound
untouched, till the Scurfs caused by the Powder fall away; after which renew
the Application as before, and continue after the same manner till the Wound be
healed. The surest way is to tie up the Horse in such a manner that he may
neither be able to touch the Wound with his Tongue, nor to rub or scratch it;
and even you may hang him up, and in some cases keep him six Months in that
Posture, as I have oftentimes done, washing their Legs every Day with cold
Water.

In the beginning of great Hurts in the Withers, the Matter that stagnates in
the Part does frequently corrupt the Flesh that surrounds it, and the
Corruption slips in between the flat and broad Bone of the Shoulder and the
Body, as you may perceive by searching the Wound with your Probe. In this case
you must lay the whole Part bare, and cut a Passage for the Matter and
Corruption, that none of it may be left at the bottom of the Sore, and
afterward cure the Wound according to the ordinary Method. And since the
Shoulder Blade can never be reunited to the Body, so long as the Motion of the
Shoulder keeps it separated, you must Shackle the two Forelegs, that the Horse
may be kept constantly in one Posture, dressing the Wound according to the
abovementioned Directions. If you perceive a large Cavity, make use of the
Waters, or Potions for Gunshot Wounds, described in Chap. CX. Syringing the
Wound twice every Day, and exhibiting the Cinnabar Pills inwardly, to hasten
the Cure.

CHAP. CVIII. Powders to dry up a Wound.
TAke Honey and unslak'd Lime, reduced to Powder, and searc'd, of each a Pound;
mix 'em and put 'em into a Pot over a moderate Fire, stirring perpetually till
they be thoroughly dried, and as it were Calcined, so that the Matter may be
beaten and reduced to a fine Powder, which will incarnate and dry up a clean
and red Wound. The only inconveniency of this Powder is, that it draws Flies to
the Part in the Summer; nor will you find a more effectual Remedy among all
that vast variety of Powders, with which Books of this Nature are stuffed, if
it be applied in a Season when there are no Flies. Charcoal beaten, old Shoes
burned, sifted Ashes, Powder of Rosemary, or Sage, etc. are also very proper.

Other Powders to dry up Wounds.
Those who live in a place where Aquafortis is made, may easily prepare a
Powder to dry up Wounds, and prevent the growth of Proud-Flesh; for the Caput
Mortuum that remains in the Retort after the distillation of Aquafortis,
beaten to Powder and applied to the Wounds, is more effectual than Burnt Alum,
Calcined Vitriol, and other such like Powders. The Distillers of Aquafortis
sell the Caput Mortuum at a very low rate, for if they do not meet with a
Customer, they throw it away as useless; so that you may have a Porter's
Burden of it for Ten Pence. The distillation extracts only the most Spirituous
and Volatile Parts of the Ingredients; but the Fixed Salts remain in the Caput
Mortuum, and perform the effect required in this case. Aqua Fortis is distilled
from Vitriol, or Bock-Allum, and Saltpeter; and that which remains in the
Retort, after the first Method of Distillation, is indu'd with the Virtues of
Calcined Vitriol, as that which remains after the second, produces the effect
of Burnt-Allum. I am not ignorant that there are several other ways of
distilling Aquafortis, but these are most usual; and besides, the Caput
Mortuum is always proper in these cases, whatever be the Ingredients or Method
of the Distillation; for example, Sal Ammoniac, Sal Gemmae, and Bole-Armenic
are joined to Saltpeter, in the distillation of those Waters that are known by
the Name of Aqua-Regia, and leave in the Retort a Sediment or Caput Mortuum,
which is very effectual for the drying of Wounds, and hindering the growth of
Proud-Flesh, if they be reduced to Powder, and applied to the Part. This Advice
is particularly directed to Farriers, who use a great quantity of these sorts
of Powders.

Before all other drying Powders, I prefer those that are made of the Caput
Mortuum, remaining in the Retort after the distillation of Spirit of Vitriol,
because there is always some Bole-Armenic, mixed with the Vitriol to prevent its
melting in the Retort, since it would not yield any Spirit, if it were in a
state of Fusion. And the Bole mixed with the Calcined Vitriol, which is endu'd
with a certain Balsamic Quality, makes a Composition that hinders the falling
down of any Defluxion upon the Part, and dries the Wound very effectually and
speedily.

Borax in fine Powder is an excellent Remedy to dry up Wounds and hinder the
growth of Proud-Flesh.

Arsmart or Water-Pepper, dried and beaten to Powder dries up Wounds; and even
if it be stamped while it is green, and put between the Wound and the Saddle, it
cures a small Hurt.

Another Powder to dry up Wounds.
The drying up of Wounds is so much the more necessary, because the best
Ointments keep the Parts moist, and are apt to breed Matter. Supposing, for
example, that you have dressed a Quitter-bone, so long till there remains no
bottom in the Sore, that is, till you can discover no cavity with your Probe,
the Matter at the same time ceasing to run, you may conclude that it is time to
apply Powders, especially if you ride your Horse.

The following Powder is excellent in such Cases, for it sticks so fast that a
Horse cannot possibly shift it off by any Motion; besides, it raises a Scurf on
the Sore, that prevents the Corruption of the Flesh, and after the Scurf is
fallen, you will find the Sore all over Cicatriz'd. Renew the Application of
the Powder, continuing after the same manner; and the Sore will be sooner Cured
by this Method than any other whatsoever.

The Powder is thus prepared; Take a sufficient quantity of good White Tartar,
which is only the dry Lees of Wine that stick to the Bottom of the Cask; burn
it in an Earthen Pot, surrounded with live Charcoal, till the Pot grow red;
then suffer it to cool, and reduce it to a Powder, which in the Language of Art
is called Powder of Calcined Tartar.

It drys all sorts of Wounds or Hurts in the Withers, or any other part of the
Body; it is good for a Weeping or Frothy Sole, that cannot be dried with the
usual Remedies. When it is applied to a Wound, it raises a Scurf, which must be
so forced to fall away before the Application be renewed.

Burn some Oister-Shells in the Fire till they grow perfectly white; then take
'em out, and after they are cold, beat 'em to a very fine Powder, which is an
excellent and successful Remedy for Wounds and Scars, because it is a true Sal
Alkali separated entirely from all its Acid Particles by the Action of the
Fire: And therefore as soon as it is applied to the Wounds, it imbibes and sucks
up as much of the Acid Juice, or Humor, as it is capable of containing, and so
frees the Wound or Sore from the force of all the Disorders with which it is
attended, such as Pain, Inflammation, Eating or Corroding of the Flesh,
Swelling and every thing else that obstructs the healing or closing of the
Wound. Thus Nature being delivered from her Enemy by the frequent Applications
of the burnt or calcined Shells, exerts all her Vigor for the speedy Cure of
the Wound. I know few Farriers that are capable of comprehending the force of
this way of Reasoning, since the most ingenious Persons of that Profession
content themselves with judging of Causes by their Effects, without penetrating
further into the Nature of Distempers.

Those who are troubled with external Haemorrhoids or Piles, may use this
Powder with success, applying it to the Tumors when they bleed, mixed with
fresh Butter, or some other convenient Liniment; for it destroys the Acid that
occasions the Pain and Heat.

The Powder of calcined Muscel-Shells produces the same Effect, if it be
applied either to a Wound in Horses, or Haemorrhoids in Men, because it is a
powerful Alkali that absorbs all Acid Juices.

The Bones of a Cuttle-Fish that are every where to be found in Druggists
Shops, and commonly used by Goldsmiths for casting of Rings in a Mould, are
endu'd with almost the same Virtues, for they contain an excellent Alkali that
dries up all sorts of Wounds. They are very brittle, and may be easily reduced
to a very fine Powder.

All sorts of Bones that are of a porous or less compact contexture, if they be
burnt till they are very white, and easily reducible to Powder, are of
excellent use for the drying up of Wounds or Sores; for they are fixed Alkali's
separated from their respective Acids by calcination, and immediately suck up
the Acid contained in the Wound, which is the only Sourse of all the Disorders
that hinder the Cure.

CHAP. CIX. Of Swellings or Wounds on the Reins or Back.
THE Hurts that affect this Part are almost as dangerous as the Wringing of the
Withers, and therefore as soon as you perceive a Swelling, you must immediately
lay hot Dung in a Bag to the Tumor, and if it be not asswag'd in six Hours,
apply Whites of Eggs beaten and thickened with a piece of Alum, according to
the Directions prescribed for Hurts in the Withers. If you cannot prevent
Suppuration, proceed as in the abovementioned Case, making a Passage to let
out the whole Matter, though you should even open the Sore to the Bone; and
continue to dress it, as you were taught before in the Cure of Wounds.

After you have pierced the Swelling with a hot Iron, as for Hurts in the
Withers, draw out the Tents twice a Day, syrenge the Holes with the Waters for
Gun-shot-Wounds, and besmear the Tents with the Duke's Ointment, chafing the
whole Tumor with the same Ointment, and covering it with a Woolly Lamb-Skin,
to secure the Wound against the Injuries of the Air or Wind. But if the
Swelling have no vent, as it happens not unfrequently, you cannot make a
perfect Cure, and therefore you must immediately make an Incision, as in the
Withers, piercing to the Bottom of the Sore, and taking away all the dead and
rotten Flesh. After you have wiped off the Blood, apply hot Embers to the
Wound, and the next Day wash it with warm Wine, Urine, or a convenient Lie,
renewing the Application of the hot Embers three or four times after the same
manner, and dressing the Wound like a Hurt in the Withers. If the Tumor tend
to Separation, and cannot be dissolved, the best way is to rub the lower part
of it with a Retoire, which opens the Swelling, and draws forth a red Water,
and afterward hastens the Generation of the Matter. If the first Application
of the Retoire increase the Tumor considerably, there will be no need of a
second: But if the Swelling be not much augmented, you most proceed to a second
Application. If you have no Retoire, open the Swelling in the lower part with a
red hot Iron, if the Matter be already formed. If the Matter that runs out be
bloody, or only a red Water, you may conclude that the Swelling is too soon
opened; but if it be white, the Sore will heal of it self, and your only care
must be to keep the Hole open, and renew the Application of the red-hot Iron in
case of Necessity. We are oftentimes obliged, if the Matter take up a large
space, to make several Holes with a red-hot Iron, that we may have the
Convenience of thrusting a Tent from one Hole to another, for the more speedy
uniting of the Skin to the Flesh.

If the Matter that runs out be Black, you have reason to fear a Gangrene, and
must immediately search the bottom of the Sore with your Probe; for it is a
certain Sign that the Seat of the Matter is remote, and the surest way is to
make a large Incision to the bottom of the Sore, with a Razor, and so dip the
Bolsters of Flax in the Vulnerary Water or Limewater with Sublimate, stopping
the Wound with Tents, and anointing all the external parts of it with the
Duke's Ointment. If you perceive the Matter that runs out next Day to be very
stinking, it is a sign of great Corruption, and therefore you must cut away all
the corrupt Flesh, till it appear fair and clean; strew the Sore with Salt, and
afterward for the greater Security wash it with the Vulnerary Water, or the
Yellow-Water, as before, applying the Duke's Ointment about the Sore to all the
parts from whence you suspect the Matter may come. Afterward when you perceive
no more dead or rotten Flesh, strew the inside of the Sore with Salt, and apply
a Detersive, such as the Neat-herd's Ointment for Gauling, or Aegyptiacum mixed
with Aquafortis; and when it begins to grow of a fair red Color, dress it
with Schmit's or the Doctor's Ointment, using your utmost Diligence to prevent
a Gangrene in the Summer; for during the Winter Wounds are not so much subject
to that fatal inconveniency.

Lapis Mirabilis is good to resist Corruption, as also the abovementioned
Vulnerary-Water, and for want of that the Yellow-Water; but the Spirits of
Vitriol or Salt are better, besides several others; all these Remedies ought to
be applied in case of Necessity, when the Matter that runs out appears of a
Black Color, which is one of the greatest signs of Corruption.

If you cannot stop the Blood after the opening of an Abscess, sear the part;
for besides the convenience of stanching the Flux of Blood, the falling away of
the Scab will promote the Cure; and at last when it is time to complete the
Cure, the regular application of the Hermit's Ointment will quickly perform the
Work.

An excellent Digestive.
Take fine Turpentine and Honey of each two Ounces, the Yolks of four Eggs,
half an Ounce of Myrrh, and an Ounce of Alloes in Powder; mix all the
Ingredients cold, and you will have a Digestive that hinders the Corruption of
the Flesh, and takes away all the Pain occasioned by the violence of the
preceding Remedies.

The usual Digestive of Farriers is composed of Turpentine incorporated with
the Yolks of Eggs to the thickness of an Ointment, of a pale Citron Color,
which is a good Remedy, but inferior to the former.

When the Wound appears fair and clean, and fit to be closed, you may apply
several sorts of Ointments. That which follows is esteemed good, and is thus
prepared.

The Hunter 's Ointment for deep Wounds.
Though I have already communicated the description of the Hermit's Ointment,
which is one of the most effectual Remedies for Wounds, and cures 'em very
speedily without the least ill Accident: I thought fit also to insert that
which follows, since it is a good, easy, and cheap Remedy.

Take Hog's Grease and Oil-Olive, of each one pound; melt the Grease in the
Oil, and after they have boiled a little, add two handfuls of the fresh Roots
of Sharp-pointed Dock, beaten and sliced small. Continue to boil for the space
of half an Hour, stirring from time to time; after which add two handfuls of
Self-heal, and boil half an Hour longer; then squeeze the Substances through a
Linen Cloth in a Press, and throwing away the Dreggs, put the strained Liquor
in a Basin over a gentle Fire, with a pound of common Turpentine, and as soon
as they begin to incorporate, add four Ounces of Verdigreese reduced to a fine
Powder, boiling and stirring 'em over a slow Fire; then remove the Vessel from
the Fire, and add two Ounces of Borax beaten very small, and six Ounces of
unslak'd Lime in very fine Po wder, stirring 'em till they be quite cold.

This Ointment will be of a lovely Green Color. When you have occasion to use
it, apply it cold to the Wounds, and strew 'em with the Powder of old Ropes,
powdering the Tents with the same.

It cleanses, heals, consolidates, and cicatrizes the Wound, without hurting
it. Experience will convince you of its Excellency.

CHAP. CX. Of Waters for Gunshot Wounds, or Vulnerary Potions.
IT IS not always convenient to make large Incisions in Gunshot Wounds,
especially in the Army during the Heat of the Summer, where there are no places
to shelter the Horses, either from the Sun or from Flies.

To discover the bottom and depth of these Wounds, you must search them with a
long Iron Probe, placing the Horse in the same posture he was in when he
received the Shot. The Wounds by a Musket Bullet are usually so deep, that
it is impossible to reach the bottom of 'em with Ointments or Powders; and
therefore 'twas necessary to invent certain Remedies in form of Waters to be
injected several times a day. There is also a moistn'd Tent put into the Wound
to keep it open; the Hole is covered with a wet Linen Cloth, and half a pint
of the same Water is given inwardly to the Horse once a day. Thus several
Wounds are happily cured, that would have certainly proved fatal without the
assistance of these Remedies. It Is true, this Method is not always attended
with success, but at least a man has the satisfaction of thinking that his
Horse did not perish by his neglect.

If the Horse be seized with a Fever, you must administer Clysters prepared
with the Scoriae of Antimony, and abstain from the inward use of the
abovementioned Waters, which are composed of hot Ingredients, and would
consequently augment the heat and agitation of the humors, and precipitate 'em
on the wounded part. But it is frequently observed that very large Wounds in
Horses are not accompanied with a Fever; nor must we condemn these Medicines
for Horses, though the use of 'em be almost entirely abolished for Men, unless
among the Switzers, where they are still in great Credit.

A Simple Water for Gunshot Wounds.
Take an Ounce and a half of the Raspings of round Birth-wort, put it into a
new Varnished Pot, with three Quarts of small White Wind, and boil 'em over a
gentle Fire to the consumption of a Quart; then add six Ounces of fine Sugar,
and as soon as that is melted, remove the Vessel from the Fire, and strain out
the Liquor. Make the Horse drink half a Pint of this Water, or rather Wine,
every Morning, and wash or syringe the Wound with it twice every Day.

Another more Compound.
Take the Leaves of Comfrey, Self-heal, Speedwel, and Sow-Bread, sliced small,
of each two handfuls, Crab's-Eyes in fine Powder, four Ounces; put 'em into a
Stew-Pot, with four Quarts of the thinnest White Wind; lute on the Cover
exactly, and set the Pot on a gentle Fire. Digest three Days, after which boil
half and Hour and strain out the Water, or rather Wine. Make the Horse drink
half a Pint of it every Morning, keeping him Bridled two Hours before, and as
long after; wash and syringe the Wound with it, and apply Tents moisten^d in
the same Liquor. This Water is more effectual than the former.

Another.
Take Mace, Crab's-Eyes, and Zedoary, of each half an Ounce; Mummy, and
Galingal, of each three Drams; Nux Vomica, two Drams and half; beat 'em
grossly, and put 'em into a large and strong Glass-Bottle slightly stopped, with
three Quarts of White Wind. Digest six Hours in a moderate Heat, and without
stirring the I^quor, pour out a large Glass-full every Morning, to give the
Horse, and wash or syringe the Wound twice every twenty four Hours.

If this Water be too dear for a Horse, it cannot be thought too chargeable for
Men.

A Compound Wine for curing Wounds in a Horse.
This Composition is more easily prepared, and less chargeable than the former.
I shall insert the Names of several Vulnerary Simples, that you may choose such
of 'em as can be most easily procured; but the more Ingredients you take, the
more effectual will your Remedy be; Sow-Bread, Savin, Vervain, Comfrey,
Lung-Wort, Arsmart, Mugwort, Peny-wort, Woodroof, Zedoary, Galingal,
Periwinkle, lesser Centory, Adder's-Tongue, Sperma-Ceti, Winter-Green, Betony,
Birthwort round and long, Speedwel, Agrimony, Crabs dried in a Furnace, Nux
Vomica, Mummy, Sealed Earth, and Bole-Armenic.

To extract the Virtue of these Simples, put as many of 'em as you can procure
into a very small Cask full of White Wind as it comes out of the Vat, and let
it work or ferment for the space of two Months. This is an excellent Remedy for
Men, I mean such as are able to bear the strength of it, as Peasants or Country
Laborers.

Wash the Wound with this Wine, injecting it with a Syringe if the Hole be
deep: But the Cure will succeed the better, if you can put in Tents dipped in the
Wine. Besides, you must make your Horse drink half a Pint of it Morning and
Evening; but half a Glass is sufficient for a Man.

CHAP. CXI. Of Wounds or Hurts on the Pastern-Joint, and other Nervous or
Sinewy Parts.
THE Pastern-Joint is a very considerable Part, full of Sinews and Ligaments,
and consequently very sensible of Pain. Wounds in this Part are very dangerous,
when they are deep, and when the Nerves and Ligaments receive the least Injury.

Sometimes when a Horse happens to slip or fall, he has the Misfortune to be
pricked with a piece of Wood or Iron, which pierces the Skin, and if it enter
into the Part, though but a very little way, you may certainly conclude, that the
Sinew is cut, or at least bruised. If it were a simple Wound it might be easily
and speedily healed; but there are so many Sinews about this Part, that for the
most part some of 'em are hurt. Wounds in the Sinews are very dangerous, for
the least Hurt they receive spoils the Motion of the Part, and even all the
Neighboring parts suffer very considerably by reason of their mutual
Communication.

As soon as your Horse is hurt or wounded in the Pastern or Fetlock-Joint, if
he be very Lame, you must immediately let him Blood in the Neck, to make a
Revulsion, and to prevent the falling down of the Humors upon the Part; Feed
him with moistened Bran, giving him no Oats, and charge the whole Leg with the
red Honey-Charge, or for want of that with Lees of Wine, boiled with Honey and
Flower, or with the Ointment of Montpelier. Chafe the Joint with strong Spirit
of Wine, and apply to the Wound a Bolster of Flax with Diapalma melted in a
little Oil of Roses. Then lay the Pultiss described at the end of this Chapter,
about the whole Joint, to allay the Pain, that the Horse may be able to set his
Foot to the Ground.

The next Day bleed him again, for there is nothing more profitable for Horses
that are Wounded in this Part, than Bleeding, repeated two or three times when
the Wound is fresh. It makes a Revulsion of the Humors, allays the
Inflammation, and promotes the Cure.

Dress the Leg every Day after the same manner, renewing the Application of the
Charge or Ointment, and laying on the Pultiss as before. If the Matter appear
white and well digested, it is a very good sign, and you may expect a speedy
Cure, by persisting in this Method. If the Hole be at the top of the Joint, and
you perceive, by examining it with a Probe, that it reaches downwards, after
two or three Days you must pierce the Skin at the bottom of the Sore with a
red-hot Iron to give a vent to the Matter that would otherwise stagnate in the
Joint as in a Bag; but you must only pierce the Skin, without touching any
other Part, and stop the Hole with a Tent dipped in the Duke's Ointment, after
which you may dress the Joint as before.

If the Master-Sinew be gourded, swollen, hard, and hot, if instead of well
concocted Matter, only Red-Water (which is a Nervous Juice) run out of the
Sore; and if the Horse fears to set down his Foot, you have reason to suspect
the event; and the best way in this case is to hang up the Horse to ease his
Legs; for if he cannot imitate those Horses who lie constantly, and even eat in
that Posture; or if he be not vigorous enough to rise again; or of the number
of those Horses who are naturally so heavy and unweildy, that the apprehension
of not being able to rise again if they should lie down, keeps 'em perpetually
standing; he runs the hazard of being Foundered if he be not hung up. This
Method of hanging up a Horse is certainly very troublesome, but it is sometimes
necessary; nor should it ever be attempted in any other case.

Besides the Red and Nervous Water, that runs out of Sores in the
Pastern-Joint, sometimes the Matter that comes forth is Yellow and tough,
resembling Glue, but much harder, and sometimes Slimy. This is certainly a very
bad sign, for the Matter is in some respect the Marrow of the Sinew, or rather
the Substance by which it is nourished, and consequently when it is deprived of
its usual and necessary supplies of Nourishment, it remains dry, withered,
incapable of Motion, and shrinks up, leaving the Pastern-Joint distorted and
bending forward. As soon as you perceive this yellow and hard Matter (which for
the most part is also stinking) with the other abovementioned Symptoms, namely,
the swelling and heat of the Master-sinew, and the Horse's holding up his Foot
from the Ground, you must, in the first place, allay the Pain with good
Honey-Charges, and then proceed to give the Fire all along the Sinew, and round
the Pastern-Joint, drawing the Lines or Rases very near each other, without
piercing the Skin; then apply a convenient Plaster or Sear-Cloth to the burnt
Part, cover it with Saddle-stuffings, set on a Shoe on the Sore Foot, jetting
out two Inches at the Toe like a Mule's-Shooe, and renew the Application of the
Anodyn Pultiss, with the Bolsters or Flax, as before; the same Day give the
Horse a Clyster with Sal-Polychrest, to allay the beating of his Flanks, caused
by the Pain of the burning, and continue the use of these Clysters for five or
six Days. Note, That you must never give the Fire along the Sinew, till you
have asswag'd the violent Pain of the Leg with good Honey-Charges or Ointments;
and before these Applications you must frequently chafe the Sinew and
Pastern-Joint with Spirit of Wine.

The design of giving the Fire is to stop the course of the Nervous Humor,
which leaving the Sinews, deprives 'em of Nourishment; for Fire is the most
powerful Restringent, and this is the only way to prevent irrecoverable
Lameness, and the distortion of the Pastern-Joint.

The use of the abovementioned Remedies must be continued, till the Sores on
the Joint, and those occasioned by the Fire be absolutely healed; and if the
Horse be hung up, you must take him down as soon as you perceive that he can
set his Foot to the Ground.

If, during the progress of the Cure, the Horse lose his Appetite, which is a
common Accident in these Cases, especially when the Grief is seated in the
Pastern-Joint of the Hinder-Leg, tie a Chewing-Ball to the Bit, and make him
champ upon it every Morning, till his Appetite be restored.

To prevent his being Foundered, which is the usual effect not only of this,
but of several other Distempers that are accompanied with a violent Pain in the
Legs or Feet, give him Assa-foetida in Powder, for five or six Days together,
an Ounce every Day, in a Point of Wine, keeping him Bridled two Hours before,
and as long after every Dose; for this Medicine contributes effectually to the
Cure of those Distempers.

I promised to communicate the description of an Anodyn and Astringent Pultiss,
that is, a Remedy to assuage Pain, and stop the defluxion of Humors.

An Anodyn Pultiss.
Take a Pound of Linseed-Flower, and a Pint of Red-Wine, boil 'em together in a
Skellet, and as soon as the Broth or Liquor begins to boil, add four Ounces of
fresh Butter, boiling and stirring till it grow thick. Then put in two Ounces
of Oriental-Bole, in fine Powder, stirring perpetually till the whole be
perfectly Incorporated; after which remove it from the Fire, add six Ounces of
common Turpentine, and continue stirring for half a quarter of an Hour. Spread
the Pultiss on Flax, and lay it about the Pastern-Joint, as I ordered before.

It Is not only endu'd with a Virtue to allay Pain, but asswages the Swelling,
and prevents the falling down of the Humors. The Wounds or Sores on the
Pastern-Joint, that affect the Sinew, are oftentimes so dangerous, that if you
neglect the least Circumstance prescribed in the Cure, the Horse will remain
utterly Lame; and even, though you omit no care, I dare not warrant the Success,
for the event is still doubtful; especially if the Sores be on the Hinder-Leg,
which are infinitely more dangerous than those that are seated on the Joints of
the Forelegs, and it happens not unfrequently, that the Horse either dies, or
grows so lean, that the charge of the Cure equals, if not exceeds, the full
value of the Horse.

CHAP. CXII. To prevent the Madness occasioned by the biting of a Mad-Dog,
either in Men, or any sort of Cattle.
THis Subject is so excellently handled in a Pamphlet Printed at Poitiers, that
I cannot forbear transcribing it without the least alteration; and to begin
with the Printer's Address to the Reader.

The Secret which I discover, says he, is as useful and necessary as it is rare,
and hitherto unknown. It discovers the infallible Cure of a Distemper, for
which Physicians have not yet prescribed a certain Remedy, and all the hope of
those that are seized with it depends either on a Miracle, or dipping in the
Sea; whereas there are many places so remote both from St. Hubert and the Sea,
that it is impossible for those who inhabit 'em to have recourse to either. The
usefulness of this Remedy is attended with another very considerable advantage,
I mean, the easiness of its Preparation; for without searching the Shop of an
Apothecary, the Ingredients that enter its Composition are to be found every
where, except one that is not absolutely necessary, and might be Planted or
Sowed in every Garden. The Knowledge of this Secret was confined for several
Ages to a certain Family, who freely communicated its salutary Influences to
those who stood in need of 'em, but still kept the Secret as an honorable
Inheritance of the Family. It was lately discovered to me by a Jesuit of the
same Family, with an obliging Permission to Communicate it to the Public;
which I do the more willingly, since he assured me, that the efficacy of this
Remedy is confirmed by so many Experiments, and so universally esteemed in the
Country where his Family resides, that though it be not above seven small Leagues
distant from the Ocean, the Waters of which are known to be a sure Remedy for
that Distemper; yet all the Inhabitants of the Country, who have the Misfortune
to be bitten by Mad-Beasts, choose rather to use this Medicine, than to have
recourse to the Sea. The same Person added, That it has hitherto preserved all
those who took it, whether Men or Cattle, from the Madness occasioned by those
Accidents; and that he was lately informed, by one of his Relations, That he
had seen several Persons Cured by it, after they had suffered one or two Fits
of Madness. It Is hoped, that the Public will receive favorably so rich and
precious a Treasure, which I communicate with the Father's Permission.

I dare confidently warrant the Success of this Remedy, since I have constantly
observed, that it answers the Desire and Expectation of those who make use of
it; and I know a considerable Family, about thirty Leagues from Paris, who were
acquainted with the Secret, and communicated to the Neighbors, the
advantageous effects of so noble a Remedy, which they believed was only known
to themselves; but as soon as they were convinced of their Mistake, by the
Publication of this Pamphlet, they imparted the Receipt to all those who
desired it.

An Infallible Remedy for Madness, occasioned by Biting.
When any Person, or other Animal, is bitten by a Mad Beast or Man, if the Skin
or Flesh be Wounded, you must, in the first place, cleanse the Wound very,
carefully, scraping it with an Iron Instrument, without cutting away any part
of it, unless it be so rent and torn, that it cannot be united to the Member;
then wash and bathe the Wounds with Water and Wine somewhat warm, mixed with as
much Salt as you can lift with the ends of your Fingers.

The Wound being thus cleans'd, take Rue, Sage, and Field-Daisies, both Leaves
and Flowers, of each one Pugil, or as much as you can lift with the ends of
your Fingers, which is sufficient for one Person and one Wound; but the
quantity must be proportionably increased, if there be more Persons or Wounds
to be healed; and besides, you may take somewhat more of the Daisies than of
the other two Herbs. Take also a convenient quantity of the Roots of Eglantine
or Sweet-Bryar, and of Spanish Scorzonera, (though that which grows in France is
not inferior to the other in Virtue); chop the Roots, especially those of
Eglantine very small, and add five or six Heads of Garlic, each of the bigness
of a small Nut: First beat the Roots of Eglantine with the Sage in a Mortar,
and afterward add all the rest of the Ingredients, with as much Bay Salt as
you can lift with the Ends of your Fingers, or a somewhat larger quantity of
White Salt, beating 'em together in the same Mortar to a Mash, part of which
must be applied as a Pultis to the Wound, and bound on carefully till the next
Day; if the Wound be deep, you may also pour some of the Juice of the same Mash
into it.

This done, pour half a Glass of White Wind, or (for want of that) any other
sort of Wine, on the remaining part of the Mash, which will amount to the
quantity of a large Hen's Egg; incorporate 'em together in a Mortar, and
squeeze 'em through a Linen Cloth, giving the strained Liquor to the Patient to
be drunk fasting, and ordering him afterward to wash his Mouth with Wine and
Water, to take away, or qualify the unpleasant taste of the Potion, and to
abstain from eating three Hours after. This Potion preserves the Heart from the
Venom, and prevents the ill Effects of the Poison if it have already seized on
that Part.

It Is sufficient to scrape and wash the Wound the first Day, but you must
repeat the Application of the Pultis, and renew the Dose of the Potion at least
nine Days together, neither of which can be neglected without extreme Danger.

If at the end of nine Days the Wounds are not perfectly cured, as it usually
happens, you may dress 'em like simple Wounds, and the Patient may freely
converse with his Friends, which he ought not to do before the nine Days are
expired, especially if he was bitten long before the Application of the
Remedies.

The same Method is to be observed, and the same Remedies applied in the Case
of Beasts; only you may substitute Milk instead of Wine, because Dogs may be
more easily made to drink the former than the latter.

All the abovementioned Ingredients are common, ex cept Scorzonera, which is a
sort of Goat's Beard, having a Root covered with a Black Bark, and is an
excellent Remedy against all sorts of Venom or Poison, especially against the
Bitings of Vipers and Mad Beasts; but neither that, nor the Roots of Eglantine,
are absolutely necessary in this Composition, the other Ingredients being alone
sufficient to resist and foil the Enemy. This Plant thrives as well in our
Gardens as the ordinary Goat's Beard.

The same Potion is a good Preservative against the Plague, and for those who
breathe in an infected Air.

Another easy Remedy.
As soon as any Person is bitten by a Mad Beast, or suspects himself to be
bitten, to prevent all the troublesome and fatal Consequences of such an
Accident, without taking a Journey to be dipped in the Sea, burn or calcine the
under part or lower half of an Oister-shell, and having reduced it to Powder,
fry it with Oil-Olive, and with four Eggs make an Omelet or Pancake, which the
Patient must eat fasting, and abstain from eating six Hours after. If you
repeat the same Remedy two or three times, the Patient will be secured from
any future Danger.

As for Dogs, you must make 'em eat the calcined Shells in Powder mixed with
Oil-Olive, after which they must fast for a considerable time, repeating the
Dose twice, as I prescribed in the same Case for Men. It Is to be observed that
the upper half of the Shell is useless.

You must give the Powder of four or five Shells well calcined, and mixed with
good Oil-Olive, to Horses, Oxen, or Cows, repeating the Dose only twice, once
in two Days, and making 'em fast six Hours before, and as long after it.

There is no danger in exceeding the prescribed quantity of the Powder, and
therefore you may give to Horses and other Cattle as much as you can make 'em
swallow.

Since there are several Places where Oyster-shells cannot be so easily
procured, great quantities of 'em may be calcined in those Parts where they
abound, and kept in Powder, to be used upon Occasion; for the Powder is
incorruptible.

The Calcination is thus performed: Lay a good quantity of the Shells on hot
Embers, and open 'em with a piece of a Cole, which being kindled, burns or
calcines the Shell: Let them lie in the Fire till they grow brittle, and
perfectly white, after which beat 'em to Powder, and keep 'em for use.

Treacle-Water is also a good Remedy in this Case; but it is in vain to have
recourse to Treacle for the Cure of a Distemper, when the most effectual Remedy
may be found in every Garden.

CHAP. CXIII. Of the Biting of a Venomous Beast.
Though I have already proposed an excellent Remedy for the Cure of Horses, and
other Cattle that are bitten by Mad Beasts, 'twill not be improper to subjoin a
Method of Cure appropriated to the bitings of certain venomous Creatures
resembling Mice, but of a greyer Color and sharper Nose. The biting of these
Creatures are so dangerous and fatal, that Horses and Dogs die of it, without a
speedy and well-regulated Assistance. And even Cats who eat 'em are wasted by
the Malignity of those little Animals, and die in a kind of Consumption. They
breed among rotten Straw in Barns and Stables.

When a Horse is bitten by one of these Mice in the Pastern or Fet-lock Joint,
the next Day the Part swells, and the Tumor ascends to the Hough, stretching
upwards to the Cods and Fundament, which swell to a prodigious height, and the
Horse dies in forty eight Hours, if a Remedy be not seasonably applied.

Sometimes these Animals bite Horses under the Belly, which swells extremely,
and the Tumor either rises toward the Throat, or extends to the Sheath, and
grows so excessively big, that the Horse is quickly killed by its Malignity.

As soon as you perceive the Swelling, if it be in the Leg, tie a Ribbon or
Garter of the breadth of an Inch above the Swelling, to stop its Progress, and
beat the swollen part with a Branch of a Goosberry Bush, till it be all over
bloody. Then chafe it with a large quantity of Orvietan or Treacle, and at the
same time make the Horse swallow an Ounce of either of these Medicines in Wine;
the next Day anoint the part again, and exhibit inwardly half an Ounce of the
same Remedy.

If you have neither Treacle nor Orvietan, anoint the swollen Parts with the
Electuary of Kermes, Mithridate, or the Cordial Powder mixed with Spirit of
Wine, and exhibit inwardly a convenient Dose of the same Remedy with which you
anoint the Part.

After the second Dose and anointing of the swollen Leg, untie the Garter,
chafe the Leg with Spirit of Wine, and sow a Cloth dipped in the same Spirit,
about the Swelling; after which rub the Part with the Duke's Ointment to
assuage the Swelling. The same Remedy cures the bitings of all sorts of
Venomous Creatures that are followed with a Swelling; but you must never forget
to preserve the Heart from Malignity with proper Cordials.

I never tried this Method for the biting of Serpents, whose Poison is so
subtle, that immediately it reaches the Heart; for I Am persuaded that the
Essence of Vipers is the only effectual Remedy in those Cases.

CHAP. CXIV. Of Pursiveness or Shortness of Breath.
I Shall in the Second Part inform the Reader how he may know a Horse thatis
subject to these Distempers.

Pursiveness is a difficulty of Breathing caused by stuffing of the Lungs, or
Obstructions in the Veins and Arteries, especially in the Passages or Channels
of the Lungs, and accompanied with a beating and heaving in the Flanks, and a
Dilatation or stretching of the Nostrils. The Disease is seated in the Lungs,
and proceeds from an Obstruction of the Passages by stagnating and thick
phlegmatic Humors. It Is to be observed, that the Lungs consume more
Nourishment than any Part of the Body, since they are nourished only by the
purest and most subtle or bilious part of the Blood, as it appears evidently
from the Consideration of those Animals who are des^^tute of Lungs; for they
may be almost said to live upon nothing. Thus Fishes who have no Lungs are
easily fatten'd by a small quantity of Nourishment; and even it seems not
improbable that the Kidneys were designed by Nature for the Evacuation of the
Impurities of the Lungs; for Fishes are equally destitute of both these Parts;
and usually Horses who are troubled some Days with a Flux of Urine, are seized
with a Cough by reason of the dryness of their Lungs. I thought fit to insert
these Remarks for the Information of those who have lean and wasted Horses; for
if the Lungs be affected, they will hardly ever be able to fatten 'em, because
that Part will consume a considerable part of the Nourishment, which otherwise
would have been turned to Flesh; and besides, it is observed that all Pursive
Horses stale very much during the Cure, because the Impurities of the Lungs are
voided that way. This is a very true and curious Observation, and was never
mentioned by any Writer on this Subject, or inserted in any Book, whether
French, Italian, German, or Latin.

If we consider the Vessels and other spermatical Parts that enter the
Composition of the Lungs, they will appear to be cold and dry. If we take a
View of the fleshy, soft, and spongy Substance of the Lungs, they seem to be
hot and moist; and if we reflect on their Lightness and aptness for Motion, we
can hardly forbear concluding that they are of a cold and moist Nature.

The Lungs are divided into several parts called Lobes which surround the
Heart, and especially into two, by a double Membrane, which in Humane Bodies is
called the Midriff: They are of a spongy Substance, easily dilateable, which
sucks in the Air, and expels it again with some smoaky and fuliginous Vapors,
by the two different Motions of Respiration. This Part is fuller of Veins and
Arteries than any other Part of the Body, which make it so subject to
Inflammations and Obstructions, as the Humors are either hot and subtle, or
thick and heavy.

Pursiveness proceeds from several Causes: Thus, a slight Obstruction in the
Lungs, in the Veins, or some of the Arteries, may cause a shortness of Breath,
which is cured with easy Remedies.

The same Distemper proceeds usually from some Humors stagnating in the
Passages of the Lungs, in the Kidneys, or in the Arteries; for the free
Circulation of the Blood being stopped, a great quantity of it gathering together
in one place, presses the Ducts or Passages of Respiration, and obstructs the
Freedom of Breathing: When the Blood is hot and boiling, it quickly degenerates
into Putrefaction, and causes a dangerous Inflammation in that Part, which must
be allayed with powerful Coolers.

This Obstruction is usually caused by phlegmatic and pituitous Humors; and
though in this Case it is not attended with such violent Symptoms, as are produced
by the other Causes of this Distemper, it is very stubborn, and hardly to be
conquered by the best Medicines; for those slimy and tough Humors cannot
easily be loosened and separated from the Parts where they stick, and therefore
the Cure must be attempted with cutting and attenuating Remedies. And besides,
since the Motion of the Blood is obstructed, and that Liquor deprived of the
Advantage of Ventilation, this kind of Pursiveness is quickly accompanied with
a sort of Putrefaction, and some other Symptoms, which seem to proceed from a
hot Principle; though the Cause of the Disease is rarely of that Nature.

It Is plain that Pursiveness proceeds from a cold Principle, and yet the
Symptoms that attend it seem to denote the heat of the Cause, though it be really
of an opposite Nature; for this Distemper is usually occasioned by pituitous
Humors, and the thick Phlegm which stuffs the Passages, and causes a difficulty
of Respiration. This may serve to discover the Error of those who turn out
their Pursive Horses to Grass, and are usually much surpised when they take
'em up with an intention to confine 'em to dry Feeding, to find them
shorter-winded then ever; for the coldness of the Grass augments the Phlegm, and
makes it thicker and heavier, and consequently more apt to obstruct the Motion
of the Blood and Air in the Lungs.

If it be objected that Grass has been sometimes observed to relieve Pursive
Horses; it is reasonable to suppose that in such a Case there was an
Inflammation occasioned by a redundancy of Blood, that might be cooled and
allayed by the coldness of the Grass, which moistening the Lungs, might give
some ease to the Horse so long as he continued to feed on it. And after a due
Consideration of this Case, I am persuaded of the Justness of that General
Rule, which enjoins a total abstinence from Grass to all short-winded Horses,
since the Benefit they receive by that sort of Nourishment lasts no longer than
they actually feed on it.

The most dangerous kind of Pursiveness is that which is occasioned by hard
Riding and violent Labor; for sometimes in such cases a Vein is opened, and
the Blood falls into the Cavity of the Lungs, where it putrefies and turns to
Matter, which, for want of a Passage, stagnates about the Lungs, and breeds an
Ulcer in 'em. And the danger is so much the greater, because a large Ulcer,
from what Cause soever it proceeds, wastes and consumes the Horse to such a
degree, that it is impossible to make him thrive, or render him fit for Service.

This Distemper is usually caused by the heat of the Aliments by which the
Horse is nourished, as old Clover, too great abundance of Hay, and several
other kinds of Food; and the same Infirmity proceeds for want of Exercise, by
reason of the Multitude of Phlegmatic and Corrupt Humors that are bred in a
Horse's Body, and in a particular manner affect the Lungs.

The Watering of a Horse when he is overheated is apt to make him shortwinded.

When this Distemper is hereditary, it is absolutely incurable; for the Horse
contains in his Body the Principle of the Defect which can never be corrected
or removed by the use of Remedies. A Natural Weakness of the Lungs, which
renders 'em susceptible of the corrupt Humors that abound in the Body, can
never be repaired by Art; and the same may be affirmed of the irregular
Structure or Contexture of that Part, as when it is either too narrow, or
fastened to the Sides.

This Distemper is curable in the beginning, especially in young Horses, if it
be not accompanied with a Cough.

Purgative Remedies are of little use in this Distemper, since the Phlegmatic
Humors from which it usually proceeds, can never be evacuated by these
Medicines, and the only Passages that give any hope of drawing those Humors
from the Lungs, are either the Kidneys, Nostrils, or Mouth: And since all
Evacuations that tend upwards are contrary to the Nature of Horses, as they who
are acquainted with the internal Economy or Disposition of a Horse's Body,
will readily acknowledge, it is plain that the Cure must be performed by
Cutting, Attenuating, or Diuretic Remedies.

When the Disease is accompanied with a dry and often-returning Cough, or when
the Motion of Respiration reaches as far as the Croup, and appears visibly on
the Rump, you may conclude the Cure to be absolutely impossible. If your Horse
void Phlegmatic Humors by his Nostrils and Mouth, you will find it a very hard
Task to restore him to his Health.

A Remedy for Pursiveness.
If a diligent Observation of the various Circumstances with which the Disease
is accompanied, convince you that your Horses Lungs are very much heated, among
all the Remedies that I propose, you must choose such as are most temperate.

But if you perceive no sign of heat, you may use the most cutting Remedies.
However, I will endeavor to moderate and qualify 'em all to such a degree
that they may be able to loosen and remove the Obstructions of the Lungs
without heating 'em; and after I have proposed the most gentle Remedies at
first, I shall gradually proceed to the strongest.

The Cure ought always to be attempted in the beginning of the Disease. It Is to
be observed, that the Horse must eat no Hay; and after the ordering of his
Diet, you may prepare and exhibit the following Remedies.

Melt two pounds of Lead in a convenient Vessel, and removing it from the Fire,
stir it till it be reduced to Powder; then continuing to stir it without
intermission add two Pounds of Brimstone in Powder, and stir 'em together till
they be perfectly incorporated. Give your Horse an Ounce of this Powder every
Day in moistened Bran; and it will not only give him Ease, but not improbably
complete the Cure, if your Horse be young, and the Disease not very inveterate.

If your Horse's Lungs be heated, with a violent beating in his Flanks, Sal
Polychrest may give him Relief; but by reason of the coldness of that Remedy,
'twill be convenient to add half the quantity of Juniper Berries, or Nutmegs.

Thus you may give him an Ounce of Sal Polychrest with half an Ounce of Nutmegs
or Juniper Berries, in moistened Bran, and continue after the same manner for a
considerable time. If he refuse to eat the Bran, give him the Remedies in a
Pint of Wine, after they have stood in Infusion a whole Night, keeping him
bridled two Hours before, and three Hours after every Dose, and persisting in
this Method for fifteen Days. If his Belly be loosn'd by the continued use of
this Remedy, you may entertain more certain hopes of the Cure; for so it will
evacuate the offendin Humors, dilute the Phlegm that causes the Obstructions,
clear and unstop the Passages that cool the Lungs, purify the Blood, and
resist Corruption. If the Disease be not very stubborn and desperate, this
Remedy will at last mitigate its Violence; and since that which gives Ease may
at length perfect the Cure, you ought to persist in a careful Observance of
this Method, if you perceive that the Horse receives any benefit by it.

This Remedy is most proper for young Horses, who oftentimes stand in need of
cooling Medicines, which is seldom or never the Case of those that are old.

Another Remedy for Pursiveness.
The proper time for preparing this Remedy is when the Herbs are endu'd with
their entire Virtues, especially when Broom begins to put out its Flowers.

Take Mallows, White Mullein, Coltsfoot, Green Broom Tops of the same Year,
Succory, Bramble Tops, Bitter Succory, Hysop, and White Horehound, of each
three Handfuls. Chop 'em small, and put 'em into a Kettle capable of containing
a Pail full of Water; fill the Kettle with Water, and boil the Herbs two Hours,
after which remove the Vessel from the Fire, adding a quarter of a Pound of
Juice of Liquorice, and ten handfuls of Broom Flowers. After it is half cold,
strain out the Liquor, and dissolve in it two Pounds of Honey; then melt a like
quantity of Brimstome in an Iron Spoon or Ladle, and cast it into the
Decoction; and after it sinks to the Bottom, take it out, melt it a second
time, and throw it again into the Liquor, repeating the same Operation five or
six times, that the Decoction may be impregnated with the Salt of Sulphur.
After you have kept your Horse bridled two Hours in the Morning, give him a
fourth part of this Potion with a Horn, walking him gently half an Hour after
it; then give him another fourth part, walking him as before; the next Day make
him drink the other half, observing the same Directions; after which suffer him
to rest one Day, and on the fourth renew the Potion for two Days, as before,
which must be followed by a Day of repose, and the same Method continued till
he has drunk the Decoction ten Days, and rested four.

In the Intervals he must eat neither Hay nor Oats, but Bran and Straw during
the use of this Remedy, and you will find him if not absolutely cured, at least
very much eased; for the Operation of the Medicine depends on the State or
Degree of the Disease when it was first exhibited.

Another Remedy for Pursiveness.
The former Remedy is only proper in the Summer, and therefore since Horses are
troubled with this Distemper in other Seasons of the Year, you may observe the
following Method.

Give your Horse a sufficient quantity of White Mullein chopped small, and mixed
with moistened Oats; the larger you make the Dose, the more effectually it will
work.

If he will not eat Wheat-Straw, moisten his Hay; and for his ordinary Drink
dissolve a Pound of Honey in a Pail-full of Water; for though at first he may
seem unwilling to drink it, he will quickly be reconciled to it.

I have seen Horses abstain from drinking fifty Hours together; but at last
thirst constraind 'em to drink the Hony'd Water.

The continued use of this Remedy will either cure the Horse, or at least make
him fit for Service. You must give the Mullein as long as you can; but 'twill
be sufficient to make him drink Hony'd Water for a Month, more or less,
according to the stubbornness of the Distemper; and in the mean time the Horse
may be ridden.

CHAP. CXV. The way of Exhibiting Honey to Horses that are Purfive, or troubled
with Disorders in the Flanks, and other Distempers.
HOney is an excellent Remedy for lean Horses, who are troubled with Disorders
in the Flanks, or tired and spent with hard Exercise; for it comforts the
Lungs, and allays the sharpness of the Humors. But since it must be given
Methodically, I thought fit to insert all the particular Directions that must
be observed in those cases; Some give it with Oats to Horses that are
Short-Winded. Nor do I condemn this Method, but it is incomparably better to
make the Horse eat it hot with Bran, if he can possibly overcome his
Reluctance; for there are some Horses so obstinate that it is absolutely
impossible to make 'em eat it hot; and therefore you must either suffer it to
cool, or not heat it at all.

Some mix a Pound of Honey with two Pecks of Bran, stirring 'em together with a
little lukewarm Water.

Others boil two Bushels of Bran in a Kettle, with a proportionable quantity of
Honey and Water, and give it to their Horses.

Both these Methods are good, and the Honey prepared either way, cures the
Cough, takes away the disturbance in the Flanks, and fattens the Horse, if he
be lean and wasted after long Fatigues.

This is an excellent way of giving Honey; you may begin with half a Pound,
increasing the Dose afterward to a whole Pound, and at last to two Pounds a
Day, one in the Morning, and the other at Night, and preparing the Honey
according to either of the abovementioned Methods.

If you would have the Honey perform its Operation effectually, and resolve to
give a large quantity of it, you must neither ride your Horse, nor give him any
Oats, feeding him only with Bran, and persisting in an exact observance of this
Method till his Body be sufficiently purged; for though the Honey occasion a
copious Evacuation, you must still continue to give him the same quantity of
it, till the Purgation cease, provided it do not exceed six Days; but if it
continues to the seventh you must lay aside the use of the Honey, though this
Caution be very rarely necessary; for the heat of the Evacuation seldom or
never lasts above three or four Days together, though the Horse continue still to
take his usual Doses of Honey.

I have seen Horses eat fifty Pounds of Honey before they were thoroughly
purged; but at last they voided very stinking and corrupt Matter, and
afterward grew very Fat. This Example ought not to fright the Reader, for I
only mention it as an extraordinary case; and if all Horses required so vast a
quantity of Honey, the whole Indies could not furnish enough for so
extraordinary an Expense. The only inconveniency that attends this Method, is,
that the Worms that are in a Horse's Body, are nourished and strengthn'd by the
sweetness of the Honey, and afterward vex and torment him. To destroy these
troublesome Insects, the usual Method is to give the Horse Rye instead of Oats,
during the time of his eating Honey. The Rye is cast into boiling Water, and
immediately removed from the Fire; then the Water is suffered to cool, and the
Rye laid on a Hurdle to drain. But without engaging in so troublesome a Method,
after he has taken all the Honey that you intend to give him, you may content
your self with giving him a Dose of Aloes, which will kill all the Worms in his
Body.

You may easily destroy Worms without Purgation, by giving the Horse every Day
an Ounce of Filings of Steel, or of fine Needles, mixed with moistened Bran, for
eight or ten Days together. The Steel being dissolved by the penetrating Acid
contained in the Stomach, the Vitriolic Particles exert their Force, and
insinuating themselves a mong the Aliments, poison and destroy the Worms.
Besides, Steel is indu'd with an admirable Faculty to open and clear the
Passages, and consequently makes way for the Blood, to nourish and fatten the
Parts.

Any Needle-maker will furnish you with a sufficient quantity of these Filings;
and you may try the goodness of 'em, by throwing 'em against the Flame of a
Candle, for they will take Fire like Gunpowder.

'Twou'd be needless to allege any Arguments to demonstrate that the Vitriolic
part of the Steel is dissolved and separated in the Stomach, and afterward
mixed with the digested Aliments, since the very Excrements of the Horse, during
the use of this Remedy, furnish me with a convincing proof of the truth of that
Assertion; for they appear black, shining, and tinged with the Vitriol of
Steel, so long as the Horse continues to take the Powder of Steel, and no
longer. The Filings of Steel in Substance is an excellent Remedy, and the
laborious ways of Preparing it produce the same effect in this case as in the
Preparation of Pearls, destroying the efficacy of the Remedy instead of
exalting its Virtues; and Chemistry teaches us on several occasions, that
Nature is a better Preparer of Medicines than Art. Any Physician may be
experimentally convinced of this Truth, by giving a Dram of the Filings of
Steel every Day in some convenient Conserve to his Patients, to open
Obstructions and destroy Worms; and the same may be given, with Success, to
Maids that are troubled with the Green Sickness.

Or you may give the Horse four Ounces of Powder of Cinnabar in a Pound of
fresh Butter, which will not leave a Worm alive in his Body, and the Dose may
be repeated upon occasion.

Mercurius Dulcis is also an excellent Remedy, with a double quantity of the
Cordial-Powder, that is, half an Ounce of Mercury, mixed with an Ounce of Powder.

CHAP. CXVI. A Powder for heat and disturbance in the Flanks.
THE following Powder is of excellent use for Horses that are troubled with
disordered Flanks, and begin to be Short-Winded, though it does not absolutely
Cure 'em. To keep their Flanks fresh and cool, you must give it once a Year for
twenty Days together; by which Method I preserved a Horse as fresh as a Colt,
for six Years, who was manifestly Short-Winded, but not much troubled with a
Cough. Take Bay Berries, gathered from a Laurel-Tree of Italy or Provence,
Myrrh, Gentian, and Round Birthwort, of each eight Ounces; Agaric four Ounces;
Saffron, two Drams; beat each Ingredient severally to Powder, then mix and
searce 'em through a fine Hair-Sieve. The Dose is a Silver-Spoonful every Morning
in a Quart of White Wind, and the Horse must be kept Bridled an Hour before,
and as long after. Repeat the Dose once a Day till the whole Powder be
consumed; and if you have not the convenience of giving it with a Horn, you may
give it in moistened Bran fifteen Days together, or longer.

In the mean time the Horse may be moderately ridden, but you must never make
him Sweat, if you can possibly avoid it: if his Body be full of corrupt
Humors, they may hinder the Operation of the Powder.

Experience will convince you of the usefulness of this Remedy for Horses that
are troubled with the Flanks before they are evidently Pursive, for it cools
their Flanks, and perfectly allays the disturbances of those Parts; and
besides, it gives ease for a time to those that are Short-Winded. I am not
ignorant, that it is the usual Method of Farriers, to administer Cooling
Remedies to Pursive Horses; but the efficacy of this Powder, which is of a very
different Nature, must certainly oblige 'em to own, that though there are some
signs of Heat in the Flanks, the original cause or principle of all these
Disturbances is Cold, that is, a viscous and heavy Phlegm, that obstructs the
Veins, or the Passages of respiration. And this observation may serve to deter
all those who are not perfectly acquainted with the Causes and Effects of a
Disease, from attempting the Cure of it.

Purgation is very troublesome to Short-Winded Horses, and therefore ought to
be omitted; but in cases of extreme necessity you may loosen your Horses Belly
without any disturbance, after the following manner.

How to Loosen a Pursive Horse's Belly.
Keep your Horse two Days without Drinking, and in the mean time give him his
usual allowance of Food, but you must not ride him; then offer him a Pail-full
of Water, and as soon as he has swallowed one Draught, pull up his Head, and
restrain him from drinking more, till you have poured two Pounds of the best
Oil-Olive into the Pail; after which, suffer him to drink up all the Water and
Oil, which will loosen his Belly, and supple the surface of the Guts, that were
dried by the heat occasioned by Putrefaction. Thus the Excrements or peccant
Humors that were lodged in the Passages will be evacuated, without disturbing
or over-turning the economy or natural disposition of the Body, and the Horse
will be very sensibly relieved, supposing that you were convinced by certain
and evident signs of the necessity of Purgation. To prevent the loss of the
Oil, if the Horse should refuse to drink it, you may make an Essay, by pouring
a little Oil upon the Water, and offering it to the Horse, for there are some
Horses who will not taste it, though at the same time they are extremely
tormented with Thirst, by reason of the aversion they have for all unctuous
things; and therefore the surest way is to give him two Pounds of fresh and
sweet Oil-Olive with a Horn, keeping him Bridled four Hours before, and as long
after; for thus you need not make him abstain so long from Drinking, as you
must do if you give him the Oil mixed with Water; however, you may choose which
Method you like best, but the last is certainly the surest. After the Purgation
you may repeat the use of the abovementioned Powder, which in that case will
operate very powerfully; and if, after all, the Horse continue Short-Winded,
you may conclude that the Cure will be very difficult, if not impossible.

If you administer the Oil, without very apparent signs of an urgent necessity,
you must expect to be alarmed with the ill Consequences of a Preposterous
Purgation; for if your Horse be of a Choleric Constitution, or have too much
Fire in his Temper, he will absolutely forsake his Meat, and swell eight or ten
Hours after the Dose in so prodigious a manner, that you would think he was
just ready to burst: But the danger is not so great as the Swelling seems to
threaten, and you may easily preserve your Horses Life by observing these
Directions. After you have walked him half an Hour, give him a Clyster of Beer,
and the Scoriae of Antimony, such as you will find described in several parts
of this Book; half an Hour after walk him again for the space of an Hour; and
as soon as you bring him into the Stable inject another Clyster, which will
open your Horse's Body, and produce a plentiful Evacuation for twenty four
Hours; nor must you be surpised, if he refuse to eat during that time, for his
Appetite will return after the Purgation is over.

These Disorders never happen to Horses that are of a most Constitution, lazy,
and full of Humors; in which case you may administer a Purgative Remedy
safely, and with good Success.

This diversity of Constitutions must be observed with a great deal of care and
sagacity.

CHAP. CXVII. An excellent Powder for Pursive Horses.
TAke three Pounds of Linseed, and spread 'em in an Earthen Pan; then put the
Pan into an Oven, as soon as the Bread is taken out; shut the Oven, and stir
the Seed in the Pan once every Hour. Continue after the same manner to put the
Pan into the Oven, immediately after the Bread is taken out, till the Seeds
grow dry and brittle, and all their Moisture be exhaled. Then take two Pounds
of Liquorice rasp'd, or rather a Pound of the black Juice of Liquorice, which
is more effectual, and almost as cheap; Aniseeds half a Pound, Sage, and Leaves
and Flowers of Hyssop dried, of each half a Pound, Carduus Benedictus, and
Leaves and Flowers of Lesser Centory, of each four Ounces; Leaves of Long
Birthwort, two Ounces; Speedwel, and Sanicle, of each two handfuls; Roots of
Elecampane, four Ounces; Comfrey, and Roots of Marshmallows, or Mallows, of
each two Ounces; Gentian, half an Ounce; Missleto of the Oak, two Ounces; dry
all the Ingredients in the Shade, reduce each of 'em to Powder apart, mix 'em
together carefully, and preserve the Powder in a Leathern-Bag close tied.

Give the Horse every Morning two small Silver Spoonfuls of the Powder in two
Measures of moistened Wheat-Bran, making him fast an Hour and a half after it.
At Noon and at Night mix a Spoonful with his Oats, which must be also
moistened; and in the mean time give him no Hay, but only good Wheat-Straw.

If your Horse be not eased by a methodical use of this Remedy, you may
conclude his Disease to be incurable.

I thought it needless to treat particularly of the Cough, because the
abovementioned Remedies cure that Symptom as well as the Distemper for which
they are prescribed, since both proceed from the same Cause. I am not ignorant
that the Cure proceeds more successfully when Pursiveness is the only
Distemper, than when it is accompanied with a Cough; and it is to be observed,
that either a Cough or heaving in the Flanks, may be singly cured without much
difficulty, but when they are both joined together, they are not easily to be
removed.

The successful effects of those Powders gave me occasion to consider, and
endeavor to discover the reason why cooling Remedies are not only useless, but
oftentimes hurtful in a Disease that is accompanied with so many signs of Heat.
And after a tedious Examination of the Nature and Circumstances of this
Distemper, I was inclined to believe (as I hinted before) that its original
cause is almost always Cold, since it usually proceeds from tough and
phlegmatic Humors that obstruct both the Veins and Passages of Respiration:
The adventitious and accidental Heat communicated to Water by the Fire does not
change or destroy its natural coldness; and the same Observation may be applied
to those cold and phlegmatic Humors when they are heated by Putrefaction,
which occasions a Fermentation and Ebullition, accompanied with external signs
of Heat, though the Humors are still really Cold. From hence it is plain, that
though a cooling Remedy may allay the Fermentation for some time, the Disease
will be afterward more confirmed, since the Phlegm that causes it is not only
increased by the coldness of the Medicine, but grows thicker, and consequently
more apt to obstruct the passage of the Blood that ought to nourish and refresh
the Lungs, which are dried and corrupted for want of those usual and necessary
Supplies. Thus it is evident, that the cooling of the Lungs does not remove the
cause of the Distemper, or the obstruction of the Vessels, which can never be
taken away by cold Remedies; and therefore we are obliged to have recourse to
cutting and attenuating Medicines, mixed with Cordials, without which they are
wholly ineffectual.

Supposing the truth of this Assertion, it may be inquired, why Hay, which is
naturally hot, is so hurtful in this case, and always increases the Cough, and
the disturbance in the Flanks? This difficulty may be easily removed, by
considering, that Hay, by reason of its Heat, augments the Ebullition and
Fermentation of the corrupt Humors; and besides, produces a greater quantity
of Blood than what is usually generated by Straw, which being interrupted in
its Motion, is putrefy'd, and augments the Fermentation of the Humors. It may
be also alleged, that the Water which overflows the Fields and Meadows, covers
the Hay with a thin and sharp Slime, almost imperceptible to the Eye, that
dries the Lungs, and occasions a Cough. Besides, Hay is full of a piercing
Nitre, that irritates and dries the Lungs; whereas Straw is a Drier, and less
substantial Nourishment, and contains a smaller quantity of that Nitre which
abounds in the substance of Hay, as might be easily demonstrated by a
particular Analysis or Examination of its constituent Particles.

I submit this Hypothesis to the Judgment of the Candid Reader; but since all
the Observations I have hitherto had occasion to make, confirm the truth of
that Opinion, I must beg leave to retain it, till it be disproved either by
Reason or Experience; and to conclude, that purely Cooling Remedies are rather
hurtful than profitable in this case; and that the only effectual Medicines for
the Cure of this Distimper are such as are of a temperate Nature, or inclined
rather to Heat than Cold.

CHAP. CXVIII. Of the Cure of Pursivenss with Eggs.
SInce nothing ought to be neglected for the Cure of Horses that are troubled
with Pursiveness, or an Indisposition in their Flanks, you may try the Virtues
of the following Remedies, which, though very common, are certainly good.

Take a Dozen of new-laid Eggs, and pour a sufficient quantity of strong
Vinegar upon 'em, that is, till it rise an Inch above 'em, leaving 'em to
macerate in the Vinegar, till the Shell be wholly consumed, and only the Film
or Skin remain that incloses the Egg. Then having kept your Horse bridled all
Night, make him swallow all the Eggs entire, one after another, giving him so
much of the Vinegar with every Egg that the whole may be consumed with the
Eggs. As soon as you have given him the last Egg, cover him well, and walk him
gently for the space of two Hours; then unbridle him, and give him moistened
Bran instead of Oats, suffering him to eat no Hay. This Vinegar loses its
sharpness; and I have seen it given for the Cure of Quartan Fevers, with a
prodigious Success: And indeed it is the Vinegar alone that performs the Cure;
for the Salt of the Egg-Shells is a true Alkali, which having blunted and
sweetn'd the Acid of the Vinegar, takes hold of the Acid that causes the
Disorders in the Lungs; and from this Union there results a kind of Saline
Substance agreeable to Nature, whereas before it fretted and pricked the Lungs
by its vehement Acidity; for the sweetn'd Vinegar serves only for a Vehicle to
convey the Salt of the Egg-shells, which quickly leaves its Menstruum, and
sucks up the abovementioned Acid. It Is plain then that this Remedy is endu'd
with more excellent Virtues than the Commonness of the Ingredients seems to
promise. The use of it may be repeated if need require; and there cannot be a
more effectual and less chargeable Remedy proposed.

The Emetic or Angelic Powder for Pursiveness.
The Angelic Powder is an excellent Preparation of Antimony, called by
Chemists, Algarot, Butter of Antimony, Oleum Glaciale, Emetic Powder, and the
White Eagle. I shall first describe the Method of preparing it, and afterward
consider its Virtues.

Take Corrosive Sublimate and crude Antimony, of each one Pound in Powder, mix
'em in a Glass Retort, so large that two third parts of it may remain empty,
and place it in an Earthen Pot of sufficient strength to resist the Fire, with
a Lay of Ashes of the thickness of two Inches between the bottom of the Pot and
that of the Retort. Then fill the Pot with Ashes till the Retort be almost
covered with 'em. The Beak of the Retort must hang down, and the Matter
contained in it must not be above an Inch lower than the beginning of its Neck.
Set the Pot in a common Furnace, with a very moderate heat for the space of two
hours, after which augment the Fire, and set a Glassfull of Water under the
Beak of the Retort at a considerable distance from it. When the Distillation
begins, the Drops that fall into the Water will turn to a very White Powder, if
there be no Error committed in the Operation; but if the Fire was too violent
at first, the Powder will be of a Gray Color, and of no value. If the Powder
be white, continue the Distillation, augmenting the Fire by degrees. Sometimes
the Liquor in its Passage through the Neck of the Retort, congeals, and stops the
Distillation: But if you hold a Cole for some time near the Neck, and blow upon
it, the Butter will melt, and begin again to drop into the Water. Toward the
end of the Operation increase the Heat to the highest degree; and after the
Distillation is over, and the Vessels cold, pour off the Water, and wash the
White Powder with fresh Water so often, till that which is poured off at last
be wholly insipid. Then dry the Powder, and preserve it as one of the best
Preparations of Antimony.

Note that in this Preparation the Acid Spirits of Salt and Vitriol that kept
the Mercury in the Form of a Crystalline Salt, called Corrosive Sublimate, are
separated by the Fire from the Mercury, and united to the Reguline part of the
Antimony which they raise, and bring along with 'em through the Neck of the
Retort, in form of a thick Liquor. In the mean time the Mercury being freed
from those Spirits, joins it self to the Sulphur of the Antimony, and both
together are sublimated in the form of Cinnabar, to the top of the Retort. To
proceed to the Use and Virtues of this Preparation.

Infuse half an Ounce of the Angelical Powder all Night, stirring it two or
three times, and in the Morning pour off the clear Wine, without raising or
shaking the Powder at the bottom.

Having kept your Horse two Hours bridled, give him the Quart of Wine and the
Powder mixed together, and afterward rinse the Pot or Horn with half a Pint of
Wine, that none of the Remedy may be lost; then let the Horse stand two Hours
bridled, and renew the Dose once every two Days for the space of a Month, till
the Cure be perfected.

Or you may with less trouble give half an Ounce of the Powder every Morning in
moistened Bran for fifteen or twenty Days.

Whatever Method you think fit to take for administering the Powder, you must
always remember to walk your Horse gently an Hour or two every Day; and even
you may make him perform his usual Service; only you must neither ride him too
hard, nor make him sweat too much.

The Angelical Powder may be exhibited very safely, and with good Success to
Men, for the curing of Intermitting Fevers. The Dose is from two to six Grains
in any convenient Vehicle, or from two to four Ounces of its Infusion in Wine.
It cures the Plague being given in Substance, when the Disease begins to
appear, before the Patient's Strength be wasted.

CHAP. CXIX. The Yellow Pills for short-winded Horses.
THis is an excellent Remedy, and infallibly performs the Cure, if it be not
absolutely impossible.

Take half an Ounce of Gum Tragacanth, one Dram of Oriental Saffron in Powder;
infuse and macerate 'em in a Pint of Colts-Foot-Water till it turn to a Gelly:
Then take two Pounds of Glass of Antimony very transparent, and of a Citron
Color, beat it to a fine Powder, and mix it in a Mortar by degrees, with the
Gelly or Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, beating and incorporating them with the
Pestle, till they be reduced to a Mass that will retain any Figure: Make it up
into Pills weighing nine Drams each, and having dried 'em on the bottom of a
Strainer turned upwards, keep 'em in a Box. These Pills are incorruptible.

Make your Horse eat one of 'em every Day reduced to Powder, and mixed with
moistne'd Bran; and in the mean time you may ride him, and if he forsake his
Meat, forbear repeating the Pills till he begin to recover his Appetite. If the
heaving in his Flanks be increased instead of being abated, it is a Sign that
the Lungs are incurably ulcerated, and therefore you must entirely lay aside
the use of the Pills, which in this Case would only hasten his Death.

The same Dose may be also given in a Pint of White Wind, after the Horse has
stood bridled two Hours. You must also keep him bridled two Hours after, and in
the mean time may give him his usual Allowance of Food, observing the
abovementioned Directions concerning the Heaving or Palpitation of the Flanks,
and the loss of Appetite. If you perceive that he begins to relish his Meat
again, repeat the Dose for thirty Days together, observing still that if the
Palpitation of his Flanks be augmented, the use of the Pills must be absolutely
discontinu'd. But if neither that Symptom be increased, nor his Appetite quite
lost, you must continue the use of the Pills till the whole quantity that was
prepared be consumed; for, as I intimated before, the most stubborn Pursiveness
will yield to this Remedy, if the Disease be not altogether incurable.

At first your Horse perhaps will grow lean, and seem to be wasted; but he will
afterward recover his Flesh, and grow fatter than before. This Remedy must
never be administered to Horses that have weak and tender Stomachs; for even
the greatest Feeders are wont sometimes to forsake their Meat on this Occasion,
and will neither taste Bran nor Oats; in which Case you must forbear giving 'em
any more Pills till their Appetite be restored; but many Horses undergo the
whole Course without losing one Stroke of their Teeth. When the Lungs are
ulcerated or putrefi'd, these Pills will certainly kill your Horse, if you
continue the use of 'em after he has lost his Appetite; but when the Disease is
incurable, as it is in this case, the best way is to dispatch him speedily.

The Glass of Antimony may be also prepared and exhibited after this manner.
Mix half a Pound of it with two Pounds of the Dough of a Loaf, kneading 'em
together till the Powder be thoroughly incorporated with the Dough; then bake
the Loaf, and two Days after give the Horse an eighth part of it, repeating the
same Dose every Morning, till he has eaten two Pounds, if he do not lose his
Appetite, and if the heaving in his Flanks be not augmented.

This Remedy removes obstructions, and opens the Passages very effectually,
cooling the Lungs that were heated for want of Air; and the Natural Temperament
of that Part being restored, the Horse will recover his Health and Breath
without any Difficulty.

The Charge of the two Pounds of Pills will not amount to above Seven Livres,
allowing a moderate Gain to him who prepares 'em; for Glass of Antimony is sold
very cheap at Paris.

Tincture of Sulphur for Short-winded Horses.
Since Sulphur is the Balsam of the Lungs, the Tincture, containing its pure
Substance, or Essential Salt, must certainly be a very effectual Remedy in this
Case; for this Distemper being accompanied with a Redundancy of putrefi'd,
tough, and viscous Humors, requires a powerful cutting Medicine; and it is
certain that the Operation of Minerals is more effectual than what can be
expected from Vegetables. The Remedy is thus prepared.

Take Powder of Brimstone and unslak'd Lime, of each one Pound, put 'em into a
glazed Earthen-Pot, capable of containing fifteen Quarts, placing it in a
Furnace full of live Coals, and stirring uninterruptedly, till the Matter break
forth in a bluish Flame, which proceeds from the Sulphur; then pour in about
twelve Quarts of boiling Water, stirring the Matter perpetually to prevent its
growing hard. After six or seven Waums, the boiling Water will be tinged with
the Color of the Brimstone; and after it has boiled half a quarter of an Hour,
it will be impregnated with the Tincture, and must be poured off from the
Matter.

Take four Pints and a half of this Tincture, and boil it for the space of half
a quarter of an Hour in a large Pot, with three handfuls of the Leaves of
Coltsfoot chopped small, three Roots of Ellecampane stamped in a Mortar, and
three Stalks of Liquorice beaten; then infuse them in hot Ashes all Night, and
in the Morning set it over the Fire till it grow hot; after which strain out
the Liquor, and make your Horse drink it up, keeping him bridled two Hours
before and as long after, and walking him gently for the space of half an Hour.
Repeat the Dose five Days together, after which let him rest two Days; then
give him his Potion five Days, as before, and after two Days of Intermission,
finish the Course by exhibiting the Remedy five Days longer; at the end of
which the Horse will recover his Health if the Disease be not absolutely
incurable.

If during the use of this Remedy your Horse forsake his Meat, you must suffer
him to rest till he recover his Appetite, and then proceed as before. The
Tincture may be exhibited alone with very good Success.

This Tincture of Sulphur is by many esteemed a great Secret; but whatever it
might be called before, it cannot pretend a Right to that Title, since it is now
communicated to the Public. You may pour in twelve Pints of fresh Water into
the same Pot, and proceeding as before, make a new Tincture; and even may
repeat the Operation three or four times; but it is in vain to prepare so great
a quantity of the Remedy, unless you have three or four Horses to cure; for the
Tincture does not continue good above ten or twelve Days, after which the
Sulphur leaves the Water, and is precipitat edat the bottom of the Vessel.

An excellent Ptisan for Asthmatic Persons may be made of this Tincture, with
the Addition of Liquorice, and other convenient Druggs.

Some Gentlemen will perhaps complain of the tediousness of this Preparation:
But if they can find a Remedy to cure their Horses with less trouble, I promise
them not to be offended at the happiness of their Invention.

CHAP. CXX. Of the Cough.
PUrsiveness is almost always attended with a Cough; but the latter of these
Distempers is frequently unaccompany'd with the former.

The Cough is an extraordinary Motion of the Parts that serve for Respiration,
by which Nature endeavors to expel the Matter that offends her out of the
Lungs.

This Distemper usually proceeds from Phlegm lodged in the Canals of the
Windpipe, which is the Passage of the Air or Breath. It Is the vulgar Opinion
that a great quantity of Phlegmatic Humors distill from the Brain into the
Chest; but the Lungs of a Horse are so large, and watered with so many Vessels,
that they are sufficiently able to furnish Matter for a Cough, without
borrowing it from any other part of the Body.

The Cough is a struggling of Nature to throw off the Humor that oppresses her.

Sometimes it is the effect of a great Cold, or of the Dryness of the Passages
of the Lungs, for want of Moisture, or of the irritation of that Part by Smoke
or Dust either in the Field, or the Dust that sticks to his Hay or Oats; and
sometimes a Cough is occasioned by Drinking either Muddy, or too cold Water.

Sometimes a Horse is seized with a Cough, when, eating too greedily, some part
of his Food slips into the Passage of Respiration; but in this case there is no
need of any Remedy. When an old Horse Coughs, you may know whether he is
Pursive, by an attentive Consideration of the Circumstances of the Symptom; for
if the Cough be moist, you have no reason to suspect that your Horse is
shortwinded; but if he be dry, and often repeated, you must observe his Flanks
carefully, to know certainly whether he be Pursive. An old Cough is oftentimes
more dangerous than a beginning Pursiveness. Sometimes the Cough may be
occasioned by the Relics of a Rheum, or Foundering in the Body.

The following Powder is an excellent Remedy for all sorts of Coughs. But
before I proceed to the Description of that Medicine, it will not be improper
to communicate an Easy and Cheap, but very Essectual Remedy. Put into each of
the Horse's Ears half a Silver Spoonful of Oil of Sweet-Almonds, rubbing the
Ear very hardto make it penetrate, continuing after the same manner five or six
Days.

By this Method you may cure any Cold that proceeds from Foundering and Rheums,
even though it be accompanied with a Running at the Nose. And it is to be
observed, that this Remedy may be administered during the use of the following
Powder, since the Operation of the one does not in the least hinder or retard
that of the other.

A Powder for a Cough, whether old or newly taken.
Take Carduus Benedictus, Hyssop, Colt's-Foot, white Mullein, Fenugreek Seed
and Juice of Liquorice, of each six Ounces, Juniper Berries, Roots of
Elecampane and Flower de Luce of Florence, of each five Ounces; Cardamoms,
Gentian, Birthwort long and round, of each three Ounces; Seeds of Annise,
Cummin, and Fennel, of each an Ounce and a half; Cinnamon and Nutmegs, of each
half an Ounce; Live Sulphur half a Pound.

Beat all the Ingredients apart, and searce 'em through a fine Hair Sieve; then
mix the Powders, and keep 'em hard pressed in a close-ty'd Leathern Bag. This
Powder may be kept long, and is superior in Virtues to most other Remedies.
It Is Methodically composed, being a Mixture of Cordials and specific Remedies
for the Lungs; for since the Cough is occasioned by Flegmatic Humors rising
from the Lungs into the Windpipe; the cure of it requires a cutting and
attenuating Remedy; and all the Indications are answered by this Powder.

To a large Horse you may give two Ounces of the Powder, in a Quart of lukewarm
Beer; to those of a middle size, an Ounce and a half; and only an Ounce to
small Horses; let it stand in a cold Infusion in the Beer all Night, and in the
Morning make your Horse drink it lukewarm, keeping him Bridled two Hours
before, and as long after, and repeating it once a Day for fifteen Days. Those
who live in a Country where there is no Beer, may, instead of it, mix a Pint of
Water with a Pint of Wine; or you may give your Horse an Ounce every Morning in
moistened Bran.

If your Horse be very fat and fleshy, and consequently of a phlegmatic
Constitution, you must give him the Powder in unmixt Wine instead of Beer.

Since there are some Horses who cannot be easily made to swallow any thing
with a Horn, and the lifting up of his Head and keeping it in that Posture, may
raise the Cough; and since there are some Persons who have not the convenience
of Horns, and others who are not willing to use 'em; you may give the Powder in
moistened Bran, beginning with a small quantity, and afterward augmenting the
Dose to a handful, or two Ounces.

Some Horses at first have an Aversion to this Remedy, and therefore you must
begin with a small Dose; but afterward they became so fond of it, that they
eat their Bran more heartily when that is mixed with it. And I have even seen
some Horses eat the Powder without any Mixture, from a Man's Hand.

It will not be improper to present the Reader with a particular description of
all the Ingredients that enter the Composition of this excellent Remedy; that
such as are Novices in this Art may know the peculiar Virtues of each Simple.

If this digression seem tedious or useless to some Critical Readers, it is
presumed they will not be offended, since they may skip over it without any
trouble; and that they will be so just as to consider, that the description,
which they censure, may be perused by others with Pleasure and Advantage.

I. Carduus Benedictus is a very useful Herb, which is sown, and prospers very
well in our Gardens. It Is moderately hot; it comforts, strengthens, and
rejoices the Heart, corroborates the noble Parts, expels peccant Humors by
Sweat, resists Poison, asswages Pains in the Kidneys, and destroys Worms.

II. Hyssop is a very common Herb, and hot in the second Degree; it attenuates
Humors, and being joined to Purgative Medicines, augments their Virtue; it is
one of the Specifics for Diseases of the Breast, helps Respiration, and
strengthens the natural Heat.

III. Coltsfoot, called in Latin, Tussilago, grows in moist, sandy, and cold
Places, and is cold and moist in the first degree.

It cures Inflammations, being externally applied, and is a specific Medicine
for the Lungs that are dried by a preternatural Heat which causes a Cough. You
will find a large account of its Virtues in Dioscorides.

IV. White Mullein grows every where in the Fields, but its commonness does not
lessen the excellency of its Virtue.

It sends forth a high Stalk set round with yellow Flowers, it is cold and moist
in the second degree, and Cures Fluxes of the Belly, caused by Choleric
Humors, it is an excellent Remedy for the Cough, and allays the heat of the
Breast; it may be given either Green, or dried and reduced to Powder, and cures
the Cough in Horses, without any other Remedy.

V. Fenugreek, called by Hippocrates Epiceras, is a Seed commonly used for the
Cure of the Diseases of Horses, whom it also fattens. It Is almost Temperate; it
softens hard Swellings, and expels Wind. Galen affirms, that it cures
Inflammations that are hard, and not very hot, by Digestion; it provokes
Sweating and Urine, and makes a Horse void by the Nose, the Humors that are
lodged in the Windpipe. You must not be deceived by the Smell, which might
inc^ine you to believe that it is of a hot Nature.

VI. The Juice of Liquorice is made of the Roots of that Plant, which at
present is very common in France; it is somewhat moist, but temperate, as to
Heat or Cold. It Is a specific Remedy for the Breast, sweetens and allays the
sharpness of Humors, and helps Nature to expel 'em. And to conclude, it is an
excellent Remedy for all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs.

VII. Juniper is so well known, that it does not stand in need of a
description. The Berries are indu'd with admirable Virtues, they continue green
two Years before they come to Maturity, and are hot in the third Degree. They
provoke Urine, are good for the Stomach and Breast, resist Poison, and expel
Wind. The efficacy of these Seeds can never be sufficiently praised, and this
Simple alone is worth a multitude of Drugs.

VIII. Elecampane grows in sandy places, the Leaf is of no use, and the Root
alone is commended by Physicians; it is hot in the third degree, and of an
Aromatic Smell; it provokes Urine very powerfully, resists Poison, helps the
Cough, is good for the Breast, strengthens the Heart, and cures spitting of
Blood, and the biting of Venomous Creatures.

IX. Flower-de-luce grows plentifully in wet places, but that which is brought
from Florence is most effectual; the Root is very odoriferous, hot in the
second degree, comforts the Breast, and consumes superfluous and
excrementitious Moisture. It purges watery Humors, if a large quantity of it be
given; and its Smell chears and comforts the Brain. It enters the Composition
of Waters for the Eyes; and it is an excellent internal Medicine for Horses.

X. Cardamoms are hot; they cheer and comfort the noble Parts, strengthen the
natural Heat, expel Wind, and promote the digestion of Aliments.

XI. Gentian has its name from Gentius, King of Sclavonia; the Root is
commended by all Authors; Renodaeus says, That it is a famous Preservative
against the Plague; that it resists Putrefaction, and is an Antidote against
Poison. It comforts the Stomach, kills Worms, and is an excellent Remedy for
the biting of Venomous Beasts.

XII. The Birthworts round and long, are dedicated to the Spleen; they dispel
Vapors, resist Poison and Putrefaction, heat and dry up superfluous Moisture,
close and heal Ulcers in the Lungs and other internal Parts, and assuage Pains
in the Kidneys.

XIII. Anniseed is one of the four great hot Seeds, and, according to Galen, is
hot and dry in the third degree. It Is a powerful Resolvent, provokes Urine, and
expels Wind. Dioscorides, in the Sixty second Chapter of his Third Book, says,
That none of the Seeds that are usually eaten are more agreeable to the Stomach.

XIV. Cummin-seed is hot and dry in the second degree. It Is a good Remedy for
Griping of the Guts caused by Wind, it dries up Milk, and strengthens the
Stomach. It Is prescribed to correct Purgative Medicines.

XV. Fennel is hot in the second degree; it strengthens the Stomach, discusses
Wind, dispels Vapors that cause the Headache, and provokes Urine.

XVI. Cinnamon is an odoriferous Bark very much in use, and considerably hot.
It Is endu'd with an admirable faculty to rejoice the Heart; it helps Digestion,
and ripens tough and viscous Matter. 'Twou'd be needless to trouble the Reader
with a particular description of two Simples that are so generally known as
Cinnamon and Nutmeg.

XVII. Brimstone is a fat, unctuous, and inflammable Mineral, found in the
Bowels of the Earth, either pure or mixed, and sometimes separated by Art from
certain Waters. We call that Live Brimstone which is found in certain Mines,
where it is Refined, and afterward brought to us in Rolls. It Is the Balsam of
the Lungs, a singular Remedy for the Cough, and shortness of Breath, and
purifies the Blood. It Is a vulgar Error, that it is of a hot Nature, because
it is easily Inflammable.

If you examine this Account of the Drugs that enter the Composition of the
abovementioned Powder, you will find that they are all agreeable to the Stomach,
and that some of 'em attenuate thick Humors, and assist Nature to expel what
offends her. You may make the Powder more durable by reducing it into the form
of an Electuary. Boil a sufficient quantity of Honey, (that is, about six times
the weight of the Powder) to half the thickness of a Syrup; then mix the Powder
with the Honey while it is moderately hot, without setting it again upon the
Fire. The Dose is four Ounces in a Quart of Wine. That you may proceed with
more exactness in preparing the Electuary, you may consult the description of
that which follows in the next Chapter.

When the Matter is tough and clammy, it sticks too fast; and when it is very
thick it resists too long; so that notwithstanding Nature's endeavors to expel
it, it sinks and falls down again by its own proper weight, and especially if
the Passages by which Nature usually throws it forth, are obstructed. And
therefore if Nature be not assisted by a powerful Remedy, such as this Powder,
the Disease will be of long continuance, and at last degenerate to Pursiveness.

CHAP. CXXI. An Electuary for a Cough, caused by Preternatural Heat.
TAke Sal-Polychrest, and ripe Juniper Berries, of each one Pound; Roots of
Marshmallows and Elecampane, and Juice of Liquorice, of each half a Pound;
Zedoary and Sassafras, of each four Ounces; Speedwel dried, two Ounces; beat
all the Ingredients severally to Powder; then take a sufficient quantity of the
Leaves of Coltsfoot, White-Mullein, and Red Maidenhair; boil 'em in Water to
four Quarts; strain out the Liquor, and add ten Pounds of Honey, boiling 'em to
half the thickness of a Syrup till two Quarts of the Decoction be consumed, and
skimming all the while; mix the Powders with the Honey, while it is half cold,
till they be well incorporated, and reduced to an Electuary, which must be set
to ferment in a Pot for the space of twenty or thirty Days in Summer; but in
cold Weather the Fermentation will require a longer time, and you must never
use the Electuary till it be duly Fermented. Electuaries and Confections are
more effectual than Powders, by reason of the Fermentation that Concentrates,
and afterward exalts the Virtues of the Ingredients. Avicen was certainly of
this Opinion, for he expressly affirms, That the Virtue, or Efficacy of a
Medicine is doubled by Fermentation. And besides, a Remedy may be kept longer
in this form, without losing its Virtue, it is more easily swallowed, and sooner
wrought upon by the natural Heat in the Stomach. This Electuary does very
powerfully allay the boiling and preternatural heat of the Stomach; and
therefore is an excellent Remedy for fiery and mettlesome Horses, that pine
away after hard Labor or violent Exercise, even though they be not troubled with
a Cough: In this case you must take away their Oats, feed 'em with hot Bran,
and give 'em a Dose of this Electuary once every Day for fifteen or twenty
Days; after which they will be in a thriving Condition.

For the satisfaction of the curious, I shall, in few Words, explain the Nature
of Fermentation. It derives its Name from Fermentum or Leven, which is a
Contraction of Fervimentum from Fervere, to be hot or to boil. It may be thus
defined, Fermentation is a Motion, by which, in a Mixture of different
Substances, those that are most subtle, agitate and dilate the rest. We may see
Examples of it in Dough, in Wine, and several other Substances.

Golden or Red Maidenhair is one of the Ingredients of the Syrup, called the
Syrup of the Capillary Herbs.

Marsh-Mallow Roots are common at Paris; but those who cannot procure 'em may
take double the quantity of the dried Leaves of Coltsfoot. The Dose is four
Ounces for Coach-Horses, infused all Night in three Pints of Beer, and drunk
lukewarm in the Morning. The Horse must be kept Bridled two Hours before, and
as long after the Dose; and in those Countries where there is no Beer to be
had, the Medicine may be Infused in an equal mixture of Wine and Water.

This Electuary is endu'd with all the Virtues of the abovementioned Powder;
and besides, allays the preternatural Heat that usually accompanies the Cough.
But if that Distemper be occasioned by cold, tough, and flegmatic Humors, you
must not administer so cooling a Remedy; and therefore, if after the first and
second Dose, you perceive that his Hair begins to stare, or that he forsakes
his Meat, or Shivers, you must give him the Powder instead of the Electuary;
but if none of these signs appear, persist in the use of the latter, which will
effectually cure the oldest and most inveterate Cough. It happens not
unfrequently, that after seven or eight Doses of the Electuary the Horse begins
to scour as if he had taken a purging Medicine; but you must still continue to
give him a Dose once a Day, for it is a sign that the Remedy operates
effectually.

You must persist in the daily use of the Electuary, till the Cough be
perfectly cured. It Is a singular Remedy for those Horses whose Lungs are dried
up by excessive Heat, for it moistens the Part, and restores it to its natural
temper.

But since the Cure of this Distemper may be sometimes performed with less
Charge and Trouble, I shall propose some other Remedies.

Other Powders for a Cough.
Take Femugreek and ^^^wers of Brimstone, of each an equal quantity, and mix
'em with moistened Oats.

Brimstone alone may be given with Oats; but the Flowers are better.

A Pound of Honey put into a Pail-full of Water, and used for ordinary Drink is
excellent for a Cough, as I intimated before.

I have already described a Cordial Powder for the Cure of this Distemper.

A small handful of Hemp Seed mixed with Oats, and given to a fat and fleshy
Horse, cures the Cough, if the use of it be long continued.

The same quantity of Hemp Seed may be beaten and infused in White Wind all
Night, and both the Wine and the Seed given to the Horse in the Morning.

A Cough may be also cured by giving the Horse a handful of Juniper Berries,
every Day for a considerable time.

Take the Wood and Leaves of Tamarisk, either dry or green (though the latter is
best) stamp 'em, and give 'em to your Horse with moistened Oats or Bran,
beginning with a small quantity, and augmenting the Dose every Day to a large
Spoonful.

A Remedy for the Cough.
Take a Pound of newly churn'd Butter, before it is washed, and a like quantity
of Honey, with two Ounces of Juniper Berries beaten; mix and make Pills,
rolling 'em up with Powder of Liquorice. Give your Horse a Dose with a Pint or
a Pint and half of White Wind, keeping him Bridled two Hours before, and three
Hours after. Repeat the same two or three times, interposing a Day or two
between the Doses.

Another Remedy.
Take of clear Oil of Walnuts newly drawn, one Pint; common Honey, a Pound; and
thirty Grains of White-Repper beaten. Incorporate 'em all together, and give
the whole quantity to the Horse. Repeat the Dose if there be occasion, and the
second will perfect the Cure.

Grate two or three Nutmegs, and give 'em to your Horse with half a Pint of
Brandy. One Dose of this Remedy has often cured the Cough; but if the Horse be
old you must repeat it, or prepare that which follows.

Take a small Porringer of dry Pigeon's-Dung, beat it and infuse it all Night
in a Quart of White Wind; in the Morning heat it till it begin to boil, then
strain out the Liquor, add two Ounces of Juice of Liquorice, and make your
Horse drink it up. Repeat the same thrice, interposing one Day between the
Doses; after which the Cough will probably be cured.

The English Pills for an Old Cough.
An Inveterate Cough is one of the most stubborn Distempers incident to Horses.
I have already proposed several Remedies, that have been often, but not always
attended with Success. The following Pills cured Horses that were troubled with
this Distemper six Months, and sometimes a whole Year, after a fruitless Trial
of other Remedies.

Take Flower of Brimstone four Ounces, Annis^eds beaten, two Ounces, Liquorice
dried in the shade and beaten, four Ounces, Bay Berries in fine Powder, four
Ounces, brown Sugar Candy six Ounces, good Treacle four Ounces, Oil-Olive eight
Ounces, Tarr two Ounces. Beat 'em in a Mortar till they be well incorporated,
and mix 'em with four Eggs beaten in a Dish without the Shells, breaking 'em
all together in a Mortar till they be reduced to a hard Mass or Paste. Make
Pills weighing ten Drams each, and dry 'em in the Shade on a Hair Sieve turned
upside down.

When you intend to give your Horse this Remedy, let him have his usual
Allowance of Meat, and then make him swallow a whole Pill in a Pint of Red or
White Wine. It Is not absolutely necessary to keep him Bridled, before you
exhibit the Medicine; but it is certainly most convenient to let him stand
Bridled an Hour before: You must always remember to walk him about an Hour
after, and then you may ride him; and in the mean time you may either work or
ride him, or put him in a Coach; or if not, you must keep him Bridled two Hours
after the Dose. Continue after the same manner to give him a Pill once a day
till the Cough be wholly cured; if the Distemper be inveterate the Cure will at
least require twenty Doses.

The same Pills may be also beaten, and mixed with moistened Bran.

They may be kept very long, and never grow moudly, though they are almost always
moist. Though your Horse be not troubled with the Cough, to preserve him from
accidental Inconveniences, you may give him one of these Pills in the Morning
before Hunting, or hard Riding.

CHAP. CXXII. Of. Ch^st-Foundering, and Foundering accompanied with a Fever.
THis Kind of Foundering is a preternatural Heat, caused by the Fermentation of
Humors in the Guts, and Passages of Respiration, and is accompanied with the
same Signs that denote Pursiveness; but the Symptoms are more violent: Only
there is this difference between these two Distempers, that there are few
Horses troubled with Pursiveness at the Age of six Years, whereas there are
many foundered.

This Distemper is often occasioned by riding a Horse from his Wind, and beyond
his Strength. It frequently accompanies the Melting of the Grease, and
sometimes it is occasioned by the Application of a violent Caustic, or giving
the Fire too roughly, for the Cure of Diseases in the Feet; but in this last
Case the Distemper is not dangerous, since it may be easily Cured, by injecting
one or two Clysters with Sal Polychrest.

Sometimes this follows some other Distempers, when the Humors that fomented
'em are not entirely evacuated, and continue to send up sharp, hot, and
malignant Vapors, which irritate the Lungs, and cause the extraordinary Motion
that is observed in 'em.

Horses are also Subject to this Distemper, if they be suffered to feed on
corrupt Provender when they are Young as Grass; frozen in the Meadows, during
the Winter, which putrefies in the Body, and breeds a Ferment that occasions
either this, or some other dangerous Distemper.

It Is caused by an Obstruction in the Passages of the Lungs, which hinders
Respiration; if this Obstruction be newly generated, or proceed from hot and
subtle Matter, it may be easily cured by the Application of convenient
Remedies, if it be not accompanied with a Fever, in which Case it is frequently
Mortal.

The Remedies prescribed for the Cure of this Distemper ought to be temperate,
and rather inclining to Cold than Heat, to allay and stop the Fermentation and
Ebullition of the Humors; whereas the Medicines that are prescribed to pursive
Horses, must be rather Hot than Cold. In the Cure of this Distemper we must
endeavor to allay the Heat that occasions the Boiling of the Humors,
prescribing all the Medicines in a liquid Form, to dilute and qualify the Heat
of the Ingredients; The Electuary prescribed in the preceding Chapter for the
Cough, is very useful in this Case, and will certainly perform the Cure if it
be administered regularly and repeated for a considerable Time.

If your Horse eat heartily you may cure him of his Distemper by giving him
every Day from one to two Ounces of Liver of Antimony mixed with moistened
Bran; but if he be naturally squeamish, or has lost his Appetite on this
Occasion, 'twill be in vain to attempt this Method.

If the Horse be Young, and not troubled with a Fever, the surest and easiest
Method of Cure is to turn him out to Grass, when the Herbs begin to spring
forth, and to leave him in the open Fields under the Dew, during the Months of
April and May; for the young dewy Grass will scowre his Body, and open the
Passages. Green Barley is also an excellent Remedy for this Distemper.

If this Method be impracticable, by reason of the Inconveniency of the Place,
or of the Season of the Year, you may observe the following Directions.

Feed your Horse with Wheat-Sheaves and Barley, without allowing him either Hay
or Oats; Let him blood in the Flanks at the New Moon, and the next Day give him
a softening and opening Clyster, which may be thus prepared. Take of the five
opening Roots beaten, that is, the Roots of Grass, Madder, Eringo, or Sea-holm,
Capers and Rest-Harrow, of each an Ounce, Sal Polychrest half an Ounce; boil
the Ingredients in five Pints of Water for a Quarter of an Hour: after which
add the five softening Herbs, namely, Mallows, Marshmallows, Mercury, Violets,
and Pellitory of the Wall, of each a Handful; Boil 'em a quarter of an Hour
longer, then strain the Decoction, add half a Pound of Honey prepared with the
Herb Mercury, and inject it by way of Clyst^^ in the Evening, repeating the
same five or six Days together.

The Day after the administering of the last Clyster, take White Mullein and
Coltsfoot, of each two Handfuls: Chop 'em, and boil 'em in three Pints of Water
for a quarter of an Hour, with half an Ounce of Sal Polychrest in Powder.
As Soon as you remove the Vessel from the Fire, add three Handfuls of fresh
Corn-Poppy Flowers, or half an Ounce of the same Flowers dried, and covering
the Pot, let 'em stand in Infusion, till the Liquor be half cold; then strain,
and adding an Ounce of Juice of Liquorice, give the whole Decoction to your
Horse with a Horn, at Night inject the Clyster, and next Morning repeat the
Decoction. Administer the same Remedies once every two Days, for the Space of
twelve Days; but if, during that time, the Horse forsake his Meat, you must
endeavor to restore his Appetite, by making him champ on a Chewing-Ball two
Hours in the Morning, and as long after Dinner, and forbear the Use of the
Decoction till he begins to eat heartily: but this Inconveniency may be
prevented, notwithstanding the Use of the abovementioned Remedies, by giving
him two Ounces of Liver of Antimony in Bran every Day, when he is not obliged
to take the Decoction; which will not only preserve his Appetite, but promote
the Cure.

If these Remedies prove ineffectual, and the Disease continue for a
considerable Time, it may at last degenerate to Pursiveness; to prevent which,
if your Horse be of a phlegmatic Constitution, Slow, and Lazy, you may give him
the following Remedy, to expel the thick and slimy Phlegm; but if he be of a
dark Sorrel Color, or fiery and full of Mettle, this Medicine would make him
extremely sick, though a Couple of Clysters administered in the Height of the
Sickness, might perhaps prevent the ill Effects of it, if you take care in the
mean time to walk him frequently. And besides it is to be observed, that this
Remedy must not be given to a Horse either in the Beginning of the Disease, or
when it is accompanied with a Fever; for it would purge his Life out of his Body.

Take two or three Pounds of Fat of Bacon cut into thin Slices, steep it in
Water till it be fresh, changing the Water five or six times once every two
Hours; in the mean time take red Colewort, not a headed Cabbage, and white
Mullein, of each two large Handfuls, Carduus Benedictus, one Handful; Chop 'em
small, and beat 'em to a Mash in a Mortar, with the fresh Fat of Bacon. Form
this Mass into Pills like Tennis-Balls, and roll 'em up with Powder of
Liquorice, that they may not stick to your Fingers when you put 'em into the
Horse's Mouth. After the Horse has taken six or seven of these Pills, give him
a little Wine with a Horn, or even after every Pill, if you perceive that your
Horse swallows 'em with Difficulty; and after he has taken all the Pills, wash
his Mouth with a Pint of Wine, and afterward pour it down his Throat; besides
which you must allow another Pint to be taken with the Pills. The Horse must
stand bridled four Hours before, and as long after.

If this Remedy be attended with Success, to complete the Cure you must begin
the former Course with the Decoctions and Clysters; but if it proves
ineffectual, administer the following Remedy.

Take the Leaves of Red Colewort (not headed Cabbage, which is not only useless
but hurtful) and Carduus Benedictus, of each three Handfuls, White Mullein and
Colt's-foot, of each three Handfuls; Juniper Berries one Handful: Boil 'em half
an Hour in two Quarts of Water; then remove the Vessel from the Fire, and add
to the boiling Decoction two Handfuls of fresh Corn-Poppy Flowers, or one
Handful of 'em dried; Cover the Pot immediately, and when it is almost cold,
strain out the Liquor, adding as much Saffron as is sufficient to tinge it with
a yellow Color, with two Ounces of Liquid Conserve of Roses; and having given
your Horse a Clyster the Day before, make him drink up this Decoction,
repeating the same Clyster in the Evening, and continuing after the same manner
for twelve Days, if your Horse's Stomach be not disordered; in which Case you
must forbear the Use of the Remedies till his Appetite be restored.

After the twelve Days are expired, if his Flanks be sound without any
Palpitation, you must not overwhelm Nature, with a Heap of Remedies, but allow
her Time to complete the Victory, and utterly to destroy her Enemy that is
already weakened by the Medicines.

Since usually the preternatural Heat which causes the Distemper, is augmented
by the Remedies, and the internal Parts heated and wasted, 'twill be necessary
to restore the Natural, and destroy the Preternatural Heat; and to remove the
remaining Obstructions, by giving the Horse every Day an Ounce of Sal Prunellae
in Powder, and two Nutmegs grated and mixed with moistened Bran. The Use of this
Remedy must be continued for a long time, unless the Horse forsake his Meat; in
which Case instead of Sal Prunellae 'twill be convenient to give him two Ounces
of Liver of Antimony in Powder, which procures an Appetite without cooling the
Body so much as the other.

CHAP. CXXIII. Remedies for Obstructions of the Lungs, caused by Foundering.
A Young Horse who had so great an Oppression in the Flanks, that he was
thought to be Pursive, and given over for lost, was perfectly cured by the
following Remedy.

Take Carduus Benedictus, Mossie Lung-wort, chopped small, of each one Handful,
Missleto of the Oak beaten, an Ounce, Roots of Marshmallows and Elecampane
stamped in a Mortar, half an Ounce, Hyssop two Handfuls; boil the Ingredients
about half an Hour; then press out the Liquor, and add half an Ounce of Juice
of Liquorice, an Ounce of Liquorice beaten to Powder, Anniseed and Fennelseed
reduced to fine Powder, of each half an Ounce, a Scruple of Saffron, half a
Pound of Clarified Honey, and a Quart of White Wine; Mix and make a Decoction,
to be given blood-warm to the Horse at two Doses, who must stand bridled six
Hours before, and after you have walked him an Hour, must be kept bridled four
Hours longer.

This Decoction must be exhibited four Days together, then intermit three Days,
and afterward give him four Doses more. This Remedy will ease him very
considerably, and even absolutely cure him if he be Young. But if you perceive
no Benefit by the Use of it, you may exhibit the Purging Medicine described in
the preceding Chapter, observing diligently all the Circumstances and
Directions mentioned there: And afterward give him the following Powder, which
may be also given safely and with good Success, without any preceding
Evacuation.

Take three Pound of Linseed, dried in a Furnace, (according to the Method
described in one of the preceding Chapters,) Gentian three Ounces, Fenugreek
two Ounces, Elecampane an Ounce and a half, Sage and Hyssop, of each three
Ounces, Brimstone half a Pound; Mix and make a Powder. The Dose is two
Spoonfuls, mixed with Bran every Morning, till the whole Powder be taken; and
the Horse must stand bridled an Hour and a half after every Dose. If the
Disease continue still, give him a Clyster; for though it will not perfect the
Cure, it may perhaps give him Ease, if it be frequently repeated. And
afterward suffer Nature to act, for she will quickly subdue her Enemy, if you
assist her with a well-regulated Diet.

The most dangerous Kind of these Distempers is that which is accompanied with
a Fever, which not only torments the Horse extremely, but makes so quick a
progress, that it will not admit of so long a Delay as is required for the
administering of the abovementioned Remedies.

You must begin the Cure with one of these two Clysters. Make a Decoction of
the softening Herbs chopped small, and dissolving half a Pound of Honey in the
strained Liquor; inject it lukewarm: Or you may give one of these Clysters in
the Morning, and the other in the Evening if you think fit.

Boil an Ounce of Crocus Metallorum reduced to fine Powder, in five Pints of
Beer for half a Quarter of an Hour; then suffering it to settle, pour off the
Liquor, strain it through a Linen Cloth doubled, add a quarter of a Pound of
Butter; inject the whole lukewarm, and the next Day exhibit the following
Remedy.

CHAP. CXXIV. A Remedy for a Foundered Horse that is troubled with a Fever, and
very sick
TAke the distilled Waters of Carduus Benedictus, and Sccbious, of each six
Ounces, Water of the Herb called Queen of the Meadows, Cinnamon Water, and
Succory Water, of each four Ounces; Liquid Conserve of Roses, two Ounces,
Confection of Alkermes without Musk or Ambergrise, one Ounce, Treacle half a
Dram, Powder of Oriental Saffron six Grains. Mix all the Ingredients in a
Glass-Vial, and give to your Horse with a Horn, rinsing the Horn, the Vial and
your Horse's Mouth with a Mixture of the Waters of Carduus Benedictus, Succory,
and Scabious, of each an Ounce and half. This Water or Julep allays the Heat of
the Fever: Inject a Clyster about Four a Clock in the Afternoon; give the
Remedy at Six, and keep your Horse bridled till Eight.

The next Day at Four in the Afternoon, administer one of the abovementioned
Clysters; at Six, let your Horse blood in the two Plate-Veins of the Thighs,
keeping him bridled two Hours after. You may repeat the Dose of the Remedy two
or three times; but not the Bleeding, without Necessity. In the mean time, the
Horse must eat little Hay; you must frequently wash his Mouth, with Verjuice,
Salt, and Honey of Roses, and oftentimes inject one of the abovementioned
Clysters. Since I have often observed, that the Apothecaries ask an excessive
Rate for this Remedy, I thought fit to advertise those who may have Occasion to
use it, that the highest Price of it does not amount to above About 6s.
Three Livres and Ten Sous; for the Confection of Alkermes is without either
Musk or Ambergrise.

This Remedy ought to be highly esteemed by those who are Masters of good
Horses; for by the Use of it in less than a Month, I cured Four Horses of
Value, after they were past Hope of Recovery.

For your Horses Ordinary Drink. You may dissolve in a Pailful of Water the
Remedy for Fevers, consisting of Salt of Tartar, Sal Ammoniac, etc. described
in Chap. CXXXVI. If that cannot be procured, you may infuse in a Pailful of
Water, the Dough of a Peny-Loaf ready to be put into the Oven, which makes the
Water white, cools the Body of the Horse, and affords some Nourishment; and is
infinitely better than Flower, which is commonly used on this Occasion.

This is an excellent Remedy for simple Fevers, and almost for all Horses that
are troubled with a violent beating in the Flanks, proceeding from a hot Cause;
and I have even given it with good Success to Morfounded Horses, when the
Disease was accompanied with a beating in the Flanks; for though in this case hot
Remedies are required to strengthen Nature, and enable her to expel that which
offends her; yet since the Fever is augmented by the heat of the Medicines, we
must find out and exhibit a good Remedy that strengthens without much Heat,
which is the peculiar Character of the abovementioned Julep, or mixture of
Waters.

When the Fever is violent, the Sick Horse either does not lie down at all, or
if he does, starts up again immediately, by reason of the difficulty of
Breathing, that oppresses him when he lies; and therefore, if in this case your
Horse lie down, and remain long in that Posture, you may conclude him to be in
a hopeful Condition; nor must you reckon it a bad sign, though he complain more
when he lies than when he stands, for even the soundest Horses are wont to
complain when they are in that Posture. This is an important remark in the case
of all Horses that are extremely Sick, and a diligent observance of it, will
enable you to make a better Judgment of the Nature of the Distemper.

A Potion or Drink for a Foundered Horse that is very Sick, either with or
without a Cough.
Take two Pints and half of the Four Cordial Waters, viz. of Scorzonera, Queen
of the Meadows, Carduus Benedictus, and Scabious, dissolving in the same an
Ounce of Confection of Hyacinth without Musk or Ambergreece, and one
Treacle-Pill in Powder. Give this Mixture to your Horse in the Morning, and
rinse the Pot and Horn with half a Pint of Wild Succory-Water, which you must
make him drink, after you have washed his Mouth with it. Keep him Bridled three
Hours before and two Hours after, and at Night give him the following Clyster.
Take Powder of Sal Polychrest, an Ounce and a half, Pulp of Coloquintida
without the Seeds, half an Ounce; boil 'em in five Pints of Beer half a quarter
of an Hour, and in the strained Liquor dissolve a quarter of a Pound of good
Populeum; make a Clyster to be injected Lukewarm. If this Remedy prove
ineffectual, you may conclude that your Horse's Life is in danger; but if you
perceive any signs of Amendment, you must frequently repeat the Clyster, which
will very much promote the Cure.

I have sometimes given with Success a Dose of Stinking Pills to Horses
troubled with this Distemper; for though that Medicine seems at first to increase
the beating in the Flanks, it quiets all those disorders afterward; though I
must confess the same Remedy has disappointed me at other times.

The Lieutenant's Decoction for a Horse that is Foundered, and very Sick.
Take Carduus Benedictus and Hyssop, of each one handful; Juice of Liquorice,
two Ounces; Roots of Gentian stamped in a Mortar, one Ounce; boil the
Ingredients in a Pint and a half of Water, for the space of half an Hour; and
as soon as you remove the Vessel from the Fire, pour into it half a Pint of
White Wind, straining out the Liquor. Add as much Saffron as you can lift
between your three Fingers, and make a Decoction for one or two Doses,
according to your Horse's Strength, or his Aversion to the Medicine. The next
Day let him Blood in the Flanks, and keep him in a temperate place.

Since Horses in this Condition are wont to eat very little, they must be
nourished with cleans'd Barley, without Butter or Fat, or with Bread, if you
can persuade 'em to eat it, or Bran, etc. For more particular directions in
this Case, you may consult the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Chapters of
this Book; and therefore I shall content my self at present with putting you in
Mind that you must frequently put a Bit into your Horses Mouth; and remember
always to offer him Meat when you unbridle him.

CHAP. CXXV. Crocus Metallorum.
TAke the best Crude Antimony, or that which is fullest of Points, and Nitre or
Saltpeter, of each an equal quantity; beat 'em severally to Powder, and mix
'em in a Crucible. Then set 'em on Fire with a Match or live Cole, and as soon
as the Flame is extinguished, and the Matter cold, you will find the Liver of
Antimony under the Scoriae; which are also of good use in certain Cases.

Separate the Liver and reduce it to a very fine Powder; then throw it into
Water, and beat again in the same Mortar that which the Water cannot dissolve,
continuing after the same manner till the whole Matter be reduced to an
impalpable Powder; then suffer the Water to settle, and you will find at the
bottom a Liver-Colour'd Powder, which you must continue to wash by pouring on
fresh Water, till the Salt of the Nitre that is not consumed by the Flame be
wholly separated from the Powder.

Crocus Metallorum, or the Infusion of it in Wine, is given inwardly to Men;
but it is not proper for Horses, and therefore instead of it use Liver of
Antimony, which differs in some respects from Crocus, and is thus prepared.

Liver of Antimony.
Take choice Crude Antimony grossly beaten, six Pounds; Saltpeter of the second
Solution four Pounds and a half, for that which is white and refined is too
violent; beat the Saltpeter very small, and mix it with the Antimony in an
Iron-Pot or Brass-Mortar, two third Parts remaining empty; then kindle the
Matter with a light Match or piece of Charcoal, and as soon as it takes Fire
remove to a convenient distance from the Pot, to avoid the Fumes of the
Antimony: when the Matter is cold, turn up the Mortar, for the Liver lies at
the bottom, under the remaining part of the Saltpeter, which is joined with
the Impurities of the Antimony, commonly called the Scoriae. You may easily
separate 'em, for the Liver shines like Glass, and is of a very dark brown
Color; if not, it is a sign that you have committed some error in the
Operation; and especially, if it be of a pale yellowish Color, you may
conclude that it is burnt and not fit for Horses. You must not wash the Liver of
Antimony; for they who take that Method, deprive it of a considerable part of
its Virtues. The Scoriae serve for other uses, especially for Clysters; and
it is to be observed, that in whatsoever part of this Book Sal-Polychrest is
prescribed as an Ingredient for a Clyster, you may substitute a like quantity
of Scoriae, which will produce a very good, and perhaps a better effect; for
they are a true Polychrest, composed of the Sulphur of Antimony and Nitre; and
the Virtue of the Antimony with which they are impregnated, makes 'em operate
more effectually than common Polychrest.

You may give your Horse once a Day, for the space of a Month, two Ounces of
the Liver reduced to fine Powder, and mixed with Oats or moistened Bran. It
restores lost Appetite, kills Worms, promotes the Cure of Wounds, of the Farcin
and Mange, purifies the Blood, by removing Obstructions, and opening the
Passages, fattens tired and wasted Horses; helps the Cough, and shortness of
Breath.

The effect of this Remedy does not appear externally, for it acts by
insensible Transpiration, cooling and refreshing the inward Parts without
evacuation, and if there be any universal Medicine for Horses, it must
certainly lurk in this Remedy; for Experience daily makes new discoveries of
its Virtues, and it is generally good for all Distempers that do not require hot
Remedies.

To convince you that it acts by insensible Transpiration, I shall only desire
you to be present while your Horse is Curry'd; for when he begins to take this
Medicine, you will perceive the Impurity and Filth that sticks to his Skin to
be wonderfully increased; for the Antimony purifying the Blood, expels through
the Pores of the Skin the Excrements of the third Concoction, or those
fuliginous Vapors that corrupt the Blood.

Not long ago a Person who had given Liver of Antimony to his Horses, asked me,
what Crude Antimony was before it was put into any other form; and told me,
that I ought to have so much regard to the Reader's satisfaction, as not to
leave him unacquainted with the nature of that Remedy. Antimony is a Mineral
Body, approaching to a Metallic Matter; it is of a black Collom, somewhat
bluish, with large Points like Needles, shining like polished Tin; it is
composed of two kinds of Sulphur, one very pure and fixed, and its Nature is not
very much different from that of Gold; the other is inflammable like common
Sulphur. Besides, it contains a great deal of Mercury, more solid and better
concocted than the Metal that commonly bears that Name, with a little thick and
salt Earth. The best Antimony is brought from Hungary; it is also brought from
Germany and several other Places; it is now very cheap and common, since several
excellent Mines of it have been discovered in France.

In most of its Preparations it assumes the Figure of the Salts with which it is
joined; and almost all the most celebrated Powders that are made of it, are
only disguised Particles of the Regulus of Antimony, that act diversely
according to the Nature of the Salts or Corrosive Spirits with which they are
entangl'd. I might confirm this Assertion, by observing, that many of the
Preparations of Antimony may be reduced to a Regulus with Nitre or Borax, which
disintangle 'em by the assistance of the Fire, and give 'em an opportunity to
reassume the form of a Regulus. The design of these various Preparations is to
open the Body of the Regulus, that being reduced to smaller Atoms, it may
operate more effectually, and in a less quantity.

To make Emetic Wine you must Infuse two Ounces of Liver of Antimony, reduced
to fine Powder in three Pints of White Wind, and after it has stood twenty four
Hours in a cold Infusion, you may pour off a Quart, and add another in its
place, repeating the abstraction of the old, and addition of fresh Wine five or
six times. This Remedy is generally magnified by all Chemists; but since it was
never given to Horses till the use of it was introduced by me, it is not so well
known as it ought to be. Rulandus's Aqua-Benedicta is made of the Crocus, and
several Authors have treated particularly of its Virtues; among the rest
Schroder, Crollius, and Quercetan, relate several curious Observations and
Experiments concerning Crocus Metallorum.

To satisfy the Scruples of those who are not acquainted with the Operation of
Antimony on the Bodies of Horses, and that none may be afraid to administer so
excellent a Remedy, I shall once more assure 'em, that in what manner or form
soever it is given to Horses it never purges 'em, and that even the Golden
Sulphur of Antimony, which is drawn from the Scoriae that remain after the
Preparation of the Regulus, and is the most violent Emetic that is extracted
from that Mineral, does not in the least purge a Horse. Before I was acquainted
with the effects of prepared Antimony, having seen the perpetual Pills of
Regulus of Antimony for Men, one of which may serve to purge a whole Army,
being swallowed by all the Soldiers one after another, as every Physician knows
and will acknowledge: I caused two Pills of the Regulus to be made, of the
bigness of a large Nut, and gave 'em to a Horse with a design to purge him, but
he voided 'em without any alteration, two Days and a half after he had taken
'em, without the least sign of Purgation, or change in the thickness or
consistency of his Dung. I gave the same Pills to another Horse, who two Days
after voided one, and the other remained in his Body the seven last Years of
his Life, and was found by the Man that flayed him in one of the folds of his
Guts, who imagining that it was a Musquet-Bullet, came to show it me, wondering
that so large a Bullet did not kill the Horse when he received the Shot. These
two Experiments may serve to convince the Reader, that the Regulus of Antimony
does not exert its Purgative force on the Body of a Horse.

Prepared Antimony may be safely given in the abovementioned, and several
other cases. Its principal effect is to purify the whole Mass of the Blood by
insensible Transpiration; and the frequent use of it consumes the superfluous
watery Humors, which being Infected with Putrefaction, transmit malignant
Vapors to the Brain, breed a slimy Matter that stops and obstructs the small
Branches of the Veins, and mixing with the Blood corrupts the whole Mass of it,
and makes it unfit for nourishing the parts of the Body.

The Liver of Antimony does very powerfully open the Obstructions of the Veins
and Arteries, and so destroys the fomenting cause of most Distempers; and
besides, it is endu'd with this admirable quality, that it acts by way of
Irradiation, an unbounded Virtue, peculiar to this Mineral, reduced to
Medicines by a due Preparation.

The same Remedy is both an excellent Preservative from all Distempers, if it
be given to a Horse from time to time, and Cures those that are actually
troubled with Diseases, excepting such as require hot Remedies, as the
Strangles, Glanders, and Running at the Nose. I am extremely surpised not to
find the least mention of so noble a Remedy in the Works of so many Learned and
Judicious Authors who have described the Maladies of Horses.

It cools and refreshes the Body, and those who use it will have the pleasure
and satisfaction of believing, on most certain and reasonable Grounds, that it
cannot produce any ill effect. I know the ancient Physicians who were generally
Enemies to Antimony, endeavored to destroy the credit of that Remedy, by
affirming that it is full of Arsenical Spirits that waste and corrode the
Internal Parts, and are usually attended with fatal Consequences, though it seems
at first to be administered with excellent Success; but I must beg leave of
those Gentlemen to tell 'em, that at least with respect to Horses, those
Arsenical Spirits are only lodged in their Brains, for I have made several
Horses eat four or five Pounds of this Remedy without intermission, and
sometimes four or five Ounces every Day, so that if there had been any
Corrosive Spirits in the Antimony, the Stomach and Intestines of these Animals
would have certainly been bored like Sieves: Whereas on the contrary the Horses
that devoured so large a quantity of Antimony recovered daily, grew brisk and
lusty; and even some that were Hide-bound and wasted, were quickly fatten'd by
the use of this Powder, which contains no malignant Particles, nor even
produces any ill effect on the Body of a Horse, as I might easily demonstrate
by the testimony of a thousand Persons that have used it. After so many
Experiments I am so fully persuaded of the harmlesness of this Remedy that I
recommend it to all my Friends; and as for the Arsenical Spirits I Am no more
afraid of 'em than of the Spirits or Hobgoblins with which Children are usually
scared. If your Horse's Distemper requires hot Remedies, you must abstain from
the use of Liver of Antimony, because it cools the Body. And it is also to be
observed, that when your Horse begins to eat it, especially during the first
eight or ten Days, you must neither Gallop, Work, nor even Ride him
immediately; for by the use of this Remedy the Blood is put into a kind of
universal Ebullition; and therefore if the Horse be fatigued or over-ridden,
while the Blood continues to be so briskly moved, he will easily become
Foundered, though he might have escaped that Inconveniency, if he had not eaten
the Liver of Antimony, since the Humors, and especially the Blood, would not
have been so violently agitated. In the mean time moderate Exercise is not only
convenient but necessary, for it obliges Nature to expel by the Pores those
Vapors, called Fuliginous Steams, that infect the Blood; but during the first
eight or ten Days, vehement Exercise is extremely hurtful, and you must always
remember when your Horse sweats, to wipe and dry him very carefully, and to
prevent his growing suddenly Cold; though after the first Ebullition of the Blood
is over, you need not confine your self to so strict an observance of those
Cautions.

CHAP. CXXVI. Of Tired Horses that Pine away after hard Labor or Riding.
HOrses are usually reduced to a languishing condition by violent Exercise, and
fatiguing Marches, especially in an Army, and can hardly ever after recover
their wonted Health and Vigor; for sometimes they have good Forage, whereas at
other times they are obliged to eat Rye, Millet, unwholesome Herbs and rotten
Hay; sometimes they have abundance of Provender, and at other times very little
or none at all; and besides, they are sometimes forced to drink corrupt Water
at unseasonable times, not to mention the irregularity and hardness of their
Marches; so that if a Horse be not of a very strong Constitution, and well
Limbed, it is almost impossible for him to undergo so many Fatigues.

It Is not an easy Task on such occasions to direct the Intentions of the Cure
to any particular Distemper; but you can hardly fail of success, if you take
care to exhibit and apply such Remedies as are proper to strengthen the
internal, and refresh the external parts of the Body, to expel and consume the
peccant Humors that are daily gathered, either by Bleeding, or universal
Purgations; and if you discover any particular Distemper, you must have
recourse to the specific Remedies that are peculiarly appropriated to your
Horse's present Condition.

The Signs to know a Horse that has been ill used in the Camp, are these; When
he Breathes, there appears a sort of Canal stretching along his Belly like a
Rope or Cord; his Hair stares, and is discolored, his Dung is dry, black, and
sometimes full of Worms, and his Eyes are heavy; he never thrives, though he
feeds heartily, when you walk him he seems sullen and complains, and shows none
of that briskness or liveliness, which is usually the effect of repose.

If these Signs appear in a tired Horse, after his return from the Army, or
from a long Journey, you must in the first place let him Blood in the
Neck-Veins, and afterward proceed to exhibit some digestive Powder that
promotes the Concoction of Aliments, and prepares the superfluous Humors, in
order to their more easy and effectual Evacuation.

Liver of Antimony produces the effect of a Digestive Powder, if two Ounces of
it be given once a Day with moistened Bran: But if your Horse has an aversion
to Bran, you may give him the Golden Sulphur of Antimony in Wine, according to
the Directions prescribed in Chap. CXXIX. which will operate more effectually
than any other Preparation of Antimony, and quickly restore the Horse to his
wonted Strength and Vigor. The Stinking Pills are of excellent use in this
case to prepare the Horse's Body, if you give him a Dose every two Days,
repeating the Medicine two or three times.

A Clyster.
Boil a sufficient quantity of the five softening Herbs, in two Quarts of Beer,
and a Pint or a Pint and a half of the Urine of a Cow, or (for want of that) of
a sound Man, who drinks a great deal of Wine. In the strained Liquor dissolve
half a Pound of Honey, prepared with the Herb Mercury, and a quarter of a Pound
of fresh Butter; make a Clyster to be injected lukewarm in the Evening.
Continue the daily use of Liver of Antimony for fifteen Days, and inject the
Clyster once every three Days.

For his ordinary Drink dissolve a Pound of Honey in a Pail-full of Water: give
him no Oats, and dissolve two or three Ounces of Polychrest in a Pail-full of
Water to moisten his Hay.

After twenty Days lay aside the use of the Powder and Clysters, and suffer the
Horse to repose seven or eight Days; at the end of which you may order
convenient Fomentations, continuing all the while to give him moistened Hay,
and Water mixed with Honey.

CHAP. CXXVII. Of Sal-Polychrest, or Fusible Sulphur.
IT IS an undeniable Maxim, founded on Reason, that fusible Remedies are more
effectual than others; thus if Scammony were rendered fusible 'twou'd make an
excellent Purgative; and the same may be said of Tartar, and several other
Medicines. It Is generally acknowledged, that Sulphur, or rather the Flowers of
it, are the Balsam of the Lungs; and it is plain, that if it be rendered fusible
it will exert its force more effectually, by cleansing, opening, purifying, and
even loosening the Belly, since it penetrates more easily when it is dissolved,
and is more capable of effecting the Operations that are ascribed to it, than
if it were indissoluble, and lay like a heavy lump of Earth at the bottom of
the Stomach. It Is thus Prepared.

Set a Crucible or Iron-Pot in the midst of a heap of live Coals, till it be
all over red-hot, even at the bottom; then cast into it with a Spoon, a Mixture
of Sulphur and fine Nitre, both in Powder, about half an Ounce of each, and the
Matter will take Fire, and break out into a Flame, as soon as it touches the
Crucible. As soon as the Flame disappears, stir the Matter at the bottom of the
Crucible, and cast in the rest of the Sulphur and Nitre by Spoonfuls, as
before, stirring the Matter at the bottom with some Iron Instrument, that the
Fire may penetrate it more effectually; after you have cast in three or four
Spoonfuls, you must stir the Matter for some time, and continue after the same
manner till all the Sulphur and Nitre be cast into the Crucible; then cover it,
and lay Coals on the top, and every where round the sides, suffering it to cool
of it self. After it is cold beat the Matter to Powder, which, if the Operation
be rightly performed, and the Nitre very fine, will be of a pale Rose-Colour,
if not, 'twill be white as Snow, and fit for use, or grayish and of no value.
Four Pounds of Matter will yield a Pound and half of Sal-Polychrest, which is
endu'd with qualities opposite to those of ordinary Sulphur, for it dissolves
in Water, and grows red in the Fire without consuming. That which resembles the
color of a Rose is better than the white; though I must confess, that supposing
the Operation to be performed with the utmost exactness, and the Nitre to be
pure and fine, it is not always possible to produce that Rosy Color, which in
some measure seems to be the effect of Chance.

This Remedy cools very effectually, and even sometimes too powerfully; for
such Medicines as are moderately cold are most proper for Horses; and for this
reason it is seldom or never given alone, and not often internally. You may
correct it with Juniper Berries or Nutmegs, mixing an Ounce of the Powder, with
half an Ounce of the Berries, or scrapings of Nutmeg in moistened Bran; or if
the Horse will not eat it so, you may Infuse it all Night in a Quart of Wine,
and in the Morning heat it lukewarm, and make the Horse drink it up fasting.
You may easily perceive by the first or second Dose, whether your Horse's
Condition requires a cooling Remedy; for if not, he will lose his Appetite, and
his Hair will bristle and stare, especially in the Flanks; and therefore if
these signs appear, you may conclude, that his Body ought rather to be heated
with good Cordial Powders, than cooled with Sal-Polychrest. It Is the general
Opinion that sick Horses ought to be treated as Men, who for the most part
stand in need of cooling Medicines, by reason of their Passions and inordinate
Desires, which together with their Intemperance, heat the Blood, and
consequently all the Parts of the Body; but Horses are free from those
disorderly Motions and Vexations that disquiet Men, so that their Blood and
Humors are not so apt to be heated and inflamed, and consequently they stand
rarely in need of cooling Remedies.

You may give from one to two Ounces of Polychrest in a Clyster, to appease the
beating of the Flanks, and allay the heat of the Intestines; for though his Dung
be dry and baked, three or four of these Clysters will reduce it to its natural
Temperament and Consistency.

This is also an excellent Remedy for Men, and might be used with very good
Success by those who are troubled with a stoppage in their Lungs, and spitting
of Blood, or to prevent the ill consequences of a fall from a high place; but
besides the abovementioned Directions, it must be dissolved in Water,
filtered, boiled till there appears a Film on the top, put into a Wooden
Vessel, and set to Crystallize in a Cellar. The Crystals are of a square
Figure, almost like that of common Salt, and must be kept in a Glass close
stopped for Men; but the first Preparation is sufficient for Horses. It Is also
exhibited in Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and Mesentery; it
loosens tough Matter, and purges gently by Stool: The Dose is from two to four
Drams, and it may be successfully given after this manner. Take four Drams of
Sal-Polychrest in Crystals, one stalk of Liquorice beaten, Flowers of double
Damask Roses, either fresh or dry, two Pugils; or instead of these, Violet
Flowers, put 'em into an Earthen Pot with a Quart of boiling Water, and let 'em
stand in Infusion all Night. In the Morning drink a large Glass-full of the
Water, and an Hour after another; for it purges very gently, and without
heating the Body; or you may make a Diet-Drink to be used even at Meals, by
dissolving half an Ounce of this Salt in two Quarts of Water. I am so sensible
of the excellency of this Medicine, and of its usefulness to those who live in
the Country, at a distance from Physicians, that I could not forbear inserting
the Preparation of it for humane Bodies, contrary to my resolution, not to
invade the Province of Physicians; and besides I think my self obliged to
advertise those who are able to make a right use of such an Admonition, that
there are above Fifty excellent Remedies for Men described in this Book.

CHAP. CXXVIII. A Fomentation for a Lean and Tired Horse.
HOrses that are Hidebound are not at all nourished by their Food; and besides
the Use of internal Remedies, they stand in need of Fomentations, to loosen
their Skin from their Flesh and Bones.

Take the five opening Herbs, Dandelion, which is a kind of wild Succory,
Hart's-tongue, Wormwood, Agrimony, St. John's-wort, Leaves and Flowers;
Bay Leaves, Marjoram, Mint, Bawm, Pennyroyal, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Thyme, wild
Thyme; The five opening Roots, namely, the Roots of Grass, Madder, Eringo's,
Capers, and Rest-Harrow: I do not propose so great a Variety of Plants, with a
Design to recommend a scruplous Niceness in making use of all that are here
mentioned, but only that you may have the Convenience of choosing such as may be
procured with the least Difficulty. Cleanse and stamp the Roots, and put a
Handful of each Kind into a Kettle, with Lees of Wine; after they have boiled
for a considerable time, add a convenient Quantity of the Herbs, and boil 'em
three Hours longer: Then take a Handful of the Herbs and Roots as hot as you
can endure to hold 'em in your Hand, and rub the whole Body of your Horse, till
it be well moistened; and immediately after rub his Flanks, Belly, Throat, and
all the rest of his Body with Ointment of Montpelier, chafing it in with your
Hands to make it sink: Then dip an old Table-Cloth, or any other worn and used
Piece of Cloth, in the hot Lees that remain in the Kettle, and lay it double on
the Horse's Body, covering him entirely with it; and over that lay one or two
Quilts, binding 'em on with a Surcingle or two, if there be occasion; or you
may few the Ends of the Quilts together. Twenty four Hours after unbind the
Quilts and Cloth, and renew the Fomentation, repeating it twice afterward, as
before.

The main Scope and Intention of these Fomentations, is to draw the Spirits and
Nourishment to the dry Skin, that it may be loosened from the Horse's Body.

After the Fomentations, you must keep your Horse close covered for some Days,
to prevent his catching of Cold, by reason of the Tenderness of his Skin; and
afterward give him the last Clyster prescribed in Chap. CXXIII. The next Day
give him the following Medicine, to loosen his Belly.

To loosen the Belly of a Tired Horse.
Mix a convenient Quantity of the Roots of sharp-pointed Dock, chopped small,
with two Pounds of fresh Butter, and beat 'em together in a large Mortar, to a
Mash, making it up into Pills of the Bigness of Tennis-Balls, which must be
given to the Horse with a Quart of Wine, keeping him bridled six Hours before,
and four Hours after. If he retain his Appetite for his Meat, give him the
following Purgative four or five Days after.

A Purging Remedy for a Tired Horse.
Take of Aloes an Ounce and a half, Sena Leaves an Ounce, Agaric half an Ounce,
Mercurius dulcis, and Scammony prepared with the Steams of Brimstone, of each
two Drams, Anniseed and Cumminseed, of each one Dram, four Cloves, and two or
three Pugils of Cinnamon: Beat all the Ingredients to a gross Powder, and mix
'em with a Quart of Emetic Wine, which the Horse must drink up immediately;
only the Aloes, Scammony, and Mercurius dulcis must be mixed apart with every
Draught, lest they fall to the bottom. After your Horse has taken the whole
Powder, rinse his Mouth, the Pot, and the Horn with about half a Pint of Emetic
Wine. Instead of this Remedy, you may use the purgative Oil, described in Chap.
XCVI. or the purging Medicine, recommended in Chap. CXXXVIII.

You must always observe to keep your Horse bridled five Hours before the
taking of a Purge, and at least four Hours after; and as soon as he has taken
it, you must walk him for the space of half an Hour.

'Twill be convenient to allow a Breathing-time to Nature, after the Operation
of the last Remedy is over: In the mean time feed your Horse as before, and
enure him to travel by degrees. Some Horses recover without much difficulty,
but the Cure of others will require your utmost diligence.

You may conclude that your Horse is in a fair way of Recovery when he eats and
drinks heartily, and both the Quantity and Consistence of his Excrements are
agreeable to Nature; for though his Appetite be strong and firm, if his Dung be
either excessive in Quantity, or too soft, it is impossible for him to thrive.

Note; That your Horse must be let blood the Day before you apply the first
Fomentation.

Since few Persons are endu'd with so large a stock of Diligence and Patience,
as as is necessary for an exact Observance of the abovementioned Directions;
to oblige those who are Lovers of Ease, I shall subjoin a Remedy that alone
suffices to perfect the Cure, if it be not absolutely impracticable, though the
Horse's Hide be glu'd to his Bones.

CHAP. CXXIX. The Golden Sulphur of Antimony.
GLauber has communicated the Preparation of this Medicine in several Parts of
his Writings; but by collecting and comparing together these scattered Shreds,
it is plain that his true Method is as follows.

Take of crude Antimony two Pounds, Tartar a Pound, fine Nitre half a Pound;
make a Regulus according to Art, and reserve the Scoriae, which are only useful
for this Preparation; though the Regulus may serve for several other Uses in
Physic. Boil the Scoriae in a sufficient quantity of Water, stirring it from
time to time, till part of the Scoriae be dissolved; Let the Solution stand
till it settle, then pour off the clear Liquor, or, if you please, filtrate it
through brown Paper, and throw away the gross Substance that remains upon the
Paper, reserving the strained Solution. At the same time, boil a sufficient
quantity of Tartar in Water, stirring it till it be dissolved, which will
require a considerable time; then put the first Water into an Earthen Pot, and
by degrees pour the Solution of Tartar upon it, after which you will
immediately feel a strong and stinking Smell, and the mixed Liquors will
precipitate, or let fall a brown Powder to the bottom. This is the Golden
Sulphur of Antimony, which must be dried on brown Paper, and preserved for Use.
The Dose is from half an Ounce to an Ounce, mixed with a double quantity of fine
white Flower; infuse it all Night in a Quart of Wine, and give it to your Horse
every Morning, keeping him bridled two Hours before, and three Hours after; and
repeating the Dose once a day for the space of fifteen or twenty Days, which
without any other Remedy will restore him to his perfect Health, by consuming
and dispelling the Humors that hinder him from growing fat. Since the Flanks
of lean and tired Horses are usually lank and heated, this Remedy will also
remove that Inconvenience, though they eat a great deal of Hay.

They who are not skilled in the Operations of Art, will perhaps be offended at
the seeming Difficulty of this Preparation, though it be really easy, and very
cheap; but they may free themselves of that Trouble, by having recourse to any
Apothecary that has the least Skill in Chemistry. I ordered the Golden Sulphur
to be mixed with Flower, to keep it from falling to the bottom, that the Horse
may swallow it more easily.

This Remedy does not purge Horses; Glauber calls it his Universal Medicine,
and gives us a long Catalogue of successful Experiments, to demonstrate its
Usefulness in all Diseases incident to Men. It imitates the other Preparations
of Antimony in its Operation on the Body of a Horse, which is performed by
insensible Transpiration: It purifies the Blood, loosens the Skin from the
Bones, cools the internal Parts, expels watery Humors, opens and scowres the
Passages, resists Putrefaction, and increases the Natural Heat.

Besides its Usefulness for the Recovery of lean and tired Horses, it
contributes to the Cure of the Farcin, Scab, Cough, Peeling of the Head, and a
beginning Pursiveness: And in a Word, it may be said, that there are few
Remedies for Horses of equal Virtue and Efficacy to this: And besides it is of
excellent Use in the Distempers of Humane Bodies.

It cools and purifies the Blood, and allays the Heat of the Intrails, without
the least Prejudice to the Horse; whereas other cooling Remedies are usually
more hurtful than profitable: For they make the Horse lean and meager, spoil
his Appetite, make his Hair stare, and confirm the Obstructions of the inward
Parts, especially when they are unseasonably and preposterously exhibited; but
this admirable Medicine is not attended with any of those Inconveniences.

Of a Horse tired with hard Riding.
The abovementioned Remedies are only designed for the Use of those, whose
Love to their Horses may induce 'em, and their Riches permit 'em to bestow so
much Trouble and Charge upon the Cure, especially if the Horse be of a very
considerable Value. But those who are not willing or able to pursue so
laborious and costly a Method, may either content themselves with part of those
Remedies, or observe the following Directions.

Let your Horse blood in the Neck-Vein, the next Day give him a Clyster, with
an Ounce and a half of Sal Polychrest; and the Day after make him drrink a
Pound and a half of Oil-Olive, keeping him bridled two Hours before, and as
long after. Four Days after, reckoning that on which he drank the Oil, give him
the following Potion.

A Purging and Comforting Potion.
Take the Electuary of Diacarthamum and fine Catholicum of Nicholaus, of each
an Ounce, Treacle two Drams, Liquid Conserve of Red Roses, and Powder of Sena
Leaves, of each an Ounce, Pulp of Cassia two Ounces, Juice of Liquorice half an
Ounce, Scammony prepared with the Steams of Brimstone, two Drams, Anniseed and
Cumminseed, of each one Dram. Mix all the Ingredients, and give 'em to your
Horse in a Quart of White Wine, keeping him bridled six Hours before, and four
Hours after. As Soon as the Purgation is over, give him a purging Clyster, to
carry off that which the Medicine could not bring away; but if he be already
sufficiently purged, you may omit the Clyster.

Give him no Oats, but feed him with moistened Bran; or rather give him
moistened Hay and honey'd Water. Then suffer him to rest for some time, that
you may have an Opportunity to observe the Effects of the Remedies. If you
perceive no Amendment, you must have recourse to the Cordial-Powder, the Golden
Sulphur, and Clysters, and afterward repeat the Purgation. If the Purgative
and Comforting Potion seem too chargeable, (as indeed it is for most Persons)
you may give your Horse the cheap Oil, described in the Fifty sixth Chapter, or
the Medicine that follows in the next.

CHAP. CXXX. The Method of Fattening Horses.
THis Method has all the Advantages that can be desired; for it is Easy, Cheap,
and very Effectual.

After you have let your Horse blood, put half a Bushel of coarse Barley-Meal
into a Pailful of Water, stirring it about for a considerable Space of Time;
then let it stand till it fall to the bottom, and pour out the Water into
another Pail, for the Horse's ordinary and only Drink; and make him eat the
Meal that remains at the bottom of the Pail, thrice every Day, Morning, Noon,
and Night. If he refuse or seem unwilling to eat the Meal alone, mix it with a
little Bran: The next Day lessen the Quantity of the Bran, and at last give him
none at all, for it serves only to accustom him to eat of the Meal; or instead
of the Bran you may mix a small quantity of Oats with the Meal, and diminish it
by degrees as before. It Is to be observed, that the Barley must be ground every
day as you use it; for it quickly grows sour, after which the Horse will not
taste it.

There are few Horses that may not be fatten'd by keeping 'em to this Diet for
the space of twenty Days.

Barley, ground after this manner, purges the Horse, and cools his inward
Parts: But the greatest Efficacy lies in the Water that is impregnated with the
most nourishing and useful Substance of the Meal. When you perceive your Horse
to thrive and grow lusty, you must take him off from this Diet by degrees,
giving him at first Oats once and Barley-Meal twice a day; then Oats twice, and
the Meal once, till your Horse be perfectly recovered. In the mean time you may
give him Hay, and good Straw also if you please; but you must not ride him,
only walk him softly about half an Hour in the middle of the Day.

After your Horse has eaten Barley-Meal eight Days, give him the following
Purgative, if you find he stands in need of it. Take of the finest Aloes an
Ounce and a half, Agaric, and Roots of Flower de Luce of Florence, of each an
Ounce; beat all three to Powder, and mix 'em with a Quart of Milk warm as it
comes from the Cow, if you can procure it, keeping your Horse bridled six Hours
before, and four Hours after the taking of it, without discontinuing his usual
Diet. This Purgation will operate effectually, since the Humors are already
prepared, and the Body moistened and cooled: And therefore the Medicine will
not occasion any Disorder, or Heat, and the Horse will visibly amend. After the
Operation of the Purgative is quite ceased, you must keep your Horse eight Days
longer to the Diet, as before.

If Horses of Value, that are full of Mettle, and of a hot and dry
Constitution, were kept to this Diet, for a convenient space of Time once every
Year, 'twou'd infallibly preserve 'em from several Distempers; and it is
especially useful at the End of a Campaign, or after a long Journey.

If your Horse loose his Appetite when he begins to eat the Meal, (as it
happens not unfrequently) you may tie a Chewing-Ball to his Bit, renewing it so
often, till he begin to feed heartily on the Barley; for these Balls not only
restore a lost Appetite, but purify the Blood, prevent Diseases, and
contribute to the Fattening of the Horse.

CHAP. CXXXI. Of the Shrinking of the Sinews, and Gauntness of the Belly,
occasioned by Foundering of the Body, and other Distempers.
THis Distemper has some Affinity with that which was last described, and is
occasioned, when by reason of hard Labor, or some Indisposition, as the
Relicts of a Foundering, or excessive Heat of the Body, the Guts are
straightened, and the two Sinews that run along the Belly, from the Sheath to the
Girding-place, reaching to that part of the Belly which the Horse touches with
his Thighs as he goes, grow hard and stiff, and so painful, that he loses his
Flesh; and the Straitness of his Guts proceeds from the Dryness and Shrinking
of the Sinews.

In order to the Cure, you must let the Horse blood in the Neck, and the next
Day chafe the Sinews with this Ointment.

An Anodyne Ointment.
For the Satisfaction of the Curious, I shall explain the Meaning of this Term
of Art. Those Remedies are said to be Anodyne, which by a mild Heat, agreeable
to that which is usually called the Natural Heat, a temperate Moisture, and a
thin Substance, insinuating it self into the Part where the Pain is seated,
cherishes the Natural Heat, softens and loosens the Part, and consequently
allays the Pain. From whence it may be inferred, that an Anodyne Remedy is that
which takes away the Pain from the Part to which it is applied.

Take the Ointments of Marshmallows, Roses, and Populeon, of each two Ounces,
mix 'em cold: Or for want of these Ointments, the Fat of Chickens, Hens, or
Capons, which is found near their Guts, or about their Breast, melted and
strained through a Linen Cloth, may be successfully applied to the same uses.
Anoint the Sinews with the Ointment or Fat, holding a red-hot Bar of Iron near
the part, to make the Remedy sink into it.

The next Day, or some Days after, take hold of the Sinews with your two
Fingers, and separate 'em very gently from the Belly. The Day after renew the
Application of the Ointment, and draw the Sinews as before, continuing after
the same manner till they be sufficient'y lengthened and relaxed; after which
the Pain will cease, and the Horse regain his former Vigor and Lustiness.

In the mean time make a sound Man, that Drinks unmixt Wine, Piss on two double
handfuls of Barley; and after it has stood in Infusion a whole Night, pour off
the Urine in the Morning. Then boil a handful of green (or, for want of these,
dry) Fennel-seeds, in a Pint of Water for a quarter of an Hour, and sprinkle
the Barley with the Scum that arises in this Decoction.

Make your Horse eat the Barley, thus prepared every Morning for the space of
fifteen Days, mixing it with a little Oats, if he seem to have an aversion
against it, and keeping all other sorts of Nourishment from him till he be
accustomed to eat this, which will promote the Cure effectually and restore his
Appetite.

The Remedy described in the preceding Chapter, consisting of a Preparation of
Barley-Flower, is also very useful in this case, and with the assistance of the
abovementioned Ointment will restore the Horse to his perfect Health.

Instead of Oats you may give your Horse Rye sprinkled with boiling Water, and
afterward drained and cooled.

A double handful of Wheat, eaten always before you suffer him to Drink, will
open his Flanks, and make him lusty.

Honey'd-Water, or moistened Bran, prepared according to the Directions
mentioned in one of the preceding Chapters, are very effectual in this case. If
you perceive that your Horse continues still lean and meager, after the use of
all these Remedies, give him either the Golden-Sulphur or Liver of Antimony in
his Bran.

I have often observed that lean Horses are thought to be troubled with this
Distemper, when their leanness proceeds from a multitude of Worms or
Trunchions, that suck up all the Substance of their Food, and consequently
deprive all the parts of the Body of their usual and necessary supplies of
Nourishment. Trunchions are small and short Worms, smooth, and of a reddish
Color, which at last eat their passage through the Stomach, and occasion present
Death. They are never voided with the Dung, so that it is impossible to make a
certain Judgment in this case: But when you have reason to suspect that your
Horse is troubled with these pernicious Insects, the safest way is to give him
half an Ounce of Mercurius Dulcis, with an Ounce of the Cordial Powder, in a
quarter of a Pound of Butter, or an Ounce of Treacle without Butter, if the
Cordial Powder cannot be procured; or four Ounces of Cinnabar beaten to Powder,
and mixed with a Pound of fresh Butter. These Medicines will kill and destroy
all the Worms, after which the Horse will recover his Flesh. If you propose the
inward use of Cinnabar to a Physician that is not acquainted with the
Constitution of Horses, he will condemn it, and not without reason, knowing
what a penetrating Faculty it has acquired by its Sublimation with Sulphur; so
that it is certainly a very dangerous Medicine for Men, if it be not given with
more than ordinary Caution: But you may administer it to Horses without any
fear, and I dare warrant it both safe and effectual. The Confidence with which
I recommend it, is grounded on a long Experience; and I have even made some
Horses eat several Pounds of it mixed with Bran, giving 'em one or two Ounces
every Day with an equal quantity of the Cordial-Powder; by which Method I have
cured the Farcin, without occasioning the least disorder in the Gums, or any
other part of the Body. I intend to describe all the Remedies against Worms, in
a Chapter that shall expressly treat of that Subject; but if you are convinced
that your Horse is not troubled with Worms, you may give him one of the
Remedies prescribed for Surfeiting or Foundering in the Body. Or you may give
him the Powder for a Cough, or the Lieutenant's Powder described in the Second
Part. Grass, or Green Barley, if it be in season, will Cure your Horse without
any other Remedy. In the Winter you may make him eat Beans moderately, and in
the Summer give him Barley bruised (rather than Ground) in a Mill mixed with a
little Bran.

CHAP. CXXXII. Of the Anticor.
THe Anticor is a preternatural Tumor caused by a sanguine and choleric
Humor, and seated on the Breast just opposite to the Heart.

This Swelling is sometimes generated in the spongy Membrane that surrounds the
Heart, where the Humors easily lodge themselves when they abound too much in
the Body: The external Swelling discovers the Disease to the Eye; and besides,
it is accompanied with a Palpitation of the Heart, and very often with a violent
Fever. The sick Horse is heavy and sad, hangs down his Head, and sometimes
falls to the Ground, and Swoons away.

This dangerous Distemper destroys the Appetite, and few escape when it enters
into the Body: And even it proves oftentimes fatal, though it never enter into
the Body, by reason of the redundancy or malignity of the Humors.

The usual Ripening or Suppurating Remedies are of little use in this case; for
the Venom contained in the Tumor would infect the Heart by its malignant
Vapors before it could be expelled by the Medicine.

You must begin the Cure with a Clyster prepared after this manner. Boil two
handfuls of Barley, and two Ounces of Sal-Polychrest, reduced to a fine Powder,
in the Quarts of Water, for the space of a quarter of an Hour. Add to the
strained Liquor a Pint of the Urine of a Cow; or for want of that of a healthy
and robust Boy, with a quarter of a Pound of fresh Butter, and a like quantity
of Oil of Rue, Repeat the Clyster twice every Day, or oftener if need require:
Then shave away the Hair in the lower part of the Swelling, and anoint the Part
with one of the Retoires described in Chap. LXXIV. two or three times
successively, till the Medicine penetrate, which will draw forth a reddish
Water, and so either ease the Horse, or ripen the Tumor, or at least mark the
place where you make an Incision. If the Anticor come to Suppuration, and the
signs of the Concoction of the Matter appear, you may conclude that your Horse
is in a hopeful way of recovery.

The method of Cure commonly used by Farriers is not so sure as that which I
have already communicated; They draw a Circle with a hot Iron round the
Swelling, and divide it equally by two Brass Lines; then they pierce the Skin
with an actual Cautery, or red-hot Iron, with a Button of the breadth of an
Inch at the end of it, making seven or eight Holes besides within the compass
of the Circle. Afterward they chafe the place once every Day with the
following Ointment applied warm. Melt four Ounces of Basilicum with two Ounces
of Turpentine, and adding four Ounces of old Treacle, and two Ounces of Oil of
Rue, incorporate 'em well together over the Fire. The Oil of Rue is endu'd with
an excellent Virtue to draw or dissolve these Tumors; and besides, it
separates the Escar or Scab, and makes the corrupt Humors flow abundantly out
of the Holes made with the hot Iron.

Before you proceed to give the Fire you must endeavor to make a Revulsion, by
taking about a Pound and a half of Blood out of the Neck-Vein on the right
side, taking care not to exceed that quantity, least Nature be weakened by an
immoderate expense of Blood, at a time when all her force is scarce sufficient
to resist the Malignity of the Humor. The next Day, if the Distemper be not
accompanied with a Fever, or an extraordinary beating in the Flank, give your
Horse the following Potion.

A Comforting Potion for the Anticor.
Take Bay Berries, Juniper Berries, Galingal, and Zedoary Roots, of each two
Ounces; Roots of Gentian and Angelica, of each an Ounce and a half; Cubebs and
Myrrh, of each half an Ounce; Saffron one Scruple. Make a Powder.

Give your Horse two Spoonfuls of this Powder (...) a Pint of Spanish-Wine,
with two Ounces of Conserve of Roses, and two Drams of old Treacle; then walk
him half an Hour, and keep him fasting two Hours before, and as long after,
which you may easily do, for if the Disease be violent, you will find it a hard
task to make him eat any thing.

Instead of this Powder you may use the Treacle Powder, or the Electuary of
Kermes; thus you may give him an Ounce of the Treacle Powder, with a like, or
even double quantity of Confection of Hyacinth in a Quart of Wine; or two
Ounces of the Electuary of Kermes, with half an Ounce of Assa-foetida in
Powder. Or if none of these Medicines can be procured you may content your self
with an Ounce of good Treacle, dissolved in a Quart of a Cordial Julep,
composed of the Waters of Scabious, Cinnamon, Scorzonera, and Carduus
Benedictus, rinsing the Pot and Horn with a little of the same Water; and even
in some respects I prefer this Potion before all other Remedies whatsoever;
since it may be safely exhibited, and repeated two or three times when the
Distemper is accompanied with a Fever, or beating in the Flanks. The same
Evening give your Horse a Clyster with an Ounce and a half of Sal-Polychrest;
which will allay the beating in the Flanks. None of the other Remedies can be
given without manifest danger, when the Disease is attended with a Fever, or
when there is a violent beating in the Flanks.

I know some that are wont, with very good success, to begin the Cure with this
Potion, preceded and followed by a Clyster. You may also observe the following
Method.

Make an Incision with your Fleam or Lancet in eight or ten several places on
the Swelling, and thrust into the Holes, between the Skin and the Flesh, a
piece of the Root of black Hellebor, of the bigness of the Tag of a Point. If
the Tumor be very large you may use white Hellebor, and in either case you
must remember to chafe the Part frequently with an Ointment, consisting of
equal parts of Treacle, and the Ointments of Agrippa, and of Marshmallows.

The Roots of Hellebor raise the Swelling to a vast height, and draw forth the
Venom and Malignity of the Humor, which is the true design of the Application;
and the Ointment ripens that stubborn and malignant Humor.

The next Day give your Horse a Clyster of two Ounces of Sal-Polychrest boiled
in two Quarts of Beer, adding a quarter of a Pound of Oil of Bay, after the
Decoction is removed from the Fire: And two Hours after the Injection of the
Clyster give him one of the Cordial Potions.

If the Disease be very violent, 'twill be convenient to open a Vein a second
time, taking away about a Pound of Blood, and to continue the frequent use of
Clysters as before. You must also walk your Horse from time to time, to provoke
the natural Heat, to expel the offending Humor.

The Retoire is more effectual than the Roots of Hellebor, though the last Method
is not to be despised; but in either case the vehemence of the Disease does
frequently prevent the Operation of external Remedies; and therefore the Cure
chiefly depends on the timely and regular use of proper Cordials. The Essence
of Vipers is a noble Remedy, if half an Ounce of it be mixed with a Pint of
Spanish-Wine.

Since the Horse has usually few or no intervals of ease, and his Appetite is
quite destroyed by the violence of the Distemper, you must either give him an
Armand, or feed him with cleans'd Barley: and observe the Method prescribed in
the Sixth and following Chapters.

Since the Oil of Rue is a good and cheap Remedy, it will not be improper to
insert the true description of it.

Oil of Rue.
Take a Pound of Oil-Olive, and two handfuls of Rue chopped small; boil 'em
slowly in a Skellet, and strain out the Oil, throwing away the Herbs: Then add
two handfuls of fresh Rue, and boil and strain as before. Repeat the same
Operation a third time, and preserve the Oil, which is indu'd with a Virtue to
cut and digest thick and tough Humors. Being dissolved in a Clyster it helps
the Colic, and asswages Pains in the Belly, Kidneys, and Bladder; and it may be
successfully used in outward Applications for the Cure of several cold
Diseases. It resolves hard and cold Tumors, that resist the efficacy of
ordinary Remedies; but by reason of its Heat you must never use it when you
have reason to fear an Inflammation.

CHAP. CXXXIII. Of Palpitation of the Heart.
THE beating or palpitation of the Heart is a quick and violent Motion of that
noble Part, by which it endeavors to expel something that oppresses it. It Is
usually occasioned by a malignant Steam or Vapor, proceeding partly from a
Melancholic Humor that stagnates in the Veins, and insinuates it self into the
great Artery; hard Riding, violent Exercise, corrupt Water, bad Nourishment,
and every thing that is apt to produce Heat or Obstructions, are the remote
Causes of this Distemper.

The Palpitation of the Heart is visible to the Eye; for when the Disease is
violent, the Heart beats with so much force against the Horse's sides, that you
may plainly perceive the motion of the Skin at every stroke; and if you lay
your Ear to the Part, you may hear, as it were, the Blows of a Hammer within
the Horse's Body, on both sides together.

Some Horses in this Condition retain their Appetite better than others, and
are not troubled with an extraordinary beating in the Flanks.

Remedies that strengthen the Heart, cherish and revive the Spirits, dispel
thick Vapors, and resist their Malignity, are proper in this case.

Bleeding is the sovereign Remedy of this Distemper; and it may be safely
repeated oftener than once in one Day, if the violence of the Palpitation be not
abated.

This Distemper is sometimes very vehement and impetuous, but not usually
Mortal, unless it be accompanied with a Fever, which does not happen very often.

The Cure is almost always successfully performed by the frequently repeated
use of convenient Clysters, Bleeding, and Cordial Remedies.

As for Cordials, you have the Electuary of Kermes, the Cordial-Powder, the
Lieutenants-Powder, and the Cordial-Balls, which must be methodically
exhibited, and the Dose repeated two or three times according to the violence
of the Distemper. If the Palpitation be accompanied with a vehement beating in
the Flanks, you must give your Horse a Quart of a Cordial Mixture, of the
Waters of Scorzonera, Scabious, Carduus Benedictus, and Roses, with an Ounce of
Confection of Hyacinth, without Musk or Ambergreese, and one of the Cordial
Balls reduced to Powder, rinsing the Pot and Horn with half a Pint of the same
Cordial-Waters. The Cordials must be repeated every Day, or at least once in
two Days. They who cannot procure any of the abovementioned Remedies, may
prepare the following Potion.

A Remedy for the Palpitation of the Heart.
Take Bugloss, Bawm, and Borage, of each a handful; boil 'em in a sufficient
quantity of Water, for the space of half a quarter of an Hour, till the Water
be reduced to a Pint: Then removing it from the Fire, add two handfuls of
Sorrel, and let it stand till it be cold. Dissolve in the strained Liquor an
Ounce and a half of Conserve of Roses, half an Ounce of Confection of Hyacinth,
without Musk or Amber-greese, and ten Grains of Saffron; make your Horse drink
it lukewarm, and two Hours after give him the following Clyster.

A Clyster for the Palpitation of the Heart.
This Clyster dispels and removes Obstructions, and consequently is very proper
for a Horse oppressed with such a Distemper as this that proceeds from Vapors
and Wind.

Take the five softening Herbs, Mugwort, Cammomil, Rue, and Melilot, of each
two handfuls, Powder of Sal-Polychrest, an Ounce and a half; boil 'em for the
space of half a quarter of an Hour in a sufficient quantity of Water to three
Quarts, then press out the Water and throw away the Herbs. After which add to
the strained Liquor Linseed and Fenugreek-seed, beaten to Powder, of each two
Ounces: Boil about a quarter of an Hour longer, and add to the straining, Oil
of Bay, and fresh Butter, of each three Ounces; Cow's Urine, one Pint, if it
can be procured. Repeat the Clyster every six Hours, and the Potion once a Day.
Keep your Horse to a spare Diet, feed him with moistened Bran, give him no
Oats, and walk him frequently at a foot pace.

As soon as you perceive the Palpitation to be perfectly allayed, and your
Horse restored to his former Health, 'twill be highly convenient to exhibit the
following Purgative. Take an Ounce and a half of Aloes for an ordinary Horse,
or two if he be of a very large size; an Ounce of Agaric in Powder, and a like
quantity of Flower de luce of Florence; make a Powder, and give it to your
Horse in a Quart of Milk, keeping him Bridled five Hours before, and four Hours
after. The next Day the Medicine will begin to operate, and you must walk your
Horse from time to time till the evacuation be stopped; after which you may give
him his usual allowance of Oats.

This Purgation attacks and subdues the cause of the Distemper, and quickly
perfects the Cure.

A Clyster to dispel Wind.
Take of the usual softening Decoction three Quarts, and three or four Ounces
of the Carminative and Purgative Oil, prescribed for the second kind of Colic,
or a quarter of a Pound of Oil of Bay, and two Ounces of Butter. Mix and make a
Clyster.

The preceding Remedy, I mean both the Potion and Clyster are universally
useful in all the various kinds of Palpitation; but if you can certainly
discover the cause of the Disease, you may observe the following Directions.

If it be Summer, and you have reason to suspect that the Distemper proceeds
from the excessive Heat of the Horse's Body, let him Blood in the Neck-Vein,
and make him stand in Water up to the Neck for an Hour, during which time you
may prepare this Potion. Take the Waters of Scorzonera, Scabious, Roses, and
bitter Succory, as much of each as a common Drinking Glass will contain; Cream,
or Crystal of Tartar in Powder, one Ounce; Syrup of the Juice of Sorrel, or for
want of that of Violets, four Ounces. Mix and make a Draught. And you may give
him an Ounce of Sal-Polychrest in a Quart of Wine, and walk him an Hour, or
somewhat less, according to his Strength, and afterward give him one of the
following Clysters.

You may mix the Febrifuge described in the Hundred thirty sixth Chapter, with
his ordinary Drink.

A Clyster for the Palpitation of the Heart, accompanied with Heat.
Take an Ounce and a half of Sal-Polychrest in Powder, with a sufficient
quantity of the five softening Herbs, the Roots of Sorrel and Bugloss, the
Seeds of Cucumbers, Gourds, Citruls, and Melons, grossly beaten, and a small
quantity of Anniseed. Boil the Ingredients in Water to three Quarts, add a
quarter of a Pound of fresh Butter, four Ounces of Powder-Sugar, and half a
Pound of Oil of Roses. Mix, and make a Clyster.

Another cooling Clyster.
Boil a sufficient quantity of the softening Herbs, with two Ounces of
Anniseeds in Powder, for half a quarter of an Hour in the Whey of Cow's Milk,
to two Quarts; and to the strained Liquor add the Yolks of six Eggs, a quarter
of a Pound of Butter, half a Pound of Honey of Violets, and an Ounce of
Sal-Gemmae in Powder, or for want of that of common Salt. Make a Clyster.

If you perceive no sings of an excessive Heat in your Horse's Body; or if he
be seized with the Distemper during the Winter, you must not let him Blood,
unless there be a great Oppression: For in that case you may open the Veins of
the Thighs, or that in the Brisket, and prepare the following Potion.

Some of the Clysters and Potions prescribed for a Palpitation, accompanied
with a violent Heat, may serve to cool Horses that are overheated, though they
be not troubled with a Palpitation; but you must take care not to cool 'em
immoderately. I have often advertised the Reader, that the Constitution of
Horses is different from that of Men; and you may conclude, that their
Condition does not require cooling Remedies, when after the use of those
Medicines, the Hair begins to bristle and stare, when they lose their Appetite,
or are seized with a shivering Fit. If any of these signs appear, you must lay
aside the use of cold Remedies, and give 'em Cordial Powders, or the following
Cordial Potion.

A Cordial Potion for the Palpitation of the Heart.
Take Carduus Benedictus, Sage, and Rosemary, of each half a handful; boil 'em
for half an Hour in a Pint and a half of Water, to the consumption of half a
Pint: To the strained Liquor add of White Wind, one Pint; Juniper Berries,
round Birthwort, Myrrh, and shavings of Ivory, of each one Dram; Galingal,
Cinnamon, and Cloves, of each a Scruple; Saffron, six Grains; all in fine
Powder. Make your Horse drink this Potion lukewarm, then walk him half an
Hour, and two Hours after give him the abovementioned Clyster for the
dispelling of Wind.

Continue in a diligent observance of this Method, according to the variety of
Seasons, and other Circumstances.

For his ordinary Food you may give him Bran, Hay, and Wheat-Bread. The
Distemper is sometimes very violent, but rarely Mortal; and Horses that are
once seized with it, are usually subject to it afterward.

CHAP. CXXXIV. Of Fevers.
A Fever in Horses is a preternatural and unusual Heat in the Body, proceeding
from an Ebullition or violent Fermentation of the Humors, which weakens the
natural Heat, and renders it unfit for the regular discharge of its Functions.
I cannot explain its nature better than by comparing it to the Ebullition of
Wine in a Cask, where that Liquor is agitated, heated, dilated, and fermented;
and if it be straightened, or have no vent, it breaks impetuously through all
obstacles, spreads is Steams and Vapors all around, and appears so troubled
and muddy that we cannot discern the least drop of Wine in the Vessel. But
after these disorderly Motions, all the Impurities that were contained in the
Wine are separated, the Lees fall to the bottom, a sort of Scum floats on the
top, and the Concavity of the Vessel is covered with a crusty Substance. This
is the true Idea and representation of a Fever. When an unusual Ebullition or
Fermentation happens in the Mass of the Blood, from what ever cause it
proceeds, the Blood is agitated and put into a disorderly Motion; it swells and
breaks out of the Vessels that are no longer able to contain it; it acquires a
Heat that is obvious to Sense, and fills the whole Body with Steams and
Vapors, which stupifie the Head; and the Mixture of it is so extremely
perverted, that when you open a Vein, that which runs out of it seems to be
corrupt Matter rather than Blood. When Nature gets the Victory over her Enemy,
she separates and expels the impure and superfluous Humors: And it is this
struggle of Nature that occasions the burning Heat, extreme Thirst, heaviness
of the Body, difficulty of Breathing, excessive beating of the Arteries and
Heart, and all that numerous Train of Symptoms which usually accompany Fevers,
and discover the Nature of the Distemper. 'Twou'd be an Undertaking of more
Labor and Ostentation than Profit, to engage in a long Dissertation concerning
the Causes, Differences, and Effects of Fevers. I am resolved neither to give
my Reader nor my self so much Trouble, since few Persons are willing to employ
their Time in such nice Enquiries, and perhaps their want of Curiosity in this
Case ought not to be esteemed a Fault. But I shall omit nothing that may serve
to promote the Cure of this dangerous, and oftentimes fatal Disease.

Some pretend to discover, by a diligent Observation of the Urine, the Progress
of Nature in her Conflict with the Distemper, and the true State of the Body:
But this Method is hardly practicable, in the Diseases of Horses, by reason of
the Difficulty of procuring their Urine, to make Observations of that Nature.

The various Distinctions of Fevers, into Quotidians, Tertians, Quartans, etc.
are of no Use in this Case; and therefore I shall only take Notice of three
Kinds of 'em.

A simple Fever.
A Simple Fever is neither attended with a Putrefaction of the Humors, nor
with any considerable Disorder in the Parts of the Body. It proceeds from a
slight Ebullition of the overheated Blood, and is easily Cured, by reason of
the few Symptoms that accompany it: It Is frequently seated in the Substance of
the Heart, or in the Lungs, Spleen, Liver, or Stomach. It may be Cured without
much Difficulty, by a seasonable and methodical Application of convenient
Remedies.

A putrid or humoral Fever.
The second kind is accompanied with a Putrefaction of the Humors, and with a
remarkable Indisposition of some part of the Body, either internal or external:
It Is usually Mortal, and since Horses are not very subject to Fevers, we may
reasonably conclude that so dangerous a kind of 'em proceeds from a violent
Cause; only it must be acknowledged, that Beasts have this Advantage over Men,
that their Natural Appetites are less inordinate, and their Food more simple,
and agreeable to Nature: Besides their Brains are not disturbed with Drinking,
and their Exercise contributes to the Preservation of their Health.

A pestilential Fever.
The pestilential Fever makes a prodigious Havoc in a little time: It
overturns and destroys the Strength of a Horse in a Moment, and finds so little
Resistance, that it comes very speedily to a Period. It proceeds either from
the Biting or Stinging of a venomous Creature, from the Eating of poisonous
Food, or from the Infection of the Air, which is sometimes so Violent and
Contagious, that it kills all the Horses in a Stable.

CHAP. CXXXV. Of the Causes and Signs of a Fever.
FEvers are usually occasioned by all those things that promote the Ebullition
and Fermentation of the Humors; and particularly every thing that heats the
Body, as violent Exercise, and the use of hot Aliments, especially in Summer;
to which we may add whatever is apt to breed Fullness or Repletion in the Body,
which oppresses Nature, and renders her unable to subdue those rebellious
Humors that stagnate in the Vessels, where they are putrefy'd and fermented.
Sometimes a Fever proceeds from Obstructions in the excretory Passages,
especially those in the habit of the Body, which are very numerous; or by a
stoppage of the free and natural Motion of the Blood, that performs so many
Rounds every Day, passing from the Heart through the Arteries to the Veins, and
from thence returning to the Heart. Thus if a Horse, that is heated by hard
Riding, or any violent Exercise, be suddenly exposed to the cold Air, or drink
very cold Water, the least tendency, to a Fever will discover it self, and
actually break forth into a Distemper, which perhaps lurked in his Body before.
And to conclude, the least Disturbance in the natural Disposition of the Body
is apt on some Occasions to produce a Fever.

The Signs of a Fever are these; A violent Beating in the Flanks, Heat of the
Mouth, Tongue, and all the rest of the Body, Swelling of the Veins, and Beating
of the Heart against the Sides: The sick Horse breathes thick, and with
Difficulty, reels frequently as he goes, seldom lies down; and when he is laid,
starts up suddenly, because the Difficulty of Breathing is increased by that
Posture; forsakes his Meat entirely, or eats only by Starts; takes no notice of
those who come near him, nor turns his Head, though you make a noise behind him:
Takes no care of himself, and at last remains immovable, as if he were
perfectly stupid, and deprived of all his Senses. His Lips and Ears hang down,
his Eyes seem sad and shining, a sharp and piercing Heat is spread over all his
Body, and all the Symptoms of a violent Oppression of Nature appear.

I shall proceed to lay down some general Rules to be observed in the Cure of
all Sorts of Fevers. And first,

You must keep your Horse to a very spare Diet; for if the Fever continue three
Days without Intermission, you may conclude that he is in extreme Danger, and
therefore he may well fast, or at least be contented with a very small Quantity
of Nourishment in so short a time; and Hippocrates tells us in his Aphorisms,
That when a Disease is at the Height, it is absolutely necessary to observe a
very thin Diet.

Thus you may easily perceive the dangerous Error of those, who if a Horse be
troubled with a Fever, and fast twenty four Hours, immediately give him Milk
and Yolks of Eggs, which is a very unwholesome kind of Nourishment in this Case,
and increases the Distemper. Besides it must be given with a Horn, and the
Violence of that Method of Feeding him, augments the Difficulty of Breathing,
and disturbs him when he stands most in need of Rest. You must therefore
content your self with endeavoring to make him eat something of his own
Accord; for a small quantity of Nourishment given after this Manner, will
produce a better Effect than all that you can pour into his Mouth with a Horn.

It Is a Rule of great Importance in the Cure of Fevers, never to exhibit a
purging Medicine; for in so great a Confusion of the Humors, it is impossible
for Nature to evacuate those that offend her, till she has separated 'em from
the rest of the Mass; and it is plain that the Execution of so laborious a Work
requires a considerable space of Time. And besides, the Operation of a
purgative Medicine heats the Body, and causes a Pain in the Guts, which may not
improbably breed an Inflammation. It Is also convenient to keep the sick Horse
always bridled, unless for so long time as must be necessarily allowed him for
Eating.

Of the Cure of a simple Fever.
If your Horse be troubled with a simple Fever, you have no reason to dread the
Event; since the Cure may be easily and almost infallibly performed by a
careful Observance of the following Method.

As Soon as you perceive any Signs of a Fever, open the Neck-Vein on the right
Side, and take out about three Pounds of Blood: The same Day give him the
following Clyster.

A Clyster.
Boil two Ounces of Sal Polychrest, and two Handfuls of whole Barley, in three
Quarts of Water; and after one Waum, add Blites, Mercury, Leaves of Violets and
Pellitory of the Wall, of each three Handfuls; boil for the space of half a
quarter of an Hour; then remove the Decoction from the Fire, and after it is
half cold strain out the Liquor; and adding three Ounces of the Lenitive
Electuary, with a quarter of a Pound of Oil of Roses, make a Clyster, to be
injected lukewarm.

An Hour after he has voided the Clyster, tie a Chewing-Ball to his Bit, and
give him two Ounces of Powder of Liver of Antimony in a Quart of Beer; or a
Ptisan, which may expel the Humors by Urine, without heating the Body.

The next Day after rubb his whole Body with a Wisp of Straw or Hay, to open
the Pores of the Skin, that the Steams or Excrements of the third Concoction
may exhale; which, if they were suffered to remain in the Body, would oppress
the Blood that stands in need of a free and unobstructed Motion.

His ordinary Drink may be thus prepared; Melt four Ounces of Sal Prunellae in
a sufficient quantity of Water, and after it is cold, mix it with a little
Flower, and let your Horse drink as much as he pleases; for this Drink allays
the Heat of the Entrails, resists Corruption, and opens the Passages: Besides,
it stops that Ebullition or Fermentation, which is the usual Cause of all
Fevers, and evacuates the Humors by Urine, which is the right Passage through
which they should be expelled.

As for his Food, you must give him Leaves of Succory, Lettuce, Dandelion, or
of Vines, but little or no Hay, and less Oats; for either of these are apt to
heat the Body, constipate the Belly, and harden the Excrements: If you consider
the short continuance of the Disease, you will not be troubled at the small
quantity of Nourishment that your Horse is allowed to take. If it last above
three Days, take Assa-faetida and Savin grossly beaten, of each half an Ounce;
Sugar and Raspings of Liquorice, of each an Ounce; Tie 'em to the Bit in a
Linen Bag, and make him champ upon it frequentlty. This Medicine will purge
the Brain, and make him eat of his own Accord, which is absolutely the best way
of Feeding; afterward you may give him moistened Bran with Liver of Antimony
in Powder, which will infallibly restore his Appetite.

If his Aversion to his Meat continue, you must have recourse to the Horn, and
give him cleans'd Barley, without the Addition of Butter or Salt, which will
nourish and moisten his Body. The Barley must be boiled in Water for the space
of five Hours over a gentle Fire, then strain and mix it with a convenient
quantity of Sugar.

Take a Pound and a quarter of Barley-flower, well boulted, and separated from
the Bran; boil it in two Quarts of Water to the Consistency of thick Broth,
then add two Ounces of Sugar, and give it to your Horse lukewarm. This Draught
will serve to sustain him twenty four Hours, at the end of which it may be
repeated.

If the Violence of the Distemper be not abated, you may bleed your Horse a
second time. The continued Use of Clysters, and frequent rubbing of the Body
are always very profitable in those Cases.

The Knowledge of the Cause is of very great Importance for the right
Management of the Cure, and therefore if the Fever be occasioned by exposing
your Horse to the Cold or Night-Air, you must keep him covered, rubb his Body
frequently, and continue the frequent Use of Clysters. If the Distemper proceed
from hard Labor and violent Exercise, you must boil the Water that serves for
his ordinary Drink, and mix it with Barley Meal, feeding him with Vine Leaves,
if they be in Season; and if you can make him eat 'em without Reluctance, or
with Panado or Bread baked with Sugar, without Fat, Butter, or Salt.

If the Fever be caused by unwholesome Food, 'twill be convenient to repeat the
Bleeding, and to inject Clysters composed of a sufficient quantity of a
Decoction of the softening Herbs, with a Handful of Pigeon's Dung beaten small,
half a Pound of salt Butter, and a Pint of Emetic Wine. I have always observed
the Efficacy of Emetic Wine in Clysters; but you must take care not to abuse so
useful a Remedy; for since Fevers, are very dangerous, and oftentimes Fatal,
it is the usual Custom to lay the Blame of the Horse's Death on the Medicines,
without taking notice of the Violence of the Distemper.

By this Method you may certainly cure any Fever that continues simple: But
these Distempers degenerate oftentimes to putrid Fevers.

CHAP. CXXXVI. Of the Cure of Putrid Fevers.
THis Kind of Fever commonly attacks young Horses, especially those who are
vigorous, and of a slender Make. It may be easily known by these Signs; The
sick Horse hangs his Head, as if he were quite stupid; is hardly able to keep
his Eyes open, and reels as he goes, by reason of the Ascent of Vapors to the
Brain; his Tongue, and Roof of his Mouth are blackish, rough, and dry; there is
a great Heat over all his Body; his Eyes are red, his Breath hot and sharp, and
his Flanks beat violently.

You must immediately let him blood, sometimes in the Neck, Temple, or
Eye-Veins, and sometimes in the Brisket, Flanks, or Veins of the Thighs.

The Bleeding ventilates, lessens the Redundancy, and facilitates the Motion of
the Humors. It prevents the Breaking of the Vessels, allays, in some measure,
the Ebullition, tempers the Heat, and by taking away part of the Cause of the
Distemper, gives Nature an Opportunity to subdue the rest.

You must allow him no more Nourishment than is just sufficient to keep him
from starving. Green Barley, Dandelion, and the Tops of Vine Leaves are very
proper in this Case; or for want of these a little moistened Bran, Bread, and a
very small quantity of Hay.

For his ordinary Drink, boil two Ounces of white Tartar, beaten to fine
Powder, in two Quarts of Water, for a quarter of an Hour; then pour the
Decoction into a Pailful of Water, with a Handful of Barley Flower, and let him
drink as much as he pleases: You may also mix the following Febrifuge with his
Drink, which is an excellent and cheap Remedy.

A Febrifuge, or Remedy to drive away Fevers.
Put a Quart of Water with two Ounces of Salt of Tartar in a Brazen Pot with a
Cover, and set it over the Fire till the Salt be dissolved; then pour the Water
into a Pail, and after the same manner dissolve an Ounce of Sal Ammoniac beaten
to Powder, in another Quart of Water. Mix this last Solution with the former,
and fill up the Pail with common Water; if your Horse refuse to drink it, add a
little Barley Flower to qualify the unpleasant Taste. This Drink will allay
the Heat of the Fever, quiet and stop the Fermentation and Ebullition of the
Humors, provoke Urine powerfully, and wonderfully ease the sick Horse. And
therefore you must always pour a little of this Febrifuge into the Water you
give him to drink, neglecting the Use of Sal Prunellae, since it is not
expedient to confound Remedies; and the Febrifuge excels all the rest that can
be prescribed.

Take Assa-faetida and Savin, both in Powder, of each half an Ounce; tie 'em in
a Bag to your Horse's Bit, and never unbridle him, unless when you think fit to
suffer him to eat or drink.

There are no other internal Remedies useful in this Case, but the Cordial
Waters, which by Virtue of their Essential Qualities, strengthen the Heart, and
enable it to resist the Malignity of the unnatural Heat, that opposes and
endeavors to destroy that which is Natural; and besides, by reason of their
Moisture, they allay and temper that internal Heat which causes the Fever. Take
three Pints of the Waters of Scabious, Carduus Benedictus, Scorzonera, and
Queen of the Meadows, with an Ounce of the Confection of Alkermes: Make your
Horse drink up the whole Mixture, and repeat it the next Day, if need require.

Above all, you must continue, and frequently repeat the use of Clysters,
injecting three or four every Day, if there be occasion: For there is no Remedy
gives greater ease, and relieves the Horse more effectually.

A Clyster for a Fever.
Boil two Ounces of the Scoriae of Liver of Antimony, reduced to fine Powder in
five Pints of Whey, made of Cow's Milk; and after two or three brisk waums,
remove the Decoction from the Fire, and immediately add two Heads of
Coloquintida sliced small; and after it is half cold press out the Liquor, add
to the straining a quarter of a Pound of Butter, and inject it lukewarm. This
Purgative Clyster will give ease to the Horse without heating his Body: Yet it
must not be used daily, but that which follows may be repeated several times
every Day.

Another Clyster for Fevers.
Take a sufficient quantity of the emollient or softening Herbs, and
Fennel-seed beaten, with an Ounce and a half of Sal-Polychrest, and two
handfuls of whole Barley; boil 'em, and add to the strained Liquor Oil of Roses
and Violets, of each four Ounces, Benedicta Laxativa, two Ounces, or extracted
Cassia, three Ounces.

This Clyster evacuates the Impurities contained in the Intestines, and
comforts the superior Parts.

You may also rub your Horse against the Hair, to open the Pores, and let out
the Fuliginous Vapors contained under the Skin.

I have observed some Horses cured by the use of these Remedies; and I have
seen the same Medicines given to others without Success. When the Fever
continues three Days without intermission, I lay aside the use of Remedies, and
immediately order the Horse to be thrown upon the Dunghill; for I never observed
in all my Practice, that any Horse escaped after that fatal Period; though
sometimes they linger out five or six Days longer; because during the three
Days of the uninterupted continuance of the Fever the Liver is quite burnt and
consumed by the violence of the Heat, as it appears evidently by the Dissection
of Horses that dye of a Fever.

CHAP. CXXXVII. Of a Pestilential Fever.
THE Cure of this Fever is different from that of the last, and is performed by
strengthening Nature, in correcting the malignity of the Poison that causes the
Disorder: For the removal of the Cause is the most probable way to put an end
to the Distemper.

For this purpose you must inject Clysters frequently, and give repeated Doses
of the Cordial Pills, or the Electuary of Kermes, observing almost the same
Directions that are prescribed for the Cure of the Anticor.

I once observed a great Mortality of Horses in Germany, few escaping that were
once seized with the Distemper. Almost all of 'em voided a great quantity of
Water at the Eyes, they were troubled with a Fever, and a strong Aversion to
their Meat, the tips of their Ears were cold, and a certain yellow and greenish
Matter dropped constantly from their Nose.

At first several Remedies were tried in vain; but at last I invented one that
performed a great number of Cures.

As soon as the Disease appeared, the Horse was let Blood before he was
suffered to Drink, but if he had already Drunk, the bleeding was delayed till
the next Day. He was kept Bridled two or three Hours after; then the following
Remedy was exhibited; after which he stood Bridled two Hours longer, and a Man
was ordered to walk him half an Hour.

Take new Treacle, not above three Months old, and Aloes Hepatica in Powder, of
each one Ounce, Confection of Hyacinth, and of Alkermes, without Musk or
Ambergreese, of each half an Ounce, dissolve 'em in a Decoction made with
Scabious, Carduus Benedictus, and Speedwel, of each a large handful. 'Twas
observed, that the Distilled Waters of those Herbs, when they could be
procured, were more effectual than the Decoction.

The next, and the following Days Clysters were Injected, and if the violence
of the Distemper did not abate, the Remedy was repeated, taking only one half
of the prescribed Doses of the Treacle, Aloes, and Confections, but the
quantity of the Liquor was not lessened. This Remedy cured all the Horses to
whom it was exhibited, but perhaps would not succeed so well on another
occasion.

I ordered new Treacle to be used, because that Medicine acquires a great deal
of Heat by being long kept, and all the cooling Virtue of the Opium that enters
its Composition vanishes.

Mithridate, Orvietan, the Treacle Diatessaron, the Electuary of Kermes, the
Confections of Hyacinth and Alkermes, without Musk or Amber-greese, are
excellent Remedies against Pestilential Fevers, as are also the Cordials
described above.

If the Disease be occasioned by the Contagion of the Air, as soon as you
perceive your Stable to be infected, remove instantly all your sound Horses,
without permiting 'em to enter into it again, till you have perfumed it with
equal Parts of Sulphur and Saltpeter, and double quantities of Antimony and
Pitch. Or you may make an excellent Perfume by burning a Faggot of green
Juniper-Wood, the Doors and Windows being shut: And you must also whiten the
Walls, wash the Rack, and make the whole Stable clean.

For the biting of Venomous Beasts, you may consult the Hundred and thirteenth
Chapter.

If your Horse has swallowed Poison make him drink a great quantity of Oil, and
give him Orvietan, Treacle, or the Electuary of Kermes; and the Cordial Pills
are also proper in this case.

When a Horse happens to swallow Arsenic, if his Stomach be void, it is
impossible to prevent his Death, if he be not assisted in less than an Hour;
for during that time the Arsenic is able to burn and utterly consume the Part
to which it sticks. The only Remedy in this case is to make him Drink two
Pounds of good Oil-Olive to blunt and deaden the Acrimony of the Arsenic; and
two or three Hours after give him another Pound of the same Oil.

Of the Method to be observed after a Horse's Recovery from a Fever.
When a Fever actually prevails, you must not exhibit a Purgative Remedy; for
that would be a no less preposterous attempt, than if you should endeavor to
separate the Lees from the Wine, during its Fermentation. There are only two
cases in which a Purging Remedy can be administered with safety or success in a
Fever. In the first place, it may be given for the evacuation of corrupt
Humors floating in the Stomach and Guts, and it must be acknowledged, that the
removal of those Humors would be advantageous to the Horse. But since they are
not the cause of the Disease, that advantage would be very inconsiderable, with
respect to the damage which Nature could not avoid receiving by the heat and
acrimony of the Remedy, and by the violent and unusual Motion excited by it.
The other case in which Purgation is not only useful but necessary, is when
Nature after the agitation of the Humors during the Fever, separates the
corrupt from the pure Humors; for she is often so weakened and rendered so
lazy by the violence of her late Conflict, that she contents her self with the
Victory she has gained, and is either unable or unwilling to attempt the utter
overthrow and expulsion of her Enemy, who seems to be perfectly quieted, but
may afterward return to the assault with a more dangerous Fury than before. As
soon therefore as you perceive a remission or cessation of Arms, you must take
hold of that occasion, to assist Nature to complete the ruin of her Adversary.
It Is true, Purgatives are repugnant rather than agreeable to Nature; but it is
certain, she receives an accidental benefit by 'em; for when they are in the
Body they irritate and offend he Parts through which they pass, and Nature
perceiving those new Commotions, endeavors to expel the cause of 'em; and in
the struggle drives forth the remainders of the Humors that not long before
had almost overwhelmed her, as if the Operation of the Medicine had roused her,
and put her in mind of her Duty. You must not wait for the Marks of the
Concoction, and separation of the Humors from the Urine or Excrements of
Horses; For it is impossible to perceive the least sign of Nature's Victory in
'em: But you may confidently and safely proceed to the use of Purgatives, as
soon as you see the Tempest succeeded by a Calm. In the mean time 'twill be
convenient to administer cooling Remedies for some Days, such as Sal-Polychrest
in Wine, to extinguish the latent Fire that lies buried in the Embers after the
Flame is seemingly quenched, and to recruit the Horse's strength by a good and
wholesome, but spare Diet; for it is a dangerous Error to imagine, that the
abundance or large quantity of Nourishment repairs the decayed Vigor of the
Horse's Body: For if the Stomach be over-loaded with Food, it cannot duly
perform the work of Digestion, without which the Aliments are not only useless,
but very hurtful. After you have spent some time in endeavoring to strengthen
and cherish Nature, you may give such a Purging Remedy as you have reason to
believe is least apt to disturb her. There is a great variety of those
Medicines; but we should be taught by Experience to reject those that are
usually observed to occasion Disorders in the Body, and to make use of such as
are most likely to answer your Design and Expectation. It Is in my Opinion a
very hard Task to discover the peculiar Nature and Properties of the offending
Humor; and to choose Specific Remedies for the evacuation of Choler, Phlegm, or
any other particular Humor. Sal-Polychrest purges gently, and almost
insensibly: And I have successfully used the following Remedy, which I
recommend as one of the best and most effectual Medicines that can be proposed
in this case.

A Purging Remedy for a Horse, after his Recovery from a Fever, and generally
in all other Cases.
Take Powder of white Tartar, and fine Nitre, of each two Ounces, put 'em in an
Earthen Dish, and kindle 'em with a live Coal. After the Matter is sufficiently
burnt and cold, beat it to a fine Powder; put it into a Quart of Water, with a
like quantity of White Wind, and four Ounces of Sena, and let 'em stand all
Night in a cold Infusion.

Take of fine Powder of Scammony half an Ounce, for an ordinary Horse, or five
Drams for one of a very large size; incorporate it in a Mortar, with half a
Pound of Honey, prepared with the Herb Mercury: Then pour on your strained
Infusion, stiring it gently with the Honey, and Scammony, with the Pestle, and
give the whole quantity to your Horse, keeping him Bridled four Hours before,
and three Hours after.

Give him moistened Bran instead of Oats, and twenty four Hours after walk him
gently for the space of an Hour to facilitate the Operation of the Medicine.

It Is a peculiar Excellency of this Remedy, that it Purges effectually without
heating the Body: For though Infusions are generally free from the excessive heat
of Medicines, even in Substance, they rarely procure a plentiful Evacuation:
But this Remedy operates powerfully, though the Sena be not given in Powder; for
the Scammony, and Honey of Mercury produce the desired effect, because the Salt
of Tartar opens the Body of the Sena, and enables the Decoction to extract its
essential Salt, in which its Purgative quality is lodged.

This Medicine may be safely administered to Horses of a hot and fiery
Constitution, when they are extremely fatigued with violent Exercise; and on
all other occasions when they stand in need of Purgation, without any danger of
heating and inflaming their Bodies.

CHAP. CXXXVIII. An excellent Catholicum for Clysters.
TAke of the Roots of Flower de Luce of Florence, half a Pound; Sena, fine
Aloes, and Hermodactyls, of each four Ounces; black and white Hellebor, of each
two Ounces, Indian Pine-Nuts, an Ounce. Beat all the Ingredients to a gross
Powder, and put 'em into a large Pot with three Quarts of Water, an Ounce of
Spirit of Vitriol, and four Ounces of Sal-Prunellae in Powder; let 'em stand in
a cold Infusion three Days, and as many Nights, stirring 'em from time to time;
then strain out the Liquor through a very thick Canvas-Bag, and evaporate it with
a gentle Heat over a clear Fire, till there be about a Quart remaining, to
which add a Pound and half of good common Honey, and boil it to the thickness
of a Syrup; then put in Jalap and Turbith, of each four Ounces; Coloquintida,
and Gum-Gotte, of each two Ounces; Scammony one Ounce; green Anniseed and
Fennel-seed, of each two Ounces; all beaten to a fine Powder, and well sears'd:
Boil to the thickness of an Electuary, stirring perpetually.

The Dose is from three Ounces to three Ounces and a half, dissolved in any of
the usual Decoctions for a Clyster, without Honey, Oil, or any other addition.
It operates very effectually, and is an universal Purger of all bad and corrupt
Humors.

I must acknowledge, that I could never yet administer a Purging Remedy,
without dreading the event, even after a hundred successful Trials: For
certainly the Motion occasioned by those Remedies is contrary, and even
oftentimes destructive to Nature; and there are so many Aspects and Oppositions
of the Stars that may occasion great Disorders after the use of those Remedies,
that I never give 'em without an absolute necessity. And it has been frequently
observed, that for want of a regular Preparation of the Horse's Body, or
perhaps of a due observation of the Heavens, several Horses have been
Foundered, and even killed, by Remedies that have been given with success a
hundred times before. But since, according to the usual Proverb, Necessity
knows no Law, we are sometimes obliged to break through all those Considerations,
choosing the least dangerous Medicines, and observing all possible Precautions.
Nevertheless, Clysters are safe and gentle Remedies; for the most powerful
Purgatives perform their Operation without the least disturbance, when they are
injected at the Fundament: And this is a true Catholicum, that is, an universal
Remedy, fit, or rather necessary for all those that go to the Army, where many
Horses perish for want of a duly prepared Clyster.

CHAP. CXXXIX. Of the Farcin.
THE Farcin is a Swelling that frequently appears with an Ulcer, caused by the
corruption of the Blood, and that by a certain Poison which is more or less
Malignant, and consequently makes the Horse's condition, either hopeful, or
altogether desperate. When any Part that is necessary, or of considerable use
and importance for the regular performance of the Vital Functions, fails in the
discharge of its Office, by reason of some defect in its Temperament, Figure,
or Contexture, the economy or disposition of the Body must unavoidably suffer a
great and dangerous alteration. If the Part be necessary for Sanguification,
the mixture of the Blood is disturbed and perverted, and according to the
vitiated constitution of the Part affected, it receives a noxious Impression,
and oftentimes acquires an acid, hot, and corrosive quality, that eats and
consumes the Parts where it stagnates; as it appears evidently in the Farcin,
which spreads almost over the whole Body, and is originally occasioned, not by
the acid and frequently malignant Corruption of all the Humors, but by the
Poison that infects the principal Humor, or the Blood; and therefore the
malignity of the Humors is only the effect of the Poison that causes the
disorders in the Blood. The radical and methodical Cure of this Distemper is
performed by removing the cause of it, that is, by purifying and sweetning the
Blood; in order to which I shall propose several Remedies. Van Helmont says
that the French Pox had its Original from the Farcin in Horses; and it is
generally agreed that in the Cure of that Distemper the Malignity of its Poison
must be destroyed, and the Blood afterward purified and rectified; after which
all the Symptoms disappear: The same may be applied to the Farcin.

When the Farcin is inveterate, or of long continuance, the Blood being utterly
corrupted by the Poison that is lodged in it, acquires so virulent an Acrimony,
that it ulcerates the Lungs or the Liver, by its excessive Heat and Malignity:
For when the Blood returns from the Brain, according to the established Laws of
its Circulation, to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, it passes from thence by
the Vena Arteriosa to the Lungs, which consisting of a spongy, foul, and moist
Substance, are heated by the sharp Spirits contained in the depraved Blood.
This preternatural Heat occasions a Corruption of the weakest Parts, and
afterward an Ulcer, which at last destroys and consumes the whole Substance of
the Lungs: You may be easily convinced of the Truth of this Hypothesis, by
opening the Body of a Horse, whose Death is occasioned by an inveterate Farcin;
for you will find the Lungs wholly putrefy'd and full of Ulcers, caused by the
hot and corrupt Blood, which also vitiates and ulcerates the Liver. It Is plain
then that the Cure depends chiefly on the Cooling of the Blood, and the utter
Destruction of that Poison which causes the Farcin, and all its loathsome
Symptoms.

For a brief Explanation of the Nature of that Poison, 'twill be sufficient to
tell you, that it is a venomous Steam, or certain corrupt Spirits, which
penetrate the Parts of a Horse's Body, as the Light of the Sun passes through a
Glass. These Spirits are a sort of Ferment that breeds Corruption in whatsoever
part they attack: And it is to be observed that this Poison can never be
destroyed by purgative Medicines, without the Use of Specifics.

This Disease is sometimes communicated by Contagion from an infected Horse;
it is also occasioned by eating too great a quantity of (especially new) Oats,
or new Hay, before it is purged by evaporating its superfluous Moisture, which
usually happens about two Months after it is put up in Stacks, or in a Barn.
Violent Exercise in hot Weather, and even once hard Riding, Hurts or Wounds
made with a foul or Cancerous Iron-Instrument, such as Spurs, Bits, etc. and
the too great Abundance of Blood may also cause this Distemper. It proceeds not
unfrequently from a preposterous and too hasty Diligence, in fattening tired,
lean, and overheated Horses; for too great Abundance of Nourishment breeds the
Farcin, unless it be prevented by moderate Exercise and often-repeated Bleeding.

The most dangerous and stubborn Kind of Farcin, is that which is accompanied
with a Running at the Nose; for as soon as you perceive that Symptom, you may
conclude, that your Horse's Death approaches; especially if his Appetite be
lost, and the Matter that runs out be mixed with Blood. The Number of those
which escape is so small, that all Horses in this Condition may be given over
for desperate, unless the Running at the Nose proceed from the Strangles, and
even in that Case the Disease is usually fatal.

The Cure is very difficult, when the Farcin appears first on the hinder Legs
near the Pastern, or on the Fetlock-Joint, and even in the Hough, ascending
along the Thigh; for it is a Sign of the Violence of the Infection, and
Weakness of the Natural Heat, when the Farcin-Knots appear in the extreme Parts
of the Body at so great a distance from the Heart; even as the Gout is more
troublesome when it makes its first Attack near the Toe, or Ankle-Bone, than
when it begins nearer the Heart.

When the Knots cannot be brought to Suppuration, but instead of Matter thrust
forth a piece of reddish brown Flesh, which grows very fast, and can neither be
extirpated by Burning, nor Caustic Ointments, the Cure is also very difficult,
and even impossible, without the Help of powerful Remedies to destroy the
inward Poison.

The Farcins that are brought from the Camp are very rarely cured; because the
Blood is wholly corrupted by violent or unseasonable Exercises, and by the
Defect or Excess of Nourishment, which very often is rotten and unwholesome.

The Farcin that begins to appear during the Increase of the Moon, is stubborn,
and less easily cureable than that which begins in the Wane, when the Humors
are weaker, and less abundant: and the same Observation may be applied to the
Glanders and Quitter-bone. The Farcin in the Head is the least dangerous, and
most easily cured of all other Kinds of that Distemper, unless when there is a
Knot, or Kernel, between the two Jaw-bones, which is usually nourished by a
certain Flegmatic Matter that comes from the Lungs through the Windpipe; for
these Kernels can hardly be dissolved in less than three or four Months, and in
the mean time the Horse is in danger of falling into the Glanders.

You may conclude that the Cure will be difficult, when the Thighs are much
swollen, when there are hard Knots on the Sheath, or when the Swellings break,
and instead of Matter put forth a piece of blackish Flesh like a Hen's
Fundament; but the most dangerous, and hardly curable Kind of Farcin is, when
the Horse is naturally of a squeamish and tender Stomach; for it is impossible
to give him the Remedies that are necessary for the Cure, without destroying
his Appetite.

When the Knot that appears first is healed, the Horse is usually in a way of
Recovery, though at the same time there be several other Knots in his Body: But
this is not an infallible Rule.

The Farcin is called by the Italians, Verme, and by the Germans, Wurme,
because it seems to gnaw and bite between the Flesh and Skin, as Worms gnaw the
Bark of a Tree.

It may be easily known by the Knots and Cords that run along the Veins, and
are spread over the whole Body.

It Is also discovered by Tumors and Ulcers; and as soon as you perceive an
ulceratted Swelling in the Emunctories, which are Kernels situated between the
Jaws and the Neck, and on the Breast and Thighs, near the Cods, and designed by
Nature to receive the Impurities of the Body, and the Defluxions that fall upon
those Parts, you may conclude that your Horse is troubled with the Farcin,
which is more or less dangerous, according to the degrees of the Ulceration,
and the sticking of the Kernels to the Flesh: for if it be seated only in the
Substance of the Hide, and may be easily moved with your Fingers, it may be
cured without much Difficulty before it break the Skin.

In the Cure of the Farcin, one of the most promising Signs of a speedy
Recovery, is when the Cords or Knots grow loose and moveable; and therefore
such as are naturally loose may be quickly cured with a very moderate degree of
Care.

Horses that are troubled with the Farcin are usually brisk and lively; they
eat and drink as when they were in Health, and discover not the least Sign of
Sickness by their Actions; they are as capable of enduring Labor or Travel as
ever; and even moderate Exercise promotes the Cure, by dissipating and
expelling part of the Humor that causes the Disease.

Some reckon up seven, and others eight Sorts of this Distemper; but I shall
only divide it into four Kinds, to which all the rest may be reduced.

The Flying Farcin.
This Kind of Farcin is known by certain Knots that are spread over the whole
Body, appearing sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another; and
resembling the little Swellings called Corns in Men. It Is called the Flying
Farcin; because it quickly over-runs those Parts that seemed not to be infected
with it before. It Is easily cured, because it has not a fixed Seat or Root in
the Emunctories.

The Corded Farcin
The second Sort of Farcin is accompanied with hard Swellings, resembling the
Ropes or Strings that run between the Flesh and the Skin along the Veins,
especially those of the Thighs, Neck, and Brisket, and along the Belly. These
Cords are beset with Tumors or Knots, which break forth into Ulcers, and cast
out Matter; and the Color of the Lips of these Ulcers is different, according
to the Variety of the corrupted Humors.

If the Blood predominate they are Red; if it degenerate into Choler, by reason
of the Defect of the Liver in separating the Bile from the Mass of Humors,
they appear yellow, if Phlegm abound they are White, and if there be a
Redundancy of burnt, black, and melancholic Humors, they are of a blackish
Color, which is the most dangerous of all the four Cases.

The Farcin resembling a Hen's Fundament.
This is a very dangerous Farcin, and difficult to be cured. It Is known by
great Tumors or Bunches, which break the Skin without voiding any Matter: The
Lips of the Ulcer are almost always callous and foul, and of a Reddish-black
Color, which is a Sign of burnt and melancholic Blood. It takes its Name from
the Resemblance of its Figure.

The internal Farcin.
In this Kind the Knots are seated between the Flesh and the Skin, without any
visible external Swelling; they resemble Corns, and fasten the Flesh to the
Skin. If the Cure be not timely begun, the Disease enters into the Body, and
infecting the inward Parts, kills the Horse.

Sometime the Knots are fastened to the inside of the Skin only, and are not
rooted in the Flesh; they appear usually on the forepart of the Breast, and
are very easily cured.

CHAP. CXL. Remedies for the Farcin.
TO proceed methodically in the Cure of this Disease, you must begin with
inward Medicines before you proceed to external Applications; for 'twou'd be to
no Purpose to extirpate the Tumors, and dry up the Ulcers, while the Cause
remains still in the Body, and after such a fallacious, and barely palliative
Cure, the Disease would return with equal or perhaps greater Violence than
before: And therefore you must endeavor with all possible Diligence, to
correct the Acrimony of the Humors, destroy the Poison that causes the
preternatural Heat, evacuate or extirpate all the Corruption, and fortify
Nature, that she may be in a Condition to execute her wonted Functions with
Vigor and Alacrity.

It Is the usual Custom to cure this Distemper by applying certain Roots to the
Forehead, putting Remedies in the Ears, or hanging 'em in Bags at the Mane: But
though these Applications may stop the Course of the Humors for some time, they
are absolutely incapable of draining the Source of 'em; and since the Farcin is
usually occasioned by corrupt and overheated Blood, the Horses that are cured
by these Remedies, are afterward rendered obnoxious to more dangerous
Distempers; for this way of Curing the Farcin is not unlike to the Method of
Curing Quartan Fevers with the Peruvian Bark, or Jesuits Powder, which only
fixes the Spirits that cause the Distemper, without consuming or evacuating
'em, and the Fever certainly returns, if the Ferment or Humor be not expelled
by convenient Purgatives. The same may be said of the Farcin; for those
palliative Remedies perform a seeming Cure, but the Corruption and poisonous
Cause of the Distemper remain, and afterward degenerate to Scabs or Scratches
on the Sinews or Cronet, Glanders, Pursiveness, and several other Diseases that
are more difficult to be cured than the Farcin it self.

Others apply Caustic Ointments, to extirpate the foul and corrupt Flesh; but
though I have observed this Method to be sometimes successful, as I shall
afterward show in two Remarkable Instances, I cannot be persuaded to believe
that this is the true Cure of the Farcin, since it reaches not the Cause of the
Distemper.

It requires a stronger Faith to believe that a triffing Medicine put into the
Ear, or hung at the Mane is able to root out an inveterate Farcin, than that
the Sympathetic Powder cures Wounds without immediate Application: And since
there are not many who give Credit to the boasted Effects of that Powder, I
know no reason why we should be obliged to believe the more incredible Efficacy
of these Applications for the Farcin. If it be objected, That daily Experience
confutes my Opinion, and that Horses are frequently cured with Bags hung at the
Mane or Tail, and such like Toys; I shall not scruple to confess that I have
cured some Horses by the same Method: But I must beg leave to continue still in
my former Persuasion, That this is not a true Cure, since the Cause is not
removed, and the Blood remains still hot and corrupted. It Is true, the Humor
that fomented the Disease is diverted, and as it were laid asleep for some
time; but it will quickly take another course, and perhaps occasion greater
Disorders: For the Poison is not destroyed, which, besides the abovementioned
Disease, may breed some internal Abscess, Cramps, Gout, and other Distempers,
or putrefie and ulcerate the Lungs.

If when the course of the Humor is diverted, and a stop put to the external
malignity of the Farcin, by those palliative Remedies, due care were taken to
attack or destroy the venomous cause of the Disease with some good specific
Remedy, by purifying the Blood, and powerfully expelling the corrupt Humors,
the Cure would certainly succeed. But then it must be acknowleg'd, that those
pretended sympathetic Remedies are altogether useless, since the work is
performed without their assistance: For if the noxious Humors be evacuated,
and the Blood purified, all the symptoms of the Farcin will disappear without
any other Remedy.

There is nothing that promotes the Cure more effectually than Bleeding in the
beginning of the Distemper; for it prevents the corruption of the Blood, by
facilitating and quickening its Circulation, and gives Nature an opportunity to
produce new and better Blood in the room of that which is taken away. But you
must take care not to imitate those Pretenders to Art, who, in my Presence,
have taken such an immoderate quantity of Blood from Horses troubled with the
Farcin, that they fell into a Deliquium or swooning Fit. This is the most
unreasonable and terrible Remedy in the World; for by that vast expense of
Blood, the natural Heat is so infeebl'd, that it remains incapable of
performing its Functions: And Nature is not able in a long time to repair so
prodigious a havoc and waste of Spirits. It Is true indeed, you have taken away
part of the corrupt Blood, but then you must expect, that the emptied Veins
will be immediately filled with all the Serosities in the Body, and the other
Humors that were necessary for the preservation of the Parts in their natural
state and constitution; and consequently the mixture of the whole Mass of Blood
will be depraved. It Is obvious to every Man of Sense, that the destruction of
the principle of Life which is lodged in the Blood is fatal and pernicious; and
though perhaps you may cure the Horse of the Farcin, you will afterward be
sensible, though too late, that you have robbed him of all his Beauty, and
rendered him unfit for service.

Sweating alone would be sufficient to purify the Blood; but our usual
Remedies are not strong enough to procure such a plentiful Evacuation as would
be necessary for the Cure of the Distemper. For the best Sudorifics for Men
operate very weakly on Horses, or perhaps not at all.

It Is true, Chemistry furnishes us with some Remedies that are found by
experience to be of sufficient efficacy to make Horses Sweat, and in some
measure to purify their Blood: But they raise so great a heat in the Intrails,
that it is frequently a harder Task to allay that, than to Cure the Farcin.

After you have let a Horse Blood, whatever Method you intend to follow, you
may if you please, administer a Purging Remedy to prepare the Horse's Body, and
open Obstructions: For the Medicines that are afterward exhibited will purify
the Blood more effectually; though after all, Purgation is not absolutely
necessary. The two following Purgatives are of excellent use in this case, and
I have cured several Horses of a less Malignant kind of Farcin, with a Dose of
one of these Medicines.

A Purge for the Farcin.
Take of clear or Succotrine Aloes, an Ounce and a half; Roots of Jalap, and
Mercurius Dulcis, of each half an Ounce; old Treacle an Ounce and a half; beat
the hard Ingredients to Powder, and when you have occasion to use the Medicine,
mix it with a Quart of Wine, putting in the Aloes just before you administer
it, for it would immediately grow hard, and fall to the bottom. After your
Horse has drunk it all up, rinse the Pot and Horn with half a Pint of Wine, and
give it to the Horse, keeping him Bridled six Hours before and five Hours
after, and feeding him all that Day, and two Days after with moistened Bran
instead of Oats; nor must you give him any Hay the Day before you administer
the Medicine, nor so long as the Purgation continues.

If this Remedy do not procure a sufficient evacuation you may use the
following Pills. There cannot be too many Purgative Medicines prescribed for
the Cure of the Farcin; for that which is given with Success to one Horse may
hurt another, or that which operates effectually one time may frustrate your
Expectations on another occasion.

Pills for the Farcin.
Take Sena Leaves, and Roots of Hermodactyls, of each one Ounce, Agaric three
Drams, Fine Scammony, four Drams; Cinnabar, one Ounce; Cinnamon and Cloves, of
each one Dram; Fennel-seed and Ginger, of each two Scruples. Reduce all the
Ingredients to a Gross Powder, to be made up into Pills, with two Pounds of
fresh Hog's-Lard: observe the same Directions that were prescribed for the use
of the preceding Remedy.

After the Bleeding and Purging there will not be need of any more inward
Remedies, only when the Knots are ripened, you must open 'em to give a passage
to the Matter; and if, instead of drying up, the Lips of the Sore remain
swollen, strew 'em once with Realgar in fine Powder. After nine Days the Scab
will fall off, and leave the Sore fair and clean, which you may afterward dry
up with some of the Powders prescribed for the Cure of Wounds; for Example,
with the Powder of the Caput Mortuum that remains after the distillation of
Spirit of Vitriol.

Give your Horse every Day in moistened Bran an Ounce of the Root of the
hundred headed Thistle in Powder, or two Ounces of the Green Root. You must
gather the Root in the Spring, when the Plant begins to shoot forth, dry it in
the shade, and beat it to Powder. The Root of the Queen of the Meadows gathered
at the same time, and given in the same quantity, is no less effectual; for
these two Roots are the true specific Remedies of the Farcin.

It Is a common Error, that if a plentiful Evacuation be procured by any
Remedies whatsoever, the Cure will succeed: For it is certain, that
notwithstanding the effectual operation of the Medicine, if it be not
peculiarly adapted to the Distemper, the Farcin will grow more Malignant; and
if it be seated on the Thigh the Swelling will increase instead of diminishing.
A Purgative Remedy that is not endu'd with a singular Virtue against the
Disease, stirs the Humors, which it cannot evacuate, and Nature throws the
Load that oppresses her upon the weak and sore Parts, and consequently the
Swelling is augmented after Purgation; but if the Remedy attack the Venom and
cause of the Distemper, the Swelling will be sensibly abated; and from thence
you may conclude, that the Purgation has produced the intended effect.

The two abovementioned Remedies are useful for all Horses that stand in need
of Purging, such as those who are very Fat, or full of Humors, and are not
accustomed to Exercise. But you must never administer a Purging Remedy for the
Cure of the Farcin to lean Horses, that are full of Mettle and Fire, or of a
burnt Sorrel Color.

CHAP. CXLI. A Specific Remedy for the Farcin.
FEed your Horse with moistened Bran instead of Oats, Bleed him, administer a
Purging Remedy, if you think it necessary; and two Days after, when the
Purgation is over, give him three Doses of Cinnabar Pills, a Dose every two
Days. Make him eat an Ounce of the Root of White Mullein, Queen of the Meadows,
or the hundred headed Thistle, once every Day in moistened Bran; when the Knots
break, draw out the Matter, and afterward dry up the Sores with Powders.

This is the true Method of curing the Farcin, by purifying the Blood,
destroying the Poison, and strengthening Nature.

Another easy Method.
Bleed your Horse abundantly, and give him every Morning three Pints of Emetic
Wine or Beer, which some Horses will drink like Water, for it tastes only of
the Wine. Continue the use of this Wine or Beer till your Horse be sound. This
is a very convenient Remedy in those Countries where Wine is cheap, and for
those that have Horses that drink Wine, since the making it Emetic costs little
or nothing; and the same may be said of the Beer.

The Horse must eat nothing but Bran, and may be moderately ridden. When the
Knots break, strew 'em with Powder of Sublimate, Hellebor Roots, or apply a
Caustic. If your Horses Legs be swollen, you may chafe 'em with the following
Ointment. If he refuse to drink the Emetic Wine or Beer, pour it down his
Throat with a Horn, and make him fast about two Hours before and after.

These Methods of Cure are, in my Opinion, to be preferred before giving the
Fire. But, for the satisfaction of several Persons, who are fond of that
Operation, I shall briefly show the manner of performing it.

CHAP. CXLII. To cure the Farcin by giving the Fire.
IF this Operation be accompanied with good inward Remedies, it may be
administered with good Success for the cure of the Farcin.

To proceed methodically in the beginning of the Disease, you must surround the
Knots with a Line drawn with a hot Iron, without piercing the Skin, which
frequently puts a stop to the Farcin.

As soon as you perceive that the Knots are full of Matter, I mean such as are
capable of Suppuration, open 'em boldly with a red-hot Iron wheresoever they
are seated, not excepting even the Hough nor the Master-Sinew of the Fore-Leg:
For if you thrust in your Instrument no farther than till it reach the Matter,
you can never do the least Injury to the Part, but only assist Nature to expel
what offends her: And the opening of the Tumor prevents those Disorders that
might have been occasioned if the Matter had been longer retained.

As soon as you have surrounded and stopped the Cords and Knots with the Rases
of Fire, open a Vein, taking away a great quantity of Blood, and give your
Horse a Purging Medicine, mixed with Mercurius Dulcis or Cinnabar.

If afterward new Knots appear, you must let 'em ripen; and if they will not
come to Suppuration, burn 'em with a red-hot Iron. When the Scab falls off, if
new pieces of Flesh spring up like Mushrooms, it is a certain sign of the danger
of the Distemper, and difficulty of the Cure; and the Flesh must be consumed,
either by a repeated Application of the red-hot Iron, or of one of the
following Caustics.

When you have burnt the Knots or Swellings that come to Suppuration, you must
wash 'em every Day, after the Scab is fallen off, with Urine, and dress 'em
with the Ointment of Portugal.

The Ointment of Portugal for Farcin-Knots.
Take Verdigrease and Realgar, of each one Ounce; Arsenic, two Ounces;
Camphire, two Drams; beat the Arsenic, Camphire, and Verdigrease severally to a
very fine Powder, then mix 'em together, pouring on six Ounces of Oil by
degrees, and incorporate 'em with the Pestle; after which add the Ounce of
Realgar in fine Powder. Mix and make a Liquid Ointment, having cleans'd the
Sores, and even washed 'em with the Second Water, or hot Urine, if you think
fit. Anoint 'em every Day with a Pensil made of Hog's Bristles dipped in the
Ointment, till they be dried up.

Several Horses have been cured by this Ointment without giving the Fire, or
using any other Remedy but Bleeding. It serves also to cleanse and dry the
Sores, after the Escar occasioned by giving the Fire, is fallen off.

Bleeding is useful in the beginning and end, but not in the middle of the Cure.

After you have burnt several Knots, if you find that there are some of 'em
situated, where you cannot safely give the Fire, you may apply Caustics, which
will produce the same effect.

A Cautery or Caustic.
Take Powder of Sublimate, mixed with Spirit of Wine, and apply it to the Part,
where you would raise an Escar. Four or five Days after anoint it with
Basilicum, to hasten the falling away of the Escar.

Another.
Take Corrosive Sublimate, and Red Precipitate, of each half an Ounce;
Verdigrease and Vitriol, of each an Ounce; Powder of Cantharides half an Ounce;
Arsenic, an Ounce; incorporate 'em with four (or if you would have a gentler
Caustic, with eight) Ounces of Basilicum. This Caustic burns the Part to which
it is applied in twenty four Hours, and the Scab or Escar falls off three or
four Days after.

There are a hundred several sorts of Caustics. The Caustic-Stones that are
sold by Apothecaries produce the same effect, but they are not strong enough
for Horses. In the Composition of a Caustic we must not only regard the raising
of a large Scab, but endeavor to prevent the Swelling; Heat and other
Disorders, that are the usual and inconvenient effects of the ill-proportion'd
Doses of the Ingredients. The following Ointment raises a sufficient Escar,
without any considerable Swelling or Inflammation.

The Ointment of Naples which alone Cures the Farcin.
Take Realgar and Sublimate, of each two Ounces; Arsenic and Euphorbium, of
each one Ounce; beat 'em to fine Powder, and incorporate 'em without Heat, with
half a Pound of pure Oil of Bay, not mixed with half the quantity of Grease, as
it is Sold in many Shops at Paris.

Keep the Ointment in a glazed Pot, and when you have occasion to use it, open
the Knots or Swellings with a Lancet, and put into the Hole a little Cotton
dipped in this Ointment, without heating it in the least. The next Day, if you
perceive that it is fallen away, you must put in a little Cotton with some fresh
Ointment, but if it stick, one Application will suffice. This Ointment is also
good for Warts, Quitter-bones, and in all cases that require the raising of an
Escar.

An Italian Groom who communicated to me the description of this Ointment as a
great Secret, cured many Horses of the Farcin, without applying any other
Remedy. I have seen with Amazement the unexpected Cures he performed before he
imparted his Medicine to me; and I Religiously observed the Promise I made him
never to publish it during his Life.

CHAP. CXLIII. The Remedy of a German Farrier for the Farcin.
IT IS a very considerable convenience to be furnished with variety of Remedies
for dangerous Distempers; for some Medicines are not duly Prepared, and others
that cannot be accused of that defect, are nevertheless found to be
ineffectual; and besides, every one may gratify his Inclination in the choice
of a Remedy among so great a number.

Whatever Method you follow in the Cure of the Farcin, you must always observe
the abovementioned Directions concerning your Horse's Diet: You must also
Bleed him, and Purge him too, if you think fit; but whether you purge or not,
you must begin with Bleeding. Then,

Take Sarsaparilla and China-Roots cut small, of each three Ounces; Roots of
Avens, two Ounces; Leaves of Agrimony two large handfuls, Scordium a handful
and a half; boil 'em gently in four Quarts of Water, to a Quart and a half in a
covered Vessel; then strain, and adding a Pint of White Wind, make a Decoction
for five Doses, to be given five Mornings together, adding to every Dose an
ordinary Glass-full of Urine (...) Substance in the Top, and in the Neck of the
Vial. Thus you have a sweet Sublimate, which if it be rightly prepared, will
not discover the least Acrimony when you touch it with your Tongue; for all the
sharp and biting Salts that made the first Sublimate corrosive, are evaporated
through the Neck of the Vial, which must be always kept open during the
Sublimation; and even part of the first Corrosive Sublimate is carried off with
the Salts: so that there remains only the sweet Sublimate or Mercury, which may
be kept for several Uses. It Is to be observed, that all the Preparations of
Mercury may be revived, and restored to their natural Form and Fluidity, with
Filings of Steel, or unslak'd Lime, which by the Assistance of the Fire attract
and retain all the Spirits that kept the Mercury in a manner imprisoned in so
many various Forms, according to the Diversity of the Preparations for several
Uses: Thus Cinnabar, which is only Mercury sublimed with Sulphur, may be
reduced to fluid Quicksilver with Filings of Steel; and the same may be said
of all the other Preparations of Mercury, such as the Precipitates, Turbith
Mineral, etc.

CHAP. CXLIV. Remedies for the Farcin that resembles a Hen's Fundament.
THE Humor that foments this Kind of Farcin partakes so much of Melancholy,
that the Knots are seldom or never brought to Suppuration; sending forth a sort
of foul and proud Flesh that can hardly be curbed or extirpated by Remedies.
The Difficulty of the Cure ought to heighten our Diligence, and convince us of
the Necessity of using the most potent Remedies to expel the Cause of the
Distemper, such as these that follow.

Since black Hellebore is one of the principal, and most effectual Remedies for
the Cure of this Disease, great Care should be taken to correct its ill
Qualities by an exact Preparation.

Take a sufficient quantity of the Roots of true black Hellebore washed and
dried; infuse 'em twenty four Hours in Vinegar of Roses, and throwing away the
Vinegar, dry the Roots at a very gentle Fire.

Pills for the Farcin.
Take Sena Leaves and Salt of Tartar, of each an Ounce; Turbith, Aloes, and
Mercurius dulcis, of each half an Ounce; black Hellebore prepared, three Drams;
Rhubarb two Drams, Ginger and Nutmegs, of each a Dram and a half; Anniseed and
Fennelseed, of each half a Dram: Beat all the Ingredients to a gross Powder,
and with a Pound of fresh Butter make 'em up into Pills; keep your Horse
bridled six Hours before, and as long after, and as soon as he has taken the
Pills walk him gently for the space of half an Hour well covered. Note, That
you must bleed your Horse the day before you give him the Pills.

You may purge a Horse for the Farcin with two Ounces of the Catholic or
Imperial Pills of Fernelius, mixed with half an Ounce of Mercurius dulcis, made
up into one or two Pills, and exhibited in a Pint of White Wind. As soon as you
perceive that your Horse has recovered a good Appetite, and that the Operation
of the Purgative is over, give him the following Ptisan.

CHAP. CXLV. The German Ptisan, for the Cure of the Farcin.
TAke the dry Roots of Angelica, Gentian, Valerian, Avens, round Birthwort and
Marshmallows, of each an Ounce and a half, or a double quantity of the green
Roots; Leaves of Agrimony two Handfuls. Beat the Roots grossly, boil all the
Ingredients in a close-cover'd Pot, in three Quarts of Water, to the
Consumption of one half: Then press out the Liquor through a Linen Cloth, and
add to the Straining before it grow cold, half an Ounce of Juice of Liquorice,
and White Wine an equal quantity to the whole Decoction, and afterward add two
Pugils of Oriental Saffron in Powder.

Three Days after the Purgation, when the Evacuation is over, and the Horse's
Appetite restored, let him stand bridled from Five a Clock in the Morning to
Eight, then give him the fifth Part of the Decoction, keeping him bridled three
Hours after. Repeat the Decoction after the same Manner for five Days together.

If his Appetite be not fully restored in the limited time after the Purgation,
you must wait four, five, or six Days, till you are convinced that he feeds as
heartily as he did before you gave him the purging Medicine. During the time of
his taking the Decoction, if the Weather be not too hot, walk him gently half
an Hour every Day after Dinner. These five Doses of the Decoction, are usually
sufficient for perfecting the Cure, without any other Remedy; and the Cords,
Knots, and Tumors are healed and dried up.

Moderate Exercise is convenient in the beginning; but afterward you may
travel him as if he were perfectly sound.

If you perceive new Knots to arise at the first New Moon, you may conclude
that the Disease is not perfectly extirpated; and therefore you must prepare
and exhibit the Ptisan, as before, but without Bleeding or Purging. If the
Tumors break forth again, the Case is altogether desperate; for it has been
frequently observed, that when the Farcin is inveterate, and has long resisted
the Efficacy of the best Remedies, especially when corrupt Flesh breaks out of
the Tumors instead of Matter, that the Malignity of the burnt and corrupted
Blood has so heated the Substance of the Lungs, that there are Ulcers generated
in several parts of 'em: And therefore since it is impossible to restore a
consumed Part, those Ulcers that waste the Lungs are the infallible Messengers
of Death. The Truth of this Observation is confirmed beyond Contradiction, by
the Diffections of those Horses that die of the Farcin; for their Lungs are
almost always found to be corrupted and putrefy'd, and sometimes the Liver is
overspread with Ulcers, and part of it wasted and turned to Putrefaction. Now
I would willingly know of those confident Pretenders to infallible Secrets for
the Farcin, whether their Remedies are able to restore a rotten and wasted
Liver? If not, it is in vain to expect the Horse's Recovery, for the putrefy'd
Liver will still continue to vitiate the Blood, and hinder the Cure of the
Farcin, which is occasioned by the Corruption of the Blood. How ridiculously do
those Boasters betray their Ignorance for want of Experience! Since all that
the most skilful and expert Farrier can promise in this Case is, That he will
cure the Farcin if it be curable; for sometimes the Liver is ulcerated at the
first Appearance of the Distemper, and is the very Cause of the Disease, in
which Case it is certainly incurable: And I have already intimated that an
inveterate Farcin may infect and waste the Substance of the Lungs. And how a
Remedy applied to the Forehead, put into the Ear, hung at the Tail or Mane, or
Ointments spread on the Knots, can heal an Ulcer in the Lungs, I confess is
very much above my Capacity to comprehend: Only thus much I know, and dare
confidently maintain, That so long as those Ulcers remain, the Farcin that is
caused and fomented by 'em must necessarily subsist. From what has been said I
may reasonably conclude, That those Infallible Gentlemen are very little
acquainted with the Nature of the Disease they pretend to cure, and perhaps
never made an Experiment of the Virtue of their Remedies.

The Farcin seems to have a very near Resemblance to the French Pox, Leprosy,
and King's Evil.

CHAP. CXLVI. Of an inveterate Farcin.
YOU will sometimes meet with Farcins of so long a standing, and so deeply
rooted, that the Cure is extremely difficult, and even sometimes impracticable,
if the Substance of the Liver or Lungs be wasted, and corrupted. But since it is
impossible to divine whether those Parts be infected; 'twou'd be a very
unreasonable Inference from what I have said on this Subject, to pretend that
when a Horse is troubled with an inveterate Farcin, he must be suffered to
perish without Assistance. And besides these Parts are oftentimes only heated,
dried, or so slightly ulcerated, that they may be easily healed, and restored
to their wonted Temperament, by the Use of convenient Remedies. But I shall
never advise any Man, whatever Trial he may have made of his Remedy, to promise
the Cure of an inveterate Farcin, when the Knots send forth great Pieces of
Flesh like large Mushrooms; especially after an unsuccessful Application of
other Remedies. For such Attempts are oftentimes attended with Shame instead of
Honor and Success; especially when the Farcin is accompanied with a Running at
the Nose, or seizes on the Kernels, as it happens frequently in inveterate
Farcins, which degenerate into the Glanders, according to the Vulgar Saying,
That the Farcin is Cousin-German to the Glanders.

Before you proceed to the Application of Remedies, you may try this easy
Experiment. Spread about two Ounces of Assa-foetida on a Stick, and wrapping a
Cloth about it, put it into the Horse's Mouth, and make him champ upon it
twenty four Hours together, without suffering him to eat or drink all the
while. This will draw forth a prodigious Quantity of filthy Humors; and if the
Lungs be not consumed, or the Liver ulcerated, perhaps the Horse will recover.
You must not be afraid of the seeming Violence of the Remedy, for a Horse may
fast twenty four Hours without any Danger: Neither do I blame the Custom of
those, who put a second Stick with fresh Assa-foetida into the Horse's Mouth,
after twelve Hours.

The Decoctions of Guaiacum, Sassafras, Sarsaparilla, and China Roots, are very
proper on this Occasion; and may be given every Morning, for seven or eight
Days before Purgation.

For Example; If the Horse's Body be full of raw, tough, and viscous Humors,
to which Inconveniency fleshy Horses are very subject; the Decoction of
Guaiacum will cut, attenuate, and prepare the Humors, to be expelled by
Nature, or evacuated by a Purging Remedy.

If the Horse be Lean and Dry, full of Hot and Choleric, or Melancholic
Humors, the Decoction of China will prepare 'em, without augmenting their
Heat; for it may be conveniently given in a Consumption, and ill Habit of Body.
The Decoction of Sarsaparilla is of a middle Nature between the other two.

The Decoction of Guaiacum is proper for those thick and bulky Dutch Horses,
that are over-loaded with Flesh, and full of Moisture, and running or watery
Sores.

The Decoction of Guaiacum.
Infuse ten Ounces of the Shavings of Guaiacum Wood, or for want of that, of
Box Wood, in nine Pints of Water, and after they have stood twelve Hours in
Infusion on hot Ashes; Boil 'em with a gentle Heat in a covered Vessel, to the
Consumption of the third Part of the Water: Then strain out the Liquor, and
give your Horse a Quart every Day, for eight Days together, keeping him bridled
three Hours before, and three Hours after every Dose. You may Purge him
afterward with one of the abovementioned Remedies.

The Decoction of China.
Take four Ounces of the Roots of China cut very small, put 'em into a large
Glass-Bottle well stopped, with nine Pints of Water; and after they have stood
fifteen Hours in Infusion, boil 'em over a gentle Fire to the Consumption of
one half, taking care to prevent the Evaporation of the thinner Parts of the
Medicine: Then strain out the Liquor, and give your Horse a third part of it
every Morning, keeping him Bridled two Hours before, and as long after.

This Decoction must be drunk lukewarm, and prepared every three Days, because
it is apt to turn sour. After eight Doses 'twill be convenient to exhibit a
Purging Remedy.

The Decoction of Sarsaparilla.
This Decoction is prepared like that of China, only the quantity must be
larger, because it is adapted for the Preparation of thicker Humors: For
Example, instead of four Ounces of China, you must take six of Sarsaparilla.

Continue the use of this Decoction six or eight Days, to prepare the Humors
that cause and foment the Farcin, and to purify the Blood.

After such a Preparation the Purging Remedy operates more effectually, and
procures a more plentiful Evacuation: whereas the Purgatives that are given
without any Preparation, or consist of ill chosen Ingredients, increase the
Distemper instead of abating it, and even augment its Malignity.

After Purgation repeat the Decoctions, to dry the habit of the Body, and to
drain the source of those Malignant Humors that foment the Disease.

This Method is also very proper for Coach-Horses that are troubled with the
Pains, or filthy Sores in their Legs; for otherwise it is hardly possible to
stop the course of the Humors, and dry up the source of those noisome Ulcers,
since they usually break forth again three Months after they are dried up, and
at last are succeeded by hard Swellings, like Warts, which render the Disease
incurable. To prevent those dangerous Relapses, while your Horse is Young,
after you have observed twice or thrice his Legs to be overrun with Sores, you
must take two Pound of Blood from him, then give him the Decoctions of
Guaiacum, or for want of that, of Box-Wood; and afterward purge him, and dry
up those watery Humors. If the Sores break forth again, make him drink the
Decoction ten Days, then purge him, and after the Evacuation is ceased, and his
Appetite perfectly restored, give him the Decoction for ten Days longer, which
in all probability will put a final stop to the course of the Humors. Instead
of the Decoctions of Guaiacum, China, and Sarsaparilla, you may exhibit two
Ounces of the Powder of either of the three in a Quart of White Wind, and
observe the same Directions both as to the time and manner of giving it, that
were prescribed for the use of the Decoctions: These Powders are not altogether
so effectual as the Decoctions, especially that of China, for lean, dry, and
choleric Horses: Yet they are not to be despised, since they also produce a
considerable effect, especially the Sassafras.

CHAP. CXLVII. Of the Farcin in the Head.
THE Reader will perhaps be surprised to find a Method recommended in this
Chapter, which I condemned and labored with so much earnestness to confute
before: But he ought to consider, that I am now treating of the most easily
cured kind of Farcin; namely, that which appears in the Head; and besides, I
can assure him, that he may use this Remedy without the least danger of
producing these fatal effects, which I have often seen occasioned by Medicines
put into the Ears. For it is the usual Custom to make use of such violent
Liquors, or rather Caustics on such occasions, that the Horse's Brains are
usually spoiled, some remaining Wry-Neck'd ever after, while others are
blemished with the unseemly deformity of a hanging or bangle Ear: And I
observed one that could not walk three steps without falling, and continued
above six Months before he could be restored to the degree of Health he enjoyed
before the Remedy was put into his Ears. Take Powder of burnt Allom, an Ounce;
Powder of common Salt, two Drams; Spirit of Vitriol, one Scruple; Juice of
Wormwood, half a Glass-full.

Bridle your Horse at Midnight, and at six a Clock in the Morning, without
taking out his Bridle, drop a little of the Mixture into his Ear, rubbing it
very hard to make the Liquor sink; after which pour in more Liquor, and rub it
in as before, continuing after the same manner till you have consumed one half
of the quantity prescribed; then stop the Ear with part of the mash or bruised
Wormwood, out of which you squeezed the Juice, and tie it up so close, that
there may be no passage for the Air to get into it. Pour the remaining half of
the Medicine into the other Ear, observing the same Directions as before, and
let your Horse stand Bridled till Noon.

Some make it a part of the Cure to bind the Horse's Ear, with a green String;
but a blue or yellow one is as good. At Noon unbridle your Horse, and give him
moistened Bran and Hay, with some Water to drink, suffering him to eat till
Midnight, then bridle him again, and at six a Clock in the Morning, open the
two Neck-Veins, taking three Pounds of Blood on each side, and keeping him
Bridled till Noon.

Then cut the silken Strings that were bound about the Ear, and the Farcin will
be cured without any other Remedy.

This Receipt is particularly adapted to the Farcin in the Head, and cures also
that which appears on the Breast, being seated on the inside of the Skin,
without sticking to the Body. Sometimes it cures the Farcin in the hinder
Parts; but since I have applied it to some Horses in that case without Success,
I can only recommend it as a certain Remedy for the Farcin in the Head and
Shoulders, without pretending to warrant its efficacy when the Distemper
infects the rest of the Body.

The main inconveniency of this Receipt is, that there remains always a white
mark on each Ear where the String was tied. Some endeavor to avoid that
deformity, by sowing the Ears lengthways; but I have seen some Horses Ears so
notch'd and peeled by that Method, that the blemish was a great deal more
unseemly, than that which is usually occasioned by the Ligature. Those Marks
are not visible on white Horses.

If you perceive foul or corrupt Flesh in any of the Knots, or if the Tumors
be large and continue long without breaking, you must open 'em with a Lancet
when they are fully ripened, and afterward dress 'em every Day with the
Ointment of Portugal, till they be dried up.

CHAP. CXLVIII. To dissolve and assuage all sorts of Swellings caused by the
Farcin, both in the Legs, and other Parts of the Body.
SOmetimes after the cure of the Farcin, the Thigh, Hough, or Leg, and not
unfrefrequently all the three remain swollen and gourded. This inconveniency is
the effect of the Carelessness of those to whom the management of the Cure is
committed, who neglect to apply a dissolving Medicine in the beginning, which
would have prevented the congealing and hardening of the Humors; for at the
first you may expect a more considerable effect from the weakest Remedy, than
afterward from the most powerful Resolvent.

These Swellings may be reckoned among the worst Infirmities of a Horse: For
the swollen Leg is bigger, heavier, and more unweildy than the rest; the Horse
is apt to Stumble, and Tires sooner than otherwise he would have done; and when
you have occasion to sell him, you must part with him for a fourth part of his
Value.

It Is very difficult, and oftentimes impossible to assuage the Swelling of a
Leg that has been feared or burnt; for the Skin is hardened, and that which the
Fire could not dissolve is so hard and congealed, that the Application of the
best Medicines produces a very inconsiderable effect, and frequently none at
all.

The following Ointment dissolves Swellings of what kind soever, whether
proceeding from the Farcin, or any other cause; and if the Tumor yield not to
this Medicine, you may conclude, that it is above the power of Remedies to
perform the Cure.

Take common Honey, and the Grease of a Capon, Chicken, or Hen, or if neither
of these can be procured, of a Horse, or for want of that of a Bore, melted and
strained through a Linen Cloth. Leaves of Rue three Pounds, beat 'em in a
Marble-Mortar, and incorporate 'em with the Grease and Honey. Then boil this
Mash with a Pint of the Juice of green Coleworts in a Skillet or Basin over a
gentle Fire, stirring perpetually, for the space of half an Hour; after which
press it through a Linen Cloth, and throwing away the gross Substance that
remains in the Cloth, boil the Straining with two Pounds of fresh Rue, if the
Herbs be dry: Then strain it into a new Pot, and after it is cold, add Cinnabar,
Sal-Armoniac, and Gum-Ammoniac, of each four Ounces; Black-Soap, one Pound; mix
and incorporate the whole; and keep the Ointment close covered for use.

Dissolve an Ounce of Camphire beaten to Powder, in a Pint of highly rectified
Spirit of Wine, by a cold Infusion, and keep the Solution in a Bottle. The
Camphire hinders the Spirit of Wine from exhaling, and the Spirit retains the
Camphire.

When you have occasion to dissolve any cold Tumor, rub the Part till it grow
hot, then chafe it with the Camphorated Spirit of Wine, and anoint it with the
following Ointment. The next Day, without washing away, or taking off the
Ointment that remains upon the Part, chafe it with the Spirit, and afterward
with the Ointment, continuing after the same manner till the Swelling be
asswag'd.

The Ointment alone is sufficient for the Cure of the Water-Farcin, or other
softer Swellings.

When a Horse's Legs are swollen with the Farcin, even during the Application
of other Remedies, for the Cure of the main Disease, you must chafe the swollen
Leg with this Ointment once every Day, walking the Horse to make the Medicine
sink in, and continuing after the same manner till the Leg be sound.

While you are endeavoring to draw out the Humor that causes the Cord, by
anointing it with the Ointment of Beetles; you may at the same time apply the
dissolving Ointment to the other swollen parts of the Leg.

Sometimes Tumors appear under the Chaul, and at the sides of it, on the
Shoulders, and in other parts of the Body. If you perceive that these Tumors
are neither occasioned by the Strangles, nor have the least tendency to
Suppuration, apply this Ointment cold till the Swellings be asswag'd.

The following Ointment is sufficient for the Cure of small and inconsiderable
Tumors. Take the Ointment of Marshmallows, and Populeon, of each two Ounces;
Black-Soap, four Ounces; and with a sufficient quantity of Brandy make an
Ointment. This Ointment will also assuage those Swellings that are only
fastened to the Skin, and remain after the Cure of Wounds or Hurts that are not
brought to a due Supration, especially on the Withers: But it is to be observed,
that the Cure will succeed the better, if you apply the Ointment as soon as you
perceive the Swelling.

Sometimes after the Cure of Swellings in the Legs or Houghs by Blows or
Bruises, or other such like Accidents, the Legs and Pastern-Joints continue
gourded by the congealed and hardened Humor, though the Horse seem not to be
troubled with any Pain or Lameness. This Deformity may be easily corrected by
moderate Exercise, and the daily Application of the Ointment to the swollen
Part: But if it be not attended with the expected Success, after you have
renewed the Application five or six times without any visible abatement of the
Swelling; you must wash the Part with a strong Lie twice a Day, for five or six
Days, and then apply the Spirit of Wine Camphorated, and afterward the
dissolving Ointment; for there are few Swellings so inveterate, that may not be
asswag'd by this Method.

If you perceive that the Ointment is too strong, and that it raises Blisters
and Scabs, or swells the Part, add a convenient quantity of Capon's, or Horse's
Grease.

Sometimes you may meet with inveterate Swellings, that elude the force of all
those Remedies, especially in Winter, by reason of the Cold which condenses the
Pores and makes the Cure extremely difficult; and therefore you must double the
quantity of the Remedies. But if the Success, after all, do not answer your
Expectations, you must give the Fire very dexterously, without piercing the
Skin. Note, That in this case, you must not apply a Plaster, but only chafe
the burnt Parts with a Mixture of Honey, and Spirit of Wine, for the space of
nine Days, and then with Spirit of Wine alone, till the Scab fall away, and the
Sore be dry.

Since Fire is the most powerful Resolvent, it oftentimes performs Cures that
have been in vain attempted with the best Ointments; but it operates slowly,
and you must often wait three Months before you can perceive any considerable
effect of it. You may give the Fire safely in any part of the Body, even on the
Sinews, Tendons, and Veins; for it never produces any ill effect, if the hot
Iron be nimbly and dexterously applied without piercing the Skin; and if those
Cautions be observed, it hardly leaves any visible Mark.

I could have added many other Receipts for the Farcin, if I had not resolved
to insert none but such as I have often tried with Success; among which I may
justly reckon the two that follow.

A Receipt for the Farcin.
The Person who communicated this Receipt was so confident of its Virtue, and
pretended that he had performed so many wonderful and unexpected Cures with it,
that he usually bought all the Horses that were troubled with the Farcin, which
he could purchase at a low rate. But the Observations I made on the Condition
of some of those Horses when he began to apply the Remedy, makes me inclinable
to think that his Attempts were not always attended with Success. Take a Root
of sharp-pointed Dock, two Fingers breadth long, and about the thickness of
one; Split it through the middle, and having made an Incision in the Forehead
cross-wise, separate the Skin with a Hazel-stick, and put in the Root, laying
over it a Plaster of Black-Pitch, and suffering it to stick till it fall of it
self.

Take the Leaves and Roots of sharp-pointed Dock and Dandelion, gathered in the
Summer, of each an equal quantity; having washed and dried 'em, beat 'em in a
Mortar, with a Pugil of common Salt, and make up the Mash into Balls, of the
bigness of a Walnut to be put into each Ear. Then bind the Ears very hard, for
twenty four Hours, after which cut the Ligature, and wash the Farcin-Knots with
the following Remedy.

Infuse a large quantity of the Rustiest Iron you can find in two Quarts of the
Lees of Wine, for twenty four Hours: Then take out the Iron, and scraping off
all the Rust, put it again into the Lees of Wine, with a handful of the Powder
of Roch-Allom, and the like quantity of Bay Salt, and adding a Pint, or a Pint
and a half of Water, boil away two thirds of the Liquor: Rub the Knots with a
piece of new and coarse Linnen-Clo th, dipped in this Liquor, till they be raw,
and begin to Bleed.

If the Farcin be in the Thighs or Legs, bathe 'em with this Liquor, and wrap
'em about with Linnen-Clouts dipped in the same. If the Parts be swollen or
gourded, renew the Application once every three Days.

When the Knots begin to be a little Mortified, strew 'em with the Powder of
green Copperas Calcined.

They who put their Horses who are troubled with this Distemper, to the Grass,
increase the Distemper instead of abating it; for it is a vulgar Error to
imagine, that Grass is profitable in this case.

An easy Remedy for the Farcin.
Open the two Neck-Veins, and take away three Pounds of Blood on each side; the
next Morning give your Horse a Drench of three Pints of White Wind, two Ounces
of fine Aloes, and a like quantity of good Treacle, well mixed, keeping him
Bridled six Hours before, and as long after. This Remedy alone frequently Cures
a beginning Farcin, and is always proper in this case, when the Horse stands in
need of Purgation. You must afterward give him two Ounces of Liver of Antimony
every Day without intermission, till he has consumed two or three Pounds. And
as soon as the Knots are opened, dress 'em with the Ointment of Portugal, or
with that of Naples, if they be full of foul and corrupt Flesh.

CHAP. CXLIX. Of the Ebullition of the Blood, or Bloodrunning Itch.
MAny Persons take this Distemper for the Farcin, and put themselves to
needless Trouble and Charge for the Cure of it. It Is occasioned by a Redundancy
of Blood, overheated by several Accidents and other Causes, already mentioned.
For the thinnest and most subtle part of the Blood penetrating the Substance of
the Flesh, causes external Tumors resembling the Farcin: And long Rest and
want of Exercise are usually the occasional Causes of this Distemper, by
hindering the Dissipation of superfluous Humors.

You may easily cure this Distemper, by Bleeding your Horse plentifully once or
twice in the Neck-Veins.

These Tumors are distinguished from the Farcin, both by the suddenness of
their Appearance, and of the Cure; for sometimes they overspread the Body in
one Night: And besides, they are neither hard, nor fastened to the Flesh.

These Swellings are oftentimes repelled and driven inwards by unseasonable
Bleeding, and the Horse is seized with a Fever; in which Case you must
immediately give him a Clyster, and an Hour after an Ounce or two of Treacle,
or Diatessaron in Wine; which by driving out the Humor, will give Ease to the
Horse, and at last cure him.

Some Horses are troubled from time to time with little Knots or Bunches in
several parts of their Body, occasioned by the Boiling, or rather excessive
Heat of their Blood; for the most subtle and choleric Particles being driven
outward to the external Parts of the Body form these little Tumors, part of
which break and disappear, and the rest are dissolved by insensible
Transpiration.

The general and most effectual way to cure all these Ebullitions, is to mix
with your Horse's Bread those Remedies that are endu'd with a Virtue to cool
and purify the Blood. Thus Liver of Antimony given to the quantity of an Ounce
and a half every Day, will safely and quickly dissolve all those Knots, and
sweeten your Horse's Blood. Three or four Doses of the Cinnabar-Pills are also
very effectual in this Case.

You may prevent this Distemper, by giving your Horse Sal Prunellae in his
Bran, which will expel those Bilious Serosities that usually cause these
Symptoms, and perhaps drive 'em out by the Urinary Passages. The same Remedy
allays the Heat of the Blood and Intrails, and prevents the Farcin, and other
Distempers occasioned by the Heat of the Blood.

For the Satisfaction of the Curious, I shall insert the Preparation of Sal
Prunellae, which is a very useful Medicine both for Men and Horses.

CHAP. CL. Crystal Mineral, or Sal Prunellae.
THis is only Nitre, or Saltpeter, fixed with Sulphur, to prevent its Solution.

Take Saltpeter of the fourth Solution, melt it in a Crucible or Iron Pot, and
when you perceive that it is entirely reduced to a liquid Form, throw a little
Brimstone upon it. As Soon as the Flame ceases, cast some more Brimstone into
the Crucible, continuing after the same manner, till you have thrown in an
Ounce of Flower of Brimstone for every Pound of Saltpeter, which must be kept
in Fusion during the whole Operation. Then take out the Saltpeter with an Iron
Spoon, and put it into a little Copper Basin, which being placed in a Pailful
of cold Water, the Mineral will congeal at the Bottom, and appear as white as
Snow. An Iron Pot is more fit for this Operation than Crucibles, which are
usually pierced and cracked with the Saltpeter, unless you can procure a good
German Crucible.

For the better understanding of a Passage, in the Beginning of the preceding
Description, it will not be amiss to acquaint the Reader, that Saltpeter is
found congealed into Chrystals in the Water which is poured for that purpose,
on Lime and Plaster taken from the Ruins of old Buildings, and mixed with
Ashes. This Water is afterward boiled till a Scum appear on the Top, and then
set in a cold place in Wooden Vessels; where Chrystals of a long Figure, and
rusty Color are formed, which is Saltpeter of the first Solution. Then
dissolve these Chrystals in clean Water, strain it through a Woollen Cloth, boil
it as before, and when it is cold the Saltpeter of the second Solution will
appear in Chrystals, which are proper for the making of Gunpowder, Liver of
Antimony, and several other Preparations: For if the Nitre were too fine and
violent, it would carry off part of the Antimony that is mixed with it. If you
would have your Saltpeter more pure and refined, dissolve it in Water,
filtrate, boil, and chrystallize as before, to procure Saltpeter of the third
Solution; repeating the same Operation as often as you think fit, for if the
Saltpeter be not very pure, it is impossible to make fine Sal Prunellae.

Crystal Mineral is not only fixed by the Sulphur, but purged of those
Arsenical Spirits of which it was full; so that it is entirely freed of all
Sharpness and Malignity. It purifies and cools the Blood and Intrails, allays
and stops the Ebullition of the Humors in Fevers, powerfully opens all
Obstructions, opens and incides the Body of Medicines, that their Virtues may
be the better extracted, and in one Word, it is a very cooling Remedy without
Acrimony or Biting.

You may give an Ounce and a half of it every Day in moistened Bran, mixed with
half an Ounce of Juniper Berries beaten, or dissolve three or four Ounces of it
in a Pailful of Water for your Horse's ordinary Drink; and it may be also
conveniently mixed with purging Medicines. Every Author extols the Virtues of
this Remedy; but I have only insisted on its Usefulness for Horses.

So Cooling a Medicine ought to be cautiously administered to Horses, whose
Constitution is different from that of Men: And therefore when you give it in
moistened Bran, 'twill be convenient to add half an Ounce of Juniper Berries
beaten, to qualify and correct the extreme Coldness of the Remedy; which
notwithstanding its great Usefulness in other Respects, oftentimes destroys the
Horse's Appetite, and makes his Hair stare: But some Horses have the Advantage
of such strong Appetites, that the Use of this Medicine, though administered
alone, produces not the least ill Effect upon their Stomachs: And I have made
some Horses eat three or four Pounds of it, without disordering their Stomachs,
or making 'em forsake their Meat.

CHAP. CLI. Of the Shedding of the Hair from the Head, accompanied with the
Mange; And of the Falling of the Hair from the rest of the Body, especially
about the Neck, and hinder part of the Thighs.
THE Heat that occasions these Disorders is not always an Effect of Distempers
in the Intrails, but sometimes proceeds from a Corruption of the Humors, and
is the more dangerous because it may degenerate into a Fever. The remote Causes
of this Heat are immoderate and violent Exercise, too hot Nourishment, such as
Clover, Beans, etc. Fatness of the Body, and a hot or choleric Constitution.
The Signs are evident, for the Hair sheds and falls off from several parts of
the Body, the Horse is tormented with a violent Itching, and several other
Symptoms are visible Marks of an internal Heat. This Distemper sometimes
precedes a Cough. The following Remedy is very effectual in this Case, and
generally useful for all overheated Horses.

In the first place you may give your Horse the Cinnabar-Pills, observing the
necessary Directions: But if those prove ineffectual, prepare the following
Medicine.

Put half a Pound of calcined Roch-Allom into a Mattress or long-neckt Vial,
with a Quart of distilled Vinegar; digest on hot Ashes till the Allom be
dissolved, after which strain the Vinegar through a double Cloth or brown Paper:
Then boil away the third Part in an Earthen Pot, and afterward set it in a
cool Cellar, where it will congeal into Crystals about the Sides of the Pot.
Pour off the remaining Vinegar, and having evaporated one half, set it in a
Cellar to crystallize as before: Then mix these Crystals with the former, and
dry 'em carefully.

When you have occasion to cool your Horse's Body, take these Crystals of
Allom, Sal Prunellae, and Juniper Berries, of each half an Ounce; beat 'em to
Powder, and having infused 'em in a Quart of White Wine during the space of a
Night, make your Horse drink the Infusion in the Morning, keeping him bridled
two Hours before, and as long after. Continue after the same Manner, unless the
Horse forsake his Meat; for in that Case you must discontinue the Use of the
Remedy, and even lay it aside entirely, if you perceive that his Appetite is
quite lost, and his Hair begins to stare: For these are evident Signs, that he
stands not in need of cooling Medicines.

The best way to cool or refresh the Body of a Horse, when his Stomach is
injured by the abovementioned Remedy, is to purify his Blood with the Liver
of Antimony, or some other convenient Medicine.

I might take this Occasion to confute the vulgar Mistakes concerning the
Method of administering cooling Medicines to Horses; but to avoid Repetitions, I
shall content my self with referring the Reader to what has been already said
on that Subject, and conclude this Chapter with the Case of a Horse that
without the least Appearance of a Scab, was tormented with a violent and almost
incredible Itching in his Hide. I ordered him to be let Blood twice, and made
him eat above six Pounds of Polychrest in moistened Bran, giving him a Handful
every Day without weighing the Doses. His Stomach was not in the least
disordered; but he had so great a Looseness for twenty Days, that his
Excrements were as liquid as Cows Dung. In the mean time I continued the Use of
the Sal Polychrest, till his Dung was reduced to its natural Thickness; after
which he was bathed in a River, and the Mange was cured without any external
Application.

CHAP. CLII. Of Molten-Grease.
IT IS the general Opinion of Farriers, and consequently of most other Men, who
believe that their Authority has the Force of an Argument in a Case relating to
the Art they profess; that this Distemper, is occasioned by violent Exercise,
which over-heats the Horse to such a degree, that his Fat (which they also
suppose to be redundant) is melted in his Body, and stifles him: But this is a
very ill-grounded Hypothesis; for if you consider attentively the Causes and
Symptoms of this Disease, you will find your self obliged to conclude, that it
proceeds from tough and slimy Humors, agitated and fermented by a sharp and
subtle sort of Choler, so that being extremely rarefy'd, they break out of the
Places where they were lodged by Nature; and overrunning the whole Body,
(according to the Operation of Leven upon Bread) ferment the rest of the
Humors, which being agitated, and put into Motion, disorder the Economy of
Nature, emit Vapors that disturb the Brain, excite a Fever, by reason of the
violent Agitation of the Spirits, and at last, by a provident struggle of
Nature, in order to the final Evacuation of (at least) part of those Humors
that oppress her, they are driven into the great Gut; where they are mixed with
the Dung, and give us occasion to judge that the Horse is troubled with the
Disease commonly called Molten-Grease.

Fat Horses are most subject to this Distemper, which is usually occasioned by
Repletion or Fullness: For the Choler being agitated by violent Exercise, and
meeting with a Body full of Humors, produces the abovementioned Disorders.

It Is a very hard Task to know, but more difficult to cure this Distemper; I
saw a Horse that di'd after two Days Illness, without giving the least Sign to
help us to the Knowledge of his Disease. It Is true, if the Horse be suffered to
rest after his Grease is molten, the Symptom will be more apparent.

The sick Horse usually forsakes his Meat, lies down and rises again suddenly,
and looks, upon his Flanks; but the surest way to discover the Nature of the
Disease, is by putting your Hand into his Fundament; for if the Excrements you
draw forth, be covered with a whitish Membrane or Film, in some measure
resembling Grease, you may certainly conclude that his Grease is molten, and
proceed immediately to the Application of convenient Remedies. I attempted and
successfully performed the Cure of a Horse who was troubled with this Distemper
in so violent a Degree, that the slimy Humor he voided after the Injection of
a Clyster, continued to boil and ferment on the Floor, for a very considerable
time.

Of the Cure of Molten-Grease in the Beginning.
As Soon as you perceive the least Cause to suspect that your Horse's Grease is
molten, anoint your Hand and Arm with fresh Butter, and put it into his
Fundament, drawing forth not only the Dung, but all the slimy Humors. After
you have raked him carefully, let him blood in the Neck, and half an Hour after
give him a Clyster, made by dissolving two Ounces of Benedicta Laxativa, one
Ounce of Sal Gemmae, or Sal Polychrest, or the Scoriae of Liver of Antimony,
and a quarter of a Pound of Honey of Violets, in two Quarts of the common
Decoction, adding Emetic Wine, and the Urine of a sound Man, of each a Pint.
Then walk your Horse gently for half an Hour, to provoke him to void the
Clyster. When the Clyster leaves off Working, that is about an Hour after the
injecting of it, give him about half a Pint of the Juice of Housleek, (which is
a Herb that grows on the Walls, and resembles little Artichoaks) mixed with a
Pint of White Wine, walking him gently for the space of an Hour. This Juice
stops the Ebullition of the Humors, allays the Heat of the inward Parts, and
both cleanses and heals the Body if it be seasonably administered: Afterward
you may repeat the former, or some other convenient Clyster; and by all means
endeavor to restore your Horse's Appetite, according to the Method prescribed
in the sixth and following Chapters.

You may easily try an Experiment, which is said to cure this Distemper
effectually, by giving your Horse the Blood of a Sheep, warm as it comes out of
the Vein. I can only recommend this Remedy upon the Credit of others: but I can
assure you I have often administered that which follows, with very good
Success. In the first place, you must rake your Horse, and after you have
allowed him some time to rest, bring a young Sheep, or great Lamb into the
Stable, (or for want of both these) a Calf. Cut its Neck, and receive its Blood
into a Pipe, which must be heated, to prevent the Dissipation of the Spirits,
and the Cooling of the Blood: Then inject this Blood warm and pure without any
Mixture, into the Horse's Fundament by way of Clyster. It moistens and tempers
the great Gut, and Nature makes so good Use of it, that it is seldom or never
rejected till the usual time of Dunging, when it appears clotted among the
Excrements. You may repeat it every twelve Hours, and if you think fit, give
your Horse no other Clyster but this, which alone is richly worth a Dozen.

It Is a general and almost infallible Rule, that few Horses ^escape, when the
Disease is accompanied with a Running at the Nose, either before or after the
Use of Remedies, especially if he void a great quantity of Matter: But if the
Humors be frothy, it is a certain Sign of Death. You may also try the following
Method.

Bleed your Horse, and half an Hour after give him two stinking Pills in a Pint
of Wine, or of Beer, if it be in Summer; an Hour after repeat the Dose, making
him swallow the Pills entire with a Pint of Wine, or Beer, and after a like
Interval, give him two Pills. Half and Hour after the third and last Dose,
inject the following Clyster. Boil two Ounces of the Scoriae of Liver of
Antimony reduced to fine Powder, in five Pints of Beer, or for want of that of
Whey, and after two or three brisk Waums remove the Vessel from the Fire; And
adding a quarter of a Pound of fresh Butter, inject the Clyster blood-warm. If
you cannot conveniently prepare a Clyster, half an Hour after the last Dose of
Pills, thrust a piece of Soap into his Fundament, to make him void that which
is called the Molten-Grease: If you perceive that the Distemper is extremely
violent, that is, if the Horse be troubled with a vehement Palpitation of the
Heart, if he be very restless, and rise and lie down very often, and if you
draw a great deal of white Slime, or greasy Matter out of his Fundament, give
him a Clyster of Sheep's-Blood warm; for in this case you must inject a Clyster
every two Hours, to make the Horse void the Humor, and even if the violence of
the Disease be not abated, 'twill be convenient to give him three Doses of the
Pills, two or three Hours after the last of the former Doses, by which means
you may perhaps save your Horse: You must not be afraid of administering so
large a quantity of those Pills; for their Heat is qualified by the Antimony
that enters the Composition, and the Fixed Salt with which they abound, stops
and fixes the Ebullition or Fermentation that occasions all these Disorders. I
have seen Horses seized with this Distemper in the Stable, and others after so
moderate Riding, that it would have seemed altogether incredible, that such a
violent effect could be produced by so slight a cause, if I had not been
convinced of the truth of it by the testimony of my own Eyes. I have also
observed this Distemper to proceed from the violent agitation of the Body,
occasioned by the Pains of the Colic. In all these cases the Cure is the same:
But the most dangerous of all is that which is caused by violent Exercise; for
the Horse's Body is so extremely overheated, that it can hardly be restored to
its natural Constitution.

The abovementioned Method of Cure is almost always attended with Success, if
it be seasonably begun: But since it is very hard to perceive the first insults
of the Distemper, it oftentimes gives an irrecoverable Blow before you can be
sensible of the danger.

CHAP. CLIII. Stinking Pills for Foundering, Molten-Grease, Chest-Foundering,
and the Colic.
ASsa-faetida is a certain Gum that grows in the Indies, where it is called
Hingb: The best is gathered in the Province of Utrad; but the greatest part of
what we have in France is brought from Persia, and is very much inferior to
the other. In India it grows upon a Bush or Shrub with small Leaves resembling
Rue, whereas the Plant that produces it in Persia, has Leaves like those of a
Fig Tree: These Plants usually grow in stony and dry places, and the Gum
begins to appear about the end of Summer, so that it must be gathered in
Autumn. Though it be very stinking the Indians who inhabit Guzarat make use of it
in all their Sauces, and anoint their Pots and drinking Vessels with it. Since
this Gum is of excellent use for Horses, and purifies the Blood very
effectually, the curious Reader will perhaps be pleased to have a brief view of
its History.

Take the best and clearest Assa-foetida, which is of a reddish Color,
Bay Berries of Provence or Italy, and Liver of Antimony, of each an equal
quantity. Beat 'em to Powder, and mix 'em carefully in a large Mortar, with a
sufficient quantity of the best Vinegar, incorporating 'em with the Pestle till
they be perfectly united into a Mass, pouring on the Vinegar by degrees. Then
make it up into Pills, weighing fourteen Drams each, that being dried on the
bottom of a Hair-Sieve, the weight of two Pills (which is the usual Dose) may
amount to three Ounces, or somewhat more. You may keep the dry Pills as long as
you please, without any diminution of their Virtues.

I used formerly to dissolve the Assa-faetida in Vinegar, and afterward
evaporating the Solution to the thickness of Honey, I added the Powders; but I
found by Experience, that by observing that Method, the Virtue of the Remedy
was extremely weakened, which partly consists in a Volatile Salt, that exhales
with the Steams of the Vinegar; whereas if the Pills be made up according to
the abovementioned Directions, you preserve all the Virtue of the Medicines,
and are not troubled with that insupportable stench and sharp Odor that
usually causes a violent Headache. The old Method was brought to us from
Holland, but besides the alteration I have already taken notice of, I thought
fit to add the Liver of Antimony to the other two Ingredients; for they were
not given with so great Success in the Cure of Fevers before that addition; and
besides, their agreeableness to the Stomach is partly owing to the Antimony,
which being endu'd with a Virtue to promote Transpiration through the Pores,
quickens the slow Operation of the Assa-foetida; and together with that
produces such excellent effects, that I am firmly resolved to retain the Method
proposed in this Chapter.

The wonderful efficacy of these Pills cannot be sufficiently magnified: And
those who carry Horses to an Army ought always to make Provision of a
sufficient quantity of this Medicine, to prevent the Disorders that may be
occasioned by the melting of the Grease, Foundering or Fevers. In these cases,
as soon as you perceive the least sign of the Distemper, you must bleed your
Horse, and half an Hour after give him two Pills, with a Quart of Wine, or of
Beer in the Summer, then walk him a quarter of an Hour well covered, and set
him up Bridled. If he Sweat it is a good sign, though it rarely happens. If the
Disease be violent, an Hour after the former Dose, whether your Horse be
Foundered, or his Grease Molten, give him another with a Quart of Wine, or of
Beer, if it be in the Summer, keeping him still covered, and walking him from
time to time. If you perceive no signs of Amendment, if the Swelling of his
Legs continue, or if he be troubled with a violent beating in his Flanks, give
him a third Dose an Hour after the second: And there are few of those Diseases
so stubborn, that will not yield to this Medicine so often repeated. The next
Day, if your Horse be very Sick, you may give him three other Doses of Pills,
but you must not bleed him a second time. Note, That as soon as you let your
Horse Blood, you must pick his Feet, if he be Foundered, and pour Oil of Bay
into his Fore-Feet, stopping 'em with Flax, and laying hot Embers upon the
Flax, with Splents over all. Renew the same Application thrice, once every six
or four Hours, and twenty four Hours after you may suffer him to lie down.

The Horse must neither eat nor drink for the space of eight Hours, that is,
four Hours after the last of the three Doses; and even 'twou'd be convenient to
keep him twenty four Hours from Drinking, and to give him neither Hay nor Oats
for two or three Days after; but then he may safely return to his former Diet.
Two or three Doses of those Pills, exhibited according to the abovementioned
Method, may perhaps Cure that fatal kind of Colic, which Farriers usually call
the Red-Gripes: And a Clyster made of the warm Blood of a Sheep or Calf is very
effectual in this case.

You may depend on the wonderful efficacy of this Remedy, which you will find
to exceed what could be reasonably expected from it.

If your Horse be seized with a Fever, which is an usual effect of Morfounding,
give him a Dose of Pills, and cover him up very carefully: The beating of his
Flanks will increase at first, but it will abate quickly after. If you perceive
no signs of amendment, repeat the Dose next Morning, and perhaps the Horse will
recover if you give him frequent Clysters.

To sum up all in one word; There are few Remedies so universally useful, and
so portable, more effectual, and less chargeable than these Pills; and
therefore I cannot forbear once more recommending them to all Lovers of Horses.

I forgot to give you an important Caution concerning the choice of
Assa-foetida, for if it be not very pure and clean, without any mixture of
Earth or Wood, the Pills must not be made up according to the abovementioned
Method; since the mixture of those Impurities would weaken their Virtues, and
hinder their Operation; and therefore if you cannot procure fine reddish
Assa-foetida, you must dissolve it in Vinegar on hot Embers, strain it through a
Linen Cloth, and evaporate it to the thickness of Honey; then add the Powders,
and anointing your Hands with Oil, make up Pills weighing fourteen Drams each,
drying 'em on the bottom of a Searce or Sieve; the Dose is the same with that
of the former. I believe these Pills are inferior in Virtue to those that are
prepared according to the other Method, because the Volatile Salt of the
Assa-foetida exhales with the Vinegar; nor can I be induced to retract this
Opinion by the Authority of a certain Physician, who imagines, that the Volatile
Salt is included in the oily and viscous Substance of the Assa-foetida, and
consequently incapable of evaporating with the Vinegar.

CHAP. CLIV. Of Foundering.
FOundering is a Rheumatism or preternatural Defluxion of sharp and acid
Humour^ which are frequently mixed with Phlegm. This Defluxion is sometimes (...)
a defect or stoppage of Transpiration, and oftentimes by a sudden suppression
of a plentiful Sweat, which being spread through the whole habit of the Body,
occasions violent Pains, and unweildiness, or unfitness for Motion; so that the
Legs cannot perform their usual Offices without extreme Pain and difficulty.
Sometimes a Horse is Foundered, when he is either exposed to Cold, or suffered
to cool suddenly after hard Riding or Labor; for the Pores are so stopped by
the Cold, that it is impossible for any thing to transpire through 'em. This kind
of Foundering is more easily cured than the second, which seizes on a Horse in
the Stable, without any preceding Exercise, and frequently proceeds from eating
too large quantity of Oats.

The first kind is occasioned by violent Exercise, and riding the Horse from
his Wind, and beyond his Strength. For by reason of the agitation of the
Humors, and their mixture with Acids, there arises an Ebullition or
Fermentation that rarefies the most subtle Part of 'em, which shooting, like a
Vapor, through the whole Habit of the Body, and even into the cavities of the
Nerves, though very small and imperceptible, are condensed into Water by a sudden
Cold. And this Water is oftentimes thickened into a sort of Jelly, which not
only stops the Passages of the Nerves, but makes 'em so stiff that they are not
capable of any Motion without extreme Pain and difficulty. You may easily
conceive the reasons why this rarefy'd Humor, which is afterward reduced to
Water, usually falls upon the Legs: For Nature endeavoring to rid her self of
the troublesome load of Humors, throws 'em upon the Legs that are weakened by
Traveling.

These Spirits or Vapors are always accompanied with, or rather full of, a
sharp and biting Salt; for the Humors being out of their natural place, become
eager and sour, and consequently sharp and biting. Thus the Foundering of the
Body is quickly followed by a violent Pain which is almost always accompanied
with a Fever; and according to the abundance and thickness of those sharp
Vapors or Spirits, the Foundering is more or less dangerous, and the Cure
either difficult or easy.

The second kind of Foundering that seizes on a Horse in the Stable, and is
occasioned either by eating too great a quantity of Oats, or by reason of the
Pain which Lame Horses usually suffer, is not so easily cured as the former,
because of the abundance of Humors which, for want of moderate Exercise to
promote Transpiration, ferment and cause the abovementioned Disorders. The
difficulty of the Cure is also in a considerable measure owing to the
redundancy of that sharp and malignant Vapor which falls so violently upon the
Legs, that without a seasonable Application of Remedies, the Hoof is loosened
from the Cronet, or the Bone of the Foot spoiled under the Sole, and at last
the Horse sinks under the violence of the Distemper.

The same Disorders may be also occasioned by the first sort of Foundering, if
they be not prevented by timely Remedies: So that it may be truly said, that
both kinds are very dangerous, and (if they be accompanied with a Fever, and
melting of the Grease) for the most part fatal.

There is a third sort of Foundering which usually seizes on Horses in the
Army, by reason of their eating green Corn; but it may be easily cured in
twenty four Hours, and is oftentimes removed by Bleeding, or some trivial
Remedy.

Foundering in the Body is very frequently accompanied with Melting of the
Grease, in which case the Horse is seldom or never free from a Fever. This
Complication of Distempers which Farriers call Chest-Foundering, is almost
always fatal.

When after violent Exercise and plentiful Sweating, Horses are suffered to
cool of a sudden, either by the coldness of the Place or Season, or for want of
walking them after Riding, they are almost always Foundered; and since the Legs
are more violently exercised than any other part of the Body, they are also
more furiously attacked by the Distemper, and exposed to the Defluxion of the
Humors.

To prevent these Disorders you must walk your Horse gently for some time,
after long and violent Galloping, and even after any hard Labor, that the
Humors which are fallen upon the Legs, already weakened by Riding may be
dissipated, before they be condensed into a Liquor, and that into a sort of
Jelly, which is the true cause of Foundering. It will not appear strange to
those who consider the danger of a sudden alteration, or remove from extreme
Heat to excessive Cold, that Horses usually become Foundered, when they are
Watered, and ridden up to the Belly in cold Water, immediately after violent
Exercise.

A Horse that has been already Foundered, and has acquired an infirm habit of
Body may relapse into the same Distemper, if he be suffered to remain too long
in the Stable, and eat too much Oats, and even after violent Exercises, which
would not have produced any ill effect, if he had never been Foundered before.
Those who by reason of some Distemper in one of their Fore-Feet are forced to
lay the weight of their Body upon the other, are obnoxious to this Distemper in
the Stable, which is almost always occasioned by too great a quantity of
Nourishment: For the Crudities that are generated by the redundancy of Food
occasion a preternatural Heat; and the Ebullition or Fermentation, occasioned
by the Heat, rarefies the most subtle Humors into Vapors, which are
afterward condensed to Water, as I intimated before.

A Horse is very apt to be Foundered, if he be ridden while his Feet are Sore,
or his Legs stiff: And the Cure of this kind of Foundering is extremely
difficult by reason of the Defluxion a^ready fallen upon the Lame Foot.

I could never comprehend the reason of their Opinion, who pretend that a Horse
may be Foundered by riding him through a River or Pond when he is very Thirsty,
without suffering him to Drink. For in very hot Weather, if you suffer your
Horse to Drink in the Evening, after violent Sweating, while his Body is still
hot, he may be easily Foundered; whereas if you had hindered him from Drinking,
the Danger would have been certainly prevented.

Sometimes after a great Heat the Sinews are stiffen'd by cold, without any
Defluxion of Humors upon 'em. This Infirmity differs from Foundering; it
seizes for the most part only in the Forelegs, and is easily Cured.

The most dangerous kind of Foundering is that which is accompanied with a
Fever; in which case the first and main scope of the Cure must be to remove the
most urgent Symptom, that is, the Foundering: For though the Fever is very
dangerous, and may kill the Horse, it is purely accidental, and disappears as
soon as its Cause is taken away.

When the Foundering falls upon the Feet, the Cronet swells, and is separated
from the Hoof; and therefore as soon as you perceive those Signs, make several
Incisions lengthwise along the Cronet, with a sharp Lancet, piercing the Skin
to open a passage to the Humor, which will come forth in form of a Reddish
Water. After the voiding of these Scrosities, apply a Restringent Charge made
of Bole-Armenic, Vinegar, and Whites of Eggs, or unslack'd Lime, set in a
convenient place till it crumble into Powder, and reduce it to a Paste or Dough
with the Second Water and Spirit of Wine, which is the most excellent
Astringent that can be prescribed. Then dress the Sores with Vinegar and Salt:
For if that Caution be neglected, the sharp and malignant Humor, which is of
an acid and penetrating Nature like Aquafortis will certainly loos'n the Hoof,
and make it fall off by the acrimony of the corrosive Salt of which it is full;
and oftentimes it separates the Bone of the Foot from the Coffin-Bone about the
Toe; for the Bone of the Foot being dried by that corrosive Acid, and
afterward relaxed, that part which is deprived of Nourishment must necessarily
fall away.

You must not take out the Sole till the dry and sapless part of the Bone of
the Foot be ready to fall, that is, till it burst the Sole. In the mean time
the Hoof is dried, spoiled, and full of Circles, and the Horse becomes unfit
for Service, since he cannot Travel without excessive Pain. The Humor flows
chiefly to the Toe, which usually suffers most by these Disorders; and
therefore the Horse treads on his Heels, after he is cured of the Foundering.
WHen you perceive that the Foundering is fallen upon the Feet, and that the
Bone of the Foot presses the Sole, you must delay the taking out of the Sole as
long as you can, endeavoring to preserve it that it may contain the Bone of
the Foot in its proper place; you must not open the Heel, but rub the Hoof near
the Cronet, with a quarter of an Onion every Day till the Juice penetrate the
Hoof. But in the general, as soon as the Foundering falls upon the Feet, and
the Bone of the Foot appears to be dried, and to press the Sole, you may reckon
your Horse entirely lost, and unfit for all manner of Service, unless for
laboring on soft Ground. You will find a Remedy at the end of this Chapter to
prevent these fatal Disorders, and to remove the remaining Pains in the Foot
that hinder the Horse from walking boldly and easily after the Cure of the
Foundering.

The taking up of the Pastern-Veins as soon as the Disease falls upon the Foot,
may produce a very good effect, but the Operation must be performed before the
Bone of Foot appears visibly to press the Sole.

I think my self obliged to give you an Advice upon this occasion, which
perhaps few Persons will esteem it their Interest to follow. Whoever is Master
of a Horse of no very considerable value, that has been once Foundered in his
Feet, though the Hoofs were not loosened, should never turn away a Customer;
since it is folly to endeavor to make him fit for any thing but the Plow,
unless you resolve to bestow more upon the Cure than the worth of the Horse
ever did or will amount to.

A Horse that is quite Foundered can neither walk forwards nor backwards, he
cannot without extreme difficulty move his Legs, he is scarce able to put his
Feet to the Ground, either absolutely forsakes his Meat, or at best eats very
little, he is Hidebound and dull, and oftentimes all these accidents are
accompanied with a great Palpitation or beating of the Heart and Flanks.

Some Horses are only Foundered in the Forelegs: But they are certainly in a
very dangerous Condition that are Foundered both before and behind.

A Remedy for Foundering.
You must endeavor to hinder the Humors that are spread through the Sinews of
the Legs from falling upon the Feet; for that Defluxion either loosens the
Hoof, spoils the Bone of the Foot, or makes the Feet irrecoverably Feeble and
Lame. Farriers pretend to prevent the falling of the Humors on the Feet, by
binding a sort of Garters very straight about the Legs above the Knees and the
Houghs. But this is so pernicious an Invention, and so contrary to reason and
good Sense, that the most skilful Farriers have entirely laid aside the use of
it. This Ligature draws the Humor to the Legs instead of diverting it from
'em. For it is the usual Custom to bind a Man's Arm above the Elbow, to make the
Vein swell when there is occasion to let him Blood, and even the whole Arm
swells when the Ligature is too straight; and the same effect is produced by
the Garters that are tied about a Horse's Legs; besides, the Pain that is
already so violent is increased by the Ligature. Nor are the Consequences less
dangerous of another absurd practice of Farriers in this case, who force the
poor tormented Horse to walk, though he can hardly stir a Leg without suffering
such intolerable Pain, as would doubtless make him Foundered if he were not so
before.

To proceed Methodically in the Cure of so dangerous a Distemper, you must, in
the first place, bleed your Horse in the Neck, receive his Blood in an Earthen
Pot, and mixing a Pint of Brandy with it, Charge his whole Legs to the Hough.
Then pour boiling Oil of Bay into his Feet, with Flax and Splents to keep it
in, applying the same round the Cronet, with Flax and a convenient Bandage.
Half an Hour after give him two Ounces of good Treacle, and four Ounces of Salt
of Tartar, in a Quart of White (or for want of that Red) Wine, keeping him
Bridled two Hours, without stirring from the place. Then give him a Clyster
with two Ounces of Sal-Bolychrest, and two Hours after another. Unbridle him an
Hour after the last Clyster, giving him Bran and Straw to eat, and the
White-Water to Drink, and suffer him not to lie down for the space of forty
eight Hours. Renew the Application of Oil of Bay to his Feet every eight or ten
Hours; and if he be not sound the next Day, repeat the Potion and Clysters, but
not the Bleeding.

The Moors and Turks that inhabit Barbary, bleed their Foundered Horses, and
give 'em a Pint of the Juice of white Onions, mixed with a little Juice of
Garlic, repeating the same two Days after. This is a good Remedy, but not so
effectual in this Country.

Other Remedies for Foundered Horses.
As Soon as you perceive your Horse to be foundered, bring him to the Bank of a
River, and open his Neck-Vein, slack'ning the Cord that he may not bleed; then
lead him into the Water up to the middle of the Belly, and tie the Cord till
the Blood come forth, slackening it again after you have taken away about four
Pounds of Blood, and keeping him in the Water half an Hour after the Blood is
stopped. As Soon as he comes into the Stable stuff his Fore-Feet with boiled
Barley, applied hot, with Splints to keep it in, and make him drink the
following Potion. Take six large white Onions cut into slices, and boil 'em a
quarter of an Hour in two Pints and a half of Wine; then strain out the Liquor,
squeezing the Onions very hard, add two Ounces of Assa-foetida in Powder, and
make your Horse drink the whole. An Hour after give him this Clyster: Boil two
Ounces of the Scoriae of Liver of Antimony reduced to fine Powder, in five
Pints of Beer; and after one Waum, remove the Vessel from the Fire, and
dissolving the quantity of an Egg of fresh Butter in the Liquor, make a
Clyster, to be injected lukewarm. Let your Horse stand bridled an Hour after
he has voided the Clyster, and then give him another of the same, stopping his
Feet with fresh Barley, as before. Then unbridle him, giving him moistened Bran
and Straw to eat, and the white Water to drink: Litter him well, and suffer him
not to lie down for the space of two Days. Afterward repeat the Clysters, and
renew the Application of hot Barley to his Feet from time to time: Or proceed
as follows;

Bleed your Horse in the Neck-Vein, charge his Shoulders and Legs with his own
Blood, and half an Hour after make him drink a Quart of Water with two Pounds
of Salt. An Hour after give him a Clyster, and stop his Fore-feet with
Pidgeon's-Dung fried with Oil of Walnuts, and apply it hot, not only to his
Feet, but also about the Cronet, with Tow and a convenient Bandage. If the
Horse be not cured, the next Day repeat the Potion, and above all inject
Clysters frequently, and renew the astringent Application, both within his
Feet, and about the Cronet.

The following Method has been frequently tried with Success. Bleed your Horse
plentifully in the Neck, and rub his Forelegs very hard with strong Vinegar
mixed with a large quantity of Salt for the space of half an Hour. Then wash the
menstruous parts of one or two Smocks, which may be easily procured among the
Landresses at Paris, with three Pints of Wine, and dissolving in the same Wine,
the Excrements voided at one time by a Child of six or seven Years of Age; make
your Horse drink the whole, and two Hours after give him a Clyster of Sal
Polychrest, stuffing his Feet with boiling Oil of Walnuts, bound up with Flax
and Splints, and applying a restringent Charge about the Cronet. After he has
stood bridled two Hours give him another Clyster, and as soon as that is voided,
unbridle him that he may eat and drink, but you must not suffer him to lie down
for the space of forty eight Hours. Continue to inject Clysters as long as he
is troubled with a Beating in his Flanks, and renew the Application both of the
hot Oil, and of the restringent Charge.

Before all other Remedies I think my self obliged to prefer the Stinking
Pills, which I use after this manner. I order the Horse to be let blood, all
his four Legs to be rubbed with his own Blood mixed with Brandy, boiling Oil of
Bay to be poured into his Feet, and the same to be applied moderately hot about
the Cronet with Flax and a Bandage: Half an Hour after the Bleeding, give him
two stinking Pills, with a Quart of Wine, or of Beer if it be in the Summer;
repeating the same Dose an Hour after, and the third time after a like
Interval. An Hour after the last Dose, I prescribe a Clyster of a Decoction of
the Scoriae of Liver of Antimony, or Sal Polychrest, in Beer or Whey, and after
he has voided the Clyster, suffer him to eat and drink, littering him well,
without permitting him to lie down, till he be out of Danger. When the Pills
are given in the Morning, the Horse is usually cured before Night; if not, I
give him three Doses, as before, the next Day, repeating the Clysters, and
renewing the Application of Oil of Bay. I continue after the same manner till
the Horse be completely cured, and I have even given to some Horses thirty
Pills in four Days. After a violent Foundering there remains a certain Numness,
Stiffness, and Uweildiness, which may be removed by walking the Horse gently,
and injecting two or three Clysters with Scoriae of Liver of Antimony, or Sal
Polychrest, every Day; but those Horses are apt to be foundered by the least
Excess. It Is to be obferv'd that the Horse must not be suffered to eat Corn for
some time after the Cure of this Distemper, till he be completely recovered;
for the Eating of Oats has oftentimes occasioned Relapses into a worse
Condition than before.

It will perhaps be expected that I should give a Reason, why I order the
Horses to be well litter'd, when they are not suffered to lie down; and
therefore for the satisfaction of those who may think that Caution needless, it
will not be improper to put them in mind that the Littering keeps the Horse's
Feet warm in Winter, and easy both in Winter and Summer: And as for the other
Circumstance, I suffer the sick Horse to lie down, as soon as I perceive any
considerable Amendment, which happens sometimes in less than six Hours; but if
the Cure proceed more slowly, as it usually doe^ when the Foundering is
inveterate, or accompanied with a Fever, I keep him from lying down for the
space of eight and forty Hours, after which that Posture cannot obstruct the
Cure.

If I should ask now of the Generality of Farriers, why they put Faggots
between Horse's Legs, they could only tell me that they have seen others do so
before: But this Custom is no less observed than that of tying Garters about
the Legs.

I shall take this Occasion to mention another Abuse, which is usually
committed in the Cure of the Distempers, for by Bleeding the Horse in the Veins
of the Thighs, the Humor that Causes the Foundering is drawn to the affected
Part instead of being diverted from it; whereas the Diversion is effectually
performed by Bleeding in the Neck.

Those who let the Horse blood in the Toe are guilty of a more dangerous
Error; for they draw the Humor to the Foot, from whence it ought to be
diverted by all possible Means, such as the Application of Oil of Bay, Hog's
Dung, etc.

Of another kind of Foundering, that resembles a Swaying of the Back.
Sometimes while a Horse remains in the Stable without any preceding Travel or
Labor, he is seized with a certain Rheumatism, which falls so violently upon
his Reins, or the lower part of his Back, that he can hardly draw his Hips
after him; and when he goes his hinder Parts reel as if his Back was broken; he
falls upon his Buttocks, and crosses his hinder Legs. Some Horses in this Case
touch the Ground with their Pastern-Joints behind, but are neither apt to fall
on their Buttocks, nor are troubled with a rolling of their hinder Parts. This
Infirmity is of the same Nature with Foundering, and proceeds from the same
Causes: For the Humor falls upon the Back, Hips, and sometimes on the
Pastern-Joints behind, while the fore Parts are almost perfectly found. Such
Horses as have been already Foundered, are more subject to this Distemper than
others, and are sometimes surpised with it as they walk only at a Foot-Pace,
without being heated in the least: But these Accidents are very rare, and
Horses are usually taken with this. Infirmity in the Stable without any
preceding Labor.

The surest Way is to begin the Cure as soon as may be; for if the Disease be
suffered to get ground or take root, it will not yield to the best Medicines;
and though the Horse continue to eat and drink heartily, he will remain
irrecoverably infirm, and incapable of performing the least Service: I have
seen several Horses, whom their Masters were obliged to kill, after they had in
vain spent several Months in the Cure; and therefore as soon as you perceive
that the Horse cannot walk, without drawing his hinder Parts after him, and
crossing his hinder Legs, and that he is always ready to fall upon his
Buttocks, you must immediately take about three Pounds of Blood out of his
Neck-Veins, and charge his Back with his own Blood mixed with Brandy: Half an
Hour after give him a Dose of the stinking Pills with a Pint and a half of
Wine, repeating the Dose after the same manner as in the Cure of Foundering,
and injecting a Clyster an Hour after the last Dose; after which let him stand
two Hours bridled, and the Cure will be perfected, provided it be seasonably
begun. Give him moistened Bran for five or six Days without any Oats, walking
him every Day in your Hand; and observe the same Directions as in the former
Case. If one Day be not sufficient to perfect the Cure, the next Day you must
repeat the three Doses of Pills, and the Clyster, as before.

I saw a Horse that was cured of a dangerous Stavers, who by the falling of the
Disease upon the Back and hinder Parts, was seized with the abovementioned
Symptoms: for he walked as if his Back had been broken, and his Pastern-Joints
touched the Ground. The Farrier that cured him of the Stavers imagining that
his Back was swayed, thought sit to give the Fire, and made several Holes in
his Skin, all over the lower part of the Back, which he covered with a
Plaster, and then hung him up from the Ground, leaving him in that Posture
till the Scabbs fell off, after which unhanging him, and not finding the least
Amendment, I was called to his Assistance; and having ordered the Horse to be
let blood, gave him three Doses of the stinking Pills, but in vain, for he was
irrecoverably lost; and after he had lived about a Year in the Stable, unfit
for any manner of Service, they were at last forced to dispatch him. I dare not
confidently affirm, though I may venture to say with a perhaps, that he might
have been cured if the Pills had been given as soon as the Distemper seized his
Back and hinder Parts.

To conclude; This is a very dangerous Disease, and even incurable if it be
suffered to fix, and take Root: But the Danger may be prevented by a timely
Application of Remedies.

CHAP. CLV. Of Pains in the Feet after Foundering.
THE Pains that frequently remain after Foundering, hinder the Horse from
walking steadily; and from setting his Foot flat upon the Ground, for he treads
only upon his Heel to ease the Toe. The Humor that caused the Foundering
falling down from the Leg, slides between the Bone of the Foot and the Hoof;
and the natural Heat being as it were stifled by the sharp Humor, the
forepart of the Foot is deprived of its appointed share of Nourishment, and
consequently is hardend, dried, and weakened. The End of the Bone next the Toe,
falls down upon the Sole, and shrinks; so that it must necessarily be separated
from the sound Part of the Bone. This Separation is not the Work of one Day,
but notwithstanding the extreme Difficulty which attends it, it may be at last
happily perfected, if Nature, who is the best Judge of the Time, and most
skilful Performer of the Operation, be assisted by a seasonable and regular
Observance of the following Method.

If your Horse tread only on his Heels, so that you have reason to conclude
that that the forepart of the Foot is withered, or dried up, and if you
perceive its Hollowness by knocking upon the Hoof, pluck off the Shoe, and
having pared the Foot a little, set on a Pantofle-Shooe, such as you will find
explained in the Chapter that treats of the Shooing of Horses that have Narrow
Heels, and apply the following Remedy. Note; That when you shoe a Horse in
this Condition, you must always leave the Sole as firm as may be; for the
Success of the Cure depends chiefly upon that, and on the falling away of the
dry part of the Bone, which may be also promoted by the use of the following
Decoction or Broth.

If your Horse be troubled with Pains in his Feet, without any Sign of the
Dryness or Separation of the Bone; you must only pare the Feet, set on very
easy Shoes, and apply the following Broth.

A Broth or Decoction for Pains in the Feet, remaining after Foundering.
Take Brandy a Quart, strong Vinegar a Pint and a half, Oil of Bay a Pound; Add
a sufficient quantity of Bean-Flower, and boil to the Consistency of a thick
Broth, stirring it perpetually over a gentle Fire. Then pour it boiling hot
into the Foot, laying on Tow and Splints to keep it in; and apply the same
Broth, as soon as you can endure to touch it with your Hand, to the Cronet with
Tow. Renew the Application thrice every twenty four Hours, and if the Pain be
not very inveterate, the Horse will certainly recover.

If the forepart of the Bone of the Foot be dried, and fall down upon the
Sole, 'twill be very convenient to take up the Pastern-Veins, after the
Application of the Broth, that the Humor which is carried to the Foot with the
Blood, may be the sooner exhausted; besides several other Reasons already
intimated.

If the Foot be so extremely shrunk and dried up, that the Horse cannot go, nor
almost stand, you must take out the Sole, and sear the End of the Bone of the
Foot, suffering it to fall quite away; after which the Sole will grow again,
and the Horse may recover, if you set on a Pantofle-Shooe, and give the Foot
time to gather strength; but you must never expect that it will be good,
handsome, or fit for Service.

CHAP. CLVI. Of the Mange, Itch, or Running-Scab.
THis is a Disease of the Skin, which makes the Hair peel and fall away, and
the Hide grow thick, hard, dry, rough, and even wrinkl'd in several Places.

Vegetius, in the seventy first Chapter of the third Book of his Ars
Veterinaria, defines it in these Words; The Scab or Mange, is a loathsome and
unseemly Distemper of Cattle: But this is no true Definition, since it explains
not the Nature of the Thing defined. Unwholesome Nourishment may occasion this
Distemper, which proceeds from a sharp, burnt, and salt Humor, that is, from
an Acid full of sharp and corrosive Spirits, and Salts: The same Acid may be
generated by Hunger and Fatigues, and by keeping company with mangy Horses. It
may also be communicated to those Horses that are rubbed with the same
Curry-Combs, and Brushes, or Dusting-Cloths, that were formerly made use of for
Horses infected with this Distemper; and to conclude, The Mange may be an
Effect of the Carelessness of the Groom, in dressing his Horse, or of the
Neglect of seasonable Bleeding.

We may conclude, that a Horse is troubled with the Mange when he rubs one part
of his Body more than the rest; as for Example, his Joints, Legs, Tail, and
Mane, in which Case you must feel the Part, and if you perceive that the Hide
is thicker than usually, it is a Sign that your Horse is Mangy. Sometimes this
Distemper is universal, but for the most part it comes by degrees, and appears
sometimes in one Part, and sometimes in another.

This Disease may be divided into two Kinds, the dry, and ulcerated Mange. In
the first there appears nothing upon the Skin but a sort of mealy Scales which
make the Hair fall quite away. The Cure is extremely difficult, and usually the
Cause is either Cold, or Hunger.

The other Kind breaks out into little Swellings and Scurfs, which being
separated, the Part remains sore and raw. This is more easily cured than the
former Kind, unless when it is seated in the Mane or Tail, where it sticks very
fast, and can hardly be rooted out; because the Hide in these Parts is so
thick, that the strongest Remedies can scarce force their Passage through it.
Both Kinds are cured with the same Remedies.

A Remedy for the Mange.
You must begin the Cure of this Distemper with the Preparation of the Humor
that causes it: For you must never proceed to anoint your Horse's Body, till
you have removed the internal Cause of the Humor that is driven outward by
Nature; lest by enclosing and concentrating the corrupt Humor in the Body, the
Entrails be heated, and the Noble Parts vitiated. Bleeding is almost always
necessary in this Case to allay the Heat of the Blood, and promote its
Circulation. Vegetius has very prudently ordered the choosing of fit Places for
letting of Blood, according to the Variety of Cases, and the different Parts of
the Body, where the Humor is lodged: Thus, for Example, if the Mange appear in
the Head or Neck, you must let your Horse blood in the Head, if in the
Shoulders, Breast, or fore Legs, bleed him in the Brisket; if the Back be
infected, in the Flanks; and if the hinder Legs, or Hips be mangy, you must
open a Vein in the Thighs. But I cannot approve the Purgation appointed by the
same Author; for the Roots of wild Cucumbers or Elaterium, which he prescribes
to be mixed with Oats, leaves too great a Heat in the Body, without causing a
plentiful Evacuation: And therefore you may content your self with observing
his Method of Bleeding, and administer one of the Purging Medicines prescribed
in the Cure of the Farcin, which I only use in this case.

After Bleeding and Purgation, repeated if need require, give your Horse two or
three Doses of the Cinnabar Pills, two Pills for a Dose. This Medicine purifies
the Blood, and expels the malignant serous Humors, so that afterward you may
easily Cure the Mange with any common Ointment.

If your Horse be seized with this Distemper in the Spring, or about the end of
the Winter, after you have bled him plentifully in the Neck, turn him out to
Grass, letting him run Night and Day in the open Fields. If he continue still
Mangy you must have recourse to the Ointments, which you will find afterward
described; but Grass is certainly one of the best Remedies for the Mange.

If your Horse grow Mangy in the Summer, you must take away a large quantity of
Blood, and then give him moistened Bran (for without necessity he ought not to
eat Oats) mixed with convenient Herbs chopped small. Thus you may give him
Scabious, sharp pointed Dock, Fumitory, and Wild-Succory, of each one handful,
and half an Ounce of Brimstone well mixed with his Bran every Morning and
Evening for eight Days together.

If the Mange appear in the Winter, take the Roots of the same Herbs. If he
will not eat 'em make a Decoction of the Herbs or Roots in three Pints of
White Wind, and pouring off a Quart of it, add an Ounce of Brimstone in Powder,
and make him drink it in the Morning, keeping him bridled two Hours before, and
as long after. This Decoction prepares the corrupt Humors that are in the Body
for Evacuation.

If you have not the convenience to put your Horse to Grass in the Spring, or
if he have too strong an aversion to the Cinnabar Pills, you must first bleed
and purge him, and afterward give him every Day two Ounces of Liver of
Antimony in Powder, mixed with moistened Bran. This Remedy will drive all
Impurities out of the Body; and afterward the least Ointment, Balls, or
Compound Water, will suffice to dry up the Mange.

The Golden Sulphur of Antimony, described in Chap. CXXIX. will produce the
same effect, if it be given for fifteen Days together.

These Remedies cure the Mange radically in any season of the Year, but not so
easily in Winter as in Summer.

Purging Pills for the Mange.
Take common Turpentine, one Pound; Aloes and Sena, beaten to a gross Powder;
of each an Ounce; Agaric and black Hellebor washed in Vinegar, of each two
Drams; Hermodactyls, five Drams; Cinnabar, an Ounce. Reduce all the dry
Ingredients to a gross Powder, and make 'em up into Pills with the Turpentine.
If the Mass be not of a sufficient consistency, you may thicken it with
Barley-Flower, and roll the Pills on the same Flower, that they may not stick
to your Fingers when you thrust 'em into the Horse's Mouth, as other Pills are
usually given in a Pint of White Wind.

These Pills provoke Urine powerfully, and therefore ought not to be given to
very lean Horses, in which case you may prepare the following Drench.

A Drench or Potion for the Mange.
Take of Sal-Prunellae, one Ounce; Tamarinds, four Ounces; Polypody beaten, two
Ounces; Anniseeds, half an Ounce; and six Cloves; Infuse 'em all Night in three
Pints of Whey, boil 'em in the Morning, and after six or seven waums, strain
out the Liquor, then add, while the straining is yet hot, Juice of Liquorice,
half an Ounce; Sena, one Ounce; Agaric, and Coloquintida, of each two Drams;
Mechoacan and Turbith, of each half an Ounce; Pulp of Cassia, two Ounces. Mix
all these Ingredients in Substance with the Straining, and give the Potion to
your Horse in the Morning, keeping him Bridled five Hours before, and four
after.

If the Preparation of the Ingredients seem too troublesome, you may give the
Purgative prescribed for Horses after their recovery from a Fever, in Chap.
CXXXVII. for it is always an excellent Remedy in this case.

Suffer your Horse to rest one Day after the operation of the Purgative is
over, and then procceed to the use of the following Bath.

A Bath for the Mange.
Take a large Pot full of good Lie, made of the Ashes of the Green-Wood, and
strained through a Linen Cloth; a sufficient quantity of green Broom-Tops, Roots
of sharp-pointed Dock, greater Celandine, of each one handful; Roots of white
Hellebor, half a Pound; boil 'em all together, and having chafed the Mangy
Places till they grow hot, wash 'em with this Decoction, and rub 'em with the
hot Herbs and Roots continually after the same manner for five or six Days.

You may also make a Bath thus: Boil a large quantity of wild Hellebor cut into
pieces about the length of your Finger in a strong Lie for the space of an
Hour; and wash the infected places with the Decoction once every Day for five
or six Days together: For you will seldom meet with a Mange so inveterate and
deeply rooted, that will not yield to this Remedy. But it is always to be
observed, that such Applications are to be preceeded by Bleeding and Purgation.

Another Bath and Water for the Mange in Horses and Dogs.
Take half a Pound of true Brasil-Tobacco, untwist it, as if it had never been
made up into Rowls, infuse it twenty four Hours in a Gallon of very strong
Vinegar, with a handful of Salt, and afterward boil about half a quarter of an
Hour. Rub the Mangy places with a Wisp, bathe 'em with this Decoction warm once
a Day, and the Horse will certainly recover. When the Liquor begins to fail,
put in fresh Vinegar, and boil it again that it may be impregnated with the
Virtue of the Tobacco.

Note, That this Bath is also proper for Mangy Dogs; and that in the use of
this, as well as of all other Remedies, you must still begin with Bleeding and
Purgation. If you infuse the Tobacco in Spirit of Wine, the Bath will be more
effectual, especially for the Mane and Tail; but the Infusion must not be
heated.

You may also very effectually cure the Mange, by washing the Parts once a Day
with the Yellow-Water, after Bleeding and Purgation; but if you perceive that
it dries not up the Mange sufficiently, you may double the Dose of the
Sublimate that enters the Composition. If you make use of this Remedy you will
certainly prefer it before most others, but you must patiently expect the
Success, renewing the Application daily till the Cure be perfected, which
oftentimes requires fifteen or twenty Days.

The following Remedy is also very effectual in this case. Scrape a large
quantity of the Roots of white Briony, and boil it in Vinegar for the space of
half an Hour: Then rub the Mangy places two or three Days together with the
Vinegar and Roots lukewarm, after you have bled and purged the Horse.

An excellent Ointment for the Mange.
Take three Ounces of Quicksilver beaten and incorporated in a Mortar, with
four Ounces of the Powder of Live-Brimstone till the Mercury be quenched, or
entirely disappear; and an Ounce of Cantharides in fine Powder: Mix 'em with a
Pound of Tar, and chafe the infected places with this Ointment, after you have
rubbed 'em with a very hard Wisp. If the first Application be not sufficient,
the second will certainly perform the Cure.

A Fomentation for the Mange.
Take Powder of Brimstone four Ounces; black Hellebor, three Ounces;
Euphorbium, two Ounces; Roots of sharp pointed Dock without the Pith and
outward Rind, two handfuls: Sew 'em up carefully in a Bag, and boil 'em in
three Quarts of strong Vinegar to the consumption of a third Part. Then take
out the Bag with a pair of Pincers, and rub the Mangy Parts, dipping it again
in the hot Vinegar, and continuing to chafe the Infected places, till they be
thoroughly moistened. Two Days after renew the Application; and if the Mange be
not very deeply rooted, the Horse will certainly recover.

A Pomade for the Mange.
Since the usual Pomade is too dear, you may prepare that which follows. Take a
sufficient quantity of Tallow, several times washed, and mixed with
Red-Precipitate till it acquire the Color of a Red-Rose. Or, Mix a Pound of
clean Tallow, with a quarter of a Pound of Cinnabar in Powder; or, instead of
that with two Ounces of white Precipitate. But the Cinnabar is better than the
Precipitate; for besides the Mercury which is the Basis of both these
Preparations, the former is sublimed with Sulphur, which is a specific Remedy
for the Mange.

You may know that your Horse is cured, when the Skin of the infected places is
as thin as in any other part of the Body; for the thickness of the Skin is a
certain sign that the Humor is not entirely drained.

Whatever care you take in the management of the Cure, you will find it very
difficult in Winter, or in cold Weather.

If after a regular Application of all the abovementioned Remedies the Cure be
not perfected, you may conclude that your Horse is not sufficiently Purged; and
therefore you must repeat the Bleeding, give him the abovementioned Decoctions
for eight Days together, Purge him as before, and anoint the infected places
with the following Ointment.

CHAP. CXLVII. The Neat-Herds Ointment for the Pains, or watery Sores in the
Legs, foul Wounds or Ulcers, and the Mange.
TAke burnt Allom and Borax in fine Powder, of each two Ounces; white Vitriol
and Verdigrease, beaten to a very fine Powder, of each four Ounces; put 'em
into a very clean Pot, with two Pounds of Honey, and boil 'em over a clear
Fire, stirring all the Substances together till they be well incorporated.
After the Ointment is cold, add two Ounces of strong Aquafortis, keep it well
covered for use, stirring it once a Day during the first six Days. One
Application, or two at most, will perform the Cure, but you must take care that
the Horse may not be able to reach it with his Teeth. If his Tail be Mangy you
must first scrape the place.

Sometimes this Ointment, when it is laid on too thick, makes the Skin fall off
like Scales, but without any danger, for the Scab may be easily separated by
anointing it with Tallow; after which the Horse is perfectly freed from the
Mange, and even though the whole Cuticula or Scurf-Skin fall off, it will come
again with the Hair, rarely leaving any considerable Mark.

This Ointment is not only good for the Mange, but also for the Pains, running
and watery Sores, foul Wounds and Ulcers, Arrests, Mules, and other such like
Sores, which it dries up effectually; but it ought not to be applied when the
Legs are swollen or gourdy; for after the drying up of the Sores, the Legs
remain still swollen and full of Humors, which will certainly break forth in
some other Part; and therefore the Humor must be first evacuated by the white
Honey-Charge, or some other convenient Remedy, and then dried up with this
Ointment.

The same Remedy cures the Sores in the Urinary passages of Oxen, that proceed
from their being nastily kept, and heals Wounds in Horses, but not without
great Pain and Smarting. It Is a sort of Aegyptiacum of excellent use for the
healing of foul Sores in the Feet or any other part of a Horse's Body. It Is
stronger than the Countesses Ointment, but does not bind so effectually; and is
not inferior to the best Aegyptiacum for cleansing Wounds and Sores, and
consuming corrupt Flesh.

Of the Mange or Itch in a Horse's Tail.
This Distemper proceeds from the heat of the Blood, which is full of sharp and
biting Serosities; and the Horse never leaves off scrubbing till the Skin be
peeled off from his Rump.

Bleed him in the Neck, and the next Day in the Tail; then rub the Roots of the
Hair with black Soap, and twenty four Hours after chafe the infected place with
a Lie, rubbing it by turns with the Soap and Lie; and after five or six
Applications the Horse will be sound: or rub the Roots of the Hair every Day,
with Tobacco steeped in Spirit of Wine.

If the Success of these Remedies do not answer your expectation, cut the Rump
or upper part of the Tail to the Bone with a Razor or Lancet, reaching
downwards three Fingers breadth in length; and after the Wound has done
bleeding, apply red-hot Embers to it, and the next Day wash it with warm Wine
or Urine, laying on the red-hot Embers, and renewing the Application thrice;
after which the Wound will heal of it self, and the Itching cease to torment
the Horse. The same effect may be produced by stopping the Wound with Salt.

Some Horses are also subject to an odd sort of Distemper in their Tails; for a
certain Moisture breaks forth out of the Skin, and gliding along the Hair, dies
it of a red Color about two Fingers breadth from the Roots, whereas it retains
its natural Color near the Skin; and this Humor is so sharp that it makes the
Hair so rotten, that it breaks as soon as you touch it. This loathsome Symptom
appears only in the middle of white Tails, and there cannot be a greater or
more unseemly deformity in a Horse than this Redness in his Tail resembling the
color of Beer, besides that the Hair is rotten, and very apt to break.

This Distemper may be cured by the abovementioned Remedy, especially by
Incision.

Those who cut their Horse's Tails prevent this deformity; but since all
Horse's Tails are not cut, and the loss of that part would quite spoil the
gracefulness of a managed, or led Horse for War, it is fit to be provided with
proper Remedies.

In a set of six Coach-Horses three were troubled with this Distemper, who were
all cured by an Incision made according to the abovementioned Directions in
the top of the Tail, reaching downwards four Fingers breadth in length.

CHAP. CLVIII. Of Worms, Bots, or Trunchions that breed in the Body of a Horse.
THere is no Corruption without Generation; for what Nature loses in one part
she regains in another. Every Plant, and almost every Animal is a kind of
Nursery of a particular Species of Insects. When the vital Heat is vitiated it
becomes incapable of performing its natural task of concocting the Aliments,
and consequently the whole economy of Nature is dissolved; for when the
Nourishment of Horses, as well as of all other Animals is not perfectly
digested, Crudities and Humors are generated, which are easily corrupted, and
their Putrefaction produces several sorts of Worms.

I have already spoken of the Worms that occasion the Colic and violent
Gripings. Some of 'em are white, long, and sharp-pointed, appearing in the
Horse's Dung, and are not very dangerous; but those that are long and small,
resembling great Needles, are extremely dangerous: some are red, short, and
thick, of the bigness of small Beans, which torment and oftentimes kill the
Horse.

There is another sort of Worms, not unlike to Wood-Lice, only they have not so
many Feet; they are of a reddish brown Color, somewhat velvetted on the back,
consisting of diverse Folds. They abide in the Stomach, and devour all the
Nourishment; so that though the Horse be a great Eater he cannot possibly thrive,
since his Stomach prepares Nourishment only for the Worms, which sometimes by
reason of their multitude, pierce the Stomach in several Parts, and kill the
Horse with extreme Pain: And I have even seen thousands of 'em in the Stomachs
of dead Horses. It Is impossible to know certainly when a Horse is troubled with
these Worms, for they cause no Griping, and never appear in the Dung, since
they always abide in the Stomach or Maw.

When a Horse is troubled with this last sort of Worms, he commonly becomes
lean and sluggish, he looks upon his Belly or Flanks, his Hair stares, and
whatever Nourishment he takes, he never grows fat.

When Horses are taken up from the Grass, they are subject to certain smooth,
or velveted Worms, about half the Bigness of Catter-pillars, which appear near
the Fundament, and are usually called Bots. These Insects are not dangerous;
for you may take 'em away with your Hand without any Medicine.

Remedies for the Worms.
The Remedies already prescribed for destroying the Worms that occasion a sort
of Colic, are good against all the various Kinds of those Insects: such as the
Powder described in that Chapter.

Mercury, if it be duly prepared, is, in my Opinion, the most powerful and
successful Enemy of Worms: For it not only destroys 'em, but prevents their
future Growth, and therefore you cannot give a better Remedy than well-prepar'd
Mercurius dulcis, or Cinnabar mixed with the Cordial-Powder, or the
Cinnabar-Pills; for the very Steam of Mercury destroys the Worms.

You may easily kill Bots, or Worms that stick about the Fundament, by giving
your Horse an Ounce or two of the Powder or Flower of Brimstone, with moistened
Oats.

Hay moistened with the Solution of Saltpeter, kills Worms effectually. The
green Leaves of a Willow, or Peach-Tree, chopped small, and mixed with Oats, are
very good in this Case.

Half an Ounce of Savin in Powder, mixed with Oats, and given for ten or twelve
Days together, will infallibly destroy the Worms. If you keep your Horse five
or six Days in a Sheep-Cote without Litter, all the Worms in his Body will
certainly come forth, by reason of the Nitre contained in the Sheeps-Dung; but
since the Cause is not removed, you must give him the purging Medicine
prescribed in the following Chapter.

The Seed of Zedoary beaten, and mixed with Bran moistened with Wine, kills all
sorts of Worms.

Those who cannot procure compound Medicines may choose one of the following
simple Remedies, which may be given with Bran or Oats.

The Seeds of Coriander, Citrons, Oranges, and Lemons, the Shavings of Ivory,
and of Hart's-Horn.

The Pills prescribed for Pursiveness, in Chap. CXIX. expel all sorts of Worms,
if one of 'em be given daily in moistened Bran, for seven or eight Days
together. You may give a Horse that is troubled with the Worms an Ounce of
Cinnabar, with a like quantity of the Cordial-Powder in moistened Bran,
continuing for some time: Or take four Ounces of Cinnabar, and two Ounces of
the Cordial-Powder, and with a Pound of fresh Butter make 'em up into Pills, to
be given with a Quart of Wine.

Six Drams of Mercurius dulcis made up into two Pills with an Ounce of Treacle,
is an admirable Remedy in this Case: The Mercury is too cold to be given alone,
and therefore you must add either the Cordial Powder or Treacle. And besides,
when it is given alone it oftentimes causes a Disturbance without any
Evacuation; but the Swelling of the Body, that usually happens on this
Occasion, may be easily asswag'd with a convenient Clyster: However it is
certain that it never produces any ill Effect when it is mixed with Cordials. It
does not always purge, and sometimes its Operation is not visible till the
Horse begins to thrive after the Destruction of those pernicious Insects that
wasted him. Several other Remedies are good for killing Worms, such as the
Liver of Antimony, if two Ounces of it be given every Day with moistened Bran;
or you may use the following Powder.

A Powder for the Worms.
Take the Seeds of Coriander, Lettuce, Rapes, and Colewort, of each two Ounces,
Zedoary an Ounce, Shavings of Hart's-Horn four Ounces; Mix and make a Powder.
The Dose is two Ounces every Day with Oats or Bran, moistened with Wine, for
twelve Days together, after which give your Horse a Purge to expel the Worms;
for after the regular Use of the Powders and other Medicines, you will find
Purgation extremely useful, and almost always necessary, for the destroying of
these Insects.

CHAP. CLIX. Purging-Pills to destroy Worms.
THese Pills are of excellent Use for Horses that are troubled with Worms,
unless they be extremely lean and wasted, as indeed in that Case they usually
are, and therefore before you proceed to purge a lean Horse, you must first
moisten his Body with wet Bran instead of Oats, or infuse an Ounce of
Polychrest, and half an Ounce of Juniper Berries beaten, in a Quart of Wine,
for the space of one Night. Next Morning, give him the Wine lukewarm,
continuing after the same manner for some Days: But if he forsake his Meat, you
must lay aside the Use of Sal Polychrest for some time, and even entirely, if
his Hair begin to stare; for from the Appearance of that Sign you may conclude,
that the Horse's Body is not overheated, and that you may safely administer
the purging Remedy, if his Appetite be in a good Condition. Sal Polychrest is
certainly an admirable Remedy to prepare the Body of a Horse for Purgation,
when it does not take away his Appetite, and even sometimes it kills the Worms:
However you may afterward give these Pills with a confident Expectation of
very good Success.

Boil a Pound of Honey in a Skillet till it begin to thicken, then add an Ounce
and a half of Wormseed, and about two Ounces of Aloes in Powder, according to
the Bigness of your Horse, for you may give a Coach-Horse two Ounces and a
half; and if he be of a very large Size, three Ounces. Boil the Powders with
the Honey till they be well incorporated, and after the Mass is cold, make it
up into Pills, anointing your Hands with Oil-Olive, or of bitter Almonds, if
you can procure it; keeping your Horse bridled six Hours before you give him
the Pills, and as long after.

The same Day give him a Clyster of two Quarts of Milk, with a quarter of a
Pound of Sugar, and six Yolks of Eggs, to entice the Worms to the Fundament.
Note, That you must never mix any Oil or Fat with the Clysters that are given
in this Case, for they both drive away the Worms.

They who are loath to give themselves the Trouble of preparing these Pills, may
give their Horses one of the abovementioned Purgatives, especially that with
Mercurius dulcis, which will certainly answer their Expectation. But I have
often observed, that these Pills have extirpated all the Worms out of a Horse's
Body, more effectually than any other Remedy whatsover.

The following Method is also of admirable Efficacy. Boil three Quarts of Water
in an Earthen Pot, with half a Pound of running or crude Quicksilver, and mix
this Water with a Pailful of common Water for your Horse's ordinary Drink,
during the space of fifteen Days. The same Mercury will serve all the while,
and remain as good after the fifteen Days are expired, as it was at the first
Boiling. This Remedy was first proposed by Van Helmont, and I have seen it
given to Children that were full of Worms, for fifteen Days together, with
admirable Success. It Is not at all loathsome or troublesome to the Stomach, for
the Quicksilver changes neither the Color, Taste, nor Smell of the Water. I
have seen an infinite Number of Cures performed by it, and therefore I could
not forbear inserting it here for the Convenience of the Poor, who cannot make
use of a cheaper Remedy. Others put two or three Pounds of crude Quicksilver
into the bottom of a Cask where they keep Water for the ordinary Drink of
Horses that are troubled with Worms.

Another Remedy to kill Worms.
Give your Horse daily an Ounce of Filings of Steel (which you may procure at
very easy Rates from the Needle-Makers) mixed with moistened Bran, till he has
eaten a whole Pound. I will not here repeat what I have already said, in order
to explain the Reason why Steel destroys and expels Worms; but it will not be
improper to add, that it opens all Obstructions in the Veins, Arteries,
Intestins, and especially in the Passages of the Lungs: And it is well known,
that if those Obstructions be neglected, they may produce many dangerous and
stubborn Distempers.

It Is, in my Opinion, very convenient, when Horses return from the Camp, to put
'em into a Course of Steel, observing the same Dose as before: For it happens
not unfrequently that they are troubled with Worms, which hinder 'em from
thriving; though their Distemper, by reason of the want of external Signs, is
generally unknown, and consequently either neglected, or ill cured. But all
these Inconveniences may be prevented by the Use of Steel, which is a cheap
Remedy, and safe in all Cases. To secure and complete the Effect of the Steel,
you must afterward purge your Horse; for without Purgation, you can never
certainly promise the Cure of this Distemper.

A Powder that kills the Worms, and expels the Matter of which they are
generated.
Take Flowers of St. John's-Wort and lesser Centaury, of each two Ounces;
Coral, Seeds of Lettuce and Citrons, and good Aloes, of each half an Ounce;
Corallin, Gentian, Dittany, Scammony prepared with the Vapors of Brimstone,
and Coloquintida, of each one Dram; Cinnamon and Coriander-seed, of each an
Ounce; Cinnabar, four Ounces. Mix and make a Powder.

Give this Powder to your Horse in the Morning, before you suffer him to eat.
The Dose is an Ounce and a half to large Horses, and an Ounce to those of a
smaller Size.

Afterward inject a Clyster of Milk or Tripe-Broth, to entice the Worms to the
great Gut.

Repeat the Dose of this Powder seven or eight times, either every Day, or once
in two Days. Then purge your Horse, and you may certainly expect a perfect Cure.

Another cheap Powder for the Worms.
Beat the Husks of green Walnuts, and press out their Juice, or after they are
beaten infuse 'em in Water for the space of twenty four Hours; pour the Juice
or Water upon the Ground in moist, cool, and fat Places, and immediately all
the Worms that are underground will come forth.

Take a sufficient quantity of these Earthworms, and put 'em into clean Water
for they space of six Hours, till they have vomited up all their Filth: Then
fill an Earthen Pot with 'em, cover it close, and set it in an Oven after the
Bread is taken out, till the Worms be so dry, that they may be easily reduced
to Powder.

You must give this Powder every Morning for seven or eight Days, from one to
two Ounces, in a Quart of good Wine: For there are some Horses who will not eat
it with Bran or Oats, though it would doubtless produce the same Effect.

Since Purgation is so necessary for completing the Cure, I shall propose a
Remedy that may be usefully given to a Fat Horse; for all purging Medicines are
hurtful to lean Horses. Take good Treacle and Aloes, of each an Ounce and a
half; Mercurius dulcis half an Ounce, red Wine a Quart; mix 'em carefully
together, and give the Medicine to your Horse. This Remedy destroys all sorts
of Worms, and purges the Horse's Body of all manner of Impurities. If you
desire further Information on this Subject, you may consult the Book entitled,
La Gloria del Cavallo del illustre Segnori Paschal Caracciollo, where the
Author treats with a great deal of Learning and Judgment, of the Method of
Curing all Distempers incident to Horses; and Vegetius, in his Treatise Artis
Veterinariae sive Molomedicae, Lib. 1. Cap. 44. has an excellent Discourse of
the Cure of Horses, besides several other Authors. I have inserted nothing in
this Chapter but what is grounded on my own Experience; and I may venture to
say without Vanity, that you will hardly find a better Method any where else:
But since I cannot pretend to be Judge in my own Cause, I thought fit to cite
the best Authors, who have handled this Subject, that after a careful Perusal
of 'em, the Curious Reader may be enabled to judge of my Performance. I have
all along applied my self to the Study of Things rather than Words; and as for
those Admirers of a polished and florid Style, I shall only beg Leave to put
'em in mind of the Sentence, Magna pars Ignorantium, ut ligno Naufragus, verbis
haeret.

You may also destroy all the Worms in your Horse's Body, and preserve him from
being afterward troubled with 'em, by giving him about a Peck of boild Rye
every Day.

CHAP. CLX. Of Swaying of the Back, and Falls.
SOmetimes Horses fall with so much Violence, or in so dangerous a Posture,
that the Ligaments, Tendons, and Sinews, are strained, or a Vein broken within
the Body; and the Blood being extravasated in some part of the lower Belly or
Paunch, curdles, and aafterwards putrefying, produces very troublesome and
dangerous Distempers. The Back may be as dangerously swayed or strained by a
Fall caught in Riding, as if the Horse had fallen from a high Place; for the
Strength of the Back is quite destroyed, when the Ligaments that keep the Bones
firm are stretched or relaxed.

The Circumstances of the Fall are either visible to the Eye, or may be learned
from the Relation of others; sometimes the Horse voids Blood at his Mouth or
Nostrils; he cannot go without a great deal of Trouble, and there is a manifest
Rolling of his hinder Parts: From whence you may conclude, that his Back is
either broken or swayed.

The surest Sign of the Swaying of the Bach, is when a Horse cannot move
backward, especially in going up a steep Place, by reason of the Weakness of
his Back, and the Pain which he feels. Mules are more subject to these
Accidents than Horses, both because they usually bear greater Burdens, and
because the Ridge of their Back is higher, and not so firmly supported by their
Ribs, as the same Part is in a Horse, whose Ribs are so placed that they serve
as a kind of Buttresses to defend his Back from Strains. For the Cure of this
Distemper you must immediately bleed your Horse in the Neck-Veins, taking away
about two Pounds of Blood; and having chafed his Back with your Hand till it
grow warm, apply two large Cupping-Glasses, one on each Side, in the Place
where he seems to complain most of Pain, scarifying the Part about the
Cupping-Glasses, to let out the extravasated Blood, and recall the natural Heat,
to prevent the flowing of the Humors, and extinguish the extraneous or
adventitious Heat, caused by the Breaking or Straining of the Back: Then put
your Horse in a Frame, and hang him up; or if you cannot procure a Frame,
enclose him with Grates in the Stable, that he may not be able to move his
Body. Let him remain in that Posture five or six Weeks, that the Remedies may
have time to operate, and Nature may take the Advantage of their Assistance,
which she could not do if the Horse were suffered to move his Body.

Then take equal Quantities of Spirit of Wine and Oil of Turpentine, shake 'em
together in a Vial till they grow white as Milk; and with this Mixture anoint
your Horse's Back, rubbing it in with your Hand; after which apply the Red
Honey-Charge, laying it on hot, and adding half an Ounce of Galls at every
Application: Repeat the same every time, applying a fresh Charge, without
taking away the former. In the mean time you must not be surpised at the
Swelling of the Back, for that is an Effect of the Operation of the Remedy; you
must afterward proceed to wash the Back with a Bath of proper Herbs, such as
was prescribed for battered and decayed Legs, in the sixty fifth Chapter,
applying two warm Napkins moistened in the Decoction, with a Cloth over all,
according to the Directions mentioned in the same Chapter, and repeating the
Bath and Fomentation six times, once every Day. This is the true Method of
applying external Remedies, only it is to be observed, that they who have not
the Convenience to make a Honey-Charge, after they have chafed the Back with
the Mixture of Oil of Turpentine, and Spirit of Wine, may apply the Ointment of
Montpelier, for two or three Days together, and afterward proceed to the
above-m^ntion'd Baths and Fomentations. This done, if your Horse void Blood at
the Mouth o^ Nose, you must give him an Anodyne Clyster every Day for the first
four Days, (...) every two Days, and at last every three; giving him also the
following Potion.

A Potion for Falls.
In case of a dangerous Fall or Strain in the Back, you may give your Horse
every Day an Ounce of Sal Polychrest, with a like quantity of Juniper Berries
beaten, or of the Cordial-Powder in a Pint of Red Wine, or once every two Days
for eight Days together. This Remedy dissolves and expels the clotted and
extravasated Blood, resists the Corruption of the Humors, loosens the Horse's
Belly, and destroys the preternatural Heat that causes all those Disorders.

Since Anodyne Clysters are very useful in this Case, I shall subjoin a
Description of one of the best of 'em.

An Anodyne Clyster for Falls.
Take Leaves of Mallows and Violets, of each three Handfuls, Linseed beaten,
one Handful; Milk and Tripe-Broth, of each one Quart; or for want of either of
these, two Quarts of the other: Boil 'em half an Hour, and add Flowers of
Camomil and Melilot, of each one Handful. Then strain out the Liquor, and
adding half a Pound of Oil of Roses, the Yolks of six Eggs, and half a Pound of
Turpentine dissolved in Yolks of Eggs, to prevent its growing hard. Mix and
make a Clyster to be injected lukewarm, after you have raked his Fundament.

The next Day you may give the Clyster of the warm Blood of a Calf or Sheep,
prescribed for Molten-Grease, about the End of Chap. CLI.

Note; That these Potions are not necessary for all Strains of the Back, but
only when the Fall is very dangerous, or when there is a Vein broken within the
Horse's Body; which you may know by his voiding Blood at the Mouth or Nose. If
the Strain of the Back be not accompanied with any apparent Sign of the Rupture
of a Vein, or great internal Contusion; for Example, when the Horse does not
void Blood by the Mouth or Nose, but is only troubled with a Reeling in his
hinder Parts, when he trots, and a difficulty of stepping backwards, it will be
sufficient for the Cure to apply the Mixture of Turpentine and Brandy, a good
Red Honey-Charge, or the Ointment of Montpelier, and afterward convenient
Baths and Fomentations according to the abovementioned Directions. But though, as
I intimated before, the Potions are not absolutely necessary, it will not be
improper for the hastening of the Cure, to give him one before you proceed to
the Application of external Remedies. And though the Cure may be performed
without hanging him up from the Ground, you must take Care to fix him in such a
Posture, that he may not be able either to lie down, or to stir his Body for
the Space of a Month.

Another Potion for Falls or a Swayed Back.
If the former Potion be not altogether so effectual as you expect or desire,
you must bleed your Horse again, and then give him the following Potion.

Take of common Oil half a Pint, Seeds of Cresses in Powder, an Ounce, or an
Ounce and a half, if the Horse be of a large Size, Bole Armenic, and Mummy, of
each half an Ounce. Make a Potion, to be given to the Horse as soon as you
perceive that his Back is strained, and apply the Oils and Ointment of
Montpelier, with the Addition of Powder of Galls, after which bathe and foment
as before.

Some pretend to cure a Strain in the Back in the Summer, by making the Horse
swim; but this Method is not sufficient for the Cure of great or violent
Strains.

You must take Care not to ride your Horse immediately after his Recovery; for
though he be not lame, the least Exercise will put him in a worse Condition than
before, if you allow not a sufficient Time for the Back to recover its wonted
Vigor. To avoid this Inconveniency, as soon as the Horse seems to be sound,
'twill be convenient to walk him to the Water, and not to take his Back for a
Month, after the Cure of a violent Strain, and a space of Time proportionably
less, for slight Strains; and every Day when he returns from walking chafe his
Back with good Brandy or Spirit of Wine.

If the Horse be not cured by the Application of the abovementioned Remedies,
as it happens not unfrequently, you must separate the Skin from the Flesh, on
the Reins or lower part of the Back, that is behind the Saddle which I suppose
to be little, for a large Saddle covers a great part of the Reins.

You must, I say make two or three Incisions on each side, with a large Iron
Slice, and separate the Skin about the breadth of half a Foot on each side of
the Backbone, till you come to the Hip-Bone: Then stop the Holes with Slices
of Hog's-Lard, of the thickness of half a Crown, and two or three Fingers
breadth long and broad, to hinder the Skin from growing to the Flesh. Rub the
separated Skin with an Ointment made of equal parts of Populeum, and the
Ointment of Marshmallows, covering the whole Part with a Lamb's-Skin, the
woolly side inwards, and laying a Saddle-Cloth over all. Then hang up the
Horse, or fix him in such a Posture, that he may not be able to stir, and at
Night give him a Clyster of Sal-Polychrest, repeating the same every Day for
eight Days together, and in the mean time give him at the Mouth, once a Day, an
Ounce of Assa-foetida, in Powder, mixed with a Pint of Wine.

After forty eight Hours uncover the sore place, and you will find it very much
swollen, as it must be in order to the Cure. Take out the slices of Lard, and
press out the reddish Water and Matter that are in the Sore; putting in fresh
slices of Lard, and chasing the whole Part with an Ointment made of Populeum,
and the Ointment of Marshmallows. Then cover it up as before, and dress it
after the same manner once in forty eight Hours for the space of twelve Days;
after which you must not put any slices of Lard into it, but only dress it with
the Duke's Ointment, keeping it covered, and dressing it every Day, till the
Skin be reunited to the Flesh, and the Sores healed. Ten Days after you begin
to lay aside the use of the slices of Lard, take away the Lamb's-Skin, for the
Cure ought to be completed in that time; but the Horse must not stir for ten
Days longer, or thirty two Days after the beginning of the Cure; after which
you may walk him a little, observing whether he continues to halt, then lead
him to the Water, and accustom him to Travel by degrees.

Or instead of separating the Skin, you may, if you think fit, give the Fire,
piercing the Skin with a red-hot Iron, and making holes all over the same Part,
at the distance of an Inch from each other. Then apply a good Plaster, and
over that two Sheets of Paper; after which hang up your Horse, or fix him so
that he may not be able to move for the space of a Month. When the Scabs are
fallen, dress the Sores with the Duke's Ointment, and proceed as before. These
are the last Remedies in this case; some prefer the latter before the former;
but it is my Opinion that they are equally good, if the Operation be duly
performed; though I must confess the last is the easiest.

CHAP. CLXI. Of Hip-shot, or a Strain in the Hips.
HOrses are not only obnoxious to Strains in the Back, but also in other Parts
of the Body, as particularly in the Hips; in which case they are so Lame that
their Legs are not able to sustain their Body. These Strains are occasioned by
Slips or Falls; and the Bone that joins the Thigh to the Body is oftentimes
dislocated, or removed out of its right place; at other times the Humor
contained in that Part, and appointed by Nature for facilitating the motion of
the Joint, either falls out or hardens, and consequently causes Pain, and
binders the motion of the Hip-Bone.

If the Hip-Bone be extremely relaxed, or put out of its place, you may feel
the hollow Part where the Bone was, with your hand, or perceive it with your
Eye, as the Horse moves his Legs: He is also extremely Lame, and cannot sustain
the weight of his Body upon the grieved Leg. In these cases it is the usual
custom of Farriers to tie one end of a Leathern Thong about the Horse's
Pastern, and the other to an yielding Bush or Shrub, and then by whipping the
Horse, to make him struggle with all his force till the Bone return to its
proper place. This Method is not only rarely successful, but very dangerous, if
it be not performed with a great deal of Judgment and Circumspection, and by a
very sagacious and understanding Person; and therefore 'twill be safer to
observe the following Directions.

In the first place (and even though the former Operation has already been
performed with success) chafe the grieved Part with a mixture of Oil of
Turpentine and Spirit of Wine, rubbing it in with your Hand; and two Hours
after apply the Ointment of Montpelier. The next Day bleed your Horse, and two
Hours after chafe the part with the Essences, and then with the Ointment of
Montpelier, two Hours after the Application of the Essences as before. At
Night, if there be occasion, chafe the Part again with the Essences, and as
soon as they have performed their Operation, that is, when you perceive that
the Pain is over by the Horse's ceasing to complain, cover the grieved Hip,
with a Plaster made of Rosin, Mastic, Olibanum and Sulphur, with a large
quantity of Burgundy-Pitch melted together, and applied moderately hot, laying
Saddle-stuffings over it, and putting a Patten-Shooe on the contrary Foot to
make the Horse lean on the sore side. He must not be suffered to lie down till
the Plaster fall off, after which make a convenient Bath for his Hips.

If the Strain be not very considerable, apply the same Remedies that were
prescribed for Shoulder-sprains.

If there be only a relaxation of the Ligaments and Muscles, after you have
bled your Horse in the Neck, apply the Essences, Honey-Charges, Baths, and
Fomentations, prescribed for Shoulder-sprains in the Fifty fourth and Fifty
sixth Chapters.

These Directions may be illustrated with the following Example. A Horse who
had halted so long of a Strain in the Hip, that his Hip and Thigh began to
decay for want of Nourishment, was cured even in Winter, (which is a
considerable circumstance, for the Cure is more difficult in that Season than
in Summer) without the Application of any other Remedy than the abovementioned
Honey-Charge, Baths, and Fomentations; but the Part was first chafed with a
Mixture of Spirit of Wine, and Oil of Turpentine, and the Charge that was laid
over it served for a Plaster to concentrate the Virtue of the Oil, and keep it
from evaporating.

If all these Remedies be applied without Success, you must give Nature time to
work: But if, after all, you perceive no Amendment, you must proceed to give
the Fire, which is the last refuge in this case, and ought never to be
attempted till after a successless Application of other Remedies. It Is to be
observed, that some Pretenders to Skill in the cure of Horses, imagine the
Grief to be seated in the Bone at the top of the Rump, though it is certain, that
there is not any Joint in that place, and therefore it is in vain to apply a
Remedy to a sound Part. The Joint is almost at the side of the Root of the Tail
near the middle of the Thigh; and when the Bone is dislocated, or only relaxed,
you may distinctly perceive a hollowness in the Part, when the Horse goes, and
even if you lay your Hand on the two Joints on each side, and make the Horse
walk gently, you will immediately feel at every step, that the grieved Joint is
hollower than that on the other side, and consequently you may conclude, that
the Grief is seated there without ridiculously endeavoring to find it out at
the top of the Rump where there never was a Joint.

In order to the giving of the Fire, draw a Line with a red-hot Knife round the
Joint or place where you observe the Motion, making a Circle of the largeness
of a great Plate, the Joint being in the center. This Line must only burn the
Hair, for it serves merely to mark the place that must be burnt. Then make
holes in the Skin, at the distance of an Inch from each other, through the whole
space, enclosed with the round Line, cover them with a good Plaster, and over
that lay a sufficient quantity of Saddle-stuffings or Shavings of Cloth; set a
Patten-Shooe on the other Foot, to make the Horse lean on the grieved side, and
keep him still in one place, without suffering him to lie down for the space of
fifteen or twenty Days. When the Scabs fall off dress the Sores with Brandy;
and after you have kept the Horse thirty Days in the same Posture, you may
begin to walk him by degrees, and some time after to ride him gently. Since the
Fire is a powerful Resolvent, it will consume and dissipate the Humors that
occasion the Lameness, and restore the Part to its wonted Vigor.

If the Swelling of the Hip descend to the Hough, and from thence to the Legs,
you must let your Horse Blood in the Toe, and charge his Legs with the
abovementioned Honey-Charge, or anoint 'em with the Grease of a Mule, Bear, or
Camel. You may quickly perceive the effect of these Remedies, if you take care
in the mean time to walk your Horse gently from time to time. Badger's-Grease
produces the same effect: And the Marrow of a Stag, and Goose-Grease, are also
very proper in this case.

Sometimes the Strain affects only the great Sinew that runs along by the Vein
on the inside of the Thigh, as you may easily perceive by the Swelling,
Distention, Pain, and Heat of the Sinew. In this case you must let your Horse
Blood in the Neck, and charge the Part with his own Blood mixed with Spirit of
Wine; after which you may complete the Cure with proper Charges and Baths. The
abovementioned Greases are also very useful; as likewise the Ointments for the
Sinews, and other Ointments prescribed for the strengthening of the Forelegs.
Or you may apply the Baron's Ointment, or Oppodeldoc, which is certainly one of
the best Remedies not only in this Book, but even perhaps in all the Treatises
that are extant on this Subject.

CHAP. CLXII. Of the Swelling of the Cods and Stones.
THE Swelling of the Cods or Stones may proceed from several Causes. For
sometimes they are stuffed with serous Humors that descend along the
production of the Peritonaeum; sometimes the Defluxion is occasioned by the
stroke of another Horse, and not unfrequently the Guts fall into the Cods, by
reason of some Strain or Wrench.

It Is the usual custom in this case to ride the Horse into the Water, which, by
its coldness, repels the Humor that flows to the Cods; and if they be only
full of Wind, or distended with a slight Inflammation, this Method may be
attended with Success; But if the Inflammation be violent, you must apply the
following Pultiss.

A Pultiss.
Take Yellow-Wax, fresh Butter, and Oil-Olive, of each half a Pound; strong
Vinegar, half a Pint; boil 'em together till the Vinegar be almost consumed;
then remove the Vessel from the Fire, and adding an Ounce of Camphire in
Powder, make a Pultiss to be applied to the swollen Cods. Four Hours after lay
on a fresh Pultiss, without taking away the former, or covering the Part. If it
be a simple Imflammation the Swelling will be asswag'd, and the Pain abated:
But if the Swelling continue after the Heat and Pain are removed, the Cods
hanging down very low, it is a sign that the Horse is troubled with a Hydrocele,
that is, when by a relaxation of the Peritonaeum the Cods are filled with
Water, which being too long retained in the Part, by reason of the great
difficulty of expelling it through the Pores, may corrupt and ulcerate the
Stones, and at last occasion a fatal Grangrene.

To prevent these Disasters, after the Heat and Inflammation is abated by the
abovementioned Pultiss, apply that which follows; and if that also prove
ineffectual, and the Stones continue to hang very low; and if by feeling the
Cods you have reason to believe they contain a great deal of Water, you must
Geld your Horse at the Full-Moon. As soon as you make the Incision, there will
come out a Pint or two of reddish Water, which caused the Swelling; and if the
Operation be dexterously performed, the Wound may be easily healed, if the
Stones were not already ulcerated.

An Astringent Pultiss to assuage the Swelling of the Cods.
Make a sort of Gruel of Barley-Meal and Vinegar; and when it is almost boiled,
add half the quantity of Chalk, with a sufficient quantity of Oil of Roses and
Quinces, and two Pugils of Salt. Apply this Remedy as hot as you can endure to
touch it with your Hand, and bind it on very carefully.

Another Resolvent Pultiss.
Boil a sufficient quantity of Beans in the Lees of Wine, till they grow soft
and tender, then beat 'em to a Mash, to two Pounds of which add half an Ounce
of Castoreum in fine Powder; incorporate 'em well together, and sew 'em up in a
Bag large enough to cover the Stones. Anoint the Cods with Ointment or Oil of
Roses, and apply the Bag as hot as you can suffer it to touch the back of your
Hand, binding it on as well as you can. Twenty four Hours after anoint the
swollen place again, and heating the Bag in the same Lees of Wine, in which the
Beans were boiled, renew the Application, continuing after the same manner till
the Swelling be abated.

A Remedy for a Rupture or Burstenness.
I knew a very industrious Groom who invented a kind of Trusses for Bursten
Horses, by the help of which they were able to Travel without any Pain or
Incommodity; and I have even seen some Horses leap very well with this Truss,
who were not able to leap once without it. When the Peritonaeum or Rim that
holds up the Intrals is relaxed, the Guts fall into the Cods, and their descent
appears visibly to the Eye: In this case you must endeavor to put up the
fallen Guts with your Hands, and then apply the following Fomentation. If you
cannot put up the Guts, you must cast the Horse on soft Ground, and make him
lie flat on his Back, with his two Legs on each side bound together; then
having bathed his Stones with lukewarm Water, put up the Guts with your Hand,
and in the mean time prepare the following Quilt, which must be ready against
the Horse rises again.

Take the Roots of Comfrey, the Bark of the Pomgranate and Oak-Trees,
Cyprus-Nuts, and green Oak-Apples, Sumach, and Barberries, of each four Ounces;
Annis and Fennel-seed, of each two Ounces; Flowers of Pomgranates, Camomil, and
Melilot, of each two handfuls; Powder of crude Allom, half a Pound. Put 'em
altogether into a Bag large enough to cover the Cods, and sew it after the
manner of a Quilt. Then put this Bag, with half a Peck of Beans into a large
Pot full of Wine made of Sloes, or for want of that of thick Red-Wine, and boil
'em for the space of two Hours; after which apply it moderately hot to the
Stones, tying it on dexterously with a Bandage passing round the Flanks, and
tied on the Rump. Continue the use of this Remedy for a considerable time, and
every twenty four Hours heat the Quilt in the same Wine.

But after you have put up the Guts, the surest and even the easiest way is to
Geld the Horse, for so the Cods shrink up, and the Guts fall no more down into
'em.

This Remedy is also of good use for the dissolving all sorts of Swellings.

The Baths prescribed in the following Chapters for a Flux or Looseness, of the
Belly, are very effectually in this case, if the Cods be afterward fomented.

CHAP. CLXIII. Of Bruised, Swollen, or Hard Stones.
SOmetimes a Horse intangling himself among the Bars that are set up to
separate him from other Horses, and struggling vehemently to disingage himself,
his Stones are crushed and bruised, and Matter is afterward generated in 'em,
by reason of the defluxion of the Humors. Sometimes the Stone grows dry and
hard as Wood, because of the preternatural Heat occasioned by the Contusion,
which is still more dangerous, if it be accompanied with an Inflammation. The
Disease may be also seated in the Ligaments, in which case the Humors fall
down upon 'em, and produce dangerous consequences.

It Is the usual Custom to Geld Horses that have the misfortune to meet with
such Accidents; but that ought not to be done till the Pain be asswag'd, and
the Defluxion stopped. And besides the dangerousness of the Operation, at certain
Seasons of the Year, and the ill effect it produces on managed Horses, it
cannot be supposed, that the cause of the Distemper can be removed by this
Method, when the Humors fall upon the Ligaments by which the Stone hangs: For
the hardness and inflammation of the Ligaments must be taken away before the
Operation can be successfully performed, nor must it ever be attempted till
after a fruitless Application of the sollowing Remedies.

A very excellent Remedy.
Take Honey and fresh Butter melted, of each half a Pound; Juice of green
Coleworts, a Pound; Leaves of Rue, freed from the Stalks, a large handful;
Black-Soap, a quarter of a Pound; Bean-Flower, a Pound; Stamp the Rue in a
Marble-Mortar, then add the Honey, and afterward the Juice of Coleworts,
Butter, and Black-Soap; mix 'em diligently without Heat, and make a Pultiss
with Bean-Flower, which must be applied cold with a Hog's-Bladder, and kept on
with a Bandage tied about the Horse's Back. Thus even hard Swellings may be
cured, if the Dressing be renewed once a Day; and the quantity here prescribed
may serve to perfect the Cure by repeated Applications, if the Disease be not
very dangerous and stubborn.

If the Swelling be accompanied with a great Inflammation, add to the whole
Composition two Drams of Camphire, dissolved in three Spoonfuls of Spirit of
Wine: But if the Tumor or Inflammation be seated in the Ligaments that is above
the Stone, chafe the Part with Spirit of Wine Camphorated, and afterward apply
the Cataplasm or Pultiss.

If you have reason to believe, that there is Matter generated in the Stone,
spread a sufficient quantity of Emplastrum Divinum on very soft Leather, to
make a Plaster about the largeness of the Palm of your Hand, and lay it upon
the Part where the Matter seems to be seated: Then apply the Pultiss, and if
the Matter be either actually generated, or ready to be formed, the Plaster
will draw it. The Plaster must be taken off once a Day and wiped, but needs
not be changed: And, by persisting in this Method, you may Cure the Horse
without Gelding.

You must let him Blood in the beginning, and at the end of the Cure, and give
him two Ounces of Sal-Prunellae every Day mixed with Bran, which must be his
only Food. This Remedy promotes the Cure, by cooling the inward Parts, and
allaying the preternatural heat of the Bowels, occasioned by the Communication
and Neighborhood of the bruised Stone.

But since it happens not unfrequently, that the Matter appears so high above
the Stone, that it cannot be conveniently evacuated, and you have reason to
fear, that it may fall into the Cods, and there putrefie, you must open a
passage with a red-hot Iron at the bottom of the Cod, without touching the
Stone: Then anoint the Cod with Basilicum, and lay over it Beet-Leaves, smeared
with Butter, putting into the Hole a Tent anointed with Emplastrum Divinum,
melted in Oil of Roses, or, for want of that, in common Oil-Olive. Continue
after the same manner, and your Horse will certainly recover without Gelding.
This is an excellent Remedy to ripen Matter in any part of the Body where the
Skin is broken, and when the circumstances of the Disease require the Sore to
be kept open.

You may apply either of these Remedies, according to the greatness of the
Swelling.

Vegetius, in the Eighth Chapter of his Third Book, where he treats of the
Swelling of the Stones, orders 'em to be anointed Morning and Evening with the
Powder of Burnt-Barley, mixed with Hog's-Grease; adding that a Dog's-Gall is of
admirable efficacy in this case. These Remedies are cheap and safe, but I
cannot recommend 'em from my own Experience.

CHAP. CLXIV. Of the Lask, Looseness, or Flux of the Belly.
THis Disease is so frequently Mortal, I mean when it attacks Horses, that it
ought never to be neglected, when it comes without a manifest Cause. But a
Horse may be seized with a Looseness, without any considerable Danger, after
the drinking of cold Water in Summer, or of melted Snow, and after the eating
of tender Grass, or other Aliments and Medicines, that may be rather said to
produce a good Effect, by loosening the Horse's Belly, and expelling part of
the Impurities that are lodged in his Body: But this is not the Disease treated
of in this Chapter.

The Lask or Flux is caused by the Weakness of the Stomach, that cannot digest
the Nourishment, which consequently passes through the Guts, and is voided at the
Fundament almost without any Alteration.

It proceeds also from the Corruption of the Humors that are either gathered
in the Stomach, or flow thither from the neighboring Parts; and by disturbing
Nature in the Performance of her important Work of Concoction, provoke her to a
vigorous Endeavor in order to their Expulsion.

These Humors are not always raw and cold; for oftentimes the Guts are scowr'd
by an Inundation of Choler, which may be called a Natural Clyster. This kind of
Flux is rarely dangerous, and even not unfrequently profitable.

It is an ill Sign when the Aliments are voided entire, without the least Mark
of Digestion: For it is absolutely impossible for Nature to repair her Losses,
and regain her wonted Vigor, without fresh Supplies of Nourishment; and it is
plain that she receives not any considerable Advantage from the Nourishment,
when it only passes through the Body without undergoing any Change.

Besides these Internal Causes, this Distemper may be occasioned by eating too
much Provender, in which Case it may be easily cured, by diminishing the usual
Allowance of Food. Sometimes it is caused by eating moldy or rotten Hay, frozen
Grass, and other unwholesome Nourishment; as also by drinking very cold Water,
and by immoderate and fatiguing Exercise.

This Distemper may also proceed from want of Exercise, drinking immediately
after the eating of a great quantity of Oats, excessive Fatness, feeding on Rye
Straw, and an ill Disposition of the whole Body.

To discover the Nature of the Humor that causes and foments the Disease, you
must consider the Excrements that are voided; for if they boil and ferment upon
the Ground, you may conclude that the Distemper proceeds from overheated
Choler; if they be white, it is a Sign of Crudity; if they be watery, they
denote a great Weakness of the Stomach.

A Remedy for the Flux.
If the Excrements be mixed with small Pieces or Scrapings of the Guts, you have
reason to fear an Ulcer in those Parts, which usually proves fatal, if the
Danger be not speedily prevented by a seasonable Cooling of the Entrails, which
may be effected by the following Remedy.

Take Barley and the Roots of Marshmallows beaten, of each two Ounces, Powder
of Sal Prunellae an Ounce; Boil 'em in three Quarts of Water to one Quart. The
Dose is a Pint, two or three times a day. This Decoction allays the
Inflammation of the Entrails, sweetens the Acrimony of the Humors, reduces the
Choler to its natural State, and destroys the preternatural Heat that occasions
the Fever.

If this Distemper be caused by Phlegm, you must strengthen the Stomach,
evacuate the redundant Humors, and bind and strengthen the relaxed Parts.
These Indications require the Use of the Cordial-Powder or Pills, the Electuary
of Kermes, Treacle, and other hot Remedies that are endu'd with a Virtue to
strengthen and corroborate the Parts. The Cure of this kind of Flux is easier
than in the other Cases.

The Looseness of the Belly, or Flux, is frequently an Effect of a vigorous
struggle of Nature, to throw off and expel a troublesome Load of Humors: But
if it continue longer than three Days, and be attended with the Loss of
Appetite, it may produce dangerous Consequences; for sometimes Horses are
foundered by the long Continuance of this Distemper: Therefore you must
endeavor to prevent the Danger, by the seasonable Application of convenient
Remedies, and by keeping the Horse to a regular Diet.

You must not suffer your Horse to eat Oats, but feed him with Bran moistened
with Claret, if he have not too strong an Aversion against it. Barley parched
on a Peel at the Fire, and then ground, is very good in this Case; and you must
also choose the best Hay.

To proceed to the Use of Remedies, you may begin with this scowring Clyster.

A Scowring Clyster.
Take Wheat Bran well sifted, and whole Barley, of each two Handfuls; red
Roses, a Handful; true Opium sliced small, half a Dram: Boil 'em in Whey, or
steeled Water, for the space of a quarter of an Hour, then add the Leaves of
wild Succory, Agrimony, Beets, white Mullein, and Mercury, of each one Handful.
In two Quarts of the Decoction dissolve the Yolks of six Eggs, Honey of Roses
and brown Sugar, of each four Ounces: Mix and make a Clyster. After this
Clyster has scowr'd the Guts, and expelled part of the corrupt Matter that was
lodged in 'em, you may give your Horse two Ounces of Liver of Antimony in
moistened Bran, or half an Ounce of the Golden Sulphur of Antimony, persisting
in this Method for a considerable Time: For these Medicines strengthen the
Entrails, allay the Ebullition or Fermentation of the Humors, and contribute
very effectually to the Cure of this Distemper. This done, you may inject the
following Clyster.

A Cooling and Binding Clyster.
Take Knot-Grass, (or instead of that Shepherd's Purse) and white Mullein, of
each one Handful; Leaves of Plantane, two Handfuls; Flowers of wild
Pomegranates, half a Handful; the Seeds of Myrtles, Lettuce, and Plantane, of
each two Ounces: Beat the Seeds, and boil 'em in three Quarts of Beer, or
Barley-Water, with half a Dram of good Opium cut into thin slices; then put in
the Herbs, and afterward a Handful of dried Roses. Add to the Straining half a
Pound of Honey of Roses, and four Ounces of Sugar of Roses: Mix and make a
Clyster, to be administered after the usual Manner.

A Potion for the Flux.
If the Flux be not stopped, or at least abated, by the abovementioned
Preparations of Antimony, after these two Clysters you must give the following
Potion, continuing to repeat the Clysters, from time to time.

Take eight large, or ten small Nutmegs, put 'em upon the Point of a Knife, and
hold 'em over a Candle till they be burnt to a red Coal: then cast 'em into a
Quart of Claret, breaking 'em with your Fingers; and after they have stood in
Infusion all Night, strain out the Wine in the Morning, and make your Horse
drink it bloodwarm, keeping him bridled two Hours before, and as long after. I
have given this Remedy with very good Success, to Men that were troubled with a
Dysentery; for the Salt of burnt Nutmegs being dissolved in the Wine, stops and
allays the Ebullition that causes the Flux.

A Binding Clyster.
Take Plantane Leaves in Summer, or the Seeds in Winter, and dry Provence
Roses, of each a sufficient quantity; boil 'em in three Quarts of Beer, and add
to the Straining Catholicum, two Ounces, Rhubarb and Sealed Earth, of each four
Ounces.

This Clyster binds moderately; and being twice or thrice repeated, stops a
Super-Purgation in a Horse.

Another Potion.
Take two Quarts of Milk in which you have quenched a Piece of Steel five or
six times, two Ounces of the Stones of Roasted Grapes, an Ounce and a half of
Shavings of Hart's-Horn, calcined and beaten to a very fine Powder. Mix for a
Potion.

CHAP. CLXV. Another Remedy for a Flux, proceeding from a cold Cause.
DIssolve four Drams of Roman Vitriol reduced to Powder, in five Pints of
River-Water, and let the Solution stand all Night to settle: In the Morning
pour out the clear Liquor, throwing away the yellowish Sediment that remains at
the Bottom. Give your a Horse a Pint of it with a Horn, (heating it lukewarm
in Winter) and repeat the Dose every six Hours, keeping him bridled an Hour
before, and as long after. You may make the Remedy a great deal more effectual,
by adding to each Quart of the Liquor a Dram of Anniseeds, and the like
Quantity of Coriander-seeds, both beaten to Powder. If the Horse's Appetite be
not spoiled, this Remedy will cure a Flux proceeding from the Ebullition of hot
Humors, if you continue the Use of it for some Days; but the Cure may be
hastened by injecting the following Clyster. Take half an Ounce of dry Provence
Roses, and a Dram of Anniseeds; boil 'em in two Quarts of this Water or
Solution of Vitriol, and after one Waum strain out the Liquor through a
Linen Cloth; and adding three Ounces of liquid Conserve of red Roses, with a
quarter of a Pound of fresh Butter, Make a Clyster, to be injected at the same
time that the Potion is given inwardly; and repeat the same twelve Hours after,
if you perceive that the Violence of the Disease is abated: But if the Flux
continue to torment the Horse, you must repeat the Clyster every six Hours,
with the Potion.

If the Flux proceed from a cold Cause, that is from flegmatic or pituitous
Humors, after the Clysters mentioned in the preceding Chapter, you must give
the following Potion.

A Potion for a Flux, proceeding from a cold Cause.
Take the Yolks of six Eggs, and an Ounce and a half of old Treacle; dissolve
'em in three Pints of thick Claret, in which you have quenched a Piece of Steel
heated redhot three or four times. You may afterward repeat the Clysters, if
need require.

A Binding Clyster.
Take the Roots of Bistort and Tormentil, grossly beaten, of each two Ounces;
the Leaves of Mouse-Ear and Cypress, of each one Handful: Boil 'em in two
Quarts of Claret and a Quart of Rainwater, and dissolve in the Straining, two
Ounces of fine Catholicum, and twenty Grains of Opium.

A Potion for a Flux, proceeding from a hot Cause.
Take of Conserve of Roses two Ounces, Opium thirty Grains, new Treacle half an
Ounce, Succory-Water and Plantane-Water, of each a Pint. Mix and make a Potion.

In the mean time, you must rub your Horse's Belly with astringent Baths or
Fomentations, which are proper for all sorts of Fluxes, whether they proceed
from hot or cold Caufes.

Astringent Baths for a Flux.
Take Leaves of Plantane and Knot-Grass, of each four Handfuls; Comfrey and
Horse-Tail, of each one Handful; Gall-Nuts, Cypress-Nuts, and Acorns, of each
two Ounces; red Roses and Leaves of white Mullein, of each three Handfuls: Boil
'em in a large Pot, in an equal Mixture of Claret and Water, first putting in
the Nuts and Acorns beaten, then the Leaves, and last of all the Flowers; and
after they are sufficiently boiled, add a Pint of Vinegar, and half a Pound of
Oil of Quinces. With this Decoction you must bathe your Horse's Belly,
fomenting it with warm Linnen-Clouts, as I ordered in the Cure of a
Shoulder-Sprain; and you may also anoint your Horse's Belly with a Mixture of
equal quantities of the Oils of Quinces and Myrtles.

The Use of this Bath may be repeated as often as you shall think fit. It Is
also very profitable for great Swellings in the Belly, occasioned by
Spur-Galling, Swellings of the Cods, Thighs, or Houghs, provided the Tumor
proceed not from the Biting or Stinging of a venomous Beast.

You may also anoint the Belly with the Countess's Ointment, and foment it with
this Bath; choosing such of the abovementioned Remedies as you shall think most
convenient or profitable.

CHAP. CLXVI. Of the Falling of the Fundament.
SOmetimes a violent Flux; the Piles, or such like Distempers, make the Horse
strain so violently, and with such an intolerable Pain, that the Fundament
falls out, and appears visibly out of its Place. And the same Accident is
sometimes occasioned by a Strain, and very frequently by cutting off the Tail.
This Malady ought never to be neglected, for it may be attended with dangerous
Consequences; and therefore you must anoint the Place with Oil of Roses
blood-warm, and afterward endeavor to put it up. But if you perceive no
Amendment, after two or three successless Attempts, you must have recourse to
the following Remedy.

Beat six Drams of Salt of Lead with half a Pint of Goat's-Milk, or (for want
of that) of Cow's-Milk, till they be well incorporated: You must first beat the
Salt of Lead in a Mortar, and pour on the Milk by Degrees, beating and mixing
'em together all the while, till they be reduced to the Thickness, of a liquid
Ointment. Sometimes the Salt of Lead imbibes a larger quantity of Milk, than at
other times, and therefore you must pour into the Mortar only what is
sufficient to bring it into the abovementioned Form: Put a Tent into the
Fundament, dipped in this Ointment, and anoint all the Part with it, repeating
the Application from time to time.

It Is to be observed, that when the Falling of the Fundament is occasioned by
the Cutting off of the Tail, and accompanied with a great Swelling, the Horse
is in a very dangerous Condition; for it is almost always a Sign of a Gangrene
in the Tail, that spreads toward the Back: And therefore after a successless
Trial of this Remedy, you may give him over for lost.

Another Remedy.
Take Powder of burnt Oyster-Shells two Ounces, the middle Bark of an Ash-Tree,
fresh and green, four Ounces, good Honey a quarter of a Pound, and half a Pound
of the Leavened Dough of a Rye-Loaf ready to be put into the Oven: Beat the
Ash-Bark, and incorporate it with the rest of the Ingredients without Heat, to
the Consistence of a Pultiss, which must be applied cold to the Fundament, and
the Application renewed every twelve Hours.

If you cannot procure the green Bark, you may take the dry, diminishing the
Dose to two Ounces, and beating it to Powder.

Galen's cooling Cerate, Album Rhasis, and some other Galenical Remedies, may
be sometimes useful in this Case, but are inferior to the other in Efficacy.

It happens not unfrequently that the Distemper continues obstinately after a
fruitless Trial of all these Applications. In this Case, as soon as the
Inflammation and great Heat are removed, you must cut off the part of the
Fundament that hangs out, with a sharp Knife heated red-hot to prevent a Flux
of Blood.

Sometimes the Fundament shrinks into its Place, if the Horse be suffered to
rest about half an Hour; But falls out again if you make him trot thirty Paces,
which is a Sign of a Fistula: And therefore you must take hold of it when it
falls out, and tying a strong Packthread about it, cut it quite off with a
red-hot Knife.

You must afterward anoint the Wound every Day with Album-Rhasis, till the
Escarfall, and then rub the Flesh with Siccativum Rubrum. Many Horses have been
saved by this Method, and several Farriers at Paris have performed the Cure by
my Directions, who never saw it attempted before, though they are otherwise very
skilful in their Profession, and have seen Horses cured of Fistula's.

CHAP. CLXVII. Of Strains, Hurts, and Blows on the Houghs.
STrains in the Houghs are very dangerous, by reason of the extreme Pain
occasioned by the contusion of the Nervous Parts: The Horse's Body grows dry,
he becomes Lean, and is afterward troubled with so many grievous Distempers,
that he grows ugly and deformed, if not irrecoverably Lame.

The Causes are the same with those that occasion Strains in the Hips, and
there is no need of enumerating a multitude of Signs in so plain a case: For
the Hoof is swollen, and when you touch it the Horse shrinks and complains.

Bleed your Horse in the Neck, and charge the whole Hoof with his own Blood
mixed with Brandy: As soon as the Charge is dry, lay some of the Ointment of
Montpelier above it, and about eight or ten Hours after chafe the Part with
strong Brandy, without taking away the Ointment, washing it always with Brandy,
at the same Intervals after every Application of the Ointment. You may
afterward endeavor to repel the Defluxion with Astringent Remedies, such as
you will find described in several Parts of this Book, especially the
Astringent Baths mentioned in the preceding Chapter. If the Swelling continue,
notwithstanding the use of these Remedies, apply the Duke's Ointment with
Brandy, and afterward convenient Fomentations, renewing the Applications once
a Day. If the Swelling ripen or turn to an Abscess, open it with a redhot Iron,
and proceed as in the Cure of Simple Wounds. For a slight Strain 'twill be
sufficient to anoint the Hoof with the Ointment of Montpelter and Brandy.

If the Swelling be occasioned by a Blow from another Horse, bleed your Horse,
Charge the grieved place with his own Blood, and then chafe it with Spirit of
Wine, or you may choose some of the following Remedies at your pleasure.

For Blows on the Houghs, and other parts of the Body.
The Tumors that are occasioned by these and such like Accidents, are not
easily dissolved or asswag'd. If the Humor congeal in those Nervous Parts, it
resists the Operation of the best Remedies, and the Swelling degenerates into a
Curb, Spavin, etc. and therefore to prevent those Inconveniences, as soon as
the Pain is taken away, and only the Swelling remains, bathe the Part, and
charge it with thick Lees of Red-Wine, mixed with a third part of good Vinegar;
and besides, you will find severa^ Remedies for those Swellings in the Sixtieth
and following Chapters.

If the Tumor be inveterate, and cannot be dissolved by these Applications,
you may apply the following Remedy, which is very effectual.

A Remedy for a Swelling caused by a Blow.
Mix a Pound of Flower of Linseed, with a sufficient quantity of Wine till it
be reduced to the thickness of Broth; boil it over a clear Fire, stirring it
about without intermission: When it begins to thicken add four Ounces of common
Turpentine, and when that is well incorporated with the Broth, put in six
Ounces of melted Burgundy-Pitch. Then remove the Vessel from the Fire,
continuing to stir the Composition till you can venture to put your Finger into
it; after which you must immediately apply it to the place with Flax, and a
Bandage, and repeat the Application once in twenty four Hours.

If the Swelling be accompanied with a violent Pain, or if the Horse be very
Lame, you must endeavor to allay the Pain by the Application of the Duke's
Ointment, or, for want of that, of the preceding Remedy prepared with Milk
instead of Wine. For the Milk is Anodyne, and asswages Pain, but is not endu'd
with the resolving Faculty of Wine; and therefore as soon as the Horse ceases
to Halt, you must again prepare the Remedy with Wine, to take away the Swelling.

If these Remedies be not attended with the desired Success, you may have
recourse to the Bath, mentioned in Chap. LXV. or to those that are described in
the preceding Chapter; to which last you may add some of the Herbs that entered
the Composition of the former.

Sometimes these Tumors degenerate into Curbs, Spavins, or Hough-Boney's,
which are sometimes cured by giving the Fire.

As soon as a Horse has received a Blow in his Body with another Horse's Foot,
bleed him in the Neck, and bathe the place with Spirit of Wine, five or six
times every Day; or (which is more effectual) anoint it with the Ointment of
Montpelier, and eight Hours after chafe it with Brandy, repeating the
Application once a Day.

In these cases I usually apply, with very good Success, the Crease of a Capon,
Badger, or Bear, anointing the Part every Day till the Swelling be dissolved.

Another Remedy for a Swelling occasioned by a Blow or Stroke with another
Horse's Foot.
Beat the Whites of twelve or thirteen Eggs, with a large piece of Allom, till
they be reduced to a thick Froth; then mix 'em with a Quart of strong Brandy, a
Pint of Vinegar, and two Litrons of Flower, incorporating 'em well without
Heat. Charge the place with this Mixture, renewing the Application every two
Hours, till the Swelling be abated, which usually happens in twenty four Hours.

Another Remedy to assuage a Swelling caused by a Stroke.
Make a thin Paste of Potter's-Clay, mixed with a sufficient quantity of
Vinegar; boil and stir it till it thicken: Then remove it from the Fire, and
when it is only lukewarm, add as much Brandy as may suffice to make it as thin
as it was before 'twas boiled. Chafe the Part with Spirit of Wine, and then
charge it with this Paste, renewing the Application every three Hours.

Twenty four Hours after wash off all the Earth or Clay, bathe the Part with
Spirit of Wine, and Charge it as before.

The Remolade of Bohemia is of excellent use for these and all other sorts of
Swellings.

CHAP. CLXVIII. Of the Relaxation and Straining of the Master-Sinew.
THE Hough is surrounded with a great Sinew, which is divided from the Bone by
a hollow space where the Vessigons are usually seated. This is the biggest and
most visible Sinew in a Horse's Body, which by reason of a Strain occasioned by
hard Riding, evil Shooing, going down a steep place, a Slip or Fall, or too
heavy Burden, may be relaxed, and sometimes distorted with so much Violence,
that it becomes moveable like an unbent Bow-string. When a Horse walks, the Leg
seems to hang at the Hough, because its Motion is not regulated by the
Master-Sinew; and you would even sometimes imagine that the Bone was broken.
When a Horse stands with his Foot fixed on the Ground, the Hough being extended
in its natural Posture, there is so little appearance of any Grief in the Leg,
that it seems perfectly sound, but if you handle the Master-Sinew you will find
it more moveable than that of the other Leg; and if you make the Horse move his
hinder Parts, you will immediately perceive the Sinew to be as loose and infirm
as if it were broken.

I have seen the Sinew so violently strained, that 'twas plain from the
beginning, that the Cure was impossible, though in the mean time the Horse put
his Foot to the Ground, and placed it as if he had been perfectly sound; for
it is only the lifting of his Foot when he goes, that discovers the Strain.

Some Horses, contrary to the expectation of all who saw 'em, have been cured
with the following Remedies; but the Cure of such Strains is not the work of a
little time.

It Is a vulgar Error to imagine, that the Grief lies in the Hip; and I have
even seen Farriers that were reputed skilful, who could not be persuaded, that
the Distemper proceeded from the Spraining of the Master-Sinew, affirming
always, that the Hip-Bone was dislocated; but time convinced 'em of their
Ignorance; for after they had, by my Directions, observed the following Method,
the Horses were cured without any Application to the Hip-Bone.

First bleed your Horse in the Neck, put him in the Posture described in the
Cure of a swayed Back; and then prepare the following Remedy; but in the mean
time it is to be observed, that he must not be suffered to eat Oats.

Take the Roots of Comfrey and Marshmallows, dried and grossly beaten, of each
two Ounces, or a double quantity of the green Roots: Boil em with a sufficient
quantity of Claret in a clean and well-cover'd Earthen-Pot; and as soon as they
begin to grow tender, add Leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows, Hyssop, Speedwel,
and Sanicle, chopped small, of each one handful; boil all together, pouring in
fresh Wine if need require, to keep the Substances from burning. When you
perceive that they are well softened, take 'em out of the Pot, beat 'em to a
Mash in a Stone-Mortar, and strain 'em through a Hair-Sieve, after the same
manner as Cassia is usually extracted. Then heat the strained Matter with four
Ounces of Badger's-Grease, applying it hot, and covering the Part very
carefully with Flax, and an old Linen Cloth; but the place must be first
anointed with the following Remedy.

Take Oil of Roses, two Ounces; Oil of Cammomil and Juniper, of each one Ounce;
heat 'em in an Earthen Porringer, with two Drams of Castoreum, in Powder; and
as soon as the Composition grows lukewarm, anoint the place softly; for this
is a very penetrating Remedy, and better than that which the Farriers call the
Essences, which is indeed a cheaper Medicine, but burns the Skin.

Note, That the Part must be only anointed once in two Days, to prevent the
danger of an Inflammation: And if, after all, you perceive by the Swelling of
the Sinew, that these Oils produce too great a heat in the Part, you must only
anoint it with warm Oil of Roses, so long as the Inflammation continues.

As often as you renew the Dressing, lay a little fresh Pultiss upon the old,
and continue after the same manner.

The Ligature or Bandage of these Parts is extremely difficult; yet you may
conveniently bind on the Dressing with a piece of List two Else long, and an
Inch broad; or rather sow it on; for the sowing does not occasion the least
Swelling, and holds very well; and besides, you may sow it as close or as loose
as you please. However, if you incline rather to a Bandage, you may consult a
Surgeon, who will show you the manner of binding on the Dressing more plainly
than it is possible for me to describe it.

There is a particular Art in fitting a Bandage to the several Parts of the
Body, and you must in this case make use of that which Surgeons call the
Retentive Bandage; but you must take care not to bind the Part too hard; for
it is better to be at the trouble of renewing the Bandage as often as it
slackens.

In the beginning of the Cure you must put your Horse in a place where he may
not be troubled with other Horses, placing him in a kind of Frame, made with
Grates and Posts, that he may not be able to roll or move his hinder Parts. And
you may even hang him, if you think fit, so as he may not be able to lie down;
for if he were suffered to move his hinder Parts perpetually, the Cure would be
extremely retarded.

By a careful observance of this Method you may cure the most dangerous
Sinewsprain: And even though the Sinew were swollen as big as your Arm, I would
not use any other Remedy than what I have prescribed, only the Castoreum must
be omitted in this case.

Note, That when a Strain seems to be cured, instead of Riding your Horse, you
must give the Fire, beginning very high with a Stroke or Line in the middle of
the Sinew, and two under it from the upper part of the Thigh, till you come
under the top or elbow of the Hough, over against the usual place of the
Spavin; then burn the Part between those Lines, making cross Lines about a
Finger's breadth distant from each other, till the Skin be of a bright Cherry
Color, but without piercing it. Then sear the Thigh-Vein with a Star of Fire;
and sear the lower part of the same Vein with several Lines. Cover the burnt
Parts with a good Plaster of Black-Pitch, and over that lay on
Saddle-stuffings, or the shavings of Cloth. When the Scabs fall off wash the
Sores with good Brandy till they be dry, and afterward walk your Horse gently
for some time before you begin to Travel him.

By this Method I cured a fine Barbary-Horse, who was afterward sold for 500
Crowns, and continued very fit for Service.

The following Method is also very good, and requires not so much care as the
other. Bleed your Horse in the Neck, place him in a kind of Frame as before,
and anoint the place with the abovementioned Oils.

Then spread the Plaster, described in Chap. CLXXIV. on a very soft piece of
Leather, large enough to cover the whole Hough, and over that fit on Splents of
Past-board wrapped about with Flax, laying 'em length-wise on the Master-Sinew,
to keep the whole Hough, and especially that Sinew in its natural posture. Bind
on the Splents with three Else of Inch-broad Lace, and afterward put a lay of
Flax over the Splents, and the whole Hough, with a Cloth over all, which must
be dexterously sowed on with strong Thread. Ten Days after untie the Bandage,
and anoint the Parts with the abovementioned Oils, and then apply a new
Plaster, Splents, Flax, etc. as before; renewing the Application every ten
Days, without suffering the Horse to stir till he be perfectly sound, and the
Sinew no longer moveable; after which you may proceed to give the Fire,
according to the abovementioned Directions. In the mean time it is to be
observed, that while the Part is bound up, you must pour some Oil of Roses, and
of Cammomil from the top of the Thigh along the Sinew to moisten the Plaster.

CHAP. CLXIX. An admirable Balsam for Strains in the Hough, Wrenches,
Dislocations, Hip-shot, Blows, Bruises, Sinew-sprain, or Sinew-sprung.
THis Balsam is of excellent use in all Strains of the Master-Sinew of the
Hough: It serves instead of the Oils, with which, in the preceding Chapter, I
ordered the Hough to be anointed. In all other respects you must observe the
Method there described; that is, you must bleed him, place him in a kind of
Frame, anoint the part with this Balsam, and afterward apply the Pultiss.

It Is to be observed, that this Balsam can only be prepared in May and June.

In either of the abovementioned Months put a sufficient quantity of
Rose-Leaves in a Two-quart Glass-Bottle; and the like quantity of the Flowers
of St. John's-wort into another Bottle of the same bigness, and pouring a Pint
and a half of Oil-Olive upon the Flowers in each Bottle, expose 'em to the Sun
slightly stopped, during the Heat of the Summer. At the same time take a
convenient quantity of Bawm, Tobacco, Flowers and Leaves of Rosemary, Orpin,
and Milfoil, all chopped small, and put 'em into a Three-pint Earthen Pot, with a
Quart of Oil-Olive, covering the Pot with a Hog's-Bladder, or wet piece of
Parchment, three or four times doubled, and pricked in several parts with a
Needle. Expose the Pot and the two Bottles to the Sun, during the great Heat,
stirring the Herbs and Flowers twice every Day, for the space of a Month; after
which, pour all that is contained in the Pot and Bottles into a Basin, with a
Quart of strong Wine, a Pound of Horse's-Grease, half a Pound of
Badger's-Grease, or for want of that of Capon's or Hen's-Grease (not the Fat
that falls into the Dripping-Pan, when they are roasting, but the Grease that
is separated from the Entrals before they are either Roasted or boiled) a Pound
of Sugar, and four handfuls of the Flowers of Cammomil and Melilote; boil all
together over a clear Fire, stirring perpetually till the whole Moisture be
consumed, and the Flowers and Herbs remain dry; press out the Liquor through a
Hair-Strainer, and boil it in a Basin with two Pounds of Venice-Turpentine to
the consistence of a Balsam, which must be kept in a Vial slightly stopped.

You may mix this Balsam with the Ointment Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, or
Schmit's Ointment, to cleanse Sores, and prevent the Growth of Proud-Flesh: And
even it may be conveniently mixed with any Ointment whatsoever, for so it will
augment its Virtue.

In all the cases proposed in the Title of this Chapter, provided there be no
Swelling or Heat, you must rub the grieved Part with your Hand, or a Wisp, till
it grow hot, and afterward anoint it with this Balsam heated, every twelve
Hours. In case of a strain of the Hip or Shoulder, mix a third or fourth part
of Oil of Turpentine, with the Balsam, and having heated 'em together anoint
the Part; but at the second Dressing apply the Balsam alone, without the Oil.
If the Horse continue still to halt, anoint with the Balsam and Oil mixed as
before.

You may easily restore decayed and tired Legs, by chasing them twice a Day
with this Remedy: It speedily cures Pricks with a Nail in Shooing, or in the
Street, Stubs; etc. It Is also good for all manner of cold Pains and Aches, and
is even of excellent use for Men.

You may, if you think fit, prepare only the half or fourth part of the
quantity here prescribed: But since it is an admirable Remedy for several
Distempers, and can only be prepared at a certain Season of the Year, when the
Herbs that enter the Composition are in Flower, the best way is to prepare as
great a quantity of it as your convenience will permit.

This Balsam is also good against Felanders, and all other extraneous and
corrupt Substances that grow in Wounds or Sores, if it be poured hot into the
Sore, and the Felander afterward strewn with the Powder of Verdigrease,
prepared as follows. Beat a sufficient quantity of Verdigrease to Powder, and
put it upon a Fire-shovel heated till it be pretty red, stirring it perpetually
till it leave off Smoking, and change its Color; and when it is cold, mix it
with half the quantity of Aloes in Powder. After you have strewn the Sore with
this Powder of Verdigrease, lay over it a Bolster of Flax dipped in the heated
Balsam, and the Felander will quickly fall away; after which dress the Sore
with the Countesses Ointment till it be healed.

All Country Gentlemen, who have Horses, ought to be still furnished with this
Balsam, by reason of its excellent Virtues against several Distempers. And
those who carry many Horses to the Army, ought still to make Provision of this
Remedy, to prevent the dangerous consequences of the Accidents that happen so
frequently in a Camp.

BHAP. CLXX. Of the Cramp.
HOrses are subject to a certain sort of Cramp, which keeps their Houghs so
stiff, that they cannot bend it at their coming out of the Stable, and walk
sometimes fifty paces, drawing their Leg after 'em, as if the Joint of the
Hough were perfectly immovable. This Distemper is universally known, and
proceeds from the weakness of the Part, especially of the Sinews, which are the
Instruments of Motion. I have endeavored, by several Experiments, to find out
an effectual Method of Cure, by strengthening the Part with Spirit of Wine, the
abovementioned Balsam, and good Honey-Charges; but the most effectual way to
give present ease is to lift up the Horse's Leg as if you were going to shoe
him, and bend his Hough forcibly, though it must be acknowledged, that this does
not prevent the return of the Distemper. What has been said on this Subject may
suffice for the curious Reader: For 'twou'd be a needless piece of Formality to
enumerate the signs of so obvious a Distemper.

CHAP. CLXXI. Of the Hough-Bony.
THis is a Tumor generated of Cold and Flegmatic Matter that grows hard by
reason of its toughness, and seldom causes any considerable Pain.

It grows on the top or elbow of the Hough, and appears separated from the
Bone. It Is occasioned by hard Riding, and never grows very big.

It comes after Fatigues, or by rubbing the place against some hard Body, which
occasions a defluxion of the Humors.

It Is easily curable at its first appearance, but when it is inveterate it grows
painful, and can be hardly cured without giving the Fire, and even that violent
Remedy is not able to dissolve it entirely, or to prevent its growing again
after immoderate Exercise.

In order to the Cure, you must foment the Swelling with a mixture of two parts
of Brandy, and one part of Oil of Walnuts, rubbing it in diligently with your
Hand.

Then shave off the Hair, and apply the Plaster described in Chap. CLXXIV. or
that which follows.

A Resolvent Plaster.
Take of Galbanum, one Ounce; Gum-Ammoniacum, three Ounces; Opoponax, an Ounce
and a half; infuse 'em in a Pint of Vinegar for the space of two Days, stirring
'em often. Then boil away one half of the Vinegar, and strain what remains
through a Linen Cloth while it is hot: Set it again upon the Fire till it begin
to thicken, then adding black Pitch and Rosin, of each four Ounces, Turpentine,
two Ounces, mix and make a Plaster to be applied to the Part, and renewed once
in nine Days, till the Swelling be consumed.

You may also dissolve the Tumors by a long continued Application of the
Resolving Ointment, described in Chap. XLVIII. and the same effect is produced
by the Oil of Walnuts.

If the Tumor be not consumed by these Remedies, take Sal-Armoniac,
Saltpeter, and Gum-Ammoniacum, of each an Ounce; melt 'em by the Fire in a
Pint of a very strong Vinegar; then add four Ounces of Honey, and remove the
Vessel from the Fire. Anoint and chafe the Part twice a Day with this
Composition; but if the Tumor be inveterate, hard and big it will not yield to
the Remedy. These Swellings are more offensive to the Eye, than hurtful to the
Horse; though when they are old and hard, his Body is usually wasted, by reason
of the Pain, and at last he begins to Halt. And I have even seen some Horses
irrecoverably Lamed, but this happens only in Manages, where the Horses are
kept to harder Exercise and Diet than they are able to bear.

If all these Remedies prove ineffectual you must have recourse to the Fire,
making the Figure of a Star with a red-hot Knife, the Lines or Rases being very
near one another, and surrounding the Tumor. Then with a Pencil, dipped in
Spirit of Vitriol, touch the burnt Parts, and as soon as they are dry apply hot
Pitch with Saddle-stuffings, or shavings of Cloth over all. You must wait till
the Spirit of Vitriol sink into the burnt Part, for the Pitch will not stick if
it be applied before the Part be dry. After the Scabs are fallen off, chase the
Sore every Day till it be healed with Brandy, and the Tumor will vanish by
degrees; but if after the Cure you make the Horse lean too much on his hinder
Parts, he will grow irrecoverably Lame.

CHAP. CLXXII. Of Wind-Galls.
THE Wind-Gall is a soft Swelling, caused by a cold, flegmatic, and serous
Humor: If you press it with your Hand it yields and moves toward the opposite
side.

These Swellings are usually occasioned by violent and immoderate Exercise when
a Horse is young, the smallness, weakness, and fleshiness of the Hough, and by
being kept too long on a sloping Floor, which raises the forepart of a Horse
much higher than the rest of his Body.

Sometimes they grow on both sides of the Hough, but in the beginning they
appear only on the outside. The Cure is difficult in either place.

The Tumor is soft, and without Pain, of the bigness of a little Apple more or
less, seated between the great Sinew of the Hough and the end of the
Thigh Bone. This Disease is often Hereditary, and derived from the Stallion.

When the Tumor is hard and inveterate, there is little hope of dissolving it
by any other Method than by giving the Fire; but the Cure may be performed by
the Application of Remedies before the Swelling grow hard and big.

Shave away the Hair, and apply such Remedies as are endu'd with a Virtue to
soften, and afterward to dissolve the Tumor.

In order to the softening of the Swelling, take the Roots of Briony and wild
Cucumber; or for want of the latter, common Flower-de-luce, of each two Ounces;
beat 'em grossly, and boil 'em in an equal mixture of Oil-Olive and
Hog's-Grease till they begin to soften: Then beat 'em to a Mash, and press 'em
through a Hair-Sieve: Mix the Straining with the Oil and Grease, adding
Turpentine and Rosin, of each four Ounces; Resumptive Ointment, half a Pound;
and after the whole is melted, thicken it with a sufficient quantity of the
Flower or Powder of Linseed or Fenugreek-seed; mix and make a Pultiss to be
applied with Flax, sowing a Piece of Cloth about the Part. Renew the
Application once in forty eight Hours: This will soften the Tumor, and you
must afterward endeavor to resolve it. You may with less trouble, but at
least equal Charge, soften these Tumors with a Plaster made of equal
quantities of Oxy-croceum, and Melilote Plaster.

To Resolve a Tumor.
Quench four or five pieces of unslak'd Lime, in three Quarts of strong
Vinegar; and after it has stood two Hours to settle, strain out the Vinegar,
and put into it two Handfuls of the hot Ashes of Vine-Branches; let it stand
till it settle, and pour off the clear Liquor into another Pot. To a Quart of
this Vinegar add dry Pigeon's-Dung, and Oil of Peter, of each four Ounces;
burnt Allom and Brimstone, of each two Ounces; Oil of Castor, four Ounces; boil
all together for the space of a quarter of an Hour, and anoint the Tumor once
every Day, which will probably be dissolved in seven or eight Days. If the
Horses Skin be thin and tender, this Remedy will break it, and draw forth a
reddish Water, without raising a Scab; but if the Skin be hard and dry, it
produces a sort of Scurf, which must be anointed, that it may fall off. The
Plaster of Walnuts is a powerful Resolver, but can hardly be made to stick to
the Part.

After the Tumor is dissolved, take up the Veins above and under the Hough,
which may also be done in the beginning.

I might easily name a great number of Simples that are endu'd with a
softening, rarefying, and discussing quality. If the two abovementioned
Remedies do not answer your expectation, you may try that which follows; and if
that prove unsuccessful, you must proceed to give the Fire.

Another Remedy.
Shave away the Hair, and soften the Tumor with proper Remedies; then apply
the Ointment of Worms, or of Beetles; and if you cannot procure the right sort
of Beetles, make use of one of the Retoires, prescribed in Chap. LXXIV. having
first shaved away the Hair, and softened the Tumor. If the Swelling grow
again, as it does pretty frequently, you must have recourse to the Fire,
burning both sides of the Hough, though the Tumor appear only on the Outside:
For the giving of the Fire on one side, would only drive the Swelling to the
other.

CHAP. CLXXIII. The Duke of Newburg 's Ointment.
TAke an Ounce of crude Quicksilver, and half an Ounce of Powder of Brimstone;
Mix 'em in a Marble Mortar, beating 'em with a Pestle, till the Mercury be
extinguished, that is, incorporated with the Brimstone, which will acquire a
black Color; then add four Ounces of Tallow, and incorporate it with the
Mercury: After which put the whole Mixture into a Skillet over a gentle Fire,
with two Pounds of Linseed-Oil, and half an Ounce of Oil of Spike; stir 'em
gently with a wooden Slice till they be well incorporated, and then add
Ointment of Pompholix, and Oistershells burnt and beaten to a fine Powder, of
each two Ounces, Turpentine four Ounces. Boil 'em over a gentle Fire for the
space of a Quarter of an Hour after which add Arsenic and red Precipitate, of
each an Ounce, Verdigrease four Ounces, Cantharides and Malabathrum, or the
Indian Leaf, of each half an Ounce, all beaten to a very fine Powder, and
sears'd: Remove the Vessel from the Fire, stirring it perpetually for the space
of an Hour: After which add half an Ounce of white Vitriol, and set the Vessel
again on a very small Fire, just so much as is sufficient to keep the
Ingredients melted; stirring 'em without Intermission with a wooden Slice,
till they begin to grow cold, and unite into a due Consistence, which requires
a considerable time. Then pour the Ointment into another Pot, and fifteen or
twenty Days after stir it about, that the Oil which swims on the Top may be
incorporated with the Ointment: After which cover the Pot, and in a Month (and
not sooner) the Ointment will be fit for Use.

This is a kind of Caustic, endu'd with an admirable Efficacy to dissolve and
consume Wind-Galls, Splints, Water-Farcin, and the Knots of the Farcin; and is
oftentimes found alone to be sufficient for the Cure of the last of these
Distempers. It Is an excellent Remedy for Quitter-Bones, when the Flesh grows
too fast, and may be applied for the consuming of an Excrescency to any part of
the Horse's Body except the Mouth.

You must apply it cold, anointing the Parts slightly once a day, that it may
not occasion a Swelling. For the Cure of a Splent, make a Plaster of this
Oinment sufficient to cover the Tumors, bind it on, and let it stick forty
eight Hours; then anoint the Scabs with Hog's Lard till it fall away.

You must apply it with a Pencil, that you may be the better able to judge of
the Quantity.

It may be kept very long without losing its Strength; and even increases in
Virtue the longer it is kept.

You may apply the following Remedy to assuage one of these Tumors; but it
will grow again if the Horse be over-ridden.

Take a Quart of strong Vinegar, three Ounces of Galbanum, and a like Quantity
of Mastic; boil away two thirds of the Vinegar, till the Gumms be dissolved.
Then add Oriental Bole and common Turpentine, of each one Pound, incorporating
'em over a gentle Fire to the Consistence of a Honey-Charge, which must be
applied not to the Swelling, and covered with a piece of Paper.

The giving of the Fire succeeds best, and operates most effectually, after the
Application of softening Remedies. It must be given in the Wane of the Moon,
and at the same time you must bar or sear the Vein both above and under the
Hough. But this Method is not always attended with Success, when the Tumor is
grown very big; for only one part of it is dissolved by the Fire: And therefore
the surest way is to give the Fire on both sides of the Hough, as soon as you
perceive the Swelling; for if it be only given on that side where the Tumor is
seated, it will drive the Swelling to the other side. This Rule ought to be
observed in the Cure of all Tumors, especially of those which naturally pass
from one side of the Hough to the other.

CHAP. CLXXIV. Of the Jardon.
THis is a callous Tumor, caused by tough and flegmatic Matter, which by
reason of its hardness, presses the Sinews and Tendons that are the Instruments
of Motion; and is attended with such a violent Pain, that the Horse pines away,
and oftentimes grows lame. This is a very dangerous Distemper, for it may make
a Horse irrecoverably lame, and unfit for Service. It Is almost always
Hereditary, though it may be sometimes occasioned by Fatigues, and especially by
making a Horse, whose Houghs are naturally weak and small, gallop and perform
other Exercises, such as Riding up or down a Hill, leaping and curvetting, in
which the whole Weight of the Body lies upon the Houghs. But nothing hurts the
Hough more dangerously than a short and sudden stop after hard Galloping: For
one such ill-timed stop may cause either a Jardon or a Spavin, and for ever
deprive the Horse of the right Use of his Limbs.

For the Cure of this Distemper, shave away the Hair, and lay a Plaster upon
the Place, which will dissipate the Swelling for some time, if the Horse be not
lame; in which Case, or if he be ridden very hard, the Tumor will grow again;
and therefore the surest way is to give the Fire after the Application of the
Plaster. You may use either the Plaster described in Chap. CLXXI. or that
which follows.

A Resolving Plaster.
Take of Diachylum with the Gumms, two Ounces; Cinnabar, Bdellium, Opoponax,
and Ammoniacum, of each an Ounce and a half; Oil of Spike, and of Turpentine,
of each an Ounce; new Wax, a sufficient quantity. Macerate the Gumms in
Vinegar, boil 'em over a gentle Fire, and strain 'em through a Linen Cloth: Then
add the rest of the Ingredients, and make a Mass for a Plaster. This Remedy
ought to be prepared by an Apothecary, for it is hard to boil the Gumms without
burning 'em; and 'twou'd be needless to insert the Method of the Preparation,
since perhaps it would not be clearly understood.

Spread this Plaster on a piece of Leather, and apply it to the Tumor, or
instead of it the Plaster of Walnuts, having first rubbed the Part very hard
with Oil of Flower-de-luce. Let the Plaster remain seven or eight Days, and
then give the Fire very dexterously and gently: For the Fire will penetrate
further, and its Operation will be more effectual after the Application of
softening Remedies, and besides the Mark will be less visible. At the same time
bar or sear the Vein above and under the Hough, with one or two cross Lines:
And you may also draw a Line along the Vein, betwixt the two parts where it is
barred.

This Plaster dissolves all sorts of Swellings that remain after a Hurt or
Blow in the Pastern-Joint, or any other part in the Body, and the same Effect
is produced by the Ointment of Walnuts.

CHAP. CLXXV. Of the dry Spavin, or String-halt.
THis is a sort of Convulsive or depraved Motion, without any visible Swelling
in the Hough, which proceeds from a certain thick and tough Matter that falls
from the upper Parts upon the Muscles, and obstructs the Motion of the Hough,
so that the Horse is forced to perform the whole Motion with his Hip, snatching
up his Leg on a sudden, and lifting it up higher than the other. Most Horses
that are troubled with this Distemper, as soon as the Hough is healed, that is,
after they have walked five or six steps, seem perfectly sound; but if you make
'em stand till the Hough cool, the first steps they make will be attended with
the same unseemly snatching up of the Leg, as before. This Infirmity appears
visibly to the Eye: Sometimes it seizes on both Houghs; it is not always
painful, nor so dangerous as the Bone-Spavin.

Some Persons scruple not to buy a Horse that is troubled with this Infirmity,
but they ought at least to beat down the Price as low as they can; for it is
certainly a great Defect in a Horse, and it is not only impossible for him to go
swiftly, but he is in great danger of being irrecoverably lamed by it.

I never saw the Cure of this Distemper attempted by any other Method, than by
giving the Fire; and therefore I will not pretend to give any Directions to
those who are unwilling to venture on that Operation.

When a Horse that is troubled with the String-halt, begins to grow lame, as it
happens not unfrequently, you must immediately give the Fire, as in the Cure of
a Bone-Spavin, and perhaps your Horse will recover in two or three Months: and
even though the Distemper be not attended with Lameness, it is highly convenient
to give the Fire; for it dissolves and consumes a part of that thick and tough
Matter, which obstructing the Muscles of the Hough, causes this unseemly
Motion, and usually makes the Horse halt at last.

CHAP. CLXXVI. Of the Ox-Spavin, or Bone-Spavin.
THis Distemper takes its Name from Oxen, who are almost always troubled with
it when they grow old. It Is a Tumor generated by cold Humors, which by
degrees grows as hard as a Bone, the most subtle parts of the Humors being
dissolved and evaporated. It Is occasioned by the same Accidents that are
assigned for the Causes of the Jardon, and is seated below on the inside of the
Hough, where it is joined to the Leg in the part marked 30 in the Figure. It Is
small at first, but afterward grows big.

This Distemper is sometimes, but not always, attended with Lameness.

It causes so violent a Pain that the Horse pines away, especially about the
Flanks, and cannot bear Labor. This is a very dangerous Disease, and for my
part I would not buy a Horse that was troubled with it at any Rate.

I have seen some Horses with great Bone-Spavins on their Legs, who
nevertheless did not halt, nor were wasted, and even trotted equally with both
their hinder Legs on a paved Causey. These Horses may do Service in plain
Grounds, but in a Mountainous Country it is not safe to trust to 'em.

The most skilful Horse-Coursers buy Horses that are troubled with such a kind
of Spavin, provided they do not halt, but go well and even. But it is to be
considered that they do not buy 'em for their own Use, and all the Service they
require of 'em is to bring more Money than they cost; for they usually sell 'em
for sound Horses: But they who will be ruled by my Advice, shall never meddle
with 'em, especially in Mountainous Countries, where the Houghs are much
exercised.

This is a very dangerous Distemper, and requires the most violent Remedy, viz.
the Fire; and even that is oftentimes applied without Success.

When the Disease is hereditary, it is in vain to attempt the Cure by any other
Method, than by giving the Fire: otherwise you may in the beginning try some
external Remedies.

Take the Ointments of Agrippa, Marshmallows, and Martiatum, of each two
Ounces; Oil of Flower-de-luce one Ounce; Oil of Earthworms, and of Dwarf-Elder
Seeds, of each three Ounces; Mix 'em all together, and apply 'em warm by way of
Plaster to the Spavin. Continue after the same Manner eight or ten Days, after
which if you perceive no Amendment, shave away the Hair, and lay on one of the
Plasters prescribed in the preceding Chapters, keeping it on for the space of
five or six Days, and then give the Fire very dexterously, but not too gently.
At the same time fear the Vein above and under the Thigh, and draw a Line along
it, from the part where it is seared, or barred above to that where it is barred
below, half a Foot under the Hough; for if this great Vein be not stopped, it
will perpetually feed the Tumor.

It will not be improper to admonish the Reader, to prevent his being cheated
or disappointed, that no Person can promise a certain Cure in this Case, or to
make a Horse sound that is troubled with the Spavin, by giving the Fire; though
there is no other effectual Remedy. It Is true, it cures many Horses, but there
are others who remain lame all their Life, especially those who have been long
troubled with the Spavin; however their Masters continue to make use of 'em,
but the Service of a lame Horse can never be either pleasant, or very useful.

CHAP. CLXXVII. Of the Blood-Spavin.
THE Blood-Spavin is by several Farriers mistaken for a Curb; but it grows
somewhat wide of the Place where that Tumor is usefully seated, and a little
lower. It Is originally occasioned by the excessive Bigness of the Master-Vein
of the Thigh; for if the Hough happen to be strained when the Horse is young,
the Blood flows too plentifully, and with too great impetuosity into that Part,
and dilates the Vein under the Hough where the Blood-Spavin grows. It Is a soft
Swelling, and yields to your Finger when you touch it: It may be compared to a
Varix in Men, since it is only a Dilatation of the Master-Vein, which passes
under it, and feeds it. It Is seated under the highest and most apparent Bone on
the inside of the Hough, and is not accompanied with Pain. The only Remedy for
this Distemper, is to pluck out a Piece of the Vein, according to the Method
described in Chap. CLXXXV. Coach-Horses that are full of Flesh are most usually
troubled with the Blood-Spavin: It does not make the Horse halt, nor is it very
prejudicial to him; but those who are more timorous than skilful, usually
fancy it to be a Curb, which is a hard Swelling, and grows in a different
Place. The Blood-Spavin may be dissolved by the following Method, but you must
expect that it will grow again as soon as you begin to ride your Horse: Rub the
Swelling from time to time with Oil of Bay, and there will arise a Scurf which
may be taken away by Bathing the Part with the Scowrings of Dishes; then anoint
it again with the Oil, and continue after the same manner, taking up the Vein
above and under the Hough.

It Is the usual Custom of Farriers to attempt the Cure of a Blood-Spavin by
giving the Fire, but this Method does not answer Expectation; for it does not
take away the Tumor, though it often times hinders it from growing.

I cannot forbear taking this Occasion to admonish the Reader, from my own
Experience, to beware of the dangerous Consequences occasioned by the
Application of the Ointment of Beetles, or Ruptory-Plaisters, to these Tumors.
This is an important Caution, and ought never to be forgotten.

CHAP. CLXXVIII Of the Curb.
THE Curb is a large and hard Tumor, generated of Flegmatic Matter, seated on
the inside of the Hough, higher than the Spavin, on the substance of the Tendon
that strengthens the Part: It Is a long Swelling, resembling a Pear, cleft through
the middle, into two Pieces, higher above than below, and sometimes makes the
Horse halt.

It appears most commonly in the Legs of those Horses that are employed in
drawing of Carts, Coaches, etc. For the Hough is apt to be strained by that
kind of Labor, and the great Sinew being afterward weakened, all the Humors
flow thither, and are fed by the Master-Vein of the Thigh, that runs very near
this place. It may be also occasioned by backing a Horse too soon, and
sometimes proceeds from the weakness and smallness of the Hough, and from the
other causes I have already mentioned in healing of the other Diseases of the
Hough.

The Cure may be attempted by the same Remedies that are prescribed for the
Spavin, but with little Success; for our only hope in this case must be in
giving the Fire, which nevertheless does frequently disappoint us; for it only
prevents the increase of the Curb, but does not effectually dissolve it.

Since the giving of the Fire is so general and so useful a Remedy for Horses,
I shall take this occasion to explain the way of performing the Operation.

CHAP. CLXXIX. Of the manner of giving the Fire to Horses.
IT IS a general Rule that admits of no Exceptions, unless in cases of extreme
necessity, that the Fire must be always given during the Wane of the Moon. The
best time is about five or six Days after the Full-Moon. I have oftentimes had
occasion, in this Book, to treat of the Parts where the Fire must be given; and
of the Diseases which it cures. Nevertheless, I think my self obliged to add
some Considerations to what has been said on that subject, for a further
clearing of a Doubt which is frequently proposed, namely, whether this
Operation can be performed safely on Nervous or Sinewy Parts. In answer to this
Question I maintain, that the Fire may be given without any danger, provided
the Skin be not pierced with the red-hot Knives, or other Instruments that are
made use of: And therefore, that you may proceed with greater Security, you
must observe these three Directions.

1. Press not too hard upon the Part. 2. Let the Knife be red-hot, not flaming.
3. Let it be heated in a Charcoal Fire.
With a due observance of these Cautions, the Operation may be performed in any
part of the Body, without the least prejudice to the Sinews, or any other
inconveniency whatsoever. This assertion is grounded upon undoubted Experience,
which is the most demonstrative Argument in such cases: For can you imagine a
Part fuller of Nerves and Ligaments than the Hough, and the hinder part of the
Shank-Bone of the Forelegs; and yet I can assure you, that the Fire has been
given a hundred times on all these places by my order, on the inside, on the
outside, on the bending, both the sides and hinder Part of the Leg, and even on
the Pastern-Joints, both of the Fore and Hinder Legs, where there is a great
number of Nerves and Ligaments, and the Skin is very near the Bones that move
the Joint; so that the least alteration or hurt would have been easily
perceived. In all these cases I observed, that the Horse was at least eased, if
not perfectly cured; for the Fire is the most powerful Resolvent that can be
applied, and asswages those hard and congealed Swellings that resist the
Operation of all other Remedies; so that the Leg which was swollen and deformed
before, becomes clean and fit for Service.

The Italians, who deserve to be commended for their extraordinary Skill in
Horsemanship, and for their Care not to venture on any dangerous Operation,
without a due Examination and Knowledge of the Cause of the Disease, are
frequently wont to give the Fire on the legs and Houghs of their Horses by way
of Preservation, and never esteem a Horse the less valuable because he has
suffered this Operation. And the same Custom prevails among the Turks, Arabs,
and Moors, who usually give the Fire, to prevent the ill Consequences of those
fatiguing Marches to which their Horses are daily exposed.

'Twou'd be an endless Labor to undertake the Confutation of all the Errors
that are introduced by Ignorance and want of Experience in those who are
entrusted with the Cure of Horses: But I may say without Vanity, that I have
made several successful Attempts in order to the rooting out of those Abuses,
and particularly that I have brought this Method into Reputation and Credit;
especially at Paris: and I can assure the Reader, that in a vast Number of
Trials, I have always found the Effect to answer, and even sometimes to exceed
my Expectation. It Is true, that if the Horse be suffered to rub off the Skin,
or to lick the Sores, the Marks usually remain for a long time after: But these
unseemly Scars ought not to be ascribed to the Fire, but to the Neglect of
those who undertake the Cure. It Is highly convenient, or rather necessary in
this Case to hinder the Horse from rubbing, biting, licking, or peeling the
burnt Parts, after the falling of the Scab, when the Flesh is raw: For if this
Caution be not observed, all the Dexterity of the Operator cannot prevent the
ensuing Deformity of the Part. But since it is extremely difficult to restrain
Horses from endeavoring some way or other to ease themselves of the Itch that
torments 'em when the Sores begin to heal, you must put Collars upon 'em as
upon Horses that are troubled with the Farcin, or tie 'em up so fast, that they
may not be able to lick their Sores. And at the same time strew the Part with
Powder of burnt Allom, or Vitriol calcined to Redness, usually called
Colcothar, or wash 'em with the Vulnerary Water once a day, which wonderfully
allays that troublesome Itching. For want of the Vulnerary Water, you may apply
either the Second, or the Yellow Water; and frequent walking is also very
useful in this Case.

If these Directions be observed, there will be scarce any apparent Marks of
Burning, especially in Winter when the Hair is long; and even some Horses, who
suffered this Operation under my Inspection, have been afterward sold without
any suspicion on the Buyer's side, that the Fire had ever been applied to any
part of 'em. In giving the Fire, unless in Cases of extreme Necessity, you must
never pierce the Skin, at least in such Parts as are of necessary Use, but only
sear it gently, and by degrees, till it be of a reddish Color, resembling a
Cherry.

It Is to be observed, that the Cure of those Holes that are made by piercing
the Skin, is extremely difficult. Sometimes certain Bunches or Tumors, grow
upon the Cheeks, which if they were seated in any other part of the Body, ought
to be pierced with a red-hot Iron as soon as they are fully ripened, and the
Matter fit to be evacuated: But the giving of the Fire is extremely dangerous
on the flat part of the Cheek, for it usually produces an Ulcer that cannot be
healed without great difficulty.

The Skin is usually pierced for Ring-Bones, Scratches, Quitter-Bones,
Over-Reaches on the Cronet or Hoof, Strains in the Hips or Shoulders: And
sometimes there are only small Holes made which scarce pierce the Skin, and a
Plaster laid over 'em. These are almost the only Cases in which the Skin may
be safely pierced; for it is very dangerous to make such an Attempt in the
Houghs, and other Nervous Parts. The right Performance of this Operation
requires time; for it is incomparably better to make use of a moderately hot
Knife, and to draw the same Stroke five or six times over, then to make it at
one dash with a very hot Knife. Many Farriers are guilty of an Error on the
other side; for they only burn the Hair, which they call giving of the Fire
lightly, though it hardly deserves the Name of Fire at all, since it produces no
Effect. It Is true, indeed, those who commend the way of giving the Fire
lightly, may be said to speak more reasonably than they think; but though we must
not imitate 'em, in burning only the Hair, and scarce touching the Skin; it is
certain the Operation must be performed with a light and steady Hand, but, as I
intimated before, the Skin must be seared till it acquire a bright
Cherry-Colour.

Seven or eight Days before the Application of the Fire, the Parts must be
softened either with Baths or Fomentations, such as are mentioned in the
Chapters that treat of tired and decayed Legs, or with softening Remedies, such
as are prescribed for the Cure of Splents: For thus the Humors are disposed to
yield to the Operation of the Fire, which finds less Resistance, and more
effectually dissipates and dissolves 'em.

The Part being softened, you must proceed to give the Fire gently and
dexterously, according to the Nature and Situation of the Part, either in the
Form of a Feather, Rose, Shield, Palm of the Hand, or any other convenient
Figure.

The Fire thus dexterously and lightly given to a Part that is already softened,
will produce a much more considerable Effect, than the most violent Fire that
can be applied, without a due Preparation of the Part by softening Remedies.

After the giving of the Fire you may apply yellow Wax melted, and mixed with
black Pitch also melted, with Shavings of Cloth over all; and after nine, ten,
or twelve Days, when the Scabs fall away, wash the burnt Part once a day with
Brandy. I seldom use Plasters in these Cases, since the Cure may be
effectually performed by anointing the burnt Parts once a day with a Mixture of
Brandy and Honey, and by washing the Sores with Brandy alone after the Scabs
are fallen. It Is true when the Skin is pierced, it is absolutely necessary to
apply a Plaster to concentrate the Heat of the Fire, that it may operate with
greater Vigor: But when the Skin is only seared, as in the Cure of a Farcin,
the Fire does not stand in need of that Assistance. The Scab falls away of it
self, and leaves a less visible Mark, than when Wax, Pitch, or any Plaster is
applied, which commonly brings away such large Pieces of the Skin, that the
Place remains ever afterward marked and deformed.

You must give the Fire with a Knife that has a pretty thin Edge, but rather
round than sharp, and always rub it on a piece of Wood when you take it out of
the Fire; for the Ashes that stick to it would cut and fester the Skin. You
must also observe to follow the Hair, that it may cover the Marks after the
Sores are healed. Thus, for Example, when you have occasion to give the Fire on
the Sinews of the Forelegs, you must draw a Line or Raze downwards between the
Sinew and the Bone on both sides, and three or four more upon the Sinews at
equal Distances, rather than imitate those who draw cross Lines, as if they
were going to broil a Fish.

It Is a needless Piece of Curiosity to apply drying and Restringent Ointments
to the burnt Parts, unless when the Skin is pierced, and there is Reason to
fear a large and unseemly Scar. These Ointments are thus composed; Take Tarr
and Burgundy Pitch, of each half a Pound; Bole-Armenic and Seal'd-Earth, of
each six Ounces; Turpentine and Rosin, of each four Ounces; Powder of Roses an
Ounce: Mix and make an Ointment. But Farriers use only black Pitch, because
it is cheaper, and more easily procured.

I will not pretend to restrain any Man from observing this Method; but I
believe it may be better omitted, for when a Scab falls away of it self, it
leaves the Skin that is next to it entire, and the Scar is less apparent. I
acknowledge it is necessary to apply a Plaster in some Places, to concentrate
the Heat of the Fire, that it may dissolve the Swelling more effectually,
especially in such Parts of the Body, where a Scar does not occasion any
considerable Deformity. It Is also to be observed, that those who design to
apply a Plaster must draw the Strokes at a greater distance than 'twou'd
otherwise be necessary to do. Almost every Farrier has a peculiar Method of
giving the Fire; some perform the Operation with a Piece of four Pistoles, some
with a Silver Knife, and others with one of Copper, which I believe is the most
convenient Instrument, for Copper resists Corruption, and cleanses Wounds. Gold
is certainly endu'd with many excellent Virtues, but I have often observed,
that, contrary to the common Opinion, it makes a very large Scab, and leaves
and ugly Scar. There is something very soft in Silver, and its Fire is not so
sharp and fierce as that of Gold: But to avoid a needless Charge, I have
hitherto used Copper Knives with very good Success, and I shall always prefer
'em before Gold, though not before Silver.

I cannot forbear repeating the important Advice I have already given you,
never to make your Knife too hot, and to heat it always in a Charcoal-Fire; for
there is a certain Sharpness in Sea or Pit-Coals, which makes a very large Scab.

It Is to be observed that the Fire does not generally produce a very quick
Effect; and I have sometimes observed that it exerts not its utmost Vigor till
six Months after it is given: For it is an insensible and slow-paced Resolvent,
and requires a very considerable space of time, before it can digest and
concoct the Humor; and therefore every Man that resolves to have Recourse to
this Method, must arm himself with Patience; but the Sureness of the Effect
will make amends for the Slowness of it. For oftentimes a Horse continues to
halt three or four Months after the giving of the Fire, but at last perfectly
recovers his former Soundness and Vigor. Nevertheless you must not imagine
that the Fire is a never-failing Remedy, for there are some inveterate
Swellings that can neither be cured by this, nor any other Method.

I shall, in the next place, proceed to give you some Directions, concerning
the Rest that is necessary for a Horse after he has received the Fire in his
Legs, Houghs, and other low and hanging Parts of his Body. The Effect of the
Fire lasts twenty seven Days, which may be divided into three equal Periods,
for its Augmentation, State, and Declination. Now 'twou'd be convenient to let
the Horse repose all that while: But the shortest time of Rest that can be
allowed on this Occasion, is at least eighteen Days. I know that many Persons
begin to work their Horses sooner; but in my Opinion it is better to neglect
the Cure wholly than to perform it imperfectly. In the mean time the Horse must
not be suffered to lie perpetually loitering in the Stable; for the Fire will
operate more vigorously, and the Swelling will be sooner abated, if you walk
him gently half an Hour every Day: But even this Exercise must not be begun
till eighteen Days after giving the Fire.

Some Farriers are wonderfully afraid of giving the Fire on the sinewy Parts of
the Body; but their Fear is certainly an Effect their Ignorance. I dare boldly
affirm, that this Operation may be safely performed without piercing the Skin,
and with a due Dexterity and Nimbleness, in any Part without Exception: Nor
would I maintain this Assertion with so much Confidence, if I were not
convinced of the Truth of it by a hundred different Experiments. But the three
Cautions mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter, are of so great a
Importance in this Case, that to make a stronger Impression upon the Reader's
Mind, 'twill not be improper to subjoin the following Example. I saw two
Farriers perform this Operation on the two Forelegs of the same Horse, and I
observed also that the Number of the Strokes or Rases, was equal on both Legs.
One of 'em did the Work dexterously, and with a light Hand, and the Success was
suitable to his Performance: But the other, who pressed too hard upon the Part,
and overheated his Knives, had the Mortification to see the whole Skin of the
Leg fall away, and the remaining Sores were not cured without extreme
Difficulty.

To make the Fire penetrate and resolve a hard Swelling, supposing you had not
time to prepare the Part with softening Remedies; you must immediately after
the giving of the Fire, touch the Strokes two or three times with a Pencil dipped
in Spirit of Vitriol, which will concentrate the Heat of the Fire, and make it
operate more effectually than it could otherwise do. If you design afterward
to apply a Plaster to the burnt Part, you must wait till the Spirit be imbibed
or sucked in; for thus the Scabs will fall away sooner, and leave the Sore fair
and clean.

I took occasion to intimate before, that I might justly reckon my self among
the Number of those who have brought this Method into Fashion at Paris, and
banish those ill-grounded Fears and Apprehensions that formerly deterred People
from the Use of it. I think I may be allowed to say, that in this Respect I
have done a considerable Service to the Public, for I have given the Fire to so
many Horses, that those who are Witnesses of the good Effect of it, were at
last freed from their Prejudices, and submitted to Experience, which is
certainly the best and surest Instructor. About twenty five Years ago the
giving of the Fire was reckoned to be as effectual a way to dispatch a Horse as
the discharging of a Musket at his Head; but now the Case is altered, and this
Method is commonly practiced without the least Scruple.

CHAP. CLXXX. Of all the Sores, Pains, Swellings, and Distempers of hinder
Legs, from the Hough downwards.
IT IS a common Inconvenience of the large Horses of Holland and Friezland, that
by reason of their Flegmatic Constitution, and the Moistness of the Countries
where they were brought up, their Legs are so full of Flesh and Hair, that the
Grooms and Coach-Men are not able to keep 'em clean: And the Dirt, which is
full of a sort of Nitre, or corrosive Salt, frets the Skin, and draws down the
Humors which generate all the Ulcers and Sores that are commonly observed in
the Legs of Coach-Horses.

Fat and fleshy Houghs are more subject to these Sores, than those that are dry
and sinewy: For they abound with Humors, which foment and nourish all the
Infirmities that happen in these Parts, of which I design to treat in Order.

To prevent these noisome Sores, called the Pains in the Legs of Dutch Horses,
some Persons observe the following Method.

They cleave the Spur, which is a soft horny Substance, that almost all Horses
have behind their Pastern-Joint; and dividing the Skin beneath that Part, they
separate a Piece of spongy and glandulous Flesh of the Bigness of a Walnut,
which they say is the Receptacle of the flowing Humors that occasion Running
Sores, Pains, Warts, etc. having taken out this Piece of Flesh, they stop the
Hole with Flax dipped in hot Turpenpentine, which they keep in seven or eight
Days, with Shooe-Maker's Thread fastened to the Lips of the Wound; afterward
they wash it with warm Wine, and put in Flax dipped in hot Turpentine, as before.
This Operation is only performed in the Legs, and I believe does neither good
nor Harm.

Others, by way of Preservation, as soon as they have bought a Coach-Horse, take
up the Veins of the Legs above and under the Hough, to intercept the Passage of
the Humors that feed these Sores. This Method, in my Opinion, is much more
reasonable than the former; but the best way to preserve Horses from these
noisome Sores that break out on the Legs, after they have been several times
healed, is to make him drink a Decoction of Guaiacum, or for want of that, of
Box-wood, for the space of seven or eight Days in the Spring, according to the
Method described in Chap. CXLVI. and afterward to purge him; repeating the
same Course the next Year. This Method not only prevents the breaking forth of
those Sores, but is the only effectual Way to cure 'em, when they actually
overrun the Legs: For the Decoction with the subsequent Purgation, diverts,
consumes, and evacuates the Humor that falls upon the Legs.

Of Ratt-Tails, or Arrests.
This Distemper is seated on the Master-Sinew, or at the side of it, a good
space under the Hough, that is, about the midst of the Leg or lower, reaching
to the Pastern-Joint: And the Hair falling off discovers very callous and rough
Tumors, which are called Ratt-Tails, from the Resemblance of their Figure; as
the other Name is taken from their Likeness to the Arrests, or small Bones of a
Fish.

Cut off these Callus's with a red-hot Knife, and apply the white Honey-Charge,
till the Scab fall away; then dry up the Sore with the Countess's Ointment, or
with the Powder mentioned in the Chapter of Wounds.

If the Arrests be moist without any Callus or Swelling, apply the Neat-Herd's
Ointment, or that of Oldenburg.

This Distemper offends the Eye, and occasions an unseemly Deformity, by
peeling off the Hair of the Leg, but without any considerable Prejudice to the
Horse.

Of Mules.
The Mules are seated in the Bending of the Pastern-Joints of the hinder Legs,
fretting the Part, and discharging a sharp and malignant Humor. These are
painful Sores, and oftentimes make the Horse halt, being fester'd by the Motion
of the Horse's Leg, which continually opens and shuts the Bought of the Joint
where they grow. There are a hundred Receipts to dry 'em up; but if the
Pastern-Joints be swollen, you must rub the sore Place with an equal Mixture of
thin Linseed-Oil and Brandy, shaken together in a Glass, till they be thoroughly
incorporated, continuing the Application for the space of eight Days; during
which time you may ride or work the Horse.

If the Swelling continue, apply the white Honey-Charge, which will dry up the
Sores, and draw out the Humor that causes the Swelling. If the Mules be
neither accompanied with a Swelling, nor with so much Pain as to make the Horse
halt, you may dry 'em up with the Neat-Herd's Ointment, or with the black
Ointment, described in Chap. CLXXXII. or with the Water, mentioned immediately
before it: Or you may apply the Ointment of Oldenburg, which is the strongest
Dryer proposed in this Book.

Of Warts.
These Wart-like Tumors overspread the Pasterns and Fetlock-Joints almost to
the Frush, on the hinder Legs, sending forth Matter when they are green. Cut
off all the Warts entirely, and apply the white Honey-Charge to the Sores, till
they be perfectly healed.

These Warts have no apparent Roots or Filaments, but are fed with a nervous
Juice, which causes the intolerable Stench that accompanies 'em. For this Juice
being out of its natural Place, degenerates immediately into Putrefaction, and
bringing continual Supplies of Nourishment to the Warts, occasions the Growth
of new ones, after those that appeared first are taken off.

These troublesome Tumors may be extirpated with Lapis Infernalis, or the
perpetual Caustic. But you must renew the Application after the Scabs are
fallen off, till it eat to the very Bottom of the Wart, and the Place appear
perfectly smooth.

The following Remedy cures Warts, but they grow again three, four, five, or
six Months after, sometimes sooner, and sometimes later, during which time the
Horse continues fit for Service: However it is better to begin the Cure as often
as the Warts appear, than to suffer 'em to grow absolutely incurable. Mix an
Ounce of crude Mercury with three Ounces of strong Aquafortis, or (which is
better) Aqua Regia, letting 'em stand till the Mercury be consumed: For if it
remain undissolv'd it is a Sign of the Weakness of the Menstruum, and you must
promote the Solution with a moderate Degree of Heat. This is an excellent
Caustic for Farcin-Knots, which it cures in few Days, raising a little Scab
without any Inflammation: And as for Warts, you must first make 'em clean, and
wipe 'em with a Pensil of Hog's-Bristles, then touch 'em from time to time with
this Water, for three or four Days; after which they will fall quite away, and
the Place will appear fair and clean, which you may afterward dry up with the
Black Ointment.

Or, with less trouble, having rubbed the Warts very hard, you may strew it
with a Powder, consisting of an equal Mixture of Gunpowder and Brimstone,
endeavoring by all Means to make a considerable Quantity of the Powder stick
to the Warts. Then burn the Warts with a red-hot Iron, and apply Leeks beaten
with Hog's Lard to separate the Escar; after which if the Wart be not
extirpated, begin again as before, and repeat the whole Process three times, if
need require, till the Wart be wholly consumed; then heal and dry up the Sore
with the Ointment of Oldenburg, or the Coach-Man's Ointment, which is a very
effectual Remedy for small Warts: But the large ones must be cut off with a
red-hot Knife.

CHAP. CLXXXI. An Excellent Remedy for Warts.
PUT three Ounces of Powder of Copperas into a Crucible, with one Ounce of
Arsenic in Powder. Place the Crucible in a Charcoal-Fire, stirring the
Substances from time to time, but carefully avoiding their Malignant Steams.
Continue a pretty smart degree of Heat, till the whole Matter be somewhat
Reddish, then take the Crucible out of the Fire, and after it is cooled, break
it, and beat the Matter to a very fine Powder. Incorporate four Ounces of this
Powder with five Ounces of Album Rhasis, and make an Ointment to be applied
cold to the Warts, anointing 'em lightly every Day, and they will fall off like
Kernels of Nuts, without causing any Swelling in the Legs. But you must observe
diligently these two Cautions; that only the Warts be anointed, and that the
Horse must not be wrought or ridden during the Application of the Ointment.
After the Warts are fallen off, dress the Sores with the Countess's Ointment;
and thus the Cure will be completed. This is one of the best Secrets in the
World for Warts, and is also a very excellent Remedy for the Knots of the
Farcin. The Warts fall off in less than a Month, and it will require as much
time to heal the remaining Sores, which are usually very deep when the Warts
are large. I have sometimes extirpated Warts utterly by this Method; though at
other times I could only take 'em away for a time, after which they grew again
as before.

The same Effect may be produced by anointing the Warts lightly every Day with
the Duke of Newburg's Ointment; for sometimes they are wholly rooted out, and
sometimes they begin again to appear after some time: The Horse may be ridden
or kept to his usual Work during the Cure, if it be performed in Summer, but in
the Winter you must observe a contrary Method.

Of Clefts, Cracks, or Chops.
These Clefts appear on the Bought of the Pasterns, and are occasioned by a
sharp and malignant Humor that frets the Skin, and is accompanied with Pain,
and a very noisome Stench.

Shave away the Hair from the sore places, and if there be no Swelling, apply
the Neat-herd's or Coach-man's Ointment, or, if neither of these can be
procured, the white Honey-Charge, which will quickly heal the Chops. If the
Flesh be foul, and retard the Cure, you must touch it with Spirit of Vitriol,
and two Hours after apply the white Honey-Charge, renewing the Application of
the Charge till the Cleft be healed.

Some will hardly be persuaded to shave away the Hair, pretending that it
pricks and festers the Sores when it grows again; but this is an Abuse, for
it is absolutely impossible to keep the Part clean, and extremely difficult to
perform the Cure while the Sores remain covered with Hair. And therefore to
prevent any Inconveniency that may be occasioned by the cutting of the Hair,
you must shave it very close; and in my Opinion when a Horse is subject to
these Clefts, the best way is to keep the Pasterns continually shaved, and to
cut the Hair of those Places as often as the Manc; but you must not cut the
Fetlock.

The Oil of Hemp Seed, or, for want of that, of Linseed, is an excellent Remedy
in this Case; for it allays the Sharpness of the Humors, and very often heals
and dries up the Chops.

Take Linseed Oil and Brandy, of each an equal Quantity, shake 'em together in
a Glass till they be well mixed, and then anoint the Chops. If this Remedy do
not operate effectually, apply one of the drying Ointments.

Of the Pains and Watery Sores in the Legs.
There is a certain stinking or fretting Matter that issues out of the Pores,
and deadens the Skin of the Pastern, Fetlock-Joint, and sometimes of the whole
Leg. And it is even so Corrosive, that it loosens the Hoof from the Cronet at
the Heel, appearing on the Skin in the form of a very white and malignant
Matter, which denotes the greatness of the Corruption. The breaking forth of
this Matter is almost always preceeded by a Swelling, and accompanied with
Pain, and at last acquiring a venomous quality, it is succeeded by Warts and
Clefts. It appears usually at first at the side of the Pasterns, and afterward
ascends to the middle of the Leg, peeling off some part of the Hair.

The Cure is not very difficult in the beginning; but when the Disease is
inveterate, and the Course of the Humors constantly determined to the sore
Place, it becomes as it were the Sink of all the Corruption in the Body: The
Part swells, and is overspread with Warts, Mules, and Clefts, which make the
Cure very difficult.

As soon as you perceive that your Horse is troubled with this Distemper, let
him Blood, but sparingly, for 'twill be sufficient to take away two Pounds of
Blood; then give him every Morning for eight Days together, the Decoction of
Guaiacum or Box-Wood, and afterward purge him, observing the same Method both
in preparing and administering the Decoction, which is described in Chap. CXLVI.
These Medicines reach the Cause of the Distemper, by destroying and consuming
the Humors that occasion it, and are not only very useful in this Case, but
also for the Healing of all the Scabs and Sores that appear in Coach-Horses
Legs. And if a Horse begin to be troubled with these Distempers while he is
young, you may easily prevent the return of these Infirmities in his Legs, that
diminish considerably both his Price and Goodness, by repeating the same Doses
of the Decoction and Purgative the two following Years. Whether these Remedies
be administered or not, you must immediately shave away the Hair, and if the
Leg be not gourded, rub the sore places very hard with a Wisp, and then apply
the following Ointment.

An Ointment to dry up the Pains or Watery Sores.
Take a Pound of Black Soap, an ordinary Glass of Spirit of Wine, two Ounces of
common Salt beaten small, three Ounces of Burnt Allom, and a sufficient
quantity of Meal to thicken the whole; mix, and make an Ointment, to be applied
to the sore place, without any Bandage or Cover.

The next Day wash the Part very clean with a new-made Lie, and renew the
Application of the Remedy, continuing after the same manner till the Leg be
sound, as it will be in a little time, if it be not Gourded.

CHAP. CLXXXII. The Ointment of Oldenburg, to heal and dry up the Pains,
Rat-Tails, Mules, and other foul and watery Sores in a Horse's Legs.
PUT two Pounds of common Honey in a new glazed Pot, over a very small Fire,
and as soon as it begins to boil, remove it from the Fire, and add Verdigrease
in fine Powder, and white Vitriol grossly beaten, of each four Ounces,
incorporating 'em with the Honey: Then set the Pot again on a small Fire, as
before, stirring the Substances about, and adding two Ounces of Galls in very
fine Powder, take it off a second time from the Fire, and after you have
continued stirring for some time, put in an Ounce of Sublimate beaten very
small, and stir all the Substances together till they be cold. This Ointment
dries up Sores very powerfully; though it may be made stronger by adding four
Ounces of Aquafortis after the Ointment is cold; but you must take care not to
put in too much, lest it should occasion a Swelling in the Leg.

This Ointment must be mixed over a very small and gentle Fire; and as soon as
you perceive it begins to boil too fast, you must immediately remove it from
the Fire, for otherwise it would certainly fly over the Pot.

It Is so strong that if you lay on too much of it, 'twill raise a Scab instead
of drying up a Sore; and therefore in the Cure of the Pains, Clefts, and other
running Sores, you must only anoint the Parts slightly, renewing the
Application every Day; but the same Caution is not to be observed with respect
to Warts, which are oftentimes cured by this Ointment.

It may be kept a long time without losing its Virtue.

After an unprofitable Trial of other Ointments, you may have recourse to this;
for if the Leg be not Gourdy, there will not be need of above two Applications
to dry up the most obstinate running Sores.

Another Remedy to dry up the Pains or Running Sores.
Wash the Part every Evening with the Second Water; and if the Horse be old,
you may use Aquafortis; but if the Disease will not yield to these Remedies,
you must apply the Ointment of Oldenburg, or the Neat-herd's Ointment, which
will certainly dry up the malignant Humor, provided the Leg be not swollen.

If the Leg be swollen and hot, wash the sore places with the following Water,
which is a very good and safe Remedy.

A Water to heal and dry up the Pains and Warts, though the Leg be Swollen or
Gourdy.
Take white Vitriol and Allom, of each a Pound and a half; boil 'em in a clean
glazed Earthen-Pot, with five Pints of Water, to the consumption of one half,
and preserve the Water for use.

You must first cut off the Hair, and make the sore place very clean, then
bathe it every Evening with this Water, till it be healed. This is one of the
best Remedies I ever had occasion to use.

The Black Ointment, or the Coach-man's Ointment, to heal and dry up all Manner
of Sores in the hinder Legs.
If you find by Experience that in some Cases none of the abovementioned
Remedies are sufficient to cure the Pains, Clefts, Mules, and Rat-Tails, you
must endeavor to temper the Acrimony and sharpness of the Humor with the
white Honey Charge: And though, after the fruitless Application of the
Neat-heard's Ointment, or that of Oldenburg, there is little hope left of
performing the Cure with any other Remedy; it will not perhaps be improper to
subjoin the Description of a very cheap and effectual Ointment, if the Leg be
not Gourdy. Take common Honey, and Powder of Copperas, of each a Pound and a
half; mix 'em together in a Pot over a gentle Fire, stirring 'em constantly
till they begin to boil; then take off the Pot, and when the Matter is half
cold, add an Ounce of Arsenic in Powder. Then set it on the Fire again, and
stir it till it begin to boil; after which take it off, stirring perpetually
till it grow cold, and in the mean time, take all possible care to avoid the
noisome Smell.

After you have shaved away the Hair, rub the sore place with a Wisp, and
anoint it with your Finger, renewing the Application once every two Days. You
must not lay it on too thick, lest it raise a Scab instead of drying up the
Sore.

CHAP. CLXXXIII. Of Swollen or Gourdy Legs, by reason of the Pains, or other
Fleshy Sores.
THE abovementioned Distempers, namely, the Rat-Tails, Mules, Warts, Clefts,
and Pains, are accompanied with a Swelling in the Horse's Legs, which must be
cured after this manner.

Shave away the Hair upon and about the sore place as close as you can, and
anoint it with Oil of Linseed and Brandy, shaken together till they be
perfectly mixed, and renewing the Mixture as often as you have occasion to use
it; because they separate if they be suffered to stand long without shaking;
and anointing the sore Place every day till the Leg be sound. If this Remedy do
not operate with sufficient Vigor, apply the white Honey Charge, renewing it
every Day, and at every Dressing, wiping away all the Matter with Flax: By a
continued Application of this Charge, the Swelling will be asswag'd, and the
Sores dried up in ten or twelve Days at most.

Warts must be cut off with a red-hot Knife; or you may endeavor to take 'em
away with the Ointment in Chap. CLXXXI. or those prescribed for the Farcin,
besides several others mentioned in this Book. But the following Remedy is most
commodious, for it makes the Warts fall away by degrees, and by reason of the
durableness of its Effect, is called the Perpetual Caustic. You must not handle
it without your Gloves, because it stains the Skin and Nails of a Tawny Color.

The Perpetual Caustic, or Lapis Infernalis.
Put an Ounce of strong Aquafortis, with half an Ounce of Silver-Lace, burnt,
washed, and dried, into a Mattress, placing it on hot Ashes till the Silver be
dissolved, which quickly turns reddish: Then augmenting the Fire, evaporate all
the Aquafortis, and there will remain at the bottom a brown Matter, usually
called Lapis Infernalis, or the perpetual Caustic, which must be kept dry and
covered.

This Preparation is sufficient for those whose Curiosity never leads 'em out
of the beaten Road; but it might be made much more effectual and proper for
Men, according to the following Directions.

Take two Ounces of either the Filings or thin Plates of fine Silver, and
dissolve 'em in five Ounces of strong Aquafortis: Then pour the Solution into
a Glass Cucurbit, covered with its Alembic, and draw off one half of the
Aquafortis, with a Heat of Ashes or Sand. Afterward let the Vessel stand some
Hours to cool, and you will find at the bottom of the Cucurbit, a certain
Matter in a Saline form, which must be put into a pretty large German Crucible,
to prevent its boiling over. Set the Crucible in a small Fire, till the
Ebullition cease, and the Matter sink to the bottom; after which augment the
Fire a little, and you will perceive the Matter reduced to the form of Oil at
the bottom of the Crucible. Pour this Oil-like Substance into a very clean
Mould, somewhat hot, and anointed with Tallow, where it will grow as hard as a
Stone; and afterward keep it in a well-stopp'd Glass-Bottle, and in a dry
Place.

It Is to be observed, that the usual Effect of this Stone is owing to the
Corrosive Spirits of the Aquafortis, intangl'd and retained by this Silver:
And all the reason why it might not be as well made with Copper or Iron, is,
that when it is prepared with those imperfect Metals, it sucks in too much Air,
and soon turns to a Liquor, which, nevertheless, would be an excellent Caustic:
But that which is made with Silver retains its solid Form, and may be kept in a
Bottle. It Is called Infernal both from its black Color, and its caustic or
burning Quality, in both which respects it may be said to resemble Hell.

This Stone is alone sufficient, without the assistance of the Fire,
Honey-Charge, Powders, or any other Application, to consume and destroy Warts,
if they be rubbed with it every Day till they be quite eaten away; but since
it is somewhat dear, to prevent any useless waste, you may beat the smallest
pieces of it to Powder, and strew it upon the Warts, after which the Scab will
quickly fall away.

It may be also applied to Figs, Proud Flesh, and other Tumors and
Excrescences that are to be extirpated. The same Stone serves a great while,
since it is only made use of to rub the Part; but its Virtue is somewhat abated
by wearing. This second Preparation of the Infernal Stone is a very effectual
Remedy for Men that are troubled with Cancers, which may be touched every Day
with it till they fall away.

If by reason of the Malignity of the Pains, or other filthy Sores, the Hoof be
separated from the Cronet at the Heel, you must apply the white Honey-Charge,
which will remove that Inconveniency, and make the Hoof grow. This separation
of the Hoof at the Heel of the hinder Leg, is not so considerable a Symptom as
some may imagine, since it affects only the Hoof, without penetrating between
the Foot and the Coffin-Bone; so that there is no danger of an Impostume in the
Hairy part of the Foot.

CHAP. CLXXXIV. The white Honey-Charge, or Plaster, for the Pains, Warts,
Rat-Tails, Mules, Clefts, Scratches, and Halter-cast.
BOil eighteen large Lilly Roots chopped, with at least two Gallons of Beer, or
for want of that, of Barley-Water, or Whey, which, in my Opinion, is better in
this Case than Beer: When the Roots begin to grow soft, and cleave under your
Fingers, add the Leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows freed from their Stalks, of
each ten Handfuls, or for want of the latter, double the quantity of the
former. Continue boiling till the Roots and Herbs be reduced to a Mash, pouring
in Beer or Whey from time to time, to supply the place of that which is
evaporated. When the whole is thoroughly boiled, strain the Mash through a
Hair-Sieve, turned upside down, as the Pulp of Cassia is usually extracted, and
throwing away the gross Substance, boil the straining for some time with a
Pound of Tallow, and a like quantity of Butter, stirring all the while. Then
remove the Vessel from the Fire, and as soon as you perceive that the Boiling is
perfectly ceased, add Honey and common Turpentine, of each one Pound, and
incorporate 'em thoroughly with the rest of the Ingredients, thickning the whole
Mixture with a sufficient Quantity of Wheat Flour when it begins to grow
lukewarm; though the Remedy might be made more effectual by boiling away almost
all the Moisture before it be strained, that there may be no need of thickening
it with Flower: and therefore toward the end of the Boiling, when you see the
Herbs begin to grow soft, and turn to a Mash, you must not pour in any more
Beer or Whey, to prevent the Liquidity of the Matter, which requires the adtion
of Flower. The straining of the Mash is a Circumstance that ought not lightly
to be omitted, for without that the Remedy would neither be so grateful to the
Eye, nor so effectual. It may be kept two Months in a dry place, if there be
but a very little Beer left at the end of the Boiling. It retains its Virtues
best when it is well covered; and though the upper part appear Moldy, it may be
very good nearer the bottom.

If it be too thick, you may add some Beer when you have occasion to use it;
and if it be too thin, it may be thickened with a little Flower.

If you have occasion to prepare this Remedy when Lilly-Roots are out of
season, instead of these you may add about a Pound and a quarter of Powder of
Linseed, which will in some Measure supply the defect of the other. It must be
added to the rest of the Ingredients while they are lukewarm, before you put
in the Flower.

To proceed, in the next place, to to the use and manner of Application. You
must first shave away the Hair from the sore place, and then apply the
Honey-Charge cold with Flax, after the manner of a Pultiss, renewing the
Application once a Day, till the Sores be dried up: You must be very diligent
to keep the part clean, and to take away all the Matter which the Plaster or
Honey-Charge draws forth; and besides, you must not forget to keep the Hair
short, for it grows very fast during the use of this Remedy. Bind it on with
broad Lists of Cloth, and make use of that sort of Bandage which Surgeons call
expulsive.

Instead of this Honey-Charge, Farriers use another Remedy, called the White
Plaster, which does a little qualify and temper the sharpness of the Humors,
but is not at all proper to assuage the Swelling, or take the Fire out of a
Leg. The White Plaster is prepared thus: They boil half a pound of Honey, a
Litron of fine Wheat Flower, and a Pint of Milk, stirring 'em gently over a
little Fire, till they begin to incorporate, and grow thick. Then adding four
Ounces of common Turpentine, and two Ounces of Oil-Olive, they continue boiling
and stirring for some time, and apply it as I do the Honey-Charge. This is a
cheap Remedy, and not altogether ineffectual, especially when the Sores are not
very great nor inveterate.

It happens not unfrequently in the Cure of swollen Legs, that the Humors
being stopped, are condensed upon the Flesh, and grow hard by degrees; so that
after a long continued Application of the Honey-Charge, the Moisture being
dried up, and the Humor that was in Motion attracted by the Medicine, the Leg
remains so swollen and hard, that it is utterly impossible to restore it to its
wonted Shape and Soundness, without some powerful Resolvent, such as that which
follows.

A Mercurial Ointment to assuage the Swellings of the hinder Legs.
Take half a Pound of Crude Quicksilver, and four Ounces of Powder of
Brimstone, put 'em into a Mortar, and incorporate 'em with the Pestle till the
Mercury be quenched. Then adding a Pound of Tallow, mix and make an Ointment.

Shave away the Hair as close as you can, and afterward rub the Part with a
Sursingle till it grow hot, without making it raw: Then apply the Ointment,
holding a red-hot Iron-Barr near the Part, to make it penetrate the deeper.
Wrap it about with a Hog's Bladder, and lay a Cover over that, binding on the
Dressing with a piece of List, which is less apt than a Cord to leave a Mark or
Impression. Eight and forty Hours after, renew the Application, as before,
(only you must not rub the Part with a Sursingle) and continue after the same
manner. This Remedy seldom disappoints the Expectation of those who apply it,
for the Particles of the Mercury are subtle enough to penetrate and dissolve
inviterate and hard Swellings, such as those that remain after the drying up of
Scabs, Pains, and other filthy Sores in a Horse's Leg. If the Legs be swollen
and Gourdy after the Farcin, or if the Horse be old, and the Swelling very hard
and inveterate, it is in vain to attempt the Cure, which in this Case is
absolutely impossible.

You may also destroy all sorts of Vermin by rubbing the Part where they are
ingender'd, with this Ointment: And the same may be successfully used for the
anointing of Bed-Steads that are apt to breed Bugs; and even to procure
Salivation.

CHAP. CLXXXV. The Method of taking up a Vein.
THat Cure cannot justly be called perfect which is quickly succeeded by a
Relapse into the same Distemper: And therefore to complete the Cure of the
Pains, Scabs, Warts, Rat-Tails, Mules, ahd other filthy Sores, you must take up
the Veins above and below the Hough, to stop the Course of the Humor that
falls upon the Part. A due observance of this Caution will prevent the Return
of those noisome and dangerous Infirmities, if the Horse be young, and kept
clean; but I dare not warrant the Success if the Horse be old: Yet though you
must be oftentimes forced to repeat the Cure, you will at least have the
advantage of employing your Horse as you think fit, during the Intervals, which
usually last five or six Months. To proceed methodically in the Cure of all the
Infirmities of the Hough and Leg, you must never take up a Vein above, without
taking it up also below. For since the modern Opinion, concerning the
Circulation of the Blood, is undoubtedly certain, 'twou'd be in vain to stop
its descent without barring at the same time its ascent. For Example; a Sore or
Swelling in the Hough can never be dried up or asswag'd by taking up the Vein
above, since it is nourished by the Blood that ascends from the Ends of the
Veins; but this Inconveniency may be effectually prevented, and the Course of
the Blood entirely intercepted, by taking up the Vein both above and below.

The Doctrine of the Circulation of the Blood is established on such sure
Foundations, and all the Objections against it are so solidly refuted, that
none but those that are wilfully blind, refuse their assent to it; and
therefore it is merely out of Complaisance to those who are still possessed with
their old Prejudices, that I ordered the Vein to be taken up both above and
below, since the only necessary part of the Operation is that which is
performed below; for the Veins bring back the Blood to the Heart, and from the
Circumference to the Center; whereas the Arteries carry it from the Heart to
the Circumference: and it is only the grosser part of the Blood that passes out
of the Arteries into the Veins, by the Anastomoses or Communications of the
Vessels. From these Principles I might easily deduce several important
Conclusions, in opposition to the common Practice; but I could never take
pleasure in Contradicting others; and in such Cases as these, we ought rather
to study how to do than how to speak.

Every Farrier knows how to take up a Vein. First they rub the Part very hard,
to make the Vein swell, that they may discern it more distinctly from the
Neighboring Nerves; afterward making an Incision length-ways, they separate
the Vein with the Cronet, and tying it at one end of the Incision with a double
Silk Thread, they open it lengthways, either above or below the Ligature.
Having taken away as much Blood as they can, they tie the Vein at the other end
of the Incision, either above or below the former Ligature, and then cut it in
the middle between the two Knots. But this last Circumstance, though generally
practiced, is absolutely unnecessary, for without cutting the Vein, that part
of it which is intercepted between the two Ligatures falls away, and the two
Ends of it are closed: And even it is sufficient to make only one Ligature,
without opening the Vein; for the Knot cuts and corrupts the Vein, and the two
Ends are afterward closed and consolidated. Some Farriers content themselves
with letting the Blood flow till it stop of it self, and then dress the Wound
without tying the Vein: And it is certainly the best way with respect to the
speediness of the Cure, to cut the Vein, and after it has bled plentifully, to
bind it up without a Ligature, I mean in such places where the Wound can be
conveniently bound up; for when a Vein is tied, the Cure is extremely tedious,
since you must expect the Putrefaction and falling away of a piece of the
Vessel, and the closing or healing of the Ends of it. In the mean time it is the
surest way to prevent a further loss of Blood by a Ligature, which must be kept
very tight for the space of two Days. The same Operation is performed both
above and below the Hough; but the second Ligature ought to be as near the Foot
as it can possibly be made, and directly opposite to the first, and after you
have taken away a large quantity of Blood, you must proceed as before.

When the Horses Legs are swollen and fleshy, in which case the Cure is very
difficult, it is the usual Custom of some skilful Farriers to take out a piece
of the Master-Vein of the Thigh, beginning half a Foot above the Hough, and
reaching about four Fingers breadth beneath it. This Operation is very
effectual, but requires a skilful Hand: It produces a very good Effect, but
frequently occasions a very violent Pain, and an extraordinary Swelling in the
Hough and Thigh; but when it is skilfully performed, it drys the Thigh and Leg
admirably, and is not attended with those ill Consequences: So that if you have
a good Opinion of your Farrier's Skill, you may venture boldly on this
Operation, which I have both performed and caused to be performed very
frequently, especially for the Blood-Spavin in the Hough. If the Legs be very
much swollen, you may tie a Ribbon about the Vein at the Top of the Piece which
you intend to take out; for after the Vein is separated, the Ribbon remains in
its place, and serves for a Seton, which must be dressed every Morning and
Evening for nine Days together, that the swelling may be asswag'd by the
Evacuation of the Matter. In the mean time it will be highly convenient to
anoint the whole Hough every Day with the Duke's Ointment, to allay the Pain,
and prevent an Inflammation.

I never order a piece of the Vein to be taken out when there is no apparent
Swelling in the Legs, otherwise I immediately proceed to that Operation,
especially in the case of a Blood-Spavin, which is a soft Swelling, nourished
by the great Vein. For though these Tumors do not make the Horse halt, they
occasion an intolerable Deformity, and the only way to cure 'em is to take out
a piece of the Vein, according to the abovementioned Directions.

After the Vein is taken up, apply the Duke's Ointment round the whole Leg and
Thigh, to prevent a Swelling and Inflammation: Ten Days after, and sometimes
sooner, the Vein will be healed, and the Horse fit for Service.

Sometimes the Farcin is occasioned by the taking up of a Vein with a rusty
Lancet, and the first Knot appears in the place where the Vein was taken up.
This is the usual Fate of all Horses that have an ill Habit of Body, and are so
disposed to the Farcin, that the least Wound with the Tongue of a Buckle throws
'em into that Distemper.

After the same manner you may take up Veins in several Parts of the Body; for
Example, in the Pasterns for the Diseases of the Sole, for ill-shap'd Hoofs
resembling Oister-Shells, and after Foundering in the Feet; and for the
Diseases of the Eyes, you may take up the Eye-Veins with a crooked Needle,
without Incision. See Chap. XXVIII.

You may also take up the Neck-Vein on both sides, for the Glanders, and for
Defluxions in the Eyes; and there are several other Parts of the Body where the
Veins may be taken up fort he Cure of their respective Distempers.

You must never take up a Vein when the Leg is swollen; for besides the
Difficulty of the Operation, the Swelling will still continue: And therefore
you must wait till the Swelling be abated, before you take up the Vein.

CHAP. CLXXXVI. Of Halter-Cast.
SOmetimes Horses that are troubled with Itching in their Head, Neck, and other
parts of their Body, endeavoring to scrub the Part with their hinder-Feet,
entangle their Foot in the Halter, and struggle so violently to disingage
themselves, that sometimes very dangerous Hurts are occasioned in the Hollow of
the Pastern: And many vigorous Horses lame themselves, if they be not
seasonably assisted.

Take Linseed-Oil and Brandy, of each an equal quantity; shake 'em together in
a Glass till they be well mixed, and anoint the Part Morning and Evening, having
first clipped away the Hair. Note; That the Foot must be kept very clean.

I had a Horse who being tied with two Chains entangl'd his Foot, and with
violent struggling cut the Inside of the Pastern to the Bone, which occasioned
a great Swelling in his Leg and Pastern, not without danger of a Gangrene.
Immediately I ordered the Hair about the Part to be clipped away, (for his Foot
was very hairy) and applied once a day the white Honey-Charge, rubbing always
the Leg with the Duke's Ointment. He had been doomed to irrecoverable Lameness
by the Farriers, yet he was cured in a Month, and did not halt above six Weeks,
though the Sinews and Bones were laid bare; but they were neither broken nor
bruised. This was certainly a very speedy Cure, and even prevented my
Expectation; for the Cronet was swollen and inflamed, and I was afraid the
Horse should have cast his Hoof: And therefore before I dressed the Hurt in the
Hollow of the Pastern with the white Honey-Charge, I applied a good Astringent
to the Cronet, made of Powder of unslak'd Lime mixed with the second Water,
binding it up with a Cover, and another upon the Honey-Charge. By this Method
the Swelling of the Cronet was quickly asswag'd, and the Hurt was afterward
healed; though during the Cure there fell away Escars, that would have frightened
a Novice. Thus the Cure went on very successfully, but some Horses do not
escape so well; for it has been often observed, that such Accidents as those
have occasioned irrecoverable Lameness.

This may serve for an Instance of the Efficacy of the white Honey-Charge.

I might propose several other Remedies, if this Example were not alone
sufficient for your Instruction. If the Hurt be small, without a Swelling, and
only require drying Medicines, you may apply the Ointments described in the
CLXXXIst. CLXXXIId. and CLXXXIIId. Chapters: Or, instead of these, black Soap
with Spirit of Wine.

You may cure a simple Hurt occasioned by the Horse's being cast in his Halter,
with the Duke's Ointment: Or take Oil and Wine, of each a like quantity; boil
'em together till the Wine be evaporated; and apply the remaining Oil once a
day to the Hurt, which will be quickly healed.

CHAP. CLXXXVII. Of the Hungry Evil.
THis Distemper is rarely observed, and sometimes deceives the most expert
Farriers: For it is impossible to know by any external Sign, that a Horse is
troubled with this Disease, when the Fit is not upon him, unless by his
Leanness. 'Twou'd be a needless and impertinent piece of Formality, to write a
Dissertation about the Definition and Causes of a Distemper that admits not of
any Cure, and is besides, so troublesome, that a Horse who labors under it, is
altogether unfit for hard Service, though perhaps he may endure a little moderate
Exercise. For as soon as the Natural Heat has finished its Work and Aliments in
the Stomach, it acts with so much Violence against it self, or against the
neighboring Parts, that the Horse is in a manner deprived of the Use of his
Limbs, and almost unable to stir his Feet, being equally insensible of Caresses
and Threatenings. He stands moveless, and suffers himself to be beaten and
spurred without stirring, and even without feeling any other Pain than that
which is caused by the violent Action of the Heat against the neighboring
Parts.

As Soon as you perceive your Horse to be in this Condition, give him good store
of Provender, which will quickly make him fit for such Service as he is able to
perform. It Is to be observed, that Horses who are troubled with this Distemper,
which in Humane Bodies is called a Dog-like Appetite, eat three times as much
as other Horses, or even as themselves did when in Health; though in the mean
time they neither thrive, nor grow lusty. They are usually seized with the Fit
about three Hours after eating: If such an Accident happen on the Road, you
must immediately unbridle your Horse, and let him eat as much as he can; after
which you may take his Back again, and proceed on your Journey. But this Advice
is not practicable in Winter, when there is no Grass in the Fields, and
therefore they that are Masters of such Horses ought not to expose themselves
to the Danger of being suddenly stopped on the Road, and the best Advice I can
give 'em is to rid themselves of such unserviceable Horses as soon as they can.

These Horses are usual Lean, though great Eaters, or rather Devourers of their
Meat: But though it is impossible to fatten 'em, they still retain some Vigor,
unless in the time of the Fit, when they are altogether insensible. I know no
Remedy to prevent the Return of the Paroxism: Perhaps some Person of more
Learning than I can pretend to, may improve these Hints to a satisfactory
Account of the Distemper; for my part, I have always made Conscience of Writing
nothing but what is grounded upon often-repeated Experiments. It Is true, I
might make a great Noise with occult Causes, and fill whole Pages with
Gibberish: But in my Opinion, it becomes a Man of Probity, to own his
Ignorance, as well as to communicate his Knowledge.

CHAP. CLXXXVIII. Of Crepances.
THE Crepance is an Ulcer seated in the midst of the Forepart of the Foot,
about an Inch above the Cronet, and caused by a bilions, sharp and biting
Humor that frets the Skin. It Is sometime occasioned by a Hurt received in
leaping over a Bar, and may happen equally in the fore or hinder Foot.

The Cure is performed by washing the sore Place with warm Wine, or Urine; and
if it be accompanied with a Swelling, or Inflammation, you may apply the white
Honey-Charge, which will abate the one, and allay the other.

These Ulcers may be also cured by the drying Ointment, described in some of
the preceding Chapters; or the Water for drying the Pains, and other filthy
Sores: But one of the most effectual Remedies in this Case, is black Soap mixed
with Spirit of Wine.

There are two sorts of Crepances; the first, which is that I have already
described, is attended with more Deformity than Danger: It is almost the same
with Rat-Tails, and the other Sores that usually overspread the hinder Legs:
But the second Kind is much more dangerous.

Horses that have false Quarters, or cloven Hoofs like Oxen, are sometimes
troubled with Crepances. These Cracks or Clefts, proceed from the Dryness of
the Hoof, which bruises the Flesh between the Hoof and the Bone of the Foot;
and the putrefy'd Flesh infects the Tendon or Gristle: So that Nature,
endeavoring to expel what offends her, bursts the Hoof in the middle of the
Quarter, and the Matter finds a Passage through the Cleft, near the hairy part of
the Foot. This Disease is cured by the Method I prescribed for the
Quitter-Bone; for the corrupted Tendon must be separated, since it is no more to
be reckoned as a part of the Foot.

I do not say that these Clefts in the Foot are always accompanied with
Crepances; but only that these Distempers are sometimes united, in which Case
you may reckon your Horse to be in a very dangerous, if not desperate Condition.

CHAP. CLXXXIX. Of the Numness of the Hoof.
THE Name of a Distemper usually gives us a confused Idea of the Nature of it;
but the Word, introduced by Custom to express the Disease treated off in this
Chapter, seems not to have the least Relation to what it signifies. However I
will not quarrel about Words, but rather proceed to a brief Explication of the
Distemper, commonly known by this Name, to which I shall subjoin an Account of
its Signs, Causes, and surest Remedies, after I have told you that the Cure is
extremely difficult, or at least very tedious.

In the first place, you must know, that there is a Bone in the Middle of the
Coffin-Bone, which is almost of the same Figure with the Foot, but much
smaller, since it is contained within it. This is that which we usually call the
Bone of the Foot.

Now a Horse is said to be troubled with this Distemper, when the Bone of the
Foot, by reason of a Relaxation at the End opposite to the Toe, leaves its
Place, and natural Situation; and the Flesh that surrounded it, and united it
to the Hoof growing dry, there remains a hollow or empty Space: Besides the
Bone of the Foot being loosened at one end, falls down, and pressing against
the Sole that covers it, appears in Form of a Crescent, as if there were
another Bone fastened to the Outside of the Bone of the Foot, whereas it is
only that Bone it self fallen down out of its natural Place, and appearing in
the Figure of a Crescent, which is greater or smaller, as the Bone is more or
less loosened.

This Bone is seldom loosened toward the Heel, to which it is fastened by two
great Sinews, that pass through it in two several Places, and bind it so fast to
the Foot, that unless it be loosened by some violent Accident, it never
descends but toward the Toe; in which Case there remains a void space that was
formerly filled with the Flesh that surrounded the Bone before it was loosened,
so that the Coffin-Bone, and the Bone of the Foot, were in a manner one
continued Body, so closely were they united; whereas in this Case there is a
hollow Space along the Hoof toward the Toe, and the Extent of that Hollowness
is proportionable to the Relaxation of the Bone.

This Distemper may be known by these Signs. The Horse halts right down; he
trots, and even walks upon his Heels, and brings down his Toes softly to the
Ground, without laying any stress upon 'em: The Forepart of the Foot sounds
hollow when you knock upon it with your Shooing-Hammer; at last it shrinks in
the Middle, and the Foot loses its natural Shape.

This Disease has some Affinity with Foundering in the Feet, but is less
malignant, and more easily cured. The Effects are almost the same in both
Cases, for when a Horse is foundered in the Feet, the Bone of the Foot is
loosened before, and forms Crescents, like those described in this Chapter,
only they are greater, and appear usually on both Feet, whereas this Distemper
rarely attacks more than one. These Crescents in either Case, are only the Bone
of the Foot relaxed; descending from its natural Place, and appearing like a
Crescent without the Flesh that formerly used to cover it: So that you must not
give Credit to the Opinion of certain Farriers, who imagine it to be a Bone, or
bony Excrescency, growing upon the Bone of the Foot. This Bone thus relaxed,
and appearing in the abovementioned Form, is at last deprived of Nourishment,
and grows, as it were, one extraneous or preternatural Body, and consequently
must either fall away, or be cut out.

These things were necessary to be premised, in order to a clearer
understanding of the Distemper; but since I have hitherto only explained the
Effect of the Cause, I shall, in the next place, consider the Cause it self.
When a Horse by reason of vehement labor, is overheated, the Humors are put
in Motion by this Impression of Heat, and the Agitation is increased by other
more subtle Humors, which being out of their natural Place, and besides, thin,
sharp, and spirituous, ferment the grosser Humors with which they are mixed.
This Ebullition occasions the rising of very sharp Vapors, full of a volatile
and corrosive Salt, which insinuating into the Parts where they find least
Resistance, and in their way passing through some places where the natural Heat
is moderate, being no longer agitated nor supported by the Fermentation that
raised 'em, they are condensed into Water, which is carried by its own Weight
to the Foot; where they find an easy Admittance into the spongy Flesh, between
the Hoof and the Bone.

Now this Water or Liquor retaining the sharp and corrosive Nature of its
primitive Vapors, and in many Respects resembling Aquafortis; it consumes all
the Flesh that united the Hoof and the Bone, and at the same time dries up and
separates a vast Number of little Nerves that proceed from the Bone of the
Foot, and fasten it to the Hoof: So that the Bone being no longer sustained or
kept in it places by the Flesh, or those little Nerves, falls down toward the
sore-part of the Foot, forms a Crescent under the Sole, and leaves the
forepart of the Hoof empty and hollow.

Having already explained the Nature of Fermentation, and illustrated that
Explication with clear and proper Examples, I know no reasonable Objection that
can be made against the Account I have given of this Distemper. Only methinks I
hear some confident Wou'd-be-Wits enquire, who told me all these fine Stories,
and whether I or my Informers were ever Witnesses of those Transactions in the
Body. But a very moderate stock of Sense would enable 'em to conceive, that
though neither I, nor any Man else can pretend to have seen those internal
Motions and Revolutions, it is not at all impossible that a studious Enquirer
into Nature may discover the Causes by their Effects. And withal, I assure 'em,
that if they can produce a more probable Hypothesis, and confirm it with more,
or better Experiments, I will receive it in such a Manner, that they themselves
shall acknowledge, that I am neither of a very obstinate Nature, nor over-fond
of my own Notions.

'Twill not be improper in the next place, to examine the Difference between
the Humor that causes this Distemper, and that which causes Foundering. The
latter of these Humors is more subtle, and penetrating the Nerves, obstructs
their Motion, and occasions Pain; whereas the Humor from whence this Distemper
proceeds, takes its Course through ways unknown to us, without causing those
Disturbances that are observed in the other Case. And perhaps I may venture to
say, that the Cause is the same though the Effects be different, according to the
various degrees of the Acrimony of the Salt of which these Spirits are full.

In order to the Cure of this Distemper, you must endeavor by all means, to
strengthen the Sole about the Toe, for Nature may perhaps in time dissolve the
Crescent: And to assist her in the Execution of that Work, 'twill be convenient
to pour a sufficient quantity of the finest Oil of Bay into the Foot, without
paring it or cutting the Sole; after which you must stop the Foot with Flax,
and lay Splents over all. At the same time anoint the Cronet, especially about
the Toe, with the same Oil, covering it with Flax and a convenient Bandage.
Note, That the Oil must be applied cold to the Cronet, and poured boiling-hot
into the Foot.

After you have contiunu'd for some time in the Use of this Method, without any
considerable Sign of Amendment, if the the Horse be still very lean, you must
take out the Sole, and if you find the point of the Bone of the Foot separated
from the Hoof with an empty Space between 'em, you must burn all that part of
the Bone that seems to be separated both above and below, to hasten its falling
away: Then apply Aegyptiacum to the burnt Bone, and charge the whole Sole with
a Mixture of Turpentine, Honey, and Tarr melted together. Continue to dress the
Bone with Aegyptiacum, or Schmit's Ointment, till it fall out, after which,
dress the part of the Bone from which the Piece that fell away was separated,
with Monsieur Curty's Ointment applied cold, or only with Flax dipped in Brandy,
renewing the Application every two Days, which will make the Flesh grow again,
and cover the Bone: After which the Sole will grow again also. To promote the
Growth of the Sole, and make it firm and vigorous, you may observe the
Directions in the LXXXIXth. Chapter, Concerning the Method of taking out the
Sole. As Soon as you perceive that the Sole is grown strong, you may begin to
walk your Horse on soft Ground, and by degrees accustom him to travel.

If by looking into the Foot you perceive that the Crescent is not great, and
have reason to conclude that the Disease is not very dangerous, you ought not
to take out the Sole without Necessity, but rather endeavor to strengthen it
by pouring boiling Oil of Bay into the Foot, as I ordered before; and
continuing after the same manner till the Cure be completed.

This may be justly reckoned a dangerous Distemper, the Cure is long and
difficult, and very frequently the Horse continues lame for the space of a
Year, and longer. Several Farriers confound this Infirmity with Surbating, and
other Diseases in the Feet: But the Easiness of the Cure in these Cases, ought
to convince 'em of their Error.

The END of the FIRST PART.
A TABLE OF THE DISEASES.
A.
ANticor. page 212 Appetite lost. 8, 12 Arrests. 287 Attaint. 109
B.
BAck swollen or hurt. 173, Swayed 261 Barbs. 6 Biting of a mad Dog, 179. Of a
venomous Beast. 181 Bleeding. 54, 167 Bleymes. 153 Bones broken. 85 Bots. 257
Breath short. 181 Burstenness. 266
C.
Chest-Foundering. 197 Chops. 289 Clefts. ibid. Cods, swollen. 265 Cold 22.
with a Cough 23. with a Beating in the Flank. 24 Colic 59. First Kind 60.
Second 62. Third 64. Fourth 66. Fifth 69. Sixth 74 Cough. 192, 195 Cramp. 277
Crepances. 297 Cronet, swollen. 150 Crown-Scab. 155 Curb. 283
D.
DIseases of Horses in general. 1 Biting of a mad Dog. 179
E.
EYes, their Diseases 42. Rheums 44. Blows or Strokes 46. White Films. 48.
Lunatic or Moon-Eyes. 49. Haw. 51
F.
FArcin. 224, 227, 229, 230, 231, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238. How to fatten a
Horse. 209 Feet, surbated Feet 125. decayed and wasted. 158 Fevers 216. Simple
217, 219. Putrid 217, 220. Pestilential 217, 221. Causes and Signs. 218
Fiery-Evil. 39 Figs. 134 Fire, how to give. 283 Flanks. 185, 186 Flux. 268, 270
Foundering 247. In the Feet. 252 Fret, see Colic. Frush, scabbed 154. Fleshy
Excrescencies. 156 Fundament fallen down. 271
G.
GAngrene. 166 Glanders. 28, 31, 33, 35 Gripes, see Colic.
H.
HAemorrhagy. 54 Hair, falling off. 242 Halter-cast. 296 Head, its Diseases.
37, 38, 40 Heels, narrow, 130. scabbed. 154 Hide-bound. 207 Hips strained. 78.
Hipshot. 263 Hoof-cast. 151 Houghs strained, hurt, or swollen. 272 Hough, bony.
277 Hungry-Evil. 297
I.
JArdon. 280 Impostume in the Feet. 149 Itch. 253 Blood-running Itch. 241
K.
KErnels to ripen 22 To dissolve. 32
L.
LAmpas. 6 Lask or Looseness. 268 Leanness. 207 Legs, broken 85. Stiff, tired,
decayed 86, 106. Swelled, gourdy 87, 89. Old Swellings 91. Stiff and tired 93.
Spoiled by traveling 94. Sores and Swellings in the Legs. 287, 291 Lungs
obstructed. 199
M.
MAdness. 179 Malenders. 95 Mange. 157, 242, 253. In the Tail. 257 Molten
Grease. 243 Morfounding. 22 Mules. 288
N.
NUmness of the Hoof. 298
O.
Overreach. 109
P.
PAins. 289 Palpitation of the Heart. 214 Palsy in Jaw. 56 Pastern-Joint
strained or dislocated. 103. Swelled or gourded. 107 Hurt or wounded. 177
Pissing of Blood. 72 Pricks in the Foot. 137, 139 Pursiveness. 181, 185, 187,
189, 190
Q.
QUarter false. 127 Quitter-Bone. 116, 118
R.
RAt-Tails. 287 Retreats. 137 Rheum. 22 Ring-Bone. 121 Rupture. 266
S.
SCab. 253 Scratches. 110. Simple. ibid. Sinewy. 111 Selenders. 95
Shoulder-wrench, Shoulder-pight, or Shoulder-splait. 76. Strained or hurt. 77,
78, 80, 83 Signs of Sickness in Horses. 5 Sinew-sprain. 106. Relaxed or
strained. 273, 275. Sole to take out. 131 Spanish Evil. 40 Blood-Spavin. 282
Bone-Spavin. 281 Splents. 95, 98 Stag's Evil. 56 Stavers. 75 Stones drawn into
the Body. 73. Swollen. 265. Bruised or hard. 266 Strangles. 15, 19 False
Strangles. 20 String-halt. 281 Stubs in the Foot. 137, 139 Surbating. 125
T.
TIck. 6 Truncheons. 257
U.
VEin to take up. 294 Vives. 57 Urine to provoke. 68. To stop. 71
W.
WArts. 288, 289 Wind, short or broken. 181 Wind-Galls. 98, 100, 278 Withers
wrung or hurt. 167 Wolves Teeth. 7 Worms. 67, 257, 259 Wounds. 159
Y.
YEllows. 37
AN INDEX OF THE PRINCIPAL REMEDIES Described in this PART.
A.
ALoes prepared. 53 Golden Sulphur of Antimony 208 Arman for a sick Horse. 10
B.
BUrning Balsam. 16 Chewing-Balls. 11 Cordial-Balls. 25 Green Balsam. 146
Basilicum. 148
C.
CAtholicum for Clysters. 224 Liquid Caustic. 114 Perpetual Caustic. 292
Clysters. 24, 55, 59, 63, 69, 204, 215, 216, 219, 221, 269, 270. Crocus
Metallorum. 202 Crystal Mineral. 241
D.
DEcoction of China. 236 Decoction of Guaiacum. ibid. Lieutenant's Decoction.
201 Decoction of Sarsaparilla. 237
E.
FLectuary of Kermes. 17 Emetic Wine. 36 Essence of Vipers. 61 Eye-Waters. 44,
45
F.
FEbrifuge. 220
H.
HOney-Charge, Red. 81 White Honey-Charge. 293
L.
LApis Infernalis. 292 Lapis Mirabilis. 47 Limewater. 165
M.
MErcurius dulcis. 233
O.
OIl for Clysters. 63 Oil of Gabian. 145 Oil of Lead. 50 Oil de Merveille. 145
Purging Oil. 65 Oil of Rue. 213 Ointment Aegyptiacum. 163 Ointment, Baron's. 78
Ointment, Bartholomew 's. 148 Ointment Basilicum. 16 Ointment of Beetles. 98
Ointment, Coachman's. 291 Ointment, Connestable 's. 124 Ointment, Countess's.
150 Ointment, Curtis 's. 147 Ointment, Doctor's. 118 Ointment, Duke's. 90
Ointment, Hermit's. 165 Ointment, Hunter's. 175 Ointment, Mercurial. 294
Ointment of Montpelier. 78 Ointment of Naples. 231 Ointment, Neat-herd's. 256
Duke of Newburg 's Ointment. 278 Nerve-Ointment. 106 Ointment of Oldenburg. 291
Ointment Oppodeldoc. 83 Ointment of Plantane 124 Ointment of Portugal. 230
Schimt 's Ointment. 152 Ointment, Sicar 's. 147 Ointment of Worms. 99 Orvietan.
60
P.
PIlls for the Stomach. 12 Cinnabar Pills. 162 English Pills. 197 Stinking
Pills. 245 Treacle Pills. 25 Yellow Pills. 190 Plaster of Walnuts. 108 Angelic
Powder. 189 Uuniversal Cordial Powder. 24 Cordial Powders. 27 Powder for a
Cough. 193 German Ptisan. 235 Purging Medicines. 41, 52, 65, 67, 213, 254, 259.
R.
REmolade of Bohemia. 104 Retoirs. 102 Rue-water. 50
S.
SAl Polychrest. 205 Sal Prunellae. 241 Scammony prepared. 42 Second Water.
Sublimate. 233
T.
TIncture of Sulphur. 191 Treacle Diatessaron. 72
U.
VUlnerary Water. 170 Vulnerary Potions. 175
Y.
YEllow Water. 165
FINIS.

