To his Grace, His Majesty's high Commissioner, and Honorable Estates of
Parliament, The PETITION of Alexander Strachan of Glenkindie
Humbly shows,
THat the Petitioner being conveened before the Lords of Justiciarie, in the
year 1676, upon them litious I^f^rmation of the deceast Adam Gordon of
Glenbucket, and some other Neighbors, anent his being in Accession to the
Slaughter of one Alexander So^r, and put under an exorbitant Bail of 20000 lib.
Scots, for his Compearance upon the 27 day of November the said year, and for
presenting such of his Men, Tennents and Servant^ as should be cited as
Parties, and Witnesses to the said day, which Bond was extorted from him metu
Carceris, and yet he fullfilled the same in all Poin^s, so far as was possible
for him; for he gave punctual Obedience and Attendance himself, and presented
such of his men, Tennents and Servants, as he was informed were cited; and yet
some persons designed in the Executions, Servants to him, being absent, he and
his Cautioner were unlaw'd in the haill foresaid Sum of 20000 lib. as if he had
performed no part of his Bond, and this Penalty after a long time in the late
Reign, was gifted to Sr Adam Blair of Carberrie, and thereupon Diligence done
against your Petitioner and his Estate. and thereby your Petitioner subjected
to a most illegal and unwarrantable Burden; For Remeid whereof, he having
applied to the Lords of Justiciary, in February last: Their Lords^ips refused
to liberat your Petitioner from the foresaid exorbitant Penalty, and the
Diligence which followed thereupon; But prejudice to the Petitioner to pursue
the same before the next session of Parliament; whereupon the Petitioner
obtained a Warrant from the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, and caused
Summond the said Donatar and his Facttor, with the other lawful Contradictors
in the Cause, to compear before your Grace, and the Honorable Estates, to a
certain day now elapsed, as the Signet Summonds and Executions herewith
produced does bear.

May it therefore please your Grace, and the Honorable Estates, to hear the
Petitioners Advocats in the said Cause, or to Remit to the Committee for private
Causes, to hear and prepare the same, that Your Grace, and the States may
determine therein according to Justice.

And Your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

