A SPEECH AGAINST PENSIONERS,
WIthout Doubt the last Parliament had great Matters in Agitation, and the
Enquiry they made about the Pensioners of the preceding Parliament was no
small one, but rather one of the chief things they had in hand; for had they
been permitted to have perfected that, it had been a good Recompense for the
disappointment which the Nation sustained in their other Expectations, by the
sudden Prorogation: And without all question, nothing is fitter for the
Thoughts of a Parliament, than to take into Consideration how to punish them
that had proved the Pest, and had almost (if not altogether) ruined the Nation;
and how to prevent the like mischief for the future.

The Name of a Pensioner is very distastful to every English Spirit; and all
those who were Pensioners I think are sufficiently despised by their Country
men: And therefore I mention only two or three things that will ly at their
doors; before I offer my Advice what is to be done.

Breach of Trust is accounted the most infamous Thing in the World, and this
these Men were guilty of to the highest degree; Robbery and stealing our Law
punishes with death, and what deserve they who Beggar and take away all that
the Nation has, under the pretension of disposing of the Peoples Money for the
Honor and Good of the King and Kingdom: And if there were nothing more than
this to be said, without doubt they deserve a high Censure.

Besides the giving away such vast Sums, without any color or reasonable
pretense: There is this great mischief will follow upon it; Every man very well
knows that it has put the KING into an extraordinary way of Expense; And
therefore when he has not such great Supplies. it must of necessity bring Him
Into great Want and Need: And shall not only give Him an ill Opinion of all
Parliaments that do not supply Him so extravagantly, but perhaps put Him to
think of ways to get Money that otherwise would never have entered into His
Thoughts; so that whatever ill may happen of this sort, these Pensioners are
answerable for it.

Furthermore, they have laid us open to all our Enemies, whoever will invade
may not doubt to subdue us: For they have taken from us the Sinews of War, that
is Money and Courage, all our Money is gone, and they have exhausted the
Treasure of the Nation: And when People are poor, their Spirits are low, so
that we are left without a defense, and who must we thank for bringing us into
this despicable Condition, but these Gentlemen, who notwithstanding this, have
the Face to style themselves His Majesty's Friends, and all those who oppose
their practices are factious and Seditious. They have brought it to that pass,
that Debates can not be free; if a Gentleman's Tongue happen to ly a little
awry In his Mouth, presently he must be called to the Bar; or if that would not
do, whenever any Gentleman that has a true English Spirit happens to say any
thing that is bold, presently away to tell His Majesty of it, and often times
more than the Truth: And thus they endeavored to get an ill Opinion in His
Majesty of his best Subjects. And their Practice was the more abominable,
because their Words and Actions gave the occasion to force those smart
Expressions from the Gentlemen that spoke them, for their honest hearts were
fired with true Zeal to His Majesty and Country* when they beheld the
Impudence and falseness of these Pensioners.

As for Example, We find that in or about the 10th. year of Richard 2; of
England. it was endeavored to get a Corrupt Parliament; for the English Story
says, That the King seat far the Justices and Sheriffs; and enjoined them to do
their best. that none should be chosen Knights and Burgesses, but such as the
King and his Council should name; but we find it could not be effected.

The next that occurs to my thoughts, is that in the 4th year of Henry 4th. the
Parliament that was called at Coventry, named the Laymens Parliament, for the
Sheriffs were appointed that none should be chosen Knights or Burgesses, that
had any skill in the Laws of the Land.

The next that I remember, is that in Henry 4's time, in the year 1449 or 50,
when the Duke of Suffolk was accused by the Commons, and committed to the
Tower, the King dissolved that Parliament, not far unlike our Case of my Lord D
--, but it differs in this, that Suffolk was committed to the Tower, as of
Right he ought, but we were denied that Justice against D -- only Henry made
the case thus far even, that he set Suffolk at Liberty after he had dissolved
that Parliament. Soon after a Parliament was called, wherein great care was
taken in choosing of Parliament Men that should favor Suffolk: But they so far
failed of their Purpose. that his Appearance at the Parliament gave great
distaste to the House of Commons; and they were so far incensed, that they
began the Parliament with a fresh Accusation against him and others; So that
you may see that it is not alwise in the power of the Court continually to
corrupt the Members of Parliament.

In the time of Henry 8th, about the 20th Year of his Reign when the Parliament
was active against Pluralitys. and Non Residence; There was an Act passed to
release to the the King all such Sums of Money as he had Borrowed at the Loan,
in the 15th year of his Reign; it is said that it was much opposed, but the
reason that is given why it passed is. (...) the House was mostly the Kings
Servants, but it gave great disturbance to the Nation: And this is the only
case that I can remember that comes any thing near to our Pensioners; but (...)
cannot find that they or any Parliament took Money to Votes So that we must
conclude that there was never any Pension^^^ in Parliament till this Pack of
Blades were got together.

Therefore Sir, what will you do? Shall these Men Escape, shall they go free
with their Booty: Shall not the Nation have Vengeance on them, who had almost
given up the Government. It was they who had perverted the ends of Parliament:
Parliaments have been and are the great R^fuge of the Nation, that which cures
all its Diseases, and heals it Sores: But the Men had made it a Snare to the
Nation, and at best had brought it to be an Engine to give Money; It therefore
these go away unpunisht, we countenance what they have done, and make way to
have Pensioners in every Parliament; but for be any such Thought from any Man
that sits within these Walls: And having said this, I will in the next place
humbly offer my Thoughts what is to be done.

In the first place I do propose that every man of them shall on their knees
confess their fault to both House, and that to be done at the Bar one by one.

Next, That as far as they are able, that they refound all the Money they have
received for secret Service. Our Law will not allow a Thief to keep what he has
got, by steal^^^ but of course orders Restitution, and shall these proud
Robbers of the Nation, nor restore their ill gotten Goods?

And lastly, I do propose that they be Voted incapable of serving in Parliament
for the Future, or of enjoying any Office Civil or Milit^ry, and order a Bill
to be brought i^ to that purpose: For it is not fit, that they who were so fal^^
and unjust in that Trust, should ever be Trusted again. The Sir is my Opinion,
but if the House shall incline to any (...) that way, I shall readily comply,
provided a sufficient ma^^ of Infamy be set on them, that the People may know
w^^ Bought and Sold them.

FINIS.

