A TRUE COPY OF A LETTER FROM COUNT STAREMBERGH, TO THE DUKE of LORRAINE,
Concerning the present Condition of VIENNA.
TO give you a True State of the Siege of Vienna, from the Eighth of July, that
the Ottoman Army came before it, to the Eighteenth of August inclusive, take
this following Letter from Count Starembergh himself, to the Duke of Lorraine,
as it is really Translated from the Original Letter, Printed in High Dutch.

Vienna, August 18. 1683. MY LORD,
GOD be thanked, we have had once the good Fortune to hear that one of our
Letters is come to your Highnesses Hands, amongst many others that have been
writ to you from hence. I humbly b^g tha^ you will believe, That it is none of
our Fault that you have been no oftener informed of our Affairs: so neither will
we be wanting for the future to let your Highness know how it goes with us
here, as often as Opportunity shall serve. And to let you see how it is with us
at present, give me leave to tell you, That we have disputed every Foot of
Ground with the Enemy, and that they have not gained any thing upon us, but
what has cost them very dear; having been as often vigorously repuised, as
they have attempted to Lodge themselves, with so great Loss, that they dare not
thrust their Heads out of their Holes any longer, nor appear upon those Hills
which they have slung up round our Counterscarp, and by which means they
endeavor to surround our Ditch. And as I have formerly informed your Highness,
That the Enemies had made a Descent into the Ditch of the Raveline, and blown
up a part of the Wall, and thereupon made several Assaults; but God be thanked,
very unsuccessfully, we having beaten them out of their Works which they had
made at the Foot of the Preach: But finding, that as soon as our Men were
retreated, they returned again, I thought it Prudence to use some Precaution
about it, and to have Mined it so deep as to reach the Point of the Raveline;
which I also did about the two Bastions they had attaqued, toward which the
Enemy have not yet advanced any thing, keeping themselves still at the Foot of
the Counterscarp. They made a descent on the 14th instant into the Ditch called
Leb, lying before the Bastion, and the same night made another Lodgment in the
Ditch, but seeing that I could not very much incommode them neither by my
Musqueders not Cannon, they having buried themselves over Head are Ears; I
thought good to plant my Cannon against those Mountains that sorrounded the
Ditch, and at the same time made an Attaque upon them, and drove them from
thence; but not having men enough the first time to ruin their works, I made a
second Attaque, and destroyed them all, and having the wind favorable for us,
we burnt their Gabions and a great part of their Gallery, since which time they
never durst appear on that side the Raveline. On the 17th they endeavored to
spring another Mine, but with no better success then the former, for it blew up
backwards, and did little or no hurt to the Raveline, there is now already made
in the middle of the Raveline a very good Retrenchment with a deep Ditch. The
Bastions Leb and Delacour are also doubly retr^nched, and I am now b^sie at
this very hour to make a Principal Retrenchment behind the two said Bastions;
so that your Highness sees there is nothing wan ing in us to use all the
precaution that can be expected from rational Men, for the preservation of the
place, and I can assure you, to render me worthy of the Confidence your
Highness, and especially his Imperial Majesty my Master, ground on my Services,
I will never deliver up the Place, but with the last drop of my blo^d. Withal
I find that our men are no ways dounted at the sight of the Turks, who are
easily overcome, if attaqued with Courage, and God be thanked one of ours is
able to beat ten of theirs. This day was brought to me a Janizary Prisoner, who
was taken in the Raveline, who among other things tells me, That they lost in
the last attaque 11000 men, besides many Officers of the Janissaries, and the
Bashaws of Mesopotamia, and Albania; That they begin to be in want of
Provisions both of Horse and Man, which they are forced to fetch from far; That
they expect a Convoy from Bastedo with Ammunition, which if it could be met
withal by the way, or that their Po ragers could be cut off, it would make
them desperate. God be thanked, as to my health, it is in a very good Condition
again, having had the Bloody Flux for eight days together.

POSTSCRIPT.
The 19th of August, 1683. Since yesterday (my Lord) the Enemy have caused
another Mine to be sprung in the Raveline, and made an Assault with about 1000
men, but our Cannon and our Musketeers did so warmly receive them, that 300 of
them were killed upon the place, and forced them to content themselves to lodge
upon a place called Berm, which I perceiving, caused a Mine to be sprung this
morning, which soon dislodged them, burying most of them in the Ruins. I
expect this very instant the like Regale from them, but if I can be ready
sooner than they, I will cause another to be sprung to the health of your
Highness.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1683.


